(...): OR, EVERLASTING Fire no Fancy.

BEING AN ANSWER TO A LATE PESTILENT PAMPHLET, ENTITLED [The Foundations of
Hell Torments shaken and removed] wherein the Author has labored to prove,
that there is no Everlasting Punishment for any Man (though finally wicked and
impenitent) after this Life.

His Considerations Considered, and his Cavils Confuted; Together with a
Practical Improvement of the Point, and the Way to escape the Damnation of
Hell. --

By JO. BRANDON, late of Oriel College (Oxon) now a Minister of the Church of
England.

Quos mala praesentia non corrigunt, ad sequentia perducunt.

Gregor. Dialog. JOB xi. 3. Should thy lies make Men hold their peace? and when
thou mockest, shall no Man make thee ashamed?

LONDON, Printed for Henry Brom at the Gun in St. Paul's Churchyard, 1678.

Hic Liber (cui Titulus (...)) IMPRIMATUR,

GEO. HOOPER Rmo Dno Dno Gilb. Arch. Cant. a Sacris Domestic.
June 7. 1677.
To the Right Honorable HENRY EARL of STARLIN.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
THough I may easily apprehend that some will not be wanting, who will look
upon these Lines with an evil Eye, and argue from worse Principles than those
of Logic, that I am proud and presumptuous in making use of Your Name in this
sort; yet upon mature deliberation, I have adventured so to do, resolving
rather to run the hazard of their hardest censures, than to neglect so fit an
opportunity of testifying to the World my Humble Respects to Your Honor, and
my grateful thoughts of Your manifold favors toward Me and Mine.

To see some Men live, as if Hell and its Everlasting Sorrows were but
Scarecrows, and Melancholy Fancies, and (then) to see others hardening them in
their Infidel impieties, by making them believe that it is so indeed; (And that
they have gotten the knowledge of this Devilish Doctrine, by praying to the God
of Heaven, as my Author pretends very smoothly in his Preface) This (my Lord)
is sufficient to provoke a patient and peaceable spirit; The displeasure of my
Heart against his Execrable Book, has now engaged my Pen against it; And (with
the Poetical liberty) I may truly say -- Si natura negat, facit indignatio
Librum.

Certainly, it is great pity that a Book of this kind I deal with, should pass
one Year to an end, without a full and formal Confutation; And I was almost
ready to Write a Satyr against my many Betters, (that have a great deal more
Learning, and a little more leisure than my self) for suffering it to go so
long without Control.

Well, I have now (through Providence) finished that Work which they should
have done long before: For a Pamphlet of this nature must needs be as worthy of
a severe Reproof, as those Pieces that have been licensed by his Holiness at
Rome, which they have so often, and so excellently opposed; For it is worse to
believe Hell a Dream, than to believe Purgatory to be a Real thing.

And now (Right Honorable) besides my Obligations to You, it may seem in other
respects very proper to present You with a Discourse of this sort; because the
Reality of Hell thus Proved, Defended and Applied, may by God's help make You
still more and more careful of that great Work, which I persuade my self Your
Honor is truly careful of already, viz. To lead Others in the way to Heaven,
by Your good Example.

The Lord Jesus multiply his choicest blessings upon Your Self, Your Virtuous
Lady, and the rest of Your Family, granting You height of Honor, and length of
Days, the real comforts of his Holy Ordinances, and the Eternal Felicities of
his Father's House. So praying, rests

Your Honors in all Duty and Humble Observance, JOHN BRANDON.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, It was the Apostle's prediction, that in the latter days
perilous times should come; 2 Timothy 3.1.
which I think, has been more than sufficiently verified in this last Age: And
no wonder, since so many perilous Books have been published (year by year) to
pervert the Faith, and corrupt the manners of the Christian world. Of which I
might name a great many; but there is scarce any for the bigness of it, more
eminet in this kind, than this of Mr. R. which I have undertaken (by God's
assistance) to Examine and Confute. For though many could wish that there were
no Hell, nor Everlasting punishment for the Wicked and Impenitent, yet there be
few or none that have said so, with so much confidence as my Author has done.

I Confess (to give the Devil his due) some of the Socinian Worthies have
suggested something of this Nature, Vid. Calov. Socin. proflig. de Morte
aeterna.
and sometimes have pretended a Reason or two for it. But none of them (that I
know of) did ever speak it so roundly, or take so much pains to prove it as he
has done. -- Rejoice (in sin) O ye unrighteous, and be glad all ye that are
hollow in heart, Triumph and boast O ye Enemy of Holiness, and let your hearts
be hardened against the fear of evil; come now and take your fill of what you
most love, and walk (securely) in the ways of your own hearts; go often to the
Alehouse, and seldom to Gods house; let Cards be more with you than Bibles,
and be wiser (now) than to mind that Melancholy thing which Precise fools call
by the name of Religion and the Fear of God; in short, set a Cup on your Table,
and a Whore on your Knees, and sing aloud your basest Epithalamiums, and
profanest Songs that you have, yea, let them delight your honest Souls day by
day; for what though these things are known in Heaven, and offend (most
grievously) your glorious Lord; yet the matter is not much as to any great
danger therein; for your Preachers sad Doctrines are but deceits and Delusions:
you need not to fear any Everlasting Damnation, however you live or however you
die. For this good Gentleman has given you many Infallible proofs, that there
is no such thing to be feared. (see the latter part of his Book.)

But yet, Take heed sinners, and do not bless your selves overmuch in your
iniquities, for what if this Learned man should be mistaken, and his Infallible
Proofs should prove to be nothing but fair shows and real Deceits, what a case
would you then be in, if you should die as you have lived? And that they are
such, and no better, I for my part do verily believe: And if thou can doubt
of it (Christian Reader) be pleased to compare his Proofs and my Answers
together.



Amesius, (in Coron. ad Col. Hagiens.)
(in praefat. ad Ecclesias Belgicas) Licet hanc provinciam ab aliis potius quam
a me, capessendam esse judicem, a me tamen potius quam a nemine, viz. That
though I grant it were fitter

Mistake me not, Reader, I speak not this, A Digression of Mr. Chewney his Book.
in any measure to undervalue that piece which Mr. N. Chewney has opposed unto
it. But let these particulars be considered in the case. 1. That it is very
small, and 2. so general that there is need enough of another Book to that
purpose, for it is not a fourth part of his subtilties which he has engaged
with therein (and I think I may say, it is scarce a tenth part.) And the Reason
why He did not Confute his false Glosses and fair pretenses more particularly,
is; as he tells us in his Epistle to the Reader, because he thought them to be
very Obvious to every Judicious eye (to use his own words in that place.) But
with due respect to his Name and Works, he might easily have considered, that a
Pamphlet of this nature, was not designed to deceive the Judicious, but rather
the ignorant and unstable. And if it do but so, and so harden such persons in
their sinful courses, Satan will not think that he has sowed his Tares in vain.

Secondly, What if others can do it better than I, yet it will be nevertheless
lawful for me to do it as I can. Must I resolve to lay down my Ministry, and to
Preach no more, because I cannot Preach so well as they that can Preach better?
No sure, no reason for it. Doubtless I may (and must) do my Lord and Master
what Service I can, though I cannot do what others can.

Thirdly, Others can do it better (thou say, and I do not gainsay it) But I
rather look what men will do, than what they can do. If they can save us from
Drowning (when we are fallen into the River) yet if they will not do it, we are
never the more beholding to them. And if they can, it is their own fault that
they did not, or at least it was not mine, for I did not hinder them from so
doing.

Fourthly, If thou think I have done amiss in it, do but show me my Error
(in a Sober and Christian way) and I shall (I hope) be thankful for it, and
shall be ready to retract any thing therein, which thou can prove to be
unsound or unseasonable.

Fifthly, If yet thou will not be in Charity with my poor Scribble, but art
resolved to be offended at it; Then, Reader, thou may be offended still:
Behold it lies at thy mercy, and (if thou can not otherwise content thy self)
Thou may take thy Pen and write against it. If thou let it alone, I am sure
it will do thee no hurt, if thou Read it (though only to cavil at it) It is
possible it may do thee some good. And if it does, give God the Praise, and the
Author thy Prayers, who is,

Thy Servant for the Sake of Jesus, J. B.
Wargrave (Berks) July 20. 1676.
The PRINTER thought fit to insert Dr. Gregory's Approbation of the Work in his
Letter to the Author, as follows.
Worthy Sir,
I Have, though too hastily, read over Your Book; for which You deserve many
Thanks from him, who is your Adversary; and do hereby receive them from me, who
am a friend to you, and every man else who is of your Complexion; I mean, a
Lover of Virtue, and a defender of Truth. It is my Opinion, that you have much
obliged both Your Antagonist, and Your Reader; Your Antagonist, by convincing
him of his Error; Your Reader, if already Orthodox, by confirming him in a
great Article of his Faith. Methinks the Cavils of that Pamphlet, wherewith you
deal, are so weak and fond; so clearly Confuted by those strong Arguments which
you have produced from Scriptures and Reason; that if the Author of that
worthless Scroll shall not, upon his serious perusal of Your Book, subscribe to
that Truth, which therein you have asserted; it is much to be feared, that his
obstinate perseverance in so foul an Error, against such clear Convictions,
will ere long bring him to that place, which he now denies, and make him
sensible by sad experience, that there is indeed an Hell.

Who this Person is, I cannot tell; perhaps a Sceptick, perhaps a downright
Atheist, and probably a man of a lewd and vicious Conversation; for, the Truth
is, such persons are most concerned to believe, and, were it possible, to
prove, that there is no Hell, who have no ground to expect any share in Heaven.
But whosoever your Opponent may be, I have so much Charity for his Immortal
Soul, as to wish that he may reap that Advantage from your Book, which therein
you design him; that he may timely see his gross mistake, and renounce his
Heresy; lest hereafter he be forced to confess an Eternity of Torments, when
it will be too late to escape them. So Prays,

Your Neighbor, Friend, and Brother (...), F. Gregory.
Hambleton Mar. 28. 1677.
To the Doubting READER.
REader, do Doubt, whether an Hell there be?
Doubt on till Doomsday come; then shall thou see
What now thou wilt not believe. Then shall quick sense
Soon give the Lie to Doubting-Diffidence.
A Fancy now, Hellfire thou do account,
Whose sharpest pains, in thine esteem, amount
Unto no more, than if with Lance thou cut
Some callous, senseless piece of Flesh. I but,
When the great God that made thee, shall thee call
To stand before his dreadful Tribunal,
And Curse thee straightway to a real Hell,
What will thou think it is then? if thou can tell:
I Will tell thee what, in short, if so I may
Fore-speak the thoughtful Language of that Day.
It Is Hell indeed! it is Hell! Hell now I see;
Yea, feel the pains of Hell! which could I flee,
How happy I? But now, Woe! (woe's me) woe!
Fancy it is not, but Sense, that makes it so.
-- A Fancy this? This scorching Fire!
-- A Fancy this? This wrathful Ire!
-- A Fancy this? This fearful Pain!
-- Fancy all this? Which shall remain,
-- From Age to Age, still to endure?
-- Oh! Hell! -- A Fancy it is not sure.
Could I but live on Earth, as heretofore,
I Would never dare to call it Fancy more.
-- But live like one forced to believe,
-- It Is Hell, from whence there is no reprieve.
Thus when hell Flames have wrought in thee a Faith,
Forcing assent to what this Author says;
Then will thou say, oh, that I had been wise,
To credit this, and not Fool-like despise
What now I find and feel! For now I see,
'Twas ill to Doubt, whether an Hell there be.
S. N.

To the READER without Doubt.
DOubt Thou do not Reader, (go to;) it is well:
To doubt, and doubting drop down into Hell,
How dreadful is it! Far better it is to fear
An evil looked for, and in Time prepare
Against the worst may come; worse 'twill not be
Because Thou do believe Eternity
Of Torment after Death: Nay rather This
Will prove a Mean, leading to future Bliss.
This will Thee move all Times to mind the way
Thou go in, and fear going astray.
More careful this will make Thee to avoid
All evil; and still keep Thee well employed.
This will Thee cause to shun the Paths of sin
And mind the End, when ought Thou do begin.
Naught will Thou do, God's Justice to incense,
If Hell Thou do believe sin's Recompense.
What? for some short-lived sinful pleasure shall
I incur the Pains of Death perpetual?
What? for some short-breathed perishing delight,
Shall I forgo the Beatifick sight
Which Heaven affords? and this of loss entwine
With pains of Sense? No, Hell shall never be mine,
On such unequal Terms. Though sin entice,
I Will never buy it at so dear a Price.
Most true it is, thy Faith should work by Love:
The Love of God and Man should chiefly move
Thee to decline, what ever may offend
An Holy God; yet may the fearful end
Sin leads to, sometimes thought on, move Thee more
Than all the charms of Love could, heretofore.
Live thinking often then on the Pains of Hell,
Which none escape, but Those that here live Well.
S. N.

Acrosticks upon the Name of the Author, J. B.
JOHN is his Name, in Hebrew Jochanan;
Which signifies, at least, a Pious man.
On whom his God his Grace has multiplied,
More than on multitudes of men beside.
His upright Life, and painful Labors give
Most signal proofs of this, where he does live.
No one can justly spot the Coat he wears;
Nor, through his fault, blaspheme the Name he bears.
BRANDON I add, that you assured may be,
The Author's him I mean, and none but he.
Right such an one as John, described: It Is he,
Who is, what this his Name notes him to be.
A Man though young in Years, yet old in Grace;
Whose Gifts among the Elder may take place.
Nor doth't become the Gravest to despise
His Youth, whose Actions speak him gravely wise.
Doubtless, God's Church is happy in such Youth.
Skilful to strike Gaths with the stone of Truth.
On whom whosoever shall cast Dirt of contempt,
Let such see how themselves may be exempt.
Naught have I more to add, his (Christ'n) name is John,
A name (of Grace) annexed to Natures name, Brandon.
Ad Authorem Hexastichon.
PRosa sic Prologi vice, carmina qualia feci, Si Naturae negat, facit
Indignatio versum,
Qualemcunque potest: quales ego vel Cluvienus.
Juv. Sat. 1. Number. 15.

Quae tua, si statuunt, Nomina; Parce mihi.
Parcas quod, Primum, proso sermon, Rogatus
Scribere, causatus; (dans Tibi signa Rei.)
Exin, quod lusi Numeris, super horrifera Re,
Haud been compositis; Nec tibi digna tuli.
Sum tamen -- Proximus tibi amicus, and Amicus tuus fidelissimus, S. N.

THE TABLE.
THe Epistle, giving an Account of the Author's Writing. CHAP. I. SECT. I. The
Introduction, with some Reflections upon the Author of the opposed Pamphlet.
page 1. CHAP. I. SECT. II. An endless state of punishment (for the wicked) in
another World, proved; and those Proofs vindicated from the Exceptions of Mr.
Richardson, and his Brethren the Socinians. p. 3. CHAP. I. SECT. III. Other
Texts of Scripture urged, and Arguments grounded on Scripture. p. 12. CHAP. II.
SECT. I. A Taste of Mr. Richardson's Grapes in the beginning of his Garden; or a
Discovery of his gross Sophistry, and grievous Impertinencies in the former
Pages of his Discourse. p. 23. CHAP. II. SECT. II. Mr. R. his Observations upon
[Hell-fire, the Damnation of Hell, the rich Man and Lazarus, Tophet, the Worm
that never dies,] observed and censured. p. 26. CHAP. II. SECT. III. Mr. R.'s
Inventions upon the Parable of the Tares, of the word [Cursed] of Eternal
Damnation, of the word [Fire] with a Query of the Corporiety of Hellfire. p.
29. CHAP. II. SECT. IV. His pleasant Game, or a view of that pretty sport, that
he makes with the various Opinions of learned Men, about the place where Hell
is fixed. p. 34. CHAP. II. SECT. V. His admirable Combat with Mr. Ed. Leigh
upon the Point, and his causless Triumph over him: being a Vindication of the
said Mr. L. his arguments. p. 38. CHAP. III. SECT. I. Mr. R.'s Attempt to
remove (as he calls) the main Pillars of Hell Torments. p. 46. CHAP. III. SECT.
II. The strong Man armed, and his strength tried, or Mr. Richardson's deep
considerations considered. p. 61. CHAP. III. SECT. III. Mr. Richardson's
Richest Learning discovered, or his many Infallible Proofs disproved. p. 70.
CHAP. III. SECT. IV. The remaining part of his Proofs (from the 7th. to the
last, being the 20th.) carefully examined. p. 89. CHAP. IV. SECT. I. The Uses
of the Point, by way of Information in several particulars. p. 113. CHAP. IV.
SECT. II. A discovery of the madness of wicked Men in following their sins,
etc. And their extreme misery hereafter that dye such here. p. 116. CHAP. IV.
SECT. III. An humble and serious Exhortation to the Gentry, and others. (which
concludes, with some questions to the damners and sinkers.) p. 132. CHAP. IV.
SECT. III. A Continuation, or a word to the better sort of Gentry, viz. the
Religious. p. 140. CHAP. IV. SECT. IV. Particular directions for the escaping
of Hell Torments, being six in number, with a caution to all, and a consolatory
conclusion to the servants of God. p. 145.
The Authors distance from the Press has occasioned these ERRATA'S, which the
Reader is desired to Correct.
PAge 2. Line 23. add [most probably.] p. 16. l. 31. for Bond read [Land.] p.
38. l. 21. for Instance, r. [Sense.] p. 51. l. 7. for innovation, r.
[invention.] p. 66. l. 3. add [Almost.] p. 99. l. 1. leave out [for.] p. 120.
l. 31. for strange, r. [strong.] p. 134. l. 31. for selves, r. [souls.] p. 138.
l. 7. leave out the word [Two.] p. 142. l. 32. for furious, r. [Serious.]

(...): OR, Everlasting Fire NO FANCY.
CHAP. I.
SECT. I. The Introduction, with some Reflections upon the Author of the opposed
Pamphlet.
THAT the way of the wicked deceives them, Prove. 12.26.
is one of the Sacred Oracles of that God who cannot lie nor be deceived; It
fills them with Sorrow when they look for Joy, and is as the Gall of Asps
within them, even then when it is sweet to their Mouths, and pleasing to their
corrupt affections. Job 20.14. Mr. Caryl.
(See the late Expositor in his Notes upon the place.) But, O how bitter will
it be to them hereafter, when all the sweetness of it is past, and ends in
those sorrows that never end! when their continued Rebellions against the King
of Heaven have laid them under perpetual punishment, and bound them in
everlasting Chains of Darkness and Damnation.

R. has professedly opposed it: His Light has discovered the rotten
Foundations upon which it is built, and has proved all those black and dismal
Imaginations concerning it, to be no better than the effects of Atra Bilis, and
to have no ground at all in the Scriptures.



And I trust, Good Reader, that thou will perceive by that which follows, that
he has not done it well, nor indeed any better than the Socinian has proved
that there is no Trinity, or than the Atheist has proved that there is no God.

The Method observed.
And now I shall proceed ((...)) in this following Method. 1. To lay down some
Arguments to prove the Everlasting Punishment of the wicked (that live and dye
such.) 2. To examine the said Book, in all the principal parts and passages of
it, (for it will not be worth while to speak of all he has written, there
being very many Impertinencies in it.) 3. To improve the Doctrine in a
practical way, for Instruction, Exhortation, etc.

But before I speak of either of these, it may seem needful to say something of
the Author of this precious Piece, which I am to deal with.

1. Who the Author was.
If any Man should ask me who it was, I would answer, It was (O Grande nomen!)
Mr. S. Richardson, even that admired Resolute Richardson, whom the good Men of
his Party did boast of so greatly, and supposed to be a fit Match for the
London-Ministers, viz. indefinitely, (for any of them, or for All of them to
deal with) See the Author in the Margin Mr. J. Collings, Vindic. Ministerii. my
Preface to the Reader. (sub finem.)
. And therefore some may imagine I have been too venturous, to engage
(voluntarily) with so great a Champion as He: But yet Reader, I am not
discouraged; I hope to come off clear, and to pass without hurt through all the
Pikes of his Arguments and Subtilties; for God and his Truth are greater and
stronger than Mr. R. and his Fallacies. -- But to return to that which I was
speaking of; I say it was He whom the World is so much beholding to for the
Book I am opposing. For I have seen his Name prefixed to it, though it be not
set in that Edition of it which I have, (and perhaps it might be as good policy
to conceal his Name in the second Edition, as it was to mention it in the
former.

2. What he was.
But though it may be easily gained what his Name was, yet it may be more
difficult to discover what Himself was. I remember the old saying, Noscitur ex
socio, etc. A dark Fellow is to be expounded by his Companions.

It might be questioned whether Mr. R. were himself of any Religion, for all
Religions have a Hell in their Creed, and yet he has none in his; wherefore
his Opinion concludes him of the doubtful gender in point of Religion, so that
we must be forced (as was said) to expound him by his Companions. And if you
would know who they were, and what Persuasion they were of, you may fitly
consult the Anabaptists Confession of Faith, Printed Anno Dom. 1644. which that
Dr. Featly.
Light of our Church (now fixed in a Higher Orb) was sometimes pleased to pass
some Animadversions upon, I mean in his Book, called The Dippers dipped: Where he
tells you, (and you may safely take his word for it) That the said Confession
was subscribed by Paul Hobson, Thomas Gunne, and others of the same stamp, and
amongst the rest, by S. Richardson, (to whom I would wish, if he be living,
saving Mercy and a sound Mind.)

And thus much by way of Introduction to my following Discourse. The first
particular whereof is now to be presented to thy serious thoughts, and
favorable censure.

CHAP. I. SECT. II. An endless state of Punishment for the Wicked and
Impenitent, proved: and the Proofs thereof vindicated from the Exceptions of
Mr. R. and his Brethren.
THE fittest Method of procedure in my present Design seems to be that which is
mentioned, viz. To prove the truth of the Doctrine contended for, (before I
meddle with the main Body of Mr. R. his Sophistical Argumentations) namely that
abovesaid.

And herein I do not undertake to convince the Atheist, or drive him out of his
Resolved Infidelity; but rather to confirm the Christian in the Belief of this
Doctrine, which he has been so often put in mind of by his Teachers.

And the first Argument that I would propose, Scripture-Testimony the strongest
Argument.
is the Testimony of God in Scripture; and that is indeed the strongest of all
Arguments, and the most convincing to the Soul and Conscience. As the learned
have sufficiently evinced, (Vid. Crakanthorp. Logic. de Argum. a Testimonio,
and Logicos passim de Testimonio Disputantes) for Truth is Essential to the
True God, Item Scheibl. Topic. cap. 31. sect. 50.
Titus 1.2. He cannot lie. A Man may be a Man though he be not true in his
word, but God could not be a God if he were not so: Keckerm. Log. lib. 3. cap.
13.
for God to be false in his Word, implies a manifest contradiction. And there
is nothing more natural to a Man in his right Wits, than to conceive his Maker
to be True in all that he says, or reveals.

Wherefore if we have the Testimony of God for it in his written Word, we may
safely build upon it.

I say, His written Word, for that is the Testimony that we are to enquire of,
Esaias 8.20. -- And as for those inward Impulses, Revelations, A digression of
Revelations and Enthusiastic impressions, etc.
and Suggestions of the Spirit, which some have sufficiently boasted of, and
more than sufficiently trusted to, as to Divine Testimonies, they have often
proved to be the Delusions of the lying Spirit, and the false lights which the
Prince of Darkness has set up in the blinded hearts of those that shut their
eyes against the light of that Word, which is able to save our Souls; having
them so dreadfully dazelled with the glory of the light within them, (as they
use to speak:) whose Enthusiastic Errors have been examined by many worthy
Men. Spanhem. Syntag. Theol. Beckman Exercitat. in Appendice, etc.
And their vanity has been showed by famous (or infamous) instances in Mr.
Sam. Cleark His Mirror, Cap. 27. Exampl. 17. Concerning the horrid Delusions
which a Gentleman in Warwickshire fell into, after he looked to be taught by
Revelations and Inspirations, and had refused to hear any conformable Minister
preach, etc.

As also of one Mr. Gilpin in the same Chapter: The sum of which History I have
briefly set down in my Caution against Quakerisme. Near the end.


I say, if we have the Testimony of God in his written Word, for the Doctrine I
assert, then we may be bold to believe it, and must believe it, though Mr. R.
and his Companions in Infidelity should write never so many Books against it.

Reader, if thou do not believe the Scriptures to be the Word of God, (or
know but little reason why thou should believe so) then I would advise
thee to read those that may confute thy unbelief, or confirm thy faith in that
particular, as Bishop Ward's Sermon against Anti-scripturists, Dr.
Stillingfleet's Orig. Sacr. and the truly Honorable Sir Charles Woolsley his
Grounds and Reasons of Scripture-Belief, Dr. Allestry his Sermon of the
Authority of the Scriptures. Mr. Baxt. Rest, part. 2. cap. 4.
with these in the Margin.

But if thou do believe it to be so, I trust thou will believe the Doctrine I
plead for: For, the Scripture testifies of it, in words as plain as can be
desired, viz. -- in Matthew. 25. last verse, and many other places.

To begin with that, Matthew. 25. last verse. These (the ungodly that shall be
set on Christ's left hand, Matthew. 25.46.
in the former verses) shall go away into Everlasting Punishment.

What can ever be spoken more plain, or more plainly to our purpose than this
is, They shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, 1. Urged.
therefore they shall be punished everlastingly: For if one were to tell us,
such or such are to be imprisoned perpetually; How could he express it more
clearly than by saying, That they must go into perpetual Imprisonment? And
these words are the words of Him who was (and is) the Son of the Father, and
most perfectly acquainted with his Counsels, Purposes, Truths and Ways, and had
no need to fright the wicked World with such a sad Doctrine, if it were not a
Truth.

This is that Marpesian Rock which Mr. Richardson was not able to fasten his
Teeth in, yet nevertheless, 2 Vindicated from Mr. R.'s Exceptions.
He has snapt at it Five Times together, p. 18, etc. where he has several
glosses upon the word [everlasting] which, as by Him applied, are worthy to be
had in everlasting detestation.

1. He tells us, That the Fire of Tophet is so called, His first Exception.
because it did burn Day and Night. -- But here our Lord speaks not of the Fire
of Tophet, Removed.
but of the Everlasting Punishment of the Wicked. And let Him show us where any
punishment is called Everlasting Punishment, because it lasted for some days
and nights. Job his Pains were doubtless Day and Night, yea for a considerable
time too, yet it is not said he suffered Everlasting Pains. The Psalmist said,
God's hand was heavy upon him Day and Night; Psalm. 32.4.
yet it is no where said, that he was under Everlasting Affliction.

The word Ever, and Everlasting, His second Exception, p. 19.
are used to note a Limited Time; as in Exodus 40.15. We read of an Everlasting
Priesthood; yet that Priesthood did not last for ever in the largest sense, but
only till the Son of God was come in the Flesh. -- This is the substance of
that which he says in the greatest part of the 19. Page of his Book.

Removed. And it is easily removed out of the way. Let us put it into a form of
Arguing, and it will be exactly thus: [The word Everlasting in some places is
used to signify but a limited time, therefore it must signify just the same,
when it is spoken of the Punishment of the wicked, in Matthew. 25. last verse.]

Now were not this a pitiful way of reasoning, and most apparently
inconsequent? See a parallel case in the word [save.] To save, sometimes
signifies only to be a means of Salvation, and an Instrument in God's hand, of
bringing Men into the way of Salvation, as when Ministers are said to save them
that hear them. 1 Timothy 4.16.
Shall we therefore say, that Christ is but an Instrumental means of Salvation?
God forbid: for He is the Author of Eternal Salvation. Heb. 5.9. Phil. 3.20.
And The Savior (by way of Emphasis.)

Everlasting does signify a limited Time, yet Mr. R. does not show us any
place in the New Testament where it is so taken; much less can he show any
Texts therein, that call a Temporal Punishment an Everlasting Punishment, or
any thing like it.

Exodus 40. was not capable of perpetuity, being Typical of the Priesthood of
Christ, (that great High Priest, Heb. 4.14.
as the Apostle calls him) who was appointed to put an end to all former
priesthood and Sacrifice, by offering up Himself once for All.

But the Wicked shall be capable of Everlasting Punishment, (properly so
called) for their very Bodies shall be raised Incorruptible: 1 Cor. 15.52.
In 1 Cor. 15. The Trumpet shall sound, and the Dead, i. e. All the Dead, shall
be raised incorruptible.

Matthew. 25.46.) that is used by St. Paul, 2 Cor. 4.18.
where he speaks of things Eternal in contradistinction to [Things Temporal] in
2 Cor. The things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen
are eternal (...).
: Yea, it is the same word in the Original, which is used by our Lord to
express the Eternity of the Saints Happiness. Matthew. 25.46.
-- These shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, and the Righteous into
Life Eternal. So that if the Punishment of the wicked (that continue such) be
not an endless Punishment, we may be at a great doubt whether the Happiness of
the Saints shall be endless happiness, or not; since the same word (as was
said) is used of both of them.

And now having Answered his first and chiefest Exceptions against this Proof,
we shall not fear to Examine those which follow, and thirdly thus: R. -- Fire
may be said to be Everlasting, His third Exception, p. 19.
when it does not go out till the Combustible Matter is consumed. (and then he
adds)

-- The Fire that destroyed Sodom, is called Eternal Fire, because it went not
out till the City was consumed. Jud. 7.



Answered. This is his third gloss upon the word Everlasting, in the latter
part of the 19. Page. And first, A Fire may be called Everlasting (by his
Logic) when it goes not out till the Combustible Matter is consumed. --

It seems then, if Mr. Richardson should be pleased to roast his Cat, His
absurdity showed in another case.
to make a Breakfast for those (worse than) Antichristian Priests, that fright
the World so needlessly by their Doctrine of Everlasting Punishments for the
Wicked; he might then bespeak them thus: [Behold Sirs, and see; for here is an
Everlasting Fire.] And if the poor ignorant Men should ask him how that can be
true, since the Fire will be out in a little time; He could answer them, That
it may be called Everlasting, because it will last till the Faggots are
consumed; but if he should tell them so, his speech would seem as Ridiculous
unto them, as his Book is Odious unto me.

And in case He should suffer them to be familiar with him, it is possible they
might tell him, that at this rate of Arguing, his own Beard might be called an
Everlasting Beard; for it is capable of growing whiles the nourishing matter
lasts, i. e. whiles there is any considerable moisture remaining in his
Pericranium.

And what Spirit (I would demand) has moved him to make use of that Sacred
Text of S. Jude, to justify such a piece of Learning by? Jud. 7. opened.
I find not any Expositors of Note, that Interpret that Eternal fire there
mentioned, of That fire that consumed the Cities (nor is there any show of
Reason why it should be so called, so far as I can apprehend; and if the reason
were, as Mr. R. would have it, because it went not out while the Combustible
matter lasted, why might we not call the flame of a Farthing Candle, an
Everlasting fire, since it will last till the wiek is spent?) but rather do
they interpret it of the Everlasting Wrath and Vengeance of God, Dr. Willet on
Jude. Mr. Baxter Saints Rest, Part 2. cap. 10.
which is fitly compared to fire in various respects, which I need not now
insist on: Dr. Willet makes it a proof of their Everlasting punishment, and Mr.
Baxter makes it an Argument of the present Punishments of the wicked (in Soul)
immediately after death, in opposition to those that imagine their Misery to be
put off till the Day of Judgment.

And if Mr. R. should Interpret the Everlasting punishment after the same
manner, of a punishment that shall last as long as the wicked shall endure; He
will overthrow his whole design, for they shall endure for ever, and see
corruption no more, after they are once raised from the grave, 1 Cor. 15.52.
in the Text aforesaid.

Fourthly, R. -- What if the Fire were Everlasting, yet it will not follow that
That which is cast into it is Everlasting; His fourth Exception, p. 20.
to which he adds [The wicked are compared in Scripture to Chafe and Stubble,
which will not be long in consuming.]

R. why might we not say, that it will follow, that the persons cast into that
fire, shall be there for everlasting, because the Fire it self is everlasting?
for without the supposal of their continual burning in that everlasting fire, I
say without that, the word everlasting (which flames with more terror than the
fire it self, and makes it most exceedingly intolerable) should stand in effect
for a Cipher, and become a mere Bugbear to fright fools withal; for if a
wicked man be soon consumed after he is cast into Hell fire, then the
everlastingness of it afterward will be as nothing unto him (he being upon
that supposal past its fury.)

R. had been so minded, why might not he have preached glad tidings to the
devils themselves? for he might bespeak them thus -- Rejoice, O ye unclean
Spirits, or at least, Despair not; for who knows but your punishments may be
ended in time; for what though Christ tells us of Everlasting fire prepared for
you, yet it will not follow that ye shall suffer everlastingly in it -- Yet
(however his Book has pleased them, as being so dangerous to the Souls of men)
I am confident they would take little comfort in such a comfortable preachment
as this.

And if his work should not prove to be done well (in what he taught us in this
Exception) we must excuse him the better, because he has endeavored to mend
it, by offering this following Observandum, viz. That, R. -- the wicked are
compared in Scripture to Chafe and Stubble, which are not long in consuming,
in any fire that they fall into.

So then, that is the proposition, Mr. R. his excellent Comparison examined.
from which his Reader (he hopes) is wise enough to draw the conclusion; that
therefore the wicked shall not be always burning in Hellfire, because they are
compared to Stubble, which will not burn long before it be consumed.



non currunt quatuor pedibus, i. e. do not hold in all respects, but in some
only. Psalm. 22.6.
David compares himself to a Worm, yet we will not say therefore, that he had
no bones in his body, nor no reason in his Soul, because a Worm has not. So
the Scripture says, the Saints are as Christ himself was in this world [as He
was, so are we in this world:] yet it follows not that the Saints are here
without any sin, because Christ was so. It Is enough that they are as he was in
other respects, namely, subject to scorn and contempt, and manifold troubles
and temptations. So the wicked are as Chafe and Stubble in some respects, that
is fitted for vengeance, and not able to resist it when it comes upon them, as
Stubble is fit for fire, and cannot resist its violence, or the like.

R. -- It Is to be noted that the Scripture sometimes uses such words as do
exceed their signification: Nahum 3.9.
His fifth Exception, p. 20.
as in Nahum it is said, That the Ethiopian Army was infinite: that is, very
great. R. his Masters or Brethren, as may be showed in time and place; nor does
it well agree with that Opinion which he would promote by his Comparison, of
the quick dispatch which the Stubble receives from the fire it is cast into.

Matthew. 25. ult.

M. 25.46.
And that the word Everlasting, in that Text, does not mean only a punishment of
long continuance, but an endless state in Punishment, This I say has been
Evidenced before, by such Considerations as Mr. Richardson and his Angels will
never be able to Answer. See my 4. Answer to his second Exception (in this same
Section.)

Thus we have seen my Authors Glosses upon the word Everlasting and their
unserviceableness to his Design, so that we may now lawfully write over them
the words of the Wise man, ( Eccles. 1.2.) Vanity of Vanities, All is Vanity.

The Socinians gloss, removed.
And now I cannot conceive any other Exception against this proof that is worthy
to be considered, unless it be that of Mr. R. his Brethren (whom he calls the
Protestants of Poland) I mean the Socinians, who would have us think the
Everlasting Punishment that the Wicked are in danger of, to be the Total
Abolishment of their Natures to all Eternity (or in one word, Osterod. compend.
Relig. in Polonia florentis. -- Valent. Smalcius disp. de Baptism.
Everlasting Annihilation) Thus the Authors in the Margin. Their Arguments for
it I shall not trouble my English Reader with, the Learned may see them in
their Opposites, Calovius in Socin. profligat. q. De Morte aeterna; Stegman.
Photin. Refut. disput. 56. quaest. 4. and many others, who have sufficiently
Answered them.

The Author's Arguments against the Socinian Interpretat. of the word.
[Punishment.]
I shall content my self to urge my Arguments against them (herein) which as
they are not at all the better for being mine, so I hope they are never a whit
the worse, for Truth is the same when spoken by the meanest. -- And first thus,

1. The word (...), here used, is the same which is used of the Life, or
happiness of the Righteous. And since it signifies a positive state in the one,
how can it be questioned whether it signifies the like in the other? (so that
if the Everlasting Life do note a Being in Happiness; it is easy to infer that
Everlasting Punishment does note, in like sort, a Being in Misery) and not an
Abolishing of their Beings. Nor do I find that word used as an Epithete to any
thing but that which is positive (in sense at least if not in sound.)

And if it might be good sense to say -- A man may be Annihilated for ever; yet
I am apt to doubt whether it be so, to say, that He may suffer an Everlasting
Annihilation -- for Everlastingness does imply a lastingness (as a thousand
includes a hundred) and by consequence, Partit. Metaph. l. 2. Sect. 13. quaest
3.2.
a subject lasting, which in this case is not found ( Duratio est permanentia
Rei in esse, as the Learned Martinius most truly.)

2. They shall go away into this Everlasting Punishment: [to go away] into it,
implies a positive state, yea, and their going away, viz. from Christ, and his
Glorious Presence, will be none of the smallest parts of their Punishment; and
therefore is mentioned first -- Depart from me into, etc. Matthew. 25.41. The
Holy Father of old, S. Chrysostom. in Matthew. Homil. 24.
who had as little need of these men's Learning, as of their Religion, did
confidently affirm it to be the greatest Punishment of all. But it would be
little Punishment to them (or rather none) to depart from Christ, if at the
same time they should depart from themselves too, and be turned into nothing.

Matthew. 25.) is the saddest of all that ever the Enemies of God endured, for
there will be the Day of Wrath, Matt. 12.36.
wherein God will render them the full wages of their Iniquities, not abating
them so much as for Idle words; and therefore it is called in Scripture, The
Terrible day of the Lord (to the wicked though not to the Saints) but it would
not be the greatest Punishment if it were but the turning them to nothing. This
I say would not be the saddest Punishment unto them, but rather a securing them
from all Punishment; for when they have no being at all, they cannot be under
any sorrow, nor be sensible of any Punishment.

Matthew. 7.6. Acts 20.29. Psalm. 22.12.
Dogs and Swine, and Wolves and wild Bulls in Scripture, yea who are called
Enemies of God, and Children of the Devil Psalm. 37.20. Psalm. 92.9. John 8.44.
(and have served him to their Makers dishonor, all their days on Earth) I
say, can any men persuade themselves, that these wretched mischievous ones
shall be in no worse condition (for Misery) than the pretty Birds, and harmless
Lambs, and the rest, that did all the work for which they were made, and never
transgrest their Makers Law? surely if they can, we may justly bespeak them in
the words of the Apostle, Gal. 3.1. O foolish men, who has bewitched you. --

And thus I have vindicated that Sacred Text of our Savior from the false
glosses, and fallacious Exceptions of Mr. R. and his Companions. And so the
Argument it self [They shall go away into Everlasting Punishment, therefore
they shall be for ever in Punishment] is sound and firm, and the subtilties of
a Thousand hells shall never be able to Answer it.

And now it will be time to put an end to this (Second) Section.

CHAP. I. SECT. III. Other Texts of Scripture Urged, and Arguments grounded on
Scripture.
2 Thessalonians. 1.9. urged and cleared.
THe next place of Scripture that I shall name for the confirmation of the Point
is, 2 Thessal. 1.9. where he tells us that they who obey not the Gospel of
Christ, shall be punished with everlasting Destruction. They shall be punished
with that Punishment which the Apostle calls by the name of Destruction; and
that Destruction he tells us is an everlasting Destruction, therefore it must
needs follow, that they shall be under punishment Everlastingly. -- If Mr. R.
should say any thing to the word Everlasting, we may find some satisfaction in
the foregoing Section, where it has been largely discoursed of. If he Cavil
about the word [Destruction] and pretend it is meant of the Destruction of
their Beings (by turning them into nothing) then we may see something to the
contrary, in the three latter parts of the last Section (in Answer to the
Socinians;) To which I shall now add these Three particulars.

Destruction in that Text is not Annihilation. [(...), etc.]
1. That this Everlasting Destruction is such as comes unto them in a way of
Vengeance, as in the 8. Verse, To take vengeance on those (or as it is in the
Grek, to give vengeance to those) that know not God, and that obey not the
Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ.

And can he be said to give vengeance to them, when he takes away their very
Beings, and so makes them incapable of receiving any punishment at all? Surely
not. The lawful Magistrate, under Christ, is appointed to act the part of a
Revenger upon them that do evil. Romans 13.4.
And that vengeance which (according to God's Ordinance) he inflicts upon
Malefactors, is commonly such as they are very sensible of. And shall not
ungodly sinners feel their punishment, (to the purpose, as we say) when the
Supreme Lawgiver shall set himself purposely, to execute wrath, and render
vengeance to them? yea doubtless they shall. For when He will execute vengeance
upon them, Ezekiel. 25.17.
they shall then know that He is the Lord, as the Prophet speaks. But it is
plain they could not do so, if his vengeance did consist in taking away their
Being. (that which is not, cannot know any thing.)

Flood came, Matthew. 24.39.
and took them all away; but it is [ omnes only, not totos] it took away All
those Persons, viz. out of the Land of the Living: But it did not take away the
whole Natures. Their Souls are living still. And God will be so far from
destroying the Souls of the wicked, (as to their Nature and Being) as that he
will quicken and raise their Bodies, which Death and Worms had destroyed
formerly. Acts 24.15.
There shall be a Resurrection of the just and the unjust, says St. Paul in
the Acts. And they shall be raised for good and all, as we say, so as to see
corruption no more for ever. 1 Cor. 15.52.


Matthew. 10.28.
that God is able to destroy Body and Soul in Hell: that is, to fill them with
perfect Misery: And if it were meant of destroying their Beings, then that
dreadful word [Hell] which is added as an aggravation of the destruction, would
signify just nothing in point of Terror: for if a Man be turned into nothing,
it is all one whether it be in the one or the other. (for nothing is no nearer
to something, in Heaven than in Hell.)

And thus also the word is used very often in our own Language: As when we say
of Oppressors, that they have destroyed whole Families, we do not mean that
they have turned them into nothing, but that they have brought them into a
calamitous condition. And this, I hope, may be enough for that Text, and I
think it is not too much.

A third place I shall offer, Matthew. 25.41. urged for it.
(to prove the everlastingness of the Punishment of the wicked) is Matthew.
25.41. He shall say unto them on his left hand, Depart from me ye cursed into
everlasting fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels.

viz. really, by changing place:) as Christ is departed, or gone into Heaven;
in 1 Pet. 3. 1 Pet. 3. ult.
last verse. where it is the same Greek Verb that is used in both places; (...).
and so supposes the continuance of their Being.

Nothing, or such a state, if I might so call it, as the World was in before
its Creation, but) into Fire.

v. 41.
as in the Text it self; and therefore certainly is everlasting, in the saddest
sense, or without end.

And if any Man shall say, they may be cast into this everlasting Fire, but not
suffer everlastingly in it; he had need have no less than Mr. Richardson's
Learning to enable him to give a good Account of his speech. And he that can
conceive any such thing as probable, may (by the same degree of acuteness)
persuade himself, 2 Pet. 1.11.
that the Saints may go into the everlasting kingdom of Christ, and yet
possibly not dwell everlastingly in it. (which yet they will hardly question in
the least measure, while they have so many faithful promises of a Happy
Eternity. 1 Thessalonians. 4.17. Rev. 22.5, etc.
)

A fourth Text of Scripture, which may conveniently be urged, for [the
everlastingness of the punishment of the wicked] is Daniel 12.2. Daniel 12.2.
urged and opened.
Many that sleep in the dust of the earth shall awake, some to everlasting
life, and some to shame and everlasting contempt.

But before I come to speak of that which most directly concerns my present
purpose, Many] how understood.
it will not be amiss to explain the word [many] for some have gathered from
thence, that there shall be no general Resurrection. The weakness of which
Opinion (to speak no worse of it) I might show from a great many places. These
two, for brevity sake, I shall content my self with: Jo. 5.28, 29. The hour is
coming, wherein All that are in the Grave shall hear his Voice, Jo. 5.29.
and come forth, etc. So then, there are none excepted. And in the 24. chap. of
the Acts, it was the Apostles belief, Acts 24.15.
That there shall be a Resurrection of the just and the unjust: that is, of all
and every one of them: for if the just there do mean All the just; the unjust
must mean All the unjust, for the phrase is alike of both of them: so that he
that grants the one, may not deny the other. And therefore that Text in Daniel
cannot tend to strengthen that Opinion; which that we may the better perceive,
these three things may be considered. 1. That the [ Multi ex dormientibus, many
of them that sleep, vid. Synops crit. in loc.
is in substance the same, as if it were said [ Multi dormientes, i. e. Those
many that are sleeping in the Dust of the Earth. And then it will be no less,
than if it were said, All of them.

2. That the Proposition is particular only, and therefore will not warrant a
Universal Negative to be inferred from it. Many Saints, or Multitudes of
Saints, shall be caught up together, to meet the Lord Jesus, 1 Thessalonians. 4.17.
at his coming to Judgment, is a Truth. Yet we cannot truly conclude that All
shall not. Doubtless their Lord will receive them all, as well as any. And St.
Paul makes no difference between himself and the rest of the faithful, in
respect of that privilege.

3. Many] sometimes put for All.
By the word [many] we may (by a very usual figure) understand [All], and so we
find it is put for All, in several Texts of Holy Writ. Psalm. 97.1. The Lord
reigns, let the earth be glad; let the multitudes of the Isles, or the many
Isles, be glad thereof: i. e. let all Countries be glad of it. (Let all the
faithful in all Nations comfort themselves by the thoughts of his Sovereignty
and Dominion over all.) So in Romans 5. Through the disobedience of one, (viz.
Adam) many were made sinners: viz. All those that descended from him in a
Natural way.

And if any that are dead (or sleeping in, etc.) should not awake, and arise
hereafter, it must be the wicked, (for that is our Adversary's Opinion in the
case) but that cannot be supposed, nor cannot stand with the truth of this
Text, which tells us, that some (of those many) shall arise to everlasting
shame and contempt.

Which is most direct for my purpose: And so plain, that I cannot guess any
thing that can, with any show of reason, be objected against it.

For first, If the wicked shall awake to everlasting contempt, The proof of the
point from Dan. 12.
it cannot be but they must remain as to their Natures and Personal Beings, and
not be annihilated. And secondly, If they awake to everlasting contempt and
shame, it must needs follow that they shall be everlastingly under shame, etc.
As in case Mr. R. his Book against Hell, etc. should bring his name into
perpetual reproach among Christians, it must needs be perpetually under
reproach. (And the everlasting shame is everlasting in the same sense, as the
glory (of the righteous) in the same verse is everlasting) -- And thus I have
proved the everlasting punishment of the wicked in another World, from several
Scriptures. See also to the same purpose, Matthew. 3.12. Luke 3.17. Matthew. 18.8.
Mark 9.47. Jo. 3.36. Revel. 19.20.20. verse. 10. and many more, Rev. 14.11.
which thy own Reading may furnish thee with.

And thus having proved the Point by several Texts of Scripture, Some Scripture
Arguments for the Doctrine.
I shall now add (ex abundanti) some Scripture-Arguments to confirm it. And the
first is this: The wicked and impenitent shall always (or to all Eternity) have
a Being: But they shall not have a Being in Joy and Happiness, nor in a middle
state between Happiness and Misery: therefore they shall always have a Being in
Misery and Torment.

1. From the everlastingness of their Being.
The Major (or first) Proposition is easy to be proved: For first, The Dead
shall be raised incorruptible, in 1 Cor. 15.52. What Dead does he mean? surely
all of them, since he makes no distinction between one sort and another in this
respect. As when it is said, that the Sea shall give up her Dead, The wicked
shall always have a Being.
that is, all her Dead. And if we shall suppose that it must be meant only of
the Dead Saints, (or as the Scripture calls it, 1 Cor. 15.52.
the Dead in Christ) then it might be said as properly, that the Dead shall not
be raised incorruptible, for we might mean it of the wicked that are Dead; yea,
it might be more properly said so; for the wicked that are dead, are many more
than the Saints that are dead: (because most of the Living never were Saints
indeed) Now the Denomination being to be given from the greater part, I see no
Reason why it might not more fitly be said, [The Dead shall not be raised
incorruptible] than to say the contrary, if only the dead Saints should be
raised. Nor has my Author, or any for him, ever been so resolute, as to
affirm, the word Dead, to signify the Saints more than the wicked. -- And
their Souls being immortal, we cannot think that God will unite them at
Judgment to Mortal Bodies: If God had meant that the Bodies of the wicked,
after the Day of Judgment, should dye again, (in a proper sense) surely he
would not raise them at that Day from their Graves. If Death and Destruction of
their Flesh were the great wrath they were to lie under, the Worms would be
sufficient Executioners of his wrath upon them. What need any such Miracle be
wrought upon them, as the quickening and raising of their putrified Bodies, if
he intended they should dye and corrupt again?

So then, the first Proposition is certain, that the wicked themselves shall be
raised to an Immortal state at the Day of Judgment. (They that would come but
seldom to the Church, shall not have the Happiness to lie always in the Grave;
they shall be remembered in that bond of forgetfulness, and not dye like Bruits,
though they lived like such.)

The wicked shall not be happy to Eternity.
The second thing to be proved, is this, [That the wicked shall not have a Being
in Happiness, after the Day of Judgment.] This I need not be large in proving
to them, that know any thing of Holy Scripture. They shall come forth to the
Resurrection of Damnation, John 5.28, 29.
(which will be far enough from all Happiness in the least degree; though they
were joyful enough when they were Damning and Sinking on Earth, yet they will
be sorrowful enough, when their Damned Petition is granted, when they sink
irrecoverably into Damnation it self, when instead of thinking themselves
Companions for Gentlemen, they will find themselves companions for Devils)
Damnation doubtless will destroy all joys whatsoever, Matthew. 25.41.
and the curse that shall be on them will seclude all blessedness. -- Nor shall
they be in a middle state between Happiness and Misery after the Day of
Judgment, for there is no such middle state thought of by any sober Christians,
nor so much as dreamed of by the Papists themselves, (whatsoever properties
Purgatory may have in it before the Day of Judgment, yet they hold it shall
cease for ever after that Day, and nothing remain but Heaven and Hell, and Joy
and Torment, to be the places and portions of reasonable Creatures.) And this
conceit is abundantly confuted by what has been said already; for Wrath and
Damnation and the Curse are, or imply a proper state of Misery, not a middle
state between Misery and Happiness.

Wherefore the Consequence is clear as the Light: The Conseq. cleared.
for if the wicked shall always have a Being after the Day of Judgment, and yet
never have a Being in Happiness; then it must needs follow, that they must have
a Being always in Misery and Torment. And this, I think, is a plain Argument,
and that which follows is no less plain, being taken from the nature of Divine
Justice. It is thus, good Reader.

Divine Justice requires that the Wicked that continue such, A second Argument
taken from God's Justice. 1. Cleared.
should be punished for ever. Therefore they shall be punished for ever.

The Consequence will not be denied. The Antecedent is proved thus. If the
wicked are always worthy of Punishment for their Wickedness, then Justice
requires that they should always have it; for it is the part of Justice to
render what is deserved. But the wicked (supposing them to have a Being always
after the Day of Judgment, as was proved just before) must needs be always
worthy of Punishment. Romans 6. ult.
The wages of sin being Death; even Eternal Death or Damnation, as appears by
the Antithesis, and other places.

Let any sober man judge whether the punishing of sin always, upon them that
always deserve punishment, Genesis 18.25. Psalm. 9.7, 8. 2 Timothy 4.8, etc.
be not more agreeable to the nature of that God, who is a holy God and
abhorring iniquity, who is the supreme Lawgiver and Sovereign Lord, and in a
word, the Judge of the world, and the Righteous Judge, than the letting of it
go unpunished: If a Judge on earth is not counted so just as he should be, when
he appoints no punishment; or but a small punishment for a Fact that deserves a
great punishment: How shall God's justice be cleared as he is the Governor of
the World, if he should punish them but for a time, who are worthy to be
punished for ever?

That Vindictive justice is Essential to God, is the great Foundation-Doctrine,
upon which the Champions of the common Faith have proceeded, Alting. in Cat.
Palate q. 40. Arnoldus in Relig. Socin. cap. 1. de essentia Dei, Sect. 38, 39,
40. etc.
in opposing the Socinians (who I think are the most formidable party, of all
Satan's Host of Heretics) see those in the Margin, and others mentioned by Dr.
Owen in his Preface to his Defense of the Trinity, and especially that Learned
Doctor himself in his Diatrib. de Justitia vindic. (cap. 15.) where he well
defends the Arguments of the famous Lubbertus, against the Acute oppositions of
Dr. Twisse, about this particular point.

2. Defended.
But this I foresee will not pass with some Readers unless it be defended
against the objections that may most naturally be brought to the contrary.

1. Say some, At this rate of Arguing it seems to follow that the Saints
themselves should be punished everlastingly for their sins, for they also
deserve such punishment, and they can do nothing to abate the evil of sin, or
remove the evil desert of them.

2 Pet. 2.9.
for so the Apostle tells us of the unjust, and our Savior has told us that
they shall be accountable for idle words, in Matthew. 12. But he will deal with
his Saints in a way of Mercy, and spare them according to the greatness of his
Mercy, Mal. 3.17.
yea, he will spare them as a man spares his Son that serves him. And no
wonder since he spared not his own Son for their sakes, in Romans 8.32. And
though his justice be most strict and infinite (as being His justice who is God
the Judge of all and glorious in Holiness) yet it requires not a double
satisfaction, but is (if I may so speak) fully contented with Christ's
satisfaction and sufferings in their behalf, who bore their sins and had the
Chastisement of their peace upon himself, 1 Pet. 2.2.
Esaias 53.

But as for the ungodly (that live and dye such) it is not so with them; they
shall never be able to plead the satisfaction of Christ in their behalf: for he
will disown them before the Holy Angels, and say unto them Depart from me.
Matthew. 7.23.
So that there is a valuable consideration, upon the account of which Divine
Justice may dispense with the punishment of the Saints, even Christ's sufferings
for them: but it is not so with the wicked and impenitent.

etc. now, and his justice as strict now as ever it will be, and since it does
not move him to punish the Wicked according to their deserts now, why may we
not hope the same for hereafter?

Pet. 2.9. He knows how to reserve the unjust to the Day of Judgment to be
punished. What if he let them alone in the day of his Patience, wherein he is
minded to make known his long-suffering, yet he will not always be mocked as
St. Paul intimates in the Epistle to the Galat. What if his Justice does not
move him to punish them now, how will it follow that it will not hereafter,
when the Day of Wrath is come, and when the Righteous Judge shall come from
Heaven, on purpose to render unto them according to their works, and to take
vengeance on them that obey not his Gospel, in 2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9. And here a
question is very needful to be resolved, viz. How it can be just with God to
punish the sins of a short lifetime with Everlasting punishment?

Possibly sinful men (being blinded with sin and self-love) may not discern the
Equity of that severe Dispensation; How it can be just to punish Temporal
offenses eternally.
but that will not prove it to be unequal. If God might do nothing but what
they approve of, he should not be known to be a God indeed. And while he is
such he may do whatsoever he pleases most justly, to any of his Creatures. His
very Will is the Rule of Righteousness. And therefore to question whether it
can be just with God to punish the Impenitent Enemies of his Laws
everlastingly, when we have seen so plainly that it is his Will so to do, is
the very firstborn of folly.

etc. And yet that is after a sort an Everlasting punishment, as taking them
away for ever from all the privileges, honors and comforts of the
Commonwealth, that they were capable of if they had lived longer. And for many
offenses, they are commonly adjudged to perpetual Banishment or Imprisonment.
And what is an offense against a King and Country, in comparison of an offense
against the God of Heaven? surely nothing unto it: nor would it be any offense
indeed, or deserve any punishment if it were not an offense against God.

the Honor of a true Subject. And if the Prince and he should live for ever,
it were just that he should keep him in Prison for ever, till he acknowledge
his fault, and humble himself unfeignedly for it, as the Wicked in Hell will
not to any purpose: (They will not humble themselves for their sins, in any
Religious way, no not then when they are tormented for them, as may be
discovered ere long.) And if an offense against a man may deserve perpetual
Imprisonment, how much more may an offense against God deserve perpetual
Damnation? What are all the men in the world to him? Behold, says the Prophet,
All Nations before him are as nothing, Esaias 40.17.
and vanity.

Pet. 2.4. 2 Pet. 2.4.
He spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to Hell: when once
they had sinned, God spared them not, his Justice took hold on them immediately
and condemned them to Everlasting punishment, for their state is expressed by
St. Jude v. 6. by Everlasting chains under darkness, and our Savior tells us,
that Everlasting fire is prepared for them: Matthew. 25. v. 41.
And certainly, no man will question whether they shall be punished
Everlastingly by that Everlasting fire, or not, unless he be bewitched by Mr.
R's evil Spirit. And though it were severity and strict Justice so to deal with
them, yet we know it was no injustice at all; for He is a Righteous God and
without Iniquity. And though His ways are sometimes past finding out, Deutr
32.4. Psalm. 9.7.
Romans 11. yet still we must say, as those in the Revelation, Just and True are
thy ways, O King of Saints. Assuredly he will not punish the Devils themselves
one whit longer than their sins deserve. -- And if the sins of Angels are
justly punishable with Everlasting punishments, must we not acknowledge the
same concerning sinful men and their sins?

Is sin any better thing in Men than in Angels, or is God any fitter to be
despised and dishonored by them than by the other? (Doubtless if it make the
noblest Beings worthy of Everlasting shame, it must needs make their Inferiors
so too.) To which let me add thus much, that he has laid more engagements upon
Men to obey him than he has done upon the fallen Angels. He has given Time,
and Means, and Motives to Repent, and promises Mercy and Salvation in and
through Christ, Esaias 55.7.
in case they forsake their evil ways, and turn unto him, which he has not
done for the fallen Angels. And as for the Inferiority of Man's Nature to the
Nature of Angels, That (I say) is so far from excusing or extenuating their
fault, in sinning against him, as that it seems very plainly to aggravate the
offense. If it be so horrible for Angels and Powerful Spirits to cross his Will
and oppose his Laws, and Government, it seems to be much worse for Dust and
ashes so to do. As it is a greater piece of Impudence for a mean person to
contradict his Prince, than for Lords and Nobles so to do.

Matthew. 27. Luke 23. etc.
it made his name subject to reproaches and Accusations, and bitterest Scoffs
and Taunts from the basest and wickedest men; It made his Soul to be full of
Sorrow, though it were free from all spot of sin. It made him a man of Sorrows
on Earth, who is the Matter of Heavens Joy: It made him to be despised and
rejected of men, and live a life of continual Persecutions, who is the object
of the Angels Worship, and at whose Birth they sang A Hymn of Praise. Thus we
see what Miseries he bore, when he undertook for sinners, and bare their sins,
1 Pet. 2.24.

And yet the sins that Christ became answerable for, were not any sins of the
Impenitent (that live and dye such,) for if he had made satisfaction for them,
they should not be condemned for them, as we know they shall.

Now if Christ suffered so much, when he undertook for them that in time should
repent, (if they came to years) how great must that punishment be, which the
Impenitent must bear when they must answer for themselves? That which (in the
Penitent man) made Christ to suffer so great things for a time, being imputed
to him (as the surety for the sinner) must needs (in the impenitent) deserve
Everlasting Punishment. It is more for Christ to suffer for a time, than for
sinful men to suffer for ever. He being Romans 9.5.
God as well as man; that which, by Imputation to Christ, made him liable to
temporal vengeance and the curse of the Law, must needs make the sinner worthy
of Eternal vengeance, being inherent in him, and acted by him, and attended
with final impenitence, (as it is in them that perish.)



etc. as ever he was. And the like may be said in other cases. The hearts of
the children of men are fully set to do evil. Eccles. 8.11.
They would have sinned for ever, and why should not they suffer for ever? what
more just than that those should never want for sorrow, that would never
consent to forsake their sin? If a man were to live on Earth never so many
thousands of years, and his Prince should know he would always be of a
Rebellious disposition, he would think he had reason enough to keep him in
prison all that time. And yet as was said before, there is no comparison
between the Princes of this world, and the God that made it.

The Wicked cease not offending when they are in Hell: They will be
Blasphemers, Revel. 16.9. -- 11.
when they cannot be Atheists, Drunkards and Cheaters, etc. and will hate God's
people when they cannot hurt them. They will always be destitute of true
Holiness, and be enemies to it (when they are in Hell) though they will be
hindered from following the sins they like of. Hell will be as full of sin as of
Torment, yea, and a great part of its Torment, will be by sin as well as for
sin. Will it not fill the Hypocrites hollow heart with vexation to think with
himself what a silly Dissembler he has been, to remember what care he took to
deceive others, and what pains he used to deceive himself, and how careless he
was of that time which was given him to prepare for Eternity? Will it not
torment the Drunkard, to think how he served the Devil till he could not stand
on his Legs, how he valued a Barrel above Heaven, and the company of Sots,
before communion with Christ in his ways, and so of the rest.

In a word: when a reasonable creature comes to see that he has been his own
Ruin (by following the ways of his own heart) and has lost at once the world
and Heaven by his wilful wickedness, (when he was also warned of the danger
time after time, and beseeched to turn that he might be saved) who knows
whether this very Remembrance of his former follies, as the Means and Causes of
his uncurable Miseries, will not be as great a Torment to him as hellfire it
self? Doubtless we cannot here comprehend what a Hell sin it self will prove to
the sinner, that lives and dies under the guilt thereof. -- To conclude this
Section, it is observable that the Jesuits themselves, (who of all the Men in
the World, are least apt to think the worst of sin, since they have found out
ways to make satisfaction for it themselves) yet I say these very Men do
constantly own the Doctrine of the Everlasting Punishment of the wicked
hereafter, as Bellarmin, Valentia, Vid. Baronii Disp. de peccato Mortali. part
2. sect. 3.
and the like Sophisters: And therefore (Reader) if thou can see no Reason
for it, but judge it unjust, that they should be so punished, thou will show
thy self more Blind, than these Sons of Darkness.

And so much for the Proof of the Doctrine asserted.

CHAP. II.
SECT. I. A Taste of Mr. Richardson's Grapes in the beginning of his Garden, or
the Sophistry and Impertinencies of the former Pages of his Pamphlet,
discovered.
HAving laid down some Proofs of the Doctrine asserted, and vindicated those
Proofs from Mr. R. and his Fellow's Evasions and Exceptions; I shall now
proceed, with God's permission and assistance, to examine his Book, and
encounter the Enemies of this Truth, (whether great or small) that are to be
found therein. And though we may call them Legion, for that they are many, yet
I trust thou will find, Reader, in due season, that their united strength is
far enough from being insuperable. My Author was wise enough to foresee, that
all good Christians would not have a good Opinion of Him, or his Work, and
therefore supposes in his Epistle to the Reader, that (in this unthankful Age)
those that are in the Dark themselves, might reject and undervalue the new
Light he has afforded them, and say of Him, as some did of Christ, [He has a
Devil, and is mad, why hear ye him.] And truly, if they shall say so of him, I
shall not much reprove them for it. For in the entrance of his Book, he writes
as though madness were in his heart, as it is expressed in Ecclesiastes; As
though a Spirit of vanity and impertinency had guided his valiant Pen: For he
begins with a discourse of Christ's Descent into Hell, and seems to please
himself abundantly in setting his Betters at variance with each other, I mean
by reckoning up the different Expositions of that Article amongst Protestant
Divines: And what (I pray you) is that to the purpose he aims at? For what if
Vrsinus and Mr. Perkins were not altogether of the same Opinion with Bucer, and
others, as to the sense of that Article, yet it is sufficiently known, that they
were far from thinking with Mr. R. that there is no Hell, nor no Everlasting
Punishment for the Wicked hereafter.

Or what if Hell (in that Article) do not signify the place of Torment for the
Enemies of God, yet how will it follow that it does not signify such a thing
in those places, where mention is made of Hellfire, and of destroying Body and
Soul in Hell, and the like? To his Impertinency may be added his Impiety; for I
find not any thing of that sentence in the place cited out of Dr. Fulk, (his
Defense of the English Translation) which he alleges for His, in the 5. Page
of his Book.

Afterward he brings in the Opinions of some learned Men about the word Sheol,
which is as much to the purpose, as the other. He tells us, that it sometimes
signifies the Grave (and what thanks shall we give him for such a discovery)
but yet, alas, he had not showed more of his Learning, in the two former Pages,
than he has showed of his folly in two Lines following, (in p. 11.) where he
tells us, that Sheol cannot signify Hell, in their speech, that believe there
is no Hell. As much as if he had said [The Devil is not conceived to be an
Enemy to Mankind, by those that believe there is no Devil; (which has been the
Alehouse Doctrine of some Damners and Sinkers in our days) And then he adds,
[The Greeks say plainly, that Men's Souls shall vanish like smoke:] If they do,
the more ignorant are they, and if English Men think so too, they would be so
much the fitter to hear and believe the Doctrine of his Book (which is no
better than the other:) His Head has as much of Atheism in it, which can (by
the force of imagination) turn Hell into a Dream, and Everlasting Punishment
into a Bugbear and Scarecrow, as he that fancies the Soul to be turned into
smoke. But enough of this. --

Let us see a little of his Sophistry, in his Cavil at Dr. Ames his speech (if
it be his indeed. His Sophistry.
) Dr. Ames (says Mr. R.) tells us, in his Marrow of Divinity, p. 4.
that the Scripture speaks nothing distinctly of the place of Hell, or the
manner of Torture there. -- Whereupon he thus replies upon the Doctor. [If so,
then it speaks nothing of these things, for what the Scripture speaks, it
speaks distinctly. --

But while he thus makes game at Doctor Ames, he does another mischief, viz.
make himself ridiculous; for none but a Caviller would gather Mr. R.'s
conclusion from it. His meaning (I dare say) was only this, that it speaks
nothing distinctly concerning its situation; In what part of the World it is
placed, how far distant from the Sun or Stars, or what compass it is of, or the
like; But does not mean that it speaks nothing of that place, which is commonly
called by that Name, Scripture assures us, that there was a Garden in Eden,
Genesis 2.8.
in which Man was placed, yet I might say without absurdity, That it speaks
nothing distinctly of that place, for it tells us only that it was Eastward,
(in the general) but says not what part of the World it was in; how long, or
how broad, or how near to the place where Jerusalem stood, or the like. So in
p. 6. He gives us another chip of the same Block, Page 6
for he tells us, that the word [Hell] is not found in the Hebrew or Greek. And
that the word Sheol, which is so translated, signifies properly, the Grave. --

A very precious Revelation! and such as might be well accepted, if my Author,
or any of his Judgment would but impart it (kindly) to those Noble spirited
Gentlemen that are Inamorato's to a play, and frequent those Places where all
things are common. For might they not go the more pleasantly thither, when they
are assured, that if they dye when they are at worst, they shall go to no worse
a place than the Grave, and that there is no other, nor worser Hell than it;
for that which precise Men have rendered by the word [Hell] does properly
signify the Grave. But yet let them not trust too much to this kind of
Learning: for if they please to consider what I have to say unto it, they will
find it is not worth one Glass of good Wine. Mr. R.'s invention to prove [no
Hell] will prove as strongly that there is no Devil.
For if this were a proof that there is no Hell; viz. that the word so rendered
signifies another thing sometimes; then I say, at the same rate of arguing, we
might prove (as well and as wisely) that there is no Devil neither: for the
word Devil is not found in the Greek Testament: (since an English word is not a
Greek word) And that which is translated Devil in the 4th. of Matthew. and other
places, (...).
is known to signify an ill-conditioned Man, a Detractor, Railer, Accuser, and
such like: This I say is the proper importance of the original word. And yet
sob^r Christians will believe (in spite of all Mr. R.'s subtilty) that it
signifies (in that Chapter) the same that we use to call by that name, even the
great implacable adversary of Mankind, and cannot doubt of it, if they read the
10. and 11. Verses of that Chapter.

And this is that which he has offered us upon the word [ Sheol.] He adds
something like it upon the word Gehenna. But of that (with God's leave) in the
next Section.

CHAP. II. SECT. II. Mr. R. his Observations upon the word Hellfire, Damnation
of Hell, etc. Of the Rich Man and Lazarus, in Luke 16. Of Tophet: Of the Worm
that never dies, censured.
R. -- Hellfire, in Matthew. 5. and other places, signifies the Fire that was in
the Valley of the Son of Hinnom: And the word [Gehenna] which is used for Hell,
P. 12. and 14.
is borrowed from the Valley of Hinnom. -- BUT by his leave the former is
denied: Hellfire in the Gospel does only allude to that Fire in the Valley of
Hinnom, Jer. 7.31.
where (as the Prophet Jeremy shows) the People most cruelly sacrificed their
Children in the Fire, Of Hell.
to the Idol Moloch. And is it not very fit for the place of Torment for the
Enemies of God to be expressed by this place of Wickedness and Torture? As the
word which notes a mischievous Person, is fitly used to signify the Devil, as
was noted before. And that the casting into Hellfire cannot signify the
casting into the Fire of Hinnom aforesaid, is manifest; because that Fire had
been put out long ago, and the place turned to another use, by the good King
Josiah, as we find in 2 King. 23.10.

Gehenna, what.
And for the word Gehenna, we confess it is borrowed from the Valley of Hinnom,
(that place of Torture aforesaid) and therefore is very fit to express the
place appointed for the Punishment of the Wicked, etc. And that it only alludes
to that place, Per Metaphoram, uti Piscator in Scholiis super Matthew. 5.22.
Matthew. 10.28.
but does not mean the place it self, is manifest by what was now said; neither
was that a place for the Soul to suffer in, or for the Body after its Death, as
the Hell which our Savior speaks of most certainly is, Matthew. 10. but rather
fear him who is able to destroy Soul and Body in Hell: and that too after the
Body is killed, Luke 12.5. that is, He can quicken the dead Body, and make it
live in the Torments of Hell.

Of the Rich Man and Lazarus, in Luke the 12.
Having pleased his Humor upon the word Gehenna, in the 16. and 17. Pages, (to
as little profit to himself, or his Reader, as can well be desired) He proceeds
in the following Pages, to darken the Light of the word [Everlasting] from
thence to the 22 page of his Book, p. 16, 17. and 23.
which they that admire for good and sound, may conveniently Read the foregoing
Chapter, where I have examined them severally: This, Reader, I thought fit to
mention, that thou may not think I do wilfully pass over any thing in his
Pamphlet that is not grossly impertinent. Then in the 23 page, he passes his
grave censure upon that Text in St. Luke cap. 16. concerning the Rich man and
Lazarus, where he tells us that it is but a Parable. -- And that I am
confident, was no new discovery of his own, it was found out long before the
world had any benefit by this Book of his. Then (having time and paper to
spare) he undertakes to prove it by no less than Ten Reasons (as the Socinians
of old urged 30 Arguments against Infant Baptism,) But as all theirs were
deceitful arguments, so Nine of his Ten Reasons, are needless ones, for in such
a case one may be sufficient. And when he has gained what he contends for,
[that it is a Parable,] yet he has gained very little as to the cause he has
undertaken.

For as the Learned Mr. Baxter says very well -- If that of the Rich man in
Hell, and Lazarus, should be no more than a Parable, Saints Rest. part 2. cap.
10. Sect. 4.
yet it seems very unlikely, that Christ would teach them by such a Parable as
seemed so evidently to intimate the Souls Happiness or Misery immediately after
death, if there were no such thing -- So say I in like manner, it were very
strange that Christ should teach them by such a Parable, as seems so plainly to
intimate a Hell or Torment for the Souls of the ungodly that dye such (though
they dye Rich) if there were no such matter.

The next place of Scripture he has taken a view of is Esaias 30.33. Of Tophet,
Esaias 30.33. p. 26. etc.
where he tells us we must understand by Tophet, only the Valley of Hinnom
aforesaid. This he enlarges upon, to little purpose, for several pages
together, but that is the substance of his discourse, so far as it opposes my
Doctrine: (and where he does not oppose the Truth, I can let him alone very
contentedly) nor need I be large upon this point, we have enough for the
upholding the Doctrine asserted, whether this Text will serve to that end or
not: and that it need not be judged altogether impertinent to our purpose
(notwithstanding that which he has said) may be gathered in part from that
which was said (but now) upon the word Gehenna, upon which he had played the
same Critic. Mr. Calvin, and Vatablus (who could see as far as an ordinary
man, into a Text of Scripture, whether they may compare with Mr. Richardson or
not) They, I say, count it no absurdity to interpret it of Hell, for that place
of Torture is as fit (by a common figure) to denote the place of Torment for
the ungodly, Vid. Synops. Crit. in Esaias 30
as Paradise, the place of Pleasure, was to signify the place appointed for
the Saints happy Mansions.

Of the Worm that never dies.
As Logicians say of an Absurdity, that one being granted a thousand will follow
it: So Mr. R. being so vain as to discourse as he has done upon other
particulars, was not afraid to show himself so absurd, as to give a suitable
gloss upon these words of our Savior -- where their Worm never dies, telling
us that this is in this present life; he means, only in this life, if he mean
any thing to his purpose: And to make it good he cites Mark 9.44. Mark 9.43,
44. p. 32.
(misprinted, Mark 6.) and Revelations 14.10, 11. wherein he has showed
himself very impartial, for he has not spared himself and his Cause. There
being hardly any Scriptures more apparently destructive of it than those: the
latter I have mentioned before, the former I shall now insist on. The words are
these. Mark 9.44. opened. p. 32.
-- to go into hell, into the fire that never shall be quenched, where (viz. in
which Hell) their Worm (speaking of the wicked) never dies, this is only in
this life says Mr. R. -- strange certainly! for our Lord tells us, it is in
Hell. And I hope Mr. R. himself will not be so bold as to interpret Hell in
this Text of the Grave. For there is no Worm in the Grave, but such as dies in
a little time. And this is so remarkable that it is set down three times within
six Verses, and therefore seems to note something more than a Punishment in
this life only. If he take it to be meant properly, of a real and natural Worm,
it is a sign he has a Worm in his own Pate; if he take it figuratively, of the
Worm of Conscience, or the furious Reflections thereof upon its own wilful
wickedness, and its fierce Accusations, etc. (as it is commonly understood) then
he may not deny it to be after this present life is ended. Those Accusations
and Terrors of Conscience that Judas found in himself, a little before he
hanged himself, were doubtless continued in his Soul after its separation from
the body; and my Author cannot handsomely deny it, unless he have entertained
the sottish Dream of the Socinians, That the Soul is asleep after the death of
the Body. And thus I have spoken to all that is in any tolerable sense
considerable in the former part of his Book to the 32 page of it.

In that page he deals with another Text of Scripture, but seeing it is such as
I would not urge to prove Everlasting Punishments by, and seeing his Discourse
upon it is (in a great part) wild and extravagant, I shall not trouble my self
or my Reader with it, but rather proceed to the 36 page, where he has
something fit to be examined, as of the Burning the Tares, in Matthew. 13. of the
word Cursed, etc. which will be the Subject (in part) of the next Paragraph.

CHAP. II. SECT. III. Mr. R's Inventions upon the Parable of the Tares, Of the
Tares in Matthew. 13.
of the word Cursed, of Eternal Damnation, of the word Fire, and of the
Corporeity of Hellfire.
Mr. R. -- The Burning of the Tares, p. 36.
(Matthew. 13.) i. e. at the end of the World, v. 39. The Tares are the wicked,
the Harvest is the end of the World; by which it appears, that the Wicked with
the Earth shall be consumed by fire, v. 40.42. 2 Pet. 3.7. BUT what will not
those men venture to say, that are resolved to maintain a bad Cause by the
strength of their own ungodly wits? [ The Wicked shall be consumed with the
Earth it self, and by this it appears, says he.] No such matter say I; this is
false in it self, and therefore cannot appear to be true by that Text in St.
Matthew. That it is false in it self, I need name no more than that formerly
insisted on, in 1 Cor. 15. the dead shall be raised incorruptible. 1 Cor. 15.52.
Those of the Wicked that are now dead, shall be raised to life again at
Judgment, yea, to a state of Incorruption and Immortality; Of Burning the Tares.
and that these places do not speak the contrary is evident to those that duly
consider them. The former runs thus. ( v. 40. etc.) As the Tares are gathered
and burned in the Fire, so shall it be (with the wicked) in the end of this
world. The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and they shall gather out of
his Kingdom, them that do Iniquity, and ( v. 42.) shall cast them into a
Furnace of fire, etc. For my part I cannot conceive how he should make an
Argument for it, from hence, unless it be from the comparison between them, as
thus. The Tares are burned so as to remain no longer Tares. But so shall it be
at the end of the world in respect of the wicked. And if he would reason so,
there is little reason we should much regard it. They shall be burned (as the
Tares) viz. as they shall, in some respects, i. e. certainly, irresistibly, as
worthless things and the like. But it follows not that they shall burn in the
same manner in every thing, as the Tares burn, or that the fire shall have the
same effects upon them, which it has upon the Tares, it is manifest it shall
pain them and Torment them, make them weep and gnash their teeth for vexation,
but surely it shall not make the Tares do so. Esaias 42.
The Lord is as a man of War, says the Prophet, shall I therefore apply Mr.
R's Logic, to that saying, and infer (in spite of Religion and good sense)
that the Lord is not in many places at once, because a man of War is not, or
that the Lord is mortal, because a man of War is so? God forbid. It is enough
that he is like a man of War in other things, or terrible as a man of War, and
as it were ready armed against his Enemies, etc.

2 Pet. 3.7. not for Mr. R.
Nor will that of St. Peter make for him, for there it is only said, that the day
of Judgment will be a day of perdition to ungodly men, And Perdition is no more
than the word Destruction signifies, and if he tells us Destruction when spoken
of the wicked is meant of the destroying their Natures, and consuming their
Substance, as the fire does Tares or Stubble, we may answer him sufficiently,
from what has been said in Chap. 1. Sect. 2. (toward the end) and in the
Margin.

Cap. 1. Sect. 3. upon 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Of the word Cursed. p. 38.
The word Cursed comes next to hand, upon which he gives us several notes [ It
is to be Barren, to be a Fugitive, and a Wanderer, etc.] and then he adds
several Texts wherein it signifies, as he says, so to be. But I pray Sir, is
this all that it may be supposed to signify? if not, it is nothing to our
purpose; if it be, then let it be made appear, that it signifies so (and no
worse) when it is said, Depart from me ye cursed, etc. Matthew. 25. He that
concludes it must signify [to be Barren] when spoken of wicked men, Matthew. 21.
because it signifies so when spoken of Trees, will prove himself to be but a
wooden Disputant.

Of Eternal Damnation. p. 39.
Mr. R. -- p. 39. Eternal Damnation is in the Greek, Eternal Judgment, and a
Judgment is a Sentence, etc. Whether he will render the original word, by
Damned or Judged, I shall not much regard in the present case, for the judging
of the wicked is apparently the Damning or condemning of them, Matthew. 25.41.
Heb. 6.2. opened.
We read in Hebrews the 6.2. of Eternal Judgment. What will my Author say to
this? for he cannot well call it an Eternal Sentence: for it is plain, The
sentence that Christ will pass is not to be called Eternal, for it will be
passed in a little time, yea, in a moment in comparison; the Judgment therefore
is called Eternal, rather in respect of the state that men shall be adjudged
unto, whether of Joy or of Torment: and which will be the wicked man's portion,
I need not now stand to discover.

He proceeds to the word [Fire] and to enquire what manner of fire the Fire of
Hell (if any such thing be) may be called by us, Of the word Fire, and Corporal
fire, etc. p. 40.
whether Corporal, or not.

For the first, He gives us several senses of the Word, and tells us, it is
sometimes used to signify God's Word, sometimes God himself, by a Figure, etc.

Which Observations I have no cause at all to admire, since they are matters of
small difficulty, and little cause to thank him for, since they are designed
for a bad end. These therefore I pass over, Q. If Corporal fire, or not?
and shall consider rather the Learning which his next page is beautified with,
viz. in answer to the question in the Margin.

He contends for the Negative.

Mr. R. The Fire of Hell cannot be Corporal Fire, p. 41, etc.
for these Reasons following. -- (And then He mentions no less than Eight, that
thou may perceive that his Brain is not cursed, viz. not barren or
unfruitful.) And though I am not bound to follow him in all his follies, yet
some of those Reasons that seem strongest, I shall not think much to consider
of.

His first reason Mr. R. -- One Reason is this, Because Corporal Fire consumes
the Combustible matter cast into it. But the Fire of Hell (they say) consumes
not the Persons cast into it, therefore it is not Corporal Fire.

Answer. If the Fire of Hell be Corporal Fire, yet nothing proves that it must
needs consume them that are cast into it. For it is not to be considered, what
it might do in an ordinary and a natural way, but what the God of all Power
will have it to do, and has appointed it to do. The reason why that Fire that
fell upon Sodom and Gomorrha did consume them, was not so much because it was
Corporal Fire, as because God had appointed it to consume them. Matthew. 25.41.
and 46.
But how can my Author prove that the Fire of Hell is appointed to consume the
wicked and impenitent? It is appointed rather to Torment and Punish them: and
therefore in Matthew. 25.41. They that shall be sent away with a Curse into
Everlasting Fire, shall be so far from being consumed, that they shall be in
Everlasting Punishment, Verse. the last. And in Matthew. 13.42. Matthew. 13.42.
it is said, they shall be cast into a Furnace of Fire, (not where they shall be
consumed to ashes, but) where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth:
which cannot be when they are consumed, Mr. R. himself being Judge. And if the
wicked should be cast into Hellfire, only to be consumed by it; then I say,
the case would be no worse with them, in respect of the Fire of Hell, than the
case of Malefactors, in respect of the Faggot-fire, here on Earth; yea no worse
than the case of faithful Martyrs of Christ, for they were consumed by Fire,
(as to their Bodies.) And he that can think it will be no worse with the
Enemies of God in the World to come, than it was with his Servants in this
World, must stoutly deny the faith, and strongly oppose his own wits also.

His 2d. reason. 2d. Reason. Mr. R. -- Corporal Fire may be quenched, but
Hellfire, they say, cannot.

But is it we that say so, or is it not our Lord that says so? yea three times
in a few Verses. -- Mark 9.44. Where the Fire is not quenched, i. e. not at
all, or never. As when it is said, He that believes not the Son, (but lives and
dies in unbelief) shall not see life, or happiness, not at all that is. And if
it be Corporal Fire, God is able to continue it for ever, as well as for a
Time. And let Mr. R. prove that he will not continue Corporal Fire in Hell, if
he can.

3d. reason. 3. Things seen are Temporal only, says Paul; Hellfire therefore,
if Corporal, is not Eternal, for Corporal fire is seen.

But the Apostle does not mean, that nothing visible is Eternal, for the Body
of Christ is a visible Body, yet Eternal.

2. Hellfire, though it were Corporal, is not actually seen by Mortal Eyes in
this Life, and therefore is not proved to be Temporal by that Text. But
possibly some may say, What is your Judgment in the case?

If it were worth while to tell thee, it is thus.

The Author's Opinion of Hellfire.
That the Fire of Hell is partly Figurative, and partly Real, and Corporal; or
that in some Scriptures it is to be taken in the former sense, in the latter in
others.

1. Partly Figurative.
For Example. When it is said that the Everlasting Fire is prepared for the
Devil and his Angels, in Matthew. 25. I am apt to think that the word Fire does
not there signify any Corporal Fire, or Fire properly so called; because I
believe Spirits not to be any suitable objects for real Fire to work upon; much
less can I think that Corporal Fire can be the chiefest means of their
Punishment, as this Everlasting Fire is intimated to be, since there is no
mention made of any worse thing prepared for them. This Fire therefore I would
rather understand of the fire of God's vengeance, and the immediate impressions
of his wrath: And so it is no absurdity to express the wrath of God by fire; for
its terrible and piercing Nature may fitly represent it to us in some measure,
which cannot be conceived by us to the full, for who knows the power of his
Anger, says the Psalmist: yea, and God himself also, Heb. 12. v. last.
as he is a Revenger upon his Enemies, is called a consuming Fire, in Hebr. 12.
This my Author has took notice of, p. 44. -- Others say, p. 44.
That the Fire of Hell is Metaphorical, so St. Augustine, and some Modern
Preachers. -- And I think their judgment concerning it was as much worth as
His. And though he is angry with them for it, yet he had more wit in his anger,
than to undertake to disprove them in that particular. I shall not need
therefore to say any thing more for it, unless he had been pleased to say
something against it.

Yet I am not of their mind, who make it wholly and only figurative. I see no
reason at all to the contrary, 2. Partly Real. or Corporal.
but that we may suppose the Fire that shall torment the Bodies of the wicked
to be real and corporal fire, as ours is, I mean as real, though perhaps not of
the same kind. And this Opinion a Man may easily be led unto, by reading those
Scriptures which so often and so plainly call it fire; a Lake of Fire, Matthew.
13.42. Mark 9.44. etc
Fire and Brimstone, a Furnace of Fire, Unquenchable Fire, and such like, which
seem to intimate real fire. And that real fire may be sufficient to punish the
Bodies of the wicked by, (in case the terrible God shall be pleased to use it
for that end) cannot be doubted.

And if it should be but figurative fire, it would be no comfort to the wicked
that shall be in it; for those things in Scripture, that are figuratively set
forth, by real and corporal things, (to help our weak apprehensions) are such
as do exceed those things, in their respective natures, whether for terror, or
for comfort. God, who is called a shield, is a greater security to his Servants
than a Shield: And as he is called a consuming fire, so he is more terrible to
his Enemies than Fire, (in the day that he shall deal with them.) So that if
Hellfire be not fire indeed, but something else figuratively expressed by it,
it is certainly something worse than fire.

CHAP. II. SECT. IV. Mr. Richardson's pleasant Game, or the sport he makes with
the Learned, upon the account of the various Opinions (among them) where Hell
is.
Of the Place of Hell.
Mr. R. -- They generally hold it is in the lower parts of the Earth: But where
these parts are, no Man on Earth can tell, says Mr. Perkins upon the Creed.
AND what if Mr. Perkins say thus? I suppose he did not say so to offend Mr. R.
and if he will be offended without cause, p. 45, 46.
he must be pleased again, or be offended still. He cannot tell me exactly and
particularly the place where Paradise was situate, nor in what part of
Paradise the Tree grew, which bare the forbidden fruit; yet I hope he will not
question whether there were such a Place, or such a Tree in the World: And why
should we doubt whether Hell be a real place, because we cannot tell where it
is? As God has revealed the one, so he has not revealed the other. And where
ever it is, it is a Hell indeed. I know not the particular place which was
blessed with my Author's presence, when he studied for this precious Book: Yet
I doubt not but He was then in some place or other, (and I believe he studied
for it also, for I cannot think that he wrote it by Divine Inspiration.) Behold
what follows.

Mr. R. -- Bishop Bilson, Mr. Whately, and others say, Hell is below; But how
many Miles it may be to it, they cannot tell us. But why should Mr. R. make
such sport with them for giving him so little cause? Prove. 15.24.
When they said Hell is below, they followed a wiser Man than Himself, who
calls it Hell beneath in his Book of Proverbs. And it can be no disparagement
to them that they knew not how many Miles it is to it, no more than it is to
himself, that he knows not how many Miles it is to the third Heaven.

In the next Page (having recreated himself with two or three more Writers) he
comes to propose a question, 47.
which he hopes will puzle us to answer (and defend his cause, if unanswered.)

Mr. R. -- We find in Scripture that the Earth shall be consumed by Fire, 1
Pet. 3.10, 11. and then where shall Hell be? I answer. 1. It is questioned by
some, whether the Earth shall be consumed, as to its substance, or no. The
learned Wendeline, and others are for the Negative. But I know not any of their
Arguments that seem so clear, as those for the Affirmative, alleged by Dr.
Prideaux, Fascic controv. de Novissimis. 9.7.
and Dr. Hackwell in his Apology of the Power and Providence of God. Wherefore
we will take it for granted, that the Earth shall be consumed, (as my Author
supposes:) And what of that? Must Hell be consumed, if the Earth be? surely
not.

But if it be below, (in, or under the Earth) What shall become of it, after
the Earth is destroyed? What place can be for it, when its place is burnt up?
-- Alas vain Man! will thou make difficulties to the Almighty? What! Is he the
God of all Power, and the God to whom vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94.1.
(or the God of Revenges) and yet shall he want a place wherein to execute his
vengeance upon the Enemies of his Laws? O how silly is such a surmisal! If the
whole Earth were destroyed, a word of his Mouth could make all that space
wherein it stood, a sufficient Hell for his Enemies. But what need he, or any
others be curious to enquire where Hell is? for since it is a place of
Punishment, the situation of it cannot make it more comfortable, (let it be
our chief care to escape it, and turn unfeignedly to God and his Service, and
then where-e're it is, it shall be far enough from us.)

In the latter part of the same Page, p. 47.
He has something of an Objection, from Revelation 20.14. verse, where he
tells us, That Hell cannot be the Lake of Fire, because it was cast into the
Lake. -- I confess there is some strength in this, and shall easily grant him,
that Hell in that place does not signify the Lake of Fire, (though it does
elsewhere.)

And for the sense of it, either Death and Hell may be said figuratively to be
cast into the Lake, because they are conquered and triumphed over by Christ,
and as it were condemned: (and so may by a figure, be spoken of, as of Persons
condemned, in that respect) or else Hell may be taken (by a common figure) for
the Devil and his Angels: Matthew. 16.18.
As when it is said, in Matthew. 16. That the Gates of Hell shall not prevail
against his Church: That is, the power and policies of all the Devils shall not
be able to ruin it. Vide Piscatorem in loc.
(The gates being as places of strength to a City, so the places also where the
chief Council was held.)

48. etc.
In the 48, 49, 50. pages, His Pen dropped so much Vanity as that I shall not
think it worth while to trouble mine with it. But afterward he speaks thus, p.
51.
Mr. R. -- Others say plainly, they cannot tell where Hell is (as some had held
it was in one place, some in another.)

Thus being full of Mirth at their different Opinions, he expresses himself
very freely in these following words R. -- As it is reported of Father Cotton
the Jesuit, p. 52.
that he could not find out a plain place of Scripture to prove Purgatory by,
and therefore asked the Devil for one: So they are at as great a loss to prove
their Hell of Torments by a plain Text.

O admirable man! Well might he be a Ringleader among the Anabaptists, and his
name be an honor to their Printed Confession, whose wit was so far from being
cursed or unfruitful, as that it brought forth (with ease) such a blessed
comparison as this. But first he might have left out his story of the Jesuits
enquiring of the Devil, etc. For he dares not say our Ministers enquire of the
Devil for a Text to prove Hell by. Nor (secondly) have they any need to enquire
of him for that purpose. The Scripture is plain enough in the case. Matthew.
10.28. Matthew. 10.28.
(to name no more at present) is very full for it. Fear not them that can kill
the body, but rather fear him who can destroy Body and Soul in Hell. Mr. R.
shall be a Prophet if this do not prove a Hell of Torment.

For to destroy in this place does not signify to turn into nothing, or
destroy their Being See Cap. 1. Sect. 3.
, for the Soul shall remain for ever, as all but Atheists confess, besides what
was noted upon the word [Destroy] in the place before cited in the Margin. To
Destroy therefore in that place, is to punish. And to punish in Hell is
manifestly spoken as an aggravation of that Punishment (or destruction) Hell
cannot mean the Grave in that place. For the Soul is not destroyed (in any
sense) in the Grave; what then can it mean but a place of Torment so called
(the Valley of Hinnom is no receptacle for Souls) and therefore Gehenna, or
Hell in that Text does not mean that very place, but only, as was said, alludes
to it.

p. 53.
In the next page, he gives us a proof of his confidence, and concludes with
such passages as Crown the work (and are the Cream of the whole Jest.)

R. Line 8 -- See ye not the great uncertainty they are at? His Rhetorical
Query.
Do ye not see by their Reeling, Staggering, and Stumbling, that they are so
drunk that they can find no ground to stand upon, etc. Than which a sober man
can hardly speak any thing that savours of more profaneness, pride and
sottishness. And if we weigh the speech aright we shall find defective in its
Naturals as well as its Morals (in point of Truth as well as Goodness.) For
it is more true to say, that Orthodox Divines are at a certainty in the case,
than that they are at an uncertainty: For they are certain in the matter,
though uncertain in one of the smallest circumstances: They are perfectly
agreed that Hell is no Fancy, though they differ about the place where it is
fixed, (and they may differ still without any danger to the Souls of men,
unless they are so unreasonable as to conclude that That is in no place, whose
place is not certainly known.)

And Secondly, They cannot rightly be said to Reel and Stagger, that differ
from each others in such small matters. Such differences are no signs of
Drunkenness: yet if my Author will call it so, so let him do. And if he had but
given them a more particular name, and said [the Black coats, or the Covetous
Priests] instead of, [They, and These men] and then talked of their Reeling,
Staggering and Stumbling, the Quakers might have called him an upright man, and
almost have sworn (by the Light within them) that he was come out of the
Darkness and the Witchcraft, and spoke very honestly as the Spirit moved him.
-- Soon after he applies that Text in Esaias 44. p. 54.
He frustrates the tokens of Liars, and makes Diviners mad, etc. (And if we
were uncertain whether there be a Hell or not, yet we may be very certain, that
there is a Devil, when they that are pretenders to Religion, are so shameless
and profane, as to abuse the Scriptures in this manner.)

CHAP. II. SECT. V. Mr. Richardson's Combat with Mr. Ed. Leigh, and his
Triumph over him. p. 54, etc. to 74.
THE said Mr. Ed. Leigh I can say little of, any farther than his Works
discover him, and thereby I think he has showed himself a man of considerable
Learning, Parts and Painfulness. For he has wrote more than a little, and the
least Book he ever wrote is much better (as well as bigger) than this I am
opposing of. And doubtless if he had not been a man of some note Mr. R. would
have thought it somewhat below him, to give him such a large consideration as
he has done. I shall now undertake his vindication, and endeavor to make good
several of his Arguments for the present point, against Mr. R. his Exceptions
and Answers. p. 54, 55.


Mr. Leigh -- The Consciences of men are many times afraid of a Punishment
after this life. Therefore there is such a Punishment to be feared.

p. 55.
Mr. R. Replies -- p. 55. That Is no proof of it, for men's Consciences are as
they are instructed, according to the Proverb, Such as the Doctor, such the
Scholar. And hence it is that the Conscience of a Papist tells him it is a sin
to eat meat on Friday. Yet that is no proof of its being so.

Conscience a proof of a Punishment after this Life.
I answer as follows. The Comparison he uses about the Papists Conscience will
not argue any thing, but only illustrate that which he spoke before; the
instance of which, if I mistake not, is thus: That men's Consciences tell them
there is a Punishment for the wicked after this life, merely because they are
so instructed ( viz. by those unskilful Preachers whom they had the unhappiness
to hear) so that the only reason why they fear such a Punishment, is because of
the Instructions they have had about it. The 1. Evidence.
Now this I deny. It is not merely from the Instructions of others, that men
apprehend and fear a Punishment after Death. For the Heathens of old, who were
far from being instructed by our Preachers, had strange and powerful thoughts
of a Punishment for bad men after death, Witness their Expressions about
Sisyphus, Tantalus, Rhadamanthus, and the Stygian Lake, several passages in
Virgils AEneids, etc.

And how many might we hear of that in the days of their health and strength
were as confident as could be, and feared no sin that they liked of, that were
also grossly ignorant, and cared for no Instructions unless it were how to get
money, and enrich their Land, etc. that yet have been in great fear when a
dangerous sickness seized upon them, O they shall dye, they shall die, and what
shall become of them then -- And how should they have such Impressions upon
their Spirits, if they had not a sense of this Truth, as ignorant as they are.
The 2. Evidence.
-- And what if the Instructions they had about it be a means of the Terror
upon their Consciences, this rather confirms the point than confutes it: for
sometimes the thoughts of an Everlasting state of Punishment hereafter, is so
powerful upon them, and so terrible to them that they can neither eat nor
drink, nor sleep, nor take any comfort in wealth and friends, in Wine or
Music, or any of those things they naturally most delight in: Yea, fills their
mouths with horrid cries and groans, and has put them into such violent
shakings, as has shook the Beds, yea, the Chambers they lay in. Read the
memorable History of Francis Spira, and others, and you will see what Agonies
and Terrors, the Apprehension of Everlasting miseries has caused in them.

Now hence I would offer Mr. R. this Dilemma to deal with -- Either these
unspeakable Terrors were natural works of Conscience, The Authors Argument.
(as awakened by its God and Judge) or else they were occasioned by the
Instructions they formerly had about this matter. --

If he say the former, then he does as good as grant what I contend for, for
that is the only reason of his denial of the proof, because Conscience does not
act so, of it self, but by virtue of some former teachings. And whether he
grant it or no, it must needs be a proof of it, for the natural workings of
Conscience are from God, and therefore suppose the certainty of their objects
in their respective kinds. As because it is natural to the Conscience to urge a
man to pay what he owes (while he is able) thence it follows unavoidably, that
it is a real duty so to do.

If he say the latter [that these extremest terrors are occasioned by those
Instructions about a future Everlasting punishment] then he is cast also. For
what (can he think) makes those Instructions so powerful upon him? they have
not naturally such effects, for many hear them often and regard them not. And
if it be from a supernatural power, it must be Gods work or the Devils: not the
Devils, for he would rather make men forget and slight such Instructions, lest
they should be frighted out of his slavery. If from God, it must needs follow
that there is such a state, for God would not deceive them.

Mr. Leigh his second Argument vindicated.
Mr. Leigh adds -- The Heathen believed a Punishment for bad men, after this
Life. Therefore there is such a Punishment -- Mr. R. Answers in these words.
[1. Why did you not say and prove that they held they should be in Torments
without end? The Heathens do not believe any such Punishment after this Life,
p. 56-59.
for they deny the Resurrection of the Body.] And then he goes on after his own
way from the 56 to 59 page, telling us a story of Pythagoras the Philosopher
(for so he calls him, as though there had been a Pythagoras the Divine, from
whom to be distinguished) and also of Plato and his Sacrifice, etc. which are
not fit for my paper to be filled with; and therefore I leave them, p. 58.
as more proper for his own Pamphlet, and for the Book that he so gravely
mentions, I mean Mr. Jesse his Almanac. (And if Mr. Richardson had spent
that time in making Almanacks, which he spent in composing this precious piece,
it might have been more for his comfort, or at least, less for his sorrow, when
he comes to dye.)

But to come to the point; [why did not Mr. Leigh say and prove that the
Heathens believed a Punishment for bad men, never to end?] Since I have
undertaken this Task, I must suppose my self obliged to make Mr. R. some Answer
in the case, and it is thus in short.

It was (in all probability) because he thought there was no need of saying it
or proving it: nevertheless if it may be any Satisfaction to Mr. R. or his
Proselytes, I shall be content to say it and prove it too. The former is in
effect done already: the latter I shall now endeavor to do, by citing some
passages out of some of their writings. If he please to read Seneca the
Tragedian, In Amphitryone.
he shall find something to that purpose.

Sanguine Humano abstine, etc. Then he adds -- The Testimony of Heathens.
Seneca.
-- Certus inclusos tenet
Locus nocentes: utque fert fama, Impios
Supplicia vinculis saeva perpetuis domant.
Where he may fitly note that expression [ut fert fama] which speaks it to have
been the common apprehension of men in those days, how strange soever he is
pleased to make of it.

Ovid also, in some of his Books (if I mistake not in his Book de Ponto) has
these two remarkable Verses, Nec mortis poenas mors altera finiet hujus: Ovid.
de Ponto.

Horaque erit tantis ultima nulla malis.
i. e. This Death all times does far transcend:
Its pains shall never know an end.


And we may find (upon trial) that he was as much mistaken, in saying that the
Heathens deny the Resurrection of the Body: Heathens Testimony of the
Resurrection.
for if he mean it universally, I can affirm the contrary; for some of them did
speak of it not obscurely, (speaking of the Souls of men.)

-- Mill peractis
Oblitae ditem redeunt in corpora lustris. Syllius Italicus.

And the other Seneca has somewhere a speech very plain for it, Lucius An.
Seneca.
-- Veniet iterum qui nos in lucem reponet dies. In English thus, -- Another
Day shall bring to light,
Those whom pale Death drew out of sight.


2. He Answers, p. 59. -- what if the Heathens do hold as you say, p. 59. His
second Answer examined.
must we believe in Religion as the Heathens do?

Yes certainly, in those things that they believe aright.

They rightly believed that they must be just in their dealings, and true in
their speeches, and we must believe so too though we are Christians, (yea,
because we are Christians.) And now it would be an easy matter to make a good
Argument of the Heathens Judgment and Testimony aforesaid. For whence was it
that they did judge there shall be an Everlasting Punishment hereafter for evil
doers? Surely not from Satan's suggestions, for the Reason before given in the
former Argument, (it were contrary to his design to persuade them of any such
thing,) nor from mere weakness and silliness; for they were the soberest,
wisest and Learned among them, that were of this Judgment. And if it were
from God, and his Convictions upon their Consciences (whether in a Natural or
Supernatural way) it must needs follow that it is a Truth, as it is plain in it
self.

Mr. L's Reason also proves the same, Mr. Leigh his third Argument from Gods
justice, vindicated.
for it assures us that God is just; many abominable sinners enjoy more
prosperity in this world than they that live uprightly, etc. Cap. 1. Sect. 3.
Argument 2.
The proof of the point from the justice of God has been given before, and
vindicated (I hope) sufficiently, and let men cavil as long as they please,
Sober men will easily perceive that the justice of God, as he is the supreme
Lawgiver, and Governor of the world, can never be sufficiently cleared as to
his dealings with wicked men, that have lived prosperously all their days, if
there be no punishment for them hereafter, that is greater and longer than any
Miseries his Saints have endured in this world. Nevertheless, Mr. Richardsons
Answer shall be considered. The substance of it is in the following words, p.
60, 61.
Mr. R. -- I see you are more bold to affirm than able to prove; what, does
reason deny the Punishment to be just, unless it be for ever? The Scripture you
allege (viz. Psalm. 73.17.) says, they have an end, and you say they shall
have no end; Again, your Reason is against the will of God, who is pleased to
save of the worst of sinners, Luke 7.47. 1 Timothy 1.19. If some wicked men enjoy
more prosperity than others, must they therefore be punished without end? if
that you say were true, what cause would there be to rejoice in the day of
prosperity, Eccles. 7.

The Reply. This Answer is large enough, but whether it be good enough, is now
to be enquired. For the first part, the charge of Boldness upon that learned
person (if he had been guilty of overmuch) might be brought against him more
honestly by (almost) any man, than my Author; for who ever was so bold as he,
to write so much in defense of that Opinion which has always been abhorred by
Orthodox Divines? To his first question, Reply to the first part of his Answer.
Of Gods Justice.
I return this Answer, that though the Temporal Punishments upon the Impenitent
be just Punishments, yet Divine Justice will not be satisfied by their Temporal
Punishment, since his Wisdom thinks it fit to continue their being
Everlastingly, and to raise them to an incorruptible state, and since he has
resolved not to pardon the Impenitent (for if they should enjoy that Blessing,
they should not be sent away with a Curse, Matthew. 25.41.) I say these things
considered, His justice will engage him to Punish them for ever, for they will
be ever worthy of Punishment, their Iniquity will always deserve such wages,
and it is the part of justice to pay it to them (supposing no compensation to
be pleadable by them, as none shall be) The other particulars of his Answer
(herein) will receive very easy and quick dispatch. For his urging of Psalm.
73.17. to prove that the wicked shall have an end, His Sophistry.
and therefore not suffer endless Punishment; I say therein he proves himself a
profound Sophister, or rather, a most ridiculous one: for the Text runs thus,
Then I went into the Sanctuary of God, Psalm. 73.27. Opened.
and so I understood the end of these men. (Speaking of the wicked that
prosper'd in the world.) Their end in this place no man (I verily believe) did
ever interpret, as he, of their coming to an end (as we call it) or of the
ending of their Beings, as the Birds, and Beasts, and Plants shall have an end:
and I shall not now trouble my self to confute so wild a conceit, since I have
said enough to it upon the word Destruction, in the third Section of the first
Chapter.

By their End therefore I understand rather their Lot and Reward, their final
Portion and last Estate, viz. that it will be Miserable, as on the contrary,
the good man's End is Comfortable. Behold the upright, for the [End] of that man
is Peace. That is, his portion at last is Peace, his last Estate is full of
Peace and blessed Satisfaction in his God, whatever his former state in this
present world has been.

His Assertion following deserves as little to be said to it, namely, [That God
is pleased to save of the worst of sinners] for if he mean it of sinners
against the Law, I confess it is true, God is pleased to save some of those
that have been the grossest Transgressors of the Moral Law, as Idolaters,
Adulterers and the like. The worst of sinners have been saved in what sense a
Truth.
But if he mean it of the worst sinners against the Gospel, as those that live
and dye in impenitency and unbelief, and finally refuse to give up themselves
to Christ as Savior and Lord, then I say, I deny it, and let him prove it if
he can (And he might easily know that it is these that we affirm to be the
objects of Everlasting Vengeance, and not the grossest Transgressors of the
Moral Law that turn unfeignedly from their Transgressions, and believe in
Christ, etc.) Nor do we say (as he would seem to intimate) that those wicked
ones that prospered more than others, shall be punished Everlastingly for their
prosperity, but for their wickedness, and their impenitency in it. And if he
think it is unjust that they should suffer for ever upon that account, he had
best Answer what I have said upon that Point in the latter pages of the first
Chap. Sect. 3. And as for Eccles. 7.14. which he would fain get on his side, it
makes nothing at all for him; for the person Solomon bids, rejoice in the day
of Prosperity, must needs be supposed to be a godly man; for as for the wicked
(whether he prosper or not) the Lord has said, We unto him, Esaias 3.11.

Mr. Leigh's 4th. Argument from the wicked Man's will to sin. -- Vindicated. p.
62.
Mr. L. -- It is but just that they should suffer for ever, who if they had
lived, would have sinned for ever.

Mr. R. -- [If it be just that we should suffer for ever, it is just that our
Surety should suffer for ever. (speaking of Christ.)

B. This answer is short enough, but not so sweet, and Dunghill-like, the more
we stir it, the more it will stink. --

But before I come to meddle with it, observe good Reader, that it is in effect
no Answer at all, for it concerns not that which Mr. L. had said; it neither
grants it, nor denies it, nor has any more suitableness to it, than the Sails
of a Windmill have to a Ship. Alas for Mr. R. what a case was he in! though he
were inspired with a spirit of contradiction, yet he could not tell what to say
against it: To grant it, had been in a great measure to overthrow his design;
to deny it had been to disparage his own wits: for his own Conscience could
tell him, that if he were a King himself, (as God forbid he should) he would
count it just to keep them always in Prison, who would always oppose him, if
they were at liberty. --

But because I cannot Reply to his Answer, I must say something to that which
he has offered instead of an Answer.

p. 62.
If it be just that we should suffer for ever, it is just Christ our Surety
should have suffered for ever.] This assertion of my Author is very little for
his credit, for it seems to speak him a mere Socinian, one that does not
believe the Deity of Christ. Had he believed him to be God, he could not easily
have run into such an Error. I answer, in a word, That it will not follow that
Christ should suffer Eternally, if we deserved to suffer eternally. The Reason
is, because he was a Person of Infinite Dignity, (very God; as well as Man) and
being such, those sufferings which he underwent as a Surety of his People, had
the nature of Merit in them, Cap. 8. De Morte Christi in censura Resp. ad
quaest. 16. Sect. 3, 4, etc.
and for the Merit of his obedience therein, God his Father has highly exalted
him, Philip. 2.7, 8. The Learned Reader may consult the most Learned Nichol.
Arnolus, in his Anticatechesis Racoviana.

The 63. and 64. Pages of his Book contain nothing of much moment. His chiefest
subtilty therein, is in perverting that phrase in the Prophet [cast them out of
my sight] which notes his displeasedness with them, not his annihilating of
them, as he would have it.

Mr. Leigh (says he) tells us, p. 65.
that the wicked will accuse and curse each other in Hell, but how knows he
that, says he, in answer to it. -- For my part I do not question but it might
be proved very easily, and perhaps I may do it (if I think of it) in the
Applicatory part of my Discourse. Mr. Leigh adds, It is the concurrent Judgment
of Divines, etc. To which Mr. R. replies, We are well satisfied that they are
not Infallible. But he knew, that that was a very probable Argument of the
truth of it, though not a demonstrative: And his Scriptures being answered
which he urges against it: Their concurrent Judgment, is far more to be
regarded than his single testimony against it. -- The following Lines have
nothing of Argument, but of profaneness and scornfulness, which I shall not
trouble my self to answer to, but leave them to him to answer for. -- The 69,
70, 71. 69, etc.
Pages do contain much impertinency, and some passages about the Point, which
might lawfully be censured, but they are so trivial that I pass them.

In the next Page he cavils at Mr. R. Bolton, that excellent Christian, p. 72.
and eminent Divine. Mr. R. -- Mr. Bolton says, thou must live in endless woe,
which thou might have escaped, (speaking to the impenitent sinner) which
overthrows the Doctrine of Election. -- I deny it. Doubtless such a
Master Builder would not speak that which should overthrow (by any just
consequence) that Doctrine of Election which Scriptures, and the Reformed
Churches teach. And if Mr. R. or his Brethren have any thing to say against it,
The Rock unmovable.
they may answer what I have written upon that Subject, against Mr. Charles
Phelps his Book on that Point.

And for the speech it self, he meant it doubtless conditionally, and so it is
true of the worst in Hell: He might have escaped, if he would have turned in
time, etc. -- p. 73, 74. 74.
He has somewhat more of perverseness, (in several expressions) but I shall not
stay upon those Minutissima, having greater matters to insist on, and hasten to
consider his more valiant undertaking, viz. to Remove the Pillars of
Hell Torments; which is his next work, and way to make his Name famous.]

CHAP. III.
SECT. I. Mr. R. His Attempt to shake and remove the Seven Pillars of
Hell Torments (as he is pleased to call them in the 75. Page.)
I Have formerly discovered such Pillars of my Doctrine, as he will never be
able to shake (to any purpose) whiles the World stands, where also the main
Pillars of his Sophistical exceptions and answers have been fully removed. See
Chapter the 1. Sect. 2d.

Nevertheless, because he takes himself to be a strong Man, I will try his
strength, and endeavor to discover how far he has prevailed toward the
shaking of those Pillars, which he has undertaken to shake and remove. -- p.
77.
Mr. R. -- The Greek Fathers were the first Pillars of Hell Torments: and it
came to pass through their ignorance in the Hebrew Tongue, etc.

viz. The Texts of Scripture, in Matthew. 25. and elsewhere, (in the Chapter now
cited.)



Hebrew Tongue, as my Author makes for. I know not but the Greek Fathers (some
at least) might have as good skill in it, as such a bold English Man, as Mr.
Richardson; or if they were never so unskilled in the Hebrew, they were very
well seen in the Greek, (which the New Testament was written in, and which
contains the clearest proofs of the Point.) Doubtless they knew how fully the
Texts in the New Testament did prove it, and were very well able to understand
that [(...)] did signify, Matthew. 25. ult.
into punishment without end, though my Author would not know it.

Mr. R. -- The second Pillar of Hell Torments were the Writers of the Original
Copies of the Bible: But their defect has put us to a great loss; The Original
Copy that the Apostles wrote is not now to be found. And it is not enough that
we have Books in Hebrew and Greek, unless we were certain that these Copies (as
they call them) do agree word for word, with those Copies that were wrote by
the Prophets and Apostles. -- This, if I am not much mistaken, is bad enough;
But the Apostle has told us, that evil men and seducers will wax worse and
worse, 2 Timothy 3.13.
deceiving and being deceived. Behold therefore that which follows, and read it
deliberately, (if thou can read it without horror) p. 76. line 13. p. 76.


R. -- Many boast of God's preserving the Hebrew and Greek Bible, etc. Mr. R.'s
Horrid Speech.
But as he was pleased to deliver up Christ and his People, so has he
delivered the Scriptures also into the hands of Sinners to be used at their
pleasure. -- -- Oh Mr. R. which way are you tending, whither do you mean your
Pen shall run? What can you think of these black words, Examined.
or what spirit (can you suppose) did inspire you with them? You seem to have a
design to shake the foundations of all Piety and Religion, as well as the
Pillars of Hell Torments; for that end I confess your speech is very proper:
for if the Scripture be corrupted, as to the main (in its perfection and
purity) as your words seem to suggest, then farewell to our Religion; our Faith
(to use your own smooth phrase) must needs reel and stagger, and stumble, as
having no ground to stand upon.

You professed to write your Book for the glory of God, (in your Title page)
and I beseech you, let it be considered whether it tends to God's glory, to
bring the Authority of his Word into question; And as you desire to comfort
sinners, so (methinks) you should have more love toward Professors, than to
lead them to infidelity, in hopes of winning them to your own Opinion.

[God has delivered the Scriptures into the hands of sinners to be dealt with,
as they pleased, i. e. to be depraved and corrupted how themselves would.] O
monstrum horrendum, inform, ingens. -- A bold Man indeed: He is Doctor
Resolutus, (though not Durandus) He is resolved to carry it; He will turn all
things Arsie versie, and weaken the Scripture's authority, if it will not stand
on his side, like him in the Poet.

Flectere si nequeat superos Acheronta movebit.
i.e. More ways than one: He will try all,
If God will not him help, the Devil shall.
But Reader, fear not (too much) his fearful Assertion, though it be fierce,
yet it is but weak, yea, notoriously false. All those Arguments, which
Protestants use to prove that the Scripture is not imperfect (of such the
Learned may see Polanus Scharpius, Bishop Ushers Body of Divinity. p. 17.
Gerrardus de S. Scriptura, and others, and the mere English Reader may consult
those in the Margin. Mr. Leigh's Treatise of Divinity, l. 1. cap. 6. p. 116.
Proofs that the Scripture is not corrupted by men.
) I say all those Arguments will serve against my Author in this particular, as
well as against the Papists in the other. I shall now urge one or two Arguments
in the case.

If men had corrupted the Scriptures (and made them speak in any points of
Divinity otherwise than at first) it must be supposed to have been done before
the coming of Christ in the flesh, or after. If before, surely Christ who taxed
many other errors in the Jews would not have suffered such a wickedness to pass
without Reprehension. (And it is not unknown how careful the Jews were in
keeping the Oracles of God committed to them.) And that they were not corrupted
since the Death of Christ is clear, for Copies being dispersed in the world
more and more (one age after another) how could such a thing be acted by some,
but others would soon discover it? And it may not be doubted but God's
Providence did watch somewhat extraordinarily, as to this matter which so much
concerned his own glory, and the good of his people to the worlds end. Surely
he that so often discovers those that have corrupted the Coin of Princes and
States, would not conceal those long that should attempt to corrupt and pervert
his Sacred Laws. And here I shall borrow an excellent passage of the worthy Mr.
R. Baxter, Saints Rest. part. 2. cap 4. Sect. 6.
in the last page of the cited Section, which may shame all the wittiest men of
Mr. R's Religion, as to the point.

If any man (says he) be so blind as to think it uncertain whether these be
the same Books which the Apostles wrote; I would ask him by what assurance he
holds his Lands? 1. How does he know that his Deeds, Conveyances and Leases be
not counterfeit writings? or that they are the same that their Forefathers
made? Surely they have nothing but men's words for it, and yet they verily think
their Lands are their own. 2. And whereas they hold all by the Law of the Land,
how know they that these Laws are not Counterfeit? and that they are the same
Laws that were made by such and such Kings and Parliaments long ago? They have
nothing but men's words for all this. And yet if this be uncertain, then any man
may be turned out of all he has, as if he had no certain Tenure. And is it not
certain that those Laws that are kept and practiced throughout the Land, cannot
possibly be counterfeit, but it would have been publicly known? And yet a word
in a Statute Book may be false Printed. And much more certain is it, that the
Scriptures cannot be counterfeited, because it is not in one Kingdom only, but
in all the world (almost) that they have been used, and the Copies dispersed;
and Ministers still in Office to preach them and publish them. So that they
could not be generally and purposely corrupted, except all the world should
have met and consented together for that end, which could not be done in
secret, but all must know of it. And yet many Bibles may be here and there
misprinted, but then there would be Copies enough to Correct them by. So that
if it be uncertain whether these be (for substance and in the main) the same
Books that the Apostles writ, then nothing in the world can be certain to us
but what we see; and why we may not as wisely question our Eyesight I do not
well know. So far that Learned person.

And after all this, The Author's Proofs.
I shall add something more to this same end (for it is hard to speak too much
in such a case) farther to confirm the Faith of the weak Christian against the
attempts of this mighty Shaker (who I think has out gone most of the Shakers
that have went before him. Gregory Martyn, that grave profound Popeling in
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, did practice this Art with the greatest care and skill
he had, and discovered (if he did not lie) a great many gross corruptions in
our English Translation, to the advantage of our Heresies (as he calls it) But
since the Learned Dr. Fulk In his defense of the English Translation against
Gr. Martin.
has took him in hand, and shook him soundly for his pains, he was never able
to recover himself so far as to write any thing more for that purpose; and his
Brethren in the Popish iniquity have thought it their best Policy to be silent
concerning it since that time. But my Author will go higher than so, and shake
the Authority of the Hebrew and Greek Copies that are extant in the world And
well might he contend with the London Ministers, as his friends boasted he
should, if he could prove the word that they preached to be uncertain, and
their Greek Testaments supposititious Books; but though he cannot prove them to
be so, yet he will give men occasion to suspect them for such, witness his
Speech aforementioned: possibly he might remember the Counsel of the Poet:
Horatius.
Si vis esse aliquis, facinus aliquod.
Audeas egregium, etc.
i.e. If thou would be a man of Fame,
Thou must do something of great name.


Other Considerations to prove the Purity of the Original Copies of Scripture.
And now, Reader, That thy heart may be thoroughly antidoted against Mr. R's most
pestilent suggestion, I shall offer thee these following Considerations.

Plato, of Aristotle, Hippocrates, and of Pliny, and Galen, Plutarch, of
Theophrastus and Cicero, of Homer and Hesiod, of Suetonius and Florus, Tacitus
and Livy, were the writings of those men whose names they bear, or whether they
are agreeable to those Copies which they wrote at first?

So that the Writings of Philosophers and Poets, Physicians, Historians,
Naturalists, Moralists, (though very ancient) shall pass currantly for theirs,
whose names they go under, and are not imagined to be corrupted, or altered
from what they were at first (Mr. R. does not insinuate any doubt in that
case.) But when it comes to that which concerns our precious Souls, that word
which contains our rules in Life, our comforts at death, and our foundations of
hope, as to a better world hereafter, O then his patient heart is moved, his
Doubts, and Fears, and Suspicions are suggested: he kicks and flings and lays
about him extremely; he throws his blackest dust in our Faces, that we may have
no eyes to see, nor no reason to apprehend, that those Copies of the Bible
which we have among us are the same (in sense and substance) with them that the
Penmen of Scripture wrote. And all because we have not those Original Copies
to show, (as we have not of the other, for he cannot show us any of Plato's,
etc. handwriting) Is it not manifestly the work of the Devil to cast doubts in
men's minds about the one, while he raises no doubts about the other? It seems
he can be content to have us believe that other Books are what they pretend to
be, but he is not so willing that we should believe the same of God's Book: and
no wonder, for he knows the belief of that will be more likely to do us good
than the belief of the other.

those that had so much Religion as to believe it, should at the same time have
so much profaneness as to go about to corrupt the Copies of it? Would not the
heart of the wickedest man fail him, when he was about such a horrid design, if
he had but the least thought that it was the Word of his Maker that he set
himself to corrupt? If he say it was corrupted by those that did not believe it
to be the Word of God, but looked upon it as a piece of deceit, and a politic
innovation to keep fools in awe; then why should they trouble themselves to
corrupt it? doubtless they would think it were corrupt enough already, and
would not much envy the holy Christians any of those delights and comforts
which they had in it, or from it. And if they should ever have undertaken such
a work (it being that which would require much time and pains to do it, to any
purpose) it must be supposed that they must have had some considerable motives,
from credit or profit, of which no rational account (I dare say) can ever be
given. Nor can it be proved that ever any such thing was designed by the
enemies of Christian Religion. Julian the Apostate Emperor ( Acerrimus ille
Christi hostis, as an excellent Author styles him Zanchius in Tom. 8. Orat. 1.
) He I say is well known to have been as fit a man to manage such a work as
most ever was in the world, for he had wit and learning in abundance, he had
also great power without him, and an impenitent hardened heart within him, and
employed all his power and policy to the ruin, not only of Christians, but
Christianity: and accordingly he proceeded in mischiefs, by Banishments and
Imprisonments, fire and Sword, and by pulling down Churches and by putting down
all Schools of Learning, (the two latter of which, some that go for Christians
among us could have wished him good success in) yet I have not found that ever
he did any such thing as this we are speaking of, or that he employed any
others about it [to corrupt the Copies of Scripture that were in the hands of
Christians, or to counterfeit it, by any other writing:] He was crafty enough
to take other courses against Christianity that were easier to be followed.

And if any such thing were done, how soon would it be discovered? If a
Protestant should Print some Mass-Books with some considerable alterations,
leaving out a prayer to the Virgin Mary, and putting in a Prayer to Christ
instead of it, how quickly would the Romanists espy the change, how soon would
the Bulls roar from Babylon Revel. 17.5.9.18.
? How many Declarations, Manifesto's, and Testimonies would be published
(speedily) in the world, to prevent the intended mischief, and to assure all
that were concerned, that those Books were not Authentic or Catholic, or
allowed under the Hands of the Pope's Holiness. -- And do ye think, that the
Christians in the Primitive times were not as zealous for the Scriptures, as
the Papist's are for the Mass-Books, or that they would not have been as
careful to discover such forgeries, in or about them, if any such things had
been?

A 3d. Argument for the Purity of Scripture, etc.
3. If the Scripture were counterfeited, or the Original Copies corrupted by
any, it must be by blockish and ignorant Persons, or by Men of considerable Wit
and Learning. The former would not undertake such a work, or if they should,
they could not manage it and carry it on. Nor (may we well imagine) the latter;
for certainly Men of wit in any tolerable sense, could not but apprehend the
difficulty of such a work (the Copies being dispersed among Christians, that
valued them more than all the wealth of the World, and would be as careful to
preserve them from such corruptions) I say such must needs apprehend the great
difficulty of the work, and the horrible shame and reproach that they should
bring upon themselves, if they should fail in it, or have their wicked design
discovered: (and what great gain they might get by it, to countervail so great
a shame, or to encourage them in the danger of it, cannot easily be conceived.)

A fourth Argument for it.
4. If the Scriptures were perverted in the Originals, it must be supposed to be
done in favor of some corrupt and heretical Opinions, or in favor of some
loose and disorderly practices. Scripture Copies not corrupted by Heretics.
The former cannot be supposed (at least not of any general corruption, I find
not above one or two Texts in the first Epistle of John, that were attempted in
that kind, by any Heretics, and those were such as concerned mysterious
Doctrines, as of the Trinity, and the Union of the two Natures in Christ's
person; and how soon their ill dealing in that kind was discovered and
complained of, Vid. Arnoldi Lux in Tenebris in 1 John 5.7.
is not unknown) and that the generality of Heretics did not play at this
Game, is so clear, that I need not largely to prove it. They read those Copies
which the Orthodox used, and opposed them therewith; which the Papists
considering, did give out confidently (though blasphemously) that the Reading
of Scriptures among the common People, Bellar. de verbo Dei.
was the way to make them Heretics; (so that their forbidding of them so to
do, they would have us think did proceed from Religiousness, and not
wickedness; this profaneness they acted, not for the Devil's, but for God's
sake) And why should Heretics set themselves to pervert the Copies of
Scripture, whiles they hoped to maintain their Heresies by those Copies, and
through their false Philosophy and vain deceit to turn the Texts thereof in
defense of them? However, it is sure my Author cannot serve his turn hereby, for
what if he could prove that they endeavored to corrupt some Texts, (about
mysterious points) yet there is not so much as a show of reason why we should
suspect the places which speak of a Hell, and everlasting Punishment for the
wicked, to have been added to the Text by their hands (that had been but a bad
course, yea a mad course to get the favor and applauses of the World, which
yet was the great thing they aimed at.)

And that lewd and disorderly Persons did not corrupt the Copies of Scripture
in favor of their loose and wicked practices is plain; Nor by loose Livers.
for if so, they would have blotted out those strict precepts of holiness and
obedience that it is filled with and especially the Doctrines of God's wrath
against sin, and everlasting punishments for them that follow it: which they
have not done, for we see they remain in our Bibles, and shall remain still in
spite of Mr. R.'s displeasure.

5 Argument from God's Providence.
5. And that God's providence has eminently appeared in the preservation of
the Scripture, (how slightly soever Mr. R. speaks of it) is well known to them
that have been desirous of information in that matter; if it were not so, how
should it have continued to this Day, having so many enemies, as it has always
had? Church-Histories give us various Examples of God's Judgments upon the
Enemies of it, as the Persecuting Emperors, and especially Julian, and the
Heretics that abused it, to maintain their false Doctrines. Sabinian having
wrote a Book against the Doctrine of the Trinity, his Head suddenly fell off
from his Shoulders, no Man knew how; and the like (or as strange judgments)
upon others of them, you may find related by Dr. Beard, Lib. 1. cap 19.
in his Theater of God's Judgments, (and others.)

And had he so many Judgments for those that abused some Texts of Scripture for
bad purposes, and would he suffer Men to go unpunished, while they were upon
such a design, as to corrupt the Scriptures themselves, and alter the sense of
them? or could any Judgments be showed upon such Persons, (if there had been
any such) and the design not be manifested, as the procuring cause of them?
Surely not.

And since the writing of this last passage; I have met with a very Remarkable
History to our purpose in Josephus. Antiq. Jud. l. 12. cap. 2. in sine.
-- quamobrem Rex multum gavisus, etc. In English thus. Wherefore the Jews
having turned the Books of the Law into Greek, according to the will of the
King Ptolomaeus Philadelphus, He was (says the Author) much rejoiced at it,
and took much delight to hear it read to him, professing that he admired the
wisdom of the Lawgiver; and thereupon he asked Demetrius a Learned Man, that
waited on him, why the Poets and Philosophers did not mention this Law in their
Writings, since it savoured of such deep wisdom and goodness; To whom he
replied, That they durst not so to do, because they looked upon it as Divine;
and that God had showed his displeasure upon those that went about to mingle it
with their own Writings; where he mentions one Theodectes, a Poet, who
purposing to put some part of it in his own Poems, was stricken with blindness,
and recovered not his sight till he had changed his purpose. And the like he
relates of another, in the foregoing words, which for brevity sake I omit. Now
if God were pleased thus to rebuke them for such purposes; How much more, may
we think, would he have rebuked them, that should purpose to pervert the
Original Copies of it? (for that were incomparably a greater wickedness, and
more dishonorable to his Name.)

And if my Author could make us believe, That [Those shall go away into
everlasting punishment] was forged into the Text, and corruptly added; He might
as well make us believe the same of [The Righteous going away into Life
Eternal] for doubtless the same spirit that would encourage the Enemies of
Christ, would not much scruple to discourage his Servants.

I shall now add only the Testimony of Him, who is the true and faithful
Witness. Luke 16.17.
See what he says in the case, Luke 16.17.

[Facilius est autem Coelum and Terram praeterire, quam vel unam apicem Legis
excidere.] i. e.

The Earth may fail, the Heavens may sooner pass
Than one (...) of their Maker's Laws.
And thus Mr. R.'s bad speech has brought forth some good, and his shaking
has occasioned some matter of confirmation and establishment to the
Christian's Faith. For which, not unto him, nor unto me, but unto our God be
the praise.

p. 77. etc. 85.
In the following Pages, from the 77. to 85. there is a Miscellany of strange
stuff tending to the same purpose, to weaken the Christian's faith, and love,
as to the Bible and Testament; for which he may in time receive a reward; But I
shall not trouble my self with it, because the main mischief of it may be
prevented by that which is already said of the perfection and purity of the
Scripture. Apud illos nil tam vulgatum quam Scripturas calumniari.
However we may remember that in this particular, This good Protestant has
played a very Popish Game; for nothing is more common among Papists than to
reproach and undervalue the Scriptures, as Chamierus well observes.

In the next also, he has rambled so much out of the way, p. 85. -- 88.
that it is not worth while to follow him; his Assertion in chief is briefly
this: [Another Pillar of Hell Torments are sond Expositors] Fond ones; he
means, no doubt, Foolish ones. Which very expression makes a great discovery of
the Man, and shows him to be very wise in his own conceit. Surely if he can
think all those to be but foolish Men, or foolish Expositors, that have
expounded the word Hell, or Gehenna, for a place of punishment after this life,
(such as Calvin, Beza, Paraeus, Musculus, Perkins Willet, and Multitudes more
of eminent Protestants) he will show himself fit enough to sail to Anticyrus,
or to be cut for the Simples here in England. Well, had these Men been able to
foresee the severity of his censure, they might easily have prevented it,
namely by expounding Hell for no worse place than a Grave, in all the New
Testament; Everlasting, for a few Minutes time, and Punishment for
Annihilation: that is, a Punishment inflicted, for a punishment that cannot be
felt: (for when a Man is turned into nothing, he cannot be sensible of any
thing.) But though such an Exposition might have pleased him and his party, yet
it would have offended wiser Men.

The fourth Pillar that he reckons up (and sets before him, p. 88.
on purpose to beat it down) is the consent of Preachers; And of that I need
say only as before, that it is a better Argument for it, than his judgment is
against it. But see what a mood the Man was in, by the ensuing Lines. --

R. -- p. 89, 90. All sorts of Priests agree, p. 89.
and abuse the People. The Mohammedan Priests blow a Powder into the eyes of
those that come to see Mahomet's Tomb, Note.
to make them blind ever after; and then they say the glory of Mahomet has
blinded them: So the Antichristian Priests, and all sorts of Priests have
greatly deluded the People; blowing something into their Ears, that they are
never afterward able to receive the truth. (This is the substance of what he
says therein more at large.) Sir, you do except the Priests of your own Order,
and the Anabaptistical Preachers, what ever you say herein of the Antichristian
Priests, and other sorts of Priests. But, Worthy Sir, I pray let us know where
your Goodness has read this worthy story, or at least let us know whether it
were your Religion or Conscience, your Honesty or Modesty, that moved you to
apply it after this manner? Not to pass a censure upon your Grace, I am
confident you had little shame in you when you wrote this. Methinks, Sir, you
might now perceive, that the wicked may be compared to chaff and stubble,
though God's wrath will not make an end of them, as Fire does of the other. As
our Doctrines may (if your judgment fail not) be compared to that Powder
aforesaid, though they be not dug out of the Earth, or scraped out of a rotten
Post, or any such thing, as that may be supposed to be. For however they may
disagree in other things, yet they agree in this, that blindness (if you
mistake not) is the effect of both; (the one blinding Men's minds, as the other
their eyes) So, though wicked Men, and chaff and stubble are not alike in all
things, yet they are vain and worthless things in comparison of the Righteous,
as those are, in comparison of the Corn, etc. and therefore may fitly be
compared with them.

You are a Protestant in Profession, and therefore I do judge, you never wore a
Pilgrim's Weed, nor traveled to that Sacred place, where Pope Joan's pretty
Child was buried, nor do I think you ever saw the Miracles that were wrought by
the Relics of St. Anthony, nor how the Hand of St. Nicholas his Image moved,
when it was lifted up to bless the People: Dr. Downham's Treatise of
Antichrist. p. 112.
(which at length, O what pity, was thrown into the Fire, like a common piece
of Wood) And yet (Sir) if you had seen a Thousand such things as these, yet you
could not speak of any more strange, than this which your pious Pen has
acquainted the World with, to very good purpose, viz.

[That the Antichristian Priests, and all sorts of Priests have agreed to
deceive the People] That is, Protestant Divines, yea the generality of them, as
well as Popish ones: The Ministers of Christ, as well as the Vassals of
Antichrist. And that all sorts (good and bad) should thus conspire for such a
mischief; that the great Opposers of Antichrist should have such an
Antichristian design, and wilfully delude the People, (and that too in no less
a matter, than Men's everlasting state in another World) O how wonderful, and
how incredible is this! And yet we must of necessity, believe all this; or else
we must believe your Worship to be a Liar. (And for my part, I had rather
believe the latter than the former.)

p. 90, and. 91.
In these Pages, he mentions two more Pillars of Hell Torments, viz. Some
Scriptures and Reasons. -- Of which he says in effect no more but this, That
those Scriptures are wrested, and those Reasons insufficient; But if he be of
the same mind still, he had best answer what I have written for the proof of
the Point, in the 2d. Chapter of this Discourse.

The last Pillar of Hell torments (which he is pleased to mention) is a
persuasion, The last Pillar of Hell Torments.
that the believing it is a means to make men leave their sins, and the not
believing it, a means of Licentiousness. -- Whether this may be called a Pillar
of it or not, I shall not enquire; the thing I affirm to be a certain truth
(whatever he say against it) for it could not be that men should follow any way
of wickedness securely and quietly if they believed it did tend to so sad an
end. If they did thoroughly and steadfastly believe the everlasting Punishments
in another world, they would not run the hazard of them for all the pleasures
and profits of this world, nor think the greatest spiritual care and pains too
great (in a way of Religion) to make sure of escaping it. And that the Terror
of the Lord (in the knowledge of it) tends to persuade men (to leave their
sins) is clearly intimated by the manifold threats of wrath and punishment
against the children of disobedience, Romans 1.18. Colos. 3.5, 6, etc.
for what do those threatenings serve for, if not to deter men from sin? And if
any punishment will tend that way, surely everlasting punishment much more. And
on the other side, that wicked men would be more bold to sin, if they were
fully persuaded that there shall be no everlasting punishment after this life
(and say as the Epicure, Let us eat and drink for to morrow we dye) is so plain
that I shall not write one line to prove it, yet nevertheless I shall consider
what he has said to disprove it. And first (to pass over his extravagancies
from the 92. page to 102. about the Decree of God as relating to man's fall, and
the like points which are thrust in perforce, by the head and shoulders, His
Arguments to prove the Belief of Hell no preservation from sin.
and have no more to do with the point in hand, than the Lines of his Book with
the Beams of the Sun; I say passing these) I shall come directly to his
Reasons, in the 103. page, thus.

Mr. R. -- That the belief of Hell torments is no such preservative from sin,
is evident; for the greatest sinners believe there is such and yet sin still.
But what does he mean by [such a preservative from sin] and by [believing
them.] If he mean in the former, a total and complete preservative, such as
keeps them from all sin, Examined.
I confess it is not such a preservative: or if he mean it of such as preserves
them from the common practice of gross sins, I grant it also. But yet the
belief of Hell is a preservative from sin in some measure, and keeps wicked men
(so far as it is believed by them) from sinning with so much greediness,
security and peace as otherwise they would. As the Laws of the Land against
Robberies and Murders, do keep men from committing such crimes so often and so
securely, as otherwise they would do, though they do not wholly restrain them
from those crimes. And now let us examine his Reason or proof, viz. Because the
greatest sinners do believe there is a Hell, and yet sin still as much as ever;
This says he, makes it evident, that the belief of Hell is no such
preservative against sin. But this proof proves nothing, nor would he himself
like of it in another case: for (if he be not an Atheist) he will easily grant,
that the belief of a God does really tend to cleanse men's hearts and reform
their lives: yet there is not any grosser wickedness in the world than those
that are committed by some who profess to believe there is a God, and do
believe it after a sort (and would abhor that man that should say there is
none) He adds for confirmation as follows -- R. for though they be never so
wicked, yet they hope the Torments of Hell, which they believe do not belong to
them, or that they may repent before they dye, etc.

Just so may I say of the other. For though men believe there is a God, yet
they (too often) hope that he sees them not, or that he is not much offended
with their wickedness, or the like. And yet I will not doubt but the belief of
a God tends in it self, to do some good upon men, (nor does my Author himself
imagine that an Atheistical opinion is a friend to Religion, but an enemy it.)

And secondly, what does he mean by a Belief of Hell torments? If he mean it of
a slight belief, a fleeting opinion that they are real, while they know little
reason why they should believe them, but only because others are of that
judgment; This I confess is no great preservative from sin, but a grounded and
fixed belief of them is assuredly a great preservative from it as was seen
before.

P. 103.
The following lines contain no great matter, but only a story of a drunken
Arminian, that said he was at present in a state of Damnation, but to morrow
(when sober) should return into a state of grace. And why might he not have
told us as well of John a Leydon's many Marriages, or Knipperdoling's Breathing
upon the people when he bad them receive the Holy Ghost. And what if the
Arminian spoke so sottishly when he was drunk, or were of the same principles
when he was sober, yet he never was so blind when drunk, or so bold when sober,
as to deny there is a Hell, and to compare the terrors and torments thereof
with the flames of Purgatory, and the Chimerical Bulbeggars that women
sometimes fright little children with, as he has done, in page 88. and 90. of
his admired Book.

Secondly, he proceeds after this manner.

R. -- If fear of Hell were a preserver against sin, His second Reason. p. 104.
then those that are delivered from that fear (and believe they shall be saved)
would sin more than others, which is not so. Very true, if they have nothing
more or better to preserve them from sinful courses; but if they have the love
of God and holiness in their hearts, they will shun the ways of sin, though
freed from the fears of Hell. In a word, though the godly would eschew evil
when he is freed from the fears of Hell, yet the wicked man would follow it the
more if he were so. And I doubt not but many such have been more bold to do
wickedly since his Book against Hell came into the world, than ever they were
before.

In the 105. page, p. 105.
He has nothing that is worth a large consideration, yet that which may seem
any thing pertinent shall not be omitted, viz. [That the lusts of men are
stronger than the fears of Hell.] No wonder if they be so in this Age, wherein
such a skilful workman as Mr. R. has used all his craft to make them believe
there is no Hell. But if men's belief of it were stronger, the fear of it would
prevail against their strongest sinful lusts, so as that they would not give
themselves over to follow and fulfill them in their ordinary course.

In the 106. page, He has several Texts of Scripture, as Psalm. 19.11. p. 106.
Malachi 2.2. and others, which tend not so much as in show to confirm that
which he had undertaken to prove. But possibly he might suppose that some will
think the better of his Book when they see so many Scriptures in one page,
though they be not serviceable to his design. And having spoken somewhat
Heathenishly before, he will now make his Reader amends in part with a Divine
Axiom of his own in the 106. page line 3. [If sinners could enjoy all the
pleasures of sin for a season, yet they will find that they have made a bad
bargain of it.] Which I confess is a truth; but it will better appear to be so
by my Doctrine, than by his. If they live and dye ungodly, and so come to
everlasting miseries, they will see what a bad bargain it was to purchase those
miseries with the pleasures of sin for a season; but if they be turned into
nothing at the day of Judgment (as he would have us think) Then (in that state,
if I might call it a state) they could not be sensible of any of their follies,
in choosing the pleasures of sin before the pleasures of piety. Doubtless too
many in the world (yea too many that I know in the world) would think it no
very hard bargain, but rather account it a happiness in some degree, if they
could but please themselves (as they would) with their lies and slanders, The
fruits of Mr. R's Doctrine.
their malice and profaneness, etc. and be assured at the same time, that they
should suffer no worse punishment than to be turned into nothing. (after they
had wrought all the mischief they are able.) Would they not then be content (if
the Laws of the Land would allow it) to hear a Sermon but once a year? and cast
off the very show of Religion? Would they not be content to sit round a Barrel
(in the midst of a Green) on the Lord's day in the Afternoons (yea in the
Forenoons too) and desire no better company than New Cards and Old Stories, all
the day long? Would not a desperate Damning Gallant be more welcome to them
than a Preacher? and his shameless, Whorish, Heathenish Boastings be more
pleasing to their honest hearts, than the best Sermons of the other? Yea, would
they not count him a useless creature, and think him unworthy so much as of the
dregs of their Merry-go-down, for all the pains that he took to prevent their
Damnation? For if it can do them no more hurt than to consume them to nothing,
they will not much value it, since that which makes an end of them, will also
make an end of their Sorrows: and that it will do no worse, they have this
pamphlet to persuade them; but let them not trust to it, for its Author was not
infallible: Mr. Samuel was no Prophet, nor Mr. Richardson any of those that
wrote by the Spirit. And what he pretends for it from [the Destruction] of the
wicked, has received a censure in the first Chapter.

p. 107, etc.
In the 107. page, and those that follow to the 113. page, he speaks little or
nothing that needs to be examined by me, for it tends not (so far as I can
apprehend) to strengthen his cause in general, nor to confirm that particular
point, which he has last endeavored to defend. And having no more to say to
him as yet, I shall clear one truth, which tends to make my way the plainer
when I shall meet with him again, viz. when I come to take a view of his
considerations, etc. in the 113, 114. pages, The endless punishment of the
Devils, proved.
and the rest. The truth that I assert (in this case) is thus: That the fallen
Angels shall be punished with everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25.41. We read of
everlasting fire prepared for them, therefore they shall suffer everlastingly
in it, for if they should suffer in it but for a time, to what purpose (to
speak with Reverence) should everlasting fire be prepared for them? The word
everlasting, which has hitherto been looked upon as one of the saddest
properties of that fire, would signify very little in point of Terror, if it
did not suppose the everlastingness of their punishment, for whom it is
prepared. As the durableness of a Dungeon or Prison will be matter of small
consideration to those that shall endure but a little while in it.

And their perpetuity under punishment may also be cleared from their
perpetuity in sinning (their everlasting impenitency) The Devils are past all
true repentance for their sins, and therefore they that continue impenitent are
called the children of the Devil, ye are of your father the Devil, said our
Savior to the obstinate Jews of old.

And if the Devils will never truly repent of their sins, what wonder if they
never be released out of punishment? (yet I do not conclude they should be
forgiven if they should repent, for God has not made any promise of Mercy to
them upon any terms, nor has he provided any Mediator for them.) To which I
might add (as equally serviceable to my present purpose) those places of
Scripture, that tell us, that the sin against the Holy Ghost shall never be
forgiven. Matthew. 12.32.
And if it never be forgiven, they that commit it shall never come out of
punishment after the day of Wrath is come upon them.

And thus we have seen the certainty of the Devils everlasting punishment,
which of it self will cut asunder the sinews of several of Mr. R's Arguments as
shall be seen in the next Section.

CHAP. III. SECT. II. The strong man armed, and his strength discovered, or Mr.
Richardson's deep considerations considered.
HItherto he has fought (as it were) at a distance, but now (in the following
part of his Pamphlet) he comes more close, and strikes downright blows upon
the Antichristian Priests and all sorts of Priests (to use his own words) that
so he may, if it be possible, beat them out of their fond conceits about the
everlastingness of hell torments. And though the number Seven be accounted a
Number of perfection, yet he will go as far as Ten: for so many considerations
it has pleased him to offer us in the 113, etc. pages. And though his folly
has been somewhat evident by what has been said, yet I think I may affirm the
same of it, which the Queen of Sheba once did of Solomon's wisdom, p. 113.
that one half of it (Reader) has not been told thee, p. 113. l. 1.

Mr. R. -- Several considerations that there is not to be any punishment that
shall never end. B. O fortunate sir, what happy Planet were you born under that
ever you should be able (and willing) to do such a great work as this, and so
effectually to strengthen the hearts of the enemies of God in their most raging
resolute wickednesses? Well: If you make good what you have undertaken, you
shall surely have the credit of it -- and eris mihi magnus Apollo, yea, and for
your diligent endeavor in this kind, you shall (by my consent) refresh your
heart with Malmsbury Ale, be a Chaplain to Mr. Hobbs, and contemplate the
beauty of his famed Leviathan.

But let us come to the work, and consider a little your several
considerations, and we will not disturb their good order, but take them, one
after another, as they come to hand.

R. -- p. 113. l. 6. first we do not find the place of Hell mentioned in any of
the six days work of God, and if it be not found in Gods Creation, it is a
ground for us to judge that it is of man's Creation, viz. a vain imagination,
etc. B. These are plain words indeed, and he has spoken no parable therein,
but how well he has spoken a few words will discover. For first, how would he
behave himself if he were to dispute with any such as the Sadducees of old, who
held there was no Angel or Spirit? for they might very easily argue thus -- We
read not in the History of the six days work, of the Creation of Angels,
therefore there be no such creatures in the world. If Mr. R. denies the
proposition, he must forget the first of Genesis, or show us some place of it
that mentions the making of Angels, Mr. R's first consideration proves as well
that there is no Angel.
which he cannot do. If he deny the consequence, he must disparage the Learning
of no less man than himself: for his is just of the same complexion, There is
no mention of a Hell in the six days works, therefore there is no Hell -- so
that if this consideration will prove there is no Hell, it will also prove
there is no Angel, and consequently no Devil neither (for Devils are confessed
to be no other than wicked Angels or Spirits) and if so, the Damner's
imprecation [the Devil take me] will be only Nonsense and not profaneness or
wickedness.

Nor Heaven of Glory.
2. May he not at the same charges prove (as well) that there is no place of
glory for the Righteous, as that there is no place of torment for the Wicked?
for it is a question whether the Heaven of Glory be mentioned in the first of
Genesis or not. It is said indeed there [God created the Heaven] but the Hebrew
is rendered by Fagius, Vid. Synops. Crit. in Genesis 1.
Coelum hoc, i. e. This Heaven, that is the visible Heaven: and other good
Divines are not afraid to say, that Moses in that Chapter meant only to reckon
up the visible works of God (in the former part of it) and yet I shall not
doubt whether there be another Heaven above that, because I am not certain that
any such is intended in that place; but do believe it because of the Testimony
of other Scriptures: and so will I believe there is a Hell, because it is
mentioned in other places, though it be not in the first of Genesis.

His second Consideration is no less vain than the former, as thus: -- R.
Solomon was the Wisest of men, p. 114.
and yet in his writings he mentions no Hell, nor any everlasting Punishment,
etc. which he would have done if he had known of them.

B. What does he think of Proverbs 15.24. The way of life is above to the wise,
that he may depart from Hell beneath. Does not Solomon speak of Hell in that
place, or can he persuade us that it means no more than the grave, when
experience shows that the best and wisest do not escape that no more than the
worst: yet that Hell (there mentioned) is manifestly supposed to be such as the
wise (walking in the way of wisdom) may certainly escape. 2. Christ was wiser
than Solomon himself, Matthew. 25.46.
and he has told us of [everlasting punishment] whether the other has or not.
3. Solomon speaks not (at least not plainly) of the Deity of the Holy Ghost, of
the union of the Divine and Humane Nature in the person of Christ, or of the
imputation of his Righteousness to believers; yet Christians have believed
those points, and I hope the Socinians shall never baffle us out of our Faith
therein. In a word, though Solomon were the wisest man, yet God never intended
that all Truth should be comprised in the small Books that he has written.

In his Third Consideration, p. 115.
he tells us (out of the Hebrew Doctors writings) of the seven thousand years,
in the world to come in which all Souls shall be blessed] If such a piece of
Jewish learning be pleasing to such a Rabbi as Mr. R. yet that is little reason
why I or other Christians should be in love with it; and I think it more worthy
to be slighted than to be answered. And that which he concludes with [The Jews
were great searchers of Scripture, and if everlasting punishment were to be
found therein, they would have seen it.] This, I say, is as little to be
regarded; for no wise Man ever thought that the Jews ever saw, or acknowledged
all Scripture-truths, they had as many errors and weaknesses as other Men.

p. 116.
R. -- The Saints recorded in Scripture, did not believe there was any
punishment for any to endure, that shall never end; for in their penitential
confessions, they do not confess such punishment to have been deserved by them:
Dan. 9 To us belongs confusion of face. (This is his fourth Consideration.) p.
117, 118.
And in the following Lines, we have the second part of it, to the same Tune, in
these words. --

-- We do not find that ever they gave thanks for such a deliverance, or so
much as prayed for it; which yet could not but appear the greatest deliverance,
if they had known of it. B. The substance of this Reasoning is thus: [The
Saints did not confess any Everlasting Punishment to be deserved by them, etc.]

I answer. Yes, they did implicitly confess so much; for, in the Text he
mentions, in 9. Daniel, To us belongs confusion of face, it is not limited to
temporal confusion, and therefore may fitly be extended to Eternal confusion.
Psalm. 44.23.
Psalm. 44.23. They pray thus [O cast us not off for ever.] which was an
acknowledgment, that God justly might have cast them off for ever, for their
sin. And in Psalm. 79.5. Lord, will thou be angry for ever? Is not that an
acknowledgment, that he might pour out his anger upon them, ( i. e. punish
them) for ever for their sins?

And if it were as he would have it, the Argument would prove but little, for
the Saints in Scripture did not expressly confess, that they deserved to be
given over to the Devil's Tyranny, to be possessed, and terrified, and
tormented by him, and yet Christians will not doubt but their sins deserve so
much.

To the 2d. part.
And the other may be answered as easily; for though I should grant, that the
Saints in Scripture did not expressly give thanks for their deliverance from
endless punishment, yet that is far from proving, that there is no such thing:
for they did not give thanks in that manner for Heaven it self, and their
appointment to it, yet we are very sure that there is a Heaven, and that they
are appointed to it. --

2. I do not remember that ever they said, [we give thee thanks, O Lord, for
giving us thy Holy Spirit to instruct us] and yet the Text tells, that it was
so in those very words: Nehem. 9.20.
Thou gave also thine Holy Spirit to instruct them: And yet they could not
but know that it was a very great benefit; (to allude to my Author's
expression) Nor did they pray (expressly, and in Terminis) to be delivered from
evil spirits, and their malice and violence: Yet I verily believe they want not
will nor power to do us violence, (every Hour in the Day) if our God did not
overruled, and restrain them.

Consid. 5. -- R. Christ, when on Earth, did weep for the Jews, p. 119.
because of that desslation that was to come upon them: would he not much more
have spoken of a punishment never to end, and have wept for them that should
suffer that, if there were any such to be endured by any? B. It is not unfit to
be noted, how blind those Men are that have not a mind to see the Truth. [He
would have spoken of such a Punishment, if there had been such, etc.] As some
Men will face us down, (and vow most stoutly) that they did not those things
which we saw them do; So Mr. R. by that speech of his, would make Christians
believe, that our Lord never spoke any thing to that purpose, when they have
often read his plain words concerning it, Matthew. 25. last Verse, [These shall
go away into everlasting punishment.]

But says he [He would have wept for them that should have suffered such a
Punishment.] And so he might for ought he knows to the contrary, for many
things that Jesus did are not written. ( Joh. 21.) But it is not written so of
him: True, but what of that? for in the Gospel we read of some that should dye
in their sins, and be shut out of Heaven, Matthew 7.14. etc. and yet we read not
that he wept for them, which notwithstandi^g was a misery in the saddest sense.

His 6. Consideration is an Assertion, p. 120.
That Scripture makes no mention of any Punishments, but those in this life;
which certainly argues more strength of his Brow than of his Brain, 31. to the
end.
and will not be believed by them that believe the 25. of Matthew. (to mention no
more at this time) for therein we find a Day, wherein all Nations shall be
gathered before Christ, and have their sentence according to their works, to
everlasting life, or punishment: (which will be after most of them have been
dead a long time, as I need not prove to them that believe that Article of our
Creed, that He shall come to judge the quick and the dead.)

There is nothing more that needs to be considered by me, but only his heaping
up Texts of Scripture one upon another; for upon this occasion, (in this 120.
page) he has as many Texts as Lines, which yet prove no more, [that there
shall be no punishment after this life] than Mr. Hobbs his Latin Epistle to
Mr. Wood, will prove Dr. Fell to be no Scholar. (And this, Reader, may be a
caution to thee, that thou do not always conclude the Excellency of a Book,
or a Sermon, from the multitude of Texts of Scripture that are alleged
therein, for a Man may name many, when most of them are little to the purpose
they are brought for, and then they will profit thee no more, than the Meat
that goes beside thy Mouth will nourish thee: It Is not how many Texts, but how
pertinent to the point in hand, that is to be most regarded.)

p. 121.
R. -- God's punishment of sin is not of so large an extent as his mercy, Psalm.
108. Thy mercy is great above the Heavens: (And more of the same excellency,
which they that want may read in the same page, I shall not trouble my self to
transcribe it.) B. We would know what he means, when he says God's punishment
of sin is not of such a large extent as his mercy.] If he mean, that the
principle of it, and whence it flows, viz. God's Justice is not so extensive as
his mercy, I may safely deny it; His Justice being Infinite, as it is the
Justice of an Infinite Being: If he means it of the exercising mercy, and his
inflicting punishment; Then I say in like manner, that the objects of
punishment are as many, yea more than the objects of his special and saving
mercy: All that live and dye ungodly shall feel his vengeance, and they are
without controversy the greatest Number. Wide is the Gate that leads to
destruction, Matthew. 7.14, 15
and many there be that go in thereat; and (on the contrary) Narrow is the way
that leads to life, and few there be that find it. That of the Psalmist,
[That his mercy is great above the Heavens] signifies no more than the
Infiniteness of his mercy, in that it knows no bounds, but was from everlasting
predestination, and shall be to everlasting glorification upon the objects of
mercy, even them that fear him; but does not intimate that he will actually
pardon more sinners than he will punish.

p. 122.
R. -- Death (in Job) is called the King of Terrors, therefore Death is the
greatest punishment, and the most terrible; But if there were an everlasting
punishment after Death, Job 18.14.
that would be the King of Terrors, for Death is not terrible in comparison of
that. -- B. This reasoning is not so strong, as at first view it may seem to
be, and is very far from proving, that Death is the worst punishment, that
ungodly sinners are subject to.

For first, What necessity is there of expounding Job 18.14. of death? The Text
does not mention Death, and I know nothing in the Context, that will force us
to interpret it thereof. The Learned Interpretum pene dixerim, Coryphaeus. Vti
Doctiss. Polus in praef. ad vol. 2. Synops.
Mercerus, a Man well skilled in the Hebrew, renders it by gravissimos
terrores, which may be in this life, as well as in another: The King of
Terrors, by a common Hebraisme, signifies powerful, commanding, conquering
Terrors, which may be fitly understood of the Soul in its separated state, when
the Terror of the Lord, and the immediate impressions of his wrath have taken
hold upon the impenitent Soul.

Well, but my Author will not so easily yield to have it understood of any
thing but Death, because that is most for his design, wherefore let us see if
(taken in that sense) it will be any help to his cause; and I shall not fear to
undertake the Negative. I will prove, I say, that it will not: For, the King of
Terrors is but [most terrible] if we make the most of it that we can. Now Death
may be said to be most terrible, though there be a greater terror after Death;
For [most terrible] is not necessarily the very uttermost terror that can be,
but in general very terrible. As when the Thunder shook down the Houses in
Amsterdam, upon the Heads of them that dwelt therein, it may lawfully be said,
that it was a most terrible Day to them, yet the Day of Judgment will be more
terrible than that, 2 Pet. 3.10.
wherein the Heavens being on fire shall be dissolved, and the Earth with the
works therein shall be burnt up. So when Men are said to be most excellent
Scholars or Soldiers, we mean only that they have very good skill in Arms and
Arts, but not that they do exceed all others therein. And in a word, the
Scripture Phrase is Consonant to this; for, in Ezekiel 33. Ezekiel. 33.28.
the Lord threatened to lay the Land most desolate, yea he assured them of it,
[I will lay it most desolate] and yet it suffered not a greater desolation than
other Lands had suffered, and doubtless not so great, in all respects, as the
Land of Sodom had done: So that [most desolate] is in substance no more than
very desolate: And so understand the King of Terrors, or most terrible, of that
which is very terrible, as Death may be, (and is to many) though there be a
worse thing after Death, to them that dye in their sins. And indeed Death is
most terrible, as it has relation to that which comes after it -- (which is
enough for this new cavil.)

Consider. 9. R. -- Sin is punished to the full in this life, Ezekiel. 36.18. I
poured out my fury upon them: p. 123, 124.
(then he adds) would ye have it to be punished to the full in this life, and
afterward with a punishment never to end? -- then after some extravagancies he
adds in the next page ['tis as disagreeable to justice to punish sin twice, as
to receive the payment of a debt twice.] B. Herein (I confess) he has hit the
mark as well as if he had been Thomas Gunne himself: for the whole state of the
question turns upon this hinge [whether sin be punished to the full in this
life] And as Mr. R. and I can agree but in few things, so in this we differ as
much as may be, for I say it is not, and my reasons are these. 1. Because many
ungodly men have had a continued state of prosperity, and scarce ever felt any
thing that they accounted a punishment (yea, nothing more common than for such
persons to conclude their sins are pardoned because they do not find themselves
punished for them) I was envious at the prosperity of the wicked, Psalm. 73. 1
to 6 verse.
and in the following words he tells us, they are not in trouble like other men
(nor does he intimate any visible Judgments that come upon them in this life.)
And can Mr. R. persuade himself, that the sins of such men were punished to the
full in this life? 2. Because the day of wrath is after this life, even at the
coming of Christ. See Job 21.30. compared with the Text in the Margin 2 Pet.
2.9.
. 3. Because their sins make them worthy of everlasting punishment. See the
first Chapter of this Book, in answer to the question how it is just to punish
temporal offenses eternally?

But (on the contrary) my Author contends that sin is punished to the full in
this life, or at least he says so, if we can take his word for it. But how he
will prove it who can tell? For those texts of Scripture which speak of his
pouring out his fury upon the wicked in this life, as Ezekiel 36.18. are far
from proving that there is no wrath for them in another life. Yea, so far, as
that they will manifestly prove the contrary: for if God punish sin in the day
of his Patience, how much more will he punish it hereafter in the day of his
wrath, which is called the day of the Revelation of his righteous Judgment, and
the day of perdition to ungodly men, Romans 2.5.
in 2 Pet. 3.7. They shall awake to shame and everlasting contempt, after they
slept (as it were) in the dust of the earth, Dan. 12. and yet we know many of
them have been brought to shame in this world, and suffered shameful deaths for
their crimes.

But it is not agreeable to justice to punish sin twice, no more than to
receive the payment of a debt twice, (says Mr. R.)

Matthew. 25. 1 Thessalonians. 1. 1 Thessalonians. 1.10.
And the punishment he will inflict upon the impenitent in another world, will
be so far from any appearance of injustice, as that it will be the revelation
of his righteous judgment in the Text aforesaid. Romans 2.5.
Nor is it any show of injustice to punish sin twice unless the former were as
much punishment as sin deserves, (as a man may justly be required to make
several payments of a debt, when the first payment is not to the full) and if
my Author can prove that sin deserves no more or longer punishments than the
punishments of this present life, he will show himself a man of rare acuteness.

viz. That there is not a worse thing than Gods fury, wrath, and anger, and
these (says he) are poured out in this life (he means to the full so as that
there shall be no more of it remaining for any man in another life. His abuse
of Scripture. p. 125.
) And how will he prove that these are poured out to the full in this present
life? Why, by these places, Ps. 78.49. Ps. 85.3. Job 14.13. The former he
renders thus, he poured out all his fierce anger, but by his leave, the Text
says no such thing, but rather thus, [he cast upon them the fierceness of his
anger] or as Junius renders, aestum irae suae, the heat of his anger, namely,
by bringing great calamity upon them here in this world: but how will that
prove there is no punishment for the impenitent of them hereafter?

So Psalm. 85.3. is spoken of Gods own people, whom he would magnify his Mercy
upon [Thou have covered all their sins, Thou have taken away all thy wrath,
viz. from them whose sins he forgave:] But must it be so therefore with his
Enemies too, that dye in their sins and would never consent to forsake them
while they lived? So upright Job speaks of wrath that would be past as to
himself: But must there be no wrath hereafter for the mischievous Hypocrite?
Sure that was far from his thoughts: The Hypocrites in heart do heap up wrath;
Job 36.13^.
( viz. against themselves, as it is plain and needs no proof.) Wherefore if he
blame those that make too bold with the Scripture, he must needs pass a hard
censure on himself too.

Yet there is one phrase which (to the men of his Religion) may seem to favor
his assertion, viz. [the accomplishing of God's anger, in this world] Ezekiel.
5.13. Ezekiel. 5.13. Considered.
Thus will I accomplish mine Anger, viz. by the Judgments mentioned in the
verse before, Famine, etc.

But those people there spoken of may be considered either personally, or
civilly and nationally: his anger may be accomplished as to National judgments,
when it is not so as to personal punishments, as in Sodom, etc. 2. We may take
the word Anger for the threatenings of punishment which he had made against them
in particular, as Romans 1.18. The wrath (or anger) of God is revealed from
Heaven, i. e. His threatenings are set forth. So here v. 12. A third part of
thee shall dye with the Pestilence, and with Famine shall they be consumed,
etc. Then it follows, Thus (v. 13.) shall my Anger be accomplished; as much as
if he had said, Hereby shall my threatening of judgment (in the 8 and 9 verses)
be fulfilled and made good. And what is that to prove that there is no worse
thing for the worst of them than temporal judgments and corporal death? Surely
they that can gather such a conclusion from it, are as bad Logicians as the
Mohammedan Priests, that he so merrily mentions in the former part of his
Book. Thus, Reader, I have considered his various considerations, and they that
duly consider what has been said in answer to them, will not be rung to sleep
(in their sins) by the Music of those sweet sounding Bells.

CHAP. III. SECT. III. Mr. Richardson's Richest Learning discovered, or his
many infallible proofs disproved.
R. -- p. 126. line 6, and 7, etc. many infallible proofs that there is not to
be any punishment after this life that shall never end. B. UNgodly sinners are
more than secure enough in their evil ways, though we tell them never so often
(from the word) of the Everlasting Miseries they are liable to: How safe then
may they think themselves now, when such a man as Mr. R. has given them, not
only some Conjectures against them, or probabilities of escaping them, nor
barely some various Considerations to comfort their hearts against the fears of
Hell; but proofs to the contrary, yea Infallible proofs, and many of them too,
that sinners may take their choice, and see which likes them best: (and which
they may best trust to, to secure them from the storms of endless wrath.) Will
they not now bless themselves in their iniquities, and think themselves almost
as safe in a way of sin, as in a way of obedience? and go as cheerfully to a
Playhouse, or a worse House, as to a Steeple-house? (to use the witty word of
the religious Separatists.) And now by all means let us take his infallible
proofs, since we may have so good a bargain in them, viz. more than Nineteen to
the Dozen, for he mentions no less than Twenty of them. And (by the way) was it
not strange, (yea most exceeding strange) that there should be so many proofs
of it to be found, and yet none of them appear to the eyes of his many Betters,
such as St. Austine, Chrysostom, Calvin, Beza, Whitaker, Whately, Perkins,
Bolton, (and such like) that are mentioned by my Author himself, and are
confessed to be pious, as well as Learned Men. It seems their Prayers could not
obtain that measure of Illumination (in this particular) which his have done:
(for he has made this discovery, not only by the strength of his wits, but
also and especially by the fervency and frequency of his Prayers, as he tells
us in the Epistle to the Reader, in these words -- I upon often seeking God,
and diligent search, etc. am fully persuaded that it is the truth which I
contend for. --) Well, but whatsoever his persuasions may be, we must not be
persuaded by him any further, than we have reason for it; Let us consider his
infallible proofs, (and if they prove to be infallible, I will confess Him to
be as good a Man as the Pope.)

R. -- Proof 1. The Scriptures hold forth no such thing; p. 126.
and we ought not to presume above that which is written, Things revealed
belong to us, Deuteronomy. 29. B. They that purpose to poison Men are not wont to give
them pure poison, but rather to mix it with some thing that is good and
wholesome, that it may go down the more freely, (and unsuspected:) So they that
lie in wait to deceive the weak, and to corrupt their minds with Pestilent
Doctrines, and Opinions, will not present them with any thing less, than a
mixture of Truth and Error together, that they may receive the one to make way
for the other. Just thus has my Author done herein; for as it is a truth that
revealed things belong to us, so it is as apparently false, that the Doctrine
of Everlasting Punishments for the wicked in Hell, is not revealed in
Scripture: See the 1. Chapter of this Book.

R. Proof 2d. Their Opinion of a Punishment never to end, is contrary to the
Word of God. -- B. The Devil is a Liar, and his Servants (to my knowledge) do
not always speak true, and many times also they have as little of shame in
them, as they have of truth or goodness in them. But how shall this (which he
has said) be proved? Why thus.

-- From those places of Scripture, which speak of everlasting life, p. 127.
as the proper portion of Believers, as in particular, John 3. last verse. He
that believes not the Son shall not see life: and several other Scriptures to
the same purpose. B. But if this be an infallible proof, I am very much
mistaken: It is not such indeed, nor does it look like such to the eyes of them
that understand it. Let us observe the nature of it. [He that believes not
shall not see life.] whence he would have us conclude, that such a person shall
not live for ever, and consequently not live in Punishment for ever. But what
reason is there, why we should make any such conclusion from thence? for [to
see life] in that place does not signify barely to have life, or to be alive,
for so it is not a truth, since they shall live again at the last Day, and be
raised out of their Graves, Joh. 5.29. yea be raised incorruptible, in 1 Cor.
15. and many other places. Wherefore to see life is a figurative expression,
for as by life is signified glory and happiness, (life being naturally the
sweetest thing, and so very fit to express the state of glory by) so by seeing
is meant enjoying; As when it is said, Matthew. 5.3. Heb. 12.14.
Blessed are the pure in heart, for they shall see God; and in Heb. 12.14.
Without holiness no man shall see the Lord. We know, and are assured from the
Revelations, that every eye shall see the Lord, even the Lord Jesus Christ, who
is Lord of all, and by whom all things were created, in Colos. 1.16. and the
most part of Men never were partakers of true holiness, nor ever will be; and
therefore the most part shall see him without holiness. So that to see in that
place must be meant of enjoying the Lord in glory, and so we grant none shall
see him, in that sense, without holiness. And the like may be said of seeing
good, (or good days) in 1 Pet. 3. it must needs be meant of enjoyment, and
partaking that good, as it is plain. This therefore is no proof at all of it,
(much less an infallible proof.)

The next attempt which he makes for the proof of it, is from those places of
Scripture, p. 128.
where mention is made of their Perishing and Destruction; They shall be
destroyed for ever, and the ungodly shall perish, and the like in the Book of
Psalms, and elsewhere. But for my part, I think it is the saddest destruction
to be in a perpetual state of misery: This I say, is a more dreadful
destruction, than to be annihilated, and therefore fittest to be called a
destruction: And if he think the word destruction must signify (of necessity)
annihilation, and cannot signify a state of misery and punishment, he had best
remove those difficulties that lie in his way, in my first Chapter, where the
sense of the word has been cleared against the Socinians. And what does he
think (to mention but one Text for many) of the words of our God in Hosea, O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thy help: Hosea 13.9.
Surely he does not think it is meant, that they had turned themselves into
nothing, but that (by their sins) they had brought themselves into a miserable
condition, and made themselves liable to greater miseries.

In the following Page he runs very swiftly, and disputes us into absurdities
after this manner, -- The Word says, p. 129.
Their end is destruction, R.
Philip. 3. Their Opinion says, They shall never be destroyed, nor ever end:
The Word says, The last Enemy is Death, (1 Cor. 15.)
Their Opinion says, There is a worse thing after Death to be endured without
end. B. There are a sort of Men in the World that have wit and subtilty, and
some kind of Learning too, that yet are little better than fools, for want of
grace and holy wisdom, to make a good use of their wits; and therefore we use
to say of them, that they are simple and cunning. And whether my Author be not
somewhat of Kin to these kind of Men, let my Reader judge: For in these last
passages there is something of subtilty, yea enough to deceive the ignorant and
unstable, and the Men that are inclining to his Opinion: but if we view them
narrowly, they will not appear more subtle than silly. For the former runs
upon a false supposition, that the destruction threatened to the wicked is a
Natural destruction, whereas it means only a Moral destruction, viz.
Condemnation and Punishment. (as was seen before) But he says, their end is
said to be destruction, which he thinks is contrary to us, who teach that there
shall never be an end of them, but that they shall always remain under
Punishment. But it does not mean as he would have it, that the destruction
there spoken of, does make an end of them, or imply the dissolution of their
natures; for we have seen the contrary before; and if he entertain such a
persuasion, he may easily be brought to believe, (upon the same ground) that
Everlasting life (or happiness) will make an end of the Saints; for it is said,
Their end is everlasting life. Romans 6.22.
Wherefore by [end] we are to understand, their final, and unchangeable state
and portion in another World; which is everlasting destruction (or misery) to
the wicked, as it is everlasting life (or glory) to the Righteous. But of this
I have said something before.

The other labors under as much weakness as the former, for (observe) it is
not said in 1 Cor. 15. that the last enemy is Death, (absolutely, as if there
were no worse thing to come after) but thus only [The last enemy that shall be
destroyed, 1 Cor. 15.26.
is Death] where he leaves out that main passage, which carries the whole sense
of the Text. Just as the Devil alleged the Psalmist, [he shall give his Angels
charge over thee to keep thee] and left out the following words [in all thy
ways, or the ways God has appointed thee to walk in] See Matthew. 4.6. compared
with Psalm. 91.11. Vid. Muscul. in Loc.
Now we grant that Death is the last Enemy that shall be destroyed, though it
shall not be the last evil, that by the wicked shall be endured.

p. 130.
In the next Page he heaps up many places, to prove that Eternal life belongs
not to the wicked: To which I answer, by distinguishing of the word: if he take
it, as the Scripture does, for Eternal glory and happiness, I grant it: but if
he mean it only of an Eternal continuance in life, (as life is opposed only to
Corporal Death or Annihilation) then I say, it will agree to the wicked also,
after the General Resurrection; as in its due place has been manifested. The
Devils shall not have Eternal life in the sense aforesaid, as it is promised to
the People of God; but yet they shall be eternally alive, (and live the life of
spiritual substances) else they could not suffer eternally in the Everlasting
fire, as we have proved they shall.

R. -- If Adam had never sinned, he should have dyed nevertheless. p. 131.
This is proved first, because he had a Natural body, and was of the Earth
earthly; and therefore mortal and corruptible. -- B. Whatsoever strength and
goodness may be in this kind of Reasoning; it is no more than the World has
been acquainted with, before ever it was blessed with the sight of his Book,
the Learned Reader may find it amongst the most Reasonable Doctrines of those
Masters of Reason (as they would be counted) I mean the Socinian Heretics. See
Ostorod. Instit. cap. 33.
And it is easily answered, by distinguishing of the word Mortal. It may be
taken two ways (as to this present case) either first to signify a person that
may die, and is capable of dying, and so I grant Adam was always mortal, (which
his Reasons sufficiently prove) but if we mean it of one that must dye, I deny
that Adam was mortal in state of Innocence: for whatsoever may be said of a
possibility of dying, he should never have been actually under the power of
death, if he had not sinned. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by
sin, etc. Rom 5.12. A porta in Def. fidei. cap 27. Aslingii l. c. p. 2. l. 5.
q. 2.
They that would see a larger discourse on this subject, may consult these in
the Margin, where they may see the Author of this opinion.

R. -- Mr. Bolton says, If Adam had stood, he could not have conveyed to us a
Body Immortal, or not dying, in his Treat, of Heaven, p. 131. B. This
Gentleman's word is not overmuch to be valued as to the Authors he cites, so
he cites Mr. Bolton here, non bona fide, as they say: in plain English, very
corruptly. For in that place the words run thus [our condition, (speaking of
the Saints in Heaven,) is a thousand times more happy and glorious, than if we
had stood still with Adam in his Innocence and Felicity; for if so, he could
but have conveyed to us bodies Immortal, potentia non moriendi ex Hypothesi, as
they say, but in Heaven they shall be Immortal impotentia moriendi:] if he knew
not what that means, for a few good words I shall be content to tell him; if he
does know, he cannot but know that he grants no subjection to the power of
death to proceed from the nature of Adam or his posterity, but from their
sinfulness, and that they should not have dyed but upon the supposal of sin.
And I think he has done no good office, to suggest such a thing as this
concerning Mr. Bolton, to make the world believe that such an able and faithful
Teacher of Divine Truth, would play any (the least part) of the Socinians
damned Game. In the two following pages, he is very vain, p. 132. and p. 133.
and deserves not my Ink to he spent upon him: and if I should lay open all his
weaknesses, it is possible I might be thought to deal over hardly by him: those
therefore that little concern the point in hand, or are answered already I need
not concern my self with. I pass therefore to the next: p. 134.
where the substance of his many words is thus in brief. [That if death be the
punishment of sin, then Christ by freeing his people from the punishment of
their sins, must free them from dying, which he does not.]

I answer, Christ by freeing them from the punishment of sin has also freed
them from death, so far forth as it is a punishment, viz. from an accursed
death. The Faithful therefore though they suffer death, yet they suffer it not
as a punishment, properly so called, nor in a way of vengeance, but in a way of
mercy; and therefore blessed are they that dye in the Lord. That pale horse
though it sometimes affrights them, Philip. 1.23.
yet it is sent on a good errand, viz. to bring their Souls into the blessed
presence of their Lord and Savior, which the Apostle assures us (in the same
Text) is far better than to live with their friends in this sinful world.

p. 135, 136.
In the 135, and 136. pages, there is nothing that I think it worth while to
trouble my self with, some things being beside his purpose, and others in a
great measure against it. And that which is for it [how do the wicked perish
for ever, if they must live for ever] is no new dish, but only the old
coleworts* new sodden, and how much it is worth is discoverable from that which
was said but a little before, to what he had offered about [eternal life] in
page 130.

p. 137.
R. -- Men build much in this point upon [the second death:] but what that
death is they cannot agree. B. I think he is much mistaken in this, and do not
doubt but Orthodox Divines are very well agreed in their Judgments about it,
and describe it with little variation one from another. But the main mischief
is, that their Judgment of it agrees not to his (and if his be infallible,
theirs must needs be erroneous.)

R. -- Mr. Perkins says, the Second death is a total separation from God; and
if so, it is not a punishment without end; and seeing God is every where, if
they be any where how can they be absent from God? B. But as Mr. Perkins was as
wise a man as himself, so his speech herein is not so absurd, as he imagines it
to be: yea, I doubt not but it is sound and good; and now I shall consider
briefly what he says unto it. 1. [if so, then it is not a punishment without
end:] what warrant he has to make such an Inference from it, I for my part
cannot understand: for what if that Separation be everlasting (as we believe it
to be) then it will be vanity to say so (yea a contradiction too.) So that this
Collection of his is utterly groundless, unless he understand this Separation
to be by Annihilation; and if he do so, I have showed the absurdity of it
sufficiently already (in disproving the Doctrine of the Annihilation of the
wicked.)

2. R. -- If they be any where, how can they be absent from God, seeing God is
every where -- But certainly he must be a very silly man that can think Mr.
Perkins was such a fool as to suppose that they could be absent from the Lord
in a proper sense, or out of his presence. I dare say that was very far from
his mind: and he needed no more to be taught the doctrine of God's
Omnipresence, than wicked men need to be comforted by his Book (against the
fears of Damnation:) yet because he has mentioned the word [Absent from God] I
may lawfully put him in mind of that Text of the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5.6.
in 2 Cor. while we are at home in the body we are absent from the Lord: he did
not think, he and the rest of the Faithful were where God is not, while they
lived in this world, and yet he expresses it after that manner: because here
they were as it were absent from the comfortable presence of God, in comparison
of that comfort which their Souls should have in his Glorious Presence after
they had left their bodies. So in this case we mean by the Second Death, the
total and perpetual: Separation of the wicked and impenitent from the
comfortable Presence, and the glorious Presence of God; Luke. 13.28.
as when they shall be shut out of his glorious Kingdom, and depart from Christ
to dwell with the Devil and his Angels. And though this be not a death
(properly so called) yet it may fitly be called by that name, because of the
terror of it, (Death being naturally the most terrible thing) as Heaven is
fitly called Paradise, for the pleasure and purity of it, Luke 23.4^2.
though it be not that place which was mentioned in the 2. of Genesis. And if a
state of worldly troubles may be called a Death, (in 2. Cor. 1.10. compared
with the 8. verse) how much more may a state of endless punishment be called by
that name? See Rev. 21.8.

And thus having vindicated Mr. Perkins from Mr. R's cavils, I shall pass over
the idle discourses of the 139 and 140 pages, and speak a few words of that
which seems more worthy of my censure, in 141 page, thus, p. 141.
R. -- We read in Romans 2.31. of very great sinners, proud, spightful, Inventors
of evil things, and such like, yet the word says not, To. 6.21.
that they are worthy of more than death: and if death be the end of these
things, then there is not any thing to come after death. --

B. This is a rare piece of Learning indeed, and such as the common sort of
Preachers never had the confidence to teach their hearers either from the
Pulpit or the Press. But that it may not be thought better of than it deserves,
let us examine it briefly: the main strength of his Speech lies in this [That
God has not said that those wicked ones mentioned in that place, were worthy
of any more than death] true indeed they were worthy of no more punishment than
death, for that death there spoken of is nothing less than eternal Damnation:
And thus the unpardonable sin, 1 John 5.16.
called by St. John, a sin unto death, that is, such a sin as necessarily and
infallibly brings eternal damnation upon the sinner. And that so great sinners
are worthy of more punishment than corporal death, I believe was scarce ever
doubted of by any but Mr. R. (that ever were acquainted with Scripture, and the
sound writings that explain it) yea, I doubt not but the proudest Jesuit in the
world would easily grant it; and if it be needful to be proved, these
considerations may be sufficient for it. Sin deserves worse punishment than
corporal Death.
1. That this is no more than the Beasts and Birds endure who never sinned:
they dye and dye totally; whereas men though never so wicked dye only in their
bodies (as all but Atheists will acknowledge) And can we think an obstinate
rebellious sinner deserves no worse than that which the most harmless useful
creatures do suffer?

2. That the best of the Saints suffer death as well as the worst, yea, some of
them have suffered much worse, viz. by conflicting many years with horrid
Temptations, to despair and the like, (as Mr. Glover, a most excellent
Christian, in the Book of Martyrs, is said to have been in despair five years
together.) And shall we think the wicked are worthy of no worse evil than the
best of God's children have undergone? God forbid.

p. 102.
In the former part of his Book, He tells us of some Books that were burnt in
London by the Hangman, and says thereupon, the same Spirit is alive to burn
this which he has written. And I think it does as well deserve that honor as
ever any book in the world did, as may appear not only by what has been seen
of it hitherto, but also and especially by that which follows to the end of it,
and particularly by this act of his, in this Page I am upon: viz. by urging
Romans 6.21. to prove that there is not any thing to come after Death: (to speak
in his own plain words, p. 141. lin. 16.) Surely it is more than bad enough to
doubt whether there be any thing to come after Death or not; much worse to hold
absolutely, that there is not; for that contradicts the Scriptures, which tell
us, that after Death there is a Judgment, and a Vengeance to be inflicted on
them that obey not the Gospel of Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9. Hebrews 9.27. Heb. 9.27.
and in a word everlasting shame and contempt, (to the wicked, he means) Dan.
12.2, etc.

But for a Man to act Mr. R.'s part, and to urge Holy Scripture in defense of
such a Heathenish Opinion, who can imagine how horrible a thing it is in the
eyes of God, (I doubt not but he would suffer worse than corporal Death for it,
if God should deal with him after his deserts, what ever slight thoughts he
has of it) And how far these words [The end of these things is Death] I say
how far these words are from proving, that there is no Punishment for any after
Death, is so plain, that there is little need of any thing to be said about it,
for Death here signifies (as before) Eternal damnation: As when it is said, if
ye live after the flesh ye shall dye, that is, be Damned, Romans 8.13. (for
however they live, they are as much subject to temporal Death, as it is clear.)

Proof 3d. R. -- Their Opinion of a Punishment never to end makes not sin, p.
146.
but Christ to be the cause of their so suffering; for if Christ had not come,
there had been no Resurrection, and if no Resurrection there could be no
Punishment after Death: But Christ may not be supposed to be the cause of their
Punishment, etc. B. If this be a Proof, it is a very ugly one certainly, and
will not be much valued by them that know what Christ, or Sin, or Punishment
is. However, I shall not think much to say something to it. I confess Christ is
said to be the cause of the Resurrection of the Dead: He is the efficient cause
of the Resurrection of the wicked, as he is God of the same substance with his
Father; and he is the Meritorious cause of the Resurrection of the Saints, as
their Head and Mediator. (I mean as their Resurrection is a glorious
Resurrection, in Philip. 3.11. If by any means I may attain to the Resurrection
of the Dead. Intelligit non simplicem sed gloriosam. Zanch. in loc.
) Now observe his Argument; Without the Resurrection, the wicked could not be
punished after Death: Christ is the cause of their Resurrection, (if they be
raised) therefore if they suffer for ever, Christ is the cause of it, which is
absurd -- This is manifestly his Proof in this matter: and how absurd it is,
may be showed in a Parallel case, as thus: [Without life and strength Men could
not rob on the Highway: but it is God that gives them life and strength, and
without him they could not have them; therefore God is the cause of their
Robbing] Would not a Christian abhor such a Reasoning as this, yea, would not
the Devil himself be almost ashamed of it? and yet if I am not most exceedingly
mistaken, it is as good a Reasoning as that of his, yea the very same in kind.
If he had not forgotten all his Logic he might have remembered, that Causa sine
qua non, is not a cause strictly and properly so called, but only a
pre-requisite condition, etc. Sine ullo causali Influxu, as the Learned
Scheibler expresses it. Topic. de causis, cap. 2. Artic. 4.
If my Author had not had Ink and Paper, (or something that might serve in
stead of them) he could not have written these his many Infallible Proofs, yet
(if we speak properly) it was not his Ink or his Paper, or any such thing that
was the cause of his writing them, but his Error, and his desire of defending
it, etc.

And seeing his great weakness in this particular, it will not be much amiss to
bring in to his Assistance the Learning of his Learned Brother Mr. Tho. Hobbs
of Malmesbury, who, though (in some things) he speaks more honestly than my
Author has done, yet is no approver of the Doctrine I contend for. For in his
Leviathan (Chapter 44. p. 346. as the Reverend Dr. Tully cites him in his
Exposit. Symboli) he supposes the Everlasting Punishment spoken of in the
Gospel, A Digression to Mr. Hobbs.
to be meant, not of every Damned Man in particular, but only to be specifical,
and to respect diverse of them successively, so as that one should be punished a
time, and then be turned into nothing, then another to come in his place, and
so soon as he is annihilated, another after him, and another (again) after him,
and so on. -- Which doubtless was the fruit of his own Invention, for I verily
believe it never came into the Head of any Man before him. But I answer,

great absurdity by himself. And he that can imagine such a thing as probable,
may by the same perfection imagine them to be annihilated and made again (and
vice versa) every Hours space: (for the Scripture says no more for the one
than the other) And he that can think so, must needs have a very working fancy,
or (rather) a mighty Windmill in his Pate.



they shall be raised incorruptible, so far shall they be from total corruption
or annihilation. 1 Cor. 15.
They shall seek Death, but shall not find it. Revel. 9th.

(in Individuo) upon every particular Person among them that are found such at
the Day of Christ. For the words are thus, Matthew. 25. v. 46. These (i. e. these
in particular) shall go away into everlasting punishment: as much as if he had
said, Every one of them shall be punished everlastingly: as in Revel. 7.14.
These are they that are come out of great Tribulation. And if the former part
of the 46. Verse does not mean an everlasting punishment upon every one of the
wicked in particular, how shall we be assured that the latter part of the Verse
means the everlasting happiness of every righteous Man in particular? for I
will be judged by Mr. Hobbs himself whether the Greek Pronoun (there used) do
not denote a particularity as plainly in the one as in the other. But I need
say no more to this Error of his, since that worthy Doctor (in the place cited)
has proclaimed its vileness in these words -- Regnum tenebrarum, de quo ibi
delirat, maxim promovet, etc. ( p. 142.)


And in the following Lines, he assures us, that Mr. Hobbs compares the state
of the Damned, in, and under Punishment, to the troubles of a Married state
here in the World: which was such a piece of wisdom, as his Parents (I dare
say) did never teach him. And is accounted by the same pious Person not only
ridiculous, but Atheistical: Dr. Tully. 143. Lin. 4.
And then he adds, [Nec istam sane circa Impios in orco suo Ethnicorum ullus
(etiam dementissimus) insaniam unquam insanivit.] In plain English, that the
silliest Heathen never had such a mad conceit in his Head. Is it not strange
Mr. H. does not chastise him, by publishing a Latin Epistle concerning him; but
if ever he should, I hope the Printer will not give much for the Copy of it,
lest he should be a loser by it. (And if one Limb of his Leviathan be so
monstrous, See Bish. Bramhall against it.
what a frightful Creature may the whole Leviathan be?)

But now it will be time to return to Mr. R. to examine his Fourth Proof, which
is thus.

His 4th. proof. Christ came to deliver his People out of the hands of all
their enemies, and to save them from all the miseries that they are subject to;
p. 149.
but there is no mention made in Scripture of his delivering them from a
punishment after Death. -- So He, in p. 149.

Answered. I answer: There is mention made of it implicitly and in substance,
though not expressly in those very words: For it is said, that he redeemed them
from the curse of the Law, Gal. 3. and from the wrath to come, in 1 Thessal. 1.
last verse. In a word, The wicked shall arise out of their Graves to
punishment, Dan. 12.2. John 5.29.
and come forth to the Resurrection of Damnation: from which Christ has freed
the Saints.

And here under this fourth Proof, for many Pages together, from the 150. to
161. he has such a wild Discourse, as his Reader, I dare say, never met with
in any other Book whatsoever: I shall not transcribe it at large, (for why
should my time be spent so vainly, especially considering how much of usefuller
work I have to do) but shall only present thee with some of the choicest
flowers therein, which will smell no whit better than stinking weeds: And the
first is thus: p. 151.
R. -- If a Punishment for ever be due to man for sin, Christ must have
suffered for ever to free us from it. --

B. In these words we may note first his Opinion, and secondly his Proof of it.
His Opinion (which they discover) is this, That everlasting Punishment is not
due to Man for sin, or that he does not deserve to be punished for ever for his
sin: It seems then, though he prayed for some things, (as he tells us in the
Epistle to the Reader) yet he never prayed to be delivered from endless
punishment, as ten thousands of his betters have done, (and if God should cast
him into it, he must not find fault, since he never desired him to save him
from it.) And hereby we may perceive how far he goes beyond the very worst of
Papists and Sectarists that are among us. The one, though they have too many
silly Dreams about Purgatory, yet they do not doubt of the Everlastingness of
hell Torments, or of the desert of them by the sins of men, being taught the
one and the other by their great Masters in the Catholic Faith, as Bellarm. de
amiss. great. l. 1. cap. 14. Valentia Tom. 2. disp. 6. quaest. 17. punct. 4. and
others, who cite the Schoolmen for it largely enough. Vid. Baronii disp. de
Peccato mortali. etc. part. 2. Sect. 3.
And the other, though they are little in love with our Liturgy in general, or
our Letany in particular, yet they count it no Superstition to pray as we do
therein [from Everlasting Damnation, Good Lord deliver us] So that he differs
herein from these persons, as much as from Orthodox Protestants, and the Church
of England. And seeing he is singular herein, he had need give us a very good
Proof of his Opinion before he may hope to win us to it. But behold what it is!

R. [If everlasting punishment be due to us for sin, then if Christ free us
from it, he must suffer everlastingly himself.] B. But this will need a proof
as much as the other, and when he or his Brethren shall undertake to prove it,
I will undertake to Answer them. And to that which he has said, I reply thus:
That Christ's Sufferings in the place of his people were sufficient to deliver
them from everlasting punishment, though he did not suffer for ever, for his
Temporal Sufferings were of infinite merit and value, as being the Sufferings
of an Infinite Person, the Eternal Son of God, whom all the Highest Angels are
enjoined to worship, or in St. Paul's phrase, God over all blessed for ever, in
Romans 9. Romans 9.5.
For like as the greatness of an Injury is measured by the greatness of the
person that suffers it, so the value of the satisfaction is esteemed by the
Excellency of the Person that makes the Satisfaction, as is well observed by
the excellent and acute Author in the Margin, in his Anatome Samosatenianismi,
Mart. Z. Thalyaeus. quaest. 1. Arg. 11.
p. (mihi) 81. Actus secundi necessitatem supplevit tum dignit as personae, tum
pondus passionum, etc. But of this something has been said already, (only I
may add thus much, that the eternity of Christ's Sufferings, if it might be
supposed, could not work our deliverance, if his Temporal Sufferings could not.
For according to strict justice, He being to suffer in our place, could not
deliver us, till he had suffered sufficiently for us. But now in case he had
been to suffer for ever, he should never suffer sufficiently till he had
suffered for ever, which ['till] implies a contradiction, since Eternity can
never expire, wherefore his rare invention, in this case, is nothing worth.)
And whereas we suppose the dignity of Christ's person, as he is God, to add
such a value to his Sufferings (that his Temporal Sufferings may serve instead
of our Eternal Sufferings) he gives us this for Answer, [That the Godhead of
Christ did not suffer] which I confess is a Truth, but nothing at all to the
purpose, for though his Godhead did not suffer, yet he, who is God, did suffer,
(though only in his humane Nature.) And it was more for God to suffer for a
time, than for sinful creatures to suffer for ever, and with his Sufferings
(for his people) God his Father is fully satisfied; since he has given himself
for them, an Offering and a Sacrifice of sweet smelling savor to God. Ephesians. 5.2.


But against this he objecteth after this manner, p. 157.
R. -- [God was never unsatisfied: He is Perfect, Infinite, Blessed,
unchangeable, and how could he be so if he were unsatisfied at any time?]

B. Herein he does greatly mistake our meaning, and supposes that we hold God
was discontented, when we say there was need of a satisfaction to be made unto
him, for the sins of his people. Thick Ale certainly, that could fill the
Gentleman's head with such gross Imaginations! That indeed were as bad Divinity,
as most that has come from Rome or Malmsbury; and needs no more to confute it
than the consideration of those Perfections of God which my Author mentions.
But to recover him out of this Error, we would tell him, that we mean not (by a
Satisfaction) such a thing as makes God better contented (or happier) than he
was before, (that were madness so much as to imagine) but such a thing as
Answers the demands of his Law and Justice, which necessarily require that sin
should be punished according to its demerit, either upon the sinner himself or
his Surety: as the Learned Dr. Owen has excellently demonstrated in his
Diatriba upon that subject De Justitia Divina.
(which my Author, I hope, will not undertake to confute.)

And now let us proceed to the remaining Proofs that he gives us in the
following pages, p. 162.

p. 162.
R. -- Zephan. 1.18. He shall make a speedy Riddance of them in the day of his
wrath. But to continue for ever in Punishment, is no speedy Riddance. So the
pouring out his Anger is called [a Day] which agrees not to a punishment that
never ends. -- B. Bold men will not scruple to act like themselves, he that
has perverted so many other Texts to his purpose will do the like by this, yet
it is fit we should tell him of it (whether he will repent of it or no)
Wherefore we desire him (or his companions) to observe that the Text does not
say as he says, but thus [The whole land shall be devoured by the fire of his
Jealousy, for he shall make a speedy riddance of all them that dwell in the
land.] Which words manifestly speak of a National judgment here in the World,
but prove nothing of such a quick dispatch in another world, after the day of
general Resurrection. And as for the word (Day) it is not always used to
signify, a day and no more, (or thereabouts) but a time indefinitely, as when
we read of an Evil day, and of the day of Visitation, and the like. In that day
the Lord alone shall be exalted, Esaias 2.17.
and what day is that? Surely for ever after this world is ended; Eternity will
be the day of his Glory, and no less shall be the day of his Favor to his
Servants, and of his Vengeance upon his Enemies.

The opinion of a punishment never to end does cause much sin -- I deny that --
p. 163, etc.
-- Here he adds several Proofs (such as they are) some of the choicest of
which I shall examine.

R. 1. -- It causes fear.] True indeed, it does so, but is it therefore the
cause of sin? If so, what shall we think of the threatenings of God's judgments
in this world? doubtless they cause or should cause fear in the wicked man, yet
he had not best say that they cause, or should cause sin in them.

R. 2. -- Fear troubles the hearts of many of the Lords people, (he means his
Faithful people) and Christ says, Let not your hearts be troubled, John 14. It
seems he would have their Fears removed, by telling them that there is no hell
nor Everlasting Punishment for any after this life. But wise men will not go
that way to work, in comforting the Godly, but rather will comfort them by
telling them, that Christ has saved them from it, and delivered them from that
wrath to come.

R. 3. -- If the Soul apprehends it self liable to Everlasting Punishment, it
cannot submit to God or be quiet. -- What does he mean in saying [It cannot
submit to God] If he means a contentedness to undergo that Everlasting
punishment, we say God requires them not so to be content, but rather to be
content to turn to him, and his service, and to accept of Christ as Savior and
Lord, that they may (in a way of Faith and Holiness) escape that Punishment. If
he mean any thing else, he may keep his meaning to himself, unless the world
had need of it. And if he think wicked men should be quiet with their Spiritual
state, aand live contentedly and securely in a state of sin, I must profess I
know no wise man that is of his Opinion.

R. 4. -- This Opinion makes many to murder themselves that they may not live
to increase their sin, and consequently, their Punishment in another world.
This Opinion (says he) makes this mischief -- But as he does not prove it, so
I deny it. For it is not this Opinion, but their mistakes about it, and other
Delusions and Temptations that makes them so to do. And it would be no hard
matter to prove that this Doctrine rightly believed, would be a powerful
Preservative against self-murder; for if Murderers are so much in danger of
such Rev. 21.8.
misery, he that believes so will not easily be persuaded to murder himself, to
bring this misery upon him. (yet we must not judge that all self-killers are
self-murderers, or damned persons.)

R. 5. -- The contrary Opinion tends most to comfort those persons whose
friends have dyed, and left no testimony of their conversion to God. -- This
(Reader) is the present case (what course we should take to comfort those
persons who are afraid their friends shall suffer the everlasting punishments,
as dying without any signs of a true Conversion?) My Author thinks it the best
way to tell them, that there is no such thing for any man to suffer (though
finally wicked and impenitent) This indeed were a very quick and easy way, if
it were but as safe too, but certainly it is not, (as my first Chapter has
sufficiently showed, where the proof of the point is given at large, and far
above all that Mr. R. or all his Brethren, can ever Answer to it.)

The surer and more warrantable ways for men to quiet their minds in that case,
are as follows.

1. To judge charitably, and hope the best of their deceased Friends: The Case
of those that fear the worst of their deceased Friends considered.
and not too confidently to persuade themselves of their everlasting misery,
because they could not see such signs of true Conversion as might be wished.
For though we may be sure that all they are lost for ever (and beyond all hopes
of recovery) that die unconverted, yet we cannot be so sure of such and such
particular persons, that they did die unconverted: for God's Judgments are a
great deep and his Ways past finding out; God may work his gracious work in the
Soul, at the last minute of life, if he so please, and we cannot prove that he
will not do so.

Obj. But if a man should not show any signs of Repentance to his last hour,
it is very doubtful if he be ever converted indeed, and we have much more
grounds for our Fears than for our Hopes concerning him.

Pet. 3.7. The day of Judgment is called a day of perdition to such persons,)
But then consider --

1. That if your Friends have lived and dyed ungodly, and so are fallen into
everlasting Punishment, yet it was God that cast them into that Punishment: He
alone has the Keys of Hell and of Death, and none but he could adjudge them to
it; and therefore they must not murmur at it, since it was He that has done
it: Thus the Psalmist, Psalm. 39. I was dumb, Ps. 39.9.
and opened not my mouth (in a way of impatience, he means) for thou Lord have
done it.

2. As it was God that has done it, so he has never done it, but when it was
fit to be done; he is perfectly just in this severe Dispensation, of casting
the impenitent into Everlasting Punishment. The proof of which I have given in
the end of my first Chapter. Assuredly, The Lord is holy in all his ways, and
Righteous in all his works, Psalm. 145.18. and if we doubt of it now, there
shall hereafter be a Revelation of his Righteous judgment, Romans 2. If they
continued his Enemies, must he save them because they were your friends? or
must their Relation to you hinder the Judge of the world from doing Right?
Surely not.

3ly, Your excessive sorrow, from the fear of your Friends misery, will do no
good at all, but only disquiet your hearts in vain; for it will not please God,
nor profit them, but rather unfit you for the duties that are incumbent upon
you; and therefore submit to God, and pray to him to abate your sorrows.

4ly, Instead of murmuring at God's Dispensations in any kind, give him thanks
for his patience and forbearance toward you, and the means of grace that are
afforded you: And be assured, what ever be the state of the Dead, your selves
shall be happy enough, if you turn to him in sincerity, Esaias 55.7.
while you live on Earth.

5ly, Study the vile nature of sin, view it in the Glass of God's holy Law, and
in the Sufferings of Christ, etc. See how it crosses the will, and dishonours
the Name of the great God; See how it breaks his Law, resists his Power, denies
his Sovereignty, disparages his Wisdom, despises his Threatenings, and abuses
his Mercy, etc. If we did rightly apprehend these things, we should be so far
from murmuring at our Maker for condemning some, that we should greatly admire
that he does not condemn all sinners in the World.

R. -- We read in Esaias 57. v. 16. The words of the Lord himself, saying, [I
will not contend for ever, neither will I be always wroth, etc. Therefore he
will not punish for ever. B. If he were deservedly looked upon as an absurd
fellow that made his Answer concerning Onyons, when the question was proposed
concerning Garlic only; what an intolerable absurdity is my Author guilty of,
when he urges such a Text for the Impunity of the wicked, which manifestly
speaks of the Mercy of God to the Saints. In the foregoing Verse he tells us,
He will look (with an eye of favor, that is) to him that is of an humble and a
contrite Spirit; v. 15.
And then he adds, I will not contend for ever; viz. with such a one. But will
this prove that he will not contend for ever with any others; with them that
are so proud that they care not for God, that go on wilfully in the ways that
his Soul hates, and will not be reformed? surely not. If Mr. R. will see no
difference between the godly and the wicked, the humble Christian, and the
proud-hearted Hypocrite, yet our God will, and will also make others see the
difference hereafter: when the one shall be separated from the other, Mal. 3.18.
as the Sheep from the Goats, Matthew 25. (setting the one on his right hand, and
the other on his left.) Doubtless the boldest Hypocrite will tremble then, and
their hopeless cries be far louder in another World, than their scornfullest
laughter was in this.

CHAP. III. SECT. IV. The remaining part of his Infallible Proofs examined.
R. -- God has planted in man an universal love to man, especially to his own
offspring, be they obedient or disobedient; What Bowels of love in Parents,
etc. p. 170.
They do not desire their offspring, though disobedient, should suffer such a
torment, as these men speak of, one Year to an end; therefore God will not
inflict extreme miseries upon men for ever, since they are his offspring, as
they are his Creatures: for God is not less merciful than man. -- B. THis is
the substance of his proof. And if it be sufficient to prove what he intends by
it, God's mercy, and Parents pity, not alike in all things.
it will be sufficient for other purposes too, which Christians will not judge
it to be, viz. to prove that the Devils shall not suffer extreme punishments
without end; and that Christ was not punished (extremely) for the offenses of
such as we. For the former, we will take his Argument and urge it thus,
[Parents would not desire to cast their Children into an irrecoverable state of
misery, upon their first act of disobedience toward them: How can we think
then, that God would cast the Angels (that were the noblest of all the works of
his hands) into an irrecoverable state of misery, upon the commission of the
first sin against him? for God is not less merciful than Man.]

Doubtless the Proof is as strong this way, as the other way, and yet it is not
strong enough, nor will not (cannot) prevail upon them that believe what the
Scripture says in the case: for let us prove what we will, yet the Apostle
has told us, 2 Pet. 2.4. Jude 6. Matthew. 25.41.
that God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down, etc. 2 Pet.
And has prepared everlasting fire for them, Matthew 25. (And therefore
whatsoever proofs are brought to the contrary, are not Proofs truly so called,
but Sophistical Arguments and mere deceits.)

For the latter also we may reason (as strongly) after the same rate. [A good
Father would not have his beloved Son (that never offended him) be severely
punished for those offenses that he never committed, therefore much less would
the God of all Mercy lay the punishment of our sins upon his Holy Son Jesus, in
whom his Soul delighted.] One Egg is not more like another than this is like my
Author's Proof aforesaid. And though it might be approved by Socinians, yet
Christians will not be wrought upon by it, Esaias 53.
while they read and believe Romans 4.25. compared with Romans 5.8 and, in one
word, the 53d. Chapter of Esaias.

And thus we have seen how far this his Proof is from being infallible: and
therefore the Reader will not think I am bound to say any thing more unto it;
yet for his farther satisfaction, I will add thus much: viz. That God is not as
Man in every thing, (for then he should not be a God indeed) nor may his
goodness and Man's be compared together, any farther than the Scriptures will
allow of: And though he be more merciful than Man is, and will show forth more
love and kindness to the meanest of his faithful servants, than the most
compassionate Parent ever did (or can do) to his beloved Child; yet his saving
Mercy has its proper objects, and is not extended promiscuously to all the
Sons of Men. He is free in the exercising of it, and has mercy on whom he
will: And his Mercy no more binds him to save All Men, than it did to save all
Angels: The wicked and impenitent are the objects of his wrath, as the
Returning sinners are the objects of his love. Again, God is not only a God of
Mercy, Psalm. 94.1.
but a God of Vengeance. To him vengeance belongs, Psalm. 94. where the word
vengeance, is mentioned twice in one verse; And he is the Supreme Lawgiver and
Governor of the World. Now as he is such, it belongs to him to see that his
obstinate and uncurable Enemies may not go unpunished: And though he desires
not their punishment for everlasting, (to use Mr. R.'s word) as it is a
punishment, yet he will inflict it, as it is an Execution of Justice, and a
discovery of his holiness, and hatred of sin, and the like. And (to come to the
comparison) a Father, that is a Judge and a Lawgiver, as well as a Father, and
(as such) has made a Law that such and such offenders shall suffer so many
Months imprisonment, who ever they be; may not dispense with that Law, (if it
be just) no not in the case of his own Children, when they commit the said
offenses. So the God of Mercy being a Judge and Lawgiver, is engaged by his
Honor and Justice to punish sin, (which is the transgression of his Law)
according to its desert. If you say it is not punished upon the Saints, I
answer: That it was punished upon their Surety Christ Jesus in their place, and
they are freed by the merit of his sufferings: But it is not so with the
Enemies of his holiness, so remaining; they must answer for themselves.

R. -- If men had deserved everlasting punishment, yet why may not God show
that mercy, as not to inflict it, as well as to let the Rain fall upon them
that no way deserve it? p. 171, 172.
Men often show more kindness to disobedient Children than they deserve: And
may not God do the same? -- B. This [if Man had deserved such punishment] is
spoken only for Argument sake, for he does not grant it to be a truth, but it
has been proved before, whether he will grant it, or not. But this being
supposed, What then? For (says he) why may not God show so much mercy, as not
to inflict it upon them that deserve it, as he gives the rain to them that
deserve it not. -- I answer, He does show so much mercy upon many such, (yea
many thousands) as not to inflict it on them: All that truly turn from their
evil ways, and believe on his Son Christ Jesus, shall for his sake be secured
from it, and he will spare them, as a man spares his own Son that serves him.
But if he ask, Mal. 3.16, 17.
why he may not show such mercy upon all in general, or upon the wicked that
continue such, Then I except against his question; for we are not concerned (in
this case) to enquire what he may do, but what he will do. Things revealed (by
his own confession) belong to us, now he has revealed his will to the
contrary, as in other places, so in that so often mentioned, Matthew. 25. These
shall go away into everlasting punishment: and, to take vengeance of them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
who shall be punished with everlasting destruction, etc. 2 Thessalonians. (But he has
not said he will give them no Rain while they live on Earth, and therefore is
free to give it them, though they deserve it not.) So that for a Man to ask,
why God may not show such favor to the Impenitent, as not to inflict such
punishment upon them, is in effect, to ask, why he may not act contrary to his
own word? which is a question more fit to be abhorred than to be answered.

And what if Parents show more kindness to disobedient Children than they
deserve, yet he must not think that Men are a fit rule for God to walk by; nor
does he believe that God is bound to show such kindness to his rebellious
Creatures, as Men are to their disobedient Children. (yet it must be remembered,
that God does show a thousand times more kindness to his enemies in this World,
than they deserve, or could deserve, if they were his faithfullest servants,
and does more for them every day in the Year, than Parents can do for their
best Children.) And these things being considered, all that which he adds
concerning the greatness of God's Mercy above the mercy of man, is vain as to
that for which he intends it: But of that we may have occasion to speak more
hereafter.

p. 173.
R. -- Gods general goodness in the Creation of the world is to all his
Creatures, Eccles. 5.9. The profit of the Earth is for all -- B. And what of
that? Is that a proof there shall be no everlasting Punishment for any man?
Surely if it be, it is not an infallible one, but an Idle and impertinent one:
for the question (in this affair) is not of God's general goodness, but of his
saving Mercy: Now though we grant the one to be extended to all creatures, yet
we do not grant it of the other. God indeed is good to all, but he does not
grant all goodness to all alike: Dan. 12.
but as some shall arise to everlasting Glory, so others shall arise to
everlasting shame.

p. 173. lin. 18.
R. -- God takes care to provide for all, and bids us feed and cloth the worst
that want, etc. and he that would not have them suffer want here, will not
impose an everlasting Misery on them hereafter. B. We may say of Mr. R. as some
did of our Savior (though in a contrary sense) that never man spoke like him:
Surely, none but himself did ever go about to prove this point in this manner:
And at the same rate a wicked man might need no better proof of his escaping
Hell hereafter, than his health, and wealth and prosperity here, for he might
say as Mr. R. Surely that God who would not lay upon them the miseries of
sickness and poverty here, will not inflict greater miseries for ever
hereafter. (Yet Christians will not count this any good evidence of a state of
Salvation.) Does not the Parable in Luke 16. manifestly suppose, that a man may
have comfort here and Torment hereafter: All the Turkish Emperors, and all the
Popes, (I should have set them first, as being the proudest of the two) All
these I say, had Honor and Greatness enough in this world, yet we cannot doubt
but many of them (if not all) will inherit shame in the world to come.

R. -- Their Opinion lesseneth the goodness of God and limiteth it to a few --
whereas the Scriptures declare it to be to all. p. 174.
All flesh shall see his Salvation, Luke 3.6. and He will have all men to be
Saved, 1 Timothy 2.4. The Protestants in Poland say there will come a time wherein
the fallen Angels and the wickedest men shall be set free. -- B. This is not
all that he says under this 11. Proof, nor do I take my self to be engaged to
spend my Ink upon all the Vanities he is guilty of: (yet that which is for his
turn, I shall not fear to deal with) He urges Romans 8.19.21. to prove that all
in general shall be Saved: but unless he had made out his Proof from it, or
showed some better man than himself that has urged it for that purpose, I
shall not think fit to say any thing to it: for I am sure Christians may read
that Text a thousand times, without danger of being led thereby into that
Opinion. But let us come to the point. -- Our Opinion (he says) lesseneth the
goodness of God and limiteth it unto a few:] concerning which we would demand
of him, what he means by God's goodness? If he means God's common goodness, it
is utterly denied: our Opinion denies not the extent of that goodness to all;
though we believe a Hell, yet we believe God is good to all here, and he
therefore casts some into Hell because they would not be (truly) good to
themselves, nor choose the good ways which he commands them to walk in. But if
he mean it of God's saving goodness, then I say our Opinion denies it to extend
to all (so as to save All) for narrow is the way which leads unto life, and few
there be that find it. (i.e. few in comparison, Matthew. 7.14.
or not near so many as miss of it, though very many considered in themselves.)
But he tells us [All flesh shall see his Salvation] very true, who doubts of
it? But he that dares believe his Savior (in that Text but now mentioned) will
not think that it means that all without exception shall be Saved; and if it
were so, then I say, what Divinity, yea what truth or sense (to speak with
Reverence) shall be found in the words of Paul to the Corinthians, We are a
sweet savor, etc. in them that are saved, and in them that perish: (what shall
become of this division of mankind into [them that are saved] and them that
[perish] if All should be saved and none perish?) If Mr. Richardson can crack
this Nut, I will confess his Teeth are strong. And as for those Texts, they are
far from proving the contrary: Luke 3.6, Cleared.
All flesh shall see his Salvation, speaks nothing for his turn, unless he had
made it appear that [ All in those Texts, means all whatsoever, without
exception of any;] which I dare say he cannot do, nor could it agree with the
other places alleged, if taken in that sense: wherefore by All, we mean All
sorts (that Repent and Believe) such persons of what sort soever, whether Jew
or Gentile, high or low, bond or free, etc. shall see the Salvation of God. As
when it is said, our Lord healed all Diseases among the people, i. e. all
sorts; and in another, ye shall be hated of all men for my Names sake, Matthew.
10.22.
that is, of all sorts of men, for certainly All in general did not hate them
for Christ's sake, yea some loved them as truly for it, as others hated them.

1 Timothy 2.4. Cleared.
And the other Text may be vindicated with no less difficulty than the former.
It runs thus, He would that All should be saved: may we hence infer, that God
will actually and eventually save all, or that he purposes to save all? no
sure, nothing less. There are several Answers, to be made unto it to remove
this sense from it.

1. That the word All, may be taken of all sorts as before; and if I should
answer thus, Mr. R. might find it hard enough to confute it. 2. That the will
of God is to be distinguished in this case, it may signify either his
Appointing will, or his Approving Vid. Chamier. de praedestin. l. 7. cap. 6.
will; God may be said to will the Salvation of All in general, by his
Approving will: because he thus wills them to walk in the way of Salvation,
and to shun those things that tend to their Ruin. As a King may be said to
will that none of his subjects should be put to death, because he approves not
of (but wills them to shun) those evil ways which make them deserve such
punishment from him. But yet in case they prove Thieves or Murderers, or
unsufferable Enemies to the Commonwealth, in any other way, he wills that they
should die for it, and appoints them to be put to death. (and that without any
disparagement to his goodness and merciful disposition) So in case men will not
forsake their wicked ways, and turn to God and his true service, the Judge of
the world does will their deserved Punishment, and will punish them with an
Everlasting destruction 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
(and that without any impeachment of his Mercy and Goodness) In a word, he
does not so will the Salvation of All in general, as to bring them to
Salvation; that is plain, since strait is the gate and narrow is the way that
leads to Salvation, Matthew. 7.14.
and few there be that find it. And that this Text aforesaid does not mean any
such thing is plain, for he would that All should be saved, and come to the
knowledge of the Truth (even his Gospel and word of Truth) But it is clear God
does not so will, that All should come to the knowledge of his Truth, as to
bring them infallibly to the knowledge of it: Therefore he does not so Will
that all shall be saved, as to bring them infallibly to Salvation. The Argument
is good, because the Apostle makes no difference between God's Willing that
All should be saved, and his Willing that all should come to the knowledge of
his Truth. And the word in the Original, (...) not (...).
I find is not active but passive only, and accordingly it is rendered in our
Translation, (not He Wills to Save all, but) He Wills that all should be
saved. The former would infer the certain Salvation of All, (for who has
resisted his Will?) but not so the latter, as the excellent Author in the
Margin has proved, in his most Learned Animadversions against Mr. Hoard B.
Davenant p. (mihi) 17^, etc.
(which our new Predestinarians, I hope, have so much wisdom as not to oppose.)

He adds [The Protestants in Poland say there will come a time wherein the
fallen Angels, and the wickedest men shall be set free] (from Punishment he
means.)

B. And what of all that? Does he think they were infallible, that we should
believe so, merely because they say so? Why did he not set down some of their
Reasons for it? had he done so I would have been content to examine them, as I
have done his, and doubt not but I could Answer them as easily, by God's
ordinary assistance. 2. Whom does he mean by [the Protestants of Poland?] If he
means the best and soundest Protestants (as the Denomination ought to be a
potiori) I say, if he means the Orthodox Protestants of that Country, such as
Arnoldus, Maccovius, Chrzastovius (the latter of which wrote against the
Arrians In cap. 1. Johan. Evangel.
in general, as the two former against Socinus and Smalcius) or Author Censurae
Confess. Socin.
Salinarius, Clementinus, Zabarovius, Zarnovecius, etc. If he mean such
Protestants of Poland as these, and the like, I utterly deny that ever they
taught such Doctrine: and if my Author would read their worthy Works, he might
soon see very much to the contrary. But if he mean the Heretical Protestants of
Poland (who were called Protestants in opposition to Papists, and yet were as
bad or worse than Papists in doctrine) such as Smalcius, Archisevius,
Ostaradius, etc. then I do not deny but they might be of the opinion that Mr.
R. speaks of. But the judgment of these men will not go far with me, for I am
well assured, that such rank Socinians as they, were not guided by a good
Spirit, and I think they were not Protestants or Christians, unless in the same
sense as Rebels are Subjects, i. e. bad Subjects.

p. 177.
R. -- All men are in God, for in him we live, and move, and have our Being:
And if all men are in God, all men are in Christ, for He and the Father are
one: Jo. 10. Now all confess, that all who are in Christ shall be saved. Romans
8.1.] B. O admirable profoundness and learning! enough to puzzle those
Mohammedan Priests, that blew their blinding Powder into the eyes of the People,
and no less mischievous to the minds of his deluded Disciples, than that Powder
was to the Gaz^rs upon Mahomet's Tomb: I dare forfeit one of my Fingers, if he
can show me a more base, and more wilfully-distorted speech, a more gross and
wretched piece of sophistry, in any of the Writings of the Romish Foxes, than
this under consideration: Surely it is hard to guess which he strained most
herein, his wits, or his conscience: For my part I do verily judge, that he
offered violence to both of them. And that he should take so much pains in
vain, may well be matter of vexation to him; and yet so he has done and no
better. For consider,

How all men are [in God.]
1. When it is said in the Acts, That in God we live, and move, and have our
Being, (speaking of Men in general) that does not mean, that he is the Savior
of all Men in a special sense, but that he is the upholder, maintainer, and
preserver of all Men: not that all Men have an interest in his saving mercy,
but that they are sustained by his power and common providence (so as that they
could not live, or move, or have a Being without him.)

Wherefore, In him we live, is as much as if it were said, By him we live, etc.
for the Greek Particle (...) does commonly signify, By, or Through; (...), etc.
as we find in Hebr. 1.1. God, who in times past spoke to our Fathers by the
Prophets, has in these last days spoken to us by his Son: where the Greek has
it, [in the Prophets, and in his Son] but the sense of it is, by the Prophets,
and therefore our Translators have rendered it [by the Prophets] etc. And so in
the Latin it is expressed, by Per instead of In: Daven. in Col. cap. 1. v. 16.
by Beza, and others. And other Instances are given by the excellent Bishop
aforesaid, in his Comment on the Epistle to the Colossians. Now when he says,
If all Men are in God, all Men are in Christ; I grant it in the sense
aforesaid: All men are by Christ, for he upholdeth all things by the Word of
his Power. And to the last passage, Heb. 1.3.
['Tis commonly confessed that All who are in Christ shall be saved] To this I
say, my Return is thus: That if he mean All who are Members of Christ's
Mystical Body, or that have an Interest in Christ's Merits and Righteousness,
as it is meant in Romans 8. v. 1. Then I grant that All who are in Christ shall
be saved, (which that very Text demonstrateth.) But I utterly deny that All men
are in Christ, in this sense of the word. But if he mean, All that are by
Christ, (made and maintained in the World by him) then I deny that All such
shall be saved, for in this sense the Devils may be said to be in Christ,
Colos. 1.16. (...).
And thus Mr. R.'s rich Invention is proved to be worth nothing, but scorn and
contempt.

R. -- In Romans 5. The second Adam in saving, p. 178.
is put in opposition to the first Adam in sinning. And if All Nations shall be
blessed, as was foretold, in Genesis 22. Every particular must also, for the
general word All, includes every particular. And it is a great lessening of the
riches and fullness of God's grace and goodness, to say that God has made this
World for All, and the best World, but for a few. -- B. That which he would
have us gather from Romans 5. is manifestly thus, That as all Mankind are liable
to destruction by means of the first Adam, so all shall be freed from it by the
merit of the second Adam, Jesus Christ: But I cannot think how he will find any
Text in it, Romans 5.18. cleared.
that may be made very serviceable for such a design, unless it be the 18.
Verse of that Chapter. As by the offense of one, judgment came upon all Men to
condemnation; so by the righteousness of one, the free gift came upon all Men
to justification of life. But this will easily be answered: For the comparison
there made between Adam and Christ, is not in respect of the Number of Persons
that are saved or destroyed; but in respect of the causes of Salvation and
Damnation: That, as the cause of Damnation, even sin, is (originally) only from
Adam; so the cause of Salvation, even Righteousness and Justification is wholly
from Christ. As all sinners became sinners through the first Adam, and so are
liable to damnation through him: so all justified Persons are justified through
Christ the second Adam, and have a right to Heaven only through his
Righteousness imputed to them. So that when Paul says, by the Righteousness of
one, the free gift came upon all Men to justification of life; it is not so to
be taken, as if Justification were common to All men, but that it is through
the Righteousness of Christ that All, who are justified, are justified. ( viz.
that none are justified otherwise.) As the Psalmist says, the Lord upholdeth
all that fall; Psalm. 145.14.
not that he upholdeth every one that falls, for some fall irrecoverably: as
Judas, Pharaoh, the Sinners against the Holy Ghost, etc. but that All who being
fallen; are upheld and preserved from falling away utterly, are so upheld only
by him. Hanc Deo tribuit gloriam quod sine ejus open nemo sustentetur, Musculus
in Psalm. 145.
as a worthy Expositor on the place. This glory (says he) the Psalmist
ascribes to God, viz. That without his help none are upheld. Romans 8.30. Whom he
justified, them he also glorified: but God does not glorify them that live and
dye unconverted; for, Except ye be converted, Matthew. 18.3.
ye shall not enter into the Kingdom of Heaven: Matthew. 18.3. Therefore neither
does he justify any such Persons.

Nor is he more fortunate in alleging Genesis 22.18. for, though All (in it self)
be inclusive of every particular, Genes. 22.18. opened.
yet in that place all Nations cannot signify all particular Persons of every
Nation, for if all Nations should be blessed, in this largest sense, none
should be cursed, as our Lord will say unto many at the last Day, Matthew. 25.41.
Depart from me ye cursed. Wherefore by all Nations, understand some of all
Nations, or (if you will) many of all Nations, even all true believers in every
Nation: And that the word, all Nations, does not always mean all men in
general, Esaias 2.2.
is plain, by Esaias 2.2. where it is said, that All Nations should flow to the
Mountain of the Lord's house; which cannot be said of all in general, and is
expressed by [many] in the 4. of Micah, 1. Verse.

And as for the fullness and riches of God's goodness, it is not to be judged of
by the number of them that are saved by it, The goodness of God how to be
judged of.
but rather by the way and manner wherein and whereby they are saved; and by
that great Salvation which his People shall partake of. Briefly thus: The
riches of God's grace and goodness is seen in the excellency of its effect. For
Life is a more excellent thing than Death, and Righteousness than Sin; and
(secondly) in the powerfulness of the work, for it argues a greater power to
save than to destroy, to justify than to condemn: (as it is a greater matter to
reform a few, than to corrupt and harden a great many against the holy
Ordinances and ways of God: An Idle Hypocrite is too well able to do the one,
but a painful Minister is scarce able to do the other.)

And (by the way) we do not say, as Mr. R. that God has made the best World,
(or Heaven) but for a very few: For many shall come from the East and the West,
and sit down with Abraham, Isaac and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven; yet they
are few in comparison of them that miss of Heaven, Matthew. 7.14.
as was seen before from the words of him, whom he dares not (I hope)
contradict or cavil at.

And if a Man can think it is an obscuring of God's goodness to say, that he
has not made Heaven for so many, as he has made the Earth; for he may think
it much more a denying of his goodness to say that he has made comfortable
provisions for the Birds and Beasts, and at the same time reserved many
thousands of mighty Angels for extreme and everlasting punishment: Yet so it
is, whether my Author allow of it or not: he that spares the one did not spare
the other. He that prepares Food for these in this world, has prepared
everlasting fire for those in another world. Yet if a man do hence object and
cavil against God's goodness, it is a sign he has little goodness himself, See
2 Pet. 2. Judes Epist. Matthew. 25.41.
and as little wit: but he goes on,

R. -- Shall we think the fruit of the Son of Righteousness to be more narrow
and confined, than the Sun in the Firmament, p. 179.
whose excellency it is, that its bright Beams and Rays are dispersed into
every corner of the Universe? B. How sweetly might this Gentleman sleep in the
night time, that had his head so full of pleasant Dreams in the day time? And
as for these words of his, they are no more worth than the former: for
whatsoever of Rhetoric may be supposed to be in them, we are sure there is
little of Logic or sound Reason in them. Mr. H. B. in his Book of Melancholy,
tells us a merry story (as some may count it) concerning the expectations of
some of the Jews, which he has as I take it out of the Learned Author of
Synagog. Jud. Buxdorsius.
Thus it is, That when the Archangel shall sound his Trumpet, he shall gather
all the Jews into the Holy Land, and make them a great Banquet, wherein shall
be all the Birds, and Beasts, and Fishes that ever lived in the Earth, Air and
Ocean, and a cup of Wine that came from Paradise, etc. Reader, I will not, I
cannot request thee to give heed to any such Jewish Fables, or to believe any
of their lies to be true, for I do not desire to believe them my self. And yet
I profess unto thee, I may be as likely to believe all this, as to believe that
assertion which Mr. Richardson's last words include and imply, viz. That the
Glory of Heaven is as common as the light of the Sun, or that Christ will make
All happy that the Sun shines upon; yea, so long as I believe the 7th. chapter
of Matthew. or the 25. chapter, it is utterly impossible that I should believe it.

Thus of his Twenty Infallible Proofs I have examined and disproved Eleven
already; and if when we are in the middle we are half way over, then doubtless
I am more than half way to the end of Mr. R. his pleasant Garden; and what
precious Flowers are remaining in it, the following pages will show thee; and
the next Proof is near as good as any of the rest; and it is thus in brief.

p. 180.
R. -- It does no way agree to the Spirit of a Saint, for Saints are ever
merciful, as the Psalmist says, doubtless they are so merciful, as that they
would not desire that any man should be in such intolerable Torment one hour to
an end, much less for ever. Therefore it does not agree to the mind of God to
punish any everlastingly. The more the Lord manifests himself in any, the more
merciful they are, yea, to their enemies also. B. It is a strange way of
Arguing which the man here uses, and supposes the Sovereign Lord of all, and
the Righteous Judge of the whole Earth to be obliged to follow the same rules
which he has given to his creatures. And how little excellency is to be found
in such Imaginations may appear in these particulars following.

1. That the Saints do not desire that any should fall short of Heaven, but
would rather desire to further all men in the way to it, yet I dare say God
will not bring all men thither.

2. Saints do not desire that any man should be mocked or abused, imprisoned or
tormented in the world for maintaining the Truth, and opposing the Abominations
of the Romish Religion; yet it would be madness to say God would not let his
people suffer so upon that account, because it agrees not to the mind of a
Saint; for Experience shows he has often been pleased to exercise his people
with such trials, witness the Book of Martyrs, and the Histories of the former
Persecutions, etc.

3. A man of much Sanctity would not desire there should be so much wickedness
in the world as there is, no nor would not suffer it to be if he could help it.
I my self would turn all men to the love of God and Holiness if it were in my
power: That little goodness that is in my heart (alas too little, and indeed so
little that I am sometimes afraid it is none at all in sincerity, yet that)
does so dispose me, that I would turn all, if wishing or Preaching would do it,
and would not suffer any man to love a pair of Cards more than a Sermon, or a
Barrel of Beer, or a Bag of Money more than Christ, and Grace, and Heaven, nor
would I suffer men and women to play the Hypocrite for God's sake, and stay at
home like Atheists, on the Lord's Day, under pretense of spending their time in
Christian Duties in private. (whose base Hypocrisy the Lord will laugh at, for
he knows that his Day is coming) I say, I my self would not suffer these
things if I could help it. Yet God we see, does suffer them, and yet his
goodness is greater than man's.

4. I verily believe, a Saint (that is eminently such for knowledge and Grace)
would not have suffered Mr. R. to have spent his time so sadly as to write This
Book I am engaged with, yet God has suffered him to Write and to Publish it
too, or else it could never have been. -- And that which he says of the
mercifulness of the Saints to their worst Enemies, is as far from being
unanswerable: and because He has not urged this Argument to the best
advantage, I will do it for him, as thus:

[A good man would not punish his enemies eternally, therefore God will not so
punish his, for he is more merciful than Man.] I Answer, If God may not do
otherwise than a good man would do, what sad conclusions might we make from it?
for at this rate we might conclude that God the Father would not leave his
beloved Son Christ Jesus to the malice of his wicked enemies, to be mocked and
spit upon, to be Crucified and slain by them, for a good man would not deal so
by his beloved Son; yet so it was, as sure as the Gospel is true, see Matthew.
27. Luke 23. and other places.

2. There is no Reason why any man should punish his enemy everlastingly; for
his enemy does not deserve it as he is his enemy: that is, his enmity against
him, as it is against him, does not make him worthy of such punishment. But
offenses against God, as they are against God, do deserve such punishment, and
make the offenders worthy of it. (as before.)

3. Men are but men, and therefore Vengeance is not their prerogative as it is
Gods: To him it belongs, Ps. 94.1. Neither are they Governors of the World,
by natural rightful Sovereignty, and therefore a man's fault as against them,
does not respect any such Law, by which the world must be governed: But enough
of this.

R. -- Such torment agrees not to the mind of Christ, p. 181
for he was full of Love, etc. praying for his Enemies, Luke 23.34. and would
not bring fire from Heaven upon them when the Disciples would have had him do
so. Luke 9. And he that would not suffer his Enemies to endure a short
punishment by fire, will not inflict a worse that shall never end. -- B. All
this is as vain as that which before he has offered us, and will receive a
quick dispatch. For this kindness he showed forth was in the day of his
patience, but when the day of wrath is come, he himself will come in flaming
fire, to take Vengeance on them that abuse his Patience, and obey not his
Gospel. Which is told us by that Apostle of Christ that well understood the
greatness of the love of Christ. 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
And when he concludes that Christ will not inflict eternal punishment by fire
upon any, from his Clemency in sparing those particular persons, that the
Disciples would have destroyed by Fire; Herein I say, v. 41.
he seems to have forgotten the 25 of Matthew, wherein we read that he will
adjudge them on his left hand to everlasting fire (even all the ungodly in
general) for they shall not stand in the Judgment, Psalm. 1. (that is, not be
absolved but condemned in that day.)

p. 182.
R. Such punishment agrees not to the fruits of the holy God. The fruit of the
Spirit is Love, Joy, etc. B. How he will make this a Proof, that there is no
everlasting punishment for the wicked in another life, I cannot apprehend; yea,
I am confident it has not so much as a show of it, and therefore I shall say
nothing to it, for though I have engaged to answer his Subtilties, and
Sophistical Arguments, yet his mere Impertinencies and silliness it is below me
to meddle with.

p. 183. and 184.
R. Such punishment agrees not to the Nature of God, for God is Love, and is
kind to the unthankful and the evil. Luke 6. If God should only Love them that
love him, do not the Publicans the same? God's Love and Mercy is infinite, and
delights in Mercy, Mic. 7.18. and punishment is his strange act; Esaias 28.21.
and Christ dyed to answer the Law that we brake. B. This is the substance of
this 15th. Proof, and is large enough if good enough. To the first part I reply
-- If it be contrary to God's Nature to punish sin for ever, then the Devils
should not be punished by him for ever, the contrary to which we have seen
already: 2. If it be contrary to God's Nature to punish sin for ever (it is not
contrary to his Nature to preserve the sinners Being for ever, and when he will
ever be a sinner, and so ever worthy of punishment) I say if it be contrary to
his Nature to punish sin thus, because he is a God of Love, it would be as
contrary to his Nature to suffer sin to be in the World, because he is a God of
Holiness and Righteousness. If Mr. R. say, He is Love Essentially; I say in
like manner, he is Holiness Essentially, and when he would swear by himself, he
swears by his Holiness, in the Psalms, and elsewhere. And if the matter be duly
weighed, I do not question, but it will appear a stranger thing, that God
should suffer sin to be committed, than that he should punish it, as it
deserves after it is committed. (especially where it is attended with final
impenitence, as in the Damned.) 3. God is a God of vengeance, as well as of
love: and as the Saints are objects of his love, so the wicked and impenitent
are the objects of his wrath; and the wrath of God abides on them: John 3. v.
ult.



Paul tells us in the Epistle to the Colossians. Col. 3.6.


To the next thing that he urges, [That if God should only love them that love
him, he should do no more than the Publicans] I say unto this, as follows, viz.
That we do not say, or suppose any such thing, as that God only loves them that
love him, he loved his Elect from Eternity, and if he had not loved them before
they loved him, they had never loved him, for all their love is from his, 1 Jo.
4.19.
and they therefore love him, because he loved them first: Yea, God loves all,
with a common love, as they are his Creatures: The School-man spoke not amiss
upon the Point. -- Deus diligit omnes homines, Aquinas apud Davenant. in
Animadvers. etc.
in quantum vult omnibus aliquod Bonum, etc. God, says he, loves all Men, in
as much as he wills some good unto all Men, yet he wills not all that is
good to all Men: That is, p. 170.
he has some special good which he bestows only upon some persons, as Heaven
or Salvation only upon the Righteous; for St. Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 6.
The unrighteous shall not inherit the Kingdom of God. So that though God may
be said to love all Men after a sort, yet he does not so love the wicked that
remain such, as to give them Pardon and Salvation. If Mr. R. has any proofs to
the contrary, we desire him to bring them forth to light, and shall readily (if
God permit) examine them to the full.

Well, but he is Infinite in Mercy, and delights in Mercy. -- Very true: But
may he not appear to be Infinite in Mercy, unless he save his impenitent
Enemies? Sure he may. And though he delights in Mercy, yet he has Vessels of
Wrath as well as of Mercy, and reserveth wrath for his Enemies; Nahum 1.2.
and when he will be pouring out his wrath upon them, yet then he will discover
his delight in Mercy (and the infiniteness of his Mercy) to Thousands and
Thousands of his faithful Servants.

Esaias 28.21. opened.
But he Objects, That Punishment is called his strange Work, in Esaias 28.21. --

But first: The word strange in that place is expounded by some of a great and
wonderful work, and of an extraordinary judgment: and if we take it this way,
it is far from serving his purpose, so much as in show.

Or, secondly, It may be taken for such a work as flows not naturally from him,
but is occasioned, and as it were enforced by the sins and provocations of Men.
As in a Father to his Child; His comforting of it and providing for it, is his
natural work, which his natural affection moves him to; But his threatening or
correcting of it, is (in respect of the other) his strange work, which he does
not as a Parent, but as an offended Parent.

Thus punishing is God's strange work, such as he does not as he is God, but as
he is an offended God: and yet this work of his may continue for ever; as we
have an Example in the fallen Angels. And I think his everlasting punishment is
more plainly (as well as more frequently) discovered against wicked Men, than
it is against wicked Spirits, in the holy Scripture.

Lastly, The Death of Christ is so far from disproving our Doctrine, that it
does most strongly confirm it; For if God did punish his Son with an accursed
Death, when he bare the sins of his People in this World, what wonder is it if
he punish the impenitent with an everlasting curse (or punishment) in the World
to come? Nor did Christ dye to make an atonement for the sins of any such, as
might easily be proved, if it were necessary.

R. -- Such Punishment agrees not to the mercifulness of the Creator to his
Creature, p. 185.
to impose such a Punishment on any of them. And then he adds some places, that
say, he is rich in mercy, and the like. B. Surely this would be very good news
for the Devils to hear of, if it were true. But we have our Lord's words to
assure us of their everlasting punishment, Matthew. 25. and elsewhere, which show
my Author was mistaken, in thinking that it cannot stand with his goodness, as
he is their Creator. Yet we say not that he will punish any thus, as they are
Creatures, but as they are offending and rebellious Creatures.

And as for his Mercy we have spoken of it before: and though it be great, yea
infinite, yet it has its proper object, and will not be acted in opposition to
his truth, which tells us of everlasting punishment for the wicked, as well as
of Eternal life for the Righteous.

R. -- Sin cannot overcome his love; where Sin abounded, p. 186.
Grace abounds much more, Romans 5.20. This declares the mercy of God to be
greater than sin; if so, the grace of God is to all, even to the worst of men:
for sin abounds in them most. And where sin abounds, grace, says the Apostle,
abounds much more; If so, then all their sins shall be forgiven: And if any
were to suffer eternally, how does grace abound to them, much more where sin
has abounded? Answer this if you can. B. This is a precious Proof indeed, and
such as he has showed his chiefest strength in, and therefore he is pleased to
triumph over the poor ignorant Men, that Preach up the Doctrine of Everlasting
Punishment, etc. as though he had a certain, and an everlasting victory over
them, (as to this particular) Thus and thus the case stands, and Answer this if
you can. -- As brave a Challenge as any Gentleman of his Quality ever need to
make to such as we: But did he not argue against his own conscience, as well as
against us and our Doctrine? or could he really believe that this Proof was
unanswerable? if so, we shall have cause to consider the words of Solomon, The
Fool rages, and is confident. Behold, Sir, the work is undertaken, your
command with me is as good as a Law, and I will Answer you if I can.

And first, I will deal with your first Assertion, that sin cannot overcome his
love. (which is such a speech, as I have seldom met with in any Book, but
yours.) If it be meant of God's faithful Servants, of humble and penitent
sinners, I grant that his love will overcome (in due time) all their sins, and
be magnified toward them by pardon here, and glory hereafter: Romans 8.35.
for, What shall separate them from the love of Christ? Romans 8. But if he speak
of the proud contemners of his Word and ways, and the deceitful workers of
iniquity, that continue such, then though we care not to say that their sin
does overcome his love, yet we confidently affirm, that it will so provoke his
wrath, as to cause him to punish them for ever in the life to come: See Col.
3.6. John 3.36. Matthew. 25.46. Psalm 92.7. and many other places.

His second Assertion [That God's mercy is greater than sin] has been spoken
to already, and I need now to say but this about it: That it is greater than
the sin of Devils, and yet Devils shall suffer for ever for their sins. (and so
we may say, God's healing power is stronger and greater than Diseases, and yet
Men dye by them for all that.)

His third Assertion, That the grace of God is to all, even to the worst of
Men; if it be meant of his saving grace, (or such mercy as accompanies
salvation) is a gross untruth: for the Gospel tells us, that he that believes
not shall be damned, Mark 16. v. 16. (And his other, That all the sins of all
Men shall be forgiven, is as loud an Error, and let him prove it a truth, if he
can.)

Thus much for his Vanity. His Subtilty follows, [Where sin abounds grace much
more abounds; Romans 5.20.
therefore the grace of God abounds to all sinners, yea to the worst, for sin
abounds most in them. And if they suffer eternally, How does grace (or mercy)
abound to them?] -- Yea doubtless, this is the Beast that carries the Bell, but
let us pursue it a little, His gross abuse of Romans 5.20.
and we shall perceive that it is not a pretty Creature, but a horrible deformed
Monster. For I dare challenge Mr. R. and all his Brethren, yea all Mankind to
show me any one Text of Scripture, that ever was more abominably abused, more
wretchedly wrested (whether by Papists, Socinians, Atheists, or any sort of
Men) than this Text of St. Paul is, in this case, by Him. For when the Apostle
says, where sin did abound, grace did abound much more; he does not mean, that
God will show himself most gracious to them that have committed the most or
greatest sins; for then Pharaoh, Judas, and Jezabel should be more blessed than
Moses, Joseph, and the Virgin Mary; And our Damners and Sinkers be more happy
than the holy Prophets, Apostles, and Martyrs: For sin has most abounded in
them, (if we take Mr. R. his sense of the word) But the abounding there
mentioned, is the abounding of it in the sense and feeling of the sinner; that
God's gracious goodness has appeared most wonderful in the eyes of those
Penitent sinners, to whom sin has appeared most vile and hateful. That the
abounding of sin in that place is of this nature, the words just before will
make evident, for we read thus (therein) the Law entered that the offense might
abound. Surely it was not given to make men abound the more in sin, or to make
them more sinful, than otherwise they would be: but to make men more sensible
of sin, and of the evil of it. The Law, says that Learned Expositor upon the
place, auget peccatum, Paraeus in Romans 5.20.
non efficiendo sed monstrando; It increases sin (or makes it abound) not by
causing of it, but by discovering of it; and Piscator says, the offense there
is not taken properly for the offense it self, but figuratively for the
knowledge of it; and makes this the sense of it, that the grace of Christ has
appeared to be more powerful to save Believers, than sin is to destroy them.
Thus I have given an Answer to his Proof, and if he like it not, he may confute
it if he can.

R. -- God is just and equal; but such an extreme misery, p. 187.
never to end, is not equal. B. It Is a sign he spent most of his strength in
the last Proof, since this next is so exceeding weak. It seems he judges that
it cannot be just with God to punish sinners eternally, and not only judges so
but says so too. [To suffer Torment never to end, is not equal.] But though he
has adventured to say so, yet his Word is not sufficient for it, (nor is he a
fit man to judge of the equity of Gods Dispensations.)

But 1. If the sin of Angels may be justly punished upon them for ever (as few
besides himself will question) then may the sins of men also: for sin is as bad
a thing in the one as in the other, and God is as worthy to be obeyed by men as
by Angels.

2. It Is no wonder if guilty sinners (in a natural state) do not so easily
discern the equity of this severe Dispensation, it is the nature of sin to blind
the eyes of its followers, nor can we fully know the evil and vileness of sin,
unless we could fully apprehend the Excellency of that God against whom it is
committed.

3. Yet we have seen so much as may satisfy a sober Christian in the case, in
the latter end of the first Chapter of this Book, wherefore I shall not need to
say any more of the equity of such punishment, unless my Author shall Answer
what is said therein.

p. 188.
R. -- It is no profit or pleasure to God to have any man suffer endless
Torments; He has no pleasure in the death of any, Ezekiel. 18. much less can it
be any pleasure to him for any so to suffer. Hosea 6.6 He is said to desire
Mercy and not Sacrifice: if so, he desires none should be sacrificed in a
torment never to end. God abhors cruelty. -- B. This kind of Reasoning is such
as may well become a man of his Principles, and suits so fully to his blessed
design, and to what he had said in other places, that we need not doubt but he
was guided (herein) by the self same Spirit. The former part of it contains
these two Propositions. 1. That it is no profit to God to have any man suffer
endless punishments. 2. That it is no pleasure to him. --

For the first I say thus: That if that would prove that God will not have any
man suffer for ever, at the same rate of Reasoning he might prove, that none of
the wicked Angels shall suffer for ever. For certainly God is no more profited
by their sufferings, than by the sufferings of sinful men; and yet Christians
will believe that the wicked Angels shall suffer for ever, and I have showed
some reason why they should believe so. It was no profit to God to make the
world (for what need could he have of it who had All Sufficiency in himself?)
and yet Mr. R. does grant that God has made it: He grants also that God will
make his Saints happy and glorious in Heaven, and yet (I believe) he is not so
weak as to imagine, that God has any need of their Happiness and Glory: nor
had he any need of the Death of his enemies in this world, and therefore could
not be profited by their deaths, and yet he has brought them to death very
often, and in the most remarkable manner.

His Second Proposition is this: That it is no pleasure to God to punish any man
(or any wicked man) for ever -- If he mean it is no such pleasure to him, as
it is to have them obey him, or that he is not so pleased with their misery as
he is with their obedience, or with their happiness in case they were obedient;
Then we may grant it without wrong to our cause. But if he mean, that God's
pleasure is not in it, in any sense, then I deny it: for it is the good
pleasure of his will to punish the impenitent as surely as it is to give the
Kingdom of Heaven to his Saints. They shall suffer everlasting punishment, for
the mouth of the Lord has spoken it: Matthew. 25.46.
and since they suffer it not besides the good pleasure of his Will, or
contrary to it, they suffer it with his Will, or agreeable to it. The Text of
Ezekiel chapter 18.23. runs thus: Have I any pleasure that the wicked should dye
(or be damned) and not that he should return from his ways and live? And so the
sense is clear against him, more than for him; and he has no way to make it
appear to be for him, but only to mention the first part of the verse, without
the second, wherein he acts like you know whom, (See Matthew. 4.6. compared with
Psalm. 91.11.) take the words together as they lie, Have I any pleasure that the
wicked should die, and not that he return, etc. and then it is as much as if he
had said, I take more pleasure to have them turn and be saved, than to have
them go on in sin and be damned: But if they will not turn, they shall not be
saved, nor escape damnation, and therefore, Turn ye, turn ye from your evil
ways, for why will ye dye, Ezekiel. 33.11.
says the Lord in the same Book, plainly showing us, that they must dye (or be
damned) if they go on still in their Trespasses and never turn.

But the latter part of this Proof is (if possible) more strange than the
former, viz. -- God desires Mercy and not Sacrifice, therefore he desires not
that any should be sacrificed in a punishment never to end. -- As for his
Expression of men's being Sacrificed in punishment for ever, I do not well
approve of it, and could easily prove it to be very unfit; for the punishment
of the wicked is not a Sacrifice for their sins, since it makes no atonement
for them (either Typically or Really) wherefore instead of that, he might more
fitly draw his Conclusion thus: Therefore he desires not that any should suffer
punishment for ever. Now observe, Reader, the strength of this Argument: God
desires mercy and not Sacrifice, therefore he will not punish any man
eternally. How could he speak more at random if he had striven to do it? for
This is meant of his Preceptive will, namely that he values obedience in the
general, or the exercise of Mercy and works of Love, (in particular) more than
Sacrifices at the hands of his people, for the particle there used is not an
absolute Negative, but a Comparative only, as in the Text before, Ezekiel. 18.23.
Vid. Rivet. in Hos. 6.6.
where the Particle [not] does not deny his pleasure to punish, but compares
his will of punishing with his will of returning, and of their Salvation in
case they turn in Truth, and prefers the latter before the former. Now if we do
but state the matter thus, and infer the conclusion according to the sense of
the Text, it will need little or nothing more to be said for its confutation:
for who sees not the vanity of this Argument -- God regards the exercise of
Charity and Works of mercy, more than Sacrifices, therefore none shall be
punished for ever, etc. If he will take leave to infer thus, I will give him
leave to make the same conclusion from the History of Job's Cattle, or the
fiery Tails of Sampsons Foxes. He concludes this Proof with a very great truth
[That God abhors cruelty] but it is such a Truth as little concerns either his
design it self, or the things that he had said immediately before, but is
brought in by the head and shoulders, and is forced to stand in this improper
place by the mere violence of his Resolute Pen.

If he would make it serve his turn, he must (of necessity) make it appear,
that God cannot punish an impenitent sinner everlastingly without being cruel;
which, I am confident, he cannot do, and do verily hope he will not undertake
to do. And if he think so, I might easily subdue his error, if it be not
maintained by an invincible perverseness, and that by telling him wherein the
cruelty of a punishment consists; to wit, not in the duration of it, or
degree of it, but in the nature and merit of it. As first, when the person
punished is not fit to bear the punishment, as if a man should punish the
perverseness of a child with a Rack, instead of a Rod; or as if he should
disown and disinherit him for some smaller acts of disobedience to him. This
were cruelty, because the punishment in the one is of such a nature as is unfit
for the child to bear; and in the other, because it is such as is not due for
such an offense, nor deserved by it, (as it respects man) (And therefore our
honest Professors, that revile and reproach us behind our backs for preaching
God's word, and taking their Tithes, and make lies of us, for telling them the
sad Truths that concern them, are like enough to be indicted for cruelty, when
the Judge of the world shall come; for though these things through his good
Providence, do not hurt us much, yet they are things that are not deserved upon
the former accounts, and therefore are no better than cruelties in the eyes of
him whose we are, and whom we serve.)

And on the other side, though a punishment be never so great and grievous, yet
if it be such as the person punished does deserve for his offense, it is not
cruelty but justice. That wretched Villain Ravilliack, that murdered that
Renouned King of France in his Coach (King Henry the IVth, if I mistake not)
was afterward taken and Tormented to death in a fearful manner, yet I believe
there were few honest men that ever accused his Judge of cruelty, for
condemning him to such a death, because (they knew) he had well deserved it, by
the horrid crime he had committed.

And now having taken so much pains to make good his bad cause, in the nineteen
Proofs that we have seen, there is no doubt but he will make the best use he
can of his strength and skill, in his 20th. and last Proof: (as the Candle
gives a great light a little before it goes out.) And behold what it is.

R. -- It Is not for the glory of God to impose such a Punishment upon any man:
p. 189.
for glory lies not in imposing great and terrible Punishment, but in mercy
and forgiveness, Exodus 34.6, 7. But by his leave, I judge otherwise, and do not
doubt but it is for his glory, to impose great Punishment upon the wicked,
namely for the glory of his Justice (which he does not so much as pretend to
disprove, unless it be by telling us, that glory consists in mercy and
forgiveness; for which he alleges Exodus 34.6, 7. And how vain all this
wisdom is, a few Lines may discover, for certainly God's glory does not lie
only in mercy and forgiveness, for he was glorified upon his greatest Enemies,
even hard-hearted Pharaoh himself; Romans 9.17.
yet he was not glorified in a way of mercy upon him, but in a way of vengeance
and severity, and the same may be said of the Devils; And in that Text in
Exodus, as the Lord proclaims himself to be merciful and gracious, so one that
will by no means clear the guilty, or wicked, so remaining: And the not
clearing of them, is not an act of mercy, my Author himself being Judge.) Then
he adds thus --

R. -- Proverbs 10.12. It Is said, Love covers all sins. -- But what of that?
for it does not mean that God's love will cover or forgive all Men's sins,
(penitent or impenitent) no sure, the Prophet tells us of some, Esaias 27.11.
That he that made them will not have mercy upon them. It Is meant therefore of
the love of Men, one toward another. Love (so far as it prevails) will cause a
Man to cover, to wit, to overlook, and pass by the sins of his Brethren against
him, vid. Synopsin crit. in Pro. 10.12.
so far as with a good conscience he may. But he proceeds -- R. -- God does all
things for his glory, p. 190.
and it is more for his glory to save all men, than to save a few. --

In what sense we hold that [few] shall be saved, has already been showed: To
wit, comparatively with them that dye in their sins, and perish; for otherwise,
(...) etc. Rev. 7.9.
the number of them that are saved is a great number: Now, if Mr. R. supposes,
that it is more for God's glory to save all Men, than to save some only, he may
enjoy his Opinion, but ought not to impose it upon us, as an undoubted truth,
without a sufficient proof, which he has not been pleased to give us. The
Apostle speaks (all in a Verse) of them that are saved, 1 Cor. 1.18.
and of them that perish. Surely then God does not save all, (for we read of
some that perish) but he does what is most for his glory, says Mr. R. himself.
Therefore it is not most for his glory to save all (or to save the Impenitent.)
And if it were most for his glory to save all Men, why would it not be most for
his glory to save all the Angels too, for is not their nature as noble, and
their salvation as precious as Man's? And yet he will not save the wicked
Angels, (as was proved) therefore it appears he did not count it most for his
glory so to do.

And if I should say, that the saving of some only (only the Penitent and
Returning sinners; I speak of them that are of years) tends most to the glory
of God's mercy, Mr. R. may not honestly deny it: for his just severity and
vengeance upon some sets off his mercy toward others. The blackness of
darkness reserved for the wicked, makes the Inheritance of the Saints in Light
appear the more glorious, and the mercy that brings them to it, by so much the
more admirable.

And having seen what he cannot do, ( viz. that he cannot make good what he
has undertaken) he tells us (at last) what he cannot think. -- p. 190. lin. 19.

R. -- I cannot admit to think any thing that is cruel, to be in God. B. This
his disability he takes, doubtless, for his perfection: and I (for my part)
shall readily grant it to be so: for he must needs be very weak, or very
wicked, that can be persuaded to think any such thing: And I verily believe he
never heard any of those Divines that he so much undervalues, preach or speak
any thing that sounded that way: I shall add only these two particulars
concerning it.

1. That God is not cruel in punishing the impenitent for ever, since they are
worthy of such punishment (as before.)

2. That though there is nothing of cruelty belonging to the nature of God, yet
there is of Justice, and Vengeance and Severity against sin. Consider the
Example of the fallen Angels, and the sufferings of Christ. And this severity
is so far from being inconsistent with his goodness, that St. Paul joins them
both together: Romans 11.22. Behold therefore the goodness and severity of God,
etc. And if our Author shall think his severity to be cruelty, we can tell him
of a Day wherein he shall have light enough to see his folly.

Thus (Reader) I have led thee (and I hope safely) through the manifold dark
Maze's, and crooked Labyrinths of Mr. R. his newfound Wilderness; and know not
what I should need to say more unto him, unless it be to admonish him of his
design, and to bespeak him in the words of that precious Man of God, Bishop
Jewel, (to that Pestilent Popeling Mr. Harding) at the end of his Defense. --

[Deceive not the simple, they are bought with a Price; Bish Jewel.
they are the People of God, for whom Christ has shed his Blood. Your shifts
are miserable, you trouble your self, as a Bird in the Lime; the more you
strive, the faster you cleave: you cannot bridle the Seas, you cannot blind the
Sunbeams: Give place to the glory of God: whether you will or no, the Truth
will prevail.]

And now (Good Reader) having given thee the Proof of this Doctrine, and the
Defense of it, against Mr. Richardson's violence, and wrath; I would humbly
invite thee to ponder a little upon it to thy profit: To which purpose, I shall
endeavor to assist thee, in the Uses and Improvement of it; which is the next
particular to be spoken to, (and indeed the chiefest of all.)

CHAP. IV.
SECT. I. Containing some Uses of the Doctrine aforesaid.
SInce Eternal Damnation is not a Dream, Use 1. For Information of the World's
Vanity.
since Everlasting Fire is not a Fancy, but a Real thing; Then (in the first
place) let us hence be informed of the vanity of all Worldly things, yea of the
best and bravest of them: Indeed the Men of the World will set their hearts
upon it, let us say what we can (from Reason or Scripture) to the contrary; And
if you tell them they have more need of Grace than Gold, or of a good Sermon,
than of a Barrel of good Beer, they cannot understand how it can be; Their
earthly sensual wisdom is not able to apprehend it to any purpose, (and the
most of them will not be wise till it is too late.)

But however they value earthly things, because they are most suitable to their
earthly minds, yet assuredly they have not that goodness in them which they
expect to find, at least not that which can be worthy of the principal
affection and esteem of their hearts: and that partly because of that little
good that they are able to do for them in this life, for they cannot give any
sound content to an Immortal Soul. (That which is capable of God can never be
filled with the Creature.) Where is the Man that ever was satisfied with the
greatest Riches, that had not something better than his Riches? and the like
may be said in other things. And as they cannot content the Soul, so they
cannot secure the Body neither: If God do not more for the wealthiest Man than
all his Wealth can do, he will fall into mischief every moment. Yea, it cannot
procure him one good Night's rest, Dan. 6.18.
when he has most need of it: Though Darius kept his Money, and his Kingdom
too, yet it is said, his sleep went from him.

But there is a greater vanity than all this; for as the greatest of this
World's good cannot content a Man sufficiently in prosperity, nor comfort him
sufficiently in adversity, so it cannot secure him from Hell, or save him from
Everlasting Burnings: It cannot work his deliverance from it, nor prove his
deliverance from it: The former is plain, and needs no proof: Though the
Papists will sell us Pardons for Money, yet they cannot assure us, that the one
or the other can secure us from Hell. And the other is no less plain: for, we
read expressly, of a Rich man in Hell, Luke 16. and we find in Job, that God
regards the Rich no more than the Poor. If he be ungodly, and dye so, he
shall not come to Heaven, because he had the World at will. And if he go to
Hell, what will all his former comforts be to him, or how will the Remembrance
of them comfort him? What will it be to live in ease for a time, if afterward
they live in Torment for ever? What will it be to have Honor for a while, if
afterward they suffer Everlasting contempt? What will it be to be clothed with
Silk or Silver, and to fare deliciously every Day, if afterward they be
clothed with Hellish flames, and drink of the Cup of God's fiery Indignation?
In a word, what will it be to enjoy the World, and miss of Heaven, or in our
Savior's phrase, to gain the whole World, and lose their Souls? Lord, put me
not off with earthly enjoyments, let not any thing be my portion that may
consist with thy displeasure.

2d. Informat. of the vileness of sin.
A second Branch of Information, which will naturally spring from the Doctrine
aforesaid, will be this, viz. Concerning the vile nature of Sin: That Is almost
the only thing that sinners are wont to make light of; yea, many of them make
but a mock at it: And though the wise Man tells us, that they are but Fools
that do so; Pro. 14.9.
Yet (alas) how many such Fools are to be found, and that too, amongst those
that are counted good, honest, understanding Men: What if they (never so
grossly) neglect and forget the God that made them, what if they slight his holy
Commandments, and turn away their Ears (never so frequently) from hearing his
Law? Pro. 28.9.
(and so run the hazard of having their Prayers rejected) What if they are so
proud that they care not for God, nor value a sound Sermon half so much for the
bettering of their Souls, as they do the smallest piece of a rotten Dunghill,
for the bettering of their Lands: In a word, what if they rail at us for
desiring to make them better Christians than they care to be, spite at their
Neighbors, and defraud and oppress their poor Brethren, and do the Devil any
service in the World, that may but please or profit themselves, make their
Purses heavier, and their Hearts lighter, etc. Yet, I say, they can make a
small matter of it, and can see no great harm in it, or at least no such great
harm, (in any of these things) but that they can easily dispense with it, for
the attaining of those great ends which they propose unto themselves therein:
But, Reader, if these Men could but look beyond the Grave, and see what is
doing in the other World, among the Souls of such ungodly ones as themselves;
If they could but see (in a lively and sensible way) how many are now Damned
for those sins, which they are so much in love with, and be able to apprehend
what sad thoughts those miserable Souls now have of their delightfullest,
gainfullest wickednesses, which have laid them under Eternal vengeance; Then,
believe me, they would judge otherwise of these things, than now they do. I
grant indeed, there are other means whereby to see the evil of sin, as namely,
the clear Glass of God's Sacred Laws, and the Red Glass of Christ's Blood and
Sufferings, etc. These doubtless may be sufficient to show sin in its proper
Colors, to a spiritual eye, (and will be confessed to be so, by all sorts, but
blockish Papists, and blasphemous Socinians.) But this Point that I am now
upon, might convince the blindest Worldling of it, in case he would truly
believe and consider it; For he must needs grant, there is much evil in that
which the Righteous God will punish with Everlasting Torment: How vile and
hateful, how heinous and horrible must that be, which the God of all Goodness
and Mercy will show his Eternal Displeasure against? How sad a work must that
be which has such a Death for its wages, as sin has, yea all sin; Romans 6. ult.
For the Apostle speaks of sin in general, as sin, and not of such, or such a
sin in particular, in Verse. 23. As has been excellently cleared by our
Protestant Worthies against the Romanists, Ames. Anti. Bell. Cham. T. 3. lib. 6.
cap. 12.
though the Mercy of God delivers them that turn unto him.

And so it may discover the madness of ungodly sinners, that walk in the way to
everlasting misery, but this will afford matter enough for another Section.

CHAP. IV. SECT. II. Discovering the horrible madness of wicked men, in
adventuring upon this dreadfullest Misery.
Inform. 3d. of the madness of the wicked, etc.
FRom hence also we may fitly inform our selves of the monstrous madness of
wilful and resolute sinners, that will run the hazard of so great misery for
the fulfilling of their sinful lusts and humors in this present world. Solomon
often calls such men Fools, and St. Paul styles them unreasonable men. 2 Thessalonians.
3.2.
And certainly their folly and unreasonableness appear in nothing more than in
their venturing of their Immortal Souls in the ways of Destruction: they are
apt enough to fear Plagues and Famines, Bonds and Imprisonments, or any
ordinary Calamities; yea, they are afraid to obey the Commands of their God and
their Consciences, lest they should run into some inconveniences by so doing,
and scarce dare to come to the place of Gods public worship and service (in a
constant and diligent manner) lest some Factious Atheists should call them
fools for their pains.

Psalm. 9.17. Psalm. 145.20.
But as for the everlasting punishment that is threatened against them (and which
they cannot possibly escape while they are followers of wickedness) these they
have little fear of, they dread not the dreadfullest dangers, and if (in love
to their Souls) we warn them of it, and desire them to take heed in time, and
turn from their evil ways before it be too late, they will thank us for nothing
(as it is commonly said) and advise us to take care of our selves, and not to
trouble our selves with them. But if they did but know aright the greatness of
that misery that the damned shall endure, they would shun the ways that lead to
it, and not walk in any way of wickedness for the gaining of all the wealth on
earth, yea, they would be as loath to continue in a state of sin, as to stay in
a house that is on fire over their heads: That therefore I shall endeavor, in
the next place to discover.

And here I must needs say with the Apostle, who is sufficient for these
things? who can fathom the depth of the Damneds sorrows? what heart can
conceive them, or what words can express them? for who knows the power of
God's wrath, or how miserable it can make the enemies of his holiness? But
though we cannot fully set forth the Terror of the Lord upon them, yet we may
soon see so much of it as may make it appear to be most exceedingly terrible:
as he that cannot sound the depth of the Sea, yet he may quickly find that it is
very deep.

I shall now endeavor to demonstrate (with all convenient brevity) the
dreadfulness of the Damnation and punishment that the wicked that live and dye
such, shall surely undergo. The extreme misery of the wicked in Hell,
discovered.
I shall not now speak of the perpetuity of it, (having spoken much of it
before, and almost as much as need to be spoken on that subject, and much more
(I am sure) than Mr. Richardson, or any of his Abetters will ever be able to
answer in this world, or the world to come) but rather of the extremity of it,
and that in Two generals, which will admit of a large consideration;

1. The Happiness and comfort that they shall miss of or lose.

2. The miseries, pains and positive sorrows that they shall sustain and lie
under.

1. 1. In their Banishment from Christ.
They shall be banished from the Blessed Presence of the Lord Jesus Christ. In
their day they would not be commanded by him, but in His day, they shall be
commmanded from him. He himself will say unto them depart from me, ye workers
of iniquity; Matthew 7.21.
and oh what a misery will that be unto them! It was grievous to them to be
banished from their friends in the world, to be shut up close in a Prison or
Pesthouse from the comfort and Society of their old acquaintance, etc. But how
grievous will it be to be banished from Christ, and be separated
(everlastingly) from all the comforts of his Presence and Favor? This, this
will be a bitter thing indeed, and more dreadful than a Thousand Deaths: for
Consider, O Christian, Rev. 25.23.
it is He that is the Glory of Heaven, the Eternal Light of that City of God;
it is He that is the Angels Joy, and at whose Birth they sang an Hymn of Praise:
a little of His Divine Consolations have revived the drooping Spirits of his
Servants, have Crowned their Souls with blessed Peace, and turned the Shadow of
Death into the Morning, as the Prophet elegantly expresses himself. How
bravely did the Holy Martyrs Triumph over the saddest and sharpest of humane
miseries, filling their mouths with Glorious Praises when they were ready to be
filled with Smoke and Flames, and all through the sense of their interest in
Christ, and the lively hopes of happiness with him after this life ended. And
in many others of later times, The joy of their Lord has made them more than
Conquerers over all the fears and sorrows of Death [Millions of Praises to the
Lord our God, let Heaven and Earth praise Him; for he has remembered us in our
low estate, and has redeemed us to himself, said that worthy man Mr. Janway.
a little before he gave up the Ghost.]

But now those Consolations of Christ which his Saints partake of in Heaven,
are doubtless far beyond all that they were sensible of here on Earth, Phil.
1.21.
for to be with him (there) is far better, as St Paul assures us; and yet these
Consolations shall be no comfort to them that dye in their sins, for they shall
have nothing to do with them, he will say unto them, Matthew. 25.4.
Depart from me, ye cursed. And O how cursed will their case then be, and how
miserable will they then account themselves: for they will then lose all other
comforts with him, which is the next thing to be spoken to.

2 In their loss of all other comforts.
Secondly, the wicked in the world to come shall lose all other comforts too:
whatsoever here they took comfort in, shall then be taken from them. Now they
make a good shift without spiritual Consolations, and though they seldom think
of Christ and his Kingdom with any seriousness, yet the thoughts of present
enjoyments, delight their Souls, and Sensual Contentments do supply the want of
Spiritual ones unto them. But if they come to Hell, (as they needs must, if
they go on still in their sins,) they will miss of all their Sensual enjoyments.

But to come to some particulars.

1. Wealth and Honor.
1. They will lose their worldly wealth and honor; they that minded their money
more than Heaven, shall lose both Heaven and money too: Their Riches will not
profit (says the Scripture) in the day of wrath, the heat of that day will
melt their best coin, for all things of this inferior world shall be dissolved
and burnt up. 2 Pet. 3.10.
They shall see all their pleasant things in flames, before themselves are cast
into the fiery-lake: How speedily will their stately Buildings, curious
Gardens, costly Clothes, and richest Jewels then be spoiled and destroyed for
ever? Their meat and drink will also be denied unto them, because they despised
the Bread of Life, and wilfully starved their precious Souls, and desired not
(in truth of heart) the sincere milk of the Word, that they might grow thereby,
1 Pet. 2. Their Minds and Memories and Consciences will have many foul sins to
feed on, but their mouths will have no fine bits to feed on: for whatsoever
Sensual good may be expected in the Turks Airy Paradise, it is sure there is no
such thing to be hoped for in the Devils fiery prison. Their honors also will
be then at an end, since they must arise to shame and everlasting contempt. Dan
12.2. 2. Loss of rest and ease.


2. The Damned will lose all bodily rest and ease and sleep: The place of
Torment they must be cast into, will admit of no refreshment at all: They that
wearied others with their wickedness before, will then be wearied with it
themselves; and though they could sleep (very soundly) in God's house of
Prayer, yet they shall not sleep so much as one wink in his house of
punishment: That saddest word [Go ye cursed] will keep them awake for evermore.

They shall lose also all their carnal Mirth and Worldly Joy: 3. Mirth.
Here they had it (many of them) in abundance, their hearts were light when
their Consciences were loaded with guilt; And though they said unto God Depart
from us, we desire not the knowledge of thy ways, yet the Pipers and Singers
were more welcome to them, Job 21.
they take pleasure in the Timbrel and Harp, and rejoice at the sound thereof:
yea, rather than want Mirth, they will laugh at Religion, and make Doctrine and
Use the matter of their Sport. But then these things will be at an end, the
Candle of the wicked will be put out: They that would not take up Religion, nor
choose God's Fear lest it should make them dull and melancholy, shall then be
merry no more; for the Matter of their Mirth (we have seen) will then be taken
from them, and God will distribute Sorrows in his Anger: yea, their own eyes
shall see their destruction, Job 21.17.20.
and they shall drink of the Wrath of the Almighty, as it is set forth in that
Chapter.

etc.

raised incorruptible: 1 Cor. 15.
and what if they want the natural means of Life, as food and sleep, yet the
principal cause of Life will still remain, even the will and pleasure of the
Almighty: But I shall not say any thing more of this point here, having spoke
unto it already, and maintained it against the wisest of Mr. R's oppositions.

burn up their dwellings, etc. as surely as the dwellings of the wicked. --

Mansions in their Fathers house, Joh. 14.2. instead of Food and Physic, Rev.
21.4.
they shall have perfect and perpetual health and ease, and the joy of their
Lord shall be their strength: instead of Psalms and Thanksgivings in the
Churches, they shall have the Hallelujahs of Heaven, the High Praises of their
God, and the full fruition of their Fathers love. -- But the wicked in Hell
shall have none of these things: their cursed state will exclude all
Blessednesses, as it is evident, and needs not now be proved by me.

4. Peace.
4. They shall lose all their peace which before they had; for though there be
no peace to the wicked, as the Prophet says, that is, no true, sound,
well-grounded peace, that may deserve to be called peace; yet a kind of peace
they have in their sins, yea some kind of peace from their sins, as from their
ignorance, and hardness of Heart: but in hell their peace will leave them, and
they will have as little quietness as before they had Religion and
Conscientiousness. If Doctrine and Application can disturb them in some
measure, Damnation and Torment will do it much more.

5. Hopes.
5. They will then lose their hopes also; wicked men, as I said before, are
unreasonable men, and therefore will hope for that which God has not promised
them; the Word does not promise Heaven unto them otherwise than in case of true
Repentance and Conversion, but they will hope to come thither, though they are
yet in love with those sins that they should repent of. I believe there are few
of them but have a strange hope to be happy at last, though destruction and
misery are in their ways. (And therefore they will not be at the pains of being
seriously Religious, because they hope to do well enough without so much ado)
But those of them that dye such as they have lived, and so come to Hell, will
fail of what they hoped for, and lose all the hopes of it. The hope of unjust
men perishes, Prove. 11. Prove. 11.7. Job 27.9.
And Job in like manner -- What is the hope of the Hypocrite when God takes
away his Soul? And if his hope shall perish when God takes his Soul from his
Body, how far must he be from all hope, when he casts him Body and Soul into
Hell? The hope of the Righteous shall be gladness, but the hope of the wicked
shall be shame and confusion.

A Continuation of the Positive part of the Damneds misery,
HAving spoken of the Privative part of the Damneds misery, Positive Misery.
or the losses they shall sustain, I shall now Treat, with God's Assistance, of
the Positive misery that they shall suffer: And first, Bodily Pain.
they shall suffer extreme pain in their Bodies. The extremity of it is plainly
intimated in this, that they shall go into everlasting fire, Matthew. 25.41. Fire
we know is the most Tormenting creature, the pains that are caused by it are
most sharp of any, and therefore the Papists have so much delight to torture
the Heretics, as they call them, by Burning, and to oppose their obstinacy
with Faggot-Arguments; And doubtless if they had not had a good God and a good
Cause on their side, they could not possibly have withstood them. A small fire
can fill a man with pains intolerable, though no more but one finger be
scorched with it. A man would not be content to live one year in a burning
Brick Kiln, if he might gain the wealth of a hundred Kingdoms, and be sure to
enjoy it a hundred years. And we may easily assure our selves that Hell fire
will be more grievous than any other for these following Reasons.

1. Because it is such as is prepared on purpose for punishment, Hellfire
worse than any other.
and the product of God's fiercest wrath, and therefore must needs be of a more
tormenting nature than our ordinary fire, which is the effect of his gracious
Providence, and was made for the help and comfort of mankind.

2. Because the Saints themselves may be afflicted with other fire, (and the
greatest of them have been so) but Hell fire is proper and peculiar to the
wicked; and sure that evil must needs be worser which is proper to the enemies
of God, than that which his Servants may be afflicted with. To which I may add
this also, that it is such a fire as the evil Angels shall suffer in, Matthew.
25.41.
[prepared for the Devil and his Angels.]

If any shall say, perhaps Hellfire is not a real corporeal Fire, but somewhat
else figuratively expressed by the name of fire: I answer, It Is lawful to
suppose that it is real fire, and the absurdities that my Author would fasten
upon that Opinion, are nothing but the irregularities of his own imaginations,
as you may see in that Chapter, where I have examined them. And if the word
Fire were figurative, it would be no matter of relief to the Damned's miseries,
but rather an aggravation of them: For those things that are figuratively
expressed in Scripture, do commonly exceed those things by which they are
expressed; As God, who is called a Father, for his love to his People, is more
loving than any earthly Father, and Heaven, which is called Paradise, is more
glorious and blessed than ever Paradise was.

Names of Hell.
And as Hell is called Fire absolutely in that Text, so it is called elsewhere,
a Furnace of Fire, (a terrible word indeed) and (which is more terrible) a Lake
that burns with Fire and Brimstone. O how dreadful must that place and state
be supposed to be, which is set forth unto us by such dreadful names in holy
Scripture! See Matthew. 13.41, 42. Revel. 21.8.

So (to name no more) it is called a Prison. As Heaven is set out by things
delightful, so Hell is set out by that which is distastful and loathsome,
amongst which a Prison is one, and Hell is called so, in 1 Peter 3.19. And it
is the worst of Prisons, if we consider the properties of it.

A Prison.
1. It is a dark Prison. Darkness is naturally an uncomfortable thing: They that
fear nothing in the light, yet are apt to be afraid of every thing when they
are alone in the dark. Paul and his Companions had but an unpleasant sailing,
when neither Sun, nor Moon, nor Stars appeared to them for several Days
together. And the Egyptians were little less than astonished at that Plague of
thick Darkness that was upon them for three Days time, Exodus 10.
they were in such an amazement at it, that they rose not from their places all
that time: And if God should take away the Sun, or command it to with hold its
Beams and Light, we should take little pleasure in living upon the Earth: But
the Darkness of Hell is worse than all this; Jude 13.
The blackness of darkness for ever.

2. It is a fast Prison, such as they that are once in, shall never be able to
get out of: The Doors of it are shut upon them by the Justice, Truth and Power
of the Almighty.

3. It is a tormenting Prison: Other Prisons are places where the Malefactors
are reserved for Punishment, but may have some ease and comforts during their
abode therein; But Hell-Prison is the place of Punishment, where the wrath of
God is executed continually upon his Enemies: I say continually, for they shall
be punished with an everlasting (and therefore an ever-continuing) destruction,
2 Thessalonians. 1.8, 9.

The Doctrines of the Holy God were grievous to them, though they heard of them
but now and then; What intolerable grief may the displeasure of God cause in
them, when they lie under it continually?

And the more dreadful will this Prison be to the Slaves of Satan, because it
will be (if I may so call it) a convincing Prison unto them: Therein they shall
be made to see their deserts, as well as to feel their Punishment. Though they
shall have no light of comfort there, yet they shall have a light of
conviction. The Lord Jesus (at the Day of Judgment) shall come from Heaven to
convince all the ungodly of all their ungodly deeds: And doubtless, Jude 14.15.
that conviction will remain upon them when they are in Hell.

They will then be able to know, what it was that they are sent thither for,
and that they are so miserable, not merely for God's good pleasure, but for
their own evil doings; for obeying the Devil more than God, for choosing the
ways of wickedness before his holy pleasant Paths, for rejecting the counsels
of his Word, and refusing to return, that they might live; They will then be
able enough to understand, that it was their loving of Darkness (or Ignorance)
better than Light, that made Christ say unto them, I know you not, and to cast
them into that blackness of Darkness eternally: Their mischievous designs and
spightful dealings that has laid them under the Vengeance of God, and the
malice of the Devil; their mocking at Religion, and laughing at Reproofs, that
has moved God to laugh at their Calamity, and mock at all their Woes and
Cries: Their Heathenish liberty on God's Holy Day, that has made them to be
bound in those Chains of Damnation; The Pride and Profaneness, and
Unconscionableness of their Hearts, the cruelty and injustice of their hands,
the Deceit, Hypocrisy and Baseness of their Tongues, with all their witty
fine-mouth'd Railings, that brought them to that place of Torment, and made
their Blood and Bones so Hot in that everlasting fiery Prison. -- I might add
more of their Bodies misery, but I shall pass to that which is greater, the
miseries of their Souls; for as they were most in sin, so they will be also
most in Punishment.

If a Man were never so full of pain in his Body, The misery of their Souls.
yet if his Soul have some rest and comfort, he is very far from perfect
misery: But alas, it will not be so with the damned in Hell, their Souls will
be as far from ease as their Bodies: for they will be afflicted perpetually
with all sorts of tormenting passions; and that,

1. By sorrow, (in the saddest sense) our Blessed Lord, 1. By sorrow.
when he stood in the place of sinners, had great experience of sorrow, he was
a Man of sorrows, Esaias 53.
and acquainted with griefs, and said, that his Soul was exceeding sorrowful,
Matthew. 26.28. O what sorrows then may we think will fall upon the Souls of the
wicked in Hell! If the Soul of that Holy One were so afflicted, when he stood
in the room of others, what will be the case of them that must bear their own
sins, and answer the demands of Justice themselves? Psalm 32.10.
The Psalmist tells us, that many sorrows shall be to the wicked, and as it is
sometimes verified here in this World, so certainly it will be most eminently
fulfilled in the World to come; How merry soever they may be on Earth, our Lord
assures us, that they will be weeping and wailing, Matthew. 8.12.
when they come to Hell: And how happy would they think themselves to be, if
they might come out of Punishment, when they have wept as many Tears, as there
be Drops in the Ocean.

2. By shame.
Secondly, By shame: The boldest sinner of them all will then be ashamed, when
his eyes are open to see his sins, and God's Majesty against whom they were
committed, with all the shameful aggravating circumstances of them: How will
they be confounded to see the Judge of the World set them on his left hand, (in
the sight of Men and Angels) and assign them their Portion amongst unclean
Spirits. And surely their confusion in Hell, will not be less than that
confusion that they suffered before they were there. That punishment to which
they are judged, cannot be less than that which they suffered, while they were
brought forth to be judged: They that gloried in their shame, (and made their
Boast of their sins) in the Day of God's patience, will not do so in the Day of
his Wrath.

3. By rage.
Thirdly, They will be afflicted in their Souls by fury and rage; these passions
they were often tormented with on Earth upon small occasions, yea many times
upon no just occasion at all: If a Man did but speak against the sins that they
love, yea if he did but admonish them soberly in private, and entreat them for
the love of Jesus to forsake those ways which his Soul hates, presently what a
rage are they in? and how mightily do storms of wrath arise in their Breasts?
and if they could kill them with a wish, or burn them in their Beds with a
fierce and fiery word, they were likely to live but a few Hours longer: If they
have lost but a little of their estates, or but so much as missed of a good
Bargain, they are ready to fret beyond measure at it. But what will it be to
lose their Souls and Heaven, and endure the pains of Hell, for the love of
their foolish Lusts on Earth, what unspeakable vexation will this be unto them;
when they have nothing at all to make up the loss, to assuage their pain, or
abate their misery in any respect. And thus our Savior assures us, the wicked
will have as weeping, so gnashing of teeth too, when they shall see Abraham,
Isaac, Matthew. 8.11, 12.
and Jacob in the Kingdom of Heaven, and they themselves shut out.

Fourthly, In Hell they will be tormented by Desperation. 4. Despair.
This is a fearful thing indeed, and almost the only thing that wicked Men are
much afraid of: When we labor to beat down their false hopes of salvation, and
tell them they cannot be saved without that holiness that they yet hate, they
have no more compendious way to make our Sermons odious, than to report that we
Preach Men into Despair: But if they dye as they lived, and so come to Hell,
the thing they so much feared will come upon them, there will be an absolute,
total and everlasting desperation, Their hope shall perish, Pro. 11.7. They
will be no more able to hope for any comfort, than to annihilate the Heavens;
And how bitter this will be, who can tell? for verily Desperation is a Hell it
self, said (one, who I hope is in Heaven) Francis Spira.

Fifthly, Their Souls will be exceedingly miserable, 5. Conscience accusing.
through the rebukes and accusations of their own Consciences: They do
sometimes accuse them on Earth, (or else our reproofs of their sins would not
so greatly offend them) how much more will they do so in Hell, when they are
thoroughly awakened and enlightened, and quickened by the wrath of their Judge?
for then they will have nothing to do, but to testify against them, and
torment the sinners for not obeying them before. A wounded spirit (or
conscience) who can bear, said Solomon; and yet the wounds of the Spirit, and
troubles of the Conscience, do sometimes tend to the Health and Salvation of
the Soul, (through the help of the Spirit of God) how intolerable then must the
state of the Damned be, whose wounds of Conscience will never be healed, who
will ever be tormented with its ragings and rebukes? And, O how much matter of
accusation and rebuke will it then have against them! How will conscience work,

1. When they think of the excellency and eternity of that blessedness they
have lost, and how they have lost it for sin and vanity, and those things that
perished in the using, etc.

2. When they think with themselves how fair they were (many of them) for
Heaven; how highly they were exalted in Gospel privileges, having the Word of
Life and Salvation, and the Ministry of it among them, which if they had
improved, as they might and ought to have done, they might have been as those
Saints, whose glory they behold with so much envy and astonishment.

3ly, When they remember how much time, and Golden opportunities they had to
consider of their ways, and seek that grace and mercy that would save them,
which they trifled away, as nothing worth.

4ly, When they remember how often they were persuaded to return, and how often
they were convinced of the evil of their ways, of the necessity of turning; and
yet (in spite of all) would go on still in their trespasses: O that sinners
would consider of this, when they still enjoy the instructions and exhortations
of a plain and faithful Ministry! How they will one day wish that they had been
willing to obey it, or that they had never been able to hear it! It will be
more tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrha, at the Judgment Day, than for such: That
Sodom that was the shame of the World for wickedness, and the most eminent
instance of Divine vengeance, of any People under Heaven, being burnt with Fire
and Brimstone from thence, yet that Sodom shall be in a better case at
Judgment, than the neglecters of this so great Salvation. Matthew. 11.24. It will
be some abatement of their Torment, that they had not those means of grace,
those constant Sermons, those strong persuasions, and clear convictions, that
Gospel-sinners had: They shall not have so much darkness of sorrow, because
they rebelled not against so much light.

5ly, When they remember what cost and charges they were at, what care and
pains they took (many of them) in Satan's shameful services: How they
adventured the shame and censures of the World, the loss of their health, their
peace, their life, to please the Devil and their wicked humors; How they
stifled their consciences, shut their eyes against the light, rejected Christ
and Glory, his Word and his Kingdom, for the deceitful pleasures and profits of
sin; and took more pains in the way to destruction, than ever any pious Man did
in the way to Heaven. How perfect a Hell will Hell be unto them, where their
own Consciences shall be their Tormentors, where their Accusation and Rage
shall never cease, Mark 9. v. 44.
where their Worm shall never dye? Doubtless they will then be (in the saddest
sense) a Terror to themselves. It were easy to name many other particulars
that will aggravate the Damned's Misery; But I have other things to speak of,
and therefore pass them by: However that little I have said already, if we
write [everlasting] upon it, will in some measure show the folly of them, that
will venture their Souls in any way of wickedness, Matthew. 16.26.
though it were to gain the whole World by it.

The great Objection answered.
But, say some, If Damnation be such a dreadful thing as you make it to be, and
be also everlasting, what will you say of the goodness of God, which the
Scripture speaks so often of? Or how can it stand with the goodness of a God (
viz. with Infinite Goodness) to cast his Creatures into so great misery,
especially if we suppose this shall be the case of most Men, as you asserted
before?

I answer: He that has well weighed what was replied to Mr. R. when he
cavilled somewhat to the same purpose, need not be much troubled with this
Objection; Nevertheless I shall not grudge a large Answer to it, it being that
which is most commonly urged by selfish sensual sinners, and has not been
wholly forgotten by the Author of that Paradoxical Book, De Amplitudine Regni
Coelestis. Caelius Secundus.
-- Boni Natura est Communicari; quomodo Deus Pater Miserationum, etc. It is
the nature of good to communicate it self: and the more he communicates his
goodness, the more he discovers it; And how shall God appear to be the Father
of Mercies and Infinite in Mercy, if his saving beatifying Mercy be not
extended to the greatest part of Adam's Posterity? So He. -- But though a Man
cannot go through a thick Hedge without scratches, yet he may go by it at an
easier rate; so he that cannot make his way through objected difficulties, yet
may pass them by, and hold fast the truth in spite of them: And as to this
particular, if thy reason cannot untie this Knot, let thy faith cut it asunder:
And if thou can not see how the Infiniteness of God's goodness can stand with
the everlasting punishment of the Creature, yet believe it nevertheless, for
the sake of that Word that testifies both of them unto us: For as our Lord
Christ has told us, There is none good but God; (viz. absolutely, Matthew. 19.
unchangeably, infinitely good) So he has told us no less plainly, That the
wicked shall go into everlasting punishment: Matthew. 25.
And therefore it is certain, the one is not contrary to (or inconsistent with)
the other, whatsoever the wits or follies of Men may judge of it. And that thy
Reason (as well as thy faith) may have some satisfaction in the case, I shall
lay down these following Considerations.

1. That there is in God Bonitas Regiminis, as well as Beneficentiae. In plain
English, thus: There is in God the goodness of a Governor, and the goodness of
a Benefactor; now his punishing the wicked with Eternal Damnation is not at all
contrary to his goodness in either of these senses.

1. It Is plain, It is not contrary to the goodness of his Government; He is the
great Governor of the World, and therefore is called a King, a great King, the
King eternal, etc. in Holy Scripture, Malac. 1.14. 1 Timothy 1.17. Cap. 6.15.
and as he is such, it belongs to him to punish obstinate and impenitent
offenders, according to their deserts; and without this, the goodness of his
Government, namely, the wisdom and righteousness of it, would not be discovered
to his Creatures: Even amongst Men, they are not accounted good Governors,
that do not punish the disobedient, according to their deserts, and maintain
the honor of Government thereby: And if a Man suppose that the wicked do not
deserve to be punished for ever, who would gladly be wicked for ever, he little
knows what wickedness is; and the equity of this dispensation has been cleared
in the first Chapter of this Book, (toward the end of it.)

2. It is the goodness of God's nature, that he hates sin and wickedness; It Is
his Excellency that he cannot look on iniquity: (else he were not a Holy God,
and without Holiness he could not be a God indeed: for his Holiness is
Essential to him, and therefore when he would swear by himself, he swears by
his Holiness.) Now if the goodness of his nature does make him to hate sin, it
cannot be any disparagement to his goodness to punish it accordingly, since the
punishing of it is but the just demonstration of his hatred against it; and he
that shall go about to argue the contrary, will show himself a bad Logician,
and a worse Christian.

3. If it were not contrary to his goodness to threaten Everlasting Punishment
and Destruction to the wicked, Matthew. 25. 2 Thessalonians. 1. etc.
and to tell us of such Punishment for them, (so continuing) then certainly it
cannot be contrary to his goodness to make good that word by inflicting such
punishment: Whatsoever Men pretend herein, for the extolling of God's goodness,
yet he will not think himself honored by them, when they would exalt it
against his Holiness and Truth.

4. These Learned Objectors should not act so unlearnedly, as to argue the
doing of that upon the account of his goodness, which cannot be done upon the
account of his wisdom, nor complain of his casting those into Hell, whom his
wisdom sees to be utterly unfit for Heaven; The Enemies of God and Holiness
are not fit to dwell in his Holy place, [A Swine is fitter for a Prince's
Presence Chamber, than an unholy Soul for Heaven.] And if Hell be fitter for
them than Heaven, it is fit that they should be sent to Hell, rather than
Heaven; for it is fit they should have what is fittest for them: If an ungodly
Man should be brought to Heaven, it would be little comfort to him; yea, I
doubt not, but he would count it a misery, if he should come there in such a
state: The imperfect graces of his People on Earth, as discovered in gracious
practices, are matter of trouble and grief unto him, and he had rather be
amongst the Beasts of the Field, than be in company with those that would move
him to be Holy in good earnest; How contrary then would the Holiness of God be
unto him, and what a vexation would it be to him to see those glorified, whom
he so much delighted to vilify and disgrace, to see those silly precise ones
(as he counted them) sitting with Christ upon his Throne, whom he thought more
worthy to be trodden under foot by such as he? Thus miserable would an ungodly
Man be in Heaven, and is it not fitter that he should be miserable in Hell? Is
it not more proper and congruous, that he should torment himself in the place
of Torment, than in the place of Glory and Blessedness?

And secondly, Let me tell the Objector, that God will sufficiently appear to
be good in a way of Beneficence also, though the wicked be under Everlasting
Condemnation. This is so plain, that I need not spend much time in the proof of
it: for it would not be accounted a reasonable thing, that a King on Earth
should be charged with unmercifulness, for condemning of Rebels to perpetual
Imprisonment: He will appear a gracious and bountiful King for all that; while
he takes care of the honor and safety of his true Subjects. Thus will the King
of Heaven appear to be bountiful and gracious, and abundant in goodness, in his
gracious dealings toward all his faithful Servants. 2. He is very bountiful to
the wicked themselves, yea to the very worst of them, here in this World. He
gives them that Breath which they so often breathe out to his dishonor, and
the reproach of his Gospel. He gives them all that time which now they mispend,
and those precious means of grace, which they so unthankfully despise and
abuse; He gives them drink to quench their thirst, though they drown their
reason with it, and preserves them every minute and moment from many secret and
unknown dangers, besides those that are open and visible: in which respect he
is said to be the Savior of all Men. 1 Timothy 4.10.
Yea he gives them time to repent, and promises of mercy, when they unfeignedly
return from sin to his service; in Esaias 55.7, etc.

And as for the Number of them that perish, which Coelius, Of the Number of the
Damned.
and Mr. R. think so strangely of, we may easily perceive it is not so much to
be wondered at, nor may not be imagined to be any disparagement to the Divine
Goodness. A sober Christian may receive some satisfaction from the words of his
Lord, in Matthew. 7.14. -- Broad is the way that leads to destruction, and many
there be that go in thereat. Is it fit these Men should make a question of that
which their Lord (who is Truth it self) has so positively told us?

Nevertheless, I shall add a few Considerations, to rectify our thoughts
hereabouts, that on that account we may not charge our God foolishly. And,

1. How many soever they be that perish, yet none of God's true servants ever
shall: John 10.28.
Christ will give them eternal life, and they shall never perish: John 10.

2. Those many that perish were all out of the way of Salvation, and would not
be persuaded to turn into it, by a true Conversion. What wonder, if Destruction
and Misery be their end, when they are in their ways, as St. Paul, in Romans
3.16. Destruction and misery are in their ways, and the way of peace they have
not known.

He that chooses to travail in a Ship that is bound for Spain, may not wonder
if at last he comes thither. As little cause have we to wonder that they should
have Hell for their end, that make wickedness (in some kind or other) their
common way, and will not consent unfeignedly to turn into the Holy Path; And
that this is the case of the most among us, is so sadly apparent, that I may
lawfully spare the pains of proving it.

3. It is no disparagement to the goodness of a King or Judge to condemn common
Robbers or Murderers, nor to condemn many of them: Yea, Justice requires him so
to do, and their Multitude can be no reason at all to excuse them in their
wickedness: If these Men should meet with many to abuse them, (though it were
only in words) and one should say, you need not take it ill, seeing there are
many that do so, they would not think very well of his speech: And must the
just Judge of the whole World, spare the wicked and impenitent, because there
are many of them? If so, how shall the Judge of the World do right? for all the
World knows, that were not Righteousness, nor any thing like it. And if that
any Man could prove, that it is unreasonable that many impenitent sinners should
be sent to Hell, he might as wisely prove that it is so for any at All to be
sent thither: For, if many Persons under the same guilt deserve not the same
Punishment, a few that are so, do not deserve it neither: The Number does not
alter the Case.

4. It cannot be denied, but the greatest part of Men by far is actually
ungodly and unconscionable, sensual and disobedient: and it must needs be
granted that such are fitter for Hell and punishment, than for Heaven and
happiness, and the delightful fruition of the Holy God: And it is not to be
questioned, but the most of the wicked continue such still. Must a Man believe
that the Enemies of God and holiness will be in love with God and holiness,
because they are the greatest Number? If one Man, that dies unconverted, may
go to Heaven, we may as well suppose that another may, and another again, and
so of others still; So that either we must suppose, that all that dye in their
sins go to Hell, or else none; and which is most like to be true, they that
know the Scriptures may easily apprehend.

5. If Men's judgments were not blinded by guilt and selfishness, they would
think it more wonderful, that God should suffer such a Deluge of wickedness to
go unpunished in this World, than that he should punish it, according to its
desert, in another World.

6. What if God should send but one wicked Man of a Thousand to Hell, and save
all the rest, would they not acknowledge and admire his Mercy and Beneficence?
Well, though he will not do so, yet we know not, but there may be as great a
communication of his goodness, as that amounts to. For as the Heaven of glory
does incomparably exceed the inferior Heavens and Earth in bigness; So it is
judged by sober, learned Men, that there be ten thousand times more holy and
blessed Spirits there, than there be wicked Men in Earth or Hell; and they were
as wise Gassendus, and others.
as other Men, that supposed the Planets, and other Luminaries of Heaven, to be
inhabited by Spirits, as the Earth is by Men, and Beasts. And when I observe
that all places (almost) here below, both in Air and Water, as well as Earth,
are inhabited by Birds, or Flies, or Fishes, or some other living Creatures, I
am very willing to imagine, that the more glorious parts of God's handiwork,
which so dazzle our eyes but a little to behold, are not empty, but possessed by
such excellent Inhabitants, as are suitable to their magnitude and glory. Thou
know not, Reader, how many Millions of Creatures are over thy head, that are
filled with their Maker's love and goodness, and therefore entertain no hard
thoughts of it, nor murmur at the just Judgments of thy God, upon the obstinate
Enemies of his holy Laws, how many soever they may be.

And thus I have answered the Objection aforesaid, and may now fitly proceed to
a farther improvement of the Doctrine pleaded for, in a way of Exhortation and
Caution to several sorts of Men; of which with God's leave, in the ensuing
Paragraph.

CHAP. IV. SECT. III. Containing a Use of Exhortation and Caution to the Gentry
and others.
HAving proved the point so plainly before, and cleared it now at large from
the grand objection about its consistency with the Divine Goodness, I shall
urge it (by God's permission) upon several sorts of men amongst us. And I may
fitly urge it upon those in the first place, that are first in place, viz. The
Gentry of our Land --

I need not doubt but some or other will think me a pragmatical person (in the
very worst sense,) and may be willing to ask me what I have to do with such?
Well, if they have any great desire to do so, let them do it by all means, for
why should they lose their longing? But if they are reasonable men, I may hope
to prevent that query by giving them this following account, in brief:

Namely, that I am a debtor to all, and am bound (especially as I am a
Minister) to do good to all so far as I may: and it is as much worth my pains
to endeavor to prevent the damnation of these, as to prevent the Damnation of
meaner men; for their Souls are as precious, and their sins as dangerous as
others. And it is very proper to speak somewhat to such persons, because they
are most taken notice of, and their Examples most powerful to lead others in
the way to Salvation or destruction.

1. To the Sensual Gentry.
There be two sorts of Gentry amongst us. 1. Sensual careless ones. 2. Serious
and Conscientious.

First, of the former, and certainly I had need be careful how I speak to those
men that have ruined so many that never durst to speak to them so plainly as I
intend to do.

Who are such.
But before I go any further, I must express my self clearly, and show whom I
mean by Sensual Gentry, even those that take more care how to please their
senses, and sensitive Appetites, than their Consciences or their God; that make
more account of Gain than Godliness, and regard not who or how many they ruin,
so they may but raise themselves by it; that slight the Laws of the Eternal
King, and care no more for a plain (sound) Sermon than for a dish of stinking
meat; that grossly undervalue the glory of Heaven, and think themselves as happy
as need to be, if they have but health, and wealth, and honor here, etc. Dr.
Saundersons Sermon. in 1 Cor. 7.24.
or in the words of the Reverend Bishop Saunderson -- that spend half the day
in sleeping, half the night in Gaming, and the rest of their precious time in
other pleasures and vanities, to as little purpose as they can devise; as if
they were born for nothing but to eat, and drink, and snort and sport, etc. or
(as the worthy Author of the Discourse of the Decay of Piety) that live in the
world, as the Leviathan in the Sea, to take their Pastime in it, and to make up
the parallel, delight themselves to devour their Underlings. Matthew. 6. Col. 3.
etc.
-- or (as the Scripture Phrases it) that be lovers of pleasure more than
lovers of God, that set their affections (mainly) on things upon earth and not
the things that are above; that mind nothing seriously, but (Heathen like) what
they shall eat, and what they shall drink, and with what they shall be
clothed: These I call Sensual Gentry, and I will be content to be judged by
any but themselves, whether I may not fitly call them so, and may lawfully say
somewhat the more to them, because others say so little.

Yet lest I should lie open to too many Censures for it, and lest my plainness
should be interpreted to be folly, pride, or peevishness or the like, I think
it meet to mention some passages out of several Writers that speak as bluntly
to these men, as I can do, and yet will be confessed to be such as knew well
what belongs to Learning, Grace, and good manners.

First, the famous Cambridge Orator speaks thus in his Poem, Mr. G. Herberts
[Church Porch]

O England full of sin, but most of sloth:
Spit out thy Phlegm, and fill thy Breast with glory:
Thy Gentry bleats as if thy native cloth
Transfused a Sheepishness into the Story:
Not that they all are so; but that the most
Are gone to grass, and in the Pasture lost.
That worthy Divine of Broughton Mr. R. Bolton.
in Northhampton-shire in his excellent Assize Sermon at the end of his [four
last things] complained of the great degeneration of the modern Gentry,
speaking to this effect -- They are so vainly brought up, and so strangely
pufft up with insolency and Self-esteem, etc. that commonly by such time as
they come to strength of body and mind corrupt affection obtains its full
strength and height and hardness in their hearts; and I am afraid, if we go on
(meaning, without a Reformation) our Posterity will find in the next age, the
basest Generation of English, that ever breathed in this famous Kingdom. So he,
in p. 217, and 218. of the said work. And whether this thing he feared be now
come to pass or not, I do not say, let others judge.

The forementioned excellent Doctor also in that very Sermon makes as bold with
them, Dr. Saunderson
speaking to those Gallants that do nothing for the good of humane Society, but
live as if they were made for no other ends but to eat and drink, and sleep and
game, etc. tells them (however they might take it) that the poorest
contemptible creature, that cries Oysters in the streets for a livelihood,
deserves his Bread better than these brave men, and his course of life is
better approved of God and every wise man than theirs. And as he adds [a Horse
that is not good for the Cart, nor the Way, nor the Race, nor the Wars, nor any
other service, though he be never so well made, never so well shaped, and never
so well clothed, yet is but a Jade still] and (after the Application of it)
adds [the titles of honor which in courtesy we give you, we bestow upon their
memories whose degenerate offspring you are, and they no more belong to you,
than the Reverence the good man did to Isis, belonged to the Ass that carried
her Image.]

And thus having cleared my way, I shall now come directly to my intended work,
to exhort the brave Gentile sinners to consider the things that concern them,
which I take to be one of the fittest Uses that can be made of the Doctrine of
Hell Torments.

The Exhortation, etc.
Since there is a state of extreme and everlasting punishment for the ungodly in
another world, it is high time, Sirs, to look about you, and to take care of
your neglected Souls before you have lost them; O consider this, you that
forget God, and use all diligence to escape this wrath to come; your Estates
are better than other men's, and your Breeding too (as you would have us to
think) and are your Selves more contemptible or less worthy of your care, and
Religious regard? Surely not. You know that your time is passing and will
return no more: Death is at your backs as it were, that pale horse will shortly
overtake you and tread your honor in the dust; and can you doubt of this or
make light of it? You are not sure to live another day, you know nothing to the
contrary but your Souls may be called for this very night, Luke 12.20.
though you have built your Barns never so largely, to lay up your substance
in; and can you think the remembrance of the pleasures of a Sensual careless
life, will make death more safe or comfortable to you? or if it could, yet we
are well assured, it cannot make Hell Torments the more tolerable; and as you
are not more capable of escaping them, if you dye in a state of sin,
unconverted, so if you fall into them they will be as terrible to you as to
other men; though you are a little better armed against the crosses of this
world, than other men, yet you have no more security against the curse of the
Law and the wrath of God: You have no music that can charm the Devil or abate
the fury of his Malice, no Plays or Romances that can delight you after death,
no Clothes that can adorn you in the eyes of God, no money that can bribe your
Judge or purchase a Pardon at his hand: In a word, no Courage that can bear up
your Spirits against the Terrors of Judgment if it find you in an unrenewed
state, and destitute of that Grace and Holiness that naturally you disregard. O
that you did but know, any ways but by experience, what a sad creature a
Gentleman in Hell will be; And that you may never know it in that way, give me
leave I beseech you, to caution you against some special sins that are most
likely to bring Great men thither.

1. Pride and haughtiness of mind. 1. Pride.
What if you speak great swelling words, and look as big as a blown bladder
(scorning God and man at once) yet you must come down a little lower, if ever
you dwell in the high and lofty place; you must of necessity lay aside your
loftiness, and stoop so low as to take up that poor despised thing, Religion,
and walk humbly with your God, before you can see the Kingdom of Heaven, Esaias
2.12. Mic. 6.8.
The day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud and lofty,
And the proud shall be as the stubble in the day of his Anger, Mal. 4.1. and
pride goes before destruction, says, Solomon. And how apt the heart of man is
to it, when it is attended with wealth and worldly greatness, I need not say.

2. Take heed of fleshly lusts which war against the Soul, 2. Fornication.
as St. Peter speaks, in 2 Pet. 2.9, 10. The Lord knows how to reserve the
unjust to the day of judgment, but chiefly them that walk in the lust of
uncleanness, etc. So St. Paul, Heb. 13.4. Adjudicabit exitio, Piscat. in Loc.
3. Idleness and unprofitableness.
Whoremongers and Adulterers God will judge, (i. e. condemn.) They that would
not be divorced from their Harlots shall be married to Hellfire. See Rev. 21.8.

3. If you would escape the miseries of another world, be sure to take heed of
an idle and unprofitable life in this. Surely, Sirs, they are like to partake
of little good hereafter, that care not to do good here. If Plays and Romances
have not thrust the Gospel out of your minds, Matthew. 25.30.
I shall not need to tell you of the dreadful doom of the unprofitable Servant.
Is it not sad to see how little good is done in the World, by many of those
that are best able to do most, and how many there be among us, who have
hundreds, it may be thousands a Year, that yet do not give, all the Year round,
so much as the price of a good Periwig, toward the Relief of their poor
distressed Brethren; (as though such as are raised to such high fortunes were
gotten above the Law of Charity, or as if they thought the greatness of their
wealth would well excuse them in the neglect of those good works it was given
for; or as though they had thought it an honor to them to have the Papists
say, that they are Solifidians.) The neglect of this is no such harmless
Peccadillo, as these Men may be apt to account it: We read in the Gospel, that
our Lord will condemn Men at the great Day, for this sin especially, and make a
particular mention of it, as a procuring cause of Condemnation. Matthew. 25.41,
etc.
He will say unto them, Depart from me, etc. For when I was an hungered (in his
members he means) ye gave me no meat, when I was thirsty ye gave me no drink,
etc. So then, they that were able to do good to their poor Christian Brethren,
and were not willing to do it in some conscionable way, will be punished for
ever for this sin, if they dye such as they lived; and when they have lost
their Souls and Heaven, it will be no satisfaction to them to remember, that
they kept, or saved their Money; they that would not live as Christians, shall
not be spared because they were Gentlemen.

I might also caution you against Cruely and Oppression, scorning of Reproofs,
and scoffing at Religion, in the serious faithful Followers of it; but I have
not time to say all that might be said unto you.

4. Mispending of Time.
The next thing that I would entreat you to be heedful against, is, misspending
of your time: He that is careless of that, is (therein) careless of his God,
his Soul, his Duty, and every thing that most concerns him, and therefore is
most apparently (as yet) in the ready way to Hell.

[See that ye walk circumspectly, redeeming the time] is no Precept of mine,
but of the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.15, 16.
or rather of God by him; and if Gentlemen are not concerned with it, it would
be hard to prove that any others are. Believe me, Sirs, your time is one of
your choicest Treasures, nor can you name any thing, besides God's grace, and
your Souls, that can be compared with it for preciousness; What would you not
give for another years time, in order to your preparation for an endless life,
in case you were to dye to morrow? And though I am not concerned to accuse you
of mispending your time, yet I may lawfully put you in mind of it, and desire
you to call your selves to account for it, before your God does. Compare, I
beseech you, the time that you spend in excessive sleeping, in trimming and
adorning, in feasting and long meals, in pomp and state and vain curiosity, in
vain thoughts and worldly cares, in Cards and Dice, and other Games, (at home
and abroad) in fruitless and unedifying Books, in idle company and needless
visits, in vain discourses and delights, in doing ill, or doing nothing; I say,
do but compare this time that is spent in these ways, with that time which is
spent in a serious seeking and serving of God, in reading of good Books, in
thinking of good things, in governing your Families religiously, in relieving
the poor, in encouraging your Charge in the ways of God, or any thing else that
tends to the promoting of piety, in your selves, or others; And let your own
consciences tell you which is most: For in many of our Gentry, the time that is
spent in the latter, is no more in comparison of that which is spent upon the
former, than the poor Man's wages for a days work, to their Yearly Incomes;
Their whole business and work is sports and pastimes, so that we might describe
them in those words, in Exodus 32. [They are a People that sat down to eat and
drink, and rose up to play] But such provide but ill for themselves; nor can it
be safe for them to be so prodigal of time, that have Death and Judgment before
them, a Hell to escape, and a Heaven to prepare for.

5. There is another sin, that some who go for Gentlemen are sadly in love
with, Rash Imprecations.
(and must not be forgotten in this Discourse) I mean horrid Swearing and
Imprecations, Damning, Sinking, and the like. And surely if Damnation be a real
thing, and not a Dream, it must needs be a damnable thing, (in the highest
sense) rashly and profanely to imprecate it upon themselves. What wonder is it,
if these Men have Hell for their portion, that commonly have Damnation it self
for the matter of their prayer! And if they did only shame themselves by this
wickedness, the matter were not so much; but they (alas) shame their profession
also, and bring a grievous reproach upon the holy Prayers of our Church. It Is
the corrupt Lives and cursed Speeches of such Professors, that harden the
deluded Separatists in their prejudice against them, as the Quakers, and such
like: I read, not many Months ago, a passage to this purpose, (more than plain
enough) in a Quaker's Pamphlet; where speaking to some Persons of this bad
quality, he expresses himself after this manner: [You cry out, God damn us,
and God confound us, and soon after you go to your Church, and say, We beseech
thee to hear us good Lord.] Thus (Reader) this clause in our Letany, We beseech
thee to hear us good Lord, (than which it is hard to imagine any thing more
humble, or pious, or better becoming a serious Christian) is matter of greatest
scorn and contempt to these poor Creatures; and all because it is Profaned and
Unhallowed by the pestilent Tongues of these Hyperdiabolical Gentlemen, these
Damnable Damning, Sinking Gallants. O Sirs, if you are guilty of this sin,
consider of it for the Lord's sake, and do no more so wickedly. O that I might
dissuade you from it by any means; to that end I will propose unto you these
Two questions.

The Damners questioned.
1. What if you should be pleased to lay aside your Atheism, and adventure to
believe that there is a God to whom vengeance belongs? would you not then
account it reasonable to honor him by a better Prayer than [God damn us, etc.]
and think it more needful to beg his mercy, than to imprecate his Vengeance?
And if you think that there is no God, and that Religion is only a silly thing
that came into the World by chance, through the force of foolish causeless
fears (as some of your companions are willing to persuade themselves) It may be
worth your while to Read and Consider what that excellent Gentleman Sir Charles
Woolsley, p. 77.
has replied unto it, in his most Rational discourse of the unreasonableness
of Atheism, and to answer it if you can.

2. What if you did but see that wicked Spirit that tempts you thus fearfully
to challenge your Maker, and dare him to destroy you, would you not then take
heed how you yield to his temptations, and follow his counsel? And is it not
much worse to feel damnation than to see the Devil? Why then should you rashly
imprecate so great a mischief upon your selves, and run the hazard of bearing
that wrath we are assured he does tremble at James 2.19.
?

3. What if you had been among those Swaggerers in Bohemia, mentioned by Dr. B.
in his Theater of God's Judgments p. 552.
, out of an approved Author Jo. Fincelius.
, who having delighted themselves in the night with profane Speeches and wicked
wishes (much like that aforesaid, though not quite so bad) were found dead in
the morning, with their necks broken, and crushed as if a Cart-wheel had gone
over them, with blood also flowing out of their mouths and nostrils to the
astonishment of all that saw them. Surely had you seen this sad Spectacle, you
would hardly make so bold with the God of Judgment, as to dare him to destroy
you. Well, if you will not be warned by such examples your selves, he can make
you examples to others: and if such a death be dreadful, Damnation is worse,
incomparably worse, how light soever you may make of it, (as you must needs
grant if you believe there is any such thing, if you do not, let it please you
to vindicate your good friend Mr. R. and make good his Arguments against my
Answers.)

4. What makes you to be so fearful when any extraordinary signs of God's power
appear? Psalm. 77.17, 18.
If his Thunder do but shake the Earth under you, if his Lightnings singe your
well-set Hair, if a terrible Tempest overtake you in the field, and tear the
Oaks in pieces under which you stand for shelter, your courage will fail, and
your stoutest hearts tremble as a Leaf, how then can you bear up under his
fiercest wrath, and endure that damnation which you so commonly and fearlesly
imprecate on your selves?

5. If Damnation be so slight a matter as (by your speeches) you seem to make
of it, why are you commonly so much afraid of dying? They who walked in your
ways, and talked in your Language (most stoutly and presumptuously) yet spoke
very faintly when a deadly disease took hold of them: some of your Quality,
when their Physician told them they were not like to recover, fell into a
horrrid rage, and could scarce forbear cursing him to his face. And yet
Damnation is ten thousand times dreadfuller than death, if all our Religion
has not deceived us. To lie in the place of darkness is as nothing to the
living in the place of Torment. Read but the foregoing Chapter and you may see
so much Terror in it, as might hinder you from wishing it upon your selves,
though it were never so much in fashion amongst the Hectors of our Times. They
would not delight themselves in [Damn my Bloud] if they knew the fierceness of
Hellfire. (And if they can see themselves so far in danger of it as to desire
heartily to escape it, they may fitly read some directions for that purpose in
the latter pages of this Discourse.)

If any expect an Apology for what I have said to these men, he is likely to
be disappointed of his expectation; and if they themselves shall call me Stoic
or Clown, or Puritan for my pains, I shall be content to take it at their
hands, and will (as I verily hope) say no worse to them than I would to those
that are infected with the Plague, viz. The Lord be merciful unto you. -- And
now I leave them, being willing to speak a few words to their Betters, namely,
The Serious and Religious Gentry.

CHAP. IV. SECT. III. A Continuation, or a word of Exhortation to the Religious
Gentry.
ANd now, good Reader, since I am to treat of so Noble a Subject, I do really
wish for thy sake, that I could speak what is suitable to it, and that which
might be as worthy of thy Reading, as the Persons to whom I speak are of thy
Love and Respect; but alas, my manifold imperfections will be a more than
sufficient hindrance, so that I cannot promise thee any thing extraordinary
herein: yet if plain Truth may be pleasing, thou may fitly read what follows
-- They are as Gold, not only choice, but rare: And though some of them (as I
have heard) are lately gone to their beloved Lord; Sir T. R. etc.
yet blessed be God, there be some of them still remaining in our sinful Land:
long may they live, and let those hearts be faint that wish them evil.

Their Character.
I shall first tell you who I mean by Religious Gentry, and then speak a word
of Exhortation, with all humility unto them. For the former, The Religious
Gentleman is one that minds his God above his Money, and places his Happiness
in a higher world than this he lives in; one that scorns nothing so much as
sin, and desires nothing so much as a Conformity to Jesus Christ, and an
absolute fruition of his Love and Glory; It Is his highest Ambition to be a
Favorite in the Court of Heaven, and the best of his Buildings are disesteemed
by him in comparison of the many Mansions that are there; his Tongue keeps time
and tune with his Mind and Conscience, he does not make or love a Lie (he looks
upon such Drolling as a piece of damnable fooling) he counts it no pride to
make his boast of God, nor no shame to speak often of his Attributes and
Excellencies. He will glorify his God in his body also, and therefore will not
adventure to dishonor him with the Apparel he puts upon it, (God having given
him his right shape, he sees no reason why he should be misshapen by any
monstrous fashions.)

In a word, as he is Religious, so he is not afraid to own and follow the
Exercises of Religion, in public as well as in private; He seeks not for the
Golden mean between Saintship and Atheism, but is resolved to be a Saint so far
as he may, though the proud should call him Puritan for it. He goes as joyfully
to God's house as the Sensual gallants to a Playhouse, and comes out with more
as well as better satisfaction. He goes not to Church to save his Credit or his
Purse, to see Fashions or to censure his Minister, but to discharge his Duty,
and adorn his Profession, to Serve his God and Save his Soul. (and therefore he
had rather go Twice a day than Once a month) This, Reader, is the nature and
quality of these excellent Persons I am speaking of, and however thou may
wonder at it, I dare affirm there are some such to be found among us; and to
them I am now (with all Christian respectfulness) to address my self.

The Exhortation.
Honored Sirs, since Hell is no Fancy, since the miseries thereof are real,
intolerable, and eternal, give me lieve, I beseech you, to urge upon you these
following Duties.

The First Duty. 1. To rejoice in the Lord, and delight your selves in the
Thoughts of his Great Goodness toward you. For he has freed you for ever from
all this Misery. That Cloud of Vengeance which will fall upon the Careless
Gallants at the last day, shall be far from you: You may meet with many
distresses, but nothing of Damnation shall ever come near you, for there is no
condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the flesh but
after the Spirit, Romans 8.1, 2. Whosoever believes on him (to wit with a holy
and True Faith, such as is attended with a Religious life) shall not perish but
have everlasting life, Joh. 3.16.

When the awakening Trumpet shall send forth its Echo's to the ends of the
Earth, it shall be no matter of amazement unto you: when you shall look out of
your Graves and see the Lord of Glory, Armed with irresistible power, clothed
with shining Majesty, and flaming Vengeance, attended with all his Troops of
holy Angels, (Cherubins and Seraphins) honored with their loudest shouts,
their highest praises, their joyfullest Acclamations, etc. yet then I say your
hearts shall not fail, for you shall come forth to the Resurrection of life,
Joh. 5.29. and be raised up for heaven, not for hell; wherefore serve your God
with gladness, and do not so much humor the Devil, or honor this malignant
world, as to be afraid of its enmity, or to be discouraged at the worst it can
do against you: That Gracious God whom you serve is able to deliver you from
all evils: and as he has saved you from the power of sin, and the punishment
of Hell, so he will be your shield from smaller dangers, Psalm. 84.11. The Lord
God is a Sun and a Shield, and no good thing will he withhold from them that
walk uprightly.

Second Duty. Secondly, To be often in the Heavenly Duty of Praise and
Thanksgiving. This Tribute you owe for every Mercy you partake of; how much
more for your deliverance from the Everlasting Punishment? Methinks, (Sirs,)
you should delight your selves abundantly in Paying of it, and Praise your
great deliverer with enlarged hearts. O let that be a main part of your work
here, which shall be your Beatifying employment in the high and Holy place.
When Sensualists are delighting themselves in Songs of Lewdness and Vanity, let
your hearts be delighted with Songs of Praise. If the Blind man in the Gospel (
Luke 18. ult.) could follow Christ so joyfully, glorifying God, merely because
he was cured of his blindness, O what Joyful Praises should your hearts be
filled with, and your glory (your Tongues) be exercised in, when you are saved
through Christ from the Everlasting Darkness and destruction, and shall shortly
see an end of all your Sorrows.

Third Duty. Value not overmuch the Scorns and Censures of the ungodly world:
fear not the reproach of men, Esaias 51.7.
nor be afraid of their revilings (while you walk in the Holy way) No reason
for it, for why should they fear the contempt of any, that are secured from the
everlasting shame?

Fourth Duty. Another duty which I would humbly exhort you to, is this, To do
what you can to save others from Hell. Not that you can save them in a way of
absolute yower, by working saving Grace in their Souls, nor in a way of Merit,
by procuring Heaven for them, This it is confessed you cannot do: But yet you
may do that which the Scripture calls a Saving of them, namely, Persuade them
to be careful of their own Salvation, and occasion them to use the means of
Salvation that are afforded them. And what can be imagined more excellent and
honorable, or more truly worthy of a Religious Gentleman than this? Motives to
it I might add in great variety, from the Glory of God, the Worth of the Soul,
the Love of Christ, the Honor of his Gospel, the honourableness of the Duty in
it self, (To conquer Towns and Castles, and Kingdoms, is but a poor and
worthless project to the furious endeavors of Saving a Soul.) But methinks
God's goodness to your selves might be a very powerful engagement upon you so
to do, if there were no other reason for it. As the King in the Parable,
Ought thou not to have forgiven thy fellow servants seeing I forgave thee? so
may it be said much more in this case, ought you not to do your best to save
others from Hell, since your God has been so merciful as to save you? -- And I
beseech you, Sirs, let it be remembered what opportunities and advantages you
have above other men, to do good to your Neighbors Souls. Your Place and
Authority will bear a great sway with them, they will regard your words and
examples, when they will not regard ours: Happy would many a poor Minister
account himself, if his People would mind the commands of God, which he urges
upon them in the name of Christ, half so much as they would mind the words of a
Man of Place and Wealth. If you show a love to a Church, and a plain Sermon,
they will seem to do so for their credit sake, and will not dare to call the
one a Steeple-house, or the other a Puritanical Preachment.

Now you may be Instrumental to their Salvation (or deliverance from Hell) many
ways, especially these following. 1. In general, by your own example, by living
godly, righteously and soberly in your general course. They will be more
capable of believing profaneness, sottishness and injurious doings to be
hateful things, when they see them so carefully shunned by such as you.

In particular, If you would be a means of saving your Neighbors Souls from
Hell, let it please you to observe these following Directions.

1. Endeavor to engage them to public Duty, and to hear that word often, that
is able to save their Souls. Show your Zeal for the Solemn Service of your God,
and let them know how greatly you love the Habitation of his House, and the
place where his Honor dwells: This would be a means to bring them often
thither, if not for love, yet for shame, and fear, and if they come within the
sound of God's Word, whatsoever it be that moves them so to do, there is hopes
they may be the better for it, or at least not so bad, (so blind, and bold, and
hardened in sin) as if they had been drinking, or prating with their ungodly
Companions, when they should be hearing the Word of their Lord.

2. To show your Zeal against Drunkenness, common Swearing, and all other gross
sin, by punishing it according to the Laws of the Land, and to show most of
your favor and kindness to those Persons, or Families, that seem to have the
greatest kindness for Religion.

3. To discourse with your Neighbors in an edifying way. Let your speech
savor of Grace, and discover your seriousness for your God and Souls. Let them
know by your words, the holy temper of your hearts: Tell them how glad you
would be to be more holy than you are, to be perfectly conformed to the will of
Christ, and how little you value all this World's good, in comparison of his
love, and the enjoyment of it in Heavenly glory: Tell them what thoughts you
have of the state of an ungodly Professor, and that you would not be in such a
case for all the Wealth in the Earth: Tell them of the preciousness of Time,
and the greatness of that work which they must do for their Souls therein, and
if they seem careless of it, ask them seriously some awakening Questions; As,

1. Do you not know that you are Men, and that your reason was given you to
make you capable of serving your God with a reasonable service, (that is, a
ready, willing, and conscionable service.) And do you not know that he is
always present with you, and pondereth all your goings?

2. Do you not know you must shortly dye, and your Souls enter immediately into
an endless state of joy or sorrow, according as you dye, godly, or ungodly
Christians?

3. Does not God deserve infinitely more than your highest love, your best
obedience? The Heavens declare his glory, and may it become you to forget him,
and live to his dishonor?

Do you not admire the beauty and brightness of the starry Heaven, and will you
venture to lose all the glory and joy which dwells in the Heaven of Heavens,
for the transitory pleasures or profits of sin? O how much good might a few of
such questions (or speeches) do from a Gentleman's mouth upon his Tenants, or
Neighbors Souls.

4ly. Engage them in the reading of Scripture, and such Books as open and apply
the great truths and duties in it, as Bishop Taylor's Rules of Holy Living, the
Whole Duty of Man, Mr. Baxter's Books of Death and Judgment, or any other that
your Prudence and Piety shall think fit for them. Such private innocent
companions (I doubt not) have been a means of saving many a Soul. Engage them
also to a constant course of Prayer, by themselves, and with their Families:
for the often approaching to God in so holy a work (whether with a Book, or
without) will shame them from gross sins, and make them more serious in their
provisions for Eternity.

5. Do all you advise them to your selves, and be ready to do good to their
Bodies and Names, in any reasonable way, as well as to their Souls, and then
there is no doubt, but your good Examples, and good Counsels, may do them good.
And your labor (in all) will not be too much, in so great a work, as the
saving of Souls from the second Death.

My next work is to Exhort All in general, high and low, rich and poor, (one
with another.)

Surely, my Brethren, you had need be heedful to your selves, since Hell is
real; O consider your ways, and use all possible means to escape the Damnation
of Hell. I hope I shall not need to add any Motives to it, if you believe its
dreadfulness, and your own deservings; And as for Directions for it, the
following Section will supply you with them.

CHAP. IV. SECT. IV. Containing some Directions to escape Hell Torments.
Presupposition. THis part of my Discourse is designed for such (especially) as
are yet in the ready way to Hell, as common Swearers, Liars, Drunkards,
Sabbath Breakers, and such like, to which I may add our factious spightful
Professors, that mix (very wisely, as they think) their Malice, and their
Religion together; whose wicked spite against their Parish-Ministers is most
blessedly turned into a pure zeal for private Meetings: (abhorring Churches, as
profane places, and crying out, when the time and company is fittest, Down with
them, down with them, even to the ground) And in a word, Hypocrites,
Worldlings, careless and ungodly Persons. To such I now speak; and to them I
would give these following Advices, in order to the escaping of Hell Torments.

Romans 6. last verse. The wages of sin is Death, viz. Eternal Death or Damnation,
for to Eternal Life it is opposed in the verse) much more all your sins
together, with your obstinacy and impenitency in, and under them, etc. I say,
having considered your deservings, consider carefully the danger of your
present state of sin: O think a little, yea think much how uncertain your life
is, and how impossible it will be to escape Hell, if you dye in an unconverted,
unsanctified state, see Matthew. 18.3. Hebr. 12.14. and other places. And
withal, how intolerable its miseries will be to you, if for the love of sin
you be sent thither. The light afflictions of this World are greatly dreaded by
many, and carefully provided against by sober and prudent Men, How much more
should the extremity of endless Torments? O consider what it is to be for ever,
I say for ever, under the insupportable wrath of the great God, and whether the
utmost that sin can do for you, may rationally encourage you to run the hazard
of so great a misery? This is the first thing that I would advise you to in
this case; and if the escaping of everlasting misery be not a thing worthy of
our most serious thoughts that may tend that way, nothing in the World is; nor
will Men be apt to provide against a danger, till they see and consider the
reality and certainty of it, and the like.

of such sad matters, alas we cannot do it, we dare not do it; if we should
think much of such things, we are afraid it might make us mad. --



1. Whether there can be any more dreadful or damnable distraction than for a
man to follow his sins, and not consider his danger; to rebel against the King
of Heaven (wilfully and deliberately) and not to take time to consider what he
is doing, and which way he is tending? I think there can be no greater madness
than this (unless a greater degree of the same kind) and I hope, Reader, thou
art of the same opinion: it is sad to see a man, that is thus mad for his Soul,
to neglect it still, and plead that he does so for fear of being mad. O what
monstrous madness is this!

2. Whether thou would Reason at this rate in other matters of far smaller
moment? Suppose thou had passed through some infected houses (where the most
were dead of the Disease) and one say unto thee, Alas man, O how fearful is thy
case; consider the danger, and seek out for help; for those houses had the
Plague, and it is ten to one but thou art infected, etc. would thou reply I
dare not consider of it, lest the thoughts of my danger and death should dull
my Spirits, and make me Melancholy? And why should not men Reason so in such
cases, but that they less mind their Souls concerns than their Bodies?

3. Whether thy Reason was not given thee to consider of the state of thy Soul
in order to its eternal welfare? and whether God does not require thee to
consider thy ways (what they are, and what they tend to.) Hag. 1.5. Thus says
the Lord of Hosts, consider your ways: and Esaias 1.3. he complains that his
people did not consider. And can you think that it is the way to be mad to
consider of them, or that God will take away the use of your reason because you
use it according to his will and command?

A Caution. Yet think not of thy danger despairingly, nor draw any sadder
conclusions from the consideration of thy present state, than the Scripture
allows of. Say not I must needs be damned, because I am not yet in a state of
Salvation; or that thou must certainly go to Hell, because thou have been
hitherto in the way to it, etc. It Is not despairing of Salvation but returning
from thy sins that is the work thou have to mind: and if thou returnest in
Truth, as sure as there is a Hell, so surely thou shall escape it through the
Mercies of the Living God. Read for thy comfort Esaias 55.7.

These. 4.6. That no man go beyond or defraud his brother in any matter, for
the Lord is the Avenger of all such, as we also have forewarned you and
testified. Yea, this course has brought men to a hell here on earth: Spira, a
famous Gentleman of Cittadella, a Civil-Lawyer, who was almost a Miracle of
Spiritual misery, and breathed out Woes and Terrors to himself continually,
discovered the sad thoughts that he had of his former practices in that kind,
confessing his sin with a most sorrowful heart. His words are these, Spira 's
life, p. 3. lin. 1.
(translated) I was exceedingly covetous of money, and accordingly I applied my
self to the getting of it, corrupting justice by deceit, and inventing ways to
delude it; Good causes I either defended deceitfully, or sold them to the
Adversary perfidiously; Bad causes I maintained with all my might, opposing
often the known truth, etc. He saw, That money was too hardly earned, which was
gotten with the loss of Justice and Truth. Noverint universi, and caveant
universe.

a companion of fools (or wicked men that are notoriously such) shall be
destroyed, Prove. 13.20. These are likely to frustrate (as far as is possible)
the means of grace and Salvation to thy Soul, keeping thee from Hearing or
Reading or other duties when thou should be about them, and hardening thy
heart against God's fear. O how many that seemed very hopeful for Heaven a long
time, have yet at last been taken and overcome by this snare of the Devil, and
went to hell for company! shun them carefully as you love your souls, forsake
the foolish and live, Pr. 9.6. better leave them than perish with them.



The sinner's false hope removed.
1. Riches and Worldly prosperity. Some doubtless are willing to make this an
Argument of their escaping hell; Surely (they think) that God that is so good
to them now in this world as to give them the good things thereof in so great
abundance, will not be so hard to them as to send them to hell at last (though
they go on in sin, and hate to be reformed) they hope they may safely conclude
he will not press them with his fierce wrath hereafter, because he loadeth them
so much with his Benefits here. But how plausible soever such Reasonings may
seem at first view, I am sure they are not sound: for how can that be any sure
evidence of Salvation, which the worst in hell did sometime partake of? as,
Pharaoh, Herod, Nero, Julian, etc. These it is confessed were as Rich and Great
in the World as most men ever were, and yet we do not believe they are saved.
The Pope (good man) has wealth enough (if he could but think so) yet no
understanding Protestant will say, that therefore his Holiness must needs be a
Saint, and be Saved infallibly (because He is rich.)

2. Worldly Troubles and Crosses. As some hope to escape hell torments because
they are Rich and Prosperous, so others (on the contrary) hope so, because they
are Poor and Afflicted in the world: they have been poor and mean, and
despised, (a long time) and therefore since they have their hell here (as they
use to speak) they verily persuade themselves they are in no danger of hell
hereafter. -- And these men are just as wise as the former, or rather as vain;
for what place of Scripture says, that he that is poor and afflicted here,
shall therefore be saved hereafter, or that none who are such may ever perish,
or the like? Does it not threaten Damnation to the ungodly in general? or may
some of the ungodly be excused, because they are poor and afflicted? Are they
not so much the less excusable, if they will walk contrary to the Lord, when
his hand is heavy upon them? And therefore when you read that God will save the
poor, and the like, in the Book of Psalms, you must understand it either of the
poor in spirit, the humble and contrite-hearted Man, or else of the poor that
are sober, pious and peaceable, as well as poor.

3. Moral honesty in their common dealings with their Neighbors, freedom from
gross and scandalous sins, performing of outward duties of Religion, hearing at
Church, reading at home, etc. We do all this, say some, and therefore we do not
doubt, but we are delivered from Damnation. But (by their leaves) all this will
not prove it; for, in Matthew. 5.20. says Christ, Except your righteousness
exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, ye shall in no case
enter into the kingdom of Heaven. Now he that goes no farther than so, does not
exceed them in righteousness. That they were (many of them) honest in their
dealings, and free from scandalous sins, is so plain, that it may seem needless
to prove it; Ye are they that justify your selves before men, (speaking to
these People) Luke 16. Nor can we think our Savior would have spoken thus,
[the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees] if they had had no
righteousness at all, if they had been grossly unrighteous and abominable,
common Cheaters, Drunkards, Railers, or the like. And that they did use to
observe the outward visible duties of Religion is no less plain: We have
mention made of their Prayers and Alms, Mat. 6. and elsewhere. How strict were
they about the Sabbath? What a seeming zeal for the public worship was to be
found in them? They paid Tyth, so much as of Mint and Cummin, for the
maintenance of it. (which ye ought to have done, says Christ himself, if our
Malignants dare believe him) Mat. 23. These were some of the smallest matters
that were tythable, yea it was doubted by some whether they were tythable or
not; yet they for their part would be sure to pay them, lest they should seem
to rob God and Church, by withholding them. And more might be said, if need
were.



hypocrisy and iniquity within; like painted Tombs that have a beautiful
outside, but have nothing but dead Bones, and rottenness within them, which is
our Savior's comparison in the case. Matthew. 23.27, 28.

2. As they wanted a true Principle of Religion within, so they wanted the main
parts (and properties) of it; As first, true humility: How often soever they
fell upon their knees to pray, yet still they rose up with proud and haughty
hearts. We read how they affected the highest places, and would needs be called
by honorable names; yea, their pride was the main ground and original of their
religious services: They did them, that they might have glory of Men, (...),
etc. ( Mat. 6.2.) for that very end, that they might be honored of Men. That
was the great thing they designed in Prayer and Alms giving (for the hypocrites
in that place means the Pharisees, as Piscator, and others observe. Compare it
with the 23. of Matthew. 6, 13, 14, etc.) their Pride also made them hate and
scorn the plain Sermons and reproofs of Christ himself. See Luke 16. verse. 14.

2ly, They had no care to keep a good conscience toward God and Man in their
general course. Their Religion and love of God did not conquer the love of
Money: Yea, they made it a cloak for covetous practices: devouring Widows houses
under plause of devotion. Mat. 23. They were really covetous, Luke 16.14.
when they seemed most religious -- The Pharisees who were covetous --

3ly, They wanted a true valuation of Christ and his righteousness, and a true
relyance upon it for justification. Self-righteousness they knew was a real
thing, but for the imputed righteousness of the Son of God, it was but a
putative sanciful thing with them, as it is with the Papists, and some
Protestants amongst us that begin to Romanize in that point, and I hope will
get little credit by it. (If Mr. S. would be pleased to call in his Book, and
write a more Orthodox one instead of it, no honest Man would blame him for it.)
To the true Believer Christ is precious (that is, most precious) but the
Pharisees made light of him, and derided him, in Luke 16.14. Thus of the 4th.
Direction.

God in the use of all holy means for it. But above all things take heed you
mistake not in so great a concern, nor think your selves converted when it is
not so. Matthew. 18.3. Except ye be converted -- ye cannot enter into the kingdom
of Heaven. And surely if a Man cannot come to Heaven without it, he cannot
escape Hell without it neither. Now you must not think your selves converted
while you are predominantly in love with any wicked course whatsoever; or in
plainer English, while you count sin your liberty and privilege, and had
rather follow any way of wickedness than a way of real and universal
religiousness, if it were not for fear of the shame of the World, or the
damnation of Hell. Many, I doubt not, are religious, sober, civil, just, etc.
out of constraint, not willingly, and forbear gross sin more out of dread of
punishment, than out of any love to God, or obedient regard to his Will and
Law, serving God as the poor Indians did the Devil, viz. for fear lest
otherwise he should do them a mischief. And what do you think, is such service
worth? assuredly very little, or rather nothing in the sight of God; who sees
the principles of Men's works and services, and looks more upon the Bent of the
mind and will, than the matter of the work. Know thou the God of thy Father,
and serve him with a willing mind, 1 Chronicles. 28.9. A blockish, slavish,
unwilling service (when the work is done, which he had rather should not be
done) is fit only for a senseless Deity, or a dumb Idol, not for the high and
holy one. Believe it, you are not truly and savingly converted, till God and
holiness have the main disposition of your hearts and wills, till you had
rather have God in Christ for your everlasting portion to enjoy, than Honor and
Wealth, and all this World's good, (till then you are but Worldlings) till you
had rather walk in a way of holiness, than follow the most gainful Trade of
sin. As a false defrauding servant is never turned to be a true and faithful
servant, till he had rather be true and faithful to his Master, than to cheat
and defraud him. Pray therefore for your selves, as the Apostle for the
Thessalonians, that God would direct your hearts to his love, or (as our
Church) [that he would incline your hearts to keep his Law.]

Christ, search the Scriptures, and see how sufficient a Savior he is, how
able and willing to receive, and relieve returning sinners. Did he reject any
that were but truly willing to accept of him? Did he not come into the World to
save such? and complain that the People would not come unto him, that they
might have life? Them that come unto him (with true faith and repentance) he
will in no wise cast out, Joh. 6.37. O sinner, if thou will heartily forsake
the Devils drudgery, he will save thee from Hell, and all its damnation; If
thou turnest from every evil way, and give thy self up to him, relying wholly
upon his merit and righteousness, he will give thee acceptance in the sight of
his Father, and deliver thee from the wrath to come. 1 Thessalonians. 1. ult. So much
for the use of Direction.

I come now to one or two Uses more, and so shall put a period to my Discourse.

In the next place then, It may serve for our Instruction, and may teach us not
to envy at the prosperity of wicked Men, nor to judge Gods ways to be unequal,
because of their impunity (joined with final impenitency) in this present
World. No cause to judge so, when we consider that he has a Hell to punish
them in; for there the sinner shall have enough of sin, and such wages as is
suitable to his works (of iniquity). There the proud sinner shall be low
enough, the jovial sinner shall be sad enough, the sottish sinner be thirsty
enough, the Revengeful sinner have vengeance enough, the Damner and Sinker be
damned enough, and sink deep enough into the lake of fire. --

There they that tyrannized over pious Christians shall be insulted over by the
Devil, and be buffeted by the unclean Spirits; they that willingly forget their
God and Souls shall remember their sins whether they will or not: they that
made light of Christ and Sermons, shall be loaded (to the full) with wrath and
curses; and in a word they that grinn'd at godliness shall gnash their teeth at
their impieties. God, to whom vengeance belongs, will avenge himself upon
them, and punish them with everlasting destruction from his presence, 2 Thessalonians.
1.8, 9.

Lastly, Let me hence add a word to the godly in general; let them be exhorted
to grow (more and more) 1. In Grace and holy obedience; for what love, what
service, what obedience can ever be suitable to that goodness of God which
saves them (through Christ) from the everlasting punishment their sins deserve?
We may well exhort them to all holy duties, by the mercies of God, Romans 12.1.
They can never do too much for his Glory, that has done so much for their
Salvation, for he will give them eternal Life, and they shall never perish,
Joh. 10.

2. In comfort and spiritual joy: Rejoice in the Lord always, says the Apostle
to such, Phil. 4.1. Christ is their all-sufficient Savior, and they shall
surely be saved from wrath through him, Romans 5.9. why should any worldly
Troubles trouble them overmuch, since they shall have none in the world to
come? Death can do no more than rot them, and hell no more than fright them.
Rejoice therefore, O faithful Christian, and give thanks at the remembrance of
the goodness of thy God; the joy of the Lord is thy strength, O let it be thy
work too. Yea, most certainly, it shall be so at the coming of Christ to
judgment. He will then receive thee to himself: Joh. 14.3. His love shall then
be stronger than death, and conquer the last enemy for thee. Thou shall be
filled with Joy and Glory, when the wicked shall have their fill of shame and
sorrow; and shall be accepted graciously with him, when all the enemies of his
Holiness shall be banished from his Presence, and be buried alive in
everlasting fire. -- And now bless the Lord, O my Soul, for all his gracious
Providence, and, in special, for all his gracious Assistances in this small
Work! --

-- Say not This Work thy Hand to End has brought,
Or This thy Labor has attained unto;
Say rather thus: This God by me has wrought,
He Is Author of that little Good I do.
To Him be Glory for ever and ever.

FINIS.

