A COMMENT Upon the Two Tales OF OUR ANCIENT, RENOWNED, and EVER-LIVING POET
Sr JEFFRAY CHAVCER, Knight.

Who, For his Rich Fancy, Pregnant Invention, and Present Composure, deserved
the Countenance of a PRINCE, and his Laureat Honor.

The MILLER'S TALE, AND The WIFE of BATH.

Addressed and Published by Special Authority

LONDON, Printed by W. Godbid, and are to be Sold by Peter Dring at the Sun in
the Poultrey near the Rose-Tavern. 1665.

Ex dono RICARDI ATTWOOD A. M. COLL. SOC. 1734.

Collegium Siv^^lula Marice de Valentia communiter nuncupata Pembroke Hall,


TO THE HIGHLY HONORED, AND NOBLY ACCOMPLISHED, Sr JOHN WINTOUR, SECRETARY OF
STATE TO HER SACRED MAJESTY, THE QUEEN MOTHER; A LOYAL SUBJECT TO HIS
SOVEREIGN, A FAITHFUL SERVANT TO HIS COUNTRY, A RESOLUTE SUFFERER FOR BOTH; R.
B.

HIS MOST DEVOTIONAL SERVITEURE PRESENTS THESE ILLUSTRATIONS, PRIMARILY
INTENDED, and PURPOSELY PUBLISHED, FOR ENTERTAINMENT OF RETIRED HOURS.

This Comment was an Assay, whereto the Author was importuned by Persons of
Quality, to complete with Brief, Pithy, and Proper Illustrations, Suitable to
such Subjects.

A Commentary upon Chaucer's Prologue to his Millers Tale.
WHen that the knight, etc.
Our Famous and ever-living Chaucer, having in his Knight's Tale expressed the
sweet Comical passages of constant Love, covertly shadowed under the persons of
Palamon and Arcite Corrivals in their Love to Emely: Our merry Host, infinitely
delighted with the Pleasure of that Story, desires to have these Tales
continued, as the Task was at first by him contrived.

Unbokled is the male, etc.
A familiar and proper kind of Speech, implying how their Wits being now set a
work, and the Male of their Conceits unbokled, none should be so unsociably
retired, as to ingross his Conceits to himself, and not have them discovered.

Now tells Sir Monk, etc.
He gives the Monk pre-eminence; but the drunken Miller admits of no such
precedence: his Drink frees him from all Monastic reverence.

But in Pilates voice he began to cry,
And swore, etc.
Here he describes to life the humor of a Drunkard; Fearful Oaths are ever the
overflows of full Pots.

Our host saw that he was dronken of
And said, abide Robin leve brother, (ale
A pleasant contest betwixt our Host and the Miller; whom he first mildly
labors to persuade, but when no reason will prevail, he concludes,

-- Tell on a devil way
Thou art a fool, thy wit is overcome.
Wherein the Host discovers his anger, and in a passionate manner gives way to
his humor.

Now herketh quoth. the Miller, all and
But first I make a protestacion (some,
That I am drunk, etc.
The Miller makes strong Liquor his Apology, purposely to procure more
attention, and incur less offense: For true was his observation in Assayes of
this nature:

In telling tales, unless the truth we smother,
In pleasing one, we may displease another.
Right cautious are we then to be of the nature and humor of the hearer, and to
peruse him, before we disclose our selves unto him.

-- If I mispeake or say (pray
Wite it the Ale of Southwarke, I you
Like a true Ale-stake, he tells you where the best Ale is; and this was made
good long ago, as may appear by that overworn Proverb,

The nappy strong Ale of Southwrike
Keeps many a Gossip fra the Kirk.
He proceeds to the Argument of his Tale, in these words,

For I woll tell a Legende and a Life
Both of a Carpenter and his wife etc.
This is the Subject which must give life to his Tale: But entering into more
free discourse of the Lightness of the Carpenter's Wife, and the Carpenter's
disgrace, he is interrupted by the Reve in these words,

The Reve answered and said stint thy clap, etc.
This Reve being of the same Profession, cannot endure to hear a Carpenter
defamed upon any condition. He taxes him for laying such infamy on men's Wives.

Whose spotless Honor is their highest treasure,
And whose good name once lost, is lost for ever.
This dronken Miller spoke full sone again
And said, leve brother Dswold,
Who has no wife is no Cockold.
He proves that the Husband's Crest is in his Wifes Curtsie; and to allay his
fury, he confesses freely that there are many good Wives, amongst which, the
Reve's Wife may be one, for ought he knows of.

To demen of my self that I am one,
I woll beleve that I am none.
This agrees well with that Tenet, which applied seasonably, may afford a
sovereign Receipt to Jealousy: It is better to be one, and think him none,
than to be none, and think him one. The old Bard could sing as much:

More blithe that Cockold looks, who thinks him none,
Than he who ne'xe was one, yet thinks him one.
An husband should not be inquisitife
Of Gods privete, ne of his wife.
An excellent Rule of direction, including a twofold Precept. First, Not to pry
too curiously into the secret Cabinet of God's Divine Will. Secondly, Not to be
too jealously inquisitive after the Actions of his Wife. For the former, as it
is an Argument of too daring presumption; so the later, of weakness and
indiscretion.

What should I more say, but this Miller
He nolde his word for no man forbere, etc.
Here our ingenious Chaucer displays the Frontless boldness of a Rustic. On he
will go with his Tale in spite of all opposition. In the end, our Poet, out of
a native and free-bred Modesty, as one doubtful, lest some passages might
offend the chaste ear of a modest hearer, he directs him to other historical
Tales, plenteously stored with singular Precepts of Morality; which, together
with his own Apology, he expresses in these Lines, and so weaves up his
Prologue.

-- UUhoso list it not to here
Turn over the lefe, and chose another Tale.
A Comment upon the Miller's Tale.
WHilom there was dwelling in Oxenford
A rich gnofe, etc.
It gives no less life than probable light to any Story, to make mention of
the Place, Person, Profession, with other Circumstances concurring. This
induced our Poet here, as elsewhere throughout all his Tales, to express such a
place where his Scene is formed, such persons to whose condition his Discourse
is fitted, with all such passages, by which the conceit of the Reader might
become artfully entangled, his expectance pleasantly deceived, and the Plot at
which he aimed, and by which he was directed, cunningly closed. You are to
observe then, that the Scene here, is laid in Oxford; in which Shire, our Poet
was born and educated, and by Rich. 2. with the Manor of Newholme, in the same
County endowed.

A rich gnofe.
A rich grub, or miserable Caitiff, as I render it; which interpretation, to be
proper and significant, I gather by the sense of that ancient Meter,

The Catiff Gnof sed to his Crew,
My Meney is many, my incomes but few.
This, as I conceive, explains the Author's meaning; which seems no less
seconded by that ancient English Bard.

That Gnof, that Grub, of Pesants blude,
Had store of Goud, yet did no good.
Howsoever, we are to suppose him to be a Lodger or Tabler of Scholars and
other Artists, for their Chamber and weekly Commons; as he shows after.

With him there was dwelling a poor Scholar.
This Poor, has been an Epithete (it seems) for Scholars in all Ages; but
especially for Astrologers, of which profession this Scholar was, who spend so
much time upon Experiments and Conclusions, and make such a pudder about Jacobs
Staff, as they never leave, till they get a Scrip to it, and so make up a
beggarly conclusion.

If that men asken him in certain hours
When the men should have drought or shouers.
He professed certain (but most uncertain) conjectural notions of Weather, and
so probably he might, having (as may be supposed) an Almanac in his bones, by
the long familiarity he had with his Hostess Alyson, the Carpenter's Wife.
Howsoever; it may well appear, that albeit he could judiciously prognosticate
of seasons, and by turning of the Weathercock, gather where the wind was: It
was but ill wind to him; for it blew him no good.

A chamber he had in that hostelrie,
Alone, withouten any company,
Full tetously dight, etc.
Here he describes his Chamber and Furniture; with the privacy he enjoyed, to
make his Studies more successfully fortunate, according to that of the Poet,

TO improve their knowledge, those who have desire,
Must learn to leave themselves, and to retire.
Whence we may ground, that retirement is the best means for improvement of
knowledge.

And he hemself as sweet as is the rote
Of Licores, or of any Cete wall.
Here he glanceth wittily at the delicacy or effeminate privacy of this
Scholar: From whence he descends to the too accurate disposing or shelving of
his Books, his Augur stones, with other mysterious Appendices of his seldom
practiced Art. Likewise, to his Press or Wardrobe, where his Clothes were
curiously folded, his Table with Stammel, or some other Carpet, neatly covered,
with his Psaltery, or Instrument of Music hanging at his Bed-head, to give
himself and the Family delightful Melody. This he fits with a Song, to make his
Music more complete, himself more admired, and his Suit by his Hostess better
accepted. Thus spun our young Astrologer out his time; thus spent he his coin,
the yearly Pension which his Friends allowed him.

This Carpenter had wedded new a wife.
An unequal Marriage; frosty Age and Youth cannot suit together. This disparity
in years, begets a distraction in their affections: Suspicious he is of her
youth, and no less conscious of his own debility; both which (like speedy
harbingers) make ready way for Jealousy.

He knew not Cato: for his wit was rude,
That bad men wed his similitude.
This was not only the advice of Cato, but both of Pittacus, and that Cynick
Diogenes, who on a time, being solicited by a young man, for his best counsel
or advice touching his Marriage, wished him to go forth into the streets, where
the very Children would direct him in his choice: Like will to like.

Fair was this young wife, and therewithal
Is any Wisele her body gentle and small.
Here he descants on the beauty of this young Bride.

So small her Wast, as Nature made small wast.
So sung our modern Poet, which agrees well with his Description: He compares
her body to a Weesle, of all other creatures, smallest, sleakest, and
straightest. After this, he goes to describe her Apparel; which suits so well
with the artless curiosity of that time, as every Line finds out one native
Ornament to grace and beautify her Attire. Her Seint studded, or Girdle,
barred with Silk; her Barm-cloath, or Partlet, as white as morrow milk; her
embroidered Smock, her Colere of cole black Silk; the Capets or Tassels of her
white Uolupere, Gorget or Stomacher, suited to the same color; her fillet of
Silk, and set full high.

And sikerly, she had a likerous eye.
The eye is called Love's Dart. A wandering Eye discovers the affection of the
heart. It seldom roams abroad, but it either takes, or is taken. What an Index
is to a Book, is the Eye to the mind.

Full small ipulled were her brows two,
And they were bent, and black as any slo.
The Brow is the Beacon of Fancy. A bent Brow implies a sovereignty or command
of Affection. A black brow, constancy of resolution.

She was much more blisful for to see,
Then is the new Perigenet tree, etc.
Here he sets forth the Amiableness of her person in sundry proper and familiar
resemblances; wherein first, he Metonemically compares the cheerfulness of her
countenance to the Peregenet-tree, for the fruit of that Tree. Secondly, The
softness of her Skin, and tenderness of flesh, being that Euryale praised in
her Ulysses, to Weatherwool; the Luster of her complexion to Danaes Tower; the
clearness of her voice to a Swallow; her nimbleness to a Kid; the sweetness of
her breath to Braket or Methe, or Apples laid in hay; her wantonness to a Colt;
her goodly proportion and presence, to a Maste; her straightness, to a Bolt.
From these, he descends to such Ornaments as she usually wore; which (no doubt)
received more grace from her, than she from them. With a Broch as broad as the
Boss of a Buckler, was she adorned; with shoes or Sandals laced: In a word, she
was a Primrose, a peerless Paragon, a Pigges nigh, a Bedfellow for any Lord, a
Spouse for a good Yeoman. All this is so fully, freely, and familiarly expressed
by him, as it shall need no farther illustration.

Now sir, and eft sir, so bifel the caas
That one day this hend Nicholas
Fell with this young wife to rage and pley
While that her husband was at Oseney.
Opportunity is the Bay or Port of Fancy; many storms and billows did this
amorous Scholar incessantly suffer; sundry rubs and oppositions did he
encounter; before Opportunity wafted him to this long-expected harbor. At
Oseney; an ancient Abbey, distant scarce half a mile west from Oxford; seated
in a Vale no less fruitful, than delightful, whose very Bells were formerly
famous, in our old English Catches. To this Oseney was our Carpenter gone,
leaving his Inmate Astronomer at home, to turn over his Books, and try whether
the Sign were in Aries or no. Much water goes by the Mill, which the Miller
little knows on; and some Chips must be cut by the Scholar, which our Carpenter
little wots on. To be short, as Fancy cannot endure to be long; Our youthful
Boorder boords his amorous Hostess, and that so familiarly, as it requires a
Curtain, for the love of Modesty. Passionate are his Enter-breaths;
affectionate his Protests; intimate his Love; desperate his Life; if he may not
enjoy what he seems only to love, and without which, he desires not any longer
to live. But relentless she seems, howsoever she means.

She said, I woll not kiss thee by my faie,
Why let be, quod she, let be Nicholas,
Or I woll cry out, harrow and alaas, etc.
True is that Maxim;

Follow Love, and she will fly you;
Fly your Love, and she will come nigh you.
How far will some young Wenches seem from taking, when they are most taken?
What a weak kind of wrestling they will use? What an easy resistance they will
make? What a pattering with their Lips, as if they would cry out?

But our experienced youths do little fear them,
For if they cry, they will cry that none may hear them.
But quite another course takes this our Nicholas; what he cannot win by a
violent Assault, he hopes to obtain by an easy Parley: Nor is he frustrate of
his hopes, having prevailed as he expected.

This Nicholas began mercy for to cry,
And spoke so fair, and proffered her so fast
That she her love granted him at last.
This argued our Hostess Alysons good Nature, who would not be won by violence,
but by a more easy and affectionate temper. She confirms her self his, and
swears by S. Thom. of Kent (an usual Oath in those days) that she will be at
his command: Provided, that Opportunity prevent all occasion of Jealousy, to
which infectious Jaundise her husband was infinitely subject.

Nay thereof care ye not, quod Nicholas.
Alyson's consent quickens Nicholas conceit: it rests now, that he contrive
some plot, that he may with more convenience branch the Carpenter's Pate. She
accords to his device, and gives way to whatsoever he shall work. This, as it
was their first amorous encounter, they express their mutual love in
Lip-labor, hopeful promises of a succeeding favor: So the Poet observes:

Who knows not, Lips are gates to those that woo?
Which freely open, grant farther entrance too.
This Curtsie he requites with a pleasant new Tune on his Psaltery. Thus cheers
she his Lip with her Kiss, he, her Ear with his Melody.

Than fell it thus, that to the parish Cherch
(Christ's own woorks for to werch)
This good wife went on an holy day;
Her forhede shone, etc.
Here he turns aside from the former subject he had in hand, and enters into
another discourse; wherein, he first tells you of our Hostess repair to the
Church; but in so trim and neat a dress, as by all probability she resorts
rather to see and be seen, than hear and be taught; for fashion, than devotion:
Afterward, he descends to speak of the beauteous feature, and curious attire
of the Parish-Clerk, Absolon.

Now was there of the chirch a parish clerk,
The which that was cleped Absolon,
Troule was his here, etc.
In this description he glanceth at the pride of the Clergy; showing how vanity
began to strut within the Walls of a Monastery. For if a poor Parish-Clerk must
be so curiously dressed, as to have his hair curled, and so womanishly
disheveled, his eyes so effeminately pilled, his shoes artificially carved,
and in all points so completely accoutred; what may we think of those, whose
Revenues were greater, places higher, and whose persons, in the eye of the
world, more popular? Such Poets, these corrupter times require, to tax our
Clergy boldly, where such who should be exemplary Practicers and Professors of
humility, become too much Admirers of Apish Formality, and too serious
followers of these shadows of Vanity.

But such witty Evasions have some of these, as I never see any of them, but
they put me in mind of the pregnant and present Answer of that Sprusado to a
Judge in this Kingdom, a rigid Censor of men's habits; who seeing a neat Finical
Divine come before him in a Cloak lined through with Plush, thus encountered
him: Sir, You never read that Paul ever went in a Plush Cloak. But I read, My
Lord, said he, that Paul left his Cloak at Troas, and whether that Cloak was
lined through with Plush, or no, it is more (my word) than either you or I know.

For to point at some of these both in Diet and Habit; in stead of Locusts and
Wild Honey, they must (good men) content themselves with Lobsters, Crammed
Capons, and Coney; and for Raiments of Camels hair, Damask Cassocks down to
their heels; and for Leathern Girdles about their Loins, Formal Fashes, or
Apostolical, Canonical Roses, to enamour their Loves; with Downie Cushions for
their knees, in their rare, short and sweet Orisons to their Lord: But too
tedious are such tasks for fat bellies. We will go on with our Tale.

A merry child he was, so God me save,
Well coud he let blood, clip, and shave,
In twenty manner coud he trip and dance.
An excellent description of a Parish Clark; it seems he was a jovial boy; and
left his too loose or irregular conversation might bring him to a deprivation,
and so exclude him from the benefit of his Profession, he initiates himself
sufficiently in other Trades: He can play the Barber-surgeon, in cases of
necessity; and keep a dancing School to show feats of his activity; he can play
the Musician too, and make Taverns and Tap-houses resound with his melody.

This Absolon, that was joly and gaie,
Goes with a Censer on a Sundaie,
Censyng the wives of the parish fast
And many a lovely look on hem he cast,
And namely on this Carpenters wife, etc.
A fit person for such a personal employment: He carries a Censer for Cupid's
Altar. Many Objects he eyes; sundry amiable presentiments he views; yet
comparing them with this matchless Alyson, he holds them all inferior beauties
below comparison.

And Absolon his Geterne had itake
For Paramours he thought for to wake,
And forth he gooth jolly and amerous
Till he came to the Carpenters house.
Long and tedious had this task been to Absolon, had he bestowed it upon his
devotion. Love's watchful eyes may be properly compared to those three
Hesperian Sisters; their Portels are never closed, but ever vigilant to prevent
an intrusive Rival. Now are we to suppose him mounting the Carpenter's Wall,
where, directly under the beauteous Alyson's window, who lay closely locked in
the unweldy arms of her jealous husband: He chants out some amorous Roundelay,
to which he tunes his melodious Gittern. Long had he not warbled in this
manner, till the Carpenter awakes out of his Leaden slumber.

This Carpenter awoke, and heard him sing,
And spoke unto his wife, and said anon
What Alyson, here is thou not Absolon, etc.
Hourly fears, daily frights, and incessant cares beget broken sleeps, short
rests, and disquiet dreams. The Carpenter's head lay on so hard a pillow,
being, as he thought, stuffed with horn-shavings, as his sleeps could not be
long. He awakes his Alyson, who, perhaps, was awake before he called her.

And she answered her husband therewithal,
Yes God wot John, I here it every dele.
Notably did he express the effects of Fancy, who sung thus;

The Effects of powerful love, do best appear,
When passion feeds the Eye, and fills the Ear.
How our Alyson's affection was seated, or her senses sated, might hence be
probably gathered: Like a second Dulcina, she seeming slept, but did not sleep;
heard, yet would not hear. A favorable Gloss would interpret thus: She was
loath to disquiet her diseased husband, or put a disgrace on this amorous
Clark; this (as may be well imagined) begot in her a resolved silence. Nor will
Absolon, though he receive small comfort in his suit, omit the least
opportunity for Alyson's sake. He wooeth her incessantly, walks all the night
long constantly, kembs his Locks curiously, price and prayer intercede for him
powerfully, he vows to become her servant (in those days a rare kind of
Complement) he quavers in his musical Aires melodiously, he sends her Pyment,
Methe, Wafers, and choicest Spices, to win her love with presents of delicacy;
he shows her proofs of his Activity, and in Theatral actions personates Herod
in his Majesty.

But what avails him, as in this caas
She loved so, this hende Nicholas
That Absolon may blow the Bucks horn etc.
All his labor is but in vain; fruitless are all these tasks; to no purpose
his late watchings. These are but as if he strived to make the Blackamore
white: This our Poet confirms with an usual Proverb in those days.

Full sooth is this Proverb, it is no lie,
Men say right thus, always the night fly
Makes the far leaf.
As if he should say, Daily company passes holiday love. Absolon has too
strong a Corrival of Nicholas, to prevail in his purchase. Long familiarity
strengthened with domestic acquaintance, has so firmly cemented their
affections, as all this trim Clark's Rhetoric cannot dissolve it. Now is it
high time for them to address themselves for their project.

And so bifell it on a Saterdaie
This Carpenter was gone to Osnaie.
It may seem that he was Carpenter to the Abbey, by his usual resort thither:
as sundry other Artificers were constantly retained, and by a yearly Pension
tied, to repair any such ruins or decaies, as casually befell in the Abbey.

This Nicholas no longer would tarry,
But does full soft unto his chamber carry
Both meat and drink etc.
Nicholas becomes his own Purveior, and has now betaken himself to his Chamber,
to devise some plot to deceive the Carpenter, and possess him of his dearest
Paramour. Private he must be; and retired, and as one with an ecstasy
surprised, lie gaping as if he were Planet-struck. Directions to this purpose
are given to his Alyson, that the Plot may draw on to a fairer conclusion. All
Saturday Nicholas mues himself up in his Chamber, where he bestows the day in
his repast or repose; and so continues on in this his pleasant restraint till
Sunday night: Which long restraint of Nicholas Liberty, drives our simple
Carpenter into a mavelous perplexity.

This selie Carpenter has great merbeile
Of Nicholas, or what thing might him eile,
And said: I am a drad by S. Thomas
It stondeth not aright with Nicholas.
He is now grown as jealous of Nicholas life, as he was before of his Alyson's
Love. First, By falling into consideration of Man's frailty, he fears that he
died suddenly: And this he holds more probable, by recalling to mind a
Spectacle of Mortality which he had lately seen.

I saw to day a corse born to cherche
That now on monday last I saw him werche.
This confirms him in his fear: Longer he will not debate the matter; forthwith
he must be resolved what is become of Nicholas, of whose safety he becomes so
suspicious. One then must be directed, and sent to his Chamber, to see what is
acted.

Go up (quoth he unto his knave) anon
Cleape at his door, and knock fast with a stone.
On goes this rude Usher, to observe his Master's command: He cries shrilly,
knocks stoutly, presses him to answer boldly; but Nicholas, as one taken with
a Fit of Astrology, resolves him with silence. At last, lest he should leave
his Master still in suspense, and so procure his displeasure, he seeks about
till he finds an hole or passage, where a Cat used to creep in; where he pries
like a Cat for a Mouse.

Till at the last he had of him a sight,
This Nicholas sat gaping ever upright,
As he had keyked on the new moan.
Here plays Nicholas the part of a profound Astronomer; and h'as one trick
above Ela, wherein none of all his fellow-consorts or Astronomical Professants
can ever come near him: For he by help of his prospective glass, can distinctly
and apparently discover all the starry Regiment quite through the Roof of his
Chamber. Howsoever, doubtless he gapes for some preferment, or else to make an
Asterisme of his mouth, where some Constellation or other may certainly fix.
This could not choose but beget a wonderful amazement in this pitiful Spy.

Adowne he goes, and told his master sone
In what array he saw this ylke man.
This increased the number of his distracted fears, as may appear by the
sequel: for presently upon return of this sad relation,

This Carpenter to blissen him began
And said: now help us saint Frideswide.
A Saint in those days usually invoked, when any one was either blasted,
bewitched, or by a spirit haunted. Diverse are his conceits of Nicholas;
sometimes he thinks that his much study has made him mad; other sometimes,
that he labors of some other Malady, and that now he is struck into a
dangerous Ecstasy, which requires some present remedy. Amidst these various
doubts and distempered fears, far more wisely than could be well expected from
the conceit of such an Headpiece, he imputes the cause of this distemper to
his too curious search or enquiry after Gods Secrets.

I thought aye well how it should be,
Men shoulden not know of Gods privete etc.
This he confirms with a late Accident.

Right so fer'de another clerk with astronomy,
He walked into the fields for to pry
Upon the sterre, to wete what should befall,
Till he was in a marlpit yfall.
Columella observes, that man of all other Creatures, has one Muscle to erect
his Eye upward, whereas others are depressed, and haled downward; yet this was
not given him to eye that which is concealed from him. We are so to admire the
Creature, as in it we adore the Creator: We are so to bestow the Eye of our
outward man, as we darken not our inward light: For by fixing our Eyes too
intentively on Objects of Secrecy, we may justly fear, lest we should be
consumed by the Beams of his Glory. It is a good Lesson which that Sage so
seriously recommended to his Scholars; Be not wise overmuch; lest ye become
ignorant in that which you should know most. But little needed our Carpenter
fear the depth of study in his Astronomer. A better course therefore he
resolves of; and that is to cudgel him out of his humor, and so cure this
threatening distemper.

Get me a staff.
Madness must be cured by Correction, and spare Diet. Spare, did the Carpenter
think, were Nicholas's Commons; albeit, he had better provision in his
Knap-sack, than he knew of. He means therefore to correct his humor on the one
side with Bombasting, as the Patient on the other side had practiced on himself
by Fasting.

He shall out of his studieng, as I guess,
And to the chamber door he began him dress.
Though Nicholas might justly commence an action of forcible Entry against his
unruly Host, where he was Farmer, during the Lease of his Chamber; seeing his
door raised from the Hasps, his deep studies disturbed, his Astronomical
slumber disquieted, and all things topsie-turvy turned, yet would not he budge
a foot, but like one made up in Wainscot,

This Nicholas sat as still as any stone,
And ever gaped upward into the eire etc.
This troubles John Carpenter more than all the rest; who verily thinks that he
is either fallen into despair, and therefore, like a discreet Monitor, puts him
in remembrance of some devout meditation, by awaking him from that Lethargy or
amazed distraction. Or else, that he is forespoken, or blasted by some ill
Spirit, which makes him use his Charm to cure this mischance.

I crouch the from elves, and from wicked wights;
Therewith the night spell he said anon rights,
On four halves of the house about,
And on the dreshfold of the door without.
Here he repeats the Night-charm used in those days, when they shut their
doors at night, and opened them in the morning: Confirmed by that old Sylvane
Charm,

Fawns and Fairies keep away,
While we in these Coverts stay;
Goblins, Elves, of Oberon's Train,
Never in these Plains remain,
Till I and my Nymph awake,
And do hence our Journey take,
May the Nightmare never ride us,
Nor a fright by night betide us:
So shall Heavens praise sound as clear,
As the shrill voyc'd Chantecleer.
Scarcely could Nicholas keep his countenance, when he heard the Carpenter run
so glib with his Spells: But having indentted with his Face, not to blush, with
his Eye, to look up, and his Tongue, to be mute; with a constant boldness, a
fixed amazedness, and a resolved silence, he performs his Plot, that at night he
may enjoy his Place.

And at the last this hende Nicholas
Began for to sike sore, and sain alas,
Shall all this world be lost?
Now is Nicholas awaked out of his Trance, and to the Carpenter's great grief,
discovers what he has seen in his Astronomical Dream. Which, at first, his Host
seems to slight, wishing him to think on God.

This Nicholas answered, fetch me drink,
And after woll I speak in privete
Of certain things, that touches the and me.
Though Nicholas's Vision was moist, his mouth was dry; down goes the Carpenter
to quench the Astronomer's thirst; and now returning with a large Quart of
mighty Ale, that might compare with Stingo, for it would cut a Feather, they
tossed the Cannikin lovingly one to another: Which done, and having set the
Carpenter by him; Nicholas begins; yet before he has well entered into his sad
Story, the door being first shut, he solemnly swears his Host to keep counsel
in a secrecy of such high consequence; for should he discover what he imparted,
his light discovery would be thoroughly revenged.

Nay Christ it forbid for his holy blood,
Quoth tho this sely man, I am no blabbe etc.
Now he begins to give better ear to this heavy relation; and vows to be
secret, upon any condition.

Now John (quoth Nicholas) I woll not lie
I have yfounden in mine Astrologye etc.
A deep red Youth, and such an one as will not stick to belie his knowledge,
rather than want Admirers. Amongst those then may he be well numbered, who
pretend a familiar knowledge to all the Houses of Heaven, and yet can scarce
pay house-rent for their own. See how his Banks overflow! He discovers the time
of this dangerous Deluge to a minute. The Rain which fell at Noah's Flood, was
but an April shower to this Inundation: Within one hour must the whole World be
drowned, only those few saved, which by his rare and mysterious Art are
preserved. The weakly-credulous Carpenter believes him; having never seen the
Bow in the Clouds, or never heard for what Token of Covenant it was given.

Thus shall mankind drenche, and lose her life,
This carpenter answered and said, alas my wife!
And shall she drenche? Alas mine Alysoun etc.
There is nothing perplexeth him so much as the loss of his dear Alyson. Pity
it were, thinks he, that so pretty a Morsel of flesh should go the way of all
Fish. So as never till now begins he to provide for his own safety, Wife, and
Family.

-- Is there no remedy in this caas?
As if he should say, Alas, my learned Guest Nicholas, must we be all meat for
Haddocks? No remedy? no means of safety? Alas, for my self I care not so much;
for I have the one foot in the grave already; I am not a man long for this world:
But that my Alyson, who is in the very flower and prime of her time, the very
Daisie and Honey-suckle of her time, that she should become Provender for a
Seahorse, or lodge in the Guts of a Whale, it would make any ones heart yern
within him, that has any man's blood in him. Besides, for her Age, she may have
many pretty Chips when I am gone. O then, good Guest Nicholas, provide for her
safety, if not for mine. Who knows not, but if you two can agree, she may be
meat for you, when I am Wormsmeat. Thus might the poor Carpenter seem to have
expostulated with his learned Astronomer; as one desirous to receive some small
comfort from this profound Artist, which might minister a remedy in cases of
such urgent necessity: and afford to his Alyson (whom he preferred before all
his Family) some promising hopes of safety.

Is there no remedy?
Yes, yes, full good (go hende Nicholas)
Now begins he to lay his Lime-twigs more cunningly: He gives the deluded
Carpenter directions how to prevent this imminent danger: He repeats unto him
the story of Noah's deliverance. Nothing is to be undertaken rashly, without
serious advice and deliberation; yet in regard both of the apparency aand
imminency of that danger, he advises him to take some speedy course, that the
peril may be seasonably prevented, and their safeties procured.

This asks have, and of an hasty thing
Men may not preche, ne make tarying;
Anon go get us fast into this inn
A kneding trow, or else a kemelin,
For each of us.
Here must the Carpenter be sent his Errand: He must provide Materials for his
security. Though every Tub be to stand upon his own bottom, every one must not
strike on his own Tub. Thus is this Carpenter appointed to become Purveyor
against this great Deluge. And Love makes all tasks light; for, not the fear of
death, but the Love of his dear Alyson, which he preferred before his own life,
quickens his wind-gall'd feet, to prevent all occasion of fear. But this dark
and mysterious Artist Nicholas, advises him withal, that in no case he
discover this secrecy, either to his man Robin, or his maid Gille; for they
are barred by name from all hope of safety: Neither is it sitting that he
should be too inquisitive touching Gods privacies, touching the preservation of
some, and subversion of others. Let it suffice him, that these means are
provided for the deliverance of himself and his Alyson.

Go now thy way.
The Troughs now are to be provided, and sufficiently victualled, with Hatchets
to cut them down from the roof where they are to be tied, when the Flood has
once entered. A passage too must be made for these mavelous Barges through the
main Wall into the Garden.

Than shall thou swim as merry I undertake
As does the white ducke after her drake.
A proper and familiar comparison. Two especial inducements there were which
moved this careful Carpenter to address him to his laborious Task: The first
was, Security. The Second, Sovereignty.

Light is that Labor which may safety bring,
In doubtful acts, fear's an ingenious thing.
That the Carpenter likewise aspired to Sovereignty, might be probably gathered
by that comfortable hope of an universal Monarchy, which Nicholas suggested to
him.

And than we shall be Lords all our life
Of all the world, as was Noe and his wife.
This sets the Carpenter upon his Pantofles; while the Learned Clerk Nicholas
advises him by all means, that when every one is to enter into their
Roof-trough or Kimelyn, none speak one to another, but with a constant and
reserved silence remain as still as the Night. John must not speak to his
Alyson, nor Alyson to her John. Besides, these Kneading Tubs must be divided by
equal distance one from another. Thus is the Plot contrived, and no less
successefully continued. The Carpenter's Credulity promises a fair issue to
this Torrent of Astronomy.

This ordinance is said, go god the speed,
Tomorow at night, when men ben all a sleep,
Into our kneding tubbs woll we creep.
Love will creep where it cannot go. Dark and straight is that Crany, through
which Love cannot find out a way. By this, you may collect, how the Carpenter
has his Commission sealed, his Pasport granted, and all things facilitated for
so terrible an Occurrent.

This sely carpenter goth forth his way
Full often he said alas, and welaway,
And to his wife he told his privete,
And she was ware, and knew it bet than he.
Notwithstanding his great have, he will take so much time, as to impart this
Secrecy to his dearest Alyson; who, as she was known to the Plot, conjures him
by all those Professions of Love which he had ever vowed her, to follow the
Advice of their Learned Guest: She cunningly aggravates all those seeming
occasions of Fear, which wrought strongly enough already on the Carpenter's
Imagination, so as it little needed any re-impression.

This sely carpenter begins to quake,
Him thinks verily that he may se
Does flodde come waltring as the sea etc.
Such strange effects works a possessed fear. He considers not the
improbability of this Relation, but seemingly apprehends the present approach
of this Fanatical Deluge, with all those menacing dangers which accompany it:
Yet must not this fear foreslow, but accelerate his dispatch. The three Tubs
are provided, Victuals purveyed, and these necessary Storehouses in the Roof
reared. Besides, that all things might be with more secrecy carried, Robin and
Gylle are removed, and to London upon a sleeveless Errand directed.

And on the mondy, when it drow to night,
He shette his door, without candel light,
And dresed all thing, as it should be
And shortly clomben up all three.
He had purposely fixed sundry Rings or wooden Pins, by which, as by stairs or
stalks they might climb into their Tubs: Where, with a constant and continued
silence, they lay closely immured; while the Carpenter lay trembling and
shaking, hourly expecting this fearful Inundation: But Nicholas and Alyson ever
thirsting and longing for the Carpenter's good rest, that with the active joys
of Love they might seal their Affection. The Carpenter applies himself to his
Devotion, as if he and all the world were near their dissolution; But these two
amorous souls pray for nothing more, than his rest, and their recreation.

The deed sleep, for weary besinesse
Fell on this carpenter, right as I guess
About curfewe time.
The many employments to which this Carpenter stood engaged, had with a various
Medley of Cares and Fears so over-wearied him, that as one now resolved to
sleep out that small scantling of time which is left him, about Cock-crow he
bids a silent goodnight to Learned Nicholas, and Lovely Alyson.

Love's eyes are open, and can take no sleep,
While aged Eyes their Leaden Slumber keep.
Which security gives them opportunity; He snorts not so fast in his Tub, but
they have as fast to leave their Tubs, and go to bed.

And down of the ladder than stalketh Nicolay.
And Alyson full soft after she spedde,
Without words mo, they went to bed.
As this Feat was by both equally plotted, so are they now in the conclusion
mutually pleased. The Carpenter's Age enjoyes more rest than their youth. Let
night's sable Curtain enskreen these dark actions. Lust's Palace has but very
few minutes of contenting solace. They may sat Sense for a time, but never
satisfy Reason with an inhibited touch. We are now to retire a little from
this Discourse, and descend to our love-enthralled Absolon, who desires nothing
more, and hopes to deserve nothing less, than to enjoy fair Alyson's Love: To
whom he addresseth his course.

This parish clerk, this amarous Absolon
That is for love always for woe begone
Upon the monday was at Osenay
With company, him to disporte and play.
If God have his Church, the Devil will have his Chapel; yea and his Chaplain
too. Absalon repairs to the Abbey of Osenay, where he employs the day, not in
Devotion, but in a serious inquisition after John the Carpenter, and his
beloved Alyson. Private conference he has with a Cloysterer, in whose relation
he conceives infinite pleasure. For by his means he receives Intelligence of
the Carpenter's absence from home: Which opportunity chalkes out a seasonable
time for Absolon's Jubilee.

Some manner comfort shall I have parfaye
My mouth has itched all this long day
That is a sign of kissinge at the leest
All night me met eke, that I was at a feast
Therefore I woll go sleep an hour or twey
And all the night then woll I walk and pley.
He conjectures by the itching of his mouth, that he shall be graced at least
with a Kiss; which prediction he found most true, as you shall read in the Tale
hereafter. It is most certain, what the Comedian sometimes wittily observed: We
dream by night what we most think of by day. This youthful Quirister meditated
of nothing so much all the day long, as of Kissing Comfits, and luscious
Feastings. And these were the Subjects of his Dreams. In the amorous
discoursing and discussing whereof, he sets this up for his Rest: He will go
sleep an hour or two, that he may more ably turn Night-walker, or more
properly, Eavedropper. For Alyson's Chamber-window must be his Rendesvouz;
where he resolves to sing his Apocryphal Catches.

When that the first cock has crow anon
Up riste this joly lover Absolon.
He sleeps not his business. And to make himself better accepted, at
poynt-devise must his Body be attired; his Breath, to cure all rankeness, must
be with Cloves, Granates, and Lycorice sweetened; his hair daintily trimmed and
tressed, under his Tongue a true-love Flower couched, to make his Designs more
auspicious, himself to his Love more gracious. Up to the Carpenter's house he
hyeth, where he stays, and sueth.

What do ye honycombe, sweet alysoun?
My fair bird, my sweet sinamome.
How this dapper youth melts with Love! His amorous Oration is all Honey and
Cynamon: He calls her his Honeycomb, and she makes him her Coxcomb. Then he
descends to speak of that uncessant anguish of mind that he suffers. Like a
Lamb after his Dam goes he bleating; like a Turtle for his Mate waits he
mourning: as a Maid without meat sits he fasting; yet for all this, like a Calf
she discards him.

Go fro the window, Jack fool, she said,
As help me god, and sweet saint Iame
I love another, or else I were to blame
Well bet than the (by Jesus) Absolon
Go forth thy way, or I woll cast a stone.
This sweet Cynamon Clark is properly rewarded; she vows to stone him, quite
contrary to his expectance. She prefers the Stars before the Quire. Her
Nicholas she enwreaths and enjoyes; mean time let the poor Quirister chant his
humming Catch to the Seven Stars: Let him cool his Toes in Moonshine, while she
is rid of him she loathes, and enjoys him she loves. Yet, lest Absolon should be
numbered among those weak wooers, who relinquish their Suit upon the first
repulse, he rears his Battery, though with a more easy sollicitancy, than he
did at first.

Alas quoth Absolon, and welaway
That true love was ever so yuel bysette
Than kiss me, sin it may be no bet etc.
He remembers, it seems, the presage of his itching lips; the height of his
amorous Ambition is now confined to a Kiss. All his Night-labour is now brought
to Lip-labor. Which Suit our beauteous Alyson, in mere compassion, rather than
any affection to his person, thus answers,

Will thou than go thy way therewith quoth she?
Yecertes lemman, quoth this Absolon.
Small favors would not be neglected, because they may be Introductions to
higher Curtsies when occasion is offered. Mean time Absolon prepares his
Cynamon mouth for a taste of an unsavory Curtsie. He takes his corporal Oath of
his constant fidelity, and makes Alyson's Posteriora's the Book he swears by.
Whence observe, with what intolerable petulancy she jeers the poor Cloysterer!
All this while, you may imagine, Nicholas slept not; but heard this untoward
Dialogue, after his long wished, wooed, and now enjoyed amorous encouner. To
whom she imparts her Plot, which he approves, and she effects.

The window she undoth, and that in haste
Have do (quoth she) and speed the fast
Let not our neigbours thee espy.
This Absolon began wipe his mouth full dry
A civil preparation for an uncivil salutation. Now at last he perceives how
something ever has some savor: but small sweetness tastes he in her too low
curtsie, under favor.

Abacke he sterte, and thought it was amiss.
His Experience had informed him sufficiently in the knowledge of a Woman's
Lip: This had not that smoothness which he expected. Yet (quoth he) I may be
deceived. Dame Alyson may have an hair-lip, for ought that I know: While he
thus expostulated the case,

Te he quoth she, and clapped the window to
Te he, a word of disgrace, scorn, or contempt: She laughs at him after she had
galled him: Before she shut the window to, had she shut her backdoor too,
Absolon had received the greater Curtsie, and she expressed the more Civility.
But being thus, not only rejected, but disgraced;

Absolon goes forth a sorry paas
A berde, a berde, said hende Nicholas.
Nicholas has a fine world on it; his Host is incaged, his Hostess in his arms
enclosed, his Corrival discarded, and new conceits arising, other contents
hourly devised.

This sely Absolon herd it every dele
And on his lip he began for anger bite
And to himself he said, I shall the quite
The Worm will turn again. Poor Absolon thus abused, of his sleep deprived,
casts about in his mind how he may be revenged. He cannot endure to sit down
with this wrong: his Fancy is now changed into a Frenzy; his Love to Revenge.
Many had he served, yet was he never so answered; many had he loved, yet never
so rewarded; many had he kissed, yet never any Lip that so relished. His Passion
in the end works it self into a virtuous compassion.

For he was healed of his maladye
Full often Paramours he began defy
And weep as does a child that is ybete.
What rare Effects will the apprehension of a conceived disgrace produce?
First, It dictates of revenge; then it begets an inbred hate to the Object
before loved, and by whom the disgrace was occasioned: After all this, it
resolves into tears, till opportunity be offered, that the intended revenge may
be inflicted.

A soft pace he went over the street
Unto a smith men callen dan Gerveys etc.
Absolon having received such rough entertainment in Venus Court, flies for
revenge to Vulcan's Forge: Where he beats his Brain intollerably, about the
manner of his Revenge. Stronger is his desire, than his conceit; yet becomes
that so quickened by passion, as now he assaies to execute, what his doubtful
Imagination has so many several ways projected. His Pate is his Anvile, the
Forge his Study; so as, I may properly apply those ancient Verses, upon this
occasion, to our Truant Chantery-man.

That Scholar well deserves a Widdie,
Who makes his Study of a Smiddie.
Well; Suppose him now cooling his Toes at the Blacksmith's door, as he had
done before to his dainty Paramour. Thus flies he for refuge to this Lemnian,
to be revenged on his Lemman: True it is;

When Vulcan and the Muses meet,
Safely may Mars warm Venus Feet.
But secure is Gervase of any such Overture.

This Absolon knocks all easily
And said undo Gervase etc.
He knocks easily, lest he should be discovered, and consequently his plotted
Revenge defeated; or else, that he should not for a Night-walker be publicly
noted.

What who art thou?
Smug the Smith, it seems, was at work; or else of a light sleep.

It am I Absolon.
This he utters softly through a Cranny, lest it should come to discovery.

What Absalon,
-- Sum gay gyrle god it wot
Has brought you thus.
It seems this Chanterer was a notable Tarrier; and generally observed for an
inordinate walker. But little cares Absolon for this aspersion: He had more Tow
on his Distaffe. His head was otherwise employed; his Brain otherwise
exercised. Revenge was his dearest Minion, which he preferred before the
Embrace of a Wanton.

-- Friend so dear
The hot cultre, in the chyinney here
As leve it me,
The Smith of ancient acquaintance, would be loath to deny him so ordinary a
Curtsie: were it of Gold, or Nobles in a Bag, he would lend it him: Albeit, he
wonders what employment he may have for it at so unseasonable a time; but he
receives it, upon promise to return it, with relation next morning how he did
employ it.

And caught the culter by the cold stele
Full soft out at the door began he stele.
Now he renews his siege with Fire and Faggot: Up to the Carpenter's wall he
mounteth, and at Alyson's window he knocks. She, who lay waking, as one
fearful of her own security, or doubtful of her Husband's Jealousy, or
overjoyed with Nicholas's sweet Company, answers him presently, but
timerously, as if he were some Thief; while he, to free her from that
suspicion, and make better way to his intended revenge, shapes her this Reply.

I am thyn Absolon, thyn own derling
Of gold (quoth he) I have the brought a ring.
A modern Poet sometimes Sung:

There Is naught a young man can devise,
Will tempt a Woman more than prize.
Upon which grounds builds he his project; He tenders her a Ring which his own
Mother (Eris Mother of Revenge) bequeathed him, and that curiously Engraven,
and this will he give, so far he seems surpised with love for one poor kiss.
Nicholas is risen, and he will have it, and as uncivilly requite him for it.
For, thought he, shall mine Hostess exceed me in conceit? she put a palpable
disgrace upon him, and I will do the like.

And open the window did he hastily etc.
Here our Astronomer lies his Level, and discharges his shot with a powder;
while our Chanterer is prepared with his red hot Cultre.

And he was ready with his iron hot
And Nicholas in the arse he smote.
He has got a Ring with a witness. Lust must ever have a rue rub. He who even
now, so lasciviously wantonned, and so freely tasted delights prohibited; he
who surfetted in pleasures, and had hung up his abused Host for a Scare-cow,
see how he is scarrified!

Of goes the skin an hondbrede about
The hot cultor brende so his toute.
Here Is a Plaster for his pleasure. He that tastes the Sweet, must have the
Sour we'te. He rages, raveth, and roareth like another Oetean Hercules. He can
rest in no place, so sharp is his Inflammation; he can repose in no place, so
deep is his Incision; So small is the Solace he now conceives in his Alyson.

Help, water, water, for gods heart.
This carpenter out of his number sterre.
What this deep Soothsayer prediction'd before in jest, he now calls for in
earnest. Little dreamed he, when he foretold of that general inundation, that
he should stand in need of some of it to cool his inflammation. But no sooner
had he sent forth this pitiful clamor, than the poor Carpenter, who lay
snorting all this while in his suspended Trough, and had taken more rest though
less pleasure, than his Guest, began to rouse himself out of his slumber; and
fearing the imminency of danger, with his axe he smites the Cord in two, by
which his kimelin or Tub was tied; that so he might by a passage purposely made
through his Garden, slice the depths, and so lanch into the Main Ocean.

And down goes all.
Down goes the Carpenter, down goes Tarboord, Larboord, Ship, Tackling, and all
his Provision.

-- Till he came to the Cell
Upon the flore, and there a swoune he lay
Up stert than Alison and Hend Nicholay.
He never left tumbling till he came to the Cellar floor; and now senseless,
what with the Fall, and what with fear; he lies in a Swoun. This Fall from his
Roost, frights them from their Rest. This unexpected accident rouseth and
raises fair Alyson and her unfortunate Nicholas; who (as may be supposed)
might walk in his Shirt, for any rest he could take, since his late Lecture
read him on his Posteriora's; yea, and one who stood in more need of a
Plaster, than any such Panick Distemper. But need makes the old wife trot.
Some Plot must they devise or other, or they stand disgraced for ever. With
joint consent therefore, they raise a clamor in the streets, call their
Neighbors together, to view this doleful Spectacle of a distracted Carpenter:
for all must be imputed to his distemper.

The neighbors, both small and great
In run --
It is the condition of Common people to press into the view of such Novels, be
they never so disastrous. Yea, we shall observe how the most contemptible
wretch, who before was never eyed; if he chance to be wounded in the Street,
with what numbers of vulgar Spectators he becomes forthwith enclosed: So
attentive be their Ears, so intentive their Eyes to become Nuntio's of others
miseries. Here then you may suppose this Common Rout standing in a Ring or
Circle, gazing and admiring the unfortunately-deluded Carpenter like a blind
point in the midst of a Center, weakly languishing: while this rustic and
uncivilized fry, ready to hear what Nicholas and his Alyson were as ready to
report; gave all attention to the sad, but feigned relation of this woeful
accident. No matter, though the poor Carpenter interrupt them, his Tale must
not so much as be heard by them. Their Story was the first, and it must be best
heard.

They told every man, that he was wood
He was aghast so of Noyes flood.
Alas good man! what a Solemn discourse they make of his Frenzy, to palliate
the rankness of their inordinate Fancy: With more than frontless impudence they
avouch, that it was the Carpenter's distempered conceit, that brought himself
to this misfortune. For standing in great fear of a second Noah's Flood, which
out of his own brainsick Fantasy, he had long time conceited, to prevent all
ensuing danger, he had caused to be provided one Kimelyn for himself, and other
two for them to hang for Company, with all necessary provision against the
violence of such an approaching Inundation. This were they enforced, for peace
sake, to condescend to, being neither willing to incur his Displeasure, nor
cross the Fury of his incorrigible humor. This merry Relation changes the
common peoples Admiration into Laughter; they jeer the lame Carpenter, and by
their light Credulity vindicate two Wantons from dishonor. Though he vow and
swear, they have vowed not to hear. That Beast of many heads will not credit
this Beast of one head. They applaud the Jest, and asperse on him the disgrace.

Thus was Alyson cheared, Nicholas cheated, Absolon revenged, John the
Carpenter gulled, and the Spectators infinitely pleased. Nor is it to be
doubted, but if this Accident had not happened, Nicholas or Alyson would have
found one trick or other, to have deluded the Carpenter, enjoyed their
Pleasure, and evaded Danger. And none in my judgment more probable than this;
to wit, that when this supposed Deluge had not come according to the time
limited, Nicholas out of a dissembled Zeal, would have pretended, how by the
incessancy of his Prayers, Heaven's wrath was appeased, their Cataracts
stopped, and this universal Overflow till an other season stayed. Howsoever, by
the sweet Harmony which all this Family afterward enjoyed, as may be
charitably supposed, our Comment upon this Tale shall be in these Verses
finally closed.

The Cloud's dispersed, the Flood or Deluge past,
And Absolon of wanton become chaste,
John to his Alyson is reconciled,
And She, perhaps, by Nicholas with Child,
John does his jealous humor quite disdain,
What Alice did, she will not do again.
Heaven Smiles, Earth joys, when all things fall amending,
And Tragic Acts have such a Comic ending.
A Commentary upon Chaucer's Prologue to the Wife of Bath's Tale.
EXperience, though none authority etc.
This English Homer, our incomparable Chaucer, here brings in an ancient Wife
of Bath, with an Old Wives Tale, yet not so old as true, seeing her own
Experience had confirmed, whatsoever her tongue expressed: wherein she draws
the first occasion of her discourse, from the griefs which accompany a Married
life; being either weary of their present choice, and consequently affecting
change; or being deprived of their choice, brings upon them new discontents, by
an untowardly change. Then she discourses of the number of Husbands which she
had since her Twelve years of Age. Wherein, she presses an Argument against
such, as held opinion against By gamy.

That sithen Christ went never but onis
To wedding, in the Cane of Galilee etc.
As if she should say, albeit Christ, who honored Marriage with the very first
Miracle that ever he wrought upon Earth, never went to any Wedding but once,
and that in Cane of Galilee, will you hence conclude, that we are never to
marry more than once, and so exclude Bigamy? So might you infer (upon like
consequence) because Christ never scourged Buyers and Sellers out of the Temple
but once, nor was tempted in the Desert (for ought we read) but once, nor wept
over Jerusalem more than once, that neither sacrilegious Symonists are more
than once to be scourged, nor temptation more than once to be suffered, nor
tears of compassion more than once to be tendered. Nay, to refell this erroneous
Opinion, which, even some of the ancient Fathers of the primitive Church have
with too much pertinacy held, this good old wife of Bath has an Argument in
store for her own purpose, which she borrows from the very Touchstone of Truth,
the holy Scripture.

-- Jesus god and man
Spoke in represe of the Samaritan'
Thou have had five husbands --
Whence she proves, that in those days there was no such restraint, but that
it was usual and lawful for any one to marry after the Decease of their
Husband: Albeit, we find it commended by Apostolical Authority, and recommended
to Posterity, That those only were to be honored for Widows, who were Widows
indeed. True it is, that in this place here alleged by our Wife of Bath, this
Samaritan was reproved, not for that she had married five Husbands, but for
that after their Deaths, she had taken her self to one who was not her Husband;
with whom, till then, she had lived without remorse of Conscience in all
Incontinence. Albeit, that any one should be restrained to a prescript number
either of Wives or Husbands, it was yet never heard. Not to insist therefore
upon the difficulty of the Text, nor to play Schole-Divine, which would ill
beseem one of her Sex, she makes use of a Text far more easy and proper for
her purpose.

But well I wot express without lie
God badde us for to were and multiply
That gentill Text can I well understond etc.
She could find in her heart to multiply in Husbands as well as Children. One
of the Ends of Marriage she observes, and this she embraces with so free
admittance, as her Age must not deprive her of hope to multiply: Husbands
therefore she holds necessary Associates in all Ages, as well for Recreation as
Procreation; being for their Love to leave whatsoever they most tenderly love.
Parental Love is excluded, where Wedlock is admitted. Neither Bigamy, nor
Octogamy (if Wives become their Husbands Survivers) are to be questioned. The
last is no sooner committed to earth, than a new one is to be sought for on
earth. Love and Youth, no nor Age, if it have a Colts tooth, can converse with
Ghosts and Goblins. This she confirms by Instance.

Lo he the wise king Salamon
I trow had wives mo than on
As would God it leful were to me
To be refreshed half so often as he.
She holds it an honor to increase in this Number; and by variety to allay
satiety. Whence, she reflects upon her own former estate, and highly joys in
her interchange of choice.

Blessed be God, I have had five
Of which I have pyked out the best
Both of their nether purse, and eke their Chest.
She provides her self of a Husband to fit every sense, that she might more
sensibly enjoy what she did by all likelihood most affect. That she might
attain the end, she neglects not the means: No Procreation without Action. She
holds it fit therefore to share in his Ability of Person, as well as Fortune.
And because Practice begets Perfection, she loves ever to be in ure: She finds
far more Advantage in dispatch, than delay; Her old Husband must no sooner be
dispatched, than a new one must be caught: Thus is she ever mated and matched.

Of five husbands scolynge am I
Welcome the sixte when ever he shall die.
The thought is taken: All flesh is mortal; but of all flesh, she would have
none more mortal than her husbands. She would ever have her aged Husband look
like Death's Head; mean time, her sage Admonitions are never wanting, to bid
him remember his end. Life is but a Trouble; but of all others, she is most
troubled with his Life. Thus dictates she of her Husband's Pilgrimage; which,
by how much the shorter, it is for her all the better. A new Change is her
Royal Exchange: Nor is the Market so scarce, but she hopes to fit her turn with
a new Choice. Mean time, you may hence perceive, that she would have her
Husband's Life of any Stuff rather than Perpetuano or Sempiternum. Like a
charitable Wife, she could wish with all her heart that his Soul were at rest,
while she were left to the Cares of the World and the Flesh; for both which,
she would so seasonably provide, that as Fortune, and her late Husband's
Providence had sufficiently furnished her for the one, so she would take
especial care that she were not famished in the other. This she confirms, not
only with her own Opinion, but by Apostolical Doctrine.

For than the Apostel says, that I am fre
To wedde a godeshalfe, where it likes me etc.
This likewise she strengthens, to give freer scope to her own Affections, with
a fresh current of new Instances.

What recketh me though folk say villainy
Of shrewd Lameth, and of his bigamy? etc.
Here she makes a Rehearsal of sundry persons (and some of them ancient holy
Patriarchs, as Abraham and Jacob) who had diverse wives: and in the end,
proceeds farther, discoursing of the state of Virginity; which was recommended
by way of Counsel, and no express Precept, by the Apostle; concluding:

He said, thereof precept had he none
Men may counsel a woman to be one
But counsailing is no commandment
He put it in our own judgment.
To all which, she adds this enforcing Reason:

For had God commanded maidenhede
Then had he dampened wedding out of dread.
Virginity to have the precedence is admitted, but not that Wedlock should be
rejected. To live a Virgin is an extraordinary gift: This, she acknowledges,
her weakness could never attain to. The use of this Doctrine therefore, she
thus applies unto her self:

And for to ben a wife, he yave me leve
Of indulgence, so it be not to repreve
To wedde me, if that my make die
Without exception of bigamie.
This Doctrine she approves, for it relisheth sweetly to her Palate. Yea but
hence there arises another Objection; It is not good to touch a woman. To
which she answers; not inordinately or licentiously:

For peril is, both fire and tow to assemble.
It is good for young Folk to avoid occasion; for it is that which breeds a
Contagion. The Fire of Fancy needs no Oil to inflame it, nor any other Fuel to
feed it, than Opportunity, which never comes uninvited. True it is (says she)
that many there are who can live Maidens all their days; and these prefer
Chastity before any man's Society: And much good may it do them. For my own
part, I find no such strength in my self; my Frailty requires a Fellow-helper.

For well ye know, a lord in his household
Has not every vessel all of gold
Some ben of tree.
All be not of one temper in their disposition, though of one Mould in respect
of their composition. All are not to be Lillies of Chastity; for so in short
time should the world become a Desert. Vessels there are in one House of
different Metals and Tempers; yet those which are of the contemptiblest
substance, are for use and service.

Uirginite is great perfection
And continence else.
Some of our ancient Fathers have compared Virginity to Gold, Continence to
Silver: Both of excellent esteem, albeit the former incomparably to be
preferred before the later. But all have not the gift of Chastity, I mean, of
Virgin-purity. Many things are in holy Writ unto our Observance offered and
recommended, which are not expressly observed. Other things there are by
express Precept to some more especially commended and commanded, whereof others
may seem to be freed and exempted, at least, not so straightly enjoined.

-- Christ, that of perfection is well
Badde not every wight he should go sell
All that he had --
He was a young man to whom Christ gave this Command; one neither charged with
Family nor Progeny. And in him, directing his speech to all such, as were
resolved to leave the world, and retire from all earthly cares, that they might
attain Perfection, by inuring themselves in these Tabernacles of Clay, to an
Angelical Conversation. These were with Mary to be speculatively affected; mean
time those Martha's, who were troubled about many things, were not for their
provident Care in domestic affairs, altogether condemned. Both in their
degrees being respectively approved.

I woll bestow the flower of all mine age
In the acts and fruit of marriage.
She will lose no time. Let others be Saints for her; she knows what she was
made for: These Members (says she) of Generation, were not made only for
emission and evacuation, but likewise for Conception and Procreation; Nor only
for distinction sake, to know Male from Female, but that Male should be known
by Female.

Why should men else in her books set
That man should yield to his wife her debt
Now wherewith should he pay his payment?
If he ne used his sely instrument.
Husbands are to give their wives due benevolence; but how should they receive
their Benevolence, if they wanted the instrumental means? There was nothing
made in vain, much less that main and principal Point, without which, to this
wanton widow, all the world were not worth a Point. True it is, and she
confesses it, that there have been many Saints, who have led all their Lives
in perfect Chastity; and she is so far from envying their Virginity, as she
highly honors their Memory; yet must they give her leave to take another
course, for fear she should do worse: Their Actions must not be her Example.

Let hem with bread of pure whete be fed
And let us wives eat varly bredde.
Virgins are to be fed with Purest Manchet, because their Degree is highest;
Wives with Barley Bread, because their condition is lower; yet so she may enjoy
here what she most like, she cares not much though her reward be less when the
later Harvest comes.

-- With barley bred, Mark tell can
Our lord Jesus refreshed many a man.
All must not eat pure Manchet; nor all attain a Virgin-state: This is her
Resolution.

In such a state as God has cleped us
I woll persever, I nam not precious
In wifehode woll I use mine instrument
As freely as my maker has it sent.
She constantly holds to her old Tenet: She was not made for a Maid. What she
has received, must be as freely used. She expects both her Morn and Even
Benevolence: She hopes to bestead her self of such a man, as will out of his
Honesty or civil Curtsie, pay his Debt. Neither will she for her part be
altogether unthankful, as he wipes off the old Score, he may begin a new.

An husband woll I have I woll not let
Which shall be both my dettour and my thrall
And have his tribulacion with all
Upon his flesh, while that I am his wife
I have the power during all my life
Upon his proper body, and not he,
Right thus the apostle told to me
And bad our husbonds for to love us well
All this sentence me likes every dell.
She means to fit her self of an Husband both for Ability and Conformity to
please her mind. He must give her due benevolence and become enthralled to her
service. She expects homage and fealty from him, which she means to requite
with some tribulation upon his Flesh. She will confirm her Affection with fresh
remembrances of Correction: Whosoever wears the Doublet, she means to wear the
Breeches. This braving humor of hers was to Life described by our modern Poet:

Great's her Ambition, though her Size be small;
Give but a Wench her will, and she has all.
Sovereignty she will have, and such a domineering power over his captive body,
as the Mare must prove the better Horse. This she makes good not only by her
own private Opinion, nor any Fabulous Tradition, but (to her own Gloss)
Apostolical Doctrine: Thus picks she out the Kernel, take the Shell who list.
So as methinks she very nearly resembles her humor, who, like a sprightly
Bride, hearing those words of Matrimony, to Serve, Obey, Love and Honor, so
hardly digested them, as she willed the Minister to go no farther, till she had
considered better of the matter: Whence the Poet, in the person of this
metall'd Girl;

Two last I like; to do the firster two
I shall not have the Patience I vow.
Whilst this jolly Wife of Bath thus descants on her own Command, intending, as
you have heard, to make her next Husband her Slave:

Up stert the Pardoner, and that anon
Now dame quoth he, by God and by seint John
Ye ben a noble prechour in this caas
I was about to wedde a wife, alas
What, should I bye it on my flesh so dear:
Yet had I lever wed no wife to year.
This commanding Dame startles her Hearers; and will cause this poor Pardoner
answer his Minister, as sometimes a young man answered upon like occasion: Who,
being to stand as Godfather for a Child, and to answer for it at the Fount, was
asked, Do thou forsake the Devil and all his Works, etc. (as is in the words
of Baptism) answered in behalf of the Child, I forsake them all. The very same
day, this young man was to be married, and being by the Minister demanded, Do
thou take this Woman to thy married Wife? etc. Imagining belike, that he was
then answering in the person of the Child, to forsake the Devil and all his
works, presently replied, I forsake them all. While the Pardoner, poor man,
stands thus perplexed, fearing he need take up no other Cross, than his Wife,
if his Fortune be to cope with such a Whipster as this Virago.

Abide quoth she, my tale is not begone
Nay, thou shall drink of another ton etc.
The Pardoner had thought the worst was past; but she had another Brewing for
him, worse than the first; and this must have a stronger taste of the bitter Hop
of Tribulation. Her own Experience, as she confesses, had sufficiently
furnished her for matter of Discourse upon the troubles and afflictions which
accompany Marriage; nevertheless, for so much as most part of men are more
induced by Examples than Reasons, she means to enlarge her self in that kind.

For I shall tell ensamples mo than ten
Who so wol not beware by other men
By him shall other men corrected be
These same words writes Ptolome
An excellent Sentence of Ptolomy in his Astrological observations; He that
will not be warned by others, shall be a warning unto others. Though others
harms cannot make him beware, the harm which he incurrs shall beget in others
a more circumspect care: his folly shall make others wise, his weakness others
more wary.

Dame I wol pray you, if your will were
Said this Pardoner, as ye began
Tell forth your tale, spare for no man
And teache us young men of your practike.
This Pardoner being a young man, and desirous to be instructed in that
Honorable State, to which in short time, he purposes to address himself,
craves her Direction, whereto she inclines.

Gladly (quoth she) if it may you like
But that I pray to all this company
If that I speak after my fantasy
As takes not a grefe --
She easily gives way to his request, provided, that none of all her company
take distaste at ought she shall say; being now to speak freely, and after her
own Fantasy, purposely to pass time away: After which Introduction, she
proceeds to this her pleasant Relation.

Now strs, than shall I tell forth my tale
As ever more I drink wine or ale
I shall say soth. Tho husbonds that I had
Three of hem were good, and two were bad.
She repeats afresh the number of her Husbands, with their Dispositions, yea,
and Constitutions too, as appears after:

The three good men were rich and old
Unuethes might they the statute held
In which they were bounden unto me
Ye wot well what I mean of this parde.
As if she should say, they were rich in Possessions, but of cold
Constitutions. Nature was decayed in them; they could not perform the Dues of
Marriage. Their sleeps were too long, and their Benevolence too short; This was
her meaning, she needs no clearer Exposition.

As God me help, I laugh when I think
How pitously a night I made hem to swinke
But by my fay, I told of it no store
They had me yeve her land and her treasore etc.
They wanted not their Curtain-Lectures; being far better taught than fed. Time
was indeed, when she humored their old Chops, and used all diligence to win
their Love; not a good Morsel, but they had their part; but this was before
they parted Stakes. The world is altered from what it was: They have now
infeoffed her in the whole. All their Lands and Hereditaments, Estates Real and
Personal, were past to her and hers for ever; insomuch, as should they have
arrived to the Happiness to have survived her, they could hardly recover their
Thirds. Now she holds it lost labor to strive to please, where no Profit can
arise.

What, should I take keep hem for to please:
But if it were for my profit and mine ease
I set hem so a work by my faie
That many a night they songen well away.
They never laugh't till their hearts ak'd before they were married. She sets
them their Task, and every night they were to render an Account. Before this
their unhappy Marriage, they might sing Care away; Now must they change the
Burden of their Song to Well away; for well it cannot be with them before their
dying-day.

The bacon was not fet for hem I trow
That some men have in Essex at Donmowe.
The old Proverb was this:

He that is not with Penitence taken
For that he married not before, or married now,
May challenge a Flitch of Essex Bacon,
And carve his Morsel in the Cow of Donmow.
But these poor Snakes ofhers were far from challenging any property in either.
For their Marriage had brought out no good effect in them, but only Repentance.
Rough were her Salutes, Bare her Commons, cold her Comforts. So far were they
from Command, as their Lives were a continued slavery.

I governed hem so well after my law
That each of them full blisful was and fawe
To bring me gay things fro the fair
They were full fain when I spoke hem fair.
Fair words make Fools fain. It is true what the Poet sometimes sung:

With Price or Prayer the hardest heart is won,
Which Age must do, when naught else can be done.
These aged and decrepit Husbands of hers, must supply their want of due
benevolence with bounty and benificence. One comfortable smile, or amorous
look, are the readiest Keys to unlock these old men's Chests. To the Fair they
go, or rather creep; but of necessity they must go whom the Devil drives. Where
their only business is to curry Favor with a commanding Dame, by purchase of a
Fayring. Other means they want to purchase their Peace; they purpose therefore
to buy it at any Price. Content is worth a Crown; and it must cost them a
Crown, but they will procure one minute of Content: And that is the longest
Lease they can possibly expect.

Ye wise wives that can understonde
Thus should ye speak, and bear hem on hand
For half so boldly there can no man
Swear and lie, as a woman can.
An excellent Commendation for her own Sex! And confirmed by a Tragic Poetess
of our own, in these words:

Women are least of Goods, the worst of Evils,
Their best are worse than men, their worst than Devils.
Truth is, they may make bold with themselves; albeit, no modest nor gentile
Spirit, (unless they sweat in Swetnam's Surquedry) can find in their heart to
throw such Aspersions on them. But omitting this, you shall here perceive that
this wife of Bath, out of her grounded Experience, like a judicious
Schole-Mistress to all young married wives, begins her Lecture; where she
informs them how to demean themselves in their several places. Free and
friendly is her Advice, accept it who list; thus she proceeds.

A wise wife shall if that she can her good
Bear him in hand the cow is wood
And take witness of her own maid
Of her assent:
A twofold Exposition may be drawn from these Lines. First, If the good-wife
desire to put Money in her Purse, she will pretend, for want of Grain, or some
other vendible Commodity, that her Cow is run mad, and that she has sold her
to the Butcher for little or nothing, purposely to prevent danger; mean time
she converts the benefit of this pretended Bargain to her self, and so cheats
her Husband. Or else thus; She has appointed a meeting with a private Friend,
to whom she can well spare a Morsel, when her Husband sees not; And the place
of this meeting is the Byer, or where her Kine lie; where to prevent her
Husband's Repair, and free their amorous Embraces from all suspicious Fear, she
feigns her Cow to be wood, which she makes good by her Maid's Assent, who is
ready to justify her Dames Speech: She wills him therefore to be wary that he
come not there, lest he receive some hurt. Which Fetch is not much unlike that
of hers, who desirous to do a Courtesy to a Friend, but out of all hope to get
opportunity for effecting what she did so much desire; at last she remembered,
how there was nothing in the world more terrible to her Husband, than a Bear;
by which means she fitted her self of what she most loved, by affrighting him
with what he most feared. This trick therefore she plays him, with consent of
her Sweetheart, whom she preferred before him. She contracts with her Friend
to cover his Servant in a Bear's Skin, and tie him near to that private place
where they had appointed, and which the poor Wittal himself no less suspected.
Up he mounts, but as quickly descends; for the terrible sight of this
counterfeit Bear drove from his memory the conceit of all other Fear, which the
Epigrammatist no less pleasantly weaves up, in this manner.

A wily Wench there was (as I have read)
Who used to Capricorn her Husband's head;
Which he suspecting, lay in private wait,
To catch the Knave, and keep his Wife more strait
But all in vain; they day by day did mate it,
Yet could his four Eyes never take them at it.
This subtle Wench perceiving how they should
At last prevented be, do all they could:
For now Italian-like, her Husband grew
Horn-mad, I wis, and kept her in a Mew;
Invent'd a Trick, which to accomplish better,
Unto her Friend she closely sent a Letter,
And thus it was; Friend, you shall know by me
My Husband keeps me far more narrowly
Than he was wont; so as to tell you true,
You cannot come to me, nor I to you.
Yet spite of his Eyes, and as many more,
We Will use those Pleasures which we used before:
Only be wise, and second what I wish;
Which to express (my Friend) know this it is;
My Husband, as he hates the Horn to wear,
Of all the Badges forth, so fears he the Bear,
More than all other Beasts which do frequent
The Heathy Forest's spacious Continent.
If thou will right me then, and pepper him,
Cover thy Servant in a false Bear's Skin:
And come to morrow as thou used before,
Tying thy Servant to my Chamber door.
After this quaint Direction he attired
His man in Bear-skin, as she had desired:
Entering the Chamber, he received is
With many a Smile, Back-fal, and sweetened Kiss.
For they are secure of all that was before,
Having a Bear, that kept the Busfe from Door.
The Wittal Fool no sooner Inckling had,
Then up the Stairs he ran as he were mad:
But seeing none but the Bear to entertain him,
Of Horns he never after did complain him.
I have here set down this Conceit to the full, because it has such near
resemblance to this part of Chaucer's Tale: Wherein we proceed.

-- But herkneth how I said.
Sir old Reynarde, is this thyn array
Why is mine neighbors wife so gay?
The first instruction she gave young Wifes, was how to Gull their Husbands,
and how they were to cram their Purses with nimble cheats, or enjoy an amorous
choice. Now like a domineering Housewife, she tells them, how they must twit
their Husbands, if their Neighbors Wives go trimmer or neater than they. As
if she should say, What Sir Raynard, ye fox-skin'd Chuffe, must I come behind
such a Gossip for fashion? Must I Snayl-like, keep still under roof, while thou
goes a Ranging to thy Neighbor's house, and neighs after thy Neighbor's Wife?
You Sir, may whisper a wanton Tale in the ear of such a Maid, and you must not
be reproved? Nay Sir Lecher, you must be in all your amorous actions approved?
Mean time, if I have a Gossip or a Friend, without conceit of ill, I must be
chid, while you, Sir, come reeling home, upbraiding me, that I play wanton in
such an house, or dishonor you in such a place. Every Ale-bench must be the
Stage where you act my disgrace: where sometimes, you revile me, for my
poverty; or else disparage me for my Parentage; or if my descent be above
yours, you tax me of pride, and tell me, high blood ever sparkles for good
Clothes. Sometimes my mirth mads you, otherwhiles my melancholy distracts you.
If I be fair, my fort is half won, my chastity cannot hold out long; every
opportunity tempts me, every light Assailant taints me. Some, you say, choose us
for Portion, others for Proportion; some for Beauty and outward Feature, others
for Breeding and Behavior; some for Affability, others for Agility; some for
pure and dainty hands, others for small enazur'd Arms; All which, you say, are
Lures to Lust, and keep the High-Road to the Devil's Court. Again, if I be
foul, why then I turn common Haxter; I will never want for Trading: As fair
Forts are won by long Siege; so we that are foul, will rather lay siege unto
others, than not be won. Spaniels are not more fawning, than we are fancying.
He were a mean Personage we could not affect, and this were our comfort, She is
a black Crab that can find no Mate: Though our choice be not so worthy, we
shall find one Gandergoose or other to fit our Fancy.

Thus say thou lorel, when thou go to bed
That no wise man needs for to wed.
A strange kind of Even-song; when the day is spent in ranging, and the Evening
in railing. Do thou think, Lorel, that to go to heaven by a Wife, is to go
by Bow and not by String? Well Sir, I hope to see you go by the String, and
then your way will be readier. You say, a dropping, smoaky house and a chiding
wife will cause a man fly out of his house. What will a dropping Nose do, you
Ice-Ickle you? You say, Wives have the Trick to dissemble and shroud their
Vices, yea, and color them too with fair Pretenses, as if they were special
Virtues; But Wood that shines most, is most commonly least sound: We can find
time to fit you with a Peny-worth, and make your Ears look through your
Nightcap, after the new Fashion: And what of all this? We leave (I hope)
sufficient for your queasie Stomachs, when all this is done. Again, like a
Proverbial old Dottrel, you say, that not only for Oxen, Asses, Horses, and
Hounds, but even Basins, Lavers, Spoons, Stools, Pots, and other Vessels, men
use to try them, before they buy them; whereas, Wives must not be tried, till
they cannot deny it; being to be wedded before they be Bedded. Heyday! is your
Spirit so Coltish? It seems, if your Judgment might pass, or stand for a
Decree, you would try before you married, and so take occasion to repent before
you needed. Neither will these untowardly humors content you, but they must yet
run on worser Extremes. Your Doltship will not stick to say, how nothing
displeases me more, than not to hear my Beauty praised, my less than ordinary
parts admired; Nay, I am discontent forsooth, when you look not Babies in mine
Eyes, and fame my Beauty in every place; Again, if you make not a solemn Feast
on my Birthday, with preparation of Luscious Fare for your Guests, of Sumptuous
Attire for my self, a free and friendly Welcome to all, especially to my Nurse,
whom you must that day highly honor, and the Crisp-hair'd Wag that attends me
in my Chamber, with all my Fathers Folk and his Allies, you are out of my Books
for ever.

Thus say thou old barel full of lies.
And yet of our prentise Ienkin
For his crisp here, shining as gold fine
And for he squireth me both up and down
Have thou caught a false suspectioun
I woll him not. --
Thus Sir, you use the Liberty of your lavish Tongue; yea, my poor prentice
Jenkin cannot be free from your Jealousy and Suspicion. If I at any time use
him for the Squire of my Body, or to Usher me in the streets: Your yellow
humor interprets this to be too much familiarity, and that Jenkin must become
Father of your Progeny. No Sir, you shall know that I am not brought to that
low sail, but if you should dye to morrow, I could make choice of a statelier
Minion than Jenkin. But to let this pass, how is it, you old musty Dotard, that
with a sorrow you hide the keys of your Chests from me; have I not a property
in your goods as well as you? Do you mean to make an Idiot of me?

Thou shall not both though thou were wood
Be master of my body and of my good
How is it Sir, that you sometimes promised with your body to honor me, and
with all your worldly goods to endow me, and that now with the first you
dishonor me, and for the later (like a Devil in the Vault) you lock them from
me? I think Sir, if it were in your power, you would lock me up in your Chest
too, but that is above your cunning. Had you but so much wit in your Sage
Sconce, you would rather in this sort demean your self toward me, Good wife,
go where you list; disport your self where you please, mine ear is open to no
Tales; my knowledge has given me that approvement of you, as I cannot susspect
you. For I must tell you, we women cannot endure that any one should question
us where we live, or whom we love; where we gad, or when we Gossip. Of all men
blessed be that saying of the wise Astrologer Ptolomy, who drew this conclusion
from the Depth of his Philosophy.

Of all men his wisdom is the best
That recketh not who has the world in hond.
His condition is the happiest, who for Affairs of this world is
indifferentest. This Sentence here this Goodwife uses, purposely to withdraw
her Husband from intermedling in his own Estate, and absolutely to invest her
self in it. As if she should say, You Sir, that have the one Foot in the Grave
already, how is it that you incumber your mind so much with things transitory?
you have enough for your time; shake hands with the world, seeing the world
has now shaken hands with you. Leave the care of these Businesses to me.
Neither, do I only speak this in behalf of your temporal Estate, but in
delights of your Bed. What if another take a Shive of your cut Loaf; must this
trouble you? Doubt not, Good man, but you shall have enough left to serve your
turn. He is too too envious, that cannot endure another should light his Candle
at his Lanthorn. This neither lessens your Light, nor the other weakens your
delight.

Thou say also, that if we make us gay
With clothes, or with precious array
That it is peril of our chastity etc,
Besides, all this, you say Sir, if we go gay, we must needs be gamesom. We
cannot be neat, but we do it to get a new Mate: And this you strengthen with an
Apostolical Exhortation, Array your selves in comely Apparel, with
Shamefastness and Modesty; not with broided hair, or Gold, or Pearls, or costly
Apparel; but as becomes women that profess the fear of God. It seems, you are
an excellent Text-man for your own purpose. But I must not grow out of Love
with my self, for your Censure. I mean not to be taught by your Text; nor to
make your Rubric my Rule.

I nill not worch as much as a Gnatte
Thou say also, I was like a Catte.
Comely Comparisons! You say a sleekskinn'd Cat will ever go a Caterwawing; she
cannot abide keeping at home. No more will I (for so you apply it) I must needs
be showing my gay Clothes, there is no remedy; for Pride cannot endure to
attend a Family.

Sir old fool, what helps thee to spien
For though thou play Argus with his hundred iyen etc.
Never play the Fool thus, to think that your Jealousy can prevent Opportunity.

No Jealousy can ever that prevent,
Where as two parties once be full content.
For had you as many eyes as Aristor's Son, the hundred-eyed Argus, I should
find one Trick or other to gull you, and distinguish your Coat by an invisible
Crest.

Thou say eke, that been things three
The which troubles all this earth.
Wine is furious, an Eave-dropper dangerous; but a Woman, you say, of all
others most malicious. Yea, you have other Proverbial Resemblances, which, at
first sight, are like your wise Parables; wherein you compare a Woman's Love to
Hell, ever raging; to barren Land, no good bearing, without water, thirsty and
feering; to Wildfire, ever burning, and desiring to consume whatsoever is
combustible, or apt for kindling: You say likewise, as Trees are decayed by
Worms, so are Husbands by their Wives. But truth is, if we trouble you at
Board, such feeble Lorels as you, trouble us as little in Bed.

Lordings, right thus as ye have understond
Bare I stiflly mine old husband on hond.
Oft-times would I twit them with these and such like Speechs, which (as I
pretended) were usually bolted forth by them, when they were drunk; and two
Witnesses had I in readiness to justify their Abuse, my jolly Jenkin, and my
Niece. Oh how I could set my Countenance to frown and lowr, and sell store of
Powts for nothing! I was never in my right home, but when I was out of Tune; I
could whine, and plain, when I felt but little Pain. Mean time, he that came
first to Mill, had his Corn first ground. I made no Bones of choosing a dainty
Morsel for my own Tooth: Yet all this while, I lay all the blame on them: They
were in the fault, though I reapt the Fruit.

Of wenches would I bear hem on hond
When that for sick, unnethes might they stond.
I charged them with Wenching, when God knows, they stood in greater need of a
Cawdle. Yet it delighted these old Chrones to be so thought of: They desired
rather to be taxed of Luxury, than Disability. And to to sharpen their
Appetite, I told them, that so jealous a conceit I had of them, as my walking
forth a nights was for no other end, than to take them napping with their
dainty Doxies. Under which color and pretense, I took my Range, and freely
consorted with those I loved best. I had a Friend in a Corner to cool my
Choler, and cure my Distemper. Rear Suppers were my Solace: I suited my
youthful Fancy to jovial Company: And Company causes somewhat.

Disceit, weping, spinning, God has give
To women, kindly while that they live.
To have Deceit in our Ways, Tears in our Eyes, and the Spindle in our hands,
is an Instinct given us by Nature: By which subtle means, I ever had the better
of them, and gave them the Foyl at their own Weapon. Continually was I
murmuring and repining, I was a Chafing Dish at their Board, and Wormwood in
their Bed. I caused them bite oth' Bridle, while I was ever chawing some good
Bit.

I would no longer in the bed abide
(If I felt his arm over my side)
Till he had made his ransom unto me
Than would I suffer him to do his nicete.
I must tell you, I was a coy Dame, and stood on my Pantofles. I could not
brook that his dry and seer Arms should embrace my Wast. Had his Body indeed
been as strong as his Breath, I could have liked him better; but the weakness
of the one gave an Earthy strength to the other. Turn to him I would not under
a couple of Capons; He must purchase my Love, or farewell Frost.

And therefore every man this tale I tell
Wiue whosoever may, all been for to sell
With empty honds --
I am nothing nice in the Discovery of my own Device; make use of it who will.
Here is the Fair, buy who list: they may furnish themselves for nothing.
Sometimes I would not stick to put on a smooth Brow, and feign a kind of
Fonding, with a strong desire of seeming to accept what was privately tendered
by him.

And make me than a fained appetite
And yet in Bacon had I never delight.
Yet all this was but a seeming Appetite; Such course Meat was not for my
dainty Stomach. All this, and more did I for mine own ends, Which I had no
sooner obtained, than I put on mine old Countenance. Little Quiet could he have
either in his Repast, or Repose, at Bed, or at Board. Yea, so strong was my
Spleen, so violent my Hate, as had the Pope's Holiness been present, I am
persuaded I should have shown small Reverence to his Pontifical Presence. Out
might my Passion have issued, and shown her Impatience. Neither do I remember
that he ever gave me one word, but I gave him two for it. Yea, should I now make
my last Will and Testament, and discover to the world all our Bickerings, and
unsavory Parlies; I would take my Book-Oath that I am naught behind with him,
but have sitted him to the full. And this was the direct way to purchase my
Peace, otherwise had we been at Debate for ever.

For though he looked as wode as a lion
Yet should he fail of his conclusion etc.
Thus could I vye in colors to delude his Nature, and fit my Disposition to
oppose his Humor. If he played the Lamb, I could play the Lion; if he the Lion,
I the Lamb.

Than would I say, good lefe take keep
How mekely looks wilkin our sheep
Cum nere my spouse, --
What a Racket my pretty Pigsnie keeps? Let me kiss thy the other Cheek, my lovely
Honey-suckle. Can you that have preached so long of Job's Patience, retain so
long in your heart any Malice? Ye men, as you are stronger by nature, so should
you be discreeter, and of stayeder temper. What man, are you jealous of me that
you do not only enjoy me? What, would you have my best Commodity to your self?
Why, take it to you, and much good may it do you. I know you for a notable
Soaker; you cannot endure a Sharer: Well, go to; you shall have it to you, and
your sole use for ever. For know, my best Spouse, if I would set my Jewel at
sale; I could go in more gaie and fresh Arraie than I do now: but the honest
Continence of my Desire makes me walk in homely Attire. Good sooth, you are
much to be blamed; I have no Toy, but for your Tooth. My own Breast knows best
whether I love any other; For if I did, your quick Eye would soon discover it.

Such manner words had we on houd
Now will I speak of my fourth husbond.
Thus far has our Wife of Bath discoursed of the Natures, Humors, and Features
of her three first Husbands: Wherein she has expressed to life how harshlie
Youth and Age are suited; with especial Directions how the Distastes of a
loathed Bed may be allaied; how Youthful Delights may be wisely carried; and
the waiwardness of Age better tempered.

My fourth husband was a revelour
This is to say, he had a paramour.
She is now fitted in her kind; what she feigned to be in her three Husbands
before, she finds really loved by her fourth: Neither will she abate him a
hair, and she gives the Reason.

-- I was young and full of ragerie
Stubborn and strong, and joly as a Pie.
She was but in the Flower of her Youth, albeit, she had dispatched three
Husbands; full of Metal and Agilitie; of a stubborn and strong Will, for it had
never been denied her; of a pliant and nimble Body; and this had such found who
had tried her: One as right as my Leg, and seemingly, of that wanton Wenches
humor, who could not endure to have this word, Notwithstanding, mentioned in
her Jointure, but liked well of this Clause, Provided always; which if he were
not, another should. That her Education or Breeding was good, may appear by
those singular Qualities which she privately both professed and practiced. She
could dance neatly, and sing to the Harp sweetly, if she had but liberally
tasted of the sweet Grape: Which, it appears, she dearly loved, by her free
Reproof toward one, by whom his Wife was not only from drinking Wine
restrained, but being taken at it, was of Life deprived.

Metellus, the foul churl the swine
That with a staff berast his wife her life
For the drunk wine: though I had be his wife etc.
This is meant of that temperate Roman, Metellus, who, albeit he fell into this
violent Extreme, upon the finding of his wife distempered with Wine (which
Vice, by the Testimony both of Plutarch and Macrobius, was held among the
Romans to be more punishable in Women, than Adultery) was highly renowned for
a Noble and Victorious. Soldier, having highly improved his Fame to his
Countries succeeding Honor. But had this Good-wife of Bath been Metellus his
Wife, she vows she would have pli'd the Pitcher in spite of all his Valor: and
had a little touch of Venus Game too, after her Blood were inflamed with the
Spirit of Liquor.

For also seker, as cold engenders hail
Alicorus mouth must have a lecherous tail.
This her own Experience had taught her, which she patcheth up with a shread of
her Philosophy, to strengthen it the better. Wine, indeed, affords Fuel for
Lust. The understanding part being darkened and drowned, the Sensitive part
becomes domineering, by subjecting Reason to blind Affection. She finds poor
Defense for her Honor, who deprives her self of that which should be her best
Armor.

But lord Christ, when it remembers me
Upon my youth, and my jolite
It tickleth me about the heart root
Unto this day it does my heart boot etc.
It delights her to remember the Pranks of her Youth; and no doubt, it would
highly content her to have a Taste of Aeson's Herb, and so become young again:
For her Desires continue strong, though her Strength be weak; her Thoughts
green, though her Hairs be gray.

But age alas, that all woll envenime
Nath me beraft my beauty, and my pith
Let go farewell, the devil go therewith.
A charitable old Trader! Age like a Venom, has crept upon her, the Beauty and
Strength of her Youth have left her; Both which, seeing she cannot recover, she
freely bequeaths the Devil that which she cannot keep with her. Yet holds she
on in her old Trade of Folly.

The flower is gone, there nis no more to tell
The bran (as I best can) now mote I sell.
Few or none but they will leave Sin, when Sin has left them; but this merry
Gossip will scarcely leave it, when she is now left by it. Though the Flower of
her Youth be lost, the Bran of her age is left, and that must now be bolted, or
she will never rest contented.

But yet to be right merry woll I fond
Now forth to tell of my fourth husbonde.
All this which has been said last, must serve for a Preamble to her fourth
Husband; of whom her Discourse must be but short, according (as may be
supposed) to the length of his Life, and height of her Love.

I say I had in heart great despite
That he of any other had delight.
He was of a wanton Life himself, and therefore looks for his Wife in the Oven,
where himself had been. Ill Doers are ever ill Deemers. None are more
suspicious than such as are most vicious. A Licentious man's Eye is in every
Corner; to whom the very least Occasion will minister apparent ground of
Suspicion.

But he was quit, by God and saint Ioce
I made him of the same wood a troce etc.
Truth was, he could not for his heart be more jealous of me, than I was of
him. Neither indeed, had he any just cause to suspect me of Wantonness. Here
she excuses herself that she never consorted with any good Fellows for her own
bodily pleasure, in all this Husband's time. Only she invited them to good
Cheer; being now turned professed Gossipper: And all this, perchance, (so
perverse was her Disposition) rather to nettle and sting her Husband, than any
singular Delight she took, either in respect of her Comrades, or Delicacy of
Tooth: as may be probably gathered by those Verses immediately following.

-- I made folk such chere
That in his own greece I made him fry
For anger, and for very jelousie.
Out of a Jealousy, or rather a constant persuasion, that she was as liberal
of her Flesh, as of her Fare, he fried himself in his own Grease: he wasted
himself with anger: seeing both a weakening of his Fortune, and impeaching of
his Honor (as he verily suspected) cope so closely one with another.

By God, in earth I was his purgatory
For which I hope his soul be in glory.
It seems she was good for something, if it were but to become her Husband's
Purgatory; more properly the Touchstone of his Patience. By this means she
thinks he had his Purgatory on Earth, and consequently, without any Rub or Stay
in his way, he may go directly to Heaven. Afflictions being Exercises, he
needed not suffer his Body to rust for want of them, having both at Bed and at
Board such plenty of them.

For God it wot, he sat full often and song
When that his shoe full bitterly him wrong.
Like a downright honest man, he set the best Face he could on it. Yet when he
feigned most Mirth, he had greatest cause to mourn. Every man knew not where
his shoe wrinch'd him. He might laugh till his heart ak'd again, yet never a
whit nearer relief: She had vowed to be his Executioner, purposely to become
his Executor.

He died when I came fro Jerusalem
And lies in grave under the Rode beem.
This good wife, belike, had taken her Pilgrimage to Jerusalem, either
voluntarily or by Injunction. No doubt, had she played Pilgrim all her time,
her Husband had a lighter heart. But now coming home, she finds her Husband
drawing near his last home. Whom she sees no sooner departed, than she takes
course to prevent his Revival, to have him no less suddenly, than solemnly
buried. Under the Rood-loft (a place of especial Reverence in sormer times) she
causes his Grave to be made; albeit in no sumptuous manner as ancient Heroes
have been interred, as she after expressed.

All nis his tomb so curious
As was the sepulture of him Darius
Which that Apelles wrought so subtelly
It is but wast to bury him preciously.
To bestow on him so Gorgeous or Sumptuous a Sepulcher, as was that which was
erected in the honor of Darius, formed by the curious Art of famous Apelles;
or as that of Artimisia in the Memory of her Mansolus, were but (as she thinks)
lost labor: So much cost would make a poor Executor, and too much impoverish
the Survivor.

Let him farewell, god give his soul good rest.
He is now in his grave and in his chest.
He is now laid in Earth, and his Soul, I hope, at rest: He had my leave to be
gone before he went. To grieve for that which cannot be remedied is bootless. I
will spare then to shed any Tears, seeing they are no less Foolish than
fruitless. And so Good night to my fourth Husband.

Now of my fifth husband woll I tell
God let never his soul come in hell.
She had no sooner left her fourth Husband in his Grave, than she makes ready
to go to Church for a Fifth. And of such an one she speeds her self, that it
seems his Soul deserved well of her, whatsoever his Body did. Yet is it to be
wondered at, how she should be so charitable in her blessings toward him, who
was so shrewd in his blows, toward her. But of this she gives a reason: Truth
is, he was shrewd to me, and gave me store of rib roast, imagining belike that
I was of the nature of the Wallnut Tree, that must be cudgelled before it be
fruitful; yet for all this, I cannot but remember him with a great deal of
love. Though he gave me correction, he had an other winning way to gain my
affection. He was of an able and active body, and could till me on with such
pretty Toies and Tales when he desired to have that which I no less desired my
self, and he could win me with a smile, and with a smooth brow allay my storm.

I trow I loved him the better, for that he
Was of his love so dangerous to me.
A strong Woman's reason.

Follow women, they will fly you,
Fly but Women, they will draw nigh you.
If you would a Woman move,
Seem to love not, when you love.
The way then to win them, is seemingly to wean our affection from them.
Proffered ware, be it never so precious, is disvalued; That only is held worth
our purchase, which is with niceness gained: whatsoever is forbid us, is with
eager appetite pursued by us. To utter our Ware with danger, will improve our
commodity most to our advantage and honor.

And to great chepe is hold at to little price
This knows every woman that is wise
Far fetched and dear bought is good for Ladies. A vile price makes the
commodity no less vile. Highly then was this Husband affected, because he was
dainty and nice in his affection. He caused her now and then to bite oth'
bridle, and to fast, that her Stomach might become stronger for the next Feast.
She had now and then a bit and a buffet with it. All her days were not
Holy Days; this made her pleasure (because rare) more welcome, when it came.

My fifth husbonde, God his soul bless
Which I took for love and no richesse
He sometime was a Clerk in Orenforde
And had left schole, and went at home to board
With my gossip, dwelling in our town
God have her soul, her name was Alisoun
Here she expresses his state, condition, and profession; his state or
condition, it may seem, was but mean, but his person promising; pure love and
no other worldly respect made her choose him. He was a Scholar, and unpreferr'd,
and consequently not like to be rich. But now had he left Schole, with his
hopes of some poor Fellowship, which were but small, in regard of his weak
Parts, or that he had no Letters commendatory, from some great or powerful
Favorite, to procure it; And now in stead of a Fellowship, he intends to board
himself privately with Dame Alyson, this Good-wifes Gossip. Now whether this
were the self-same Alyson, the Carpenter's Wife, mentioned in our Miller's
Tale, I will not here dispute; Only, with submission always to deeper
Judgments, I conceive, that by all probability it should be the very same
Alyson, but that this Clerk of Oxford here mentioned, was Nicholas the
Astronomer, who fancied Dame Alison, I cannot assent; for this bears another
name. Be she what she will be, it appears she was a kindhearted Gossip, and of
inward Acquaintance with our Wife of Bath: Being ever constantly of her
Bosom-counsel, together with another Wife, whom she names not, and her Niece,
in all which, she reposed great Considence. No Secret could there be, which
might either concern her Husband or her self, but it was imparted to one of
these three. No counsel so private, no passage so secret, which was not to
these communicate.

And so I did it often God it wot
That made his face full often read and hot.
This Wife of Bath was too full of Chinks to be a good Secretary. Her Husband
could tell her nothing over night, but next day she would be Carrier of it
abroad: wherein our Poet privately glanceth at such as too freely use to commit
their nearest thoughts to the secrecy of a Woman: whereof though some be Seals,
others be Sieves.

And so befil, that ones in a Lent
So often time I to my Gossip went etc
Now she comes to relate the season and occasion of her first Familiar
Acquaintance with this Clark of Oxford, her jolly Jenkin: This begun in Lent,
but she means to make it no time of Abstinence. She and her kind Gossip must
take Air, and in such Months as afford most delight. Yet cannot those fresh
and fragrant Fields sufficiently refresh them, unless they have Jenkin the
Scholar for an Usher to conduct them. And a good Opportunity had this Good
wife, for her Husband was at London: With liberty therefore might she take her
range to Vigils, Visitations, Preachings, Pilgrimages and Processions; to
Stage Plays, Puppitplaies and Marriages; where she might see and be seen; yea
felt, heard and understood. Her gay Scarlet Petticoat, and Broad-cloath Gown
need now fear no Moaths; they are too daily worn to be eaten with Worms. Her
Clothes make every day their Holiday. Till her Husband come home, she means not
to make her own house her home. The Field must be her Walk, and Jenkin her Mate.

Now woll I tell forth what happed me
I say, that in the fields walked we.
Now begun she to grow more familiar with this dainty Clerk. She is now not
only for walking, but talking with him; yea, and dalliance too; till in the
end, she holds him for her only private Friend, and such an one, as she could
find in her heart to commend to his Trust the greatest Secret she has in the
world.

I spoke to him, and said how that he
If I were wedowe, should wedde me.
This is plain dealing, and deserves the Scholar's favorable construction: As
if she should say, Ye Scholars are dangerous Youths; when ye woo least, ye win
most; when ye speak least, ye prevail most. Did ye perceive nothing, Sir
Jenkin, when of all others, I chus'd you to keep me company; walked and talked
with you privately; and made you acquainted with my bosom-Secrecy? Truly, I
must tell you, should mine Husband die, as all Flesh is mortal, I am verily
persuaded that I should wish with all mine heart to enjoy an Armful of you. In
good sooth we women are the veriest Fools in the world: If we love, we cannot
lain: whereas you men are mighty Dissemblers, and will bring us weak things
into Fools Paradise: when you seem to love us, you will soonest leave us. Well,
durst I trust you, I could tell you somewhat would make your Ear tingle: But I
will not; and yet I think I must; it will needs out. I am half persuaded you
have given me some Love-powder, or I should never fawn nor fond on you after
this manner. Know Sir, I made choice of you for your Person, no Preferment nor
Possession; for I hear, you have but a poor Scholar's Fortune. Now think not
that I stood unprovided before I came to be acquainted with you. No Sir; I must
tell you, I need not want for Pleasure, if I took delight in such Chaffer. I
ever held her a foolish Mouse that had but one hole to creep out at. I am
neither so old nor misshapen, but I should find one or other to accept of the
motion.

I bare him on hand he had enchaunted me
My dame taught me forsooth that subtilte.
A dainty Device! This was Dame Alyson's subtilty. And that she might all the
better persuade him, that she thinks on him by day, she tells him how she dreams
of him by night. Where she relates to him the Circumstances of her terrible
Dream: How she verily thought in her sleep that he came and assaulted her,
purposing to have slain her: and how she started, as she lay upright in her
Bed, to resist his Fury; which were the least of her thought upon so fair an
Opportunity. Yet interprets she all this in the best sense. For that abundance
of Blood wherewith she thought her self embath'd, did signify Gold, which he
might be sure to enjoy, if ever her Husband should die, and her self to boot.

For blood betokens gold, as I was taught
And all was falls, I dremed of him right naught.
All these supposed Dreams were but to delude him, and make him more confident
of the Love she bare him. A right careful Observer of whatsoever her subtle
Tutor Dame Alyson had informed her. One who had sufficient Experience to
instruct an apt Scholar in Rules of Dalliance.

And now sir let me se, what shall I sain
A ha, by God I have my tale again.
An excellent Rhetorical (...).
Figure here used by our Poet.

It seems the remembrance of the proper Personage of her neat Clark, had like
to have made her quite forget her Tale. Yet, at last, she recals to mind the
Story whereon she is to treat, which Subject, sometimes, she was as apt to
forget.

When that my fourth husbond was on bear
I wept algate, and made sorry chere.
Or for want rather of natural Tears, she furnished her self of other effectual
means: She wrapped an Onion in the one Nook of her Handkercher, or pumped for
Tears; or drew her Face into a Purse, purposely to feign a kind of sorrowing,
when her Heart was full of Joy, in hope to enjoy her Jenkin.

But for that I was purveied of a make
I wept but small, and that I undertake.
No doubt, but she had proved a better Mourner, had she been a worser Purveior:
Like to that Widow, whereof I have heard this Story. That, having buried three
Husbands, and all those with a very small portion or quantity of Tears, she
came at last to the Grave with her Fourth, for whom she wept bitterly; which
her Neighbors much wondering at, demanded of her the Cause why she should be so
immoderate in her Sorrow for that last Husband, who had been of so harsh and
rough a Disposition, and so patient at the Deaths of all the other three, who
were of loving and affable Natures, and had deserved so well at her hands? To
whom she made this Answer; That she wept not so much for that she was of her
sweet Husband deprived, as that she was now destitute and unprovided; whereas
at the Deaths of her other Husbands, she was ever of another prepared before
the other was buried.

To church was my husband born on morrow
With neighbors, that for him made sorrow
And Tenkin our clerk --
It is to be wondered why she let him lie so long unburied; but it seems there
was some Solemnity to be used, or else that his Friends and Neighbors did
expect it. You may imagine now, when she sees her Sweetheart Jenkin amongst
other Mourners, that she has made a League with her Eyes, not to shed one Tear;
with her Heart, not to send forth one Sigh, unless it be in jest, and so fool
the Spectators. Neat were his Legs, pretty were his Feet: These were her
Objects in this Spectacle of Sorrow. This serious Survey or Perusal of Jenkin's
Person had so taken up her Eye, as it could fix it self on no other Object,
while he was in Presence. Yea, her Blood began to sparkle now afresh in her, so
as in her own conceit she was twenty years younger than she was in the Morning.
Though forty Winters had already blown upon her; and consequently some Tokens
of Age had stamped their Impreslures in her: She had always a Colt's Tooth.
Yea, she had diverse other signs of an Invincible Patient, as she her self after
confesses.

Gap tothed I was, and that bicame me well
I had the print of dame Uenus sele
As help me God, I was a lusty one
And fair, rich, and young, and well bigone.
She was gap-tooth'd, or wide-spaced, not like Pirrhus, whose Teeth were all
one Bone, undivided. Though this might seem some Deformity, it became her well,
even as Venus Mole made her more lovely: Right Bullion she was, apt for any
Impression. Of a lively and lusty Nature; a fresh and lovely Feature; rich in
Fortune; young in her own Opinion; and every way (as she thought) deserving
Affection. In Sense, she was Venereal; in Heart, Martial; Venus gave her the
Gift to be lascivious; Mars to be courageous; Taurus was her Ascendent, Mars
therein Predominant: But had Mars been her Husband, her too common Dalliance
might well have changed Taurus into Aries, and enjoined him to hold of her for
Term of Life in Capite.

Alas, alas, that ever love was sin.
She bestows the deserving Name of Love upon hateful Lust; but these are to be
remarkably distinguished, because their Natures are wholly different, as the
Poet sometimes well expressed them, in his Description of Love.

Love, what is thy Name? A Frenzy: Whence thy Birth?
From Heaven: How comes it then thou liv'st on Earth?
I live not there. Yet each usurps thy Name:
It Is true indeed, but hence redounds their shame.
I live not there, my Nature's pure and just,
But Lust lives there, and Love's a Foe to Lust.
This merry Wife of Bath could find in her heart, that this Wantonness of hers,
which she terms Love, were no sin; and pity it is, thinks she, that it is not
so, seeing it affords such sweet self-delight to the Sense.

I followed aie mine inclination
By virtue of my constellation
That made me I couth not withdraw
My chamber of Uenus from a good felawe.
Herein our Poet covertly taxes such who attribute so much unto natural
Providence, as though it were inevitable, and thereby use it as a Refuge or
Sanctuary, for all their evil Actions. Unto which may be objected the Answer of
Chrisippus, writing in this manner: Although (says he) that Nature has
provided all things from the Beginning, and that by her Providence all things
are moved and stirred up by a certain necessary Reason and Motion; yet
notwithstanding our Dispositions and Minds are no further subject or in danger
thereof, than their Propriety and Quality is concordant and agreeable unto the
same. For, if by Nature our Wits be first made wholesome and good, apt to receive
good Notions, fair Impressions; by being after endued with Reason and
Understanding, either they do utterly put off and avoid all evil Influences and
accidents, or else by their discreet temper, receive and bear them more easily
without hurt or damage. If contrariwise, our dispositions be rude and gross,
not endued with any kind of Letters or good Learning, to assist and help them
withal, with every light Conflict or Assault of our Natural Inclination, we run
headlong into all kind of Errors and Vice. For we ought first to know and
understand, that neither the Stars, nor any Natural Influences do provoke or
force us to any thing, but only make us apt and prone: And being so disposed,
do, as it were, allure and draw us forward to our Natural Inclination. This
might be illustrated by example of the Cylinder-Stone; which by nature being
apt to roll and tumble, and being cast or thrown down into hollow or steep
places, does run without ceasing, not so much because it is cast or thrown, as
for his own Nature or Aptness thereunto, and not having any thing in it self to
withstand the same.

Yet have I ^^^tes mark upon my face
And also in another privy place.
It seems our Venus had been at her Lemnian Forge; she had got some Marks of
her Trade, which she meant to carry with her to her Grave. She confesses, she
never loved with Discretion; for in the whole course of her Trade she never
made any distinction. Her Appetite was equally eager to all proper promising
persons, were they of what Rank or Fashion soever. The black was admitted as
well as the white, the poor as the rich: Her Fort gave way to all Assailants.

What should I say? but at the months end
This joly clerk Ienken, that was so hend
Has wedded me with great solempnite
And to him yave I all the land and fee --
She had past her mourning Month, and now comes in her honey Month, where Jenkin
is become owner both of her self and her state. What was given her by Age, she
as freely bestows upon Youth. Grants of her Lands, Keys of her Chests, all her
goods movable and immovable, personal and real, are at his service, without any
eviction, molestation, or encumbrance soever. But no sooner restrains he her of
her Range, then she repents her of her Gift. Gladly would she have him
re-convey it to her, but though he be a mere Scholar, he is no such Gooselin.
Now the Reason why she repents her of what was conferred by her, was this; He
begun not only to restrain her, but chastise her.

By God he smote me ones with his fist
For that I rent out of his book a lefe
That of that stroke, my eres were defe.
As if she should thus say, Who would have thought that this smooth-chinn'd
Princock, but new-come from Schole, should thus begin to scourge me, who have
had the Schooling and Scourging of four ancient Benchers? Admit I rent a Leaf
out of his Book, when the Story did discontent me, must he presently fall to
his Rubber of Cuffs, and so be revenged on me? Well, though this quaint Clerk
fell aboard so roughly with me; I think I gave him his Pennyworths; Judge you
that hear me. Never was Lioness more fierce, nor Jay more jangling. Though he
labored to restrain me, in despite of him I took my Liberty. From house to
house went I Gossipping. Neither his Oaths nor Anger could wean me from mine
humor.

For which full often time would he preach
And me of old Roman jestes teach.
He plied me with Lectures out of old Roman Stories for his own purpose:
Amongst which, he told me, how one Sulpitius Gallus utterly forsook his Wife,
for showing her self but once openly at the Door, and taking a view of
Passengers as they went by. Also, how another Roman (Novellus Torquatus; or I
mistake it) wholly relinquished his Wife, for making resort to a Summer Game
without his Knowledge. And how Plutarch (whose Authority might more properly be
alleged in this Argument) affirms that it is a Custom in Egypt, that Women
should wear no Shoes, because they should abide at home. Then would he confirm
these ancient Stories with Holy Writ, and show how Ecclesiast. gives express
Charge to all Husbands, that they should in no wise suffer their Wives to
wander or stray abroad; knitting up his goodly Precepts and Examples with this
shrewd Proverb;

Whosoever builds his house all of salowes
And pricketh his blind horse over the falowes
And suffers his wife for to seche hallowes
He is worthy to be honged on the gallows.
Sallows are but mean Timber-wood to build on; Fallows are uneven grounds for a
blind Horse to ride on: And Hallows or Pilgrimages dangerous Ways for young
Wives to go on. The first shows Improvidence, the second Rashness, the last
Weakness Conventicles are Tickle places for Holy Sisters; Those are Booths for
such Ware, as I could wish all young Bridegrooms to beware of: St. -- -- is
rather a Sanctuary for our Aunts than Saints. A place reported by Borgius for a
frequent Receipt of Pilgrims: Pomaerius in his Summaenian Annals.
.

But all for naught, I set not an hawe
Of his proverbes, ne of his old saw
Ne I would not of him corrected be
I hate him that my vices tells me.
But all these goodly Precepts and Proverbs which he delivered in this sort
unto me, were but as if he had sown Dust in the Air. I valued them not worth
the Bloom of a Haw-thorn. For truth was, those who either corrected me, or
reproved those Vices which they saw in me, were never after Cater-cosins with
me; for such Vices as we love, we defend; nor can we easily forgo them without
Distaste.

Now woll I say you soth by S. Thomas
Why that I rent out of his book a lefe
For which he smote me, that I was defe.
The Book out of which I tore this Leaf, was entitled Valerius Max. a Roman
Author, one who wrote much to our Reproof and Dishonor. With him had he joined
Theophrastus, at whose Conceits, he unmeasurably laughed, while I at his
Laughter was grievously netled. With these had he bound up St. Jerome's Book
against the Heretic Jovinian, together with Tortulanus, Crisippus, Tortula,
and Helowis, sometimes Abbess not far from Paris. And with these (to enlarge
this his Miscellane Volume) had he bound together the Parables of Solomon, Ovid
his Art of Loving, with sundry other Tracts or Treatises, discoursing of
several Subjects. Now, would you know how he employed these Books? It was his
accustomed manner every night when he had Leisure, to recreate himself in these
Works: More Legends and Lives had he of wicked Wives, than ye could repeat of
good Wives throughout the Bible. All these had he purposely compiled, and were
by him nightly recounted to make me discontented.

For trusts well, it is an impossible
That any clerk would speak good of wives
But if it been of holy saints lives --
It is not now as it was in Chaucer's days; Present times have Clarks, who can
approve and love this Sex. Such, I say, as having proper Liniments to woo with,
natural Habiliments to win with, Canonical Faculties of their own to wed with,
become no Reprovers, but Improvers of so Honorable a State. Wherein I hold
them wise; Sure I am, they trace the steps of the wise: For all the Seven wise
men of Greece were married: Albeit; there never wanted in any Age scornful
Inveighers against women, yea, and Persecuters of them too in public Theaters;
Such were Euripides, Hesiodus, with many others, who out of some bitter
Experience had of their own unhappy Choice, made that Sex, now and then, the
Subject of their Invection. It was a Stoick's Saying, No wise man was fit for a
Woman, yet may a Woman be fit for a wise man; yea, and fit him too a Penniworth
for all his Wisdom. But if a Woman would have Hearts-ease, and world at will,
let her marry one of our Sedentary-Desk Clarks, or Pedantical Fools, who know
not what the world means; for so may she have the world at will. Now in the
very last Verse mentioned by our Poet, this good wife of Bath shadows out such
jealous Clarks; who, when they suspect their Wives affected to Company, or any
way addicted to Liberty, they will pull out some ancient Story or other,
discoursing of the Lives of Saintly or Holy Women, to reclaim them from their
Gadding, and restrain them in their Freedom of living.

Ne of none other woman never the mo
Who peinteth the Lion, tell me who?
By God, if women had written stories
As clerks han, within her oratories etc.
These Clarks (says she) are of that condition as they will neither speak well
of Wives nor any other Women. But they can paint a Lion that never saw his
Feature, but by Report; This is but only as it pleases the Painter. Had women
written Stories (as our Theano, with many more Mirrors of our Sex could have
done) they would have found Colors to display the vicious Natures of men, and
discovered them guilty of more Enormities than the Issue-Male of Adam should
ever redress.

The children of Mercury and Uenus
Been in her working full contrarious.
A Contrariety there is in the workings of Mercury and Venus. The Objects at
which they aim their several Faculties, are wholly opposite. Mercury is for
Wisdom and Speculation; Venus for Riot and Sensual Meetings. Yea, their
Dispositions are likewise diverse; for, Exaltation of the one is the Humiliation
of the other; which (as if this good-wife had been well read in an Erra-Pater,
or some other Astronomical Author) she confirms with this Instance:

And thus God wot, Mercury is desolate
In Pisces, where Uenus is eraltate
And Uenus falls where Mercury is reised
Therefore no woman of no clerk is preised.
Mercury and Venus are ever in Opposition.

For true it is, Employment has no time
To offer Sacrifice to Venus Shrine.
Elegantly shadowed by Lucian, feigning Cupid's Encounter with the Muses: For
he that converseth with his Mind, by whose Eye the Body is directed, will not
intermit his Affairs, to have his Mind with Lust infected. Mercury admits
himself no time to take a Turn in Venus Walk.

The clerk when he is old, and may naught do
Of Uenus works, not worth his old sho.
Long Study has brought him to the Sciatica. He has so inured himself to the
Speculative Part, as he is wholly out of use with the Practick. The Remainder
of his days (says she) he spends like a Cricket, in a Chimney-Corner, in
descanting on the Lightness of VVomens Natures, wherein he shows the poorness
of his own Humor.

But now to purpose, why I told thee
That I was beaten for a book parde
Upon a night Jenkin, that was our sire
Read upon his book, as he sat by the fire
Of Eve first etc.
But would you know (quoth she) more at large the cause of my Beating? I will
now return to my Purpose, and fully relate to you the Occasion. Sir Jenkin (as
he accustomably used) having laid his Heel on the Ratting Crook, to pass the
Winternight away, or rather, as I expounded it, to disquiet me, took a Book in
his Hand, (a various Volume of Numerous Authors) wherein he read of Eve first,
how she by consenting to the Serpent, brought all Mankind to the Brink of
Perdition. Which mortal Sore required a Sovereign Salve, even the Blood of the
Lamb, which regained Man, before lost, and restored our Blood, before corrupted.

Lo here express of women may ye find
That woman was the loss of all mankind.
Jenkin applies the Text he had read; but few or none of all his She-Audience
will vouchsafe to make Use of his Application. But to the end he may work
stronger upon his Wives Fantasy, he brings on a fresh Army of Examples in
this kind. What did treacherous Delilah to her Sampson, when by discovery of
his Counsel, she robbed him of his Hairs, wherein lay all his Strength; and
after, of his Eyes, which gave him all his Light? What did Deianira to her
Hercules, when with Nessus poisoned Shirt, she set him all a fire? What did
Zantippe to Socrates, when she crowned him with a Chamber Pot? which shameless
Abuse of hers, when such as were his Friends, wished him to revenge, he washed
off his Disgrace with this Patient Answer:

It never yet was deemed a Wonder
To think that Rain should follow Thunder.
She thundered so much before with her Tongue, as he could expect no less than
Rain. What did Pasiphae Wife to Minos of Crete, whose Brutish Lust, and
Monstrous Birth, have made her infamous to all succeeding times? What did
Clytemnestra to her Agamemnon? What Dishonor did she to her Noble Parents
Tindarus and Leda, when she not only exposed her self to Aegistus Lust, but
deprived her Princely Husband of Life? What did Eriphyle Wife of Amphiaraus,
when for a Gold-Chain, she disloyally betrayed her Husband Polynices, when he
had hidden himself, because he would not go to the Wars of Thebes? What
Dispatch made Livia of her Husband, because she loved him too little? What
Dispatch made Lucilia of hers, because she loved him too much? What Answer
received Latumerus of Arrius (a Philosopher in Alexandria, in Augustus time)
when he made his sorrowful Complaint unto him, how that he had a Tree in his
Garden of such a strange Nature, as all his three wives, through mere despite,
had hanged themselves on it? O (quoth surly Arrius) do me the Courtesy, Dear
Brother, to give me a Plant of that Blessed Tree, that it may grow and prosper
in my Garden: For never did any yet plant it, that might make better use of it.
What Wives in these later times do we now read of, who not only consented to
see their Husbands murdered, but in the very Presence of those dislaughtered
Corpse suffered themselves to be defiled? Some have driven Nails through their
Brains; Others have deprived them of Life by poisonous Potions: As might be
instanced in the Tragic Examples of Drusilla, Faustina, Corombona, Messalina,
and many others. All which Stories Sir Jenkin would read so distinctly,
passionately, and devoutly, as if they were his Evening Orizons.

And therewithal he knew mo proverbes
Than in this world there grows grass or herves.
He was a most proper Proverbial Jenkin, and could twit his testy Wife with
store of such Proverbs as these, which he had at his Finger end. It is better
to live with Lions and Dragons, than in house with an angry woman. Better to
abide on the Roof ever smoking, than below with a Wife ever chiding. Yea, so
perverse, (said he) are they in Will, so contrary in Work, that they ever hate
what their Husbands love, like what they loath. They cast away Shame, when they
cast off their Smock. And for their Modesty, this is my Opinion, To see Beauty
accompanied by Chastity, were like a Gold Ring in a Swine's Snout.

Who coud wene, or who coud suppose
The woe, that in mine heart was and pine
And when I saw he would never fine
To reden on this cursed book all night
All suddenly three leaves have I plight
Dut of his book --
How much this Good-wife was netled with his Nightly Lectures, she can hardly
express her self, much less her Interpreter. Howsoever, one may easily collect
by those furious Sparks of her Passion which issue forth, that there is a
dangerous Fire within. For first, she takes a poor Revenge on his Book, and
tears it; Then she collars with him, and with a sound blow oth' Ear, throws him
down backward into the Fire. Which he, never till now inflamed with such
unmanly Fury, requites with such a stroke on her Head, as senseless she falls on
the Floor. Die she will needs, there is no Remedy; and the rather, as may be
imagined, to make him guilty of her Death, and so raise him to the Ladder of
his Suspended Advancement. But coming now at last to her self (for long had she
been by her self) in this sort she re-assaies to course him, before she leave
him.

Oh, have thou slain me false these I said
For my land thus have thou murdered me?
Et I be dedde, yet woll I ones kiss thee.
Though she approach near the Gates of Death, she can open the Gate of her
Teeth, and make the Poet's Observation true,

Wheel of a Woman's Tongue is like a River,
Set it once going, it will go for ever.
Well; It seems, before her Departure, she means to give him a strange
Encounter. Sirrah Thief, do you hear! You that first enchanted me, 'and so
ravished my Love from me; you that have seized of what was due to me: Nay, you
Blood-hound, you that for my Land have thus murdered me, draw near me, let me
kiss thee, and so good night to all the world. It shall not be said, but I die
in Charity; So, close up mine Eyes, I shall die presently. This dying Salute
could not choose but drive poor Jenkin into sundry Extremes. For, thought he,
should she die in spite after this manner, I should make a fair End, but a
worse Face in an Halter. Gladly would he (if she were not past hope) recover
her; Down on his knees he goes, and kisses her; rubs and chafes her; though she
needed small Chafing, being as hot at Stomach, as any Pepper. In the end, he
resolves to salute her, and if her Stomach be come down, to reconcile himself
to her; but still he fears, she is either nearly dead, or wholly deaf to such
an Humor.

And nere he came, and kneled fair adoun
And said, dear suster, sweet Alisoun
As help me God I shall thee never smite
That I have done it is thy self to wite
Foryeve it me, and that I thee beseke
And yet est sons I hit him on the cheke --
A right fair and proper Acknowledgment of his Offense; If she will but forgive
him this rash and unadvised Assault, may he never desire any Favor, nor
deserve any Love from her, nor in his greatest need receive any Succor, if
ever he attempt any such presumptuous part thereafter. And yet alas (says he)
it was your Fault that we fell into this Debate: Had you ruled your Tongue, I
had held mine Hand; yet forgive it me, dear Sister, sweet Alyson, and I promise
you, upon Jenkin's Honesty, that your Tongue shall never force me to like Fury.
While poor Jenkin is thus laboring in all humble manner to compose his own
Peace, the dead Coarse revives, and fetches him such an overthwart Blow, as
his Head rings again. Which (good man) sounds better in his Ear, than ever any
of her sweet Kisses relished his Lip; For, thought he, if she have such
lightness in her Fingers, she cannot but have some Liveliness at her Heart.

And said: thief, thus much am I bewreke
Now woll I die, I may no longer speak.
Like the humorous Lady in the Comedy, she is every foot dying, to make him the
more despairing; Though she had already wreaked her self of him sufficiently,
yet will she die with this Revenge, in spite of all his Remorse. And to
confirm, that she is near Death, she concludes, I may no longer speak: A
dangerous Sign that she is past all hope of Recovery. For when a woman is laid
speechless, the Bell may well ring out. But see what a bright Beam darted forth
of this black Cloud!

-- At last, with mikell care and woe
We fell accorded within our seluen two
He yaf me all the bridell in mine hond
To have the governance of house and land
And of his tongue and of his hond also
And made hent brenne his book anon tho.
The world is well amended with Dame Alyson; She was even now for giving up the
Ghost; but holding it far better, upon some reasonable terms, to live than
die, she is content to take heart of Grease, and live a while longer; Provided,
she may have the Bridle in her own hand, the Government of his Estate, the
Command of his Tongue and hand; and lastly, that she may burn this Apocryphal
Book, which bred all this Variance and Debate: To all which he accords, and so
the Peace is made. A very beneficial Peace for Jenkin, albeit upon hard Terms:
For by this means, became all Occasions of future Difference prevented, a
shrewd Dame to a peaceable Wife changed. And to HER no less useful, being for
term of life, of all his Estate without any Compartner, absolutely seized.
Never from that time did any Wife from Denmark to India (to take her own
Compass) live with Husband in more Unity, nor show truer Arguments of
Constancy, than she did to her Jenkin,, and all this without Hypocrisy.

-- And so was he to me
I pray to God, that sit in Majesty
To bliss his soul, for his merch dear
Now woll I say my tale if ye woll here.
One True-Love Knot betwixt them both: So faithful was his Love to her till the
End, as she cannot choose but remember his Soul in her Prayers after his End.
After which Orizon, she makes ready to tell her Tale.

The friar lough when he had heard all this
Now dame quoth he) so have I joy or blis
This is a long preamble of a tale.
The Friar, amongst others of her attentive Audience, starts up, and jeers this
good Wife of Bath, for making so long a Preamble to her Tale, which, for ought
that he knew, might prove as short; and so resemble the Mindian Building, who,
for making large Gates to a little City, were scornfully advised by that Cynick
Diogenes, to be very circumspect and wary lest their City should run out at
their Gates.

And when the Sompner herd the friar gale
Lo (quoth this Sompner) by Gods arms two
A friar woll entermete him euermo
Lo good men, a Fly and eke a Friar
Woll fall in every dish and eke matere.
In defense of her, and opposition to the Friar, up stands the Sumner; who
reproves the Friar for interrupting this Good-wife in her Tale; as if he should
say, Marry Duck Sir Friar, Must you be ever intermedling in others Affairs? You
will have an Oar, I see, in every one's Boat: and make that old Proverb good: A
Fly and a Friar will fall in every man's Dish and Matter. What have you, Sir
Friar, to do with her Preambulations? Whether she amble or trot it concerns you
nothing. You hinder our Sport; Sit down, and give her way.

Ye wolt thou so sir Sompner (quoth the Friar)
Now by my fay I shall, or er I go
Tell of a Sompner such a tale or two
That all the folk shall laugh in this place.
What, Sir Sumner, are you so malapert? Must you control a Friar? Well! For
your grave Reproof, I shall, before we part, tell a Tale or two of a Sumner,
that will give Occasion enough of Laughter.

Now else Friar I beshrew thy face
(Quod this Sompner) and I beshrew me
But if I tell tales two or three
Of Freres --
The Sumner will not abate the Friar an Ace. He has a Tale or two to bestow on
the Friar, and to fit him with his own Cool, before they come to Syttingbourn,
toward which they were journeying. He sees his Patience already netled, and he
hopes, when it comes to his Turn to tell his Tale, the Friar will not find
himself much refreshed.

Our host cried peace --
Like a peaceable Moderator, our Host, who was the very first Mover and
Contriver of this Task, cries Peace. Let the woman go on (quoth he) with her
Tale; How is it, that you fare as if you were drunk? You trouble us; Revenge
your Distasts on one another in your Tales, when your time comes; If you
prepare, we shall hear. Then turning himself to this Wife of Bath, he persuades
her to go on, in these words;

Do dame, tell forth your tale, and that is best
All ready sir (quoth she) right as you lest
If I have license of this worthy friar
Yes dame, tell forth your tale, I woll it here.
Go to Dame, let not their jarring trouble you. You know what you have to do; I
hold it best, that you go on with your Tale. I am ready (says she) to obey
your will, provided that I may have this worthy Frier's Leave, whose Patience I
have so far abused with my long Preface; which, although it solace not him, it
gave me that Delight, as I could have traveled farther in this Discourse, and
never been tired. At last, with the Frier's Permission, and Promise of
Attention, she goes on with her Tale, in this sort.

A Comment upon the Wife of Bathes Tale.
IN the old days of king Attour
Of which the Bretons speken great honor --
Prince Arthur, the Son of Uther, born in Cornwall, was Crowned King of Britain
in the Year 516. He was a Prince, for Spirit no less Courageous, than in all
his Attempts Victorious. His Courage proclaimed him a man, and his good Fortune
an happy man. He fought twelve several Battles against the Saxons, and always
returned Conqueror. And having now to his succeeding memory reduced his
Country to quietness, and planted the Peaceful Olive in his Confines; to
express his true Love to Chivalry, and memorize such who were not only
Associates, but Assistants in his Victory; He constituted the Order of the
Round Table, in which Order, he only retained such of his Nobility, as were
most Renowned for Virtue and Chivalry. This Round Table he kept in diverse
places, especially at Carlion, Winchester, and Camalet in Somersetshire. In
memory of which Foundation, by the Testimony of Leyland, there is yet to be
seen in Denbighshire, in the Parish of Llansavan, in the side of a Stony Hill,
a place artificially composed, wherein be four and twenty Seats for men to sit
in, some less, and some bigger, according to their several Statures; cut out of
the main Rock by man's Hand; where young people coming to seek their Cattle,
use to sit, play, and repose: They commonly call it Arthur's Round Table. To
insist on those Fabulous Relations which former times have broached touching
this Prince, I will not, but refer them, who take delight in the Report of such
Wonders to our Old Wives Legends. Let it suffice them, that in this King's
days (if they will take the word of a good Old Wife of Bath)

All was this land fulfilled of fairy
The Elfe queen, with her joly company etc.
King Oberon, Queen Mab, Prince Cricket, and his Paramour Pig-Widgeon, with all
their fair Company, used to repair hither, and dance a Cinque-pace upon the
Meads, (if they had so much Art among them.) Yea, by usual resorting and
consorting together, they became so familiar with our Milkmaids on the Downs,
as they would not only sport with them, but woo them and win them; whence the
Poet:

Pug wooed Jug, a wily Cub,
To drink with him a Sillibub,
Which drunk, they so familiar grew,
As Jug became one of the Crew.
But this (says our Wife of Bath) was many hundred Years ago. King Oberon's
Race is quite extinct and gone, or else confined to some other remote Island,
where they reside. And she gives a Reason of this.

For there as wont to walk was an Elfe
There walks now the limitour himself.
A Proprias Limits Terris imponendo, and removent ibus Anathemat a denunciando
dicti, ut veresimile est.
Limitors and holy Friars supply the Place of Fairies. Their Orizons, Anthems
and Prayers have conjured down all Fayries. Before times, young Wenches durst
not safely go by themselves: Every Bush had his Hob-thrush, but the world is
well amended.

Women may go safely up and down
In every bush, and under every tree
There nis no other incubus but he.
Safe and secure may now our Maids be. No Incubus, Goblin, or Nightmare shroud
themselves in the Bushy Thickets to surprise them, or with a cold Sweat in the
Nighttimes to oppress them: The devout Friar has scared them. There is no
other Incubus but he. Neither need they fear any Dishonor; for nothing but
holy Honesty attends the Friar.

And so fell it, that this king Artour
Had in his house a lusty bacheler.
Amongst others of his Princely Retinue, for whom only this brave Victorious
Prince reserved his Round Table, one Lusty Youth there was in his Court, who
giving Reins to his Desire, encountered a young amorous Maid, and ravished her;
The Report of this Rape within few days came to King Arthur's Ear, who, to
expiate the Guilt of so foul a Crime, and free his Royal Court of all
Dishonor, denounced upon this wanton Courtier due Censure: Which Censure (as
may be probably conceived) was grounded upon the Statute then, as now in Force;
That he who committed any Rape should suffer Death. Albeit, in those days, an
especial kind of Death was inflicted on the Ravisher, and that was, he should
lose his Head; to counterpoize this Offense, in depriving another of her
Maidenhead.

But that the Queen, and other ladies mo
So long prayden the king of grace
Till he his life granted in that place
And yaue him to the queen --
As it has been ever accounted the highest Honor for Knights to afford
succor and relief to distressed Ladies, so has it been the custom of Noble
and Affable Ladies to commiserate the Miss-fortunes or Overtures of dejected
Knights. Such Favor found this young Gentleman at the Hands of his Queen and
her Ladies: who, no sooner heard of this Judgment of Death pronounced upon him,
than with Prayers and Tears (prevalent Suitors to a compassionate Prince) they
labored to reverse that Sentence, and afford some comfort to his approaching
Ruin. As they prayed, so they prevailed; The King (a Mirror in his time, both
for Justice and Mercy) gives this Knight's Life to his Queen, to dispose of, as
shall best like her. Nor need he fear ought else than a gracious Usage at her
Hands, from whose Sollicitancy he had received his Reprieve, if not Reversal of
Judgment.

The queen thanketh the knig with all her might
And after this, thus spoke she to the knight etc.
The Queen, after due thanks rendered unto the King, for speeding so well in
her Suit, takes Opportunity to talk with this Knight; and tells him how, indeed,
by her means, she had procured his Reprieve for a time; but yet he was not to
hold himself safe nor secure from danger. His Life was given her, and she would
bestow it on him, provided that he performed what she propounded, and assoiled
what she demanded.

I grant thee thy life, if that thou can tell me
What thing is it, that women most desiren
Beware, and keep thy neck bone from the iren.
A necessary Caution for this condemned Gentleman. As if she should say, Go to
Sir, your Fact was heinous, for which you have here your Sentence. The Sentence
of Death, you know, to be already pronounced; to attemper the sharpness of
which Censure, I have interceded for you; and so far prevailed, as it is now in
my hands whether you live or die. Nor is my Breast so steeled, as altogether
insensible of Compassion. Yet must such a Crime as you have committed, sustain
the difficulty of some Task before it be remitted. This Question then you must
resolve me, if ever you mean to expect any Favor from me. It concerns our Sex,
as from our Sex you are to acknowledge the Benefit of your Life.

And if thou can not tell it me anon
Yet woll I give the leave for to gone
A twelve month and a day, to seek and let
An answer sufficient in this matere.
If the Question seem too intricate, I will give you a twelve-moneths time to
consider of it; yet with Sureties for your Return at the Years end. Go to, this
is all the Favor I will show you.

Woe was the knight, and sorowfully he siketh.
Mightily perplexed was this distressed Knight; but seeing there is no Remedy,
but he must either assoil this Question, or despair of Safety; he prepares
himself for his Journey. Wherein, you may suppose, what Coasts he frequents,
with what people of all Qualities and Conditions he consorts; he leaves no
place unsought, where he conceives the least hope that this Question may be
assoil'd.

But he ne couth ariuen in no cost
Where as he might find in this matere
Two creatures according yfere.
As many Men so many Minds. A whole College of Physicians had not more
different Opinions; Nor all the ancient Philosophers more discrepant Tenets
concerning Felicity. Some said it was Riches that did most delight them. Others
thought Honors did most content them. Others held that Gorgeous Attire did
highliest take them. Some said Mirth, others said Delight in Bed, others to be
Widows often. Some, and those of the self-same Sex (for who knows better their
hearts than themselves) taking compassion of this poor perplexed Knight, and
desirous to satisfy him in what they could, unriveted the very Secrets of
their own Breasts, and told him plainly what of all things in the world they for
their parts most desired, and what of all others most contented them. For my
part, said one, there is naught that delights me more, than to have
Hearts-ease, to be cheared, cherished, flattered and pleased; ever to have my
Words seconded, my Arguments maintained, and in all my Business to have my self
duly attended. Another of the same Sex, and for her Opinion, by all likelihood
of the same Sect, starts up, and affirms; That for her part, she loved nothing
better, than to be free and at her own Dispose; to be countermanded by none, to
do what she list; not to be reproved for any Vice that she loved; to be
esteemed wise; more free than nice; more buxom than precise.

For trewly there nis none of us all
If any wight woll clawe us on the gall
That we nill kike --
Here this Good-wife of Bath puts in her Vye, and confirms their Opinion, who
held that nothing delighted a Woman more than to be soothed, seconded, and
humored. For whosoever (says she) use to claw us on the Gall, or nettle us,
they shall find us to have Stomachs. We cannot endure to be controlled; give us
the Swinge, or they that oppose us, are sure to be swinged. Again, If we be
subject to any Vice, we cannot brook that any other's Eye should pry into our
Bosoms. When we are lightest, we desire to be held demurest; when most Vicious,
to be reputed most Virtuous. They are loved most by us, who defend our Vices;
They offend us most, who style not our Vices Virtues.

And some men sain, that great delight have we
For to ben hold stable and eke secre
And in one purpose steadfastly to dwell
And not bewray thing that men us tell.
Here she proceeds in the Delivery of their several Opinions; when she shows,
how some held it their highest Delight to be esteemed constant in their
Courses, secret in their Counsels; to hold their first purpose immutably, and
to conceal whatsoever was recommended to their Secrecy. But how lightly (says
she) we of our Sex set by keeping of Counsel, that Fable of Bacchus Bounty so
freely bestowed, waa not so discreetly employed by Midas, as Neptune's Gifts
were by Theseus: This brought Midas to the Brink of Misery: Those wrought
Theseus sase Delivery.
Midas, reported by Ovid, will sufficiently discover.

-- Woll ye here the tale?
Ouide, among other things small
Said, Midas had under his long heeres
Growing on his heed, two asses ears.
Mida, quasi (...), because his Eyes were blinded or filmed with Covetousness.
He was King of Phrygia, and one of the richest that ever reigned. The Poets
feign, that after he had restored Silenus unto Bacchus, to gratify his
Courtesy, Bacchus promised him what Gift soever he should demand; Upon which
Offer, he desired that whatsoever he touched, might be into Gold turned. By
which means, the very Meat which was provided for his Repast, became Gold; so
as, though he surfetted in Gold, he famished for Food. Well then deserved he an
Asses Ears for his Labor, who could not satisfy his Desires without starving
Nature. Now to cover this Deformity (as may be supposed) he wore purposely long
Hair, so as none knew of it, save only his Wife, whom he especially trusted,
and to whose Secrecy those long Ears of his were only disclosed. She, who had
solemnly vowed never to disclose what he had recommended to her Trust; both to
keep her Oath, and yet disgorge her Stomach of that Secret, which lay so
fretting and frying on her, as she must needs be delivered of it; resolved one
day to go down to a Marish near adjoining, far remote from the sight or search
of man; where, just like as a Bittern puts his Beak in a Reed, and through the
hollowness of the Cane makes a shrill and sharp sound, so lay Midas Wife with
her Mouth to the Water, using these Words; Do thou hear, thou Marish? my
Husband has a pair of Asse's Ears; This is a Secret, none but my self knows of
it; I would not for a world impart it. So, now my Heart is eased: My Lace would
have broke, if I had not disclosed it.

The remnaunt of the tale, if ye will here
Redeth Duide, and there ye may it lere.
This Story you may read in the Eleventh Book of his Metamorphosis, where the
Reason of this Transformation is lively expressed.

This knight, of which my tale is specially
When that he saw, he might not come thereby
This is to say, what women louen most
Within his heart sorrowful was his ghost, etc.
Many Coasts and Countries had this distressed Knight searched, sundry Folks
Judgments and Opinions had he sought, yet is he no nearer, than when he began.
Different were their Conceits, according to the Difference of their Minds.
Nothing was definitely concluded, because their Judgments were so diversely
distracted. On draws the time, in which his Summons calls him home; which,
rather than he will not keep, in regard of those dear Friends Words engaged for
him, he resolves to suffer a thousand Deaths. Thus perplexed, wanders this
Pilgrim Knight, hopeless of any Resolve for his Question, and consequently out
of all hope to procure his Pardon.

But home he goth, he might not soiourne
The day was come, he must home return
And in his way, it happened him to ride
In all his care, under a forest side
Where he saw upon a dance go
Of ladies four and twenty, and yet mo etc.
Amidst these distracted Cares of his, as he travels homeward (for approached
was the time of his Return, with a general Expectance of his Resolve) as he
casts his troubled Eye aside, he sees a Company of dainty and delicate Ladies,
Sylvanes or Wood-Nymphs all, leading a pleasant Dance near to the Forest side;
Toward them he addresseth his Course, in hope to receive some Comfort from
them. But to increase his Anguish, no sooner draws he near them, than they
vanish.

No creature saw he that bare life
Save in the grene, he saw sitting an old wife
A fouler wight there may no man devise.
Beauty was gone, and Deformity left. All those amiable Ladies were quite
vanished; and none remaining but an old Hag, whose sight begot in him more
Loathing than Loving. Those, whom former times have painted out for the most
ugly, and worst-favoured Creatures that ever breathed; even Nays, Catastes,
Thestylis, were dainty Paragons in Nature This Mother-Midnight, shaped like a
Sweden Hag, and by all likelihood the Fayries Midwife.


Again the knight the old wife began arise.
A proper Salute, and as mannerly a Regreet, you may expect, as an old Trot of
her shape could afford. For thus she seems to accost him: God may you bless,
young Gentleman; for you look like a bonny gamesom Youth. What way bound you so
fast down by this uncouth Forest? Sure, if I miss not my Mark, you are out of
your Aim; for this is no Highway; Sooth in God, there is somewhat or other,
that gripes you by the Heart; for your fresh flowery Countenance looks pale. Is
it Love, a God's Name, or some sike giddy thing that girds you?

-- Tell me what ye seken by your fay
Peradventure it may the better be
This old folk conne much thing (quoth she)
We old Trots are good for something. We have many fine Medicines in store,
that lustier Hussies little wot on. Read your Read to me then boldly, you shall
find me an honest old woman; And a true trusty Friend in a Corner, though she
be never so ore-spent by Nature, may do a Buxsom Boy a Pleasure.

My lefe mother (quoth this knight) certain
I nam but deed, but if that I can sain
What thing it is, that women most desire
Coud ye me wisse, I would quite well your hire.
His time limited is so short, and so speedy his Task, as it admits no Delay.
He discovers unto her the reason of his Raunge in that desert and unfrequented
Forest. The Question that he is enjoined to assoil upon pain of Life, he
declares unto her. Albeit small Comfort he expect from her. This he no sooner
imparts, than she returns him this unexpected Answer to bring him back to
himself, from this high-beat Path of his approaching Danger.

Plight me thy troth here in my hand (quoth she)
The next thing that I require of the
Thou shall it do, if it be in thy might
And I woll tell it you, or it be night.
Dapper Youth, quoth she, this Geer is of some weight; It is a dear wade, when
your Life lies upon last Stake. Well, go to; you have traveled far, and you
are never a Chip the wiser. You shall see an old Wife has some Wit. But first
you must requite me, or I mean never to resolve you. Give me your Hand-Promise,
that after I have told you this Question, you will grant whatsoever I shall
demand of you, if it be in your power; Do not deny me, lest I leave you as I
found you.

Have here my trought (quoth the knight) I grant.
Life is sweet; he will neither deny her, nor delay her, but vows truly to
perform whatsoever shall be enjoined by her.

Than quoth she, I may me well auaunt
Thy life is safe --
Be of good cheer then. Your Life is as safe as mine, and safer too; for I have
one Foot in the Grave, as you may see, already. I will so truly resolve it, as
the Queen herself, who first put this Question to you, shall before all that
fair Assembly maintain it, that the proudest she that wears a Kerchief on her
Head, shall not deny it. Withdraw your self into that Arbor, and I will tell
you.

-- Without longer speech
Tho rowned she a pistel in his ere
And bad him to be glad, and have no fere.
The preciousest Ear-Ring that ever he wore. What he had sought for among so
many Beauteous Damsels, in so many frequented places, in such eminent Courts,
and could never attain, he finds now in the Breast of an old withered Hag, in a
wild Forest, far remote from the Seat or Sight of men. Suppose him then, thus
provided, now approaching the Court, where he is expected according to his Day
limited, to return his Answer, where he is either to come off with Honor or
Danger.

(The queen her self, sitting as a justise)
Assembled ben, his answer for to here
And afterward this knight was bode apere.
A great Assembly of women are purposely come to Court to hear this Knight's
Answer, and to give their Judgments, as may be thought, whether this Question
to him proposed, were by him truly or no resolved. A general Silence by an O
Yes, thrice publicly cried, was to all Women enjoined. A Task, I grant of no
small difficulty, but this was, to the end this Knight should not be
interrupted. The Knight, after his Appearance, and so free Audience, with a
shrill Voice and stout Spirit, as one confident of his Answer, assoiles the
Question with this Resolution:

My liege lady: generally, quoth. he
Women desiren to have souerainte
As well over her husbonds as her love
And for to ben in maistry hem above
This is your most desire, though ye me kill
Does as you list, I am here at your will.
There is nothing which a woman desires more than Sovereignty; Command is her
Content; Dominion her Minion; her will her Weal. This the Poet confirms:

Nor Love, nor Life, nor Liberty, nor Land,
Can please a Wench, unless she have Command.
Sovereignty is such a Pearl in her Eye, that Life is a loathing unless it be
attending. Thus has he returned his Answer; now hear what Applause it receives
in this fair Foeminine Assembly.

In all the court nas there wife ne maid
Ne widow, that contraried that he said
But said, he was worthy han his life.
By general Voice and Vote he is held worthy to have his Life. Their own Bosoms
else would have condemned them, and netled the old rivell'd Hag, from whom he
received that Answer, and who all the time had been silent, to have stirred her
glib Tongue among them. Now imagine, after this Question so fully resolved, and
the whole Court of Women ready to be dissolved, with what unexpected Joy this
Late perplexed Knight was transported; which, (behold the Mutability of all
Earthly Comforts, ever sweeter in Ambition than Fruition) was as quickly
exiled, by another Occurrent: which now succeeds.

And with that word, up stert the old wife
Which that the knight fond sitting on the grene
Mercy (quoth she) my sovereign lady queen --
No sooner was this Question resolved, the Knight pardoned, and all ready to
depart, than up starts this old Trot, and appeals to the Queen, who sat as
Chief Justice; to whom she exhibits her Petition, after that, like another
Omphada, she had unnimbly rushed down upon her four Quarters, and in her best
homely manner had done her Reverence: Madam, I am an old woman, and so must
youngest here be, if they live to it; yet an old woman deserves her due as well
as the youngest: This gay Knight, simply though I stand here, was taught by me
his Answer: for which he plighted me his Troth, that whatsoever I should demand
at his Hand, if it lay in his power, he would perform.

Before the court than pray I the sir knight
(Quoth. she) that thou me take unto thy wife
For well thou wotst, that I have kept thy life.
You shall not say, Sir Knight, that I love you ill; both to save your Life,
and procure you a Wife, is no mean Courtesy. I mean to bestow no worse than my
self on you; and many a poor Knight would be heartily glad of a worse Choice.
You know Promise is Debt; nor can you pay your Debt, unless you tender your
self.

If I say false, say nay upon thy fay.
This knight answered, alas and welaway.
She puts him to his Book-Oath, but he will neither take it, nor her by his
goodwill. He must now turn over a new Leaf, and act another fresh Scene of
Sorrow. For, thinks he, if Life be nothing without Society, what may that Life
be worth, where he must live with her whom he eternally loths? Thusto live were
to die; yea to die were to live, rather than embrace such a Life. Better thinks
he, it had been by many Degrees, to have stood Mute, and submitted himself to
the extremest Censure, than upon such hard terms to have procured an Answer,
the issue whereof will undo him for ever. He resolves then to make her a fair
Proffer, the Acceptance whereof, though it should make him a Beggar, yet in his
Conceit infinitely happier.

Take all my good, and let my body go.
Nay quoth she, than I shrewe us both two.
As if he should say, I confess freely, that I have received an incomparable
Courtesy from you; being the next Means under God and my Gracious Sovereign,
of preserving my Life; Nor will I deny but I promised you upon the Answer I
received from you, whatsoever were in my power, I would freely and without
exception give you. But little did I expect that my self should be the Gift.
Alas! You are an old Woman, and should think of other matters, than such
youthful Marriages. For what would this beget but Jealousy in you, Discontent
in me, and some miserable End to us both? This Disparity in our Years, can make
no true Harmony in our Affections. Age, generally is more given to the World,
than the Flesh; Accept then of my Fortunes, I lay them down at your Feet, and
leave me to the wide world to raise me an Estate. I have nothing too dear for
you but my self; release me of that, and take all. This, he thought would have
prevailed, but he is far deceived; She expressly answers him, that it was not
his Fortunes that could content her; No, nor all the precious Ore, Metals, nor
Minerals of the whole Earth. As his own Life was by her means saved, so expects
she that his own Person shall recompense it. Set your heart then at rest, says
she, as you received from me the Benefit of your Life, so nothing will content
me but being your Wife and your Love. My love (quoth he) nay my dampnation Alas
that any of my nation etc.

My Love, my loathing! Hanging and wedding go by destiny, and he holds it
disputable, whether his loss of life or choice of such a Wife, were the greater
Misery. He holds Martial's opinion in his affiance to this woman.

Paula likes me, so shall I never her,
Because she is old, unless she elder were.
He could be the better contented to marry her, if he were but persuaded that
he should shortly become her Survivor; mean time, this is his conceit; though,
he received from her the benefit of his life, yet he holds his life at too high
a rate to be enthralled to her love. Neither, as he verily thinks, would this
disgrace which he should thus incur, by engaging himself to this unweldy
Beldame, who was a very fardel of Diseases, reflect only upon himself, but on
his whole Nation: For to describe her, and bestow on her her true Character,
what was she, but a sapless seer stock without verdure; a crawling creeping
Cricket, without vigor; a proportionless feature without favor? One, whose
mouth like a common sewer, was ever driveling; whose Nose, like a perpetual
Limbeck, was ever dropping. The Sciatica had taken Possession of her Hip; the
Megrim of her Head; An aged Film had quite covered her Eyes; And an incessant
Cough taken seizure of her Lungs. Her Mouth was discharged of the Grinders;
from which issued such a Steam, as it would have put a Sergeant in mind of his
Mortality. Yet must this proper Puss be this Knight's dainty Bride; For
howsoever he hold himself highly disparaged, his Nation dishonored, his
succeeding Hopes eternally dashed;

-- The end is this, that he
Constrained was, that needs must he her wed
And takes this old wife, and goes to ved.
He must perform his Promise; Where women are Judges, the worst of their Sex
must not be wronged. Now what a comfortable Bridal this was, let them judge,
who have known the misery of a Loathed Bed. Bat no Remedy in cases of such
inevitable Necessity; He must put on the best Countenance he can, and learn to
dissemble with the World, the bitterest of whose Discontents he has now
sufficiently tasted.

Now wolden some men say parauenture
That for my negligence, I do no cure
To tellen you the joy and the array
That at the feast was that ilke day.
Now some (says this old Wife of Bath) will perhaps expect that I should speak
of the Joy and Jollity, Feasts and Solemnity of this goodly Marriage, As first,
how the Bride and Bridegroom were attired, with what Companies attended, what
Dainty Cates were provided, how the Feasters were ranked, with what Music and
Melody cheared.

To the which thing answer shortly I shall
I say there was no joy ne feast at all.
They that expect any jovial Day at such a Bridal-Day, are much deceived; There
was nothing there but Pouting, Louring, and Cloudy Weather; All things were out
of temper; No Consort could keep any Concord, when the Chief of the Feast were
at such mortal Discord. They that came to their Table, might be sure to find
store of Foul in every Corner; Foul Looks, Foul Lips, Foul Linen. Well may we
think then;

Great was the sorrow the Knight had in his thought
When he was with his wife a bed ibrought.
He is now entering his Mount Aetna, or his Cancasus rather; for she is cold
enough for any season. A perpetual Fever now afflicts him. Rest he cannot, yet
may she rest, and will not.

He waloweth, and turns to and fro.
His old wife lay smiling euermo
And said: O dear husbonde, O benedicite
Fares every Knight thus as ye?
While he makes his Bed his Rack, turning to and fro, tossing and wallowing in
his Sheets of Shame, for so he holds them, his Bedfellow expostulates the
Cause with him, and with a comfortable Smile, as you may gather, by her amiable
Favor and Feature, thus accoasts him; Good God, Dear Husband, what a tossing
and turning you make! Fares every Knight with his Wife as you do? Is this the
Comfort of a first Nights Marriage? Marry, Fie upon Wedding and this be it. Are
King Arthur's Knights so dainty of their Love, as they will tender no
Benevolence to them from whom they receive the Benefit of their Life? Sure,
others are neither so coy nor curious, so dainty nor dangerous of their Busses
nor Embraces as you be. Am not I she, who preserved your Life from Danger, and
since have married you, which deserves some Honor? How is it then, that like a
mad man, you show this Distemper, and withold that Freedom of Love from me,
which you ought in duty to tender? First Night had been no such great matter,
if you had been more sparing of your Love hereafter.

Fie, what is my gilt? for gods love tell me it
And it shall be amended if I may.
Amended (quoth this knight) alas nay nay etc.
Sure my Guilt cannot be so great, but if you look on the Means of your Safety,
that will excuse me; But if I have been in ought blameworthy, do but impart
it, and I shall amend it. Amend it (quoth the Knight) that is impossible. When I
look on thy Deformity, it makes me quite forget the means of my Safety. Thy
Presence makes my Bed loathsome; thy Old Age and base Birth make my Life
wearisom. No wonder then, if I thus toss, turn and turmoil my self, when I see
no Object that may afford to my restless Misery the least Hope of Comfort.
Burst then, poor hapless Heart, since thou art destitute of all Hope, and
deprived of all Means of Help.

Is this (quoth she) the cause of your unrest?
Ye certainly quoth he, no wonder nis.
What, says she, is this all you can object against me? Is it my Base
Parentage, or Mean Personage the only Reason of your Distaste? Yes, answers he,
what Reasons can be greater, when neither outward Worth, nor Equality of Birth
suits with mine Honor?

Now sir (quoth she) I couth amend all this
If that me list, erit were days three
Do well ye might bear you unto me.
Well Sir, these are no such great Eyesores, but they might be cured; yea, and
before three Days were expired, if you demeaned your self toward me as became
a Loving Husband. But whereas you stand so much upon Gentility of Blood; Trust
me, sweet Spouse, these Titles are but Trifles. Those only are to be held
generous, who are Virtuous; those Ignoble, who are Vicious. Nobility of Blood,
if it want inward Worth, is soon corrupted; and the highest Family without
Virtue, stained. It is true, we derive from our Ancestors our Descents, yet if
we come short of them in Deserts, we more dishonor them, than we are honored
by them. For howsoever they confer on us their Inheritance, they cannot leave
us their Goodness; That must be by our own Endeavors obtained, not to us
Lineally derived. He is a right Gentleman, that has gentle Conditions; from
whence he took his Name, as it agreed best with his Nature.

Well can the wise poet of florence
That hight Daunte, speak in this sentence.
Daunt, a Famous Italian Poet, of whom succeeding times have given this
Approved Testimony;

Ingenuous Daunt, who had the Art to sit
His Subject to his Verse, his Verse to it.
He was Laureat in his Time, and of such a pregnant present Conceit, as he was
no less honored by the Eminentest Princes then living; who joy'd to be his
Mecoenas: than memorized after his Death with a rich and sumptuous Monument,
with his Effigies to Life engrav enon it.

Lo in such manner rhyme is Dauntes tale
Full selde up rises by his branches sinale
Prowess of man: for God of his goodness
Wol that we claim of him our gentilnesse.
Here this old Woman shows her self graced with inward Worth, though she want
outward Parts, in a free Delivery of her Reading both in Poetry and Philosophy.
Wherein she first repeats Daunt's Divine Sentence, how we are to attribute all
glory unto God, from whom we receive not only outward Prowess, but all inward
Goodness. From our Elders, we may receive Fortunes and Temporal Blessings,
which usually prejudice most, where they are possessed most: But for inward
Abilities, it is not in their power to derive them to us, nor bestow them on
us. And he gives the Reason, which he confirms with a Familiar Instance: For,
says he, Should Goodness be derived lineally, then where there is any goodness
in the Ancestor, it should diffuse and propagate it self to all his Family;
None that descended from him, should be addicted to any Villainy: There would be
an Heritage of Goodness in the whole Lineage. Just as Fire, should you carry it
into the darkest Cell betwixt Heaven and Frozen Caucasus, yet would it,
according to its Natural Quality and Operation, give Light and Heat; The
Darkness of the House could neither obscure nor extinguish it; till what fed it
were consumed, and so it self became quenched. But it is far otherwise with
Gentry, it derives no such Native Motion nor Operation from her Family.

For god it wot, men may full often find
A lords son done shame and villainy --
As Bastard-Slips take seldom deep Root, so the freest and most generous Plants
bring not always forth most Fruit. The hopefullest Cyens are oft-times most
degenerate. Catiline and Cethegus were a shame to their Fathers; So were
Semphroma and Lucilla to their Mothers. He or she then (says this Moral Bride)
that would be accounted Generous, let him be Virtuous; He cannot be a
Gentleman, that is not endowed with a Gentle Mind. Be he or she never so nobly
Descended, if Debauched, they are but Peasants. Neither can we justly challenge
to our selves any Honor from our Ancestors, if we second them not in Actions
worthy the Renown of those Ancestors. It is neither Priority of Place, nor
Nobility of Race, that deserves Approving, but Gentleness and Affability, which
from God have their sole Beginning.

Thinks how noble, as says Ualerius
Was thilke Cullius Hostilius.
Tullus Hostilius, of whom so glorious a mention is made by Lib. 7. c. 4.
Valerius Maximus, was the third King of the Romans, a Prince of Singular
Sobriety, a singular Observer of all Virtues; Insomuch as his own Goodness
raised him to that Greatness. His Poverty could not keep him from Imperial
Dignity, because the Eyes of all good men were upon him; by whose general
Suffrage he was elected, and to a Regal Seat advanced. Peruse likewise the
Works of Seneca and Boethius, two Authors most sententiously Divine, and you
shall find (says this old Bride) that it is gentle Deeds that make one truly
Gentile. By all which, she expressly concludes, that an Honorable Descent
infers not ever Eminence of Desert; For as one may be Low bred and well
disposed, so may one be Highborn, and ill-affected.

And therefore dear husbond, I thus conclude
Al were it that mine anceters were rude
Yet may that hie god, and so hope I
Grant me grace to live vertously.
Surcease Husband, to twit me thus with Baseness of Birth; Though mine
Ancestors were rude, yet if God give me Grace to be good, my Virtuous Life
shall ennoble my low Line. Let not this therefore so much distaste you, though
my Descent be mean, I purpose to supply that Want by Deserts, if that may
please you.

And there as ye of poverty me repreue
The hie God, on whom that we bileue
In wilful pouerte chese to lead his life etc.
Secondly, Whereas you seem so much to tax me for my Poverty; That Condition is
rather to be loved, than reproved. He who may be a Pattern to us all for
Imitation, preferred voluntary Poverty before any other Condition. Neither may
we think would He have chus'd it, if there had been any Evil in it. The
Philosopher says, To be silent in Prosperity, cheerful in Adversity, in both
to show an Indifferency, is the highest Pitch of Philosophy. It is the Saying
of Sage Seneca, and other Learned men, That he only is Prosperous and Happy,
who contents himself with his Poverty; Admit he be not worth a Shirt to his
back, he has Wealth enough, who holds himself content. He is the richest, whose
Desires are fewest; He the poorest, whose Wishes are fullest. There is no
Poverty but Sin properly. Juvenal speaks merrily:

He that is so poor he is not worth a Groat,
Before a Thief may sing a merry Note.
Yea, to describe more fully the Excellency of Poverty; It is a Sovereign good,
though generally hateful, inwardly fruitful. An expedite Dispatcher of
Business; For howsoever we pay for Expedition in these Courts on Earth, this is
that leads us in the expeditest Course to the Court of Heaven; It enlighteneth
our Understanding, enliveneth our Conceiving, rectifieth our Judgment, if in
these Gusts of seeming Affliction we be patient. These, and many other
excellent Fruits produces Poverty, though few or none entertain it willingly.
Nay, which is more, it brings Man to the Knowledge of himself, and of God, who,
for his Love to Man, humbled himself. Besides, It is a very clear Mirror or
Looking-Glass, wherein he may distinguish Friends from Foes, and try whom he
may safely trust. Reprove me then no more (Gentle Sir) for my Poverty; nor
grieve your self at that which brings with it more Comfort than Misery.

Now sir, eke of elde ye repreued me
And certes sir, though none autorite
Were in no book ye gentiles of honor
Saine that men should an old wight honor etc.
Lastly Sir, Whereas you despise me for mine Age; If no Authority did enjoin
you, nor no Book inform you, that Age were to be reverenced, even your own
Gentility would exact this from you, and that inbred Civility which Nature has
planted in you. When you see an Old Man, for the Reverence you bear unto his
Age, you clepe him Father. Will you contemn me then, because I am like your
Mother? In this respect, you should rather cherish, than discourage me, honor,
than disparage me.

Gray Hairs were once in reverence till now,
So were deep Furrows in an Aged Brow.
Believe it Sir, though Cani Juvenum Spectra, Senam Specula; Juvenum Ludibria,
Senam Decora: Adag.
Gray Hairs be young men's Terrors, they are old men's Treasures; Though young
men's Laughter, they are old men's honors. More Experience is here shrouded,
than Fair Looks, or Fresh Looks ever yet attained.

Now there as ye sain, that I am foul and old
Than dread you not to ben a cokewolde.
Now whereas you still cast in my Dish, mine Age and Deformity; This you may
use for an Antidote against Jealousy. When you are abroad, you need not fear
me; Affection is grown so cold in me, it can work no strong Effects on my
Fantasy. Neither will any one desire much to court me, for my Deformity.
Decrepit Age and want of Beauty, are sufficient Guardians to preserve Chastity.
For as Age is ever attended on by Honor, it is with more Reverence loved than
lusted after.

But natheles, sin I know your delight
I shall fulfill your worldly appetite.
These now (quoth she) one of these things twey
To have me foul and old, til that I dey
And be to you a true humble wife
And never you displease in all my life
Orels wol you have me young and fair
And take your aduenturst of the repair
That shall come to your house, because of me
Or in some other place, may well be?
But go too Sir; I see these pleas will hardly please. The Bride that lies by
you must be beautiful or she will not content you. Beauty is a dainty Pearl in
your eye. Well; you shall have your desire: There is nothing that may delight
you, wherein I will not satisfy you, if it be in my power to grant you. Go to
then, I will offer to your choice two things, wherein please your self, and you
shall please me who am your second self. First is, whether you will have me
aged and deformed as I now am; and so find me an humble, loving, and affable
Wife, unwilling to displease you, ready at bed and board to be disposed by you,
in all respects conformable unto you. Or else, you will have me young and fair,
and subject your self to the hazards of beauty. For well you know, that as
youth is sooner tempted, so is beauty soonest tainted. I cannot avoid it but I
must have Suitors to court me, Servants to comfort me, dainty Didappers to
visit me. Your house must be always open to Strangers, mine arms to embraces,
my perfumed Lips to youthful Kisses.

Now chese your seluen whether that you likes
This Knight auiseth him, and sore siketh
But at the last, he said in manete:
My lady and my love, and wife so dear
I put me in your wise governance
Theseth your self, which may be more pleasunce
And most honor to you and me also
I do no force whether of the two --
The world is well amended; Now when it is in his choice, he stands indifferent
for her Change. Yet could he find in his heart that she had Beauty, so none
might share with him in her Beauty. But Jealousy is such a dangerous Malady,
as to prevent all occasion, he will content himself with her Deformity, rather
than become subject to so cureless an Infirmity. First therefore he here
advises, then sigheth, lastly thus concludes: Albeit, Dear Wife, you may
imagine what Comfort it would be to me to enjoy a Beautiful Bedfellow; one
whose outward Parts might make her honored wherever she resorted; and whose
sweet. Society might allay my Distasts, and improve my Comforts whenever
occasioned; yet shall not you find me so drenched or drowned in sensual
Delights, as to prefer mine own Appetite before the Light of Reason. I
understand by your grave and discreet Arguments, that you are wise, which is to
be incomparably valued above all outward Beauty. Make choice then of what may
seem best in your own Discretion; I will in no wise give way to my own blind
Affection; which of these two soever may tender you most Pleasure and Honor,
choose it, and so dispose of me and it, as your Honor may be most advanced by
it. I shall hold my self content whether of these two you accept.

For as you likes, it suffiseth me.
Than have I got of you the mastrie (quoth she)
Sin I may chese, and govern as my list
Ye certes wife (quoth he) I hold it for the best
Kiss me (quoth she) we be no longer wroth
For by my truth, I woll be to you both etc.
Now what she so long aimed at, she has got; her own Will; and therein, which
may seem more strange, his Happiness. You have given me, says she, the
Mastery; which shall be such a Government, as it shall not have the least taste
of Tyranny. This you have done so freely, as it injoins my Usage to be
friendly. Go to Sir; You shall hence find what Benefit an obedient and
observant Husband may reap by resigning his Will to the Will of his Wife: You
stood doubtful at first, whether of those two Offers which I made you, were to
be accepted by you; That is, whether you would have me continue as I am, Aged
and Deformed, but withal Constant, Continent, and to your Command Obedient; Or
Young and Beautiful, but withal Youthful, and in danger to become Incontinent.
But now I shall take from you all Occasion of Doubting, and make you happy in
your Affection. For I will be to you both Young and Beautiful; and withal so
constant in my Love, so Continent in my Desires, so Moderate in my Delights, so
Temperate in my Resolves, so Discreet in my Directions, so Virtuously Good and
Gracious in all my Actions, as you shall find your Happiness fully Crowned in
enjoying me. Nor will I feed your Hopes with any long Delay; For by the next
Morning, shall my Beauty be such, as no Lady from East to West may compare with
me; whereof, with my Life, dispose as may best please you.

And so they slepte till it was morrow graie
And than she said, when it was day
Cast up the courteine, and look how it is.
And when this knight saw all this
That she so fair was and so young thereto
For joy he hent her in his arms two.
Howsoever it be said, that they both slept; It is probably to be doubted,
whether he, at least, slept or no. Such a longing desire he had to see this
approaching Hour of her Transmutation. But when this happy Hour was approached,
Aurora her burnished Beams dispersed, and the Curtain drawn aside, by which
this Brides Beauty might be discerned; it is not to be imagined how strangely
this over-joyed Bridegroom was intranced. Straight-waies he inwreaths her in
his Arms, looks Babies in her Eyes; and as one embathed in Bliss, a thousand
times a row he kisseth her, merely transported with joy for the Beauty he saw
in her.

Thus did they surset it in midst of Plenty,
Ten Kisses short as one, one long as Twenty.
To treat farther of it, I will not; Modesty would have this Subject
enskreened, and left to the Imagination to conceive it. Let it suffice, that as
her Beauty could not choose but give him Content, so was she to him constant and
obedient: In which mutual Affection; seconded with perfect Joy, free from all
Jar, they continued till their Lives ended.

-- And Jesus Christ us send
Husbondes meke, young, and fresh a bed
And grace to ouerliue hem that we wed.
And I pray to God, to short her lives
That will not be governed by her wives
And old and angry nigardes of dispense
God send hem sone a very pestilence.
Here at last this good Old Wife of Bath ends her long Relation with a serious
Supplication; By which she shows that she has one Colt's Tooth yet left;
Neither does she pray only for her self, but for the whole Congregation of her
Sex: That they may have Husbands Meek, to live with, Young, to love with, and
Fresh, to lie with; That they may ever be their Survivors; That such Husbands
may have short Lives, who will not suffer their Wives to be Governors; And that
a Pestilence may light on all such Husbands and Niggardly Cot-queans as cannot
dispose of their own, but are Misers. And so ends she her Story to make her
Audience merry. Thus then will we conclude our Comment, and recount the Comical
Passages of their Nuptial Content, woven up in these Verses.

The King's appeased, the Queen rests satisfied,
The Bridegroom joys in his new-formed Bride
No Part in her appears from Top to Toe
But may give Nature thanks for making't so;
Inward and Outward Graces jointly meet,
To make his Comfort in her more complete;
Long did they live together in true Love,
While each with other in Affection strove:
May all Folk marry so that would live well,
Or let them tarry, and lead Apes in Hell.
An APPENDIX.
AFter such time as the Author, upon the instancy of sundry Persons of Quality,
had finished his Comments upon these Two Tales; the Perusal of them begot that
Influence over the clear and weighty Judgments of the Strictest and Rigidest
Censors; as their high Approvement of them induced their Importunity to the
Author to go on with the rest, as he had successfully done with these Two
first: Ingenuously protesting, that they had not read any Subject discoursing
by way of Illustration, and running Descant on such Light, but Harmless
Fancies, more handsomely couched, nor modestly shadowed. All which, though
urgently pressed, could make no Impression on the Author: For his Definite
Answer was this: That his Age, without any Appellant, might render his Apology;
and privilege him from Commenting on Conceptions (were they never so pregnant)
being interveined with Levity, Saying;

Of such light Toys He Would tam a long Adieu,
Nor did He mean his Knowledge to renew.
Neither could he entertain any such thought of Perfection in these, being
begun and finished in his Blooming Years; wherein the Heat of Conceit, more
than the Depth of Intellect dictated to his Pen. The Remainder of his Hours
henceforth was to number his Days: But if Aeson's Herb should revive him, and
store him with a new Plumage, he was persuaded that his Youthful Genius could
not bestow his Endeavor on any Author with more Pleasure nor Complacency to
Fancy, than the Illustrations of Chaucer.

Amidst this Discourse, a Critic stepping in, objected out of the Quickness of
his Censure, much like that Fantastical Madam, who drew Rapsodies from her
Carpet, that he could allow well of Chaucer, if his Language were Better.
Whereto the Author of these Commentaries returned him this Answer: Sir, It
appears, you prefer Speech before the Headpiece; Language before Invention;
whereas Weight of Judgment has ever given Invention Priority before Language.
And not to leave you dissatisfied, As the Time wherein these Tales were writ,
rendered him incapable of the one; So his Pregnancy of Fancy approved him
incomparable for the other. Which Answer stilled this Censor, and justified the
Author; leaving New-holme to attest his Deserts; his Works to perpetuate his
Honor.

FINIS.

