BREAD for the POOR: OR, OBSRVATIONS Upon certain PROPOSALS Lately offered To
the Kings Majesty and both Houses of PARLIAMENT.

With some additional Considerations tending to Enriching of the Nation, and
E^^rease of most necessary Manufactories amon^^ us.

WHEREBY All Poor people (Women and Children from five years old) may be
comfortably Employed to get their own Livings, Beggars and Vagrants Restrained;
the Parish-Charges for the Poor Lightened: And consequently our Lands improved,
Rents raised, and yet both Farmers and Tradesmen Encouraged; And many Hundred
thousand pounds a year kept at home, which now goes out of the Kingdom to
French and there Foreign Commodities.

By Philo-Anglicus, Gent.

With Allowance.

London: Printed for D. M. 1678.

Bread for the Poor: Or, Observations upon certain PROPOSALS lately offered to
the King and both Houses of Parliament.
THe Labors of the Poor, are the Mines of the Rich; Manufactories and
Commerce, the Springs of Wealth to every Nation, whence flow Power at home, and
(the effect of that) Reputation abroad; so that no doubt that Prince or Nation
that can gain and keep the Trade of the World, will in short time bid fair to
be in effect, Master of the World.

This the FRENCH have not only understood, but vigorously endeavored; As if
they aimed to be little less formidable for their subtlety in Traffic, than
by the power of their Arms. For how considerably have they advanced their
Trade, and promoted their own Manufactories? Still no less industriously
beating down and supplanting those of their Neighbors* particularly of
England, as (amongst others) for Instance, our WOOLLEN-CLOTH, on which they
have laid such heavy Impositions, as almost quite discouraged the exporting any
thither; Yet in the mean time bringing over vast quantities of their prohibited
Trifles, with the same boats at their return jilting away our Wool ( one Pack
of which puts three of theirs into Cloth, which otherwise were unserviceable;)
and also invite over our workmen, undersel us at Market, and use a thousand
Artifices to Ruin that Trade, which once was the Glory of our Nation, and made
us renowned through the World.

These things are too apparent not to be taken notice of, too dangerous not to
be obviated. To which purpose what remains, but that we Countermine their
policies, and strive to improve to the utmost the Manufactories of those
materials which our Kingdom does, or might plentifully yield; And as much
discourage theirs, of which our people have hitherto been too fond?

In order to this, we cannot but observe and applaud a very profitable PROPOSAL
lately made by one Mr. Richard Hains, a person though to us unknown further
than by his worthy Labors, and that we are informed he is a Sussex-Gentleman,
Yet certainly his Zeal for promoting things tending to public Good, and his
Industrious Genius in the happy discovery of them, no less than the pains he
takes to divulge them, that being reduced by Authority into Practice, they may
accomplish the good ends desired, deserves both public notice and thanks.
Wherefore, though he has lately printed the same, yet the Book not being so
generally dispersed as might be wished, we shall presume to recite some parts of
it here: For, Omne Bonum quo Communius eo' Melius.

This Author considering the heavy Pressures most Parishes lie under to
maintain their Poor, who daily increase; the decay of our Woollen Clothing
Trade, and the vast Charge we are yearly at for Linen, Cordage, etc. from
other Nations, whereby our Treasure is exhausted, and our Lands fall for want
of being improved some other way, besides the common ones, of sowing of Corn,
breeding for Wool, etc.

For Remedy, does propose, That there may be erected in every County of
England, according to its Extent or Populousness, a greater or lesser Work
house or VVorking Almshouse, as he properly enough calls it; for so in the end
and design of the Erection it is; (Work for Money being a better piece of Alms
to those that are able to do it, than Money or Victuals without Work to lazy
Vagrants.) In which houses the Poor may be continually employed under Sober and
Religious Government in the Manufactory of Linen Cloth. Whereby he
demonstrates by a modest Calculation, that above thirteen hundred thousand
pounds worth of Linen Cloth may yearly be spun in those houses, besides what
is done in private Families: Whence a triple benefit would arise.

1. Those vast Sums now yearly sent out of the Nation for Linen Cloth, etc.
(which computed by very Intelligent persons, has of late cost us more than a
Million per Annum) may be saved.

2. It will be an Employment for the weakest people, not capable of stronger
labor, viz. Women, Children, and Aged, now the most chargeable; and set to
work those hands which for the most part now are idle; it being supposed there
are at least 100000 Beggars or others that want a lawful Employment, who hereby
will not only be removed from being chargeable, but on the contrary, kept in
good order, may become serviceable to the Public.

3. Much Land throughout England will be greatly improved by sowing Hemp and
Flax; one of which may be plentifully produced in every County of this
Kingdom, to the great advantage of Farmers, and consequently of Landlords.

To facilitare this Work, he has invented an Eng^ne whereby one man may turn
fifty Spinning-wheels, which shall serve a hundred persons to spin with at
once: so that they shall have nothing to do but employ both hands to draw Tire
from the Distaff, and so earn nine pence a day as easily as now they can six
pence; as is there evidently demonstrated.

The Objections that may be made either to the Advantages proposed, or the
Method, he has largely and plainly solved; so that I do not perceive any thing
that with any color of reason can be started against it, but he has soundly
and substantially answered.

The Title of his Book is, Proposals for building VVorking-Alms houses, as the
best Expedient to perfect the Trade and Manufactory of Linen Cloth in
England. To be sold by R. Harford, at the Angel in Cornhill. A Piece which I
cannot but seriously recommend to the reading and consideration of every good
Patriot and true Englishman.

It Is certain, when in any Nation Commodities are Imported to a greater value
than what are Exported, Impoverishment seems unavoidable: For then our ready
Money must go out to even the Balance; whence it appears, A Kingdom may be in
as much danger by a great Trade ill managed, as by too little. It seems
therefore Proposable, That special Care be taken to improve Commodities of our
own growth and manufacture, and restrain the bringing in of Superfluities and
Unnecessaries. Hence it is considerable, whether the prohibiting of that mighty
Glut of French Wine may not be advisable, and the promoting of Cider or other
English Liquors (altogether as pleasant, and probably much more wholesome,
because more agreeable to English bodies) in its stead. The Decrease of his
Majesty's Customs may easily be supplied by the great wisdom of the Nation
another way.

Furthermore, since the first Riches of any Nation is the multitude of its
Inhabitants, and that we are like to have great occasion for People, as well to
be employed in profitable Manufactories at home, as necessary Defense abroad;
it is sad to consider how many Thousands of his Majesty's Subjects are yearly
ruined by unjust Vexations and trivial Suits; their bodies buried alive in
Prisons, and their Families reduced to a Parish-charge. This within the
Liberties of London is in a good measure avoided, by that excellent Court
established by King James P. M. deservedly called The Court of Conscience.
Judicaturs of like nature ('it is conceived) might be as commodiously erected in
the Suburbs of that City, and other grand Corporations, where they are more
necessary, by reason of a greater confluence there of People mean and Indigent;
the common Prey of Brokers, Tallymen, Bum-bayliffs, etc.

Indeed the whole business of Arrests and Imprisonment (at least by Capias
before Judgment) deserves Consideration, if not Regulation. It Is certain, From
the beginning it was not so: Nor shall I dispute what our Ancestors did to make
Trusting fools wise, or Ticking knaves honest. However, the present Course
seems a little incongruous,

1. In Nature, consequently in Law; nothing being destrainable but what can
satisfy, which must be an Estate either in Land or Goods: For a man's body is
neither Saleable (with us) nor Eatable.

2. In Discretion; the Creditor hereby disabling the Debtor, renders his Debt
more desperate.

3. In reason of State; depriving the Sovereign of his Subjects, whose bodies
thus immured might otherwise be serviceable in Peace or War.

4. In Justice and Conscience; that a man should be debarred of his Liberty
(the greatest Enjoyment Temporal) merely on a Suggestion, before it be
judicially proved that he is either a Debtor or Trespasser: Experience
witnessing, That scarce one Arrest in ten, but is either wholly causless, or
for spleen, revenge, or some inconsiderable trifle.

Lastly, In Commerce; Spendthrifts are allured to Rookings, and the trusting
Dealer is but smothered in his own Feathers: For, to pack off his Wares at any
Rate, he readily books the loose) the reach of his Purse: And if his fortune
fall short*, curses his Confidence; and to eke out his revenge, takes forth a
Capias for his Carcass; which proves but throwing good money after (...) one
Crawls out, Twenty are swallowed (...) or devoured by excessive Fees, and
Debaucheries commonly incident to Goals. In a word, It Is both a pity and a
shame, honest men, merely because poor, should be kept a starving in Prisons;
and as for rich Knaves, they do not regard them.

It Is a good Maxim, No man ought to be wiser than the Law; yet it is hoped,
what tends to Public Advantage, may with modesty and due submission be offered
to Consideration: And it is with that becoming deference these few Hints are
tendered to that Great Authority, which has) Power (if thought meet) to make
such variations as shall be necessary; whose Consultations may the Everlasting
Counselor bless with Unanimity and Success, for the Good of his Church, and
Prosperity of this Nation.

FINIS.

