A Replication TO THE BISHOP of CHALCEDON HIS Survey of the Vindication OF THE
CHVRCH of ENGLAND, FROM Criminous Schism: Clearing the English Laws from the
aspertion of Cruelty.

With an Appendix in answer to the exceptions of S. W.

By the right Reverend JOHN BRAMHALL D. D. and Lord Bishop of Derry.

LONDON, Printed by K. H. for John Crook, at the sign of the Ship in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1656.

To the Christian Reader.
CHristian Reader, of what Communion soever thou be, so thou be within
the Communion of the oecumenicall Church, either in act or in desire, I offer
this second Treatise of Schism to thy serious view and unpartiall Judgment. The
former was a Vindication of the Church of England, this later is a Vindication
of my self, or rather both are Vindications of both. In vindicating the Church
then, I did vindicate my self. And in vindicating my self now, I do vindicate
the Church. What I have performed I do not say, I dare not judge, the most
moderate men are scarcely competent judges of their own works.

No man can justly blame me for honoring my spiritual Mother the Church of
England, in whose womb I was conceived, at whose breasts I was nourished, and
in whose bosom I hope to die. Bees, by the instict of nature, do love their
hives, and Birds their nests. But God is my witness that, according to my
uttermost talent and poor understanding, I have endeavored to set down the
naked truth impartially, without either favor or prejudice the two capital
enemies of right judgment. The one of which like a falls mirror does represent
things fairer and straighter then they are, the other like the tongue infected
with choler makes the sweetest meats to taste bitter. My desire has been to
have truth for my chiefest friend, and no enemy but error, If I have had any
byasse, it has been desire of peace, which our common Savior left as a Legacy
to his Church, that I might live to see the reunion of Christendom, for which
I shall always bow the knees of my heart to the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. It is not impossible but that this desire of unity may have produced
some unwilling error of love, but certainly I am most free from the wilful
love of error. In questions of an inferior natu re Christ regards a charitaable
intention much more then a right opinion.

Howsoever it be, I submit my self and my poor endeavors, first, to the
judgment of the Catholic oecumenicall essential Church, which if some of late
days have indeavored to hiss out of the Schools as a fancy, I cannot help it.
From the beginning it was not so. And if I should mistake the right Catholic
Church out of humane frailty or ignorace, (which for my part I have no reason
in the World to suspect, yet it is not impossible, when the Romanists
themselves are divided into five or six several opinions, what ^his catholic
Church, or what their infallible Judge is) I do implicitly and in the
preparation of my mind submit my self to the true catholic Church, the Spouse
of Christ, the Mother of the Saints, the Pillar of Truth. And seeing my
adherence is firmer to the infallible rule of Faith, that is, the holy
Scriptures, interpreted by the catholic Church, then to mine own private
judgment or opinions, although I should unwittingly fall into an error, yet
this cordial submission is an implicit retractation thereof, and I am
confident will be so accepted by t he Father of mer^^^s both from me (...) and
sincerely (...) ^th.

Likew^ (...) repr^sentative (...) general Council, or so general as can be
procured, and until then to the Church of England wherein I was baptized, or
to a national English Synod. To the determination of all which, and each of
them respectively, according to the distinct degrees of their authority, I
yield a conformity and compliance, or at the least, and to the lowest of them,
an acquiescence.

Finally I crave this favor from the courteous Reader, that because the
Surveier has overseen almost all the principal proofs of the cause in
question, (which I conceive not to be so clearly and heartily done,) he will
take the pains to peruse the Vindication it self. And then in the name of God
let him follow the dictate of right reason. For as that scale must needs settle
down whereinto most weight is put, so the minds cannot choose but yield to the
weight of perspicuous demonstration.

An Answer to R. C. the Bishop of Chalcedons preface.
I Examine not the impediments of R. C. his undertaking this survey. Sect. 1.
Only I cannot but observe his complaint of extreme want of necessary Books,
having all his own notes by him, and such store of excellent Libraries in Paris
at his command, then which no City in the World affords more, few so good,
certainly the main disadvantage in this behalf lies on my side.

Neither will I meddle with his motives to undertake it. I have known him long
to have been a Person of great eminence among our English Roman Catholics, and
do esteem his undertaking to be an honor to the Treatise. Bos lassus fortius
pedem figit, (said a great Father) The weary Ox treads deeper. Yet there is
one thing which I cannot reconcile, namely a fear least if the answer were
longer deferred, the poison of the said Treatise might spread further, and
become more incurable. Yet with the same breath he tells us, that I bring
nothing new worth answering. And in his answer to the first Chapter, that no
other English Minister (for ought he knows) has hitherto dared to defend the
Church of England from Schism in any especial Treatise. Yes diverse, he may
be pleased to inform himself better at his leisure. What, is the Treatise so
dangerous and infectious? Is the way so unbeaten? And yet nothing in it but
what is trivial? Nothing new that deserves an answer? I hope to let him see
the contrary. He who disparageth the work which he intends to confute, wounds
his own credit through his adversaries sides. But it seems that by surveying
over hastily, he did quite oversee all our principal evidence, and the
chiefest firmaments of our cause. I am sure he has quite omitted them, I shall
make bold now and then to put him in mind of it.

Hence he proceeds to five observable points, which he esteems so highly,
that he believes they alone may serve for a full refutation of my Book. Then
he must have very favorable Judges. His first point to be noted is this, that
Schism is a substantial division, or a division in some substantial part of
the Church. And that the substantial parts of the Church are these three,
Profession of Faith, Communion in Sacraments and Lawful Ministry. I confess
I am not acquainted with this language, to make Profession of Faith, Communion
in Sacraments and lawful Ministry which are no substances* to be substantial
parts of any thing, either Physical or Metaphysicall. He defines the Church
to be a Society: can these be substantial parts of a Society? as much as
rationability being but a faculty or specificall quality is a substantial part
of a man, because it is a part of his definition, or his essential difference.

But I suppose that by substantial parts he means essentialls, Three
Essentials of a true Church.
as we use to say the same Church in substance, or the same religion in
substance, that is in essence. And if so, then he might have spared the labor
of proving it, and pressing it over and over. For we maintain that an entire
profession of saving truth, a right use of the Word and Sacraments, and an
union under lawful Pastors, being taken jointly, do distinguish the Church
essentially from all other Societies in the World. We have been told heretofore
of other notes of the Church which did not please us so well, as Antiquity, and
Universality, and Splendor, etc. which may be present or absent, with the
Church or without the Church. As if a man should describe money by the weight
and color and sound, or describe a King by his Crown and Scepter, or describe
a man as Plato did, to be a living creature with two legs without feathers,
which Diogenes easily confuted by putting a naked Cock into his School, saying,
behold Plato's man. Such separable communicable accidents are not notes (...),
absolutely and at all times, but (...), accidentally and at sometimes, whereas
these three do belong unto the Catholic Church and to all true particular
Churches inseparably, incommunicably, and reciprocally, and are proper to the
Church quarto modo, to every true Church, only to a true Church, and always to
a true Church. Yet I foretell him, that this liberal concession will not
promote his cause one hairs breadth: As will appear in the sequel of this
discourse.

Great difference between a true Church, and a perfect Church.
But yet this essentiality must not be pressed too far, for fear least we draw
out blood in the place of milk. I like Stapletons distinction well, of the
nature and essence of a Church, from the integrity and perfection thereof.
These three essentials do constitute both the one and the other, both the
essence and the perfection of a Church. Being perfect they consummate the
integrity of a Church, being imperfect they do yet contribute a being to a
Church. It does not follow that because Faith is essential, therefore every
point of true Faith is essential; or because discipline is essential,
therefore every part of right discipline is essential; or because the
Sacraments are essential, therefore every lawful rite is essential. Many
things may be lawful, many things may be laudable, yea many things may be
necessary necessitate praecepti, commanded by God, of divine institution, that
are not essential nor necessary necessitate medii. The want of them may be a
great defect, it may be a great sin, and yet if it proceed from invincible
necessity or invincible ignorance, it does not absolutely exclude from Heaven.
The essences of things are unalterable, and therefore the lowest degree of
saving Faith, of Ecclesiastical discipline, of Sacramental Communion that
ever was in the Catholic Church, is sufficient to preserve the true being of a
Church. A reasonable Soul and an humane Body are the essential parts of a man.
Yet this body may be greater or lesser, weaker or stronger, yea it may lose a
leg or an arm, which before they were lost, were subordinate parts of an
essential part, and yet continue a true humane body though imperfect and
maimed, without destroying the essence of that individual man. Sensibility and
a locomotive faculty are essential to every living creature. Yet some living
creatures do want one sense, some another, as sight, or hearing. Some fly,
some run, some swim, some creep, some scarcely creep: And yet still the
essence is preserved. Naturalists do write of the Serpent that if there be but
two inches of the body left with the head, Actual want of essentials not
conclusive to God.
the Serpent will live, a true Serpent, but much maimed and very imperfect.

Much less may we conclude from hence that the want of true essentialls in
cases of invincible necessity does utterly exclude from Heaven, or hinder the
extraordinary influence of divine Grace: No more then the actual want of
circumcision in the Wilderness did prejudice the Jews. God acts with means,
without means, against means. And where the ordinary means are desired and
cannot be had, he supplies that defect by extraordinary Grace. So he fed the
Israelites in a barren Wilderness where they could neither sow nor plant, with
Manna from Heaven. True Faith is an essential, yet Infants want actual Faith.
Baptism the laver of regeneration is an essential, yet there may be the
baptism of the Spirit, or the baptism of Blood, where there is not the Baptism
of water. He that desires Baptism and cannot have it, does not therefore want
it. So likewise Ecclesiastical discipline is an essential of a true Church,
yet R. C. himself will not conclude from thence that actual subordination to
every link in the chain of the hierarchy is so essentially necessary, that
without it there can be no salvation. Thus he says, We profess that it is
necessary to salvation to be under the Pope as Vicar of Christ. Ch 8. Sect. 3.
But we say not that it is necessary necessitate medii, so as none can be saved
who do not actually believe it, unless it be sufficiently proposed to them.
What he confesses, we lay hold on, that subjection to the Pope, is not
essentially necessary. What he affirms further, that it is preceptively
necessary or commanded by Christ, we do altogether deny. I urge this only for
this purpose, that though Ecclesiastical discipline be an essential of the
Church; yet (by his own confession) every particular branch of it may not be
essential, though otherwise lawful and necessary by the commandment of God.

But if by profession of faith he understand particular forms of confession,
Particular Rites, Forms, Opinions, no Essentials.
often differing in points of an inferior nature, not comprehended either
actually or virtually in the Apostles Creed, or perhaps erroneous opinons: If
by communion in Sacraments he understand the necessary use of the same rites,
and the same forms of Administration, whereof some may be lawful, but not
necessary to be used; others unlawful, and necessary to be refused: Lastly if
by lawful ministry he understand those links of the Hierarchy, which have
either been lawfully established by the church, as Patriarchall authority; or
unlawfully usurped, as Monarchical power; we are so far from thinking that
these are essential to the Church, that we believe that some of them are
intolerable in the Church.

The other Branch of this first note, that Schism is a division in some
substantial parts of the Church of God, is true, but not in his sense. All
Schism is either between Patriarchall Churches, or Provincial Churches, or
Diocesan Churches, or some of these respectively, or some of their respective
parts. But his sense is, that all Schism is about the essence of Religion.
Schism is not always about esentials.
A strange paradox! Many Schisms have arisen in the Church about Rites and
Ceremonies, about Precedence, about Jurisdiction, about the Rites and Liberties
of particular Churches, about matter of Fact. Obstinacy in a small error is
enough to make a Schism. Saint Paul tel's us of Divisions and Factions and
Schisms that were in the Church of Corinth; yet these were not about the
essentialls of Religion, but about a right-handed error, even too much
admiration of their Pastors. The Schism between the Roman and Asiatick
Churches, about the observation of Easter, was far enough from the heart of
Religion. How manny bitter Schisms have been in the Church of Rome it self,
when two or three Popes at a time have challenged Saint Peter's Chair, and
involved all Europe in their Schismatical contentions? Yet was there no manner
of dispute about Faith or Sacrements, or holy Oders, or the Hierarchy of the
Church, but merely about matter of Fact, whose election to the Papacy was right.

From the former ground, R. C. makes two collections, First that Schism is a
most grievous crime, and a greater sin than Idolatry, because it tends to
the destruction of the whole Church, whose essence consists in the union of
all her substantial parts, and her destruction in the division of them. What
does this note concern the Church of England, which is altogether guiltles both
of Schism and Idolatry? I wish the Church and Court of Rome may be as able to
clear themselves. I am no Advocate for Schism, Yet this seems strange
paradoxicall doctrine to Christian ears. Schism is not a greater sin than
Idolatry.
What is all Schism a more grievious sin than formal Idolatry? who can believe
it? Schism is a defect of Charity, Idolatry is the height of impiety, and a
public affront put upon Almighty God. Schism is immediately against men,
Idolatry is directly against God. And the Fathers hold that Judas sinned more
in despairing and hanging himself, than in betraying his Master, because the
later was against the humanity, the former against the Divinity of Chriist.
Idolatry is a spiritual Adultery, and so styled every where in holy
Scriptures. A scolding contentious Wife is not so ill as an Adulteress; neither
is that Soldier who straggles from his Camp, or deserts his General out of
passion, so ill as a professed Rebel, who attempts to thrust some base Groom
into his Sovereigns Throne. 1. Cor. 10.10.21.
Saint Paul calls Idols Devils, and their Altars the tables of Devils. Can any
sin be more grievous than to give divine honor to the Devil?

It is true that some Schism in respect of some circumstance is worse than some
Idolatry, as when the Schism is against the light of a man's knowledge, and the
Idolatry proceeds out of ignorance: But the learned Surveior knows very well,
that it is a gross fallacy to argue a dicto secundum quid ad dictum
simpliciser, to apply that which is spoken respectively, to some one
circumstance, as if it were spoken absolutely to all intents and purposes: as
if one should say that many men were worse than beasts, because each kind of
beasts has but one peculiar fault, and that by natural necessitation, as the
Lion cruelty, the Fox subtilty, the Swine obscenity, the Wolf robbery, the Ape
flattery, whereas one may find an epitome of all these in one man, and that by
free election; yet he were a bad disputant who should argue from hence that the
nature of man is absolutely worse than the nature of brute beasts.

Aust. l. 1. de bapt. c. 8.
Saint Austin faith indeed that Schismatics baptising Idolaters do cure them
of the wound of their Idolatry and infidelity, but wound them more grievously
with the wound of Schism. The deepest wound is not always the most deadly. For
the Sword killed the Idolaters, but the Earth swallowed up the Schismatics.
And Optatus adds, Opt l. 1.
that Schism is summum malum, the greatest evil. That is, not absolutely, but
respectively, in some persons, at some times. No man can be so stupid as to
imagine that Schism is a greater evil than the sin against the Holy Ghost, or
Atheism, or Idolatry. The reason of Optatus his assertion follows, the same
in effect with Saint Austines, for the Idolatrous Ninevites upon their fasting
and prayer obtained pardon, but the earth swallowed up Korah and his company.
All that can be collected from Saint Austin or Optatus, is this, that God does
sometimes punish wilful Schismatics more grievously and exemplarily in this
life, than ignorant Idolaters; which proves not that Schism is a greater
sin than Idolatry. Jeroboam made Gods people Schismatics, but his hand was
dried up then, when he stretched it out against the Prophet, yet the former was
the greater sin. The judgments of God in this life are more exemplary for
the amendment of others, than vindictive to the delinquents themselves. And for
the most part in the whole history of the Bible, God seems to be more
sensible of the injuries done unto his church and to his servants, then of the
dishonor done unto himself. In the Isle of Man it is death to steal an Hen, not
to steal an Horse, because there is more danger of the one than of the other,
in respect of the situation of the Country. Penal laws are imposed, and
punishments inflicted, according to the exigence of places, the dispositions of
persons, and necessities of times.

But because he has appealed to Saint Austin, to Saint Austin let him go: I
desire no better Expositor of Saint Austin than Saint Austin himself. Exceptis
illis duntaxat quicunque in vobis sunt scientes quid verum sit, and pro
animositate suae perver itatis contra veritatem etiam sibi notissimam
dimicantes. Horum quippe impietas etiam I. dololatriam forsitan superat, Aust.
Ep. 48.
Excepting only those [Donatists]* whosoever among you know what is true, and
out of a perverse animosity do contend against the Truth, being most evidently
known to themselves: For these men's impiety does peradventure exceed even
Idolatry itself. The case is clear, Saint Austin and Optatus did only
undestand wilful perverse Schismatics, who upheld a separation against the
evident light of their own conscience, comparing these with poor ignorant
Idolaters; and even then it was but a peradventure, peradventure they are worse
than Idolaters. But I wish R. C. and his party would attend diligently to what
follows in Saint Austin, to make them leave their uncharitable censuring of
others. ibidem.
Sed quia non facile convinci possunt, in animo namque latet hoc malum, omnes
tanquam a nobis minus alieni leviori severitate coercemini. But because these
can not be easily convicted, for this evil (obstinacy) lies hid in the heart,
we do use more gentle coertion to you all, as being not so much alienated from
us. I wish all men were as moderate as St. Austin was, even where he professes
that he had learned by experience the advantage of severity. St. Austin and the
primitive Church (in the person of which he speaks) spared the whole sect of
the Donatists, and looked upon them as no such great strangers to them, because
they did not know who were obstinate, and who were not; who erred for want of
light, and who erred contrary to the light of their own consciences. The like
Spirit did possess Optatus, who in the treatise cited by R. C. does continually
call the Donatists Brethren, not by chance or inanimadvertence, but upon
premeditation; he justifies the title, and professes himself to be obliged to
use it; he would not have done so to Idolaters. And a little before in the same
Book, he wonders why his Brother Parmenian (being only a Schismatic) would
rank himself with Heretics, who were falsifiers of the Creed, that is the old
primitive Creed which the Council of Trent it self placed in the front of their
Acts, as their North-star to direct them. I wish they had steered their course
according to their compass.

To cut off a lim from a man, or a branch from a tree (says he) is to destroy
them: most true. But the case may be such that it is necessary to cut off a
limb to save the whole body, as in a gangreen. The word of error is a canker
or gangreen (...), 1 Tivi 2.17.
not cancer a crabfish, because it is retrograde, which was Anselmes mistake.
So when superfluous branches are lopped away, it makes the tree thrive and
prosper the better.

His second conclusion from hence is, There may be just cause of separation, no
just cause of Sch^sm.
that there can be no just or sufficient cause given for Schism, because there
can be no just cause of committing so great a sin, And because there is no
salvation out of the Church, which he proves out of St. Cyprian and St.
Austin, to little purpose, whilst no man doubts of it or denies it. And hence
he inferres this corollary, that I say untruely that the Church of Rome is the
cause of this Schism and all other Schisms in the Church, because there ean be
no just cause of Schism. My words were these, that [the Church of Rome, or
rather the Pope and Court of Rome, are causally guilty both of this Schism and
almost all other Schisms in the Church.] There is a great difference between
these two. But to dispell umbrages and to clear the truth from these mists of
words: We must distinguish between the Catholic oecumenicall Church, and
particular Churches how eminent soever. As likewise between criminous Schism
and lawful separation. First, I did never say that the Catholic or universal
Church either did give or could give any just cause of separation from it, yea
I ever said the contrary expressly. And therefore he might well have spared his
labor of citing St. Austin and St. Cyprian, who never understood the Catholic
Church in his sense. His Catholic Church was but a particular Church with
them. And their Catholic Church is a mass of Monsters and an Hydra of many
Heads with him. C. 2. S 6 Particular Churches may give just cause of separation.


But I did say, and I do say; that any particular Church without exception
whatsoever, may give just cause of separation from it by heresy, or Schism, or
abuse of their authority, in obtruding errors. And to save my self the labor
of proving this by evidence of reason, and by authentic testimonies, C. 2
Sect. 4.
I produce R. C. himself in the point in this very Survey. Neither can there be
any substantial division from any particular Church, unless she be really
heretical or schismatic, I say really, because she may be really heretical
or schismatic, and yet morally a true particular Church, because she is
invincibly ignorant of her heresy or schism, and so may require profession of
her heresy, as a condition of communicating with her. In which case division
from her is no schism or sin, but virtue, and necessary. And when I urge that
a man may leave the communion of an erroneous Church, as he may leave his
Fathers house when it is infected with some contagious sickness, with a
purpose to return to it again when it is cleansed, he answers, Pref p. 20.
that this may be true of a particular Church, but cannot be true of the
universal Church. Such a particular Church is the Church of Rome.

Secondly I never said that a particular Church did give, or could give
sufficient cause to another Church of criminous Schism. The most wicked society
in the world cannot give just cause or provocation to sin; Their damnation is
just, Romans 3.8
who say, let us do evil that good may come of it. Whenever any Church shall
give sufficient cause to another Church to separate from her; the guilt of the
Schism lies not upon that Church which makes the separation, but upon that
Church from which the separation is made. This is a truth undeniable, and is
confessed plainly by Mr. Knott. Inf. unmask chapter 7. sect. 112 p. 534.
They who first separated themselves from the primitive pure Church, and
brought in corruptions in faith, practice, liturgy, and use of Sacraments, may
truly be said to have been Heretics by departing from the pure faith, and
Schismatics by dividing themselves from the external communion of the true
uncorrupted Church. We maintain that the Church of Rome brought in these
corruptions in Faith, Practice, Liturgy and use of the Sacraments, and which
is more, did require the profession of her errors, as a condition of
communicating with her. And if so, then by the judgment of her own Doctors,
the Schism is justly laid at her own door, and it was no sin in us, but
virtue and necessary to separate from her. Lib. 2. cont. ep. Parmen. e. 11.
I acknowledge that St. Austin says praescindendae unitatis nulla est justa
necessitas, there is no sufficient cause of dividing the unity of the Church.
But he speaks not of false doctrines or sinful abuses in the place alleged, as
if these were not a sufficient cause of separation. He proves the express
contrary out of the words of the Apostle Gal 1.8. and 1. Tim. 1.3. He speaks of
bad manners and vicious humors and sinister affections, especially in the
preachers, as envy, contention, contumacy, incontinency. This was his case then
with the Donatists, and is now the case of the Anabaptists. That these are no
sufficient cause of dividing unity, he proves out of Phil. 1. v. 15.16.17.18.
He says that in these cases there is no sufficient cause, cum disciplinae
severitatem consideratio custodiendae pacis refraenat aut differt, when the
consideration of preserving peace does restrain or delay the severity of
Ecclesiastica^ll discipline. He says not that in other cases there can be no
sufficient cause, what does this concern us who believe the same?

His second note is this, Sect. 2. Pro^^stans have forsaken no ancient Churches.
that Protestants have forsaken the Pope, the Papacy, the universal Roman
Church, and all the ancient Christian Churches, Grecian, Armenian, Ethiopian,
in their communion of Sacraments; and to clear themselves from Schism, must
bring just cause of separation from every one of these. I answer that we are
separated indeed from the Pope and Papacy, that is, from his primacy of power,
from his universality of jurisdiction by divine right, which two are already
established from his superiority above general Councels and infallibility of
judgment, which are the most received Opinions and near establish^ng in the
Roman Church. We have renounced their Patriarchall power over us, because they
never exercised it in Britain for the first six hundred years, nor could
exercise it in after ages without manifest usurpation, by reason of the Canon
of the Oecumenicall Council of Ephesus. Yea because they themselves waved it,
and implicitly quitted it, presently after the six hundredth year. Disuse in
law forfeits an office as well as abuse. But we have not separated from the
Pope or Papacy, as they were regulated by the Canons of the Fathers. We look
upon their universal Roman Church as an upstart innovation, and a contradiction
in adjecto. We find no footsteps of any such thing throughout the primitive
times. Indeed the Bishops of Rome have sometimes been called Oecumenicall
Bishops; so have the other Patriarchs, for their universal care and presidency
in general Councels, who never pretended to any such universality of power. But
for all ancient Churches, Grecian, Armenian, Ethiopian, etc. none excluded, not
the Roman it self; we are so far from forsaking them, that we make the
Scriptures interpreted by their joint belief, and practice, to be the rule of
our reformation. And wherein their Successors have not swerved from the examples
of their Predecessors, we maintain a strict Communion with them: Only in Rites
and Ceremonies and such indifferent things, we use the the liberty of a free
Church, to choose out such as are most proper for our selves, and most
conducible to those ends for which they were first instituted, that is, to be
advancements of order, modesty, decency, gravity, in the service of God, to be
adjuments to attention and devotion, furtherances of edification, helps of
memory, exercises of Faith, the the leaves that preserve the fruit, the shall
that preserves the kernel of Religion from contempt. And all this with due
moderation, so as neither to render Religion sordid and sluttish, nor yet light
and garish, but comely and venerable.

Lastly, in Sacraments.
for communion in Sacraments, we have forsaken no Sacraments either instituted
by Christ, or received by the primitive Christians. We refuse no Communion with
any catholic Christians at this day, and particularly with those ancient
Churches which he mentions, though we may be, and have been misrepresented one
unto another: yea though the Sacraments may be administered in some of them not
without manifest imperfection, whilst sinful duties are not obtruded upon us
as conditions of communion. Under this caution we still retein communion in
Sacraments with Roman Catholics. If any person be baptized or admitted into
holy Orders in their Church, we baptize them not, we ordain them not again.
Wherein then have we forsaken the Communion of the Roman Church in Sacraments?
not in their ancient Communion of genuine Sacraments, but in their septinary
number, and suppositious Sacraments, which yet we retein for the most part as
useful and religious Rites, but not under the notion of Sacraments: not in
their Sacraments, but in their abuses and sinful injunctions in the use of the
Sacrament. As their administration of them in a tongue unknown, where the
people cannot say Amen to the prayers and thanksgivings of the Church, contrary
to Saint Paul. As their deteining the Cup from the Laity, contrary to the
institution of Christ, 1. Cor. 19 Math. 26.27
drink ye all of this, that is, not all the Apostles only; for the Apostles did
not consecrate in the presence of Christ, and (according to the doctrine of
their Schools, and practice of their Church) as to the participation of the
Sacrament at that time, were but in the condition of Laymen. As their
injunction to all Communicants to adore, not only Christ in the use of the
Sacrament, to which we do readily assent, but to adore the Sacrament it self.
And lastly, as their double matter and form in the ordination of a Priest,
never known in the Church for above a thousand years after Christ. These and
such like abuses were the only things which we did forsake: so as I may truly
say, non tellus Cymbam, tellurem Cymba, reliquit: It was not we that did
forsake them in the Communion of their Sacraments, but it was their Sacraments
that did forsake us: And yet we do not censure them for these innovations in
the use of the Sacraments or the like, nor thrust them out of the communion of
the Catholic Church, but provide for our selves, advise them as Brethren, and
so leave them to stand or fall to their own Master. So on our parts there is a
reformation, but no separation.

His third point is, Sect. 3.
that Protestants vary in giving the pretended just cause, of their separation
from the Roman Church. For at the first their only cause was the abuse of some
that preached Indulgences. Since some others give the adoration of the blessed
Sacrament, or communion in one kind; others give the Oath made by Pius the 4th,
which they call a new creed; others other causes. Which variety is a certain
sign of their uncertainty of any true just cause of their separation. That the
Pardoners and Preachers of Indulgences, and the envy of other Orders, and the
passionate heat of the Court of Rome, (tange montes and fumigabunt, touch the
high mountains and they will smoke,) did contribute much to the breach of this
part of Christendom, is conf^ssedly true.

But it is not only the abuse of some Preachers of Indulgences, The true cause
of the separation of some Protestants.
but much more the abuse of Indulgences themselves which we complain of, that a
treasury should be composed of the blood of Christ, and the sufferings and
supererogatory works of the Saints, to be disposed by the Pope for money. What
is this, but to mingle Heaven and Earth together, the imperfect works of man,
with the sacrified blood of Christ? Neither was it the Doctrine and abuse of
Indulgences alone, but the injunction to adore the Sacrament also and Communion
in one kind and the new Creed of Pius the 4th, or the new Articles since
comprised in that Creed, and the Monarchy of the Pope by divine right, and
sundry other abuses and innovations all put together, which gave just cause to
some Protestants to separate themselves, so far as they were active in the
separation. But we in England were first chased away by the Popes Bulls. If
these abuses were perhaps not discovered, or at least not pleaded all at once,
what wonder is it. Dies diei eructat verbum, and nox nocti indicat scientiam,
Psalm. 19.
day unto day utters speech, and night unto night shows knowledge.

His fourth point, which he says is much to be noted, is reduced by himself to
a Syllogism, Whosoever separate themselves in substance (that is in essentials)
from the substance of a Catholic and true Church in substance, are true
Schismatics. But Protestants have separated themselves in substance from the
Roman Church, which is a Catholic and true Church in substance, therefore
Prostants are true Schismatics. His proposition is proved by him, because the
substances of things do consist in indivisibili and the changing of them
either by addition or by subtraction is not a reformation but a destruction of
them. And therefore it is a contradiction to say that a Church which has the
substance or the essence of a Church, can give just cause to depart from her in
her essentials, and not only a contradiction but plain blasphemy, to say that
the true Church of Christ in essence, his mystical body, his Kingdom, can
give just cause to forsake it in essentials. The assumption is proved by him,
because we confess that the Roman Church is a true Church in substance, and
yet have forsaken it in the essentials of a true Church, namely the Sacraments,
and the public worship of God.

His proposition admits little dispute. I do acknowledge that no Church true
or falls, no society of Men or Ang^^s, good or bad, can give just or sufficient
cause, to forsake the essentials of Christian Religion, or any of them, and
that whosoever do so, are either heriticks, or schismatics, or both, or which
is worse then both, down right Infidels and Apostates. For in forsaking* any
essential of Christian Religion they forsake Christ and their hopes of
Salvation in an ordinary way. But here is one thing which it behooves R. C.
himself to take notice of, That if the essences of all things be indivisible,
Essences of things are indivisible, and destroyed by addition as well as
subtraction.
and are destroyed as well by the addition as by the subtraction of any
essential part, how will the Roman Church or Court make answer to Christ for
their addition of so many (not explications of old Articles but) new pretended
necessary essential Arricles of Faith, under pain of damnation, (which by his
own rule is to destroy the Christian Faith,) who have coined new Sacraments,
and added new matter and form, that is, essentials to old Sacraments, who have
multiplied sacred O^ders, and added new lincks to the chain of the Hierarchy.
This will concern him and his Church more nearly, then all his notes and points
do concern us.

Concerning his assumption, two questions come to be debated: first, whether
the Church of Rome be a true Church, or not: secondly, How the Church of Rome
is and is not a true Church.
whether we have departed from it in essentials. Touching the former point, a
Church may be said to be a true Church two ways, metaphysically and morally.
Every Church which has the essentials of a Church, how tainted or corrupted
soever it be in other things, is metaphysically a true Church, for ens and
verum convertuntur. So we say a thief is a true man, that is a reasonable
creature, consistng of an humane body and reasonable soul. But speaking morally
he is a faulty filching vicious person and so no true man. So the Church of
Rome is metaphysically a true Church, that is to say, has all the essentials
of a Christian Church, but morally it is no true Church, because erroneous;
contraries, as truth and error may be predicated of the same subject, so it be
not ad idem, secundum idem, and codem tempore. Truth in fundamentalls and
error in superstructures may consist together. 1 Cor. 13.12.
The foundation is right but they have builded much hay and stuble upon it: And
in respect of this foundation she may, and doubtless does bring forth many true
Members of Christ, Children of God, and Inheritors of the Kingdom of Heaven.
The Church of the Jews was most erroneous and corrupted in the days of our
Savior; yet he doubted not so say Salvation is of the Jews. John 4.22. Ephesians.
5.26.
I know it is said, that Christ has given himself for his Church to sanctify
it, and cleanse it, and present it to himself a glorious Church, without spot
or wrinkle: But that is to be understood inchoactively in this life; the
perfection and consummation thereof is to be expected in the life to come.

To the second question, whether the Church of England in the Reformation have
forsaken the essentials of the Roman Church? I answer negatively, we have not.
If weeds be of the essence of a Garden, We have not left the Roman Church in
essentialls.
or rupt Humors, or Botches, or Wennes, and Excrescences be of the essence of
man: If Errors, and Innovations, and Superstitions and sperfluous Rites, and
pecuniary Arts be of the essence of a Church, then indeed we have forsaken the
Roman Church in its essentials: otherwise not. We retein the same Creed to a
word, and in the same sense by which all the primitive Fathers were saved;
which they held to be so sufficient, that in a general Council they did forbid
all persons, Con. ephesians. p. 2. Act 6 c 7.
under pain of deposition, to Bishops and Clerks, and anathematisation to
Laymen, to compose or obtrude any other upon any Persons converted from
Paganism or Judaisme. We retein the same Sacraments and Discipline which they
retained; we derive our holy Orders by lineall succession from them, we make
their doctrine and their practice (under the holy Scriptures, and as best
Expositors thereof) a Standard and Seal of truth between the Romanists and us.
It is not we who have forsaken the essence of the modern Roman Church by
substraction, But they who have forsaken the essence of the ancient Romau
Church by addition. Can we not forsake their new Creed unless we forsake their
old faith? Can we not reduce the Liturgy into a known tongue, but presently we
forsake the public worship of God? Can we not take away their tradition of the
Patine and Chalice and reform their new matter and form in Presbyterian
ordination; which antiquity did never know, which no Church in the World
besides themselves did ever use, but presently we forsake holy Orders? The
truth is, their errors are in the excess, and these excesses they themselves
have determined to be essentials of true Religion: And so upon pretense of
interpreting, they intrude into the Legislative office of Christ; and being but
a Patriarchall Church, do usurp a power which the universal Church did never
own, that is, to Constitute new essentials of Christian Religion. Before the
determination their excesses might have past for probable Opinions or
indifferent Practices, but after the determination of them as Articles of
faith, extra quam non est salus, without which there is no salvation (they are
the words of the Bull) they became inexcusable errors. So both the pretended
contradiction and the pretended blasphemy are vanished in an instant. It is no
contradiction to say, that a true humane body in substance may require
purgation, nor blasphemy to say, that a particular Church (as the Church of
Rome is) may err, and (which is more than we charge them withal) may apostate
from Christ. In the mean time we preserve all due respect to the universal
Church, and doubt not to say with St. Austin that to dispute against the sense
thereof, Aust ep. 118.
is most insolent madness.

His fifth point to be noted has little new worth noting in it, Nor differ in
substance from the Roman Church.
but tautologies and repetitions of the same things over and over. Some
Protestants (says he) do impudently deny that they are substantially
separated from the Roman Church. If this be impudence, what is ingenuity? If
this be such a gross error for man to be ashamed of, what is evident truth? We
expected thanks for our moderation, and behold reviling for our good will. He
might have been pleased to remember what himself has cited so often out of my
vindication, That our Church since the Reformation is the same in substance
that it was before. If the same in substance, then not substantially separated.
Our comfort is that Caleb and Joshua alone were admitted ino the Land of
promise, because they had been Peacemakers in a seditious time, and
endeavored not to enlarge but to make up the breach. He adds that the
chiefest Protestants do confess that they are substantially separated from the
Roman Church. Who these chiefest Protestants are, he tel's us not, nor what
they say, but referrs us to another of his Treatises which I neither know here
how to compass, nor, if I could, deem it worth the labor. When these principal
Protestants come to be viewed thoroughly and seriously with indifferent eyes, it
will appear that either by [ substantially] they mean really, that is to say
that the differences between us are not mere logomachies, or contentions about
words and different forms of expression only, but that there are some real
controversies between us both in credendis and agendis, and more and more,
real in agendis, than in credendis. Or secondly that by [substance] they
understand not the old Essentials or Articles of Christian Religion, wherein we
both agree, but the new Essentials or new Articles of Faith lately made by the
Romanists, and comprehended, in the Creed of Pius the fourth, about which we
do truly differ. So we differ substantially in the language of the present
Romanists: But we differ not substantially in the sense of the primitive
Fathers. The generation of these new Articles is the corruption of the old
Creed. Or lastly, if one or two Protestant Authors either bred up in hostility
against new Rome, as Hanniball was against old Rome, or in the heat of
contention, or without due consideration, or out of prejudice or passion, or a
distempered zeal, have overshot themselves, what is that to us? Or what does
that concern the Church of England?

He, says St. Austine, told the Donatists, that though they were with him in
many things yet if they were not with him in few things, the many things
wherein they were with him would not profit them. But what were these few
things wherein St. Austine required their communion? Were they abuses, or
innovations, or new Articles of Faith? No, no, the truth is, St. Austine
professed to the Donatists, that many things and great things would profit them
nothing (not only if a few things, but) if one thing were wanting: videant quam
multa and quam magna nihil prosint, Aust y. 1. de hapt. c. 8.
si unum quidem defu^rit, and videant quid sit ipsum unum. And let them see
what this one thing is. What was it? Charity. For the Donatists most
uncharitably did limit the Catholic Church to their own party, excluding all
others from hope of salvation, just as the Romanists do now, who are the right
successors of the Donatists in those few things, or rather in that one thing.
So often as he produces St. Austine against the Donatists, he brings a rod for
himself. Furthermore he proves out of the Creed and the Fathers that the
communion of the Church is necessary to salvation, to what purpose I do not
understand, (unless it be to reprove the unchristian and uncharitable censures
of the Roman Court.) For neither is the Roman Church, the Catholic Church, nor
a communion of Saints a communion in errors.

His sixth and last point, which he proposes to judicious Protestants, is
this, that though it were not evident, that the Protestant Church is
Schismatic, but only doubtful. Yet it being evident, that the Roman Church
is not schismatic, because (as Doctor Sutcliff confesses) they never went
out of any known Christian Society, nor can any Protestant prove that they did,
it is the most prudent way for a man to do for his Soul as he would do for
his lands, liberty, honor or life, that is to choose the safest way, It is not
lawful or prudent to leave the English Church and adhere to the Roman for fear
of Schism.
namely to live and die free from schism in the communion of the Roman Church.

I answer, first, that he changes the subject of the question. My proposition
was that the Church of England is free, from schism: he ever and anon enlarges
it to all Protestant Churches, and what or how many Churches he intends;
under that name and notion I know not. Not that I censure any foreign Churches,
with whose laws and liberties I am not so well acquainted as with our own. But
because I conceive the case of the Church of England to be as clear as the Sun
at noonday, and am not willing for the present to have it perplexed with
heterogeneous disputes. So often as he stumbleth upon this mistake I must make
bold to tell him that he concludes not the contradictory.

Secondly, I answer, that he disputes ex non concessis, laying that for a
foundation granted to him, which is altogether denied him, namely that it is a
doubtful case, whether the Church of England be schismatic or not. Whereas
no Church under Heaven is really more free from just suspicion of schism then
the Church of England, as not censuring nor excluding uncharitably from her
communion; any true Church which retains the essentials of Christian Religion.

Thirdly, I answer, that it is so far from being evident that the Roman Church
is guiltless of schism, that I wish it were not evident that the Roman Court
is guilty of formal schism, and all that adhere unto it, and maintain its
censures of material schism. If it be schism to desert altogether the
communion of any one true particular Church, what is it not only to desert, but
cast out of the Church by the bann of excommunication, so many Christian
Churches, over which they have no jurisdiction, three times more numerous then
themselves, and notwithstanding some few (perhaps) improper expressions of some
of them, as good or better Christians and Catholics as themselves; who suffer
daily, and are ready to suffer to the last drop of their blood for the name of
Christ.

If contumacy against one lawful single superior be schismatic, what is
rebellion against the sovereign Ecclesiastical Tribunal, that is a general
Council? But I am far from concluding all indistinctly. I know there are many
in that Church, who continue firm in the doctrine of the Councels of Constance
and Basile, attributing no more to the Pope then his principium unitatis, and
subjecting both him and his Court; to the jurisdiction of an Oecumenicall
Council.

Fourthly, I answer that supposing, but not granting, that it was doubtful,
whether the Church of England were schismatic or not, and supposing in like
manner that it were evident that the Church of Rome was not schismatic, yet
it was not lawful for a son of the Church of England; to quit his spiritual
mother. May a man renounce his due obedience to a lawful Superior upon
uncertain suspicions? No. In doubtful cases it is always presumed pro Rege
and lege, for the King and for the Law, Neither is it lawful (as a Father said
some Virgins, who cast themselves desperately into a River, for fear of being
defloured) to commit a certain crime for fear of an uncertain. Yea to rise yet
one step higher, though it were lawful, yet it were not prudence, but folly,
for a man to thrust himself into more, more apparent, more real danger, for
fear of one lesser, less apparent, and remoter danger. Or for fear of
Charybdis to run headlong into Scylla. He who forsakes the English Church for
fear of Schism, to join in a stricter communion with Rome, plungeth himself in
greater and more real dangers, both of Schism and Idolatry, and Heresy. A man
may live in a schismatic Church, and yet be no Schismatic, if he err
invincibly, and be ready in the preparation of his mind to receive the truth
whenever God shall reveal it to him, nor want ( R. C. himself being Judge)
either Faith, or Church, or Salvation.

And to his reason, The present Church of Rome departed out of the ancient
Church of Rome.
whereby he thinks to free the Church of Rome from Schism, because they never
went out of any Christian Society, I answer two ways, first, It is more
schismatic to cast true Churches of Christ out of the communion of the
Catholic Church, either without the Keys or Clave errant with an erring Key,
then merely and simply to go out of a particular Church. This the Romanists
have done, although they had not done the other. But they have done the other
also. And therefore I add my second answer by naming that Christian Society,
out of which the present Church of Rome departed, even the ancient primitive
Roman Church, not locally, but morally, which is worse, by introducing
corruptions in Faith, Liturgy, and use of the Sacraments, whereby they did both
divide themselves schismatically from the external communion of the true,
primitive, uncorrupted Church of Christ, and became the cause of all following
separation. So both ways they are guilty of Schism, and a much greater Schism
then they object to us.

All that follows in his preface or the most part of it, Sect. 4.
is but a reiteration of the same things, without adding one more grain of
reason to enforce it. If I did consider that to divide any thing in any of its
substantial parts, is not to reform, but to destroy the essence thereof, etc.
If I did consider, that there are three substantial parts of a true Church in
substance, etc. If I did consider, that any division of a true Church in any
substantial part thereof is impious, because it is a destruction of Christ's
mystical body, etc. If I did consider all these things, etc. I should clearly
see that the English Protestant Church, in dividing her self from the substance
of the Roman Church in all her formal substantial parts, committed damnable
sin, and that I in defending her therein commit damnable sin. I have
seriously and impartially weighed and considered all that he says. I have
given him a full account of it, that we have neither separated our selves from
the mystical body of Christ, nor from any essential or integrall part or
member thereof. I have showed him the original of his mistake, in not
distinguishing between sacred institutions, and subsequent abuses; between the
genuine parts of the body, and wenns or excrescences. And in conclusion (waving
all our other advantages, I do not, for the present, find on our parts the
least shadow of criminous Schism: He prays God to open my eyes that I may see
this truth. I thank him for his charity in wishing no worse to me then to
himself. But errors go commonly masked under the cloak of truth. Fallit enim
vitium specie virtutis and umbra. I pray God open both our eyes, and teach us
to deny our selves, that we may see his truth, and prefer it before the study
of advancing our own party. For here the best of us known but in part, and see
as through a glass darkly, 1 Cor. 13.9, 12.
that we may not have the faith of Christ in respect of persons.

That which follows is new indeed. Iam. 2.1.
To communicate with Schismatics is to be guilty of Schism. But the English
Church joins in communion of Sacraments and public Prayers with Schismatics,
namely Puritans, and Independants. This is inculcated over and over again in
his book. But because this is the first time that I meet with it, and because I
had rather be before hand with him, then behind hand, I will give it a full
answer here. And if I meet with any new weight added to it in any other place,
To communicate with Schismatics is not always Schism.
I shall endeavor to clear that there, without wearying the reader with
tautologies and superfluous repetitions. And first I deny his proposition. To
communicate with heretics or Schismatics in the same public Assemblies, and
to be present with them at the same divine offices is not always Heresy or
Schism, unless one communicate with them in their heretical or schismatic
errors. In the primitive Church at Anti^ch when Leontius was Bishop, the
Orthodox Christians and the Arrians repaired to the same Assemblies, but they
used different forms of doxologies, the orthodox Christians saying, Glory be
to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost, And the Arrians saying,
Glory be to the Father, by the Son, in the Spirit. At which time it was
observed, that no man could discern what form the Bishop used, because he
would not alienate either party. So they communicated with Arrians, but not in
Arrianism; with heretics, but not in Heresy. Take another instance, the
Catholics and Novatians did communicate and meet together in the same
Assemblies. Illo autem tempore parum aberat quin Novatiani and Catholici
penitus conspirassent. Soz^m. l 4 ^. 19
Nam eade^ de Deo sentientes, communiter ab Arrianis agitati, in similibus
calamitatibus constituti, se mu^ua complecti benevolentia, in unum convenire,
pariter orare caeperunt. And further, decreverunt deinceps inter se
communicare. At that time it wanted little that the Novatians and Catholics
did not altogether conspire in one; for having both the same Faith concerning
God, suffering the same persecution from the Arrians, and being both involved
in the same calamities, they began to love one another, to assemble together,
and to pray together; And they decreed from that time forward to communicate
one with another. The primitive Catholics thought it no Schism to communicate
with Novatians, that is with Schismatics, so long as they did not communicate
with them in their Novatianism, that is, in their Schism. Have the English
Protestants matriculated themselves into their congregational Assemblies? Have
they justified the unwarrantable intrusion of themselves into sacred Functions,
without a lawful calling from Christ or his Church? Or their dispensing the
greatest mysteries of religion with unwashen, or it may be, with bloody hands?
As for communicating with them in a schismatic Liturgy, it is impossible;
they have no Liturgy at all, but account it a stinting of the Spirit. And for
the Sacrament of the blessed body and blood of Christ, it is hard to say
whether the use of it among them be rarer in most places, or the congregations
thinner. But where the ministers are unqualified, or the form of Administration
is erroneous in essentials, or sinful duties are obtruded as necessary parts
of Gods service, the English Protestants know how to abstain from their
communion, let the Roman Catholics look to themselves; for many say (let the
Faith be with the authors) that sundry of the Sons of their own Church, have
been greater sticklers in their private Conventicles and public Assemblies,
then many Protestants.

Secondly, I deny his assumption (that the Church of England does join in
communion of Sacraments and public Prayers with any Schismatics. What my
thoughts are of those whom he terms Puritans and Independants, The Church- of
England does not communicate with Schismatics.
they will not much regard, nor does it concern the cause in question. Many
Mushrome Sects may be sprung up lately in the world which I know not, and
posterity will know them much less, like those misshapen creatures which were
produced out of the slime of Nilus by the heat of the Sun, which perish^d soon
after they were generated for want of fit organs. Therefore I pass by them, to
that which is more material. If the Church of England have joined in
Sacraments and public Prayers with Schismatics, let him show it out of her
Liturgy, or out of her Articles, or out of her Canons and constitutions, for by
these she speaks unto us. Or let him show that any genuine son of hers by her
injunction, or direction, or approbation, did ever communicate with
Schismatics: or that her principles are such as do justify or warrant Schism,
or lead men into a communion with Schismatics: otherwise then thus a national
Church cannot communicate with Schismatics. If to make Canons and
Constitutions against Schismatics be to cherish them: If to punish their
Conventicles and clandestine meetings be to frequent them: If to oblige all her
sons who enter into holy Orders, or are admitted to care of souls, to have no
communion with them, be to communicate with them, then the Church of England is
guilty of communicating with Schismatics, or otherwise not.

But I conceive that by the English Church he intends particular persons of our
communion. If so, then by his favor he deserts the cause, and alters the state
of the question. Let himself be judge whether this consequence be good or not.
Sundry English Protestants are lately turned Romish Proselytes; therefore the
Church of England is turned Roman Catholic. A Church may be Orthodox and
Catholic, and yet sundry within its communion be heretics or Schismatics or
both. 1 Cor. 1.2. 11. c. 15: 12.
The Church of Corinth was a true Church of God, yet there wanted not
Schismatics and heretics among them. The Churches of Galatia had many among
them, who mixed circumcision and the works of the Law with the faith of Christ.
The Church of Pergamos was a true Church, yet they had Nicholaitans among them,
and those that held the doctrine of Balaam. The Church of Thyatira had a
Preaching Iesabel that seduced the servants of God. Rev 2.14 15.20.


But who are these English Protestants that communicate so freely with
Schismatics? Nay he names none. We must take it upon his word. Are they
peradventure the greater and the sounder part of the English Church? Neither
the one nor the other. Let him look into our Church, and see how many of our
principal Divines have lost their Dignities and Benefices, only because they
would not take a schismatic Covenant, without any other relation to the
Wars. Let him take a view of our Universities, and see how few of our old
Professors, or Rectors and Fellows of Colleges he finds left therein. God
said of the Church of Israel, that he had reserved to himself seven thousand
that had not bowed their knees unto Baall. I hope I may say of the Church of
England, that there are not only seven thousand, but seventy times seven
thousand that mourn in secret, and wish their heads were waters and their eyes
fountain of tears, that they might weep day and night for the devastation and
desolation of the City of their God.

And if that hard weapon Necessity have enforced any (perhaps with an intention
to do good or prevent evil) to complie further than was meet, I do not doubt
but they pray with Naman, The Lord be merciful to me in this thing. Suppose
that some Persons of the English Communion do go sometimes to their meetings,
it may be out of conscience to hear a Sermon; it may be out of curiosity as men
go to see May games, or Monsters at Faires; it may be that they may be the
better able to confute them; As St. Paul went into their heathenish Temples at
Athens, and viewed their Altars and read their Inscriptions, yet without any
approbation of their Idolatrous devotions. Is this to communicate with
Schismatics, or what does this concern the Church of England?

CHAP. 1. A Reply to the first Chapter of the Survey.
HOw this Chapter comes to be called a Survey of the first Chapter of my
vindication, Sect. 1.
I do not understand, unless it be by an antiphrasis the contrary way, because
he does not survey it. If it had not been for the title, and one passage
therein, I should not have known whither to have referred it. In the first
place he taxes me for an omission, that I tell not Why the objection of
Schism seems more forcible against the English Church then the objection of
Heresy. And to supply my supposed defect he is favorably pleased to set it
down himself. The true reason whereof (says he) is because Heresy is a matter
of doctrine, which is not so evident as the matter of Schism, which is a
visible matter of fact, namely a visible separation in communion of Sacraments
and public worship of God. I confess I did not think of producing reasons
before the question was stated; but if he will needs have it to be thus, before
we inquire why it is so, we ought first to inquire whether it be so; Objections
against the Church of England in point of Schism are colorable, not forcible.
for my part I do not believe that either their objections in point of Heresy
or in point of Schism, are so forcible against the Church of England. So he
would have me to give a reason of a non entity, which has neither reason nor
being. All that I said was this, that there is nothing more colourably objected
to the Church of England, at first sight, to Strangers unacquainted with our
affairs, or to such Natives as have looked but superficially upon the case,
then Schism. Here are three restrictions, Colourabley, at first sight, to
Strangers. Colourably, that is, not forcibly, nor yet so much as truly. He who
doubts of it, may do well to try if he can warm his hands at a Glowe-worm.
At first sight, that is, not by force, but rather by deception of the sight. So
fresh water Seamen at first sight think the shore leaves them, terraeque
urbesque recedunt; but straightwaies they find their error, that it is they
who leave the shore. To Strangers, etc. that is, to unskillfull Judges. A true
diamond and a counterfeit do seem both alike to an unexperienced person.
Strangers did believe easily the Athenian fables of Bulls and Minotaures in
Creete. But the Crecians knew better that they were but fictitious devises. The
seeming strength lies not in the objections themselves, but in the incapacity
of the Judges.

But to his reason, the more things are remote from the matter and divested of
all circumstances of time and place and persons, the more demonstrable they
are; that is the reason why Mathematicians do boast that their Principles are
so evident, that they do not persuade but compel men to believe. Yet in the
matter of fact, and in the application of these evident rules, where every
particular circumstance does require a new consideration, how easily do they
err? in so much as let twenty Geometricians measure over the same plot of
ground, hardly two of them shall agree exactly. So it seems that an error in
point of doctrine may be more easily and more evidently convinced, than an
error in matter of fact. He says the separation is visible. True; but whether
the separation be criminous, whether party made the first separation, whether
there was just cause of separation, whether side gave the cause, whether the
Keys did err in separating, whether there was not a former separation of the
one party from the pure primitive Church, which produced the second separation,
whether they who separated themselves or others without just cause, do err
invincibly, or not, whether they be ready to submit themselves to the sentence
of the Catholic Church, is not so easy to be discerned. How many separations
have sprung about elections, or jurisdiction, or precedence, all which Rites
are most intricate, and yet the knowledge of the Schism depends altogether
upon them. This Surveier himself confesses, That a Church may be really
heretical or schismatic, and yet morally a true Church, because she is
invincibly ignorant of her Heresy or Schism, in which case it is no Schism,
but a necessary duty to separate from her. In this very case proposed by
himself, I desire to know how it is so easy by the only view of the
separation, to judge or conclude of the Schism.

But the true ground why Schism is more probably objected to the Church of
England than Heresy, is a false but prejudicate opinion, That the Bishop of
Rome is the right Patriarch of Britain, That we deserted him, and that the
differences between us are about Patriarchall Rites; all which with sundry
other such like mistaken grounds, are evidently cleared to be otherwise in the
vindication. This is all that concerns my first Chapter. The rest is voluntary.

The next thing observable in his Survey is, that Protestants confess that
they have separated themselves not only from the Roman Church, but also from
all other Christian Churches in the communion of the Sacraments and public
worship of God: And that no cause but necessity of salvation can justify such
a separation from the crime of Schism. And it must needs seem hard to prove
that it was necessary for the salvation of Protestants, to make such a
separation from all Churches in the World: As if there had been no Christian
Church, in whose communion in Sacraments they could find salvation, whence it
will follow, that at that time there was no true Church of God upon earth. For
proof of the first point, That Protestants have separated from all Christian
Churches, he produces Calvin, Chillingworth, and a treatise of his own.

It were to be wished that Professors of Theology would not cite their
testimonies upon trust, where the Authors themselves may easily be had,
Authors ought to be cited fully and faithfully.
(only impossibility is stronger than necessity, as the spartan Boy once
answered the old Senator after the Laconicall manner,) and that they would cite
their Authors fully and faithfully, not by halves, without adding to or new
molding their authorities according to their own fancies or interest. It may
seem ludicrous, but it was a sad truth of a noble English Gentleman, sent
Ambassador into foreign parts, and with him an honorable Espy under the notion
of a Companion, by whom he was accused at his return to have spoken such and
such things, at such and such times. The Gentleman pleaded ingenuously for
himself, that it might be he had spoken some of those things, or it might be
all those things, but never any one of them in that order, nor in that sense. I
have, said he, several Suits of apparel, of purple cloth, of green Velvet, of
white and black Satin. If one should put my two purple Sleeves to my green
velvet Dublet, and make my Hose the one of white Satin, the other of black,
and then swear that it was my apparel; they who did not know me, might judge
me a strange man. To disorder authority, to contract or enlarge them, to
misapply them besides the scope, contrary to the sense of the Author, is not
more discommendable than common. I have seen large volumes containing some
hundreds of controversies (as was pretended) between Protestants and Papists:
And among them all not above five or six that I could own; as if they desired
that the whole woven Coat of Christ should be torn more insunder than it is, or
that they might have the honor to conquer so many fictious Monsters of their
own making. I have seen authorities mangled and mi^applied, just like the
Ambassadors clothes, so as the right Authors would hardly have been able to
know them. So much prejudice and partiality, and an habit of alteration, is
able to do like a tongue infected with Choler, which makes the sweetest meats
to taste bitter, or like colored glass, which makes every object we see
through it to appear of the same color.

Wherefore I do entreat R. C. to save himself and me and the Reader so much
labor and trouble for the future, by forbearing to charge the private errors or
opinions of particular persons (it skilleth not much whether) upon the Church
of England, the most of which were mere strangers to our affairs, and many of
them died before controversies were rightly stated or truly understood, for
none of which the Church of England is any way obliged to be responsable. And
likewise by forbearing to make so many empty references, to what he believes or
pretends to have proved in some of his other books. See the Author of the
Protestant Religion: See the distinction of fundamentals and not fundamentals:
See the sufficient proposer of faith: See the Protestants plain confession: See
the Flowers of the English Church: See the Epistle to King James: See the
prudential Balance: See the collation of Scripture. To what end can this
serve, but either to divert us from the question we have in hand? or to amuse
the Reader and put him into a belief of some great achievements which he has
made elsewhere, or to excuse his present defects, upon pretense of large
supplies and recruits which he has ready in another place, but where the
Reader cannot come to see them? And what if the Reader have them not to see, as
it is my condition in present? What am I or he the worse? If he see no more in
some of them, then I have seen heretofore, he will see a great many of mistated
and mistaken questions, a great many of Logomachies or contentions about words,
a great many of private errors produced as common principles of Protestants, a
great many of authors cited contrary to their genuine sense and meaning, and
very little that is material toward the discussion of this or any other
question.

Protestants con^esse no separation from the universal Church. Chil c. 3 p.
132.
Just as Master Chillingworth is cited here to prove, That Protestants have
separated themselves in communion of Sacraments, and public service of God,
not only from the Roman Church, but also from all other Christian Churches in
the World, which is not only contrary to his sense, but also contrary to his
very words in the place alleged. It is not all one (says he) though you
perpetually confound them, to forsake the error of the Church, and to forsake
the Church, or to forsake the Church in her errors, and simply to forsake the
Church, etc. The former then was done by Protestants, the later was not done.
Nay not only not from the Catholic Church, but not so much as from the Roman,
did they separate per omnia, but only in those practices which they conceived
superstitious or impious. Not only from the Roman Church, but from also all
other Christian Churches in the world, c. 1 s. 1.
says R.C. Not only not from the Catholic Church, but not so much as from the
Roman Church, says Mr. Chillingworth. In communion of Sacraments and public
worship of God, says R. C. Only in those practices which they conceived
superstitious or impious, says Mr. Chillingworth.

But because there is no question wherein they studdy more to blunder and
trouble the water, and to involve themselves in dark Clouds of obscure
generalities; I will do my endeavor to distinguish that which is deceitful
and confused, and represent the naked truth to the eyes of the Reader. Nor from
the Roman, but only in her errors.
First I acknowledge that the Church of Rome is a true Christian Church in that
sense that I have declared, that is metaphysically, because it still reteins
all the essentialls of a true Church. To have separated from it in any of
these, had been either formal Heresy, or formal Schism, or both. But we
have retained all these as much as themselves, and much more purely than
themselves: For it may seem doubtful whether some of their superstitious
additions, do not virtually overthrow some of the fundamentalls of Religion.
But with us there is no such danger.

Secondly, I acknowledge that, besides the Essentials of Christian Religion,
the Church of Rome reteins many other truths of an inferior nature, in
Doctrine, in Discipline, in Sacraments, and many lawful and laudable Practices
and Observations. To have separated from these, had been at least material
Schism, unless the Church of Rome should obtrude them upon other Churches as
necessary and fundamental Articles of Christian Religion, and so presume to
change the ancient Creed, which was deposited with the Church by the Apostles,
as the common Badge and Cognizance of all Christians for all suceeding
Generations.

Thirdly, It is agreed that one may not, one must not separate himself from the
communion of a true Christian Church, for the vices or faults of particular
Persons in point of manners. We may not leave the Lords Field because there are
Tares, nor his Floare because there is Chaff, nor his House because there are
Vessels of dishonor, nor his College because there was a Judas.

Fourthly, Some errors and abuses are not simply sinful in themselves, but to
those that did first introduce them, to those who maintain and practice them
for ambitious or avaritious ends they are sinful. These are pressures and
grievances to the Christian Flock, rather than sins. They suffer under the
burden of them, but they are innocent from the guilt of them. And so reum
facit Superiorem iniquitas imperandi, innocentem subditum ordo serviendi. A
Superior may sin in his commands, and yet his Subject be innocent in his
obedience. These are no just cause of separation to a private Christian,
Charity covers a multitude of sins. 1. P^t 4. 8.
But they are just cause of Reformation to a national Church or a Synod.

Fifthly, There are some errors in disputable points, and some abuses are mere
excesses without guilt, rather blemishes than sins: And for these alone no
man ought to separate himself from a Christian Society; or abandon a true
Church for trivial dissentions. Our duty in such a case is to pray and
persuade, without troubling the peace of the Church, and to leave the rest to
God. Let us therefore as many as be perfect, Phil 3 15.
be thus minded; and if in any thing ye be otherwise minded, God shall reveal
even this unto you.

Lastly, We affirm that in the superstructions of Christian Religion, the
Church of Rome has added and mixed sundry errors and abuses of greater
consequence, and sinful innovations, in point of Doctrine, and Discipline, and
administration of the Sacraments, and Feasts, and Fasts, etc. This we are ready
to maintain. Neither does she only profess and practice these errors and
abuses, which perhaps by some persons at some times might be separated without
a separation; but she obtrudes them upon all others as essential Truths and
necessary Articles. She injoins sundry of them as a condition of her Communion.
She commands all Christians to believe and practice them under pain of
damnation; and whosoever refuses, she casts them out of her society. Such is
their new Creed in point of Faith, directly contrary to the Canon of the
general Council of Ephesus. Such is the Popes Supremacy of power in point of
Discipline, expressly contrary to the determinations of the Counsels of
Constance and Basile. Such is the adoration of the species of Bread and Wine,
the detention of the Cup from the People, their unknown langguage, etc. in the
administration of the Sacraments, and in the public service of God. From these
sinful duties thus injoined as necessary, all men ought to separate. Lawful
authority of man may oblige one to suffer, but no authority of man can warrant
or oblige one to do sinful duties. Such a cause justifies a separation,
until the abuse be reformed for which the separation was made. And being thus
separated from sinful Innovations, it may be lawful or convenient to reform
lesser errors, which were not of such dangerous consequence, nor had been a
sufficient cause of separation of themselves.

But here I must advertise the Reader of a double manner of expression, used by
English Protestants concerning this separation. They agree that the Roman
Church reteineth the Essentials of a true Church. They agree that she has
introduced errors and abuses into Christian Religion. They agree that she
obtrudes sinful Innovations as necessary conditions of her Communion. They
agree that the separation is only from these errors and abuses, and are ready
to return to a Communion, when these errors and abuses are removed. So in
effect they say the very same thing, neither more nor less. But because these
errors and abuses are inherent in their Confessions. Liturgy, and forms of
administration of holy Sacraments; therefore some say that they are separated
from the external communion of the Roman Church. And because these errors and
abuses are but adventicious and accidently inherent, and may be, and ought to
be removed; therefore others say that their separation is not from the
Communion of the Roman Church, as it was, and may be, and ought to be, but only
from the errors and abuses. The one speaks simply and absolutely from the
errors and abuses: The others speak respectively, and secundum quid, from the
external communion of the Roman Church, that is, so far as it is corrupted by
these errors and abuses, and not further, and so in sense they say the very
same thing.

And therefore it is mere sophistry and a groundless cavil to argue from
their separation from errors, to their separation from truths, and from their
separation in abuses, to their separation in the Sacraments themselves. Suppose
one who is appointed to minister diet to another, will give him nothing but
poisonous meats, And he knowing it, will not receive it; tell me who is the
refuser, he that will not eat poison, or he that will not give him healthful
food? The Roman Catholics do profess themselves to be as loyal to their
Sovereign, as any of his best Subjects. And that they are as ready as any
others to give assurance of it by oath. Yet they say there are some clauses
inserted in the form prescribed, which they may not, they dare not take. If any
man should accuse them hereupon, to have deserted the communion of the English
Monarchy in point of loyalty, they would be angry, and they had good reason for
it. Upon the same equity let them forbear to accuse us of leaving the
communion of their Church in Sacraments, when we only left their abuses.
Distinguish between old institutions and new errors, and the case is clear.

Sect. 5. Not the separation, but the cause makes the Schism.
Likewise supposing, but not granting, that we were not chased away by the
censures of the Court of Rome, but had out of conscience separated our selves
from their errors in such manner as I have declared, yet the crime or guilt of
the Schism sticks close to them. A conscientious Christian is as much chased
away by imposing upon him the performance of sinful duties, as by the
thunderbolt of excommunication. Schism is a voluntary separation, but our
separation was no more voluntary on our parts, then the three children were
willing to be cast into the fiery furnace, that is, they did choose rather to
die Innocents then to live Nocents, to suffer burning rather then to commit
Idolatry. To be separated, might be our consequent will, because we could not
help it. But it was far enough from our antecedent will, or that we did desire
it. If we should see one pushed and thrust out of an house with Swords and
Whips and Clubs, would any man in his right wits, call this man a Fugitive and
a Runaway, or accuse him to have forsaken the House? Sin is a more dangerous
Edge-tool then a Sword, and the wrath of God heavier then the weight of Clubs,
and the secret lashes of a guilty Conscience sharper then Whips. If they did
impose upon us a necessity of doing sinful duties and offending God, and
wounding our own Consciences, whilst we stayed among them, then we did not
leave them, but they did drive us from them. Joseph came into his Masters house
to do his duty, his Mistrisse tempts him to Sin. Joseph flies away. What?
From his duty? No. But from the offense of God, and she that thought to hold
him, was the person that did drive him away.

It is necessary to Salvation to forsake known errors.
He urges that nothing but necessity of Salvation can justify such a separation
(as he has fancied to himself) from the crime of Schism. Let it be so^^ He
might have spared his Authors in the margent to prove it. His defect lies on
the other side. Does not he think it necessary to Salvation for every man so
far as he can to escheu deadly sin? Or thinks he that a man may live
securely in known errors, contrary to the dictate of his Conscience, without
any prejudice to Salvation? This was our condition. But yet there was Salvation
to be had in the Church of Rome. So it was not necessary to Salvation to make
such a separation. A strange consequence, just like this other, God has mercy
in store for sinners, therefore it is not necessary to Salvation to forsake
sin. Gods extraordinary mercy is one thing; our duty another. Because his
compassion is great, toward his poor Creatures that offend out of invincible
ignorance, is it therefore not necessary to Salvation for those who are
convinced of their errors, to follow the commandment of God, and the light of
their own Conscience? This is so evident that it admits no doubt.

He adds, That we separated our selves not only from the Roman Church, but from
all Christian Churches in the World, as if there had been no Christian Church
in the World, in whose communion we could find Salvation, whence it will
follow that at that time in their conceits, there was no true Church upon
Earth. This he inculcates over and over in several places, according to his
manner. And in his ninth Chapter and fifth Section, C. 9. Sect. 5
he triumphs in it, where he endeavors to prove out of Calvine, and
Chillingworth, and Doctor Potter, that Protestants separated themselves from
the whole World. That is, as he expresses himself in other places, from all
Christian Churches. And particularly, from the Roman, Grecian, Armenian, and
Ethiopian Church, and all other ancient Churches, whatsoever. If it be so,
then he may truly call us Penitus toto divisos orb Britannos. Of the Roman
Church in particular, and how that possibility of Salvation in any Church, is
not in true reason impeditive of its just reformation, we have already spoken
sufficiently. It remains to give an answer concerning our separation from
these Eastern Churches. Our reformation no separation
Our particular reformation cannot be said to be any separation from them. For
they do neither pretend to be the Catholic or universal Church, as the Roman
does, nor challenge any jurisdiction over the Britannick Churches, as the Court
of Rome does, neither do we deny them the right of Christian Churches, or the
right hand of fellowship. In coordinate Churches, 2 Gal 9.
whereof one is not subordinate to another, some Churches reforming themselves,
and not censuring or condemning others which are unreformed, whilst they
preserve their duty entire to the Oecumenicall Church, and its representative a
general Council, do not separate from other Churches, but from their own
errors. In a large garden suppose there should be many quarters, some weeded,
some unweeded, there is indeed a separation of the Plants from the Weeds in the
same quarters, but no separation of one quarter from another. Or if a man shall
purge out of himself corrupted humors, he does not thereby separate himself
from other persons, whose bodies are unpurged. It is true, that such weeding
and purging does produce a distinction, between the quarters weeded, and the
quarters unweeded, and between Bodies purged and Bodies unpurged. But either
they stand in no such need of weeding or purging, or it is their own fault who
do not weed or purge when they have occasion. If they will needs misconstrue
our lawful reformation, to be an unlawful and uncharitable separation, how
can we help it? We have separated from no Eastern, Southern, Northern, or
Western Church. Our Article tells them the same, A^t 30.
either let them produce some Act of ours, which makes or implies such a
separation, or let them hold their peace for ever.

But all this noise proceeds from hence, that R. C. conceives that we will no
more join with those Eastern Churches, or any of them, in their Creeds, in
their Liturgies or public forms of serving God, nor communicate with them in
their Sacraments, then we do with the Church of Rome. If we communicate not
with the Roman Church in some things, it is not our faults. It is not their
serving of God, Lawful to communicate with the Eastern Churches.
nor their Sacraments that we dislike, but their disservice of God, and
corrupting of the holy Sacraments. But for these Grecian, Russian, Armenian,
and Abissine Churches, I find gross superstitions objected to some of them,
but not proved. I find some inusitate expressions about some mysteries which
are scarcely intelligible or explicable, as the procession of the holy Ghost,
and the Union of the two natures in Christ, which are not frequently used among
us, but I believe their sense to be the same with ours. The Grecians do
acknowledge the holy Ghost to be the Spirit of the Son. And all the other
Churches are ready to accurse the errors both of Nestorius and E^tyches.

But that which satisfies me is this, that they exact of no man, nor obtrude
upon him any other Creed, or new Articles of Faith then the Apostolical,
Nicene, and Athanasian Creeds, with the explications, of the general Councels
of Ephesiu, Constantinople, and Chalcedon, all which we readily admit, and use
daily in our Liturgy. If the Church of Rome would rest where they do, we might
well have disputable questions between us, but no breach of unity in point of
Faith. Likewise in point of discipline, all these Churches ascribe no more to
the Pope then a primacy of Order, no supremacy of Power or universal
Jurisdiction. They make a general Council, with or without the Popes suffrage,
to be the highest Ecclesiastical tribunal. Let the Romanists rest where they
do rest, and all our controversies concerning Ecclesiastical discipline will
fall to the ground. Thirdly, they have their Liturgy in a language understood,
they administer the Sacrament in both kinds to all Christians. They do not
themselves adore, much less compel others to adore the species of Bread and
Wine. Howsoever they have a kind of elevation. They have no new matter and
form, no tradition of the paten and chalice in Presbyterian ordination, but
only imposition of hands. They know no new Sacrifice, but the commemoration,
representation, and application of the Sacrifice of the Cross. Just as we
believe. Let the Romanists but imitate their moderation, and we shall strait
come to join in Communion, in Sacraments, and Sacramentals also. Yet these are
the three essentials of Christian Religion, Faith, Sacraments, and Discipline.
So little ground had R. C. to tell us, that we had separated our selves from
all Christian Churches in the World.

But Calvin says, Calv. ep^st. 141.
we have been forced to make a separation from all the world. Admit he did say
so, What will he conclude from hence that the Church of England did the same?
This consequence will never be made good without a transubstantiation of Mr.
Calvin into the English Church. He himself knows better that we honor Calvin
for his excellent parts, but we do not pinn our Religion either in Doctrine,
or Discipline, or Liturgy to Calvin's sleeve. Whether Calvin said so or not, for
my part I cannot think otherwise but that he did so in point of Discipline,
until some body will be favorably pleased to show me one formed national, or
provincial Church throughout the world, before Geneva, that wanted Bishops, or
one lay Elder that exercised Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction in Christendom. I
confess the Fratres Bohemi had not the name of Bishops, but they wanted not the
order of Bishops under the name of Seniores or Elders, who had both Episcopal
Ordination (after their Presbyterian) and Episcopal Jurisdiction, and
Episcopal Succession from the Bishops of the Waldenses, who had continued in
the Church under other names, time immemotiall, and gave them charge at their
Reformation (long before Luthers time) to preserve that Order. All which
themselves have published to the World in private. Ratio ordinis and discipline
Fratrum Bohemo rum.
I conf^ss likewise that they had their lay Elders under the name of
Presbyteri, from whence Mr. Calvin borrowed his. But theirs in Bohemia
pretended not to be Ecclesiastical Commissioners, nor did, nor durst ever
presume to meddle with the power of the keys, or exercise any Jurisdiction in
the Church. They were only inferior Officers, neither more nor less than our
Churchwardens and Sydemen in England. ibid.
This was far enough from ruling Elders. Howsoever what does this concern the
Church of England, which never made, nor maintained, nor approved any such
separation?

Calvin no enemy to Episcopacy.
No more did Calvin himself out of judgment, but out of necessity to complie
with the present estate of Geneva, after the expulsion of their Bishop. As
might be made appear, if it were needful, by his public profession of their
readiness to receive such Bishops as the primitive Bishops were, or otherwise
that they were to be reputed nullo non anathemate digni. Epist. ad Mart.
Schaling.
By his subscription to the Augustane confession, which is for Epicopacy, cui
pridem volens ac libens subscripsi. Epl. ad Reg. Polo mae.
By his confession to the King of Polonia. The ancient Church instituted
Patriarchater, and assigned primacie to single Provinces, that Bishops might be
better knit together in the bond of unity. By his description of the charge of
a Bishop that should join himself to the reformed Church, to do his endeavor,
Calv. ep. Impres. Genesis an. 1570. page 340.
that all the Churches within his Bishopric be purged from Errors and
Idolatry, to go before the Curates (or Pastors) of his Diocese by his example,
and to induce them to admit the Reformation. And lastly by his letters to
Archbishop Cranmer, the Bishop of London, and a Bishop of Polonia.

I have searched the hundred one and fortieth Epistle, and for fear of failing,
the hundred and one and fortieth page also in my edition, but I do neither
find any such confession, nor remember any such, nor find any thing like it
in the place cited, except peradventure he mean this, that Calvine, justifying
Episcopacy and condemning the Papacy, Ep. ad. R. Polon.
has these words, It is one thing to receive moderate honor, such as man is
capable of, and another thing to rule the whole World, that is, as the Pope
would do. Calvine speaks of the Popes ambitious, affectation of an universal
Empire, not of his just right or possession. I hope he does not presently
separate from all Christian Churches, who separates from the Pope, because the
Pope pretends an universal Jurisdiction. Thus it is, when men make their own
collections to be other men's confessions. But supposing that Calvine had said
any such thing, it must be understood Synechdochically of the Western Churches,
the whole, for a part, as they say at Paris, le Mond de Paris, the World of
Paris. or as a Father said, The World mourned and wondered to see it self turned
Arrian. 4 Inst. c. 18. sect. 18.
But Calvine said further, That the Idolatrous Mass had possessed all Kings
and People from the first to the last. This confirms the former exposition, all
Kings and People, that is in these Occidentall parts of Christendom. Certainly
Calvine did not dream of the Duke of Muscovia, or Prester John, much less of
the great Turk, or Sophy of Persia, within whose territories most of these
Churches are. They have Masses indeed, but no adoration of the Elements, and
consequently no Idolatrous Masses, which Calvine disliked.

Perhaps he will speed better with Doctor Potters testimony. To let R. C. see
plainly what credit is to be given to such citations, Doctor Potter cleared.
I will reduce his argument out of Doctor Potter to a syllogism. All separation
from the universal Church is schismatic, but Protestants confess that their
separation is from the universal Church. His proposition is proved out of
Doctor Potter Sect. 3. p. 74. Chapter 9. Sect. 5.
This is true. Doctor Potters words are these, There neither was nor can be any
just cause to depart from the Church of Christ, no more then from Christ
himself. His assumption is proved out of Doctor Potter Sect. 2. p. 48. Some
separation (voluntary) from all visible Churches does not exclude from Heaven.
If Protestants lie open to the lash, Ibid:
and have no better memories, it is an easy matter to confute them out of
their own confessions, or rather let the Reader judge what credit is to be
given to such citations. Doctor Potters words are these, If separation, such as
has been said, from all visible Churches, do not exclude from Heaven. Sect.
2. p. 49.
First, R. C. omits these words such as has been said, which words quite
destroy his proof. The separation whereof he speaks there, is only external,
not internal, from all particular visible Churches, not from the universal
Church. His words are these, A man may be a true visible Member of the holy
Catholic Church who is not actually (otherwise then in vow) a Member of any
true visible Church. The instances or cases which he produces are two, the one
of a man unjustly excommunicated clave-errante, who is not in the actual
external communion of any Particular Church, yet if he communicate in desire,
^el l 2. de Eccl M^l c 6. Aust de Ve^. Re^. c. 6.
sufficit ei ad salutem, it is sufficient to save him, which he proves out of
Bellarmine and St. Austine and others. Neither will R.C. himself deny it. The
other instance is of Tertullian, who in his later days did fall off from the
Catholics, out of an indiscrete piety, why may we not hope that God pardoned
the errors of his honest zeal? And herein also he has the consent, and
concurrence of R. C. himself. That they who err invincibly, and hold the truth
implicitly do want neither Church, nor Faith, nor Salvation. What do these
cases concern the present controversy? Not at all.

And as R. C. subtracts, so he adds the word voluntary upon his own head, which
is not in Doctor Potter. He who is excommunicated unjustly, is not
excommunicated with his good will. Tertullian did not wilfully run into error.
Ignorance destroys liberty in many cases, as well as force. Doctor Potter
speaks only of such who are in vote, in their desires, or willingly within the
communion of the Church, and declares the contrary expressly, Ibid.
that voluntary and ungrounded separation from the Catholic Communion is
without doubt a damnable Schism.

Lastly, Doctor Potter speaks not of the ordinary way of Salvation, but of Gods
extraordinary mercy, Why may we not hope that God pardoned the errors of his
honest zeal? Cannot God pardon formal, much more material Schism, and
convert a Schismatic at the last gasp, if it please him? The primitive Church
refused to receive some sorts of offenders to their actual communion, and yet
left them to the mercy of God for their Salvation.

And Master Chillingwo^^h
But his chiefest testimonies, are taken out of Master Chillingworth c. 5. p.
273. That Protestants did forsake the external communion of the visible
Church. And p. 274. Master Knott objecting, that seeing there was no visible
Church but corrupted, Luther forsaking the external communion of the corrupted
Church, could not but forsake the external communion of the Catholic Church.
Master Chillingworth answers, Let this be granted. And p. 291. It is not
improbable that it may be lawful and noble for one man to oppose (in Faith)
the World. I answer first, that by external communion, Master Chillingworth
meant nothing but errors in the external communion, and by the visible Church
a considerable part of the visible Church. Hear himself, p 245.
Indeed that Luther and his followers, left off the practice of those
corruptions, wherein the whole visible Church did communicate formerly, (which
I meant, when I acknowledged above that they forsook the external communion
of the visible Church) or that they left that part of the visible Church in her
corruption, which would not be reformed. These things if you desire, I shall be
willing to grant; and that by a Synechdoche of the whole for the part, he might
be said to forsake the visible Church, that is, a part of it, and the greater
part. But that properly speaking, he forsook the whole visible Church, I hope
you will excuse me if I grant not this. And he gives this reason, because a
great part of the Church joined with Luther. He might have added a stronger
reason as I think, that Luthers first quarrel with the Pope was about
Indulgences, and the Supremacy, etc. wherein Luther did not desert, but join in
communion with the much greater part of the visible Church. If afterward
Luther fell upon other questions, not so agreeable to the Eastern Church, yet
they were no Articles of the Creed, nor necessary points of Christian Religion.
The same interpretation he gives elsewhere, The first reformers as well as the
Donatists, p. 312.
etc. opposed the commands of the visible Church, that is, of a great part of
it.

Secondly I answer, that what is said of the universal corruption of the
visible Church, is not delivered positively, but doubtfully, and upon
supposition, not grounded upon any matter of fact, p. 191.
It is not improbable, and if we were put to our oaths, we should surely
testify no such thing for you, which words do follow immediately in the place
formerly cited. And in another place, neither to suppose a visible Church,
before Luther which did not err, is to contradict this ground of Doctor
Potters, that the Church may err, unless you will have us believe that may be
and must be is all one, and that all which may be true, is true. Neither Doctor
Potter nor Master Chillingworth did ever maintain a separation from the whole
Christian World in any one thing, 6.5 p. 273.
but from some Churches in one thing, from some in another, not necessary to
Salvation, wherein they dissented one from another. That which is one and the
same in all places, Te^t.
is no error, but delivered by Christ and his Apostles. Saint Austine gives
not much more latitude, That which the whole Church holds, and was not
instituted by Counsels, but always retained, is rightly esteemed to have been
delivered by apostolical authority. L. 4 Cont. Don c. 23. c. 5. P. 302.
Let Master Chillingworth be his own interpreter, It is one thing to separate
from the Communion of the whole World, another to separate from all the
Communions in the World, one thing to divide from them who are united among
themselves, another to divide from them, who are divided among themseves. The
Donatists separated from the whole Christian World united, but Luther and his
followers did not so. In all this, here is not a word against the Church of
England, nor any thing material against any particular Protestant. A perfect
harmony and unanimity were to be wished in the universal Church, but scarcely
to be hoped for (until this mortal has put on immortality) in all disputable
questions. As great differences among the Romanists as between them and the
Eastern Churches, or us.
The Romanists have no such perfect unity in their own Church, perhaps as many
real differences, as there are between us and the Grecians, or between us and
themselves, but only they are pleased to nickname the one Heresies, and to
honor the other with the title of Scholasticall questions. C. 1. S. 13.
Our communicating with Schismatics has been already answered.

In the latter part of this Chapter, Sect. 2.
he charge me with four faults at a time, able to break a back of Steel,
first, That I endeavor to clear the English Protestant Church from Schism, but
not other Protestant Churches. I do not understand exactly the history of
their reformation, nor the Laws and Privileges of foreign particular
Churches, qui pauca considerat facile pronuntiat, he that considers few
circumstances gives the sentence easily, but seldom justly. He adds, That
either it argues little charity in me, or little skill to defend them. And
elsewhere he instanceth in the Scottish and French Huguenots, c. 2. s. 3.
and lays down the reason of my silence, because I condemn them as
Schismatics, for wanting that Episcopacy, which I require as essentially
necessary to a Catholic Church. In the mean time let him remember what it is
to raise discord and make variance, Prove. 6.16. If the want of Episcopacy were
my only reason, why do I not defend the Bohemian Brethren, the Danish,
Swedish, and some German Protestants, all which have Bishops? But because he
presses me so much, I will give him a further account of my self in this
particular then I intended, or am obliged.

Wh^th^r all those be Schismatics who want Bishops.
I confess I do not approve tumultuary reformations made by a giddy ignorant
multitude according to the dictates of a seditious Orator. But withal I must
tell him that God would not permit evil, but that he knows how to extract good
out of evil. And that he often uses ill agents to do his own works. Yea even
to reform his Church. Iehu was none of the best men, yet God used him to purge
his Church, and to take away the Priests of Baal. The treason of Judas became
subservient to the secret councels of God, for the redemption of the World by
the Cross and Passion of Christ. I do also acknowledge that Episcopacy was
comprehended in the Apostolic office tanquam trigonus in tetragono, and that
the distinction was made by the Apostles with the approbation of Christ. That
the Angels of the seven Churches in the Revelation, were seven Bishops; that it
is the most silly rediculous thing in the World to calumni^^e that for a papal
innovation, which was established in the Church before there was a Pope at
Rome; which has been received and approved in all ages since the very Cradle
of Christianity, by all sorts of Christians, Europeans, Africans, Asiaticks,
Indians, many of which never had any intercourse with Rome, nor scarcely ever
heard of the name of Rome. If semper ubique and ab omnibus be not a sufficient
plea, I know not what is.

But because I esteem them Churches not completely formed, do I therefore
exclude them from all hope of salvation? or esteem them aliens and strangers
from the Commonwealth of Israel? or account them formal Schismatics? No such
thing. First, I know there are many learned Persons among them, who do
passionately affect Episcopacie; some of which have acknowledged to my self,
that their Church would never be rightly settled until it was new molded.
Baptism is a Sacrament, the door of Christianity, a matriculation into the
Church of Christ: Yet the very desire of it in case of necessity, is sufficient
to excuse from the want of actual Baptism. And is not the desire of
Episcopacy sufficient to excuse from the actual want of Episcopacy in like
case of necessity? Or should I censure these as Schismatics?

Secondly, There are others who though they do not long so much for
Episcopacy, yet they approve it, and want it only out of invincible necessity.
In some places the Sovereign Prince is of another Communion; the Episcopal
Chaires are filled with Romish Bishops. If they should petition for Bishops of
their own, it would not be granted. In other places the Magistrates have taken
away Bishops, whether out of policy, because they thought that Regiment not so
proper for their Republics, or because they were ashamed to take away the
Revenues, and preserve the Order, or out of a blind Zeal, they have given an
account to God: they owe none to me. Should I condemn all these as Schismatics
for want of Episcopacy, who want it out of invincible necessity?

Thirdly, There are others who have neither the same desires, nor the same
esteem of Episcopacy, but condemn it as an Antichristian Innovation, and a
Ragge of Popery. I conceive this to be most gross Schism materially. It is ten
times more schismatic to desert; nay to take away (so much as lies in them)
the whole order of Bishops, than to substract obedience from one lawful
Bishop. All that can be said to mittigate this fault is, that they do it
ignorantly, as they have been mistaught and misinformed. And I hope that many
of them are free from obstinacy, and hold the truth implicitly in the
preparation of their minds, being ready to receive it, when God shall reveal it
to them. How far this may excuse (not the crime but) their persons from formal
Schism, either a toto or a tanto, I determine not, but leave them to stand or
fall before their own Master.

But though these Protestants were worthy of this contumely, The Romanists no
fit persons to object Schism to Protestants.
yet surely the Romanists are no fit persons to object it, whose opiniastrety
did hinder an uniform Reformation of the western Church. Who did first invest
Presbyters with Episcopal Jurisdiction, and the power of ordeining and
confirming; but the Court of Rome, by their commissions and delegations, for
avaritious ends? And could they think that the world would believe, that
necessity is not as strong and effectual a dispensation as their mercicinary
Bulls? It is not at all material, whether Episcopacy and Priesthood be two
distinct O^ders, or distinct degrees of the same Order, the one subordinate to
the other; whether Episcopal ordination do introduce a new Character or extend
the old. For it is generally confessed by both parties, Protestants and Roman
Catholics, that the same power and authority is necessary to the extensio^ of
a Character, or grace given by ordination, which is required to the institution
of a Sacrament, that is not humane, but divine. These avaritious practices of
that Court, (though it be not commonly observed) were the first source of these
present controversies about Episcopacy and ecclesiastical Discipline, which
do now so much disturb the peace of the Church.

The second fault which he imputes to me is, That I endeavor to clear the
English Church from Schism only in relation to the Church of Rome, not to all
other Churches. It was altogether needless to have troubled his own head or his
Readers with this. For first he esteems none of all those Churches to be true
Churches, c 2. s 6.
but a Mass of Monsters an Hydra of many heads, or so many Packs of Heretics
and Schismatics. making the Roman Church and the Catholic Church to be
Convertibles. Secondly, it had not only been vain but a sign of guilt, to make
a defense before we were accused. None of those Churches, nor any body else
that ever I heard of, has accused us for deserting them, before R. C. and he
has received his answer. 5. c. 2. s. 8.
If it had been needful, the Church of Rome had saved us that labor by
excommunicating them, before hand. I only wish more intelligence between us and
them.

My third fault is, The Church of England had better grounds than personal
faults of Popes.
That I endeavor principally to justify our separation from the Roman Church,
for the personal faults of Popes. And my fourth fault is, That I justify our
separation from the Court of Rome for their evil manners. That this is not
lawful to do, he proves by sundry authorities and arguments, I think the
rather because no man denies it, or doubts of it, or because he would insinuate
to his Reader that we do deny it. If he had pleased, he might have contracted
these two faults into one. The Pope and his Court make but one consistory, and
personal faults, and evil manners are the same thing. It had been needful to
have joined them together, to give them a little more weight: for being twisted
they weigh not half a grain. First, I deny that we hold personal faults or
evil manners a sufficient cause of separation. Secondly, that separation which
was made, was made by themselves, not by us. Thirdly, I deny that the Pope, or
Court of Rome ever had right to any Jurisdiction over us: And if they ever had
any pretense of right, we had other manner of grounds for separation than evil
manners. As new Articles of faith, obtruding of idolatrous, superstitions, and
sinful duties, gross usurpation of the rights of the sovereign Prince, and all
orders and degrees of Subjects, the overthrow or endangering of the public
peace and tranquillity of the Kingdom, unlawful oaths contrary to our
allegiance to our King, contrary to that duty which all Christians do owe to
general Counsels, and lastly, the Popes quitting of his Patriarchall power.
Yet by his leave, tyranny, and oppression, and rapine are somewhat more than
personal faults, and may be just grounds to Princes and Commonwealths to
substract obedience, until there be a reformation of exorbitant abuses. Some
personal faults, as Simony and Schism, may give just occasion to Christians to
separate from pretended Popes. But there are other faults inherent in the
Office of the Pope, not his Episcopal Office, which was instituted by Christ
or his Apostles, nor his Patriarchall Office, which was instituted by the
Church, but his pretended Monarchical Office, whereby he has usurped a power
paramount over the highest Tribunal of the Church; that is, a general
Council, whereof more shall be said in due place. Inf. c. 7 s
These faults give just cause to a general Council to separate the Popes
themselves, and to take away their domineering Courts; or to a sovereign Prince
with a N^tionall Council, to shake off their tyrannical Yoke.

CHAP. 2. Concerning the stating of the Question.
IN stating the Question I observed this Method; Sect. 1.
first to show what Ecclesiastical Separations were not Schismatic. As
first, those Separations which proceed out of a sudden passionate heat, without
attempting to make any parties, as those between St. Paul and Barnabas, St.
Hierome and Ruffinus, St. Chrysostom and Epiphanius. Secondly, premeditated
clashings of Bishops or Churches long maintained; if they forbear to censure
one another, and be ready to submit to the determination of a general
Council, are not schismatic; as those between the Roman and African Bishops
about appeals and rebaptization, Thirdly, where just cause of separation is
given, for there the Separaters are innocent, and they who give the cause, are
Schismatics. Fourthly, separation, from an erroneous Church, or Pastor in
their errors. Of all these, and their proofs R C. takes no notice at all, but
passes silently by them, without either granting, denying, or distinguishing.

The first Exception that he takes, is against my two supposed definitions of
Schism; P. 8.
the former is, Schism is a criminous scissure, rent, or division in the
Church, an ecclesiastical sedition, like to a mutiny in an Army, or a faction
in a Sat. The second, mere Schism is a culpable rupture or breach of the
Catholic Communion. P. 12.
And to supply my defect he promises a better definition of his own. P. 16.
True Schism is a voluntary division in some substantial part of the true
Church. Really, I do not wonder if my definitions be not complete. I do not
take my self to have so happy a vein, that all that I utter should be a
definition. I did not hold it needful, nor had any purpose to define Schism,
but only to explane it, which my very words might have taught him. Schism
signifies a criminous scissure, not is, but signifies. And those two
similitudes added to the foot of my pretended definition, like a mutiny in an
Army, or faction in a State. Similitudes are apt to illustrate, but not to
define. The definition and the thing defined are ever the same. Those things
which are like one another, are never the same. But let us view his grand
exceptions to my supposed definitions.

All Schism is not in essentials.
My first great fault is, That I do not express it thus in some substantial
part or parts of the Church. For all Schism is in essentials, otherwise
division in ecclesiastical Ceremonies, or scholasticall Opinions should be
Schism. Here is nothing new but his reason, to which I answer, that all
differences in Rites and Ceremonies are not schismatic; but if unlawful or
sinful Rites be obtruded by any Church, as a condition of their Communion, and
a separation ensue thereupon; the Obtruders of sinful Rites, and they who
break the unity of the Church, for difference in indifferent Rites, are guilty
of Schism. So likewise scholasticall Opinions are free, and may be defended
both ways scholastically; but if they be obtruded Magisterialy upon Christians
as necessary Articles of faith, they render the Obtruders truly schismatic.
This is the case of the Church of Rome in both these particular instances: and
therefore it is not true, that all Schism is a division in the essentialls of
Religion, or its substantial parts. When Pope Victor excommunicated the
Eastern Churches about the observation of Easter, the difference was but about
a Rite, aut Ritus potius tempore (says a Roman Catholic) or rather the time
of a Rite. Yet it occasioned a Schism, for either Victors Key did err, and
then he was the Schismatic, or it did not err, and then they were the
Schismatics. What the opinion of Ireneus and the Fathers of that age was,
Eusebius tells us, that their letters were extant, wherein they chid Victor
sharply about it. There was much and long contention between the Sees of Rome
and Constanstinople, concerning the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction of Bulgaria, a
mere humane Rite, nothing to the substance of the Church. Bar. Annal. an. 878.
And John the 8th excommunicated Ignatius the Patriarch about it. Here was a
Schism, but no essential of Religion concerned. How many gross Schisms have
been in the Church of Rome, merely about the due election of their Popes, a
matter of humane right, which was sometimes in the Emperors, sometimes in the
People, sometimes in the whole Roman Clergy, and now in the College of
Cardinals: Essentialls of Religion use not to be so mutable.

Nay, I believe that if we search narrowly into the first source and original
of all the famous Schisms that have been in the Church, as Novatianisme, and
Donatisme, etc. we shall find that it was about the Canons of the Church, no
substantialls of Religion. Novatians first separation from Cornelius, was upon
pretense that he himself was more duly elected Bishop of Rome, not about any
essential of Religion. The first original of the Schism of the Donatists, was
because the Catholic Church would not excommunicate them who were accused to
have been traditores. On the other side, Felicissimus raised a Schism in the
Church of Carthage, and set up Altar against Altar, because the lapsi or those
who had fallen in time of persecution might not presently be restored, upon the
mediation of the Confessors, or as they then styled them, Martyrs. What
Schisms have been raised in the Church of England about round or square, white
or black, about a Cup, or a Surpless, or the sign of the Cross, or kneeling at
the receiving of the blessed Sacrament, or the use of the Ring in marriage?
What bitter contentions have been among the Franciscans in former times about
their habits, what color they should be, white, or black, or gray; and what
fashion, long or short, to make them more conformable to the rule of St.
Francis? with what violence have these petty quarrels been prosecuted, in so
much as two succeeding Popes, upon two solemn hearings durst not determine
them. And nothing was wanting to a complete Schism but a sentence.
Antimach^aveil in ^^ist ad Lect.


He might have spared his second proofs of his three substantial parts he
means essential properties of the Church, until it had been once denied.
Yet I cannot but observe how he makes Heresy now worse than Schism, because
Heresy denies the truth of God, which simple Schism does not, whereas
formerly he made Schism worse than Idolatry.

The second fault which he imputes to me is, That I confound mere Schism with
Schism mixed with Heresy, and bring in matters of faith to justify our
division from the Roman Church. This second fault is like the former, both
begotten in his own brain. Let him read my supposed definition over and over
again, and he shall not find the least trace of any such confusion in it. To
bring in their errors in matters of faith, Errors in faith obtruded, justify
a separation.
to justify us, not only from Heresy, but from mere Schism, is very proper.
He himself has already confessed it: I hope he will stand to his word, for it
is too evident a truth to be denied; that supposing they hold errors in
matters of faith, and make these their errors a condition of their Communion;
it is not only lawful, but necessary, and a virtue to separate from them.
Their very errors in matters of faith, and their imposing them upon us as
necessary Articles, does justify a separation from them, and acquit us before
God and man from all criminous Schism, whether mere or mixed. The sin of
Korah, Dathan, and Abiran was not mere Schism, but ambition, treason, and
rebellion. Korah would have had the Highpriesthood from Aaron, and Dathan and
Abiran would have been sovereign Princes in the place of Moses, by right of the
Primogeniture of Ruben.

So he proceeds to my other definition. Mere Shcism is a culpable rupture or
breach of the Catholic Communion, to which he says I add in the next page
without sufficient ground, and should have added also in Sacraments or lawful
ministry, and lastly have showed what is a sufficent ground. But he mistakes
throughout: for first to have added without sufficient grounds, had been a
needless tautology, which is not tolerable in a definition. To say that it is
culpable, implies that it wants sufficient grounds. For if it had sufficient
grounds, it were not culpable. Secondly, to have added in Sacraments or lawful
Ministry, had been to spoil the definition, or description rather, and to make
it not convertible with the thing defined or described. I have showed that
there are many mere Schisms, that are neither in Sacraments nor lawful
Ministry. Lastly, I have showed what are sufficient grounds, and that the
Church of Rome gave sufficient cause of separation, if he please to take it
into consideration. Sect. 2. Me^^rall Sch^sm.


He says, internal communion is not necessary to make a man a Member of a
visible Church, or to make him a Catholic; neither is it put into the
definition of the Church. Let it be so. I am far from supposing that none but
Saints are within the communion of a true visible Church: But I am sure it is a
good caution both for them and us. There is a mental Schism as well as a
mental Murder. 1 John 3. 15.
Whosoever hates his Brother is a Murderer. What will it avail a man to be a
Catholic in the eye of the World, and a Schismatic in the eye of God? to be a
Member of the visible Church, Rom 2 29.
and to be cast into utter darkness? He is not a Jew who is one outwardly,
neither is that Circumcision which is outward in the flesh. But he is a Jew who
is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart. (So he is not a
Catholic who is one outwardly, but he who is a Catholic inwardly) whose
praise is not of men but of God.

Sect. 3.
Then I set down wherein the external Communion of Catholics does consist, in
the same Creeds or Confessions of faith, in the participation of the same
Sacraments, in the same Liturgies or divine Offices, in the use of the same
public Rites and Ceremonies, in the communicatory Letters, and admission of
the same D^scipline. These observations about the parts of the Catholic
Communion, are so innocent, so indifferent, and so unsubserviant to either
party, that I hoped they might pass without any censure. But behold there is
not one of them can escape an exception. To the first part of Catholic
communion in the same Creeds, he takes two exceptions; first, That communion in
faith is pretended a sufficient excuse from true Schism. Fear it not; no man
dreameth that communion with the Church in her Creed does acquit from Schism;
but not communicating with the Church in her Creed, does make both Schism and
Heresy. The having of faith does not supply the want of Charity; but the want
of one necessary requisite, renders the having of another insufficient. Bonum
ex singulis circumstantiis, Communion in all points of faith not necessary
always.
malum ex quolibet defectu.

His second Exception is, That true saving faith requires not only a communion
in the Creed, but in all Gods words clearly revealed to him, and sufficiently
proposed. I answer. What is necessary for this man, at this time, in this
place, is one thing; what is necessary for all Christians, at all times, in all
places, is another thing. Though all revealed truths be alike necessary to be
believed, when they are known, yet all revealed truths are not alike necessary
to be known. And they who know them not, are not obliged to communicate in the
belief of them, until they know them. So to believe them when they are
revealed to us, is a necessary duty of all Christians: And yet the explicit
belief of them is no necessary part of Christian communion. He that holds fast
the old Creed of the Church, has all things that are absolutely necessary in
point of Faith. Perhaps he thinks that the determination of the Roman Church is
a sufficient proposal: we know no such thing. Let him first win the privilige
and then enjoy it.

To the second and third parts of Catholic Communion he objects, That it is
not sufficient to participate in Catholic Sacraments, unless it be done with
Catholics. This is true. How can they be parts of Catholic Communion,
Sacraments purely and corruptly administered the same Sacraments.
if no Catholics do participate of them? But here are two advertisements
necessary: the one, that Sacraments purely administered, and Sacraments
corruptly administered, so long as the abuses do not destroy the essence, are
the same Sacraments. As Baptism administered in pure water, and Baptism
administered with salt and spittle, also is the same Baptism. The other, that
it is not any Church of one denomination whatsoever, either Roman or other,
that either is the Catholic Church, or is to judge under Christ who are true
Catholics. There are many more Catholics without the Roman Communion, than
within it. Our Separatists in England having first laid their own drowsy
conceits for infallable grounds, that their Discipline is the Scepter of
Christ, that they alone are Zion, and all other societies Babylon; then they
apply all the power, and privileges, and prerogatives of the Church unto
themselves. So the Church of Rome having flattered it self into an opinion,
that she alone is the Catholic Church, and all other Churches divided from
her, heretical or schismatic Conventicles, though they be three or four
times larger than her self; presently lays hold on the keys of the Church,
opens and shuts, lets in and thrusts out, makes Catholics and unmakes
Catholics at her pleasure.

He tells us That the Communion of the Church does not necessarily imply the
same Rites and Ceremonies. I know it right well. The Queens Daughter was
arraied in a Garment wrought about with diverse colors. No men have been so
much too blame as the Church of Rome, in obtruding indifferent Rites as
necessary duties upon other Churches. But yet the more harmony and uniformity
that there is in Rites, the greater is the Communion. The Church is compared to
an Army with banners. What a disorderly Army would it be, if every Soldier was
left free to wear his own colors, and to give his own words?

I know the Communion of the Church did not consist in communicatory Letters,
but they were both expressions, and excellent helps and adjuments of unity,
and antidotes against Schism. What he says now the third time of our
communicating with Schismatics, has been answered already.

Wherefore (says he) since I. D. has failed so many ways in defining Schism,
Sect. 4.
let us define it better. And then he brings in his definition triumphantly;
True Schism is a voluntary division in some substantial part of the true
Church, that is, in some essential of Christian Religion. Where lies the
difference? I call it a separation, and he calls it a division; I say
culpable, and he says voluntary; omnis culpa est voluntaria. My expressions
are more significant and emphaticall. All the difference lies in these words,
in some substantial part of the true Church. Which for the form of expression
is improper, to make essential properties to be substantial parts; and for
the matter is most untrue: for there have been, are, and may be many Schisms,
which do not concern any essentialls of Christian Religion. I would borrow one
word more with him, why he calls it rather a division of the true Church,
Schismatics in part do st^ll remain in the Catholic Church.
than a division from the true Church. I know some Roman Catholics have
doubted and suspended their judgments, whether Schismatics be still Members
of the Catholic Church, others have determined that they are: And we are of
the same mind, that in part they do remain still coupled and mortised to the
Church, that is in those things wherein they have made no separation, ex ea
part in texturae compage detinentur, in caetera scissi sunt. A^ ^t. l. 1. d^
bapt. cont Don^istas.
And that in this respect, the Catholic Church by their baptism does beget
Sons and Daughters to God. And we think we have St. Austin for us in this
also. Vna est Ecclesia quae sola Catholica nominatur, and quicquid suum habet
in Communionibus diversorum a sua unitate separatis, Idemo. 10
per hoc quod suum in iis habet, ipsa utique generat, non illae. This perhaps
is contrary to R. C. his opinions, howsoever we thank him for it: But we do
not think Schismatics to be equally in the Church with Catholics, nor to be
capable of salvation, without repentance particular or general.

He says, That universal Schism or a division from the whole Church is
always wicked, because the universal Church, can give no just cause of
division from her. And he proves it out of St. Austin, Aug. ep. 48.
His words are these, s^ possunt, quod fieri non potest, aliqui habere justam
causam, qua communionem suam separent a communione orbis terrarum. If any could
have a just cause to separate their commuion from the whole communion of the
whole World, which cannot be. Let him always bring such proofs which concern
not us, but make directly against himself. It is they who have separated
themselves from the communion of the whole World, Grecian, Russian, Armenian,
Abissine, Protestant, by their censures. We have made no absolute separation
even from the Roman Church it self. I say more, that all Schism whether
universal or particular is wicked. But still he confounds Schism, which is
always unlawful, with separation which is many times lawful, (I take the
word according to its use, not according to its derivation.) Hear R.C. R. C.
his confession.
his ingenuous confession in this place, which overthrowes and casts flat to
the ground, all that he has endeavored to build in this Survey. Neither
indeed, can there by any substantial division from any particular Church,
unless she be really heretical or schismatic. I say really, because she
may be really heretical or schismatic, and yet morally a true particular
Church, because she is invincibly ignorant of Heresy or Schism, and so may
require profession of her Heresy, as a condition of communicating with her, in
which case division from her is no Schism or sin, but virtue and necessary.
Apply but this to the Roman and English Churches, and the controversy is
ended. The Roman Church is such a particular Church as he has here described.
The English Church has been separated, (but we will suppose that it had
separated it self) from the Roman. In this case, by his own confession the
Schism lies at the door of the Roman Church, from which the separation was
made, if they separated first, from the pure primitive Church which was before
them, not locally, but morally. Yet says he, this erroneous Church is still
morally a true particular Church; either this Church has not all the
essentials of a Christian Church, and then how does it still continue a true
Church? Or it has all the essentials, and then a true Church in substance may
give just ground to separate from her in material Heresy and Schism. I will
be as free with him concerning the universal Church. If any man or Society of
Christians separate themselves from the united communion of the whole Catholic
Church, dispersed throughout the World, I cannot excuse him from Schism. For
whether the Catholic Church of this present age may err or not, this is
certain she cannot err universally in any thing that is necessary to
Salvation, nor with obstinacy. And other inferior errors (if there be any
such) are not of weight enough to yield sufficient ground of separation, from
the communion of the Catholic Church united. But for the divided parts of the
Catholic Church, a man may differ from all of them in inferior points, some
in one thing, some in another, wherein they differ one from another, and
separate from some of them in their errors without criminous Schism; And yet
maintain a perfect union with the Catholic Church united.

I must not here forget to put R. C. in mind, of sundry propositions laid down
by me in this place, tending much to the clearing of this present controversy,
all which he passes by untouched: as this, That external communion may
sometimes be lawfully suspended, or withdrawn. That there is not the like
necessity of communicating in all externals. That Catholic communion implies
not unity in all opinions. That inferiors in some cases may lawfully substract
communion from their Superiors, and in special the Bishop of Rome, that in
tract of time, abuses will creep into Christian Churches, and ought to be
reformed.

Only whereas I said in the vindication, Sect. 5.
that the ancient Britannick Churches were never judged, (that is censured by a
judgment of Jurisdiction to be Schismatics) for their different observation
of Easter, (he says) they were judged Schismatics, both by Catholics of that
time, and since, and Protestants, and that he has proved it in one of his
Treatises. I never see his treatise, but I know his manner of proof well
enough. The Britannick Churches never judged Schismatics.
I say it over again, that I do not believe that they were ever judged
Schismatics for it, either by the Church, or by a Council, or by any lawful
or supposed Superior, which shows plainly that they were not under the
jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome. For it is not credible that he should
excommunicate the Asiatick Bishops for that observation, and suffer his own
Subjects to differ from him under his Nose, which is the only reason why I
urged it. And I expect the proof of the contrary at the Greeks Calends. My
assertion is negative, that they were not sentenced as Schismatics, this is
affirmative, that they were censured. The burden of the proof lies upon him.
Let him show who judged them, when and where, or that they were censured at all.

I showed clearly in the vindication, Sect. 6.
out of the Colloquy between the Catholics, and Donatists at Carthage, that
the Catholic Church is no Church of one denomination, but the whole Christian
World. True says he, What is the true Catholic Church.
Neither the Church of the City of Rome, nor of Africa, is the Catholic
Church, but the whole Church of Christ. By the Church of Rome I understand not
either the Church of the City of Rome, or the Diocese of Rome, or the
Patriarchate of Rome, but all Churches of the Roman communion, which altogether
do not make the fourth part of the Christian World, yea says he, but the
whole Church is not such a multitude, or multitudes of Christians, who agreed
only in Fundamentals, but disagree in other points of Faith, and differ wholly
in Communion of Sacraments. All these great multitudes of Christians, he
fears not to call a mass of Monsters, and an Hydra of many Heads, because
they are not wholly one in profession of Faith, Communion of Sacraments, and
lawful Ministry, as that Catholic primitive Church was. I wonder he should
forget their own distinction of the virtual representative, and essential
Church, that is, these multitudes of dispersed Christians. I hope there be
others that will not slight them so much. I confess that primitive Catholic
Church had an exact communion in all essentials, or fundamentals, and in many
other things. But that they had differences also of lesser moment in points of
Doctrine and Discipline, and forms of Administration of the holy Sacraments,
and Liturgies, no man can doubt that has his eyes in his head. Yet these
lesser inconsiderable differences could produce no Schism, whilst one Church
did not condemn another, and all did submit themselves to the determination of
a general Council, as the highest Judge of controversies upon Earth. The
reason of their agreement was plainly this, because all Churches received the
primitive Creed, and no Church exacted more in point of Faith then the
primitive Creed. It would better become the Church of Rome, to repent of their
rash temerarious censure, in excluding above three parts of the Christian World
from the communion of Saints, out of passion and self interest, because they
will not acknowledge the supremacy of the Roman Bishop, no more then their
predecessors did before them, In^erest makes Catholick^ with the Court of Rome.
from the beginning. If these dispersed and despised multitudes of Christians,
would but submit to the Roman yoke, their religion would be found orthodox
enough, and they would no longer be held a mass of Monsters and a Hydra of
many Heads, but pass muster for good Catholics. Them. a Jesus. cited by Doctor
Field l. 3 c. 1.
Take an instance or two. Of all these multitudes of Christians, the Assyrians
or the Nestorians have not the best repute. Yet when Elias a pety Patriarch of
Muzall, submitted to the Bishop of Rome, and sent the confession of his Faith,
it was found to be Orthodox. Of later days about the year 1595. when part of
the Russians subject to the Crown of Poland, submitted themselves to the
Papacy, because they could not have free access to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, in their submission they articled for the free exercise of the
Greek Religion. (...) ibid.
To come nearer home This is certain that Pius the 4th sent Vincentio with
Letters of Credence to Queen Elizabeth, with secret instructions, for he
entreated her in his Letter to give the same credit to his Agent, which she
would do to himself. If these instructions were not written we need not
wonder. Such instructions are not to be seen publicly unless they take
effect. Babing. upon Numbers c 7.
But some of our Authors of great note, in these days write positively,
others probably upon common report, that he offered the Popes confirmation of
the English Liturgy, Came Annal Elis. An. 1560.
and the free use of the Sacrament in both kinds, etc. so she would join with
the Romish Church, and acknowledge the primacy of the Chair of Rome. It is
interest, not Religion, that makes Catholics, and Heretics, or Schismatics
with the Court of Rome. Lastly, all these famous Churches or the most of them,
which he calls (multitudes of Christians) have a perfect concord both among
themselves, and with the primitive Church in all essentials. How should it be
otherwise, whilst they hold the same Creed without addition or subtraction?
They agree in most lesser truths. They hold their old Liturgies and forms of
administration of the Sacraments, with less variation then the Church of Rome.
If there be some differences among them, the Romanists have as great among
themselves. One of these Churches alone, the Church of Constantinople has as
many dependents and adherents, as all the Churches of the Roman communion put
together. And I believe a greater harmony within it self, in Doctrine,
Sacraments, and Discipline. Whereas he charge me, that I profess to
communicate with the Catholic Church only in fundamentals, not in any other
thing, he wrongs me much, but himself more. For I profess my self ready to
adhere to the united communion of the true Catholic Church in all things,
whether they be fundamentals or no fundamentals, whether they be credenda or
agenda, things to be believed or to be practiced.

Sect. 7.
He says, the Church of Rome is not homogenall with the Protestant Church. This
is true, qua tales as they are Roman and Protestant. The Roman Church is not a
Protestant Church, nor the Protestant Church a Roman Church. Yet both the one
and the other may be homogeneous Members of the Catholic Church. Their
difference in essentials is but imaginary. Yet he goes about to prove it by
three arguments. First, An Indolatrous Church differs essentially from a true
Church. But he says, I charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry in the
adoration of the Sacrament. The Church of Rome is materially Idolatrous
Judge, Reader if this be not like the envious man in the Fable, who was
contented to have one of his own Eyes put out, that his fellow might lose both
his Eyes. He had rather his own Church should be questioned of Idolatry, then
that the Protestant Church should be a coheire with her of Salvation. Because
the Ear is not the Eye, 1 Cor. 12.16.
is it therefore not of the Body? In the places alleged by him, I do not
charge the Church of Rome with Idolatry. In the one place I speak of the
adoration of the Sacrament as an abuse, but not one word of Idolatry. In the
other place, I speak of the peril of Idolatry, but not a word of the adoration
of the Sacrament. If he cite his Authors after this manner, he may prove what
he list. Again, The Sacrament is to be adored, Bell l. 4. ^e Sac. Euch. c. 29
said the Council of Trent, That is, formally the body and blood of Christ, say
some of your Authors, we say the same. The Sacrament, that is, the species of
Bread and Wine, say others. That we deny, and esteem it to be Idolatrous.
Should we charge the whole Church with Idolatry, for the error of a party?
Lastly I answer, that a true Church out of invincible ignorance may fall into
material Idolatry; He himself confesses that it may fall in material Heresy
and Schism; And Schism with him is worse then Idolatry. Though the Church of
Rome do give divine worship to the Creature, (or at least a party among them)
yet I am so charitable as to hope, that they intend it to the Creator.

From the adoration of Sacrament, he passes to justification by special Faith
only, and from thence to the propitiatory Sacrifice in the Mass. As if two
Churches could not differ about any questions, nay not in the forms of
expression, but presently the one of them must cease to be a true Church. I
dare say, Special Faith is no Article of our Creed
that when I have declared my Faith in these two particulars, he dare not step
one step beyond me. Or if he do, he steps into a manifest error. I do
acknowledge t^ne inherent righteousness in this life, though imperfect, by
which a Christian is rendered truly just, as Gold is true Gold, though it be
mixed with some dross. But if justification be opposed to condemnation, and
signify a legal acquittall from guilt formerly contracted, Romans 8 33
as It is God that justifies, who is he that condemns? Then it is the free
Grace of God that justifies us for the merits of Christ, by the new
evangelicall Covenant of believing. But where does the Church of England teach,
that man is justified by special Faith? Mark 16.16.
Now here. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved, that is a part of
the Catholic Faith. But I believe and am Baptized, that is justifying Faith.
Therefore I shall be saved, that is special Faith. There may be Catholic
Faith, without justifying Faith, and justifying Faith, without special Faith,
because a man may truly believe, and yet not know so assuredly that he does
believe* and that he shall persevere in his belief, as to be able to infer
the conclusion. Special Faith is a rare jewel, not to be acquired but by long
experience, by being deeply radicated in holiness, and by the extraordinary
grace of God. So far he errs from truth, when he says, That justification by
special Faith is prora and puppis, the Life and Soul and d^f^nition of a
Protestant. But supposing it were true, what a strange arguing were this? All
Protestants believe justification by special Faith, but the Church of Rome
condemns special Faith. Therefore the Protestant and the Roman Church are
not both true Churches. As if it were impossible for one true Church, to
condemn the opinions of another. But we shall meet with this subject of
special Faith again.

And for his power to offer Sacrifice, Papists can pretend to no other
Sacrifice then Protestants.
Protestants have as much power as Romanists. The holy Eucharist is a
commemoration, a representation, an application of the all-sufficient
propitiatory Sacrifice of the Cross. If his Sacrifice of the Mass have any
other propitiatory power or virtue in it, then to commemorate, represent, and
apply the merit of the Sacrifice of the Cross, let him speak plainly what it
is. Bellarmine knew no more of this Sacrifice then we. Sacrificium crucis, etc.
The Sacrifice of the Cross, remitteth all sins past, present, and to come,
seeing it acquired a most sufficient price for the sins of the whole World.
Bell* l 1. de M^s^* c. 25.
And therefore that Sacrifice being finished, and Sins being remitted, there
remains not any oblation for sin like to that, that is, for acquiring a price
or value for the remission of sins. To what use then serves the Sacrifice of
the Mass? Hear him out. Adhuc sunt, etc. There are yet, and will be unto the
end of the World, those to whom this price of deliverance is to be applied. If
this be all, as clearly it is, to apply that price of deliverance, which Christ
paid for us, then what noise have they raised in the World to no purpose? Then
our Sacrifice is as good as theirs. Of our not communicating with them in
Sacraments, he has received an account formerly; And of our Ministers wanting
power to offer Sacrifice, he shall receive a just account in due place.

Sect. 8. 4 Ways to incur heretical pravity.
I said, that a man might render himself guilty of heretical pravity four
ways; first, by disbelieving any fundamental Article of Faith, or necessary
part of saving Truth. For though fundamentals only be simply necessary to be
known of all Christians, yet there are many other truths revealed by God, which
being known, are as necessary to be believed as the fundamentals themselves.
And to discredit any one of these lesser truths, after it is known that God
has revealed it, is as much as to deny the truth of God, or to deny all the
fundamenmentals put together. Against this he urges, that Heresy is incurred
by disbelieving any point of Faith whatsoever, if it be sufficiently proposed.
Right, if it be so proposed that a man knows it to be a revealed truth, or
might know it, if he did not obstinately shut his eyes against evident light.
But the Church of Rome is no such sufficient or infallible proposer, that every
man is bound to receive its determinations as Oracles. But R C. leaves these
words out of my discourse, [ or necessary part of saving truth,] that is
necessary to some persons, in some places, at sometimes, to whom they are
sufficiently revealed. Is this fair dealing?

Secondly, I said that Heresy was incurred, by believing superstitious errors
or additions, which do virtually and by evident consequence, overthrow a
fundamental truth. This is denied by R. C. because Faith is an assent to
divine Revelations upon the authority of the revealer, and therefore is neither
gotten nor lost, nor Heresy incurred by consequence. Does he not know that
whosoever believes a revealed truth, does of necessity believe all the evident
consequences of it? As he that believes that Christ is God, does of necessity
believe that he is eternal. And if he maintain that erat quando non erat,
There was a time when he was not, he does implicitly deny his De^ty, and incur
the crime of Heresy. Has he forgotten what their own Doctors do teach, Bell.
de Eccles. milit. l. 3. c. 15.
that a conclusion of Faith may be grounded upon one proposition inevident
(that is revealed) and another proposition evident, (that is not revealed) but
evident in it self? The hypostaticall union of the two natures divine and
humane in Christ, is a fundamental truth, that the blessed Virgin is the
mother of God, that Christ had both a divine and humane will, are evident
consequences of this truth, not expressly revealed. Yet for denying the former
Nestorius, for denying the later, the Manothelites were condemned as heretics.

Thirdly, Heresy may be incurred by obstinate persisting in lesser errors,
after a man is convicted in his conscience, that they are errors, either out
of animosity, because he scorns to yield, or out of covetous, ambitous, or
other sinister ends. And lastly, Heresy is incurred by a froward and peevish
opposition, to the Decrees of a general Council, to the disturbing of the
peace and tranquillity of the Church. Against these two last ways of incurring
Heresy, R. C. says nothing directly, but upon the by, he taxes me of two
errors. First, The Power of general Counc^ls.
that I say, No Council can make that a point of Faith, which was not ever
such. We agree in this, That no Council can make that a fundamental, which was
not a fundamental, nor make that a revealed truth, which was not a revealed
truth. I acknoledge further that a general Council, may make that revealed
truth necessary to be believed, by a Christian as a point of Faith, which
formerly was not necessary to be believed, that is whenever the reasons and
grounds produced by the Council, or the authority of the Council, (which is and
always ought to be very great, with all sober, discreet Christians,) do
convince a man in his conscience of the truth of the Councels definition. In
doubtful questions, if there be no miscarriage, no packing of Votes, no fraud
used in the Council, like that in the Council of Ariminum for receiving Christ
and rejecting homo-ousios, and if the determination be not contrary to the
tradition of the Church, who would not rather suspect his own judgment, then a
general Councels? I confess yet further, that when a general Council has
determined any controversy, no man may oppose its determination, but every one
is bound to acquiesce, and possess his Soul in patience, though he be not
convicted in his conscience of the truth of their sentence. And if any man out
of pevishnesse, or stubbornness shall oppose their definition, to the
disturbance of the peace and tranquillity of the Church, he deserves to be
punished as an Heretic.

Then wherein lies the difference? First, in R. C. his misreciting my words
according to his ordinary custom. I said only this, that a Council could not
make that proposition heretical in it self, which was not ever heretical, nor
increase the necessary Articles of the Christian Faith, either in number or
substance. What I said is undeniable true. [First, in it self] That is in its
own nature, without any reference to the authority of a Council. And [
necessary Articles of the Christian Faith] that is, absolutely and simply
necessary for all Christians. If the proposition were heretical in it self,
then they that held it before the Council were Heretics, as well as they who
hold it after the Council. And that is a necessary Article of the Christian
Faith, without the actual belief, whereof Christians could never be saved.

The Popes c^nfirmation adds nothing to general Councels.
This is sufficient to answer his objection. But for the Readers satisfaction I
add moreover, that the Romanists believe a general Council, not only to be
fallible without the concurrence and confirmation of the Pope, (whose
privilege and prerogative the most of them do make the fool ground of the
Churches infallibility,) but also without his concurrenee to have often erred
actually. But with the concurrence and confirmation of the Pope, they make the
determination of a general Council to be infallible. On the other side we know
no such infallibility of the Pope, but the contrary. After Stephen had taken up
the body of Formosus his predecessor out of his grave, spoiled him of his
pontifical Attire, cut off his two Fingers, and cast his body into Tybur,
Platina.
it became an usual thing with the following Popes, either to enfringe or
abrogate the acts of their predecessors. Neither was this act of Stephen an
error merely in matter of fact, but principally in matter of Faith, that the
Episcopal character is deleble. We know no such confirmation ne^dfull, nor of
any more force then the single Vote of a prime Bishop of an Apostolical
Church. And therefore we give the same privileges to a Council unconfirmed
(which they acknowledge to be fallible) and to a Council confirmed by the
Pope. We have no assurance that all general Counsels were, and ever shall be
so prudently mesnaged, and their proceedings allwaies so orderly and upright,
that we dare make all their sentences a sufficient conviction of all
Christians, which they are bound to believe under pain of damnation. If R C. be
not of my mind, others of his own Church have been, and are at this day. When I
forbear to cite, because I presume it will not be denied. In sum I know no
such virtuall Church as they fancy. Antiquity never knew it. I owe obedience
(at least of acquiescence) to the representative Church; and I resolve for ever
to adhere (to the best of my understanding) to the united Communion of the
whole essential Church, which I believe to be so far infallable, as is
necessary for atteining that end, for which Christ bestowed this privilege,
that is, salvation.

Neither let him think that I use this as an artifice, or subterfuge to decline
the authority of general Counsels. I know none we need to fear. And I do
freely promise to reject the authority of none that was truly general, which
he shall produce in this question. As for occidentall Councels, they are far
from being general.

Acquiescence to the decrees of a general Council is necessary.
My other supposed error is that I say, That though a Christian cannot assent in
his judgment to every decree of a general Council, yet he ought to be silent
and possess his soul in patience. That is, until God give another opportunity,
and another Council sit, wherein he may lawfully with modesty and submission
propose his reasons to the contrary. This (he says) is to bind men to be
Hypocrites and Dissemblers in matter of Religion, and by their silence to
suppress and bury divine Truth; and brings them within the compass of Saint
Paul's Woe; 1 Cor 9.
woe be unto me if I evangelise not. Excellent Doctrine, and may well serve for
a part of the Rebels Catechism. Because my Superior is not infallible, if I
cannot assent unto him, must I needs oppose him publicly, or otherwise be
guilty of Hypocrisy and Dissimulation? If he shall think fit in discretion, to
silence all dispute about some dangerous questions, am I obliged to tell the
world that this is to suppress or bury divine Truth? If he shall by his
authority suspend a particular Pastor, from the exercise of his pastoral
Office, must he needs preach in defiance of him, or else be guilty of St. Paul's
Woe, Woe be unto me because I preach not the Gospel? I desire him to consult
with Bellarmine. All Catholics do agree that if the Pope alone, or the Pope
with a particular Council, do determine any controversy in Religion; whether
he can err, Bell de To. pont. c. 4. c. 2.
or whether he can not err, he ought to be heard obediently of all Christians.
May not I observe that duty to a general Council, which all Roman Catholics
do pay to the Pope? or is there a less degree of obedience than passive
obedience? Certainly these things were not well weighed.

Where I say that by the Church of England in this question, Sect. 9.
I understand that Church which was derived by lineall succession, from
British, English, and Scottish Bishops, Mixed ordination.
by mixed ordination, as it was legally established in the days of Edward the
sixth, and flourished in the Reigns of Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King
Charles; and now groans under the heavy Yoke of persecution, to let us see what
an habit of alteration is; he excepts against every word of this. First,
against the lineall succession, because none of these ancient Bishops taught
justification by faith alone. This is an argument from the Staff to the
Corner. I speak of a succession of holy Orders, and he of a succession of
Opinions. And when the matters come to be searched to the bottom, he will be
found at a default here also. Those ancient Bishops held the same justification
by faith that we do.

In the next place, he excepts against mixed Ordination, as partly Papisticall,
partly Protestanticall. He erres the whole Heavens breadth from my meaning.
Before Austin preached to the Saxons, there were in Britain ancient British
Bishops, and ancient Scottish Bishops, who had their several lines of
succession, to which Austin added English Bishops, and so made a third
succession. These three were distinct at first, but afterward in tract of
time, they came to be mixed and united into one succession. So as every English
Bishop now derives his succession from British, Scottish, and English Bishops.
This is the great Bugbear of mixed Ordination.

The English Church lawfully established.
He tells us that King Edward the sixth was a Child. He mistakes. Kings are
never Children nor Minors whilst they have good Tutors, and good Councellers.
was he more a Child than King Iehoash; and yet the Church was reformed during
his minority. This was no Childish Act, thanks to Iehoiada, a good Uncle and
Protector.

He demands how that Church was legally established in King Edwards days,
which was established contrary to the liking of the most and best of the
Bishops, whereof diverse were cast in Prison, for not assenting to the erecting
of it? And I ask how it was not legally established, which was established by
sovereign authority, according to the direction of the Convocation, with the
confirmation of the Parliament? What other legal establishment can there be in
England? By the Laws of England, a Bishop had but his single vote either in
Parliament or Convocation. Some Bishops were imprisoned indeed, but neither the
most nor the best of the English Bishops, whether for not assenting, or for
other reasons, will require further proof than his bare assertion. This is
certain that every one of them had freely renounced the Pope and Papacy, in the
reign of Henry the eighth.

He says I should have added that Church which was suppressed by the last
Parliament, Not lawfully suppressed.
under King Charles. Why should I add a notorious untruth, as contrary to my
conscience as to my affections? I might have said oppressed, I could not say
suppressed. The external splendour was abated, when the Baronies of the
Bishops, and their votes in Parliament were taken away, but the Order was not
extinguished. So far from it, that King Charles himself suffered as a Martyr
for the English Church. If his meaning be, that it was suppressed by an
ordinance of one or both Houses without authority royal, he cannot be so great
a stranger in England, as not to know that it is without the sphere of their
activity.

Yet he is pleased to style it a dead Church, The English Church nor dea^,
and me the Advocate of a dead Church; even as the Trees are dead in Winter
when they want their leaves, or as the Sun is set when it is behind a Cloud,
or as the Gold is destroyed when it is melting in the Furnace. When I see a
seed cast into the ground, I do not ask where is the greeness of the leaves?
where is the beauty of the flowers? where is the sweetness of the fruit? but I
expect all these in their due season: Stay a while and behold the Catastrophe.
The rain is fallen, the wind has blown, and the floods have beaton upon their
Church, but it is not fallen, for it is founded upon a Rock. The light is under
a Bushel, but it is not extinguished. And if God in justice should think fit
to remove our Candlestick, yet the Church of England is not dead, whilst the
Catholic Church survives.

But under persecution.
Lastly he denies that the English Church is under persecution: And though some
of the Church do suffer, yet it is not for Religion, but matters of State.
What can a man expect in knotty questions from them, who are so much
transported with prejudice, as to deny those things which are obvious to every
eye. If it be but some that have suffered, it is such a some as their Church
could never show, wherein he that desires to be more particularly informed, may
read the Martyrology of London, or the List of the Universities, and from that
paw, guess at the proportion of the Lion. But perhaps all this was for matters
of State. No, our Churches were not demolished upon pretense of matters of
State, nor our Ecclesiastical Revenues exposed to sale for matters of State.
The refusal of a schismatic Covenant is no matter of State. How many of the
orthodox Clergy, without pretense of any other delinquency have been beggered?
how many necessitated to turn Mechanics or day-Laborers? how many starved? how
many have had their hearts broken? how many have been imprisoned? how many
banished from their native Soil, and driven as Vagabonds into the merciless
World? No man is so blind as he that will not see.

His tenth Section is a summary or repetition of what he has already said,
Sect. 10.
wherein I find nothing of weight that is new, but only one authority out of
St. Austin, That Catholics are every where, and Heretics every where, but
Catholics are the same every where, and Heretics different every where. If by
Catholics he understand Roman Catholics, they are not every where, not in
Russia, nor in Aethiopia; and excepting some hand-fulls, for the most part upon
toleration, not in any of the Eastern Churches. The words of Saint Austin are
these. Vbicunque sunt isti, illic Catholica, ^ 4. cont. Cresion. c. 61.
sicut in Africa ubi and vos; non autem ubicunque Catholica est, aut vos istis,
aut Heresis quaelibet earum. Wheresoever they are, there is the Catholic
Church; as in Africa where you are; but wheresoever the Catholic Church is,
you are not, nor any of those Heresies. St. Austins scope is to show that the
Catholic Church is more diffused, or rather universal than any Sect, or all
Sects put together. If you please, let this be the Touchstone between you and
us: But you will say that you are united every where, and we are different
every where. Nothing less. You are united in one pretended head, which some of
you acknowledge more, some less. We are united in the same Creed, the same
Sacraments, and for the most part the same discipline. Besides of whom does St.
Austin speak in that place? of the Novatians, Arrians, Patripassians,
Valentinians Patricians, Apellites, Marcionites, Ophites; all which condemned
all others but themselves, and thereby did separate themselves Schismatically
from the Catholic Church, as it is to be feared that you do. Our case is
quite contrary: we reform our selves, but condemn no others.

CHAP. 3. Whether Protestants were Authors of the separation from Rome.
Sect. 1. Protestants not Authors of the Schism.
WE are now come from stating the Question to proofs, where we shall soon see
how R. C. will acquit himself of the province which he has undertaken. To show
that Protestants were not the Authors of the Separation from Rome, but Roman
Catholics, I produced first the solemn unanimous resolution of our
Universities in the point, that the Bishop of Rome had no greater Jurisdiction,
within England conferred upon him by God in the Scripture, than any other
foreign Bishop. Secondly, the decrees of two of our national Synods. Thirdly,
six or seven Statutes or Acts of Parliament. Fourthly, the attestation of the
prime Roman Catholic Bishops and Clergy, in their printed Books, in their
Epistles, in their Sermons, in their Speeches, in their Institution. Fifthly,
the unanimous consent of the whole Kingdom of England testified by Bishop
Gardener, and of the Kingdom of Ireland proved out of the Council Book.
Lastly, the Popes own Book, wherein he interdicted and excommunicated the whole
Church of England, before the reformation made by Protestants: So as apparently
we were chased away from them. Hear the judgment of a Stranger. This year the
Pope brake the wise patience, or rather dissimulation, which for four years
together he had used toward England: Hi^t* Conc. Trid an. 1538.
And sent against the King a terrible thundering Bull, such as never was used by
his Predecessors, nor imitated by his Successors. It will cost him some tugging
to break such a six-fold cord as this is. What does he answer to all this? Not
one word. And so I take my first ground pro confess, That Protestants were not
Authors of the separation of the English Church from Rome.

Sect. 2.
Yet something he says upon the by, which is to be examined first, That they
who made the King head of the Church, were so far from being Zelots of the
Roman Religion, that they were not then of the Roman Religion, but Schismatics
and Heretics outwardly, whatsoever they were inwardly. What a change is here?
Even now when they opposed the Reformation, they were the best Bishops: and now
when they oppose the Popes Supremacy, they are Schismatics and Heretics. Let
them be what they were, or whatsoever he would have them to be, certainly they
were no Protestants. And if they were not Roman Catholics, they were of no
Christian Communion. They professed to live Roman Catholics; and they died
Roman Catholics. The six bloody Articles contrived by them, and executed by
them in the reign of King Henry, and the Bonefires which they made of poor
Protestants in the days of Queen Mary, do demonstrate both that they were no
Protestants, and that they were Zelots of the Roman Religion.

But (says he) the essence of the Roman Religion does consist in the primacy
of the Pope. If it be so, then whereas the Christian Religion has twelve
Articles, the Roman Religion has but one Article, and that none of the twelve,
namely, the supremacy of the Pope. But this needs makes no difference between
us: For they denied not the Popes Primacy, that is, of order, but his Supremacy
of power. Neither is his Supremacy either the essence. or so essential a part
of the Roman Catholic Belief, but that many of the Roman Catholic Communion
have denied it of old, as the Counsels of Constance and Basile, and many do
deny it, and more doubt of it at this day. But let that be as it will. In all
other Controversies they were pure Romanists, and the denomination is from the
greater part. Certainly they were no Protestants, which is enough for my
purpose.

He tells us from Bishop Gardener, The Parliament not compelled.
that the Parliament was with much cruelty constrained to abolish the Primacy
(he means Supremacy) of the Bishop of Rome. A likely thing indeed that a whole
Parliament, and among them above fifty Bishops and Abbets should be forced,
without any noise against their conscience, to forswear themselves, to deny the
essence of their faith, and (to use his own words) to turn Schismatics and
Heretics. How many of them lost their lives first? Not one, not one changed
his Soil, not one suffered imprisonment about it. For howsoever the matter has
been misconstrued by some of our Historiographe^s, Bishop Fisher and Sir Thomas
Moore were imprisoned, before this Act of the Supremacy was made, for denying
the Kings Marriage, and opposing a former Act of Parliament, touching the
succession of his Children to the Crown. Thus much is confessed by Sanders in
his Book de Schismate p. 73. b. concerning Fisher, and p. 81. concerning Sir.
Thomas Moor. Quae Lex post Mori apprehensionem constituta erat, The Law (of
Supremacy) was made after the apprehension of Sir Thomas Moore. Of this much
cruelty I do not find so much as a threatening word, or a footstep, except the
fear of a Praemunire. And is it credible that the whole representative of the
Church and Kingdom should value their Goods above their Souls? Or that two
successive Synods, and both our Universities, ( nemine dissentiente) should be
so easily constrained? But who constrained the most learned of the Bishop^, and
the greatest Divines in the Kingdom, to tell the King that it was his right,
to publish Catechisms, or Institutions, and other Books; and to preach Sermons
at St. Paul's Cross and elsewhere, for maintenance of the Kings Supremacy? These
Acts were unconstrained. Hear the Testimony of Queen Eizabeth, given in their
life time, to their faces, before the most eminent Ambassadors of the greatest
Persons in the World, when Bishop Gardener might have contradicted it, if he
could. When the Emperor and other Roman Catholic Princes interceded with her
for the displaced Bishops, she returned this answer, That they did now
obstinately reject that Doctrine, which most part of themselves under Henry the
eighth and Edward the sixth, Camd. An. Eliz. anno. 1559.
had of their own accord with heart and hand publicly in their Sermons and
Writings taught unto others, when they themselves were not private Persons, but
public Magistrates. The charge is so particular that it leaves no place for
any answer. First, of their own accord; Secondly, not only under Henry the
eighth, but Edward the sixth; Thirdly, when they themselves were public
Magistrates; Fourthly, with heart and hand, not only in their Sermons, but also
in their printed Writings. Against Subscriptions and printed. Writings there
can be no defense: But upon whose credit is this constraint charged upon King
Henry? upon Bishop Gardiners? In good time, he produces a Witness in his own
cause. He had an hard heart of his own, if he would not have favored himself,
and helped to conceal his own shame, after King Henry was dead. Mortui non
mordent. Bishop Gardener.
Is not this that Stephen Gardener that writ the book de vera obedientia, to
justify the Kings Supremacy? Is not this that Stephen Gardener that tells us,
That no foreign Bishop has authority among us, that all sorts of people are
agreed with us upon this point with most steadfast consent, that no manner of
person bred or brought up in England has ought to do with Rome? Is not this
he that had so great an hand in framing the oath of Supremacy, and in all the
great transactions in the later days of King Henry? was not he one of them who
tickled the Kings ears with Sermons against the Popes Supremacy, Speed in Hen.
8. c. 21 n. 1 c 5.
who was a Contriver of the six bloody Articles against the Protestants, and
was able by his power with the King, to bring the great Favorite of those times
to the Scaffold for Heresy and Treason. To conclude, if any thing did
constrain him, it was either the Bishopric of London or Winchester; or which I
do the rather believe out of charity, the very power of conscience. So much
himself confesses in the conclusion of his book de vera obedientia, where he
proposes this objection against himself, De vera ob^dientia, in fine.
that as a Bishop he had sworn to maintain the Supremacy of the Pope. To which
he answers, That what was holily sworn is more holily omitted, then to make an
oath the bond of iniquity. He confesses himself to have been married to the
Church of Rome bona fide, as to his second Wife, but after the return of his
first Wife (that is the Truth) to which he was espoused in his Baptism, being
convicted with undeniable evidence; he was necessitated out of conscience, to
forsake the Church of Rome in this particular question of Supremacy, and to
adhere to his first Wife the Truth, and after her to his Prince, the supreme
head of the English Church upon earth

His next attempt is to prove that the Protestants were the Authors of the
separation from Rome. And he names three, Cranmer, Crumwell, and Barnes. He
might even as well say that two or three common Soldiers of the Carthaginian
Army, (and perhaps not one of them at the fight) were the Authors of the Roman
overthrow at Cannae. It was the Universities that approved the separation
unanimously. It was the Synods that directed the separation. It was the King
that established the separation. It was the Parliament that confirmed the
separation. How could two or three Privados without Negromancy, have such an
efficatious influence upon the Universities and Synods, and Parliaments, and
the King himself. Yet they might have an hand in it, no, nor so much as a
little finger. As much as the Fly that sat upon the Cart-wheel, had in
raising of the dust. The two Houses of Parliament alone did consist of above
600. of the most able and eminent persons in the Kingdom: what had these three
been able to do among them, supposing they had been then Protestants and of
the House? Even as much as three drops of honey in a great vessel of vinegar,
or three drops of vinegar in a great vessel of honey.

But let us see what it is, Archbishop Cranmer.
which he objects against Cranmer and the rest, That Cranmer whom I will not
deny to have been a friend and favourer of Protestants advised, that the King
should seek no more to the Court of Rome, And that bidding adieu to the Court
of Rome, he should consult with the most learned in the Universities of Europe
at home and abroad. There was no hurt in all this. There could be no suspicion,
that the most learned in all the Universities of Europe should be enemies to
the just rights of the Roman Court. But upon this (says he) it was by
Commission disputed by the Divines in both Universities. And so he concludes
triumphantly, Behold Cranmer the first author of secession from the Pope. I
answer, That this secession was no secession of the Church of England, nor this
disputation any disputation concerning the jurisdiction of the Roman Court over
the English Church, but only concerning a particular process, there depending,
between King Hen^y and Queen Katherine, about the validity or invalidity of
their marriage and the Popes dispensation, which Cranmer maintained to be
determinable by Divine law, not by Canon law. The truth is this. Doctor
Stephens and Doctor Fox two great Ministers of King Henry, and Doctor Cranmer
chanced to meet without any design at Waltham, where discourse being offered
concerning this process, Cranmer freely declared his judgment, that the
marriage of a Brother with his Brothers Wife was unlawful by the Law of God,
and that the Pope could not dispense with it. And that it was more expedient
and more proper to seek to have this cause determined by the best Divines and
Universities of Europe, then by the dilatory proceeding of the Roman Court.
This was related to the King. The King sent for Cranmer. He offered freely to
justify it before the Pope. And to demonstrate both that this was no
separation from Rome, Speed, Baker, etc. in Henr. 8.
and that Cranmer himself was no Protestant at that time, it is acknowledged by
all our Historiographers that after this, Cranmer with others was sent as an
Ambassador or Envoy to Rome, and returned home in the Popes good Grace, not
without a mark of his favor, being made his penitentiary. Likewise, says
another, Cranmer that unworthy Archbishop of Canterbury was his (the Earl of
Hartfords) right hand, Image of both Churches, second edition page 413.
and chief assistant in the work* although but a few months before he was of
King Harries Religion, yea a great Patron and Prosecutor of the six Articles.
That is as much as to say, no friend no favourer of Protestants. So this
victorious argument fails on both sides. Sand de Schism. page 115. Sacrificio
missae intersuit quotidie dum regnabat Henricus.
Some other places he cites concerning Cranmer, That he freed the Kings
conscience from the yoke of Papal dominion, that is to say, in that process.
That by his counsel, destruction was provided divinely to the Court of Rome,
that is, occasionally and by the just disposition of Almighty God. That the
King was brought by Cranmers singular virtue to defend the cause of the
Gospel, that is, in that particular case, that the Pope cannot dispense
contrary to the Law of God. And lastly, That the Papal power being discovered
by King Henry's authority and Cranmers, did easily fall down. I much doubt if I
had the Book whether I should find these testimonies such as they are cited.
Howsoever it may be true distinguendo tempora and referendo singula singulis.
They could not be spoken of the first separation, when Cranmer had no more
authority then a private Doctor, but of the following times. King Henry
suppressed the Papal tyranny in England by his Legislative Power, and Cranmer
by his discovery of their usurpations, and care to see the Laws executed.

Crumwell.
Against Crumwell he produces but one testimony, That it was generally
conceived, and truly (as never thought,) That the politic ways for taking
away the Popes authority in England, and the suppression of Religious Houses,
were principally devised by Crumwell. First, this is but an argument from
vulgar opinion. Secondly, when Archbishop Warham and the Synod did first give
to King Henry the Supremacy, and the Title of Head of the English Church,
Crumwell was no Protestant, he had lately been Cardinal Wolsies Soliciter, and
was then Master of the Jewel House, of no such power to do any great good or
hurt to the Protestants. And at his death he professed that he was no
Sacramentary, and that he died in the Catholic Faith. Lord Cherbury in H. 8.
anno 1540. Holl. an. 32. H. 8. fol. 242.

But for the suppression of Religious Houses, it is not improbable. He might
well have learned that way under Cardinal Wolsy, when he procured the
suppression of forty Monasteries of good note, for the founding of his two
Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich. In which business our historians say the Pope
licked his own Fingers, to the value of twelve Barrels full of Gold and Silver.

Lastly for Doctor Barnes poor man, Barnes.
he was neither Courtier nor Councelor, nor Convocation man, nor Parliament
man. All the grace which ever he received from King Henry, was an honorable
death for his Religion. He said, That he and such other wretches as he, had
made the King a whole King, by their Sermons. If they did so, it was well done.
The meaning of a whole King, is an Head of the Church, says R. C. It may be
so, but the consequence is naught. Perhaps he meant a Sovereign independent
King, not feudatory to the Pope, which he that is, is but half a King. Not only
of old, but in later times the Popes did challenge a power Paramount over the
Kings of England within their own dominions, as appears by the Popes Bull
sent to James the fifth King of Scotland, wherein he declares that he had
deprived King Henry of his Kingdom, as an Heretic, a Schismatic, Speed l. 9.
c. 21.
an Adulterer, a Murderer, a Sacrilegious person, and lastly a Rebel and
convict of laesae Majestatis, for that he had risen against him (the Pope) who
was his Lord.

But now supposing all R. C. his suggestions had been true, That Cranmer and
Crumwell had been Protestants at that time; and had been in as much grace; and
had had the like opportunity of address to the King, as they had afterward;
that Cranmer had persuaded the King as a Divine, and Crumwell as a Politician,
to separate from the Court of Rome: And that Barnes had preached against the
Popes Supremacy. Yet this is far from the authoritative separation of the
whole Church, and Kingdom from the Court of Rome. Moral persuasions may
incline, but cannot necessitate the will.

Therefore not confiding to these broken Reeds at length he admits that Roman
Catholics were the Authors of the saparation, Be it so that Roman Catholics
were the authors of the division, that is worse for Protestants, because then
Protestants continue a wicked Schism, wicked begun, against conscience, against
known truth, and consequently a sin against the holy Ghost. And to make his
assertion good, he produces the authority of Optatus, L 1. Cont. Parm.
It appears evidently that you are the heirs of Schismatics. He who reads
this would believe, that Optatus spoke positively of Protestants, when he
speaks only of Donatists, Papists are the right Heirs of the Don^rists, not
Protestants.
cum haec it^ gesta esse manifestissime constet, and vos haeredes esse
traditorum and Schismaticorum evidenter appareat. Seeing it is most evident
that these things did fall out thus, that is, that Majorinus (whose Chair
Parmenianus did now possess) did divide himself from the communion of
Caecilianus, and set up a Chair against a Chair in the same Church, or a new
Chair, quae ante ipsum Majorinum originem non habebat, and seeing Majorianus
was a traditor and a Schismatic, it appears evidently that Parmenian was the
heir of a Schismatic. Now what does this concern us? The Donatists set up a
new Chair against an old Chair in the same Church, we have done no such thing.
God make us able to keep up tha old. Secondly, the Donatists separated
themselves from all other Churches, we separate our selves from no Churches,
neither from the Chair of Caecilian, nor of Peter, nor of Cyprian. But if we
would know, not only who are the heirs of the Donatists, but who are their
heirs in their Schism, we may find them easily. It is the Roman Catholics
themselves, first, in their uncharitableness, in breaking the bond of
brotherly unity. The Catholics owned the Donatists for their brethren, but the
Donatists refused to own the Catholics for their brethren, quamvie and illi
non negent and omnibus not um sit, etc. Although they deny it not, and it is
known to all men, Opt. l 1. Cont. Par. in^initio.
that they hate us, and accurse us, and will not be called our brethren, yet
etc. without doubt they are our brethren. And a little after, And because they
will not have the Episcopal College common with us, let them not be our fellow
Collegians if they will not, yet, as I said before, they are our brethren. This
is just the case between them and us, we offer them the right hand of
brotherhood, as the Catholics did to the Donatists, but they refuse it, as the
Donatists did to the Catholics. Secondly, the Donatists separated the whole
Catholic Church from their communion, and substituted themselves, being but a
small part of the Christian World in the place of the Catholic Church. Just as
the Romanists do at this day. Optatus speaks home unto them both, the old and
new Donatists. Se pro voluntate vestra inangustum coarctatis Ecclesiam, Opt. l.
2. Cont. Parm. in initio.
etc. If ye for your pleasure do thrust the Church into a streit, if ye
substract all Nations, where is that which the Son of God has merited, where
is that which the Father has given him? Psalm. 2.
I will give thee the Heathen for thine inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the Earth for thy possession. Why do you infringe this promise? Or imprison
this universal Kingdom, etc. Suffer the Son to possess his Fathers gift.
Suffer the Father to fulfill his promise. Why do you set bounds and limits?
And still ye endeavor to persuade men that the Church is only with you. Let
the Reader judge who are the right heirs of the Donatists.

The rest of his discourse is a groundless asking of the question. Roman
Cathol^cks sinn^d not against conscience in their s^paration
First, those Roman Catholics did make no separation from the Roman Church,
but from the Roman Court. Secondly, they separated from the Roman Court only in
its innovations without criminous Schism. Thirdly, we cannot, we dare not be so
uncharitable as to judge that the whole Kingdom, and all the Pastors of the
Church, did sin against their conscience, but we believe firmly that it was
the clear light and evidence of truth, that made them so unanimous in their
separation. Fourthly, though they had sinned against the known truth, not being
done of malice, it was not the sin against the holy Ghost. St. Peter did not
sin against the holy Ghost when he denied Christ. Fifthly, though they had
sinned against conscience in separating, yet the fault being not in the thing
done, but in the conscience of the doer, we being better informed may with a
good conscience hold, what they with a bad conscience did take away. Lastly,
though they had sinned, not only in separating against conscience, but also in
the very act of separation. Yet we who found the separation made to our hands,
who never did any act either to oblige us to Rome, or to disoblige us from
Rome, holding what we received from our Ancestors, and endeavoring to find out
the truth, and ready to receive it whenever God shall reveal it unto us, are
not censurable as Schismatics, as I proved out of Saint Austine, though R. C.
be pleased to take no notice of it.

Henry the eight no Protestant
Here he makes a short double and will needs have Henry the eight to have been a
substantial Protestant. If he was a Protestant, doubtless he was a
substantial Protestant, But why a Protestant? Doctor Barnes and many more who
were burned by him for Protestants, would hardly have believed it. But he
says, Henry the eight was an Antipapist, and that is sufficient to make a
Protestant. If that be sufficient to make a Protestant it is well, otherwise
one of his friends tells us, ^ul. Alan. Apol. c. 4. p. 59.
We had a King who by his Laws abolished the authority of the Pope, although
in all other things he would follow the Faith of his Ancestors. Lately he told
us, that the essence and life and soul and definition of a Protestant, was to
hold justification by Faith alone, then Henry the eight was no Protestant, for
he did not hold justification by Faith alone. Now he makes the essence of a
Protestant, to be impugning the Popes Supremacy. I had not thought essences or
definitions had been so mutable: but for my part I am glad of the change. If
all Antipapists be Protestants, then all the Grecian, Armenian, Abyssen,
Russian Christians are Protestants, then we shall not want Protestants to bear
us company in the Church of Rome it self, so long as there are any followers of
the Counsels of Constance and Basil.

But some Protestants have confessed, Sond de Schism p 103 b. Denique nulla in
re a side Catholica discessit nisi libidinis and luxu^i^ causa.
That he was a Member of the Catholic Church. Why not? There are many Members
of the Catholic Church besides Protestants. Others call him a true Defender of
the true Faith, a Denfender of the Gospel, an Embracer of the pure Gospel of
Christ, rejecting devises of men contrary thereunto. All this may be true, and
yet they neither say nor intend this absolutely, but comparatively; not
universally but respictvely to some particular controverted points, and
principally this of the Supremacy.

I charged some for making the cruelty of the Protestants, Sect. 4.
and the rigor of their Laws the motives of their falling away from the
English Church. A full justification of our penal Laws.
And showed that more Protestants suffered not only death, but extreme torments
in death for Religion, in the short reign of Queen Mary, then Roman Catholics
in all the much longer reigns of all the Protestant Princes since the
Reformation. And that the Kingdom of France and the Commonwealth of Venice
had made the like Laws to ours. Whatsoever I say in our defense he takes no
notice of, but declaimes against the injustice of our Laws and Judges, not
without a specious show of reason. Wherefore, because it intrencheth upon the
honor of our Church and Nation, I will take the liberty to search this sore
to the bottom.

I confess that no man or Society of men can be justly punished
(notwithstanding the brutish opinions of some persons) because they are
noxious, unless they be noxious in the eye of the Law. No not by a legislative
authority. Where a man cannot give sentence innocently, he cannot vote
innocently. The reason is plain, Where there is no Law, there is no
transgression; and where there is no transgression, there is no guilt, nor just
punishment.

Secondly, I confess that a Law made like a Casting-net, to throw over men's
lives, is (...), L 3.
a most lawless Law. In the twelve Tables which Livy calls the fountains of
public and private right; which alone said Tully, L. 1. de Orator.
do excel all the Libraries of all the Philosophers in the World, it is thus
enacted, according to the excellent concise simplicity of their style, Leg. 12.
tal.
Privilegia ne inroganto. Let no private Laws be made to any man's hurt or
prejudice. Likewise it was the Law of Solon, That no Law should be made of
particular men, Aen Gaz. in Theo. ph^asium.
(...), unless it were imposed upon all the Athenians indifferently (said
Demosthenes.) For the same reason, Cont Arist^c^aetem and Timocratem.
when the Thebans had a mind to banish Heraclitus, they durst not name him,
but pointed him out in general, If there was any man in the City that never
laughed, and hated all Mankind, let him depart before Sunset. Thinking vainly
to hide the nakedness of their Law with a few figg-leaves of general
expressions. So universally was this received throughout the World, that Laws
should not be made for the ruin of particular Subjects.

Thirdly, We must Take notice that many things are lawful in public Justice,
that is, in War, or Legislation, or the like, which are not lawful in
particular Justice between Subject and Subject. As it is lawful to pull down
any Citizens house, to save the whole City from fire. It is lawful to make
use of any man's land, to make a bank to save the whole Country from inundation;
in which cases nevertheless the public is obliged to repair the Subjects
damage. Suppose the greater part of a City should force the honester part to
submit to their pleasure, and contribute to their rebellious courses, or force
them to it, the party forced is innocent. Yet in the recoverie of the Town,
the honestest Citizens are as subject to be slain, their houses to be burned,
their goods to be plundered, as the most disloyal: And justly. For it being
lawful to reduce the City to obedience by war, this justifies all
necessary means of reduction. And the honest party who suffer without fault,
cannot blame the Magistrates for their sufferings, nor the Soldiers who do
their commands, but their fellow Citizens. But when this necessity is over, and
the City is reduced, and distinction can be made, particular Justice must take
place again, and then none ought to suffer but Delinquents, according to the
degree of their Delinquency.

Fourthly, To proceed one step nearer to the case in question. The same
necessity does justify those Laws which are enacted for the common safety and
tranquillity of the whole body politic, under whatsoever penalties they a^e
pleased to impose, as banishment, confiscation of goods, imprisonment, or death
it self, so they be proportioned to the exigence of the dangers greater or
lesser, though these Laws prove burdensome to particular Citizens, or
restrain Subjects from the exercise of those things which o^herwise were
benefi^iall, lawful, and laudable to them in particular. Suppose a General
should make an Edict, That no Soldier, under pain of death, should leave the
C^mp: Yet one goes to visit his Father being sick, and suff^rs for it. This is
not for doing his filial duty, but for violating of his Generals Edict. In
Ireland it was forbidden by Statute, under pain of most severe punishment, to
use the words Crumabo and Butlerabo, because they were badgets of Faction, and
incentives to Sedition. The Philistims did not suffer a Smith in Israel, least
the Hebrews should make themselves Swords and Spears. The King of Spain,
weighing the danger that might arise from the numerous multitudes of Moors
within his Dominions, sent them all packing away by an Edict. The Athenians
thought it no injustice to banish their chiefest and most loyal Citizens, if
they f^ared a tyranny* or necessity of State did require it. All Nations have
their Imbargues, and prohibited goods, and forbid all Commerce and Conversation
with those that are in open hostility against them. If a ship arrive from any
places infected with some contagious disease, they keep the pas^^ngers from
mixing with their Subjects, until they have given sufficient proof that they
are ^ound. If they find cause to banish a citizen, either for a prefixed term,
or for ever, under pain of death, or forfeiture of all their goods, if there be
a necessity in it to secure the Commonwealth, they may do it. And if the
persons to banished will return on their own heads, upon pretense that they
love their Country so well that they cannot live out of it; or if any of them
being a Clergy man should pretend that he returns out of conscience to do the
offices of his Function among his Countrymen, it is not the Law, but they who
pull the penalty of the Law upon themselves. In sum, it is clear that
whenever a Prince or a Republic, out of just necessity, and for the
preservation of the Commonwealth, shall restrain their subjects from anything
that threatens the same with imminent dangers, upon whatsoever penalty it be,
so it be proportionable to the danger, it is just. And if the Subject will not
obey, his blood is upon his own head. The only question is, whether there was
at that time not only a pretended, but a real necessity to make those Laws,
which they call sanguinary or bloody, for the preservation of the Common
wealth. This is the case between the Romanists and us, upon these two hinges
this controversy is moved.

Then to leave the Thesis, and come unto the Hypothesis, and to show that at
that time there was a real necessity for the making of those Laws. First, let
it be observed, that after the secession of the English Church from the Court
of Rome, the succeeding Popes have for the most part looked upon England with a
very ill eye. Sand de Schis. l. 1.
Witness that terrible and unparalleled excommunication and interdiction of
England, a deprivation of Henry the eighth, formerly mentioned, published at
Dunkirk, because they durst bring it no nearer. Witness the Bull of
Anathematization and deprivation by Pius the fifth, against Queen Elizabeth and
all her adherents, Camd Annal. Eliz. l. 2. p. 7.
absolving all her Subjects from their oaths of Allegiance, without so much as
an admonition preceding. Witness the Popes negotiations with the English,
Spanish, French, and Portugheses, to have Queen Elizabeth taken away by
murder, and the frame of the Government altered, published at Rome by
Hieronimo Catena Secretary to Cardinal Alexandrino, in the time and with the
privilege of Sixtus the fifth, Witness the Logantine authority given to
Sanders, and the hollowed Banner sent with him and Allen two Romish Priests, to
countenance the Earl of Desmond in his Rebellion: Id. l. 2. p. 98.
And the Phaenix plume sent to Terowen, to encourage him likewise in his
Rebellion, Id l 4. p. 145 and p. 150.
and a plenary Indulgence for him and all his adherents and assistants, from
Clement the eighth. Lastly, witness the two Briefs sent by the same Pope to
exclude King James from the inheritance of the Crown of England, p 164.
unless he would take an Oath to promote the Roman catholic Interest.

This is not all. In the second place the Popes, to have the greater influence
upon England, did themselves found or conserve several Colleges or Seminaries
of English Priests at Rome, at Rhemes, at Doway; where the English youth were
trained up more for the advantage of the Pope, than of their Prince and native
Country. What those Principles were which were then infused into them, I have
neither means at present, nor in truth desire to inquire, because I hope that
at this day they are disclaimed by all or the most learned and moderate persons
of those Societies: Only for the justification of my native Country, give me
leave to set down some of them in the words of the former learned
Historiographer. Suspicions also were daily raised by the great number of
Priests creeping more and more into England, C^md Annal l 3 p. 11
who privily felt men's minds, spread abroad That Princes excommunicate were to
be deposed: and whispered in corners, That such Princes as professed not the
Roman Religion, had forfeited their Title and Regal Authority: That those men
which had entered into holy Orders, were, by a certain ecclesiastical
freedom, exempted from all Jurisdiction of Princes, and not bound by their
Laws, nor ought to reverence their Majesty. And that the Bishop of Rome has
supreme authority and most full power over the whole World, yea even in
temporal matters. And that the Magistrates of England were no lawful
Magistrates; and therefore not to be accounted for Magistrates. Yea, that all
things whatsoever done by the Queens authority from the time that the Bull
declaratory of Pius quintus was published, were by the Laws of God and Man
altogether void, and to be esteemed nothing. And some of them dissembled not
that they were returned into England with no other intent, then, by reconciling
in confession, to absolve every one in particular from all oaths of allegiance
and obedience to the Queen. Judge how such Emissaties deserved to be welcomed
into a Kingdom. More might be added, but this it self is enough or too much.

Lastly, View all the Treasons and Rebellions that were in Queen Elizabeth's
time, and see from what source they did spring. Parsons proposed to Papists the
deposing of the Queen, so far forth that some of them thought to have delivered
him into the Magistrates hands. And wrote a Book under the name of Doleman, to
entitle the Infanta of Spain to the Crown of England. Of Sanders I have spoken
formerly. Only let me add this, That when he was found dead, they found in his
pouch Orations and Epistles to confirm the Rebels, with promise of assistance
from the Bishop of Rome and others. Parre confessed, That that which finally
settled him in his treasonable purpose, Ibid. l. 3. p. 44. l. 3. p. 74.
to kill the Queen, was the reading of Allens Book, that Princes excommunicated
for Heresy were to be deprived of life. Ballard was himself a Priest of the
Seminary of Rhemes. See his conspiracy. I pass by the commotions raised in
Scotland by Bruce, Creiton, and Haies. Camd. An. l. 3. p. 132
Squire accused Walpoole for putting him upon it to poison the Queen. I speak
not of the confession of John Nicholas, nor the testimony of Eliot mentioned
in their own Apology, because they are not of undoubted faith. Apol. Marc. p.
329.
This is most certain, That when Campian was interrogated before his death,
whether Queen Elizabeth were a lawful and rightful Queen, he refused to
answer: And being asked, If the Pope should send forces against the Queen,
whether he would take part with the Queen or the Pope, he openly professed and
testified under his hand, that he would stand for the Pope. Camd. An. l 3. p.
11.
The same Author adds, That his fellows being examined in like manner, either
refused to answer, or gave such ambiguous and prevaricatory answers, that some
ingenuous Catholics began to suspect that they fostered some treachery.

Lay all these together, their disloyal answers, their seditious tenets, so
many treacherous attempts, so many open Rebellions, so many depositions and
deprivations and exclusions, so many Books brim-full of prodigious treason. At
such a time when the seditious opinions of that party were in their Zenith;
when seditious persons crowded over daily in such numbers; when the Heir
apparent of the Crown of England was a Roman Catholic. And let any reasonable
man judge, whether the Kingdom of England had not just cause of fear; whether
they were not necessitated to provide nequid detrimenti caperet Respublica,
that the Commonwealth should sustain no loss; whether our Statesmen who did
then sit at the stern, were not obliged to their Prince and to their Country,
to provide by all means possible for the security of their Prince and
tranquillity of their Country, which could not be done at that time, without
the exclusion of such Bigots and Bowtifeus from among them, nor they be
possibly excluded but by such severe Laws.

These are the very reasons given in the Edict it self, Apr. 1. and El. 23. ex
Apol. Mart.
That it did plainly appear to her Majesty and her Council, by many
examinations, by their own Letters and confessions, and by the actual
conspiracies of the like persons sent into Ireland by the Pope, that the end
and scope of sending them into her Majesty's Dominions, was to prepare the
Subjects to assist foreign invaders, to excite the People to Rebellion, and to
deprive her Majesty of her Crown and dignity, and life it self.

Yet may we not accuse all for the faults of some. Though many of them who were
bred in those Seminaries were Pensioners of the Pope, the King of Spain, or the
Duke of Guise, all which at that time were in open hostility with the Crown of
England. (Is it not lawful to forbid Subjects to be bred in an enemies
Country, or to turn their Pensioners? or if they do go out of themselves, to
exclude them from their native Soil?) Yet in other places, and it may be in
those Colleges also, many others preserved their principles of loyalty. At the
same time Doctor Bishopp, one of the Roman communion, writ a Book to prove that
the constitution obtruded upon the world under the name of the Lateran
Council, upon which the Popes authority of deposing Princes and absolving
Subjects from their allegiance is founded, was not decreed by the Fathers, nor
ever admitted in England, but was a private Decree of Pope Innocent the third.
If all his Fellows had held the same moderation, there had been no need of
such Laws. But it is a remediless misery of Societies, that when distinction
cannot be made between the guilty and the Innocent, public Justice (which
seeks to prevent the common danger) looks upon the whole Society with one eye.
And if any innocent persons suffer, they must not blame the Law, but their own
Fellows, who gave just occasion for the making of such severe Laws.

So we see how many things here were of their own election. First they were
warned by an Edict not to study in those Seminaries, which were founded and
maintained by such as were at that time in public hostility with the Crown of
England. Nevertheless they would not do it. They were commannded to return
home by a prefixed time. They would not do it. This alone had been sufficient
to punish them as Traitors by the ancient laws of the Land. Yet further they
were commanded upon pain of death not to return into England, nor to exercise
their priestly Functions there. Yet they did it. And one of them writ a letter
to the Lords of the Council, Edm. Camp. epist. ad Conc. R. Aug.
That he was come over, and would not desist until he had either turned them
to be Roman Catholics, or died upon their Lances.

To conclude if we view the particular Laws, we shall find that they looked
more upon the Court of Rome then the Church of Rome. The Act and Oath of
Supremacy were framed in the days of Henry the eighth by Roman Catholics
themselves. The first penal Laws of this nature that I find made by Queen
Elizabeth, were in the sixth year of her reign, against those who should
maintain the authority of the Pope thrice by word or writing, or refuse the
Oath of ^upremay twice. The second in the fourteenth year of her reign, against
those who should pronounce the Queen to be an Heretic, Schismatic, or
Infidel. And likewise those who brought over Bulls from the Bishop of Rome, to
reconcile any of the Queens Subjects, or Indulgences, or Agnus Dei, or the
like. Yet was this never put in execution for six years, until the execution
of it was extorted. All this either concerned the Court of Rome, or such Acts
as were not necessary to a Roman Catholic for the enjoyment of his conscience.
A man might believe freely what his conscience dictated to him, or practice his
own religion, so he prated not too much, nor meddled with others. Afterward in
the twenty third year of her reign, issued out the Proclamation against the
English Seminaries, wherein her Subjects were bred Pensioners to the enemies of
her Crown. The last Laws of this kind were made in the twenty fourth year of
her ^eign, against those who should diswade English Subjects from their
obedience to their Prince, or from the Religion established, or should
reconcile them to the Church of Rome.

In all these Laws, though extorted from the Queen by so many rebellions, and
treasons, and deprivations, and extremest necessity, there was nothing that did
reflect upon an old quiet Queen Maryes Priest, or any that were ordained within
the land by the Romish Bishops then surviving, so they were not over busy, and
meddled with others. These might have sufficed or officiating to Roman
Catholics if the Pope had pleased: But he preferred his own ends before their
safty, Non his juvenius orta parentibus infecit aequor sanguine. These were not
principled for his purpose, nor of that temper that his affairs required. And
therefore he erected new Seminaries, and placed new Readers according to his
own mind. And in conclusion forced the Queen to use necessary remedies so save
her self and the Kingdom. These things being premised, it will not be
difficult to answer to all which R. C. says.

First, he says that in all the pretended cases of treason, there is no
election but of matters of Religion, and that they suffer merely for matters of
Religion, without any show of true Treason. I confess that Treason is
complicated with Religion in it. But I deny that they suffer merely for
Religion, any more then he that poisoned an Emperor or a Prior in the
Sacrament, could have been said to suffer for administering the Sacrament, and
not rather for mixing poison with the Sacrament; or then he, who out of blind
obedience to his Superior kills a man, can be said to suffer death for his
conscience; or he who being infected with the Plague, and seeking to infect
others; if he be shot dead in the attempt, can be said to suffer for his
sickness. In so many designs to take away the Queens life, in so many
rebellions, in so many seditious tenets, in so many traitorous books, and
lastly in adhering unto, and turning Pensioner to a public professed Enemy of
their Prince and native Country, can he see no treason? nothing but matters of
Religion? If he cannot, or will not; yet they who were more nearly concerned in
it, had reason to look better about them.

He asks how I can term that political Supremacy, which is Supremacy in all
causes, to wit, Ecclesiastical or Religious? I answer, very well; As the King
is the Keeper of both Tables, to see that every one of his Subjects do his
duty in his place, whether Clergyman or Layman, and to infl^ct political
punishment upon them who are delinquent. And where he says that Queen
Elizabeth challenged more, he does her wrong. She Challenged no more. And
moreover in her first Parliament took order to have the head of the English
Church left out of her Title.

He demands further, whether Nero by the same right might not have condemned
St. Peter and St. Paul of Treason, for coming to Rome with forbidden Orders,
and seeking to seduce his Subjects from the Religion estabished. No, for no
Orders were forbidden in Rome by law, true or false: Neither did those blessed
Apostles seduce Subjects when they converted them from vanities to serve the
living God. Let him show that Saint Peter by his declaratory Bull did deprive
Nero of his Empire, and absolve his Subjects from their allegiance, or had his
Emissaries to incite them to rebellion, or sent hollowed banners, and Phoenix
plumes, and plenarie indulgences, to those who were in Arms against him, or
plotted how to take away his life, or that Christians in those days did
publish any such seditions books, or broach Opinions so pernicious to all civil
government. And then his question will deserve a further answer. Until then it
may suffice to tell him the case is not the same. Still he confounds political
Supremacy with ecclesiastical, and the accidental abuses of holy Orders, with
holy Orders themselves.

Upon this mistake, he urges an Enthymeme against us, Popish Priesthood and
Protestant Ministry are the same in substance: Therefore if the one be
treasonable, the other is treasonable also. His consequence is just such
another as this; Thomas and Nicholas are both the same creatures in substance,
that is, men; therefore if Thomas be a Traitor, Nicholas is another. How often
must he be told, that their Treason did not lie in the substance of their holy
Orders, but in the abuses, and in the treasonable crimes of the persons
constituted in holy Orders, in their disobedience to the Laws in being
Pensioners to public enemies of the Kingdom, etc.

But he presses this Argument yet further. If Popish Priests can be lawfully
forbidden by Protestants to return into England, contrary to the Laws under
pain of Treason, then Protestant Ministers may be also forbidden by Puritans
and Independents to return into England, contrary to their Laws, upon pain of
Treason.

Hoc Ithacus velit, and magno mercentur Achivi.
This is that which many of them desire. They doubt not at long running to deal
well enough with the rest, but the English Protestants are a beam in their eye.
To his Argument I answer by denying his consequence, which halts downright upon
all four. First, Let him show that those whom he terms Puritans and
Independents have the same just power. Secondly, That there is such a Law in
force. Thirdly, That there are as just grounds now for such a Law as there were
then, That the Protestant Clergy on this side the Seas are so formidable,
either for their number, or for their dependency upon the Pope or foreign
Princes. Let him show that they left the Kingdom contrary to Law, and have
been bred here in such Seminaries contrary to Law, and are so principled with
seditious opinions, which threaten such imminent and unavoydable danger and
ruin to the Kingdom. If he fail in any one of these, as he will do in every
one of them, his consequence falls flat to to the ground.

In the close of this Chapter, he produces two testimonies beyond exception,
to prove that Popish Priests in England died for Religion. The one of King
James in his Apology for the Oath of Allegiance. page 127.
I do constantly maintain that which I have said in my Apology, that no man
either in my time or in the late Queens, ever died here for his conscience,
Priests, and Popish Churchmen only excepted, that receive Orders beyond Seas.
The other of Queen Elizabeth, that she did think that most of the poor Priests,
Camb. Annal Eliz an. 1581.
whom she executed were not guilty of Treason, and yet she executed them for
Treason. What sa^^sfaction he will make to the Ghosts of these two great
Princes I know not. This is apparent, that he has done them both extr^am
wrong. First, to King James by coupling together two divided and disjointed
sentences, and likewise by cutting off his sentence in the midst. For evident
proof whereof, I will here lay down the sentence word for word, as they are in
the French edition, for I have neither the Latin nor the English by me. I
maintain constantly and it is most true which I said in my Apology, that never,
neither in the time of the late Queen, nor in my time, any man whatsoever has
been executed simply for Religion. Here is a full truth without any exception
in the World. Then follows immediately, For let a man be as much a Papist as
he will, let him publish it abroad with as much constancy and zeal as he
pleases, his life never was, nor is in danger for it: Provided that he attempt
not some fact, expressly contrary to the Laws, nor have an hand in some
dangerous and unlawful enterprise. Then follows the exception, Priests and
Popish Churchmen excepted which receive their Orders beyond the Seas. Which
exception is not referred to the former clause, never has been executed simply
for Religion, but to the later clause, his life never was nor is in danger for
it. Their lives were in danger indeed, being forfeited to the Law, but they
were never executed, by the grace and favor of the Prince. The words
following, which he has altogether clipped off, do make the fraud most
apparent: who (which Priests) for many and many treasons and attempts which
they have kindled and devised against this estate, being once departed out of
the Kingdom, are prohibited to return, render pain of being reputed, attainted
and convicted of the crime of treason. And nevertheless if there were not some
other crime besides their simple return into England, never any of them were
executed. We see plainly that these penal Laws were not made in Order to
Religion, but out of necessary reason of Estate to prevent treason. Nor was any
man executed for disobedience to those penal Laws, unless it was complicated
with some other crime.

To come to Queen Elizabeth, If that which he says here be true, then that
flower of Queens was a tyrant worse then Nero, to thirst not only after humane
blood, but after innocent blood, yea after the blood of those who were designed
to the service of God. Shall we never have one testimony ingenuously cited?
Reader, I beseech thee, take the pains to p^ruse the place, and thou shall
find that nothing was more merciful then that Royal Queen, and nothing more
cruel then the Pope and their Superiors, who sacrificed those poor Priests to
the ambition of the Roman Court, having first blindfolded them with their vow
of obedience, and exposed them to slaughter, as the Turks do their common
Soldiers, only to fill up Ditches with their Carcasses, over which themselves
may mount the Walls.

First, Camb. Annal. Eliz an. 1581.
the Author alleged, does testify, That the Queen never thought men's
consciences were to be forced, no sign of purposed cruelty, quaeque, dolet
quoties cogitur esse ferox. Secondly, that she complained many times that she
was driven of necessity to take these courses, unless she would see the
destruction of her self and her Subjects, under color of conscience and the
Catholic Religion. Tell me, who are the supreme Judges of the public dangers
and necessities of England? Is not the Prince? At least with his Council and
the representative body of the whole Ki^gdome. When all these unanimously have
declared that there is a necessity, and have prescribed the best means that
possibly they could devise to prevent the danger, shall a foreign Prelate, and
he not only interessed, but the very source of all the danger, have power to
contradict it, and to send his suspected Emissaries more frequently then ever
into the Kingdom? A Pit is dug, true, but the Authors of these seditious
opinions and practices, are they who dug it. The Queen did what she could to
cover it, by her Proclamations and Acts of Parliament, to premonish every one
of the danger. If the Pope and their Superiors would be so cruel to thrust out
their Emissaries upon desperate attempts, upon their vow of blind obedience,
and a promise of Celestial rewards, their blood is upon their heads. The Queen
said further, That for the most part of these silly Priests, she did not
believe them to be guilty of practicing the destruction of their Country, but
their Superiors were they, whom she held to be the instruments of this foul
crime, for as much as they who were sent, committed the full and free
disposition of themselves to their Superiors. So first, R. C. inserts these
words into the Queens speech [ whom she executed] she executed none, she
condemned none. Those who were executed in her long reign of above forty four
years were not so many. This expression would have fitted the short reign of
Queen Mary much better. Secondly, he adds these words, [ were guilty of
treason] whereas the Queen said no such thing, but [were guilty of practicing
the destruction of their Country.] Can none have an hand in the destruction of
their Country, but only they who are practisers and plotters and contrivers of
it? Are none guilty of treason, but only they who practiced the destruction of
their Country? There are Instruments in treason as well as Engeniers, who are
not privy to the intrigues of the conspiracy. And yet suffer justly for acting
their parts in it. Yea without practicing or acting, the very concealment of
treason alone, is sufficient by the Law of England, and by the Law of Nations,
to condemn a person for not discovering it. Lastly, he leaves out these words
which are a clear exposition of the whole sentence. But their Superiors were
they whom she held to be the Instruments of this foul crime, for as much as the
Emissaries did commit the whole disposure of themselves to their Superiors. So
she makes the Superiors and some others, who we^e most busy, most subtle, and
most affected among them, to be the contrivers and grand traitors. But for the
most part of the silly Priests, she took them to be but executers of the
designs of their Superiors, to sh^ot those Bolts which they had made, and to
pull the Chestnuts out of the fire with their naked fingers for their Superiors
to eat. What dealing may others expect from them in citations, who are not
afraid to cast undeserved dirt upon Majesty, and prevaricate with their
natural P^incesse, under the gracious protection of whose just government they
first beheld the light It may serve as one instance of his undue citing
testimonies, and authorities, that whereas I say, that dangerous and bloody
positions and practices, produce severe Laws. And that I wish all seditious
opinions and over-rigorous Statutes, with the memory of them buried in
perpetual oblivion, he infers that I seem to confess, that the Laws made
against Catholics, were cruel and un^ust. He did well to say [ it seemeth]
for I neither say the one nor the other, though my wishes be the same they
were. On the contrary I justify them upon this undeniable ground, that no
Kingdom is destiture of necessary remedies for its own conservation. That
which I said, I spoke indifferently both of their Laws and ours. That Law
which was justly enacted, may be over-rigorously executed, when that necessity
which was the only ground of the Law is abated. I wish the necessity had not
been then so great as to require Laws written in blood, and that a lesser
coercion would have sufficed then for a remedy. The necessity being abated I
wish the rigor may be likewise abated. To divide their Laws and our Laws, or
the necessity and the remedy is a fallacy and contrary to what I said, when I
wished all seditious opinions and overrigorous Statutes were buried in oblivion.

He adds, That perhaps mine own persecution has taught me this lenity. At
last he confesses that we suffer persecution, which even now he denied. The
Earl of Strafford then Lieutenant of Ireland, did commit much to my hands the
political regiment of that Church, for the space of eight years. In all that
time let him name one Roman Catholic, that suffered either death or
imprisonment, or so much as a pecuniary mulct of twelve pence for his Religion
upon any penal Statute. If he cannot, as I am sure he cannot, then it is not
my present persecution that taught me that lenity. I remember not one Roman
Catholic that suffered in all that time, but only the titular Archbishop of
Cashells, who was indeed imprisoned for three or four days, not only upon
suspicion, but upon information out of Spain, that he was a pensioner of the
Catholic Kings, and being found to be no such dangerous person upon my
representation was dismissed.

Let no man hence imagine that we neglected our duties. We did our work by more
noble and more successful means then penal Laws, by building of Churches
and mansion Houses for Ministers, by introducing a learned Clergy, by injoyning
them residence, by affording them countenance and protection and means of
hospitality, by planting and ordering Schools for the education of youth, and
by looking carefully, to the education and marriages of the Kings Wards. To
look to the Ecclesiastical Regiment was the care of particular Bishops. To
look to the public safety of the Kingdom, and to free it from sedition masked
under the Visard of Religion, was the care of the Sovereign Magistrate.

CHAP. 4.
Sect. 1.
IN the fourth Chapter of the vindication I set forth the dignity of
Apostolical Churches, The Kings of England always political Heads of the
English Church.
and he great influence they had upon their neighbor Churches, yet without any
legal juris^iction over them, especially the Roman Church in the West. I
showed how they endeavored to convert this honorable Presidency into
Monarchical power; But that the power which they endeavored to usurp, was in
it self incapable of prescription. And if it had been capable, yet they had no
prescription for it. That the British, Saxon, Danish, and Norman Kings,
successively were the only Patrons and Protectors of the Church within their
Dominions, and disposed of all things concerning the external regiment
thereof, by the advice of their Prelates, called ecclesiastical Synods, made
ecclesiastical Laws, punished ecclesiastical persons, prohibited
ecclesiastical Judges, received Appeals from ecclesiastical Courts, rejected
the ecclesiastical Laws of the Popes at their pleasures, gave legislative
interpretations of other of their ecclesiastical Laws, as they thought good,
in order to their own Dominions; made ecclesiastical Corporations,
appropriated ecclesiastical Benefices, translated episcopal Sees, forbid
Appeals to Rome, rejected the Popes Bulls, protested against his Legates,
questioned both the Legates and all those who acknowledged them in the Kings
Bench, condemned the Excommunications and other sentences of the Roman Court,
enlarged or restrained the privileges of the Clergy, prescribed the endowment
of Vicars, set down the wages of Priests, and made Acts to remedy the
oppressions of the Roman Court. And all this was showed evidently, not out of
the single testimonies of some obscure Authors, but out of the Customs and
Common Law of the Realm, out of the Reports of our Judges and greatest Lawyers,
out of the Laws of Edward the Confessor, the Statutes of Clarendon and Carlisle,
the Articles of the Clergy, the Statutes of Provisors, and many other Statutes
made with the general consent of the whole Kingdom. It is not possible in any
cause to produce more authentical proofs then these are: To all which in
particular R. C. answers not one word. So as once more I take it for granted,
that Henry the eight did nothing in his separation from the Court of Rome, but
what his most renowned Ancestors had chalked forth unto him.

All that he says, with any show of opposition to this, is first, That
whatsoever Kings do is not lawful, Whereas I spoke not of any single Kings,
but of the whole succession of British E^glish, Danish, and Norman Kings, nor
of Kings alone, but of them with the consent and concurrence of the whole
Kingdom, Clergy and Laity, which proves irrefragably, that what they did, was
the Custom and common fundamental Law of the Kingdom. And that there is no
Prescription, nor can be, against it. That they did it de facto, is enough to
make good my assertion, that Henry the eight did no new thing, but what his
Predecessors in all ages had done before him.

Secondly, he says, That Kings may resist the exercise or Acts of Papal power
sometimes, and yet acknowledge the power Whereas the Laws and testimonies which
I produced, Not only acts of Papal Power, but the Power it self contrary to
our Laws.
do not only speak against some acts of Papal power, but against the power it
self, against the Popes power to make Laws, to send Legates, or Bulls, or
Excommunications without license, the power to receive Appeals, the power to
make ecclesiastical Co^porations, the power to dispose of ecclesiastical
Benefices, etc. What lawful power had the Pope in the eye of the Law of
England, who by the Law of England could neither send a Legate thither to do
Justice there, nor call the Delinquents or Litigants to Rome to do Justice
there, without license? Our Laws speak not only against Pandulphus, or this or
that Legate, but against all Legates that come without license; nor against the
Bull or Excommunication of Paul the third alone, but against all Bulls and
Excommunications which were brought from Rome into the Kingdom, without
license. Frustranea est ea potentia quae nunquam deduci potest in actum, In
vain is an absolute power given to a single person to execute that which he
cannot execute without another man's license. Lastly, our Laws do ascribe this
very power to the King which the Pope does challenge, The Patronage of the
Church, the power to make ecclesiastical Laws, the power to call
ecclesiastical Synods, the power to dispose of all things which concern the
external regiment of the Church, by the advice of his Clergy and Council,
within his own Dominions. In vain does he distinguish between the acts or
exercise of Papal power and the power it self, seeing our ancient Law does not
only forbid the exercise of Papal power, but deny the power it self.

He says, If I would indeed prove that Henry the eight did but vindicate his
ancient liberty, I should prove that English Kings before him did challenge to
be heads of the Church immediately under Christ, by which headship, as it was
expressed in King Edwards time, all Jurisdiction both in spiritual and
temporal causes descended from the Crown. To prove that Henry the eighth did
but vindicate his ancient Liberty, it is not necessary that I should justify
all the extravagant expressions, or oily insinuations of parasiticall
flatterers. Our Kings neither do challenge, nor ever did challenge all
Jurisdiction in spiritual causes, nor any part of the power of the Keys,
either to their own use, or to derive it to others. Great Palaces seldom want
their Moths, or great Princes their Flatterers, who are ready to blow the coals
of ambition, and adorn their Masters with stolen plumes, such as the Canonists
were of old to the Popes. It is not much to be wondered at, if some Protestants
did overshoot themselves in some expressions upon this subject, having learned
that language from a Roman Catholic before them. Bishop Bonner, being the
Kings Ambassador with Clement the seventh, did so boldly and highly set forth
his Masters Supremacy in the Assembly of the Cardinals, that they thought of
burning him, or casting him into a vessel of scalding lead, if he had not
provided for his own safety by flight. Acworth contra Monarch. Sanderi, l. 2.
p. 195. It would better become him and me, if any such thing had been, to give
unto Caesar that which is Caesar's, and unto God that which is Gods. It is
enough to my purpose to have showed that all King Henry's Predecessors did both
challenge and enjoy this political headship of the Church, as I have showed
throughout all the parts and branches thereof, if he could see wood for trees.
These very flowers and jewels of the Crown enumerated by me in this Chapter,
and demonstrated out of our Laws in my vindication, do make up that politic
headship, that is, a power paramount, to see that all persons do their duties
in their callings, and that all things be acted by fit Agents, which are
necessary to that great and Architectonicall end, that is, the safety and
tranquillity of the Commonwealth. This is that title which Edward the Confessor
did enjoy before the Conquest, namely, The Vicar of God to govern the Church
within his own Dominions, which is neither more nor less then the political
head of the Church. In a great Family there are several offices, as a Divine,
a Physician, a Schoolmaster, and every one of these is supreme in his own way;
yet the Master of the Family has an oeconomicall power over them all, to see
that none of them do abuse their trust to the disturbance of the Family. Our
Parliament Rolls, our ecclesiastical Registers, the Records of the Kings
Bench and Common Pleas do all prove, that it is no innovation for our Kings to
interpose in ecclesiastical affairs. I do confess that some of these flowers
which were peculiar to the King, as the Patronage and investitures of Bishops,
in later days were snatched from the Crown by the violence of Popes; but for
many of the rest, and especially for that which did virtually include them all,
that is, the Leg^slative power in ecclesiastical causes, wherein the whole
body of the Kingdom did claim a nearer interest, in respect of that receptive
Power which they have ever enjoyed, to admit or not admit such new Laws whereby
they were to be governed, it had been folly and madness in the Popes to have
attempted upon it.

One doubt still remains, How ecclesiastical Jurisdiction could be said to be
derived from the Crown. (For they might be apt enough in those days to use
such improper expressions. Jurisdiction is from Ordination, but Princes apply
the matter.
) First, with the Romanists themselves I distinguish between habitual and
actual Jurisdiction. Habitual Jurisdiction is derived only by ordination.
Actual Jurisdiction, is a right to exercise that habit, arising from the
lawful application of the matter or subject. In this later the Lay Patron, and
much more the Sovereign Prince, have their respective Interests and
concurrence. Diocesses and Parishes were not of divine but humane institution.
And the same persons were born Subjects before they were made Christians. The
ordinary gives a School master a license or habitual power to teach, but it is
the Parents of the Children who apply or substract the matter, and furnish him
with Scholars, or afford him a fit subject whereupon to exercise this habitual
power.

Secondly, we must also distinguish between the interior and exterior Court,
between the Court of Conscience and the Court of the Church. For in both these
Courts the power of the Keys has place, but not in both after the same
manner. That power which is exercised in the Court of Conscience, for binding
and loosing of sins, is soly from Ordination. Jurisdidiction enlarged and
fortified with coercive power by Princes
But that power which is exercised in the Court of the Church, is partly from
the Sovereign Magistrate, especially in England where Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction is enlarged and fortified with a coercive power, and the bounds
thereof have been much dilated by the favor and piety of Christian Princes, by
whom many causes have been made of Ecclesiastical cognizance which formerly
were not, and from whom the coercive or compulsory power of summoning the Kings
Subjects by processes and citations was derived. It is not then the power of
the Keys, or any part or branch thereof in the exercise of Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, even in the exterior Court of the Church which is derived from
the Crown: But it is coercive and compulsory and coroboratory power, it is the
application of the matter, it is the regulating of the exercise of actual
Ecclesiastical Jurisdicton in the Court of the Church, to prevent the
oppressions of their Subjects, and to provide for the tranquillity of the
Commonwealth, which belongs to Sovereign Princes.

As to his corollary that never any King of England before Henry the eighth,
did challenge an exemption from all Jurisdiction under Christ, Henry the eighth
not exempt from the power of the Keys.
it is as gross a mistake as all the rest. For neither did Henry the eighth
challenge any such exemption in the Court of Conscience. Among the six bloody
Articles established by himself, that of auricular confession was one. Nor in
the Court of the Church, seeing the direct contrary is expressly provided for
in the Statute it self. An. 25. H. 8. C. xxi.
The Archbishop of Canterbury for the time being, and his Successors shall have
power and authority from time to time, by their discretions to give, grant, and
dispose, by an instrument under the Seal of the said Archbishop, unto your
Majesty and to your Heirs and Successors, Kings of this Realm; as well all
manner of such Licenses, Dispensations, Compositions, Faculties, Grants,
Rescripts, Delegacies, Instruments, and all other Writings, for causes not
being contrary or repugnant to holy Scriptures and Laws of God, as heretofore
hat^ been used and accustomed to be had and obtained by your Highness, or any of
your most noble Progenitors, or any of yours or their Subjects at the Sea of
Rome. So vain a suggestion it is, That King Henry the eighth did free himself
not only from Papal Authority, but also and as well from Episcopal,
Archiepiscopall, and all Spiritual Authority either abroad or in England.

Sect. 2.
And his Argument which he presses so seriously to prove it is as vain, That
the Head of a Company is under none of that Company. The Pope himself is under
his Confessor, who has power to bind him or loose him in the Court of
Conscience. The Master of a Family is under his own Chaplain for the regiment
of his Soul, and under his Physician for the government of his Body. What
should hinder it, that a Political Head may not be under an Ecclesiastical
Pastor. The Kings of England are not only under the foreign Jurisdiction of a
general Council, but also under their Ecclesiastical Pastors though their
own Subjects. Only they are exempted from all coercive and compulsory power.

Let us try whether he be more fortunate in opposing, then he has been in
answering. The Kings of England (says he) permitted Appeals to Rome in
ecclesiastical causes, as is evident in St. Wilfrides case, Saint Wilfrid.
who was never reproved nor disliked for appealing twice to Rome: not so, but
the clear contrary appears evidently in Saint Wilfrides case. Though he was
an Archbishop, and if an Appeal had been proper in any case, it had been in
that case. Spel. conc An. 705.
This pretended Appeal was not only much disliked but rejected, by two Kings
successively, by the other Archbishop, and by the body of the English Clergy,
as appears by the event. For Wilfride had no benefit of the Popes sentences,
but was forced after all his struggling, to quit the two Monasteries which were
in question, whether he would or not, and to sit down with his Archbishopric,
which he might allwnies have held peaceably if he would. This agrees with his
supposed Vision in France, that at his return into his Country, he should
receive the greatest part of his possessions that had been taken from him, Bed.
l. 5. Ecc. hist c. 20.
that is, praesulatum Ecclesiae suae, his Archbishopric, but not his two
Monasteries. But this is much more plain by the very words of King Alfride,
cited by me in the Vindication, to which R. C. has offered no answer, That he
honored the Popes Nuncios for their grave lives and honorable looks. Here is
not a word of their credentiall Letters: O how would a Nuncio storm at this,
and take it as an affront! The King told them further, That he could not give
any assent to their legation. So that which R. C. calls permitting, was in
truth downright dissenting and rejecting. The reason follows, because it was
against reason, that a person twice condemned by the whole Council of the
English, should be restored upon the Popes Letter. Is not this disliking? What
could the King say more incivillity, then to tell the Popes Nuncios that their
Masters demands were unreasonable; or what could be more to the purpose, and to
the utter ruin of R. C. his cause, then that the Decrees of the pope were
impugned, not once but twice, not by a few factious persons, but by two or
three Kings successively, and by Theodore the Archbishop of Canterbury, a
Roman, with the flower of the Clergy, and the whole Council of the English.

He proceeds, St. Austin and his ^ Fellows. Bed. l. 2. c 4.
they never disliked that Profession of Saint Austins Fellows, that the Sea
Apostolic had sent them to preach in Britanny, as she is accustomed to do in
all the World. First, why should they dislike it? they had no reason for it. No
good Christian can dislike the Husbandmans sowing of Wheat, but every good
Christian does dislike the envious man's supersemination, or sowing of Tares
above the Wheat: Or if there had been reason, how could they dislike that which
in probability they did not know. The Letter, out of which these words are
cited, was not written to the English Kings, but to the Scottish Bishops, by
Laurentius, Successor to Austin, in the Sea of Canterbury, and Melitus of
London, and Iustus of Rotchester, which three were all the Bish^ps of the Roman
Communion, that were at that day in Britain.

But if perchance he imagine that the Popes sending Preachers into Britain,
does either argue an ancient or acquire a subsequent Jurisdiction over Britain,
he erres doubly; first they did nothing without the Kings license for matter of
fact, they produced no Papal mandates, which had been in vain to a Pagan King.
At their first arrival the King commanded them to abide in the Isle of Thanet
until his further pleasure was known. They did so. Afterward they were called
in by his command; Bed. l. 1. e. 25.
he gave them an express license to preach to his Subjects, and after his own
conversion majorem praedicandi licentiam, a further and larger license. So the
conversion of Kent was by the Popes endeavoures, and the Kings authority.
Secondly, for matter of right, Conversion gives no just title to Jurisdiction.
See Speed l. 6 c. 9. 11.22.
How many Countries have been converted to the Christian Faith by the Britans
and English, over which they never pretended any authority.

It follows, they never disliked That Saint Gregory should subject all the
Priests of Britain under Saint Austin, and give him power to erect two
Archiepiscopall Sees, and twelve Episcopal Sees under each of them. Fed. l. 1.
c. 29.
Whom could Ethelbert, being himself a Novice in Christianity, better trust
with the disposing of Ecclesiastical Affairs in his Kingdom, then those who
had been his Converters? But either Saint Gregory in his projects, or rather
Austin in his informations, did mightily over-shoot themselves; for the
twentieth part of Britain was not in Ethelberts power: And all the other Saxon
Kings were Pagans at that time. We have seen that after the death of Austin and
Gregory, there were still but one Archbishop, and two Bishops of the Roman
Communion throughout the Britannick Islands. The British and Scottish Bishops
were many, but they renounced all Communion with Rome. The British Bishops
professed plainly to Austin himself in their Synod, that they would not
acknowledge him for their Archbishop. Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
And the Scottish Bishops did so much abhor from the Communion of the Bishops
of the Roman Communion, that (as themselves complained) Dagamus one of the
Scottish Bishops refused to eat with them, or to lodge with them in the same
Inn: Bed l. 2. c. 4.
And yet he tells us in great earnest that they never disliked it.

He adds, St. Melit.
they never disliked that Saint Melit should bring the Decrees of the Roman
Synod, to be observed of the Church of England. It may be so. But whether it
was so or not, whether they liked them or disliked them, whether they received
them or rejected them, L. 2. c. 4.
Venerable Bede who is his Author speaks not a word. This is not proving, but
presuming. And why might they not receive them if they found them to be equal
and beneficial, non propter authoritatem Legislatoris, sed propter aequitatem
Legis, not for the authority of the Roman Synod, but for the equity of their
Decrees? And what were their Decrees? Ibidem.
Ordinationes de vita and quiet Monachorum, Orders for the good conversation
and quiet of Monks. A matter of no great importance, but great or small, the
Decrees of the Roman Synod were of no force in England, unless they were
received by the King and Kingdom; and if they were received by the King and
Kingdom, then they were naturalised and made the Laws of England, not of Pope
Boniface an usurping and (if we may trust Saint Gregory his Predecessors) an
Antichristian Prelate.

Bed l. 3. c 29. An A^ch bishop sent from Rome.
They willingly admitted a Bishop of Canterbury sent to them and chosen by the
Pope. Why should they not admit him? seeing it was their own desire and request
to the Bishop of Rome, in respect of the great scarcity of Scholars then in
England, to send them one, as appears by the very letter of Vitalianus,
hominem denique docibilem and in omnibus ornatum Antistitem, secundum vestrorum
scriptorum tenorem, minime valuimus nunc reperire. L. 4 c. 1.
We could not find for the present such a complete Prelate as your letters
require; and by the reception of the King, qu^d cum Nuncii certo narrassent
Regi Egberto adesse Episcopum quem petierant a Romano Antistite, when King
Egbert had certain notice that the Bishop (Theodore) was come, whom they had
desired of the Roman Prelate. So he was not obtruded upon them against their
wills, which was the case of patronage between us and them.

Bed l. 3. c 25. St. Peter Po^ter of Heaven.
They acknowledged that Saint Peter was the special Porter of Heaven, whom
they would obey in all things. I understand not why he urges this, except it
be to expose the simplicity of those times to dirision. The case was this,
there was a disputation between Coleman and Wilfrid about the observation of
Easter. Coleman pleaded a tradition from Saint John, upon whose bosom Christ
leaned, delivered to them by Columba their first Converter; Wilfrid pleaded a
different tradition from St. Peter, to whom Christ gave the Keys of the
Kingdom of Heaven. The King demanded whether that which was said of Saint
Peter was true. They acknowledged it was. And whether any thing of like nature
was said to Saint Columb. They said no. Thereupon the King concluded, Hic est
Ostiarius ille cui ego contradicere nolo, etc. ne forte me adveniente ad fores
Regni Coelorum, non sit quireseret, averso illo qui Claves tenere probatur,
This is the Porter whom I will not contradict, least peradventure when I come
to the gates of Heaven, there be none to open unto me, having made him averse
to me, who is proved to keep the Keys. No man can be so simple as to believe
that there are Gates, and Keys, and Porters in Heaven. It were but a poor
office for Saint Peter to sit Porter at the Gate, whilst the rest were
feasting within at the Supper of the Lamb. The Keys were given to Saint John
as much as to Saint Peter.

They publicly engraved in the front of their Churches, Camd. Brit. p. 165. St
Peter Superior to Saint. Paul.
that Saint Peter was higher in degree then Saint Paul. Let them place St.
Peter as high as they please, so they place him not so high as Christ, nor make
him Superior to the whole conjoint college of Apostles. The truth is this. King
Ina builded a magnificent Temple at Glastenbury to the honor of Christ and
memory of St. Peter and St. Paul; and upon the same caused some verses to be
engraven, wherein St. Peter and St. Paul were compared together Doctior hic
monitis, celsior ille gradu, or St. Paul was more learned, but St. Peter higher
in degree; St. Paul opened the hearts, St. Peter the ears; St. Paul opened
heaven by his Doctrine, St. Peter by his Keys; St. Paul was the way, St. Peter
the gate; St. Peter was the rock, St. Paul the Architect. Theological truths
ought not to be founded upon Poetical license. He knows right well that their
own Doctors do make St. Paul equal in all things to St. Peter, except in
primacy of order. We acknowledge that St. Peter was the beginning of unity; why
then might he not have the first place, according to his primacy of Order? But
the question between them and us is of another nature, concerning a supremacy
of Power. When St. Peter's Nets were full, he did but beckon and his fellows
came to partake: But the Court of Rome use him more hardly. For whatsoever was
ever said or done to his honor or advantage, rests not upon his person, who
was still no more but a fellow of the Apostolical college, but devolves wholly
upon his Successors, to make them Monarchs of the Church and Masters of all
Christians.

They suffered their Bishops to teach, L. 2. Flor. c. 11. St. Peter a Monarch.
That St. Peter had a Monarchy; Was, next after Christ, the foundation of the
Church; And that neither true Faith nor good Life would save out of the unity
of the Roman Church. As if our Ancestors had ever understood the Roman Church
in that sense which they do now, for the universal Church, or heard of their
new coined distinction of a mediate and immediate foundation; as if Saint Peter
was laid immediately upon Christ, and all the rest of the Apostles upon Saint
Peter: or as if the Court of Rome were Saint Peter's sole Heir. If their Bishops
had taught any such Doctrine in the Counsels of Constance and Basile, they
would have gone near to have been censured for Heretics, unless they had
explained themselves better then he does. Though it is true, that after the
Popes by violence and subtlety had gained so much upon the World, as to be able
to impose new upstart Oaths, first upon Archbishops, and then upon Bishops,
inconsistent with their Oaths of Allegiance, and had falsified the very forms
of their own Oaths from regulas sanctorum Patrum, the rules of the holy
Fathers, to regalia sancti Petri, the Royalties of Saint Peter; then they had
the Bishops bound hand and foot to their devotion. But who were these Bishops?
What were their names? What were their words? Who were the Kings that suffered
them? Nay he tells us not, but leaves us in the dark, first to divine what
was his dream, and then to show him the interpretation of it: Only he refers
us to a treatise of his own, called the flowers of the English Church, which I
never see nor heard of but from himself. If there be any thing that is
pertinent and deserves an answer, had it not been as easy to have cited his
Authors, as himself, in the margent? When his latent testimonies come to be
viewed and examined, it will be found that his Monarchy is nothing but a
primacy or principality of Order; his foundation a respective, not an absolute
foundation; and his Roman Church the Catholic Church: Or else it will appear,
that instead of gathering flowers, he has been weeding the Doctors of the
Church.

Bed. l. 4 c. 18.
They admitted Legates of the Pope, whom he sent to examine the faith of the
English Church. The intended Pope was Pope Agatho: John the precentor.
The pretended Legate was John the precentor, whom the Pope sent into England
at such time as the Heresy of Eutyches was frequent in the oriental parts, ut
cujus esset fidei Anglorum Ecclesia diligenter edisceret, that he should learn
out diligently what was the faith of the English Church. He says not to
examine juridically, but to learn out diligently. This John his supposed
Legate, had no more power then an ordinary Messenger. Well, a Synod was called:
by whom? by the supposed Legate? No, but by the English. Who presided in it?
the pretended Legate? No, but Theodore the Archbishop of Canterbury. There is
not the least footstep of any foreign Jurisdiction or Authority in the whole
business.

They caused diverse Bishoprics to be erected at the commandment of the Pope.
Malm. l 2^ Reg. c 9. Bishoprick^ er^cted in England by the Pope* answered.
If it had been proper for the Pope, or if he had had power to have erected
them himself, why did he put it upon others? To command them to erect new
Bishoprics had been a power paramount indeed, This was more then to execute
the Canons. The history is recited not in the ninth chapter, but in the fifth
chapter of the second Book of William of Malmesburie, de Gestis Regum Anglorum,
not as his own relation, but transcribed out of a nameless Writer, verbis
eisdem quibus inveni scripta interseram. In the days of Edward the elder, the
Region of the WestSaxons had wanted Bishops (upon what ground does not appear)
per septem annos plenos, seven whole years. And it may be that some of the
Bishoprics had been longer vacant, perhaps engrossed by the Bishops of
Winchester and Shireborne, which two I find to have been always of great note
in the Court of the West Saxon Kings. The ground of my conjecture is the words
of the Author, Quod olim duo habuerunt in quinque diviserunt, What two for ^ome
space of time had possessed, they divided into five. Formosus the then Pope
resented this; R. C. remembers what tragical stirs he made at Rome; but as
to this particular a better man might have done a worse deed. He sent his
Letters into England, misit in Angliam Epistolas, and it seems that they were
very high, quid a Papa Formoso praeceptum sit, but praeceptum signifies a
lesson or instruction as well as a commandment. And again, dabat
excommunicationem and maledictionem Regi Edwardo and omnibus Subjectis ejus, he
bestowed an excommunication and a curse upon King Edward and all his Subjects.
Why what had the poor Subjects offended? or King Edward for any thing that
appears? This was sharp work indeed, the first summons an excommunication
with a curse: A man of Formosus his temper, who was indeed a Bishop of an
Apostolical Church, though he violated his oath to obtain it; and who supposed
himself to be not only the Patriarch of Britain, but a Master (of misrule) in
the Church, might adventure far: But to do him right, I do not believe that
this was any formal sentence; that had been too palpably unjust before a
citation, I remember not that any other Author mentions it, which they would
have done, if it had been a solemn interdict, in those days. And this nameless
Author calls it but an Epistle. Moreover he tells us of honorable presents
sent to the Pope, but not a word of any absolution, which had been more to his
purpose, if this had been an excommunication. It could be nothing but a
threatening, That unless this abuse were reformed he would hold no communion
with them: As Victor a much better Pope, and in much better times dealt with
the Asiaticks, over whom he had no Jurisdiction. There is a vast difference
between formal excommunication and withholding of communion; as also between
imposing ecclesiastical punishment, and only representing what is incurred by
the Canons.

Where observe with me two things, First, R. C. his great mistake, that here
was a command to erect new Bishoprics, to which the Canons of the Fathers
oblige not, and therefore it must proceed from sovereign Authority, whereas
here was only a filling or supplying of the empty Sees. The Authors words are
de renovandis Episcopatibus, of renewing, not erecting Bishoprics; and per
septem annos destituta Episcopis, they had wanted Bishops for seven years.
Lastly, the names of the Sees supplied, which were all ancient episcopal Sees
from the first conversion of the West Saxons, do evince this. Will Malmes l. 1.
Reg. c. 6.
Winchester, Schireborne or Salessb^ry, Wells, Credinton now Exceter, and the
Bishopric of Cornwall, called anciently St. Germans. Secondly, observe that
whatsoever was done in this business, was done by the Kings Authority,
congregavit Rex Edwardus Synodum, King Edward assembled a Synod, says the same
Author in the place cited: And he calls the sentence of the Synod Decretum
Regis, the Kings Decree. This is more to prove the Kings political headship,
in convocating Synods, and confirming Synods, then all his conjectures and
surmises to the contrary.

L. 2^ Flo^. c. 11.
They with all humility admitted Legates of the Pope in the time of Kinulphus
and Off^, and admitted the erection of a new Archbishopric in England. Why
should they not admit Legates? What are Legates but Messenges and Ambassadors?
The office of an Ambassador is sacred, though from the Great Turk. But did they
admit them to hold Legantine Courts, and swallow up the whole ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction of the Kingdom. King Offa desired to have a new Archbishopric
established at Lichfeild within his own Dominions; and before he had the
concurrence of Pope Adrian, had excluded the Archbishop of Canterbury out of
the Mercian Kingdom, by royal Authority. On the other side Kenulphus desired
to have the Archbishopric settled as it was formerly at Canterbury. This is
nothing to enforced Jurisdiction. England always admitted the Popes Legates
and his Bulls with consent of the King, Edgar apud Ealred in orati. ad
Episcopos withred a pud Speim. Conc p. 192
but not otherwise. Here again he cites no Authority but his own.

They professed that it belonged to Bishops to punish Priests and religious
men, and not to Kings. No man doubts of it in their sense, but they who leave
nothing certain in the World. Here is nothing but a heap of confused
generalities. In some cases the punishment of Clergy men does not belong to
Kings, Clergymen not exempted from secula^ Judges.
but Archbishops, that is, cases of Ecclesiastical cognizance, tryable by the
Cannon Law, in the first instance. In other cases it belongs not to
Archbishops, but to Kings to be their Judges, as in cases of civil cognizance,
or upon the last appeal: Not that the King is bound to determine them in his
own person, but by fit Deputies or Delegates. Plato makes all Regiment to
consist of these three parts, Plat. in politico.
knowing, commanding, and executing: The first belongs to the King and his
Council, The second to the King in h^s person, The third to the King by his
Deputies. So the King governs in the Church, but not as a Churchman; in the
Army, but not as a Soldier; In the City, but not as a Merchant; in the
Country, but not as an Husbandman. Our Kings did never use to determine
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes in their own persons, but by meet
selected Delegates. Persons of great maturity of judgment, of known dexterity
in the Cannon Laws, of approved integrity: And lastly such (at least some of
the number) as were qualified by their callings to exercise the power of the
Keys, and to act by excommunication or absolution, according to the exigence
of the cause; and who more proper to be such Delegates in questions of moment
then Archbishops and Bishops? This is so evident in our Laws and Histories,
that it is not only lost labor, but shame to oppose it. King Edgars words in
the place alleged were these. Meae solicitudinis est, etc. It belongs to my
care to provide necessaries for the Ministers of Churches, etc. and to take
order for their peace and quiet, the examination of whose manners belongs to
you, whether they live continently, and behave themselves honestly to them that
are without, whether they be solicitous in performing divine offices, diligent
to instruct the People, sober in their conversations, modest in their habits,
discreet in their judgments. No man doubts of this. But for all this Edgar did
not forget his Kingly office and duty. See the conclusion of the same oration
to the Clergy, contempta sunt verba, Ib^dem.
veniendum est ad verbera, etc. words are despised, it must come to blows, Thou
have with thee there the venerable father Edelwald Bishop of Winchester, and
Oswald the most reverend Bishop of Worcester, I commit that business to you,
that persons of bad conversation may be cast out of the Churches, and persons
of good life brought in by your episcopal censure, and my royal Authority. So
Edgar did not forget his political headship.

What King Withred said was spoken in the Council of Becancelde, where he
himself fate as a civil president, and where the Decrees of the Council issud
in his name and by his Authority, firmiter decernimus, etc. His words are
these, It belongs to him (the King) to make Earls, Dukes, Noble men, Princes,
Presidents, and secular Judges, but it belongs to the Metropolitan or
Archbishop to govern the Churches, to choose Bishops, Abbats, and other
Prelates, etc. If King Withred had said, It belongs to the Pope to govern the
Churches, it had made for his purpose indeed; But saying as he does, it belongs
to the Metropolitan, it cuts the throat of his cause, and shows clearly what we
say, that our Metropolitans are not subordinate to any single ecclesiastical
Superior. As for the bounds between the King and the Archbishop, we know them
well enough: he needed not trouble his head about it.

They suffered their Subjects to profess, that qui non communicate Ecclesiae
Romanae Hereticus est; (...) Ser. 25 in 14 c (...)
quicquid ipsa statuerit, suscipio; and quod damnaverit, damno: He is an
Heretic that holds not communion with the Church of Rome; what she determines,
I receive; what she condemns, I condemn. Supposing these to be the very words
of Ealred, Rome has no certain^y of i^tallibiliti^.
though I have no reason to trust his citations further then I see them, and
supposing them to have been spoken in R. C. his sense; yet Ealred was but one
Doctor, whose authority is not fit to counterbalance the public Laws and
Customs and Records ^f a whole Kingdom. Neither does it appear that they who
sat at the stern in those days did either suffer it, or so much as know of
it. Books were not published then so soon as they were written, but lay most
commonly dormient many years or perhaps many ages before they see the Sun. But
Ealred his sense was not the same, it could not be the same with R. C. his. No
man in those days did take the Church of Rome for the Roman Catholic or
Universal Church, but for the Diocese of Rome, which their best protectors do
make to be no otherwise infallible then upon supposition of the inseparability
of the Papacy from it, which Bellarmine himself confesses to be but a probable
opinion, Neque Scriptura neque traditio habet, sedem Apostolicam ita fixaem
esse Romae, Bell. de To. Pont. l. 4. ^. 4.
ut inde auferre non possit, There is neither Scripture nor Tradition to prove
that the Apostolic See is so fixed to Rome that it cannot be removed from it.
Therefore these words of Ealred cannot be applied to this present question,
because the subject of the question is changed. And if they be understood
simply and absolutely of an universal communion with the Church of Rome both
present and future, they are unfound in the judgment of Bellarraine himself. It
remains therefore that they are either to be understood of communicating in
essentials; and so we communicate with the Church of Rome at this day. Or that
by the Church of Rome Ealred did understand the Church of Rome of that age,
whereas all those exceptions which we have against them for our not
communicating with them actually in all things, are either sprung up since
Ealreds time or at least, since that time, made or declared necessary
conditions of their communion. Lastly, I desire the Reader to take notice, that
these words of Ealred do contain nothing against the political Supremacy of
Kings, nor against the liberties of the English Church, nor for the
Jurisdiction of the Court of Rome over England, and so might have been passed
by as impertinent.

They endited their Letters to the Pope in these words, Aclred de vita and
Mirac. Edw. Conf. superseriptions to Popes.
Summo and universali Ecclesiae Pastori Nicholao, Edwardus Dei gratia Angliae
Rex debitam subjectionem and omnimodum servitium. It seems that the Copies
differ, some have not Pastori but Patri, nor universali but universalis
Ecclesiae, and no more but obedientiam for omnimodum servitium. But let him
read it as he list, it signifies nothing. There cannot be imagined a weaker or
a poorer argument then that which is drawn from the superscription or
subscription of a Letter. He that enrolls every man in the catalogue of his
friends and servants, who subscribe themselves his loving or obliged friends,
or his faithful and obedient servants, will find his friends and servants
sooner at a feast then at a fray. Titles are given in Letters more out of
custom and formality then out of judgment and truth. The Pope will not stick
to endite his Letter To the King of the Romans, and yet suffer him to have
nothing to do in Rome. Every one who endited their Letters to the high and
mighty Lords the States General, did not presently believe that was their just
Title before the King of Spains resignation. Titles are given sometimes out of
courtesy, sometimes out of necessity, because men will not lose their business
for want of a complement. He that will write to the great Duke of Muscovia must
style him Emperor of Russia. How many have lost their Letters and their
labors for want of a mon Friar or mon Confine, my Brother or my Cousin.

It were best for him to quit his argument from superscriptions, otherwise he
will be showed Popes calling Princes their Lords, and themselves their Subjects
and Servants, yea Princes most glorious and most excellent Lords, and
themselves Servants of Servants, that is, Servants in the snperlative degree.
They will find Cyprian to his brother Cornelius health, and Justinian to John
the most holy Archbishop of the City of Rome, and Patriarch. Did St. Cyprian
believe Cornelius to be his Master and style him Brother, or owe obedience and
service and send but health? Had is been comely to style an ecclesiastical
Monarch plain Archbishop and Patriarch, and for the Christian World to set
down only the City of Rome?

But what does he take hold on in this superscription to their advantage? Is it
the word summo? That cannot be, it is confessed generally that the Bishop of
Rome had priority of order among the Patriarchs. Or is it the word universali?
Neither can that be, all the Patriarchs were styled oecumenicall or universal,
not in respect of an universal power, but their universal care, 2 Cor. 11. 28.
as Saint Paul says, The care of all the Churches did lie upon him, and their
presidence in general Councels. It cannot be the word Pastori, all Bishops
were anciently called Pastors. Where then lies the strength of this Argument?
In the words due subjection? No. There is subjection to good advise, as well as
to just commands. The principal Patriarchs bore the greatest sway in a
general Council, in that respect there was subjection due unto them. The last
words all forts of service, are not in some Copies, and if they were, verborum
ut nummorum, as they are commonly used, as well from Superiors to their
Inferiors, as from Inferiors to their Superiors, they signify nothing.

I wonder he was not afraid to cite this superscription, considering the clause
in Pope Nicholas his letter to King Edward, Aclred ibidem.
Vobis veroi and posteris vestris Regibus committimus Advocationem and
tuitionem ejusdem loci, and omnium totius Angliae Ecclesiarum, ut vice nostra,
cum consilio Episcoporum and Abbatum, constituas ubique quae justa sunt. King
Edward by the fundamental Law of the Land, was the Vicar of God to govern the
Church of God within his dominions. But if he had not, here is a better title
from the Sea of Rome it self, then that whereby the King of Spain holds all the
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction of Sicily to him and his heirs at this day.

Walsing, A^. 133 How the Pope presideth above all Creatures.
They professed that it was Heresy to deny that the Pope omni praesidet
creaturae, is above every creature. That is no more then to say, that the
Bishop of Rome as successor to Saint Peter is principium unitatis the beginning
of unity, or has a principality of order (not of power) above all Christians.
It will be hard for him to gain any thing at the hands of that wife and
victorious Prince Edward the third, who disposed of Ecclesiastical dignities,
received homage and fealty from his Prelates, who writ that so much admired
Letter to the Pope for the liberties of the English Church, cui pro tunc Papa
aut Cardinales rationabiliter respondere nesciebant, W^lsi^g. ^, An 1343.
to which the Pope and Cardinals did not know at that time how to give a
reasonable answer. Wherein he pleads, that his Ancestors had granted free
elections, ad rogatum and instantiam dictae sedis upon the earnest entreaty of
the Sea of Rome, which now they endeavored to usurp and seize upon, who made
himself in Parliament the Judge of all the grievances, which the Kingdom
sustained from the Pope, who made express Laws against the oppressions of the
Roman Court, declaring publicly, 25 E. 3.
That it was his duty and that he was bound by his oath to make remedies
against them. This was more then twenty such complements as this, which is most
true in a right sense. That it was but a complement appears evidently by
this. The question was about Edward the thirds right to the Crown of France,
and his confederation with Lewis of Bavaria, these were no Ecclesiastical
matters, the King sent his Ambassadors to the Pope, to treat with him about his
right to the Crown of France. But notwithstanding his supereminent judgment, he
gave them in charge to treat with the Pope, not as a Judge, Walls. An. 1343.
but as a private person, and a common friend not in form nor in figure of
judgment. He attributes no more to the Pope, then to another man, according
to the reasons which he shall produce. His own words are these, parati semper
nedum a vestro sancto cunctis presidente judicio, imo a quolibet alio de
veritate contrarii (si quis eam noverit) humiliter informari, and qui sponte
rationi subjicimur aliam datam nobis intelligi veritatem cum plena and humili
gratitudine complectemur. Being ready always humbly to be informed of the
truth of the contrary, if any man know it, not only from your holy judgment
being placed in dignity before all, or as it is in another place before every
Creature) but from any other. And we who are subject to reason of our own
accord, will embrace the truth with humility and thankfulness, when it is made
known unto us. This was Edward the thirds resolution to submit to reason, and
the evidence of the truth, from whomsoever it proceeded. Yet though the case
was merely Civil, and not at all of Ecclesiastical cognizance, and though
Edward the third did not, would not trust the Pope with it as a Judge, but as
an indifferent Friend, yet he gives him good words, That his judgment was
placed in dignity above all Creatures, which to deny was to allow of Heresy.

Why do we hear words, when we see Deeds. The former Popes had excommunicated
Lewis of Bavaria, and all who should acknowledge him to be Emperor.
Nevertheless Edward the third contracted a firm league with him, Walls. ibidem.
and moreover became his Lieutenant in the Empire. Pope Benedict takes notice
of it, writes to King Edward about it, intimates the decrees of his
predecessors against Lewis of Bavaria and his adherents, signifying that the
Emperor was deprived, and could not make a Lieutenant. The King gives fair
words in general, but notwithstanding all that the Pope could do to the
contrary proceeds, renews his league with the Emperor, and his Commission for
the Lieutenancy, and trusted more to his own judgment then co the supereminent
judgment of the Pope.

So he draws to a conclusion of this Chapter, and though he have proved nothing
in the world, yet he asks, What greater power did ever Pope challenge then
here is professed? Even all the power that is in controversy between us and
them. He challenged the political headship of the English Church, under
pretense of an Ecclesiastical Monarchy. He challenged a Legislative power in
Ecclesiastical causes. He challenged a Dispensative power above the Laws,
against the Laws of the Church, whenever, wheresoever, over whomsoever. He
challenged liberty to send Legates, and hold legantine Courts in England
without license. He challenged the right of receiving the last Appeals of the
Kings Subjects. He challenged the Patronage of the English Church, and
investitures of Bishops, with power to impose a new Oath upon them, contrary to
their Oath of Allegiance. He challenged the first Fruits and Tenths of
Ecclesiastical livings, and a power to impose upon them what pensions or other
burdens he pleased. He challenged the Goods of Clergymen dying intestate,
etc. All which are expressly contrary to the fundamental Laws and Customs of
England.

He confesses, That it is Lawful to resist the Pope, invading either the
Bodies or the Souls of men, or troubling the Commonwealth, or indeavoring to
destroy the Church. I ask no more, Yea forsooth, says he, if I may be judge,
what does invade the Soul? No I confess I am no fit Judge. No more is he. The
main question is who shall be Judge, what are the Liberties and Immunities of a
national Church, and what are the grievances which they sustain from the Court
of Rome. Is it equal that the Court of Rome themselves should be the Judges?
Who are the persons that do the wrong. Nothing can be more absurd. In vain is
any man's sentence expected against himself. The most proper and the highest
judicature upon Earth in this case, is a general Council, as it was in the
case of the Cyprian Bishops and their pretended Patriarch. And until that
remedy can be had, it is lawful and behooveth every Kingdom or national
Church, who know best their own rights, and have the most feeling where their
Shoe wrings them, to be their own Judges, I mean only by a judgment of
discretion, to preserve their own rights inviolated, and their persons free
from wrong, sub moderamine inculpatae tutelae. And especially Sovereign
Princes, are bound both by their Office and by their Oaths to provide for the
security and indemnity of their Subjects, as all Roman Catholics Princes do
when they have occasion.

And here he falls the third time upon his former Theme, that in things
instituted by God, the abuse does not take away the use. Which we do willingly
acknowledge and; say with Saint Austine, Neque enim si peccavit Cecilianus,
ideo haereditatem suam perdidit Christus, Aust. Ep. 50.
and sceleratae impudentiae est propter crimina hominis quae orbi terrarum non
possis ostendere, communionem orbis terrarum velle damnare. Neither if Cecilian
offended, did Christ therefore lose his inheritance. And it is wicked impudence
for the crimes of a man, which thou can not show to the World, to be willing
to condemn the communion of the World. But neither was that authority of the
Bishop of Rome, which we have rejected either of Divine or Apostolical
institution. Nor have we rejected it for the personal faults of some Popes,
but because it was faulty in it self. Nor have we separated our selves, from
the conjoined communion of the Christian World in any thing. I wish the
Romanists were no more guilty thereof then we.

Of King Henry's exemption of himself from all spiritual jurisdiction we have
spoken formerly in this very Chapter. Sect. 2.


CAAP. 5.
THe scope of my fifth Chapter, was to show that the Britannick Churches were
free from all foreign jurisdiction for the first six hundred years, and so
ought to continue. For the clearing of which point, I showed that there was a
parity of power among the Apostles. And that the Sovereignty did not rest in
any single Apostle, but in the Apostolical college. I showed that in the age
of the Apostles, and the age next succeeding the highest Order in the Church,
under the Apostles, were national Protarchs or Patriarchs. And by what means,
and upon what grounds in after ages some of these Patriarchs came to be exalted
above the rest, and to obscure their fellows. But each of these within their
own Patriarchates, Patriarchs ind^p^ndent upon a single Superior.
did challenge a jurisdiction independent upon any single Superior. As might be
made clear by many instances, when Athanasius and Paulus procured the Letters
of Pope Julius for their restitution, Socrat. l. 2.^.11.
(I meddle not with the merits of the cause) the Bishops of the East took the
reprehension of Julius as a contumely, they called a Council at Antioch, they
accused Julius sharply, and showed that he had nothing to do to contradict
them, more then they did contradict him when he thrust Novatus out of the
Church. Neither did the great Protopatriarchs challeng this independency only,
but other lesser Patriarchs also, as Saint Cyprian. When Fortunatus
Faelicissimus and others being sentenced and excommunicated in Africa,
addressed their complaint to the Bishop of Rome, let us hear what Saint Cyprian
said of it, Cypr. Epist. l. 1. Ep. 3.
What cause had they to come and relate the making of a false Bishop against
true Bishops? Either that which they have done pleases them and they persevere
in their wickedness, or if it displease them and they fall from it, they know
whether to return: for whereas it is decreed by us all, and it is equal and
just, that every ones cause should be heard there where the crime was
committed, and a certain portion of the Lords flock is assigned to each Pastor,
which he is to govern, and to give an account of his actions to the Lord.
Therefore it behooveth those whom we are over not to run up and down, nor to
break the firm concord of Bishops by their subtle and deceitful rashness. But
to plead their cause there where they may have both accusers and witnesses of
their crimes, unless the authority of the African Bishops, who have sentenced
them already, seem to a few desperate cast awaies to be inferior, etc. To say,
with Bellarmine, that Saint Cyprian speaks only of the first instance, is to
contradict Saint Cyprian himself who says expressly that the cause had been
sentenced already in Africa.

Then I showed the bounds of the ancient Roman Patriarchate out of Ruffinus.
The rest of the Chapter may be reduced to a Syllogism. Whatsoever Church or
Churches were free and exempted from the foreign Jurisdiction of the Roman
Court, from the beginning, until the general Council of Ephesus, and after,
until the six hundredth year of Christ, ought to continue free and exempted for
ever, notwithstanding the subsequent usurpation of any foreign Prelate or
Patriarch. This was clearly and irrefragably proved out of the words of the
Council it self. Conc. ^^h^sia. part 1. act. 7.
And if the Bishop of Rome did intrude himself after that time he is a Robber
and an Usurper, and can never prescribe to a legal possession, according to
the famous rule of the Law; Adversus furem aeternae authoritas esto.

B^itain enjoyed the Cyprian p^iviledge.
But the Britannick Churches were free and exempted from the foreign
Jurisdiction of the Roman Court from the beginning, until the general
Council of Ephesus, and after, until the six hundredth year of Christ. This
assumption was proved first by their silence, upon whom the proof in law does
rest, being not able to produce one instance of the exercise of their
Jurisdiction in Britain, or any of the Britannick Islands, for the first six
hundred years, and in some parts of them scarcely for 1200. Math Paris in H 3.
an. 1238.
years. When the Popes Legate would have entered into Scotland to visit the the
Churches there about the year 1238. Alexander the second then King of the Scots
forbad him to do so, alleging that none of his Predecessors had ever addmitted
any such, neither would he suffer it; and therefore willed him at his own
peril to forbear. Secondly by priority of foundation, the Britannick Church
being the elder Sister and ancienter then the Roman, and therefore could not be
subject to the Roman Church from the beginning; that was, before there was a
Roman Church. Thirdly, it was proved by the right of ordination and election of
all our Primats: For all other right of Jurisdiction does follow or pursue the
right of Ordination. But it is most evident that all our British Primates, or
Archbishops were nominated and elected by our Princes with Synods, and ordained
by their own Suffragans at home, as Dubricius, St. David, Samson, etc. not only
in the reigns of Aurelius Ambrosius, and King Arthur, but even until the time
of Henry the first, after the eleven hundredth year of Christ, as Giraldus
Cambrensis witnesses. Semper tamen, etc. Itine^az. Ca^^b. l 2. c 1.
Yet always until the full Conquest of Wales by the King of England, Henry
the first, the Bishops of Wales were consecrated by the Archbishop of St.
David's: And he likewise was consecrated by other Bishop^ as his Suffragans,
without professing any manner of subjection to any other Church. But
principally it was proved by the answer of Dionothus, the reverend and learned
Abbat and Rector of the Monastery and University of Bangor, and from the solemn
Sentence or Decree of two British Synods in the point, recorded by all our
Historiographers, who write the Acts of those times.

I confess he n^bles here and there at some odd ends of this discourse, but
takes no ^^ner of notice of the main grounds, especially the two British
Synods which are express in the point, and the Answer of Dion^thus, that they
refused absolutely to submit to the Jurisdiction of the Pope, or to receive
Austin for their Archbishop, That as for that man whom they called the Pope
they o^^g^^t (...) no obedience, but the obedience of love, that they were
immediately under God, subject to the Bishop of Caer Leon: But let us take a
view of his exceptions.

Bellarmine ma^^s the Apostles all equal in power.
First, he says That Bellarmine has not these words That Christ in saying
these words, As my Father sent use so send I you, did endue his Apostles with
all fullness of power, that mortal men were capable of. Neither did I cite his
words but his sense, as he might see by the Character; but that Bellarmine said
as much or more then this, I will now make it good. Let him speak for himself.
Therefore that the Apostles received the^r Jurisdiction immediately from
Christ, I. 4 de Romans Pont. c. 23.
first, the words of our Lord do testify, John 20. As my Father sent me so
send I you, which place the Fathers Crysostome and Theophylact do so expound,
that they say plainly that the Apostles were made by these words the Vicars of
Christ: Yea that they received the very office and authority of Christ. He
adds out of St. Cyrill, That by these words the Apostles were created
Apostles and Doctors of the whole World; and that we might understand that all
Ecclesiastical power is contained in Apostolical authority, therefore Christ
added, as my Father sent me, siquidem Pater misit Filium summa potestate
praeditum: Further he proves out of Saint Cyprian, That whatsoever power
Christ did promise or give to St. Peter, when he said, to thee will I give the
Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and feed my Sheep, he did give parem
potestatem an equal power to the rest of the Apostles in these words. And
afterward he calls it Iurisdictionem plenissimam, a most full Jurisdiction.
Lay all this together, that by these words he made them the Vicars of Christ,
and conferred upon them the very office and authority of Christ, made them
Apostles and Doctors of the whole World, gave them all Ecclesiastical Power,
an equal Power to Saint Peter's, and lastly a most full Jurisdiction; and
compare them with that which I said, that by these words Christ gave them all
the plenitude of Ecclesiastical Power that mortal men were capable of. And if
he say not more then I did, I am sure he says no less. Is mortal man capable
of more then the Vicariate of the Son of God, yea of his office and
authority? Can any thing be more high then that which is highest, more full
then that which is fullest, or more universal then that which comprehends all
Ecclesiastical Power within it? It had been sufficient to my purpose if he had
said no more, but only that it was equal to Saint Peter's. If it were needful,
I might cite other places out of Bellarmine to make my words good. L. 4 de To.
pont. c. 16.
Therefore the Lord left unto his Apostles (by these words) his own place, and
would that they should enjoy his authority in governing the Kingdom.

L 1. de To Pont. c. 12.
But Bellarmine tells us, That this is meant not in respect of themselves, but
in respect of all other men. I know Bellarmine says so; not in this place but
elsewhere. But first he says it upon his own head, without any authority. None
of the Fathers ever taught that Saint Peter had a supremacy of Power and
Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles. All that they say is, that he was
the beginning of unity, and the Head of the Apostolical College; that is, in
order and eminence, Princeps Apostolorum, as Virgill is called the Prince of
Poets, or Saint Paul the Head of Nations, or Saint James the Bishop of Bishops.

Secondly, this answer is altogether impertinent. The question is not between
us, what the Apostles were in respect of their personal actions among
themselves one toward another, though even this were absurd enough to say that
Saint Peter had Power to suspend his fellow Apostles, either in their offices
or in their Persons: But the question between us is, what the Apostles were in
respect of the government of the Christian World, wherein by this distinction
he grants them all to be equal.

Thirdly, by his leave he contradicts himself; for if Saint Peter had any Power
and Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles, and they had none mutually over
him; then it was not par Potestas, an equal Power, for par in parem non habet
Potestatem. If his Power was fuller then theirs, then theirs was not plenissima
Potestas: If his Power was higher then theirs, then theirs was not summa
Potestas: If there was some ecclesiastical Power which they had not, then all
ecclesiastical Power was not comprehended in Apostolical Authority, then the
Power of opening and shutting is larger then the Power of binding and loosing;
and to feed Christ's Sheep, is more then to be sent as his Father sent him; all
which is contrary both to the truth, and to what himself has taught us.

Lastly, if Saint Peter had not only a primacy of Order, but also a Supremacy
of Power and Jurisdiction over the rest of the Apostles; then his Successors
Linus, and Cletus, and Clemens were Superiors to Saint John, and he was their
Subject, and lived under their Jurisdiction, which no reasonable Christian will
easily believe; Hoc erant utique and caeteri Apostoli quod fuit and Petrus,
Cypr. de unit Ecclesiae.
pari consortio praediti and honoris et Potestatis; sed exordium ab unitate
profeciscitur, and primatus Petro datur, ut Ecclesia una monstretur. If they
were equal in honor and power, then the primacy must be of Order. That these
words [ to thee will I give the Keyes] and [ feed my Sheep] do include Power
and Authority I grant, but that they include a supremacy of Power over the rest
of the Apostles; or that they include more Power then these other words [ as my
Father sent me, so send I you] I do altogether deny.

I acknowledge the words of Saint Hierosme, That one was chosen, that an Head
being constituted the occasion of Schism might be taken away. Cont. Iovin l.
1. c. 14. How Peter head of the rest.
But this Head was only an Head of order: And truly what Saint Hierosme says
in this place seems to me to have reference to the persons of the Apostles,
and by Schism to be understood Contention and Altercation among the Apostles
themselves, which of them should be the greatest, as Mark 9.34. To this I am
induced to incline; first, by the word occasio he says not as elsewhere for a
remedy of Schism, but to take away occasion of Schism or Contention. Secondly,
by the words following in St. Hierosme, Magister bonus qui occasione^ jur gij
debuerat auferre Discipulis, to take away occasion of chiding from his
Disciples; and in Adolescentem quem dile^erat sa^^^^ (...) videretur invidia;
because Peter was the eldest and John the youngest, our Savior would not seem
to give cause of envy against him whom he loved, To take away occasion of
chiding from his Disciples, and not to give cause of envy against his beloved
Disciple, do seem properly to respect the Apostolical College. But let this
be as it will, I urge no man to quit his own sense.

He presses his former Argument yet further, A superiority of Order is
sufficient to prevent Schism.
That a superiority of Order is not sufficient to take away Schism, without a
superiority of Power and Authority. I answer that in all Societies an Head of
Order is necessary to prevent and remedy Schism, that there may be one to
convocate the Society, to propose Doubts, to receive Votes, to pronounce
Sentence. And if there be a judiciary Power and Authority in the body of the
Society, it is a sufficient remedy against Schism. As in a College Schism is
as well prevented by placing the Power jointly in the Provost and Fellows, as
by giving the Provost a monarchical Power over the Fellows. And in the
Catholic Church by placing the supremacy of ecclesiastical Power in a
Council, or by placing it in a single person. And thus the sovereign Power
over the universal Church was ever in an oecumenicall Council, until of later
days, that the Popes hving gotten into their hands the bestowing of the most
and best ecclesiastical Preferments in Europe, did find out their own
advantage in that behalf above a general Council, which has neither
Dignities nor Benefices to bestow. When, or where, or by whom, the primacy of
Order was conferred upon Saint Peter, it concerns R. C. to enquire more then
me?

The rest Pastors as well as Peter.
They have yet another evasion, that the highest ecclesiastical Power was given
not only to Saint Peter, but to all the rest of the Apostles; but to Saint
Peter as an ordinary Pastor to descend from him to his Successors, because they
were appointed heads of the universal Church, which they could not govern
without universal Power; and to the rest of the Apostles as Delegates or
Commissioners only for term of their lives, not to descend to their
Successors. This distinction I called a drowsy dream, hatched lately without
either reason or authority divine or humane. Against this he takes exception.
And I am ready to maintain my assertion. That if he can produce but one Text of
holy Scripture expounded in this sense by any one ancient Interpreter, or but
one Sentence of any one Council, or single Father, for a thousand years after
Christ, who taught any such Doctrine, or made any such distinction as this is,
directly without far fetched consequences, and I w^ll retract: but I am
confident he cannot produce one Author or Authority in the point. All his
reason is, because Saint Peter was the ordinary Pastor of the Church, and the
rest of the Apostles but Delegates, which is a mere begging of the question.
Neither was Saint Peter sole Pastor of the Church, nor his universal Authority
necessary to a true Pastor, neither were the Apostles mere Delegates, for then
they could have had no Successors, which yet he acknowledges that they had. De
Romans Pont. l. 4. c. 25. l. 1. c. 9.
Sometimes Bellarmine will admit no proper Successors of the Apostles, no, not
of St. Peter, as an Apostle. At other times he makes the Pope an Apostolical
Bishop, his See to be an Apostolical See, and his Office to be an Apostleship.
It is strange the Spirit of God should be so silent in a piece of Doctrine
which they assert to be necessary, and that the blessed Apostles, and the
Nicene Fathers, and holy Athanasius should be so forgetful, as not to insert
it into their Creeds. But that the whole Church should be ignorant of such a
mystery for fifteen hundred years, is not credible.

I pass by their comparison of a Bishop who is Pastor and ordinary of his
Diocese, whose Office descends to his Successors, and a Friar licenced by the
Pope to Preach throughout the same Diocese, whose Office determines with his
Life. So what they can not prove they endeavor to illustrate. Before they told
us that the Apostles were the Vicars of Christ, are they now become the Vicars
of Saint Peter, and his Coadjutors? Before they taught us that the Apostolical
power was summa and plenissima potestas, a most high, a most full power, and
comprehended all Ecclesiastical power, and is it now changed to a license to
Preach? No, the Apostles had more then licenses to Preach, even as ample power
to govern, as Saint Peter himself. The Pope having instituted one man into a
Bishopric, cannot during his incumbency give the joint government of his
Church to another. This were to revoke his former grant.

Sect. 2. Universality an incommunicable qualification of the Apostles. 9
I confess, that which R. C. says, is in part a truth, That the rest of the
Apostles did not leave an universal and Apostolical authority and
jurisdiction to their successors. But it is not the whole truth, for no more
did Saint Peter himself. The Apostles had diverse things peculiar to their
persons, and proper for the first planters of the Gospel. Which were not
communicated to any of their successors. As universality of jurisdiction, for
which their successors have assignation to particular charges. Immediate or
extraordinary vocation, for which their Successors have episcopal Ordination.
The gift of strange Tongues and infallibility of Judgment, for which we have
Christian Schools and Universities. The grace of doing miracles and giving the
holy Ghost, by Imposition of Hands. If the Bishops of Rome will take upon them
to be Saint Peter's Heirs ex ass, and pretend that their Office is an
Apostleship, and that they themselves are truly Apostolici, excluding all
others from that privilege, let us see them do some Miracles, or speak
strange Languages, which were Apostolical qualifications. If they cannot,
certainly they are not Saint Peter's Heirs ex ass, and though their See be
Apostolical, yet their Office is no Apostleship. Nor may they challenge more
then they show good evidence for, or then the Church is pleased to confer
upon them. The Bishops of Rome pretend to none of these Privileges, but only
this of universal jurisdiction, for though they challenge besides this an
infallibility of judgment, yet it is not an Apostolical infallibility, because
they challenge no infallibility by immediate revelation from God, but from the
diligent use of the means, neither do they challenge an infallibility in their
Sermons and writings as the Apostles did, but only in the conclusions of
matters of Faith. And why do they pretend to this Apostolical qualification
more then any of the rest? Either because that if they should pretend to any of
the rest, the deceit would presently be discovered, for all men know that they
can work no Miracles, nor speak strange Languages, nor have their calling
immediately from Heaven, but are elected by their Conclave of Cardinals, many
times not without good tugging for it. Or else because this claim of universal
power and authority does bring more moliture to their mill, and more advantage
to the Court of Rome.

This is certain, that when the Pope is first elected Bishop, it may be of some
other See, before he be elected Pope, he is ordained after the ordinary form of
all other Bishops, he receives no other, no larger character, no more authority
and power, either of order or of jurisdiction, then other ordinary Bishops do.
Well after this he is elected Pope, but he is ordained no more. Then seeing the
power of the Keys and all habitual jurisdiction is derived by Ordination, and
every Bishop receives as much habitual jurisdiction at his Ordination as the
Pope himself, tell me first, how the Pope comes to be the root of all
Spiritual jurisdiction? Which though it be not the general Tenet of the Roman
Church, as R. C. says truly, yet it is the common Doctrine of the Roman Court.
c. 8. s. 2.
Secondly, tell me, how comes this dilatation of his power, and this
Apostolical Universality? Since all men do confess that the same power and
authority is necessary to the extension of a character or Grace given by
Ordination, which is required to the institution of a Sacrament, that is, not
Humane but Divine. But the election of the Cardinals is a mere Humane policy,
without all manner of Sacramental virtue, and therefore can neither render his
Judgment infallible, nor his Jurisdiction universal. What can the new election
do? Only apply the new matter, that is, make him Bishop of that See whereunto
he is elected. They who elect him are the Bishops of the Roman Province, and
the Presbyters and Deacons of the Church of Rome. Fit persons indeed, to choose
a Bishop of Rome, but no fit persons to choose an universal Bishop for the
whole Church. It were too much honor for one Nation to have the perpetual
Regiment of Christ's Church throughout all ages. And whom do the Conclave
choose? An universal Pastor? No, but expressly a Bishop of Rome.

They have a third novelty as ill as either of these which I touched even now,
that the Regiment of the Church being monarchical, as in a Kingdom, all
Civil authority is derived from the King, so in the Church all ordinary
jurisdiction of Bishops descends immediately from the Pope. Bell l. 4. de To.
Pont c ^4.
If all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be derived from the Pope, as all Civil
Authority is from the King, then as Civil Magistrates do exercise their Civil
authority in the name of the King; All Episcopal jurisdiction is not derived
from the Pope.
so Bishops ought to exercise their Spiritual jurisdiction in the name of the
Pope. But this they do not, this they never did.

Again if Spiritual jurisdiction be derived to Bishops from the Pope, by what
way, by what means, by what channel does it descend? Either it must be by
Commission, or by Ordination. But it is not by Commission. No Bishops did ever
need or expect any Commission from Rome, for the exercise of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction within his Diocese. Neither is it by Ordination, they are very
few indeed, that receive Ordination from the Pope. How many thousand Bishops
have been and are still in the World, that never received any Ordination from
any Pope, either mediately or immediately? But derive the line of their
Succession from the other Apostles? If Ecclesiastical jurisdiction be conveied
by Ordination, then it is a part of the character or Grace conferred, which is
Divine and Sacramental. I hope the Pope will be wiser then to challenge to
himself the conferring of Sacramental Grace.

Sect. 3. The Chair of St. Peter not fixed to Rome by Divine right.
I made a question how the Bishop of Rome came to be Saint Peter's Heir ex ass,
to the exclusion of his eldest Brother the Bishop of Antioch, where Saint Peter
was first Bishop, where Christians had their first denomination. I had reason,
for I never read that the Church was governed by the Law of Gavellkind, that
the youngest must inherit. I said moreover that they produced nothing that I
had seen but a blind Legend out of a counterfeit Hegesippus. I spoke not this
to the disparagement of that venerable Saint, but to discredit that
supposititious treatise. He says, If I had read Bellarmine, I should have
found the same testified by Saint Marcellus the Pope, l. 2. de Pont. To. c. 12.
by Saint Ambrose, and Saint Athanasius. I have read Bellarmine, and I find no
such thing testified by Marcellus, more then this, That Peter came to Rome by
the commandment of the Lord. Nor by Athanasius more then this, That when Peter
heard that he must undergo Martyrdom at Rome, he did not lay aside his
voyage, but came to Rome with joy. What conclusion can any man make from these
premises? Saint Ambrose indeed says more, but as little to his purpose, That
Saint Peter being about to go without the Walls in the night did see Christ
meet him in the gate, and enter into the City, to whom Peter said, Lord whether
go thou? Christ answered, I come to Rome to be crucified again. And that
Peter understood that the answer of Christ had relation to his own Martyrdom.
I have likewise read what Bellarmine cites out of Saint Gregory elsewhere,
that Christ said to Saint Peter, Bell. de Pont. To. l. ^^ c. 23.
I come to Rome to be crucified again. For he who had been crucified long
before in his own person, said that he was to be erucified again in the person
of Saint Peter. Though these things be altogether impertinent, yet I rehearse
them the more willingly, to let the Reader see upon what silly grounds they
build conclusions of great weight. We receive the Fathers as competent
Witnesses of the faith, and practice, and tradition of the Church in their
respective ages, we attribute much to their expositions of the holy Text: but
in those things which they had upon the credit of a supposititious Author, the
conclusion always follows the weaker part. How common a thing has it been
for credulous piety to believe, and to record rumors and uncertain relations?
If they see no hurt in them, and if they tended to piety. But in a case of this
moment to give an infallible Judge to the Church, and a spiritual Prince to
the Christian World, to whom all are bound to submit under pain of damnation,
we ought to have had better Authority then such a blind History. Yet this is
all the plea they have in the World for the divine right of their succession.
How came Saint Ambro^e or Saint Gregory to know a matter of fact, done some
centuries of years before they were born? They had it not by Revelation, nor
other Authority for it then this of a counterfeit Hegesippus, in the judgment
both of Baronius and Bellarmine, except only the borrowed name, not much
ancienter then themselves.

Supposing that Saint Peter had had such a spiritual monarchy as they fancy,
and supposing that this Apocryphal Relation was as true as the Gospel, yet it
makes nothing in the World for the Popes succession to Saint Peter therein, but
rather the contrary. That Saint Peter sub finem vitae, just upon the point of
his death was leaving of Rome, shows probably that he had no intention to die
there, or to fix his See there. That Christ did premonish him of his Martyrdom
in Rome, and that he as^ented to it with joy, has nothing in it to prove, or
so much as to insinuate either the Act of Christ or the Act of St. Peter, to
invest the Bishop of Rome with the Sovereignty of Ecclesiastical Power. Had
they urged this history only to show how Christ fore-armes his Servants against
impendent dangers, or how he reputes their sufferings for his sake to be his
own, it had been to the purpose: But they might even as well prove the Popes
Supremacy out of our Saviors words in the Gospel to Saint Peter, Io 21.18.
When thou art old thou shall stretch forth thy hands, and another shall girde
thee, and carry thee whither thou would not: For our Savior did signify by
these words by what death St. Peter should glorify God. These words have
authority, th^^gh they be nothing to the purpose, but those they cite have
neither authority nor any thing that comes near the purpose.

They see this well enough themselves, what a weak unjoynted and unnecessary
consequence this is, wherefore they suppose that Christ said something to Saint
Peter which is not recorded, to command him to fix his Chair at Rome, Bell de
R^. Po^ 2. c. 12.
Non est improbabile Dominum etiam aperte jussisse, ut Sedem suam Petrus ita
figeret Romae, ut Romanus Episcopus absolute ei succederet, Because some
Fathers say that Peter did suffer Martyrdom at Rome by the commandment, or at
least according to the premonition of Christ, it is not improbable that the
Lord did likewise openly command him that he should so fix his Chair, or See,
at Rome, that the Roman Bishop should absolutely succeed him. Judge Reader
freely, if thou did ever meet with a poorer foundation of a divine right,
because it seems not improbable altogether to a professed sworn Vassal and
partial Advocate, well fed by the party.

Ibidem
It is no marvel if they build but faintly upon such a groundless presumption,
licet forte non sit de jure divino, although peradventure it is not by divine
right. He might ^ell have omitted his peradventure.

Wherefore doubting that this supposition will not hold water, he adds, That
though it were not true, it would not prove that the Pope is not Successor to
Saint Peter ex ass, but only that he is not so jure divino.

It is an old artifice of the Romanists, when any Papal privilege is
controverted, to question whether the Pope hold it by divine right or humane
right, when in truth he holds it by neither, so diverting them from searching
into the right question, whether he have any right at all, taking that for
granted which is denied.

Nor by humane right
But for humane right they think they have it cocksure, The reason is manifest,
because S. Peter himself left the Bishopric of Antioch, but continued Bishop
of Rome until his death. This will afford them no more help then the other.
When the Apostles did descend and deign to take upon them the charge of a
particular Church, as the Church of Rome or Antioch; they did not take it by
institution as we do. They had a general institution from Christ for all the
Churches of the World. When they did leave the charge of a particular Church to
another, they did not quit it by a formal resignation, as we do. This had
been to limit their Apostolical Power, which Christ had not limited. But all
they did was to depute a Bishop to the actual cure of Souls during their
absence, reteining still an habitual cure to themselves. And if they returned
to the same City after such a deputation, they were as much Bishops as
formerly. Thus a Bishop of a Diocese so disposes the actual cure of Souls of
a particular Parish to a Rector, that he himself remains the principal Rector
when he is present. Saint Peter left Rome as much as he left Antioch, and dyed
Bishop of Antioch as much as he dyed Bishop of Rome. He left Antioch and went
to Rome, and returned to Antioch again, and governed that Church as formerly he
had done. He left Rome after he first sat as Bishop there, and went to
Antioch, and returned to Rome again, and still continued the principal Rector
of that Church. Linus and Clemens or the one of them were as much the Bishop or
Bishops of Rome during the life of St. Peter and St. Paul, as Evodius and
Ignatius or the one of them were the Bishop or Bishops of Antioch. Suppose a
Rector having two Benefices dies upon the one of them, yet he dies the Rector
of the other as much as that. I confess an Apostle was not capable of
pluralities, because his Commission was illimited, otherwise then as a Bishop
is Rector of all the Churches within his Diocese. And though he can die but in
one Parish, yet he dies governor of all the rest as much as that. If we may
believe their History, St. Peter at his death was leaving Rome, in probability
to weather out that storm (which did hang then over his head) in Antioch, as
he had done in a former persecution. If this purpose had taken effect, then by
their Doctrine St. Peter had left the Bishopric of Rome, and dyed Bishop of
Antioch. Thus much for matter of fact.

Secondly, For matter of right, I do absolutely deny that Saint Peter's death
at Rome does entitle the Bishop of Rome as his Successor to all or any of those
privileges and prerogatives which he held in another capacity, and not as he
was Bishop of Rome. Suppose a Bishop of Canterbury dies Chancellor of England,
another Bishop dies Chancellor of the University of Cambridge or Oxford; must
their respective Successors therefore of necessity be Chancellors of England or
of that University? No, the right of donation devolves either to the Patron or
to the Society. So supposing, but not granting, that one who was by special
privilege the Rector of the Catholic Church died Bishop of Rome, it belongs
either to Christ or his Vicegerent or Vicegerents, invested with Imperial
power, to name, or to the Church it self to choose a Successor. If they could
show out of Scripture that Christ appointed the Bishops of Rome to succeed St.
Peter in a spiritual Monarchy, it would strike the question dead: Or that St.
Peter did design the Bishop of Rome to be his Successor in his Apostolical
power: Or lastly that the Catholic Church did ever elect the Roman Bishops to
be their ecclesiastical Sovereigns, it were something. But they do not so
much as pretend to any such thing. The truth is this, that after the death of
St. Peter that pre-eminence (I do not say Sovereingty) which he had by the
connivence or custom of the Church, devolved to his Successors in his Chair,
the Patriarchs of Rome, Alexandria (for I look upon Saint Mark as St. Peter's
Disciple) and Antioch, among whom the Bishop of Rome had priority of Order, not
of Power; to which very primacy of Order great privileges were due. Yet not so
but that the Church did afterward add two new Protopatriarchs to them, of
Constantinople and Jerusalem, and equalled the Patriarch of Constantinople in
all privileges to the Patriarch of Rome: which they would never have done, nor
have proposed the honor which they gave to Rome with a placet? Does it please
you that we honor the memory of St. Peter? If they had believed that Saint
Peter's death at Rome had already settled a spiritual Monarchy of that See,
which had been altogether as ridiculous, as if the Speaker of the House of
Commons should have moved the House in favor of the King, Does it please you
that we honor the King with a judiciary power throughout his own Kingdom?

Sect. 4.
Hitherto R. C. has not said much to the purpose, now he falls on a point that
is material indeed (as to this ground) if he be able to make it good, That the
Bishops of Rome exercised ecclesiastical Jurisdiction over the Britannick
Churches before the general Council of Ephesus, or at least before the six
hundredth year of Christ. First he complains that few or no Records of British
matters for the first six hundred years do remain. If so few do remain that
he is not able to produce so much as one instance, his cause is desperate.
Howsoever he proves his intention out of Gildas, who confesses that he
composed his History, Gild. in Prol.
non tam ex scriptis Patriae, etc not so much from British Writings or
Monuments (which had been either burned by their enemies with fire, or carried
beyond Sea by their banished Citizens) as from transmarine relations. Though it
were supposed that all the British Records were utterly perished, this is no
answer at all to my demand, so long as all the Roman Registers are extant: Yea
so extant that Platina the Popes Library keeper is able out of them to set
down every Ordination made by the primitive Bishops of Rome, and the persons
ordained. It was of these Registers that I spoke, [ let them produce their
Registers.] Let them show what British Bishops they have ordained, or what
British Appeals they have received for the first six hundred years: Though he
be pleased to omit it, I showed plainly out of the list of the Bishops
ordained, three by Saint Peter, eleven by Linus, fifteen by Clement, six by
Anacletus, five by Evaristus, five by Alexander, and four by Sixtus, etc. that
there were few enough for the Roman Province, none to spare for Britain.

He says Saint Peter came into Britain, converted many, made Bishops, Priests,
and Deacons. That Saint Elutherius sent hither his Legates Fugatius and
Damianus, who baptized the King, Queen, and most of his People. That St. Victor
sent Legates into Scotland, (it seems they had no names) who baptized the
King, Queen, and his Nobility. That Saint Ninian was sent from Rome to convert
the southern Picts. That Pope Caelestine consecrated Palladius and sent him
into Scotland, where as yet was no Bishop. And Saint Patrick into Ireland, and
Saint Germane and Lupus into Britain, to confute the Pelagian Heresy. And in
the year 596 St. Gregory sent over St. Austin and his Companions, to convert
the Saxons, and gave him power over all the Bishops in Britain, and gave him
power to erect two Archiepilcopall Sees, and twenty four Episcopal: And
moreover that Dubritius, Primate of Britannie, was Legate to the Sea
Apostolic. And lastly, That Saint Samson had a Pall from Rome. I confess here
are store of instances for Preaching, and Baptizing, and ordeining, and
Converting: but if every word he says was true, it is not at all material to
the question. Our question is concerning exterior Jurisdiction in foro
Ecclesiae. But the Acts mentioned by him are all Acts of the Key of Order, not
of the Key of Jurisdiction. If he do thus mistake one Key for another, he will
never be able to open the right door. He accustometh himself to call every
ordinary Messenger a Legate. But let him show me that they ever exercised
Legantine authority in Britain. That he does not, because he cannot. The
Britannick and English Churches have not been wanting to send out devout
persons to preach to foreign Nations, to convert them, to baptize them, to
ordain them Pastors; yet without challenging any Jurisdiction over them.

Now to his particular instances. We should be glad that he could prove St.
Peter was the first converter of Britain, Whether St. Peter converted Britain.
and take it as an honor to the Britannick Church: But Metaphrastes is too
young a witness, his authority over small, and his person too great a stranger
to our affairs: If it could be made appear out of Eusebius it would find more
credit with us. If St. Peter did ever tread upon British ground, in probability
it was before he came first to Rome, which will not be so pleasing to the
Romanists. For being banished by Claudius, Onuph.
he went to Jerusalem, and so to Antioch, and there governed that Church the
second time. Whether St. Peter, or St. Paul, or St. James, or Simon Zelotes, or
Aristobulus, or Joseph of Arimathea, was the first converter of Britain, it
makes nothing to the point of Jurisdiction, or our subjection to the Bishop of
Rome. But for Joseph of Arimathea we have the concurrent testimonies of our own
Writers and others, the tradition of the English Church, the reverent respect
borne to Glastenbury, the place where he lived and died, the ancient characters
of that Church, wherein it is styled, the beginning of Religion in this Island,
the burial place of the Saints, builded by the Disciples of the Lord. The very
name of the Chapel called St. Joseph's, the Arms of King Arthur upon the
walls, and his monument found there in the reign of Henry the second, do all
proclaim this truth aloud.

Of Eleutherius his sending into Engand,
His second instance has more certainty in it, That Pope Eleutherius sent
Fugatius and Damianus, two learned Divines, into Britain, to baptize King
Lucius. But it is as true that Lucius was converted before, either in whole or
in part, and sent two eminent Divines of his own Subjects Eluanus Avalonus,
Eluan of Glastenbury, the Seminary of Christian Religion in Britain, and
Medvinus of Belga, that is, of Wells, a place near adjoining to Glastenbury, to
Rome, to entreat this favor from Pope Eleutherius. So whatsoever was done in
this case, as it was no act of Jurisdiction, so it was not done by Eleutherius
by his own authority, but by license and upon request of King Lucius. And not
to diminish the deserts of Fugatius and Damianus who in all probability were
strangers and understood not the Language, certainly Eluan and Medwin and many
more British Natives had much more opportunity to contribute to the conversion
of their native Country then forreiners, who were necessitated to speak by an
Interpreter, at least to the vulgar Britans.

And Victors into Scotland
Concerning Pope Victors sending of Legates into Scotland to baptize the King,
Queen, and Nobles, when he tells us who was the King, who were the Legates, and
who is his Author, he may expect a particular answer. But if there be nothing
in it but baptizing, he may as well save his labor, unless he think that
baptizing is an act of Jurisdiction, which his own Schools make not to be so
much as an act of the Key of Order. Ireland was the ancient Scotland. The Irish
Scots were converted by St. Patrick, the British Scots by St. Columba.

Next for Saint Ninian, Ninian.
he was a Britan, not a Roman, Neither does venerable Bede say that he was
taught the Christian Faith at Rome simply, but that he was taught it there
regularly, that is, in respect of the observation of Easter, the administration
of Baptism, and sundry other Rites, wherein the British Church differed from
the Roman. Nor yet does Bid say that he was sent from Rome to convert the
Picts: His words are these, The Southern Picts (as men say) long before this
had left the error of their Idolatry, Bed l. 3^ c. 4.
and received the true Faith by the preaching of Ninias a Bishop, a most
reverend and holy man of the British Nation, who was taught the Faith and
mysteries of truth regularly at Rome. Capgrave finds as much credit with us as
he brings authority. And in this case says nothing at all to the purpose,
because nothing of Jurisdiction.

From St. Ninian he proceeds to Palladius and St. Patrick. Palladius and S.
Patrick.
Pope Caelestine consecrated Palladius and sent him into Scotland: And not
forgetful of Ireland, sent thither S. Patrick In all the instances which he
has brought hitherto, we find nothing but Preaching, and Converting and
Christening, not one syllable of any Jurisdiction. Will the British Records
afford us so many instances of this kind, and not so much as one of any
legislative or judiciary act? Then certainly there were none in those days.
Whether Palladius was sent to the British or Irish Scots, is disputable: But
this is certain, that whithersoever he was sent, he was rejected, and shortly
after died. In whose place succeeded St. Patrick. Bed in vi^a St. Patri^. l. 1.
Therefore his Disciples hearing of the death of Palladius the Archdeacon, etc.
came to St. Patrick and declared it, who having received the Episcopal degree
from a Prelate called Arator, straightway took ship, etc. Here is nothing of
Caelestinus but of Arator, nor of a Mandate but St. Patricks free devotion.

Germanus and Lupus
He says, The same Pope sent thither St. German and Lupus to confute the
Pelagian Heresy: and both Britans, Scots, Picts, and Irish, willingly accepted
these Legates of the Popes, nor denied that they had any authority over them.
I am weary of so many impertinencies. Still here is not one word of any
Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishops over the British Church, but of their charity
and devotion, which we wish their Successors would imitate. Prosp. in Chron.
I confess that Prosper says that Peladius was sent by Caelestinus. If it
were so, it concerns not this cause. Constant de vita Germ. l. 1.
But Constantius and venerable Bede and almost all other Authors do affirm
positively that they were both sent by a French Synod, to assist the Britans
their neighbors against the Pelagians. And it is most probable; for they were
both French Bishops, St. German of Anxewe, Bed l 1. c. 17.
Lupus of Troyes. Baronius labors to reconcile these two different relations
thus, It may be the Pope did approve the choice of the Synod, Baron. an. 429.
or it may be that Caelestine left it to the election of the Synod to send whom
they pleased. Admit either of these suppositions was true, it will bring no
advantage to his cause, but much disadvantage. If the Bishop of Rome had been
reputed to be Patriarch of Britain, and much more if he had been acknowledged
to be a spiritual Monarch, it is not credible that the Britannick Church
should have applied it self for assistance altogether to their neighbors, and
not at all to their Superior. He adds that they willingly accepted these
Legates of the Popes. He is still dreaming of Legates: if they were Legates,
they were the Synods Legates, not the Popes. As much Legates and no more then
the Messengers of the British Church, which they sent to help them, were
Legates; Constant l. c. 19.
eodem tempore ex Britannia directa Legatio Gallicanis Episcopis nunciavit,
etc. at the same time the British Legates showed their condition to the French
Bishops, what need the Catholic Faith did stand of their present assistance.
Had they not reason to welcome them whom themselves had invited, who were come
only upon their occasion? Or what occasion had they to deny their authority,
who neither did usurp any authority, nor pretend to any authority? They came
to dispute, Idem, c. 23
not to judge. Aderat populus Spectator futurus ac Iudex. I know Constantius
and venerable Bede do call them Apostolicus Sacerdotes, Apostolical Bishops,
not from their mission, but most plainly for their Apostolical Endowments, erat
in illis Apostolorum instar gloria and authoritas, etc.

Austine.
That Saint Gregory did send Austin into England to convert the Saxons, is most
true; that the British Churches did suffer him to exercise any Authority or
Jurisdiction over them, is most untrue. Touching the precise time of his
coming, Historiographers do not agree exactly. All accord that it was about
the six hundredth year of Christ, a little more or less. Before this time,
Cyprus could not be more free from foreign Jurisdiction then Britain was. After
this time we confess that the Bishops of Rome, by the consent or connivence of
the Saxon Kings, as they came to be converted by degrees, did pretend to some
formalities of right or authority over the English Church, at first in matters
of no great consequence, as bestowing the Pall or the like. But without the
consent, or against the good pleasure of the King, they had no more power at
all.

Dubritius.
Jeoffry of Monmouth says that Dubritius, primate of Britain, was Legate of the Sea Apostolic. I should sooner have believed it if he had proved it out of
Gildas, who lived in or about the age of Dubritius, then upon the credit of
Ieoffry of Monmouth, who lived so many hundred years after his death, whose
Writings have been censured as too full of Fables. It were over supine
credulity to give more credit to him, then to the most eminent Persons and
Synods of the same and the ensuing age. Dubritius was Primate of Wales in the
days of King Arthur, and resigned his Archbishopric of Caer Leon to St. David
who removed his Archiepiscopall See from thence to Minevia, now called St.
David's by the license of King Arthur, not of the Pope. King Arthur began his
reign, as it is commonly computed, about the year 516. perhaps something
sooner, or later, according to different accounts. But certainly after the
Council of Ephesus, from whence we demonstrate our exemption. And so it can
neither advantage his cause, nor prejudice ours. We are told of store of Roman
Legates, and yet not so much as any one act of Jurisdiction, pretended to be
done by any of them. Certainly either they were no Papal Legates, or Papal
Legates in those days were but ordinary Messengers, and pretended not to any
legantine Court, or legantine Power such as is exercised now a days.

St. Samson (says he) had a Pall from Rome, St. Samson
wherefore untruly says L. D. that the Pall was first introduced in the reign
of the Saxon Kings, after six hundred years of Christ. He mistakes my meaning
altogether, and my words also: I said not that the first use of the Pall began
after the six hundredth year of Christ, but the abuse of it, that is, the
arbitrary imposition thereof by the Popes upon the British Churches. Vind. p.
150.
When they would not suffer an Archbishop, duly ellected and invested, to
exercise his function, until he had bought a Pall from Rome. I know the
contrary, that they were in use formerly. But whether they were originally
Ensigns of honor, conferred by Christian Emperors upon the Church, namely,
Constantine and Valentinian, as is most probable, or assumed by Patriarchs, is
a disputable point. This is certain, other Patriarchs and Archbishops under
them had their Palls in the primative times, which they received not from Rome.
This Samson was Archbishop of Wales, and had his Pall; But it appears not at
all that he had it from Rome: It may be that they had it from their first
conversion, or rather that the British Primates themselves assumed it, in
imitation of foreign Patriarchs, as they might well do. This Pall he carried
with him into lesser Britain, in the time of an Epidemicall sickness, and such
extreme mortallity, Pol. Virg. l 13 hist. Angl.
ut mortui aegros, aegri integros tum metu tum tabe infecerint, so that the
dead did infect the sick, the sick infect the sound both with fear and
contagion. That the same Bishop never returned to his See again appears to me
more then probable by this, that his Successors for many ages retained their
metropoliticall dignity, but ever after wanted the use of their Pall. Certainly
he who was so careful of his Pall when he forsook his See, would have been
more careful to have brought it back with him, when he returned to his See.
What time this Samson lived and when that contagious sickness raged so cruelly,
is more doubtful; whether it was in the reign of Maglocunus the fifth, or in
the reign of Cadwallader the ninth in succession after King Arthur, or long
after both these. Giraldus Cambrensis makes him to be the five and twentieth
Archbishop after St. David, Iti^. Camb l. 1. c. 1.
sederunt a tempore David successivis temporum Curriculis Archiepiscopi ibidem
viginti quinque, etc. the last of which was this Samson. And then follows,
Tempore Samsonis hujus pallium in hunc modum est translatum, etc. In the time
of this Samson the Pall was transported after this manner: The pestilence
increasing throughout Wales during his incumbencie, whereof the people died by
heaps, etc. R^g. ^^ved. An. anno. 1^99.
The same is testified by Roger Hoveden in the life of King John, that this
Samson, whom he makes the four and twentieth Archbishop after St. David, flying
from an infectious yellow jaundice, did transport with himself into Little
Britain the Pall of St. David, etc. So R. C. had need to retract his rash
censure of me, that I said untruly, That the Pall was first introduced in the
reigns of the Saxon Kings, for neither did I say so, neither does he prove that
it was not so. A few of these histories would quickly spoil the Popes market
for his Palls: The Menevoan Archbishops had but one Pall, that was Saint David's
Pall, for him and all his Successors, whereas the Pope compells every
succeeding Archbishop to buy a new Pall.

King James does not at all speak of the Bishop of Romes right, King James.
but how far himself would condescend for peace sake; which words being
expressly used by the King in the place alleged, are guilefully omitted by R. C.
Much less does he speak of any supremacy of power, or submission to the Popes
Jurisdiction in any of the cases controverted between us and them. Our
differences are not about any branches of Patriarchall Power. If they like King
James his proposition, why do they not accept it? If they like it not why do
they urge it? Matrix Ecclesia.
A Church may be, and is usually called a mother Church in two senses, either
because it is the Church of a Metropolis or Mother-City: and so no man can deny
but the Church of Rome, among many others, is a prime Mother Church: Or else,
because it has converted other Churches to the Christian Faith. And so also we
acknowledge that the Church of Rome is a Mother Church to sundry of our Saxon
Churches, and a Sister to the British Church, but a Mistress to no Church.

I showed clearly that that Power which the Bishops of Rome do challenge and
usurp at this day, is incompatible and inconsistent with true Patriarchall
Power, and that thereby they themselves have implicitly quitted and disclaimed
that true Power which was conferred upon them by the Catholic Church. So by
seeking to turn spiritual Monarchs, they had lost their just Title of
Patriarchs. But withal that Britain was never rightly a part of their
Patriarchate. To this he answers nothing, but objects, That this is to depose
all the Popes since Boniface the third, for more then a thousand year, and say,
that they have all lost their Patriarchate. And cries out, O intolerable
presumption. Thus he confounds Papal and Patriarchall Power, making things
inconsistent to be one and the same thing. If they have lost their Patriarchall
Power it is their own fault who quitted it; it is his fault who does no better
defend it. With as much reason he might plead, that he who says that a Rector
of a Church by accepting of a new incompatible Benefice, had quitted his old,
does deprive him of his former Benefice. Or that he who says the King of Spain
has quitted his Title to the united Provinces, does thereby depose him from
his Monarchy. O intolerable mistake!

I said not ignorantly, Sect. 5.
but most truly, that the British (I will add also the Scottish Church) for
many hundred years sided with the Eastern Church in the observation of Easter.
He says, That they did not side entirely with them. Neither did I say they
did. They observed Easter always upon Sunday, which Polycrates and those
Asiaticks that joined with him did not. And so they had nothing common with the
Jews, those parricides, as Constantine the great calls them, who murdered
Christ, and herein they did join with the Roman Church, but it is as evident
that they did not observe it upon the same Sundy with the Church of Rome. This
is clear by those two British Synods mentioned by venerable Bede. This being
one of Austins propositions to them, that they should conform themselves to the
Roman Church in the observation of Easter, Bed. l. 2. c. 2.
and after solemn discussion altogether rejected by them. That in this they
sided with the Eastern Church, appears as evidently by the public
conferrence between Colman and Wilfrid about this very business, wherein
Coleman did expressly and professedly maintain the tradition from Saint John,
^ed. l. 3. c. 25.
before the tradition from Saint Peter.

Lastly, to say that this manner of observing Easter was but risen in Scotland
a little before the year 638, upon the authority of Pope John, is ridiculous.
For it is most evident that it was as ancient as their Christianity,) contrary
to reason, for the Britans and Scots had no commerce with the Oriental
Christians in those days, and contrary to authority, for Colman in that
disputation did derive it from Saint John the Apostle.

CHAP. 6. Sovereign Princes in some cases have power to change the external
Regiment of the Church.
IF the Reader does not find so much in this Reply as he desires and expects,
let him blame R. C. who, according to his custom, omitteth all the chiefest
grounds, and the whole contexture of my discourse, only snatching here and
there at a word or a piece of a sentence. I shall deal more fairly with him. In
the first place I complain that besides the omitting of those main principles
whereupon my discourse in this Chapter is grounded, which are received by both
parties,) he does me wrong in stating of the question. For whereas I set down
four conditions or limitations necessary in every reformation, first, that it
be made advisedly upon well grounded experience, Secondly, Vind. p. 115, 116.
that it be done in a National Synod, Thirdly, that it be only in matters of
humane right, Fourthly, that nothing be changed, but that which is become
hurtful or impeditive of a greater good, he leaves out three of these
restrictions altogether, and only mentions one, that it be in matters of humane
institution, as if the rest were of no consideration. He cannot choose but know
that by the Doctrine of their own Schools, if a man do vow any thing to God,
which afterward is found to be hurtful and impeditive of a greater good,
makes his vow null and void, Aqui. ^ (...) 2.2. quaest. 88. Art. 2. and 10.
and disobligeth him from performance of it. If it be true in a vow to God, it
is more true in a promise made to man, and he needs no dispensation to
retract it.

A King has all power needful for the preservation of his Kingdom
But let us follow his steps. First, whereas I allege their own Authors to
prove that to whom a Kingdom is granted all necessary power is granted,
without which a Kingdom cannot be governed, he distinguishes between the
necessity of the Kingdom, and the benefit of the Kingdom, a King has power
to do whatsoever is necessary for the government of his Kingdom, but not
whatsoever is for the benefit of his Kingdom. To this I answer first, That he
confounds Power, and the exercise of Power, or the necessity of the one with
the necessity of the other. Power is the necessary qualification of a King. But
the act or exercise of that power may be free, and sufficiently grounded not
only upon the necessity, but upon the benefit of the Kingdom. A Legislative
power is necessary to a King, but this does not imply that he cannot make a Law
except only in cases of absolute necessity. Power to administer an Oath, or to
commit a Malefactor is a necessary qualification of a Judge, yet he may
administer an Oath upon discretion, or commit a man npon suspicion. If a King
or a Judge invested with such a power should misapply it, or err in the
exercise of it, he owes an account to God and the Prince from whom he received
the power, but the Subject is bound at least to passive obedience. Now let him
see his own mistake. The question between us is whether a power to reform
abuses and inconveniences be necessary to a King, to which all his Subjects owe
at least passive obedience. He answers, concerning the exercise of this power,
in what cases a King may lawfully use it, but if the King mistake the case, yet
the Subject owes passive obedience.

Secondly, A respective necessity is a sufficient ground of a Reformation.
I answer that there is a double necessity, first, a simple or absolute
necessity, Secondly, a respective necessity secundum quid, which we may call a
necessity of convenience, which is a true necessity, and a sufficient ground of
a Christian Law, that is, rather to make such a Law, then to sustein such
indignities, or to run such extreme hazards, or lose such great advantaages, As
it seems good to the holy Ghost and to us, Act. 15.28.
to lay upon you no greater burden then these necessary things. And of four
things these were three, to abstain from meats offered to Idols, and from
blood, and from things strangled. None of which things were necessary in
themselves, either necessitate medii, or necessitate precepts. But they were
necessary to avoid scandal, and to gain advantage upon the Jews, and to retein
them in a good opinion of Christian Religion. Saint James used the same
argument to Saint Paul, Act. 21 20
Thou see Brother how many thousands of Jews there are which believe, and
they are all zealous of the Law, etc. If the advantage be but small, it is not
worth abrogating a Law or changing a received custom, but if it be great,
Senec.
Malo semel excusare quare secerim, quam semper quare non secerim. It is better
to make one just apology why a man does abrogate such a prejudicall custom,
then to be making daily excuses why he does not abrogate it. Vivere, non est
vita, sed valere. To live is not to draw out a lingering breath, but to enjoy
health. So the health and convenience, and good constitution of a Kingdom, is
more to be regarded, then the bare miserable being of it.

Thirdly, I answer that our Reformation in England was not only beneficial and
advantageous to the Kingdom, Our Reformation was necessary.
but necessary, to avoid intolerable extortions, and gross unjust and general
usurpations of all men's rights. They found plainly that this foreign
Jurisdiction did interfere with the Sovereign power. The Oaths which Bishops
were forced to take to the Pope were examined in Parliament, Hall. 24. Hen. 8.
sol. 205.
and found to be plainly contradictory to their Oaths of Allegiance, and
repugnant to that duty which they did owe to general Councels. They found that
they were daily exposed to peril of Idolatry, and in danger daily to have new
Articles of Faith obtruded upon them, they see that the Pope had implicitly
quitted their Patriarchall right, and challenged a Sovereignty over the Church
by Divine right. Lastly, they see that this foreign Jurisdiction was become not
only useless, but destructive to those ends for which Patriarchall authority
was first instituted.

As the Hangings are fitted to the House, The Regiment of the Church conformed
to that of the Commonwealth.
so was the external Regiment of the Church, fitted and adopted to the then
State of the Empire, when these Ecclesiastical dignities were first erected,
for the ease and benefit of the Subject, to the end that no man should be
necessitated to seek further for Ecclesiastical Justice, then he did for
Civil, nor to travel without the bounds of his own Province for a final
sentence. Therefore wheresoever there was a Civil Metropolis, there was placed
an Ecclesiastical Metropolitan also. And where there was a Secular Protarch,
there was constituted an Ecclesiastical Patriarch, to avoid the confusion and
clashing of Jurisdictions. This is plain out of the Decree of the Council of
Chalcedon, that whereas some ambitious persons, contrary to the Laws
Ecclesiastical, had multiplied Metropoliticall Sees, making two in one
Province, where there was but one mother City or one Civil Metropolis, the
Council defined that no man should attempt any such thing for the future,
conc. chalc. c. 11. vel 12.
But those Cities which had been adorned with the name of Metropolis by the
Edicts of Kings, should only enjoy that privilege. And more plainly by that of
Anacletus, cited by Gratian, if we may credit him, Provinces were divided long
before the coming of Christ, Did. 99.
for the most part. And afterward that division was renewed by the Apostles and
Saint Clement our predecessor, so that in the chief Cities of all Provinces,
where long since were primates of the Secular Law, and the highest judiciary
Power, etc. There the Divine and Ecclesiastical Laws commanded Patriarchs or
Primates to be placed and to be, which two, though they be different in names,
yet retein the same sense. This was well so long as the Empire continued in the
same State, and the Provinces kept their ancient bounds. But now when the State
of the Empire is altogether changed, the Provinces confounded and the Dominions
divided among lesser Kings, who are sometimes in hostility one with another,
and the Subjects of one Prince, cannot freely nor securely repair for Justice
into the Dominions of a foreign Prince, without prejudice to themselves, and
danger to their native Country. It is very meet that the Subjects of every
Sovereign Prince should have final Justice within the Dominions of their own
Sovereign, as well in Ecclesiastical causes as Political. And this is
agreeable with the fundamental Laws and Customs of England, which neither
permit a Subject in such cases to go out of the Kingdom, nor any foreign
Commissioner to enter into the Kingdom, without the Kings license. Upon this
ground the Bishops of Scotland were freed from their obedience to the Primate
of York, and the Bishops of Muscovia from the Patriarch of Constantinople.

But (says he) That which is for the benefit of the Kingdom, In gain or loss
all circumstances to be considered.
may be contrary to the good of the Church, and should we prefer a Kingdom
before the Church, the Body before the Soul, Earth before Heaven? I answer that
gain and loss, advantage and disadvantage ought not to be weighed or esteemed
from the consideration of one or two circumstances or emergents. All charges
damages and reprises must first be cast up and deducted, before one can give a
right estimate of benefit or loss. If a Merchant do reckon only the price
which his commodity cost him beyond Sea, without accounting Customs Freight
and other charges; he will soon perish his Pack. If the benefit be only
temporal and the loss Spiritual, as to gain Gold and lose Faith, which is
more precious then Gold that perishes, 1 Pet. 1.7.
it is no benefit but loss, What should it advantage a man to gain the whole
World and lose his own Soul? The English Church and the English Kingdom are
one and the same Society of men, differing not really but rationally one from
another, in respect of some distinct relations. As the Vine and the Elm, that
susteins it, they flourish together and decay together. Bonum ex singulis
circumstantiis, that which is truly good for the Kingdom of England, cannot
be ill for the Church of England, and that which is truly good for the English
Church cannot be ill for the English Kingdom. We may in reason distinguish
between Alexanders friend who studies to please him, and the Kings friend who
gives him good advise. The one is a friend to his person, the other to his
office. But in truth whilst Alexander is King and the person and office are
united, he that is a true friend to Alexander is no enemy to the King, and he
who is a true friend to the King is no foe to Alexander. Indeed if by the
Church he understand the Court of Rome, then that which was good for the
Kingdom of England was prejudicial to the Church in point of temporal
profit. But seeing as he confesses, The Soul is to be preferred before the
Body, it turns to their greater advantage by lessening the account of their
extortions.

He adds, Our Reformation not contrary to the Decrees of general Councels.
That a Kingdom is but a part of the Church, and it is not in the power of any
part, only for its particular profit, to alter what is instituted by the
universal Church, for her universal good, no more then it is in the power of
a part of the Kingdom, as one Shire or Province, to alter for its private
in^erest what has been decreed by Parliament for the good of the Kingdom. His
instance of a Shire or a Province is altogether impertinent, for no particular
Shire or Province in England has Legislative authority at all as the Kingdom
has. But particular Corporations being invested with power from the Crown to
make Ordinances for the more commodious government of themselves, may make and
do make ordinarily by Laws and Ordinances, not contra against the Acts of
Parliament, but praeter besides the Acts of Parliament. And let him go but a
little out of the Kingdom of England, as suppose into the Isle of Man, or into
Ireland, though they be branches of the English Empire, yet he shall find that
they have distinct Parliaments, which with the concurrence of the King, have
ever heretofore enjoyed a power to make Laws for themselves contrary to the
Laws of the English Parliament. But we are so far from seeking to abrogate or
to alter any institution of the universal Church or its representative, a
general Council, in this case, that on the contrary we crave the benefit of
their Decrees, and submit all our differences to their decision. No general
Council did ever give to the Sea of Rome Jurisdiction over Britain. And though
they had, yet the state of things being quite changed, it were no disobedience
to vary from them in circumstances, whilst we persist in their grounds.

To make my word good I will suppose the case to have been quite otherwise then
it was, That Protestants had made the separation, That they had had no ancient
Laws for presidents, That the Britannick Churches had not enjoyed the Cyprian
privilege for the first six hundred years: Yea I will suppose for the present,
That our Primates were no Primates or Patriarchs, And that the Britannick
Churches had been subjected to the Bishop of Rome by general Counsels: Yet
all this supposed upon the great mutation of the state of the Empire, and the
great variation of affairs since that time, it had been very lawful for the
King and Church of England to substract their obedience from the Bishops of
Rome (though they had not quitted their Patriarchate) and to have erected a new
Primate at home among themselves. Provided that what I write only upon
supposition, he do not hereafter allege as spoken by way of concession.

We have seen formerly in this chapter that the establishment of Primates or
Patriarchs and Metropolitans in such and such Sees, was merely to comply and
conform themselves to the Edicts and civil constitutions of Sovereign
Princes, for the ease and advantage of Christians, and to avoid confusion and
clashing of Jurisdiction That where there was a civil Exarch and Protarch
established by the Emperor, there should be an ecclesiastical Primate or
Patriarch: And where a City was honored with the name and privilege of a
Metropolis or mother City, there should be a Metropolitan Bishop. The practice
of Bishops could not multiply these dignities, but the Edicts of Emperors
could. And this was in a time when the Emperors were Pagans and Infidells.

Afterward when the Emperors were become Christians, if they newly founded or
newly dignified an Imperial City or a Metropolis, they gave the Bishop
thereof a proportionable ecclesiastical pre-eminence at their good pleasure.
Either with a Council, as the Councels of Constantinople and Chalcedon with
the consent and confirmation of Theodosius and Martian Emperors) did advance
the Bishop of Constantinople from being a mean Suffragan under the Metropolitan
of Heraclea, to be equal in dignity, power and all sorts of privileges to
the Bishop of Rome. And this very ground is assigned by the Fathers, because
that City (Constantinople) was become the seat of the Empire. So great a
desire had the Fathers to conform the Ecclesiastical Regiment to the
Political. Or without a Council, as Justinian the Emperor by his sole
Legislative Power erected the Patriarchate of Iustiniana prima, and endowed it
with a new Province subtracted from other Bishops, freeing it from all
Appeals. The like prerogatives he gave to the Bishop of Carthage,
notwithstanding the pretensions of the Bishop of Rome. Novell. 11 and 131.
And this was not done in a corner, but inserted into the public Laws of the
Empire, for all the world to take notice of it. So unquestionable was the power
of Sovereign Princes in things concerning the Order and external Regiment of
the Church in those days, that neither the Bishop of Rome, nor any other
Patriarch or Bishop did ever complain against it. Shall the presence of an
Exarch or Lieutenant be able to dignifie the City or place of his residence
with Patriarchall Rites, and shall not the presence and authority of the
Sovereign himself be much more able to do it? Is so much respect due to the
Servants, and is not more due to the Master?

That the British and the English Kings had the same Imperial Authority to
alter Patriarchates within their own Dominions, to exempt their Subjects from
the Jurisdiction of one Primate, p. 127.
and transfer them to another, I showed in the vindication by the examples of
King Arthur, who translated the Primacy from Caer-Leon to St. David's above
eleven hundred years since, And Henry the first who subjected St. David's to
Canterbury above five hundred years since, for the benefit of his Subjects.
Neither did any man then complain that they usurped more Power then of right
did belong unto them.

This is not to alter the Institutions of the universal Church or of general
Counsels (supposing they had made any such particular establishment) but on
the contrary to tread in their stepps, But in pur suance of them.
and to pursue their grounds, and to do that (with all due submission to their
authority) which they would have done themselves in this present exigence of
Affairs. Make all things the same they were, and we are the same. To persist in
an old observation when the grounds of it are quite changed, and the end for
which the observation was made, calls upon us for an alteration, is not
obedience but obstinacy. General Counsels did never so fix Patriarchall
Power to particular Churches, as that their establishment should be like a Law
of the Medes and Persians, never to be altered upon any change of the Christian
world whatsoever. But to be changed by themselves (as we see they did establish
first three Protopatriarchates, then four, then five.) Or when general
Counsels cannot be had (which is the miserable condition of these times) by
such as have the Supreme Authority Civil and Ecclesiastical in those places
where the change is to be made. Suppose a Patriarchall See should be utterly
ruined and destroyed by war or other accidents, as some have been; or should
change the Bible into the Alchoran, and turn Turks as others have done; suppose
a succession of Patriarchs should quit or resign their Patriarchall power
explicitly or implicitly, or forfeit it by disufe or abuse, Or should obtrude
heretical errors and Idolatrous practices upon the Churches under their
Jurisdiction, so as to leave no hope of remedy from their Successors, O^ should
go about to enforce them by new Laws and Oaths to maintain their usurpations
over general Counsels, to which all Christians are more obliged then to any
Patriarch: Lastly, suppose a Patriarchall City shall lie in the Dominions of
one Prince, and the Province in the Dominions of another, who are in continual
war and hostility the one with the other, so as the Subjects can neither have
license nor security to make use of their Patriarch, ought notthe respective
Provinces in all these cases to provide for themselves? Put the case that a
King going to war in the holy Land should commit the Regencie to his
Council, and they constitute a Governor of a principal City, who fails in
his trust, and makes the Citizens swear allegiance to himself, and to maintain
him against the Council; all men will judge that the Citizens should do well,
if he were incorrigible, to turn him out of their Gates. Christ was this King,
who ascending into the holy of holies, left the Regiment of his Church with the
Apostolical College and their Successors, a general Council. They made the
Bishop of Rome a principal Governor, and he rebels against them. There needs
no further application.

Now to close up this point, the end is more excellent then the means. The end
of the primitive Fathers in establishing the external Regiment of the Church
in a conformity to the civil Government was salus Populi Christiani, the ease
and advantage of Christians, the avoiding of confusion, and the clashing of
Jurisdictions. We pursue the same ends with them, we approve of their means in
particular, as most excellent for those times, and in general for all times,
that is, the conforming of the one Regiment to the other. But God alone is
without any shadow of turning by change. It is not in our power to prevent the
conversion of sublunarie things. Empires and Cities have their diseases and
their deaths as well as men. One is, another was, a third shall be. Mother
Cities become Villages, and poor Villages become Mother Cities. The places of
the residence of the greatest Kings and Emperors are turned to deserts for
Owls to screech in and Satyrs to dance in. Then as a good Pilate must move his
rudder according to the variable face of the heavens. So if we will pursue the
prudent grounds of the primitive Fathers, we must change our external Regiment
according to the change of the Empire. This is better then by adhering too
strictly to the private interest of particular places, to destroy that public
end for which external Regiment at first was so established. I confess that
this is most proper for a general Council to redress. Every thing is best
loosed by the same authority by which it was bound. But in case of necessity,
where there can be no recourse to a general Council, every Sovereign Prince
within his own Dominions, with the advice and concurrence of his Clergy, and
due submission to a future oecumenicall Council, is obliged to provide
remedies for growing inconveniences, and to take order that external
Discipline be so administered, as may most conduce to the glory of God, and the
benefit of his Christian Subjects.

I made three conditions of a lawful reformation, just grounds, due
moderation, and sufficient authority. King Henry's Divorce lawful, but no
ground of the Reformation.
He faith, Henry the eight had none of these: First, no just ground, because
his ground was, that the Pope would not give him leave to forsake his lawful
wife and take another. Perhaps the Popes in justice might, by Gods just
disposition, be an occasion, but it was no ground of the Reformation: And if it
had, yet neither this nor his other exceptions do concern the cause at all.
There is a great difference between bonum and been, between a good action and
an action well done: An action may be good and lawful in it self, and yet the
ground of him that acts it sinister, and his manner of proceeding indirect,
as we see in Iehu's reformation. This concerned King Henry's person, but it
concerns not us at all. King Henry protested that it was his conscience, Hall
in Hen. 8. an. 20. sol. 180. b. and an 21 f. 182.
they will not believe him. Queen Katherine accused Cardinal Wolsey as the
Author of it, she never accused Anne Bolen who was in France when that business
began, The Bishop of Lincoln was employed to Oxford, and Bishop Gardener and
Dr. Fox to Cambridge, All the Cardinals of Rome opposed the Dispensation
to see the cause debated. Besides our own Universities, the Universities of
Paris, Orleans, Angew, Burges, Bononia, Padua, Toulouse, and I know not how
many of the most learned Doctors of that age, did all subscribe to the
unlawfullness of that Marriage, which he calls lawful. Hall. An. 1. H. 8.
The Bishop of Worcester prosecuted the divorce: The Bishops of York, Duresme,
Chester, were sent unto Queen Katherine to persuade her to lay aside the title
of Queen: The Bishops of Canterbury, London, Winchester, Bath, Lincoln, did
give sentence against the Marriage: Bishop Bonner made the appeal from the
Pope. The greatest sticklers were most zealous Roman Catholics. And if wise
men were not mistaken, that business was long plotted between Rome and France
and Cardinal Wolsey, to break the league with the Emperor, and to make way
for a new Marriage with the Duchess of Alenson, Acworth, emt. Sand 1 2. c 13.
and 14 Hall. An. 19. H 8. f^l. 161. Sand de Schism p. 11. and 12.
sister to the King of France, and a stricter league with that Crown. But God
did take the wife in their own crastiness. Yea even Clement the seventh had
once given out a Bull privately to declare the Marriage unlawful and invalid,
if his Legate Campegius could have brought the King to comply with the Popes
desires. I will conclude this point with two testimonies, the one of Stephen
Gardener Bishop of Winchester, Steph. Wint. de vera Obedientia apnd Gild. t. 1.
p. 721.
Quid aliud debuit aut potuit, etc. What else ought the King or could the King
do, then with the full consent of his People and judgment of his Church, to be
loosed from an unlawful contract, and to enjoy one that was lawful and
allowed, and leaving her whom neither Law nor Equity did permit him to hold, to
apply himself to a chaste and lawful marriage? In which cause whereas the
sentence of the Word of God alone had been sufficient, to which all ought to
submit without delay, yet his Majesty disdained not to use the censures of the
gravest men and most famous Universities. The second is the testimony of two
Archbishops, two Dukes, three Marquesses, thirteen Earls, five Bishops, six and
twenty Barons, two and twenty Abbats, with many Knights and Doctors, in their
Letter to the Pope, Causae ipsius justitia, etc. The justice of the cause it
self being approved every where by the judgments of most learned men, and
determined by the suffrages of most famous Universities, being pronounced and
defined by English, Ld. Cherb. in Hen 8. An 1530. p. 303. Sufficere sant,
alioqui debuisset causae ipsius, etc.
French, Italians, as every one among them does excel the rest in learning,
etc. Though he call it a lawful Marriage, yet it is but one Doctors opinion.
And if it had been lawful, the Pope and the Clergy were more blame worthy then
King Henry.

Secondly, he faith he wanted due moderation, because he forced the Parliament
by fear to consent to his proceedings. The Parliament not forced.
I have showed sufficiently that they were not forced, by their Letter to the
Pope, by their Sermons preached at St. Paul's Cross, by their persuasions to
the King, by their pointed looks; to which I may add their Declaration, called
the Bishops Book, Idem p. 334.
signed by two Archbishops and nineteen Bishops. Nor do I remember to have
read of any of note that opposed it but two, who were prisoners and no
Parliament men at that time. Sir Thomas More, yet when King Henry writ against
Luther, he advised him to take heed how he advanced the Popes authority too
much, left he diminished his own. And Bishop Fisher who had consented in
convocation to the Kings title of the Supreme Head of the English Church [
quantum per Christi legem licet.] Anno. 1530.
But because Bishop Gardener is the only witness whom he produces for proof of
this allegation, I will show him out of Stephen Gardener himself, who was the
Tyrant that did compel him. Quin potius orbirationem nedde^e volui, etc. I
desired rather to give an account to the World what changed my opinion, De vera
Obedien tia. Ib^dem. p. 719.
and compelled me to dissent from my former words and deeds. That compelled me
(to speak it in good time) which compels all men when God thinks fit, the
force of truth to which all things at length do obey. Behold the Tyrant, not
Henry the eight, but the force of truth, which compelled the Parliament. Take
one testimony more out of the same Treatise. But I fortified my self so that
(as if I required the judgment of all my senses) I would not submit nor
captivate my understanding to the known and evident truth, nor take it to be
sufficiently proved, unless I first heard it with mine ears and smelt it with
my nose, and see it with mine eyes, and felt it with my hands. Here was more of
obstinacy then tyranny in the case. Either Stephen Gardener did write
according to his conscience, and then he was not compelled; or else he
dissembled, and then his second testimony is of no value. It is not my
judgment, but the judgment of the Law it self Semel falsus, semper presumitur
falsus.

To the third condition he faith only, that Henry the eight had not sufficient
authority to reform, first, because it was the power of a small part of the
Church against the whole. I have showed the contrary, that our Reformation was
not made in opposition, but in pursuance of the acts of general Counsels,
neither did our Reformers meddle without their own spheres. And secondly,
because the Papacy is of divine right. Yet before, he told us that it was
doubtful, and very courteously he would put it upon me to prove that the
Regiment of the Church by the Pope is of humane institution. But I have learned
better, that the proof rests upon his side, both because he maintains an
affirmative, and because we are in possession. It were an hard condition to put
me to prove against my conscience, that the universal Regency of the Pope is
of humane right, who do absolutely deny both his divine right and his humane
right.

His next exception is, that it is no sufficient warrant for Princes to meddle
in spiritual matters, because some Princes have done so. If he think the
external Regiment of the Church to be a matter merely spiritual, he is much
mistaken. I cite not the exorbitant acts of some single Prince or Princes, but
a whole succession of Kings, with their convocations, and Parliaments,
proceeding according to the fundamental Laws of the Kingdom. So he might have
spared his instances of Saul and Uzziah.

But he faith, King Henry did not act against conscience
that what King Henry did in such matters was plainly against his own
conscience, as appears by his frequent and earnest desires to be reunited to
the Pope. It is a bold presumption in him to take upon him to judge of another
man's conscience. God alone knows the secret turnings and windings of the heart
of man. Though he had desired a reconciliation with Rome, yet charity requires
that we should rather judge that he had changed his mind, then that he
violated his conscience. Neither will this uncharitable censure, if it were
true, advantage his cause the black of a bean. His conscience might make the
reformation sinful in him, but not unlawful in it self. The lawfullness or
unlawfullness of the Action within it self, depends not upon the conscience of
the doer, but the merit of the thing done. His witnesses are Bishop Gardener
and Nicholas Sanders. c 3. s. 5.
The former a great Counselor of King Henry, a contriver of the oath, a
propugner of the Kings Supremacy, both in print and in his Sermons, and a
persecutor of them who opposed it. For a Preacher to preach against his own
conscience, comes near the sin against the holy Ghost. He had reason to say he
was constrained, both to hide his own shame, and to flatter the Pope (after his
revolt) whom he had so much opposed, especially in the days of Queen Marie:
Otherwise he had missed the Chancellership of England, and it may be had
suffered as a Schismatic. Yet let us hear what he faith, that King Henry had a
purpose to resign the Supremacy when the tumult was in the North: And that he
was employed to the Emperor to desire him to be a mediator to the Pope about
it. All this might have been, and yet no intention of reconciliation. Great
Princes many times look one way and row another. And if an overture or an empty
pretense will serve to quash a Rebellion, or prevent a foreign war, will make
no scruple to use it. But upon Bishop Gardiners credit in this cause we cannot
believe it. This was one of them who writ that menacing Letter to the Pope just
before the reformation, that if he did not hear them, Ld. Cherb. H. 8. an.
1530. p. 305.
certe interpretabimur nostri nobis curam esse relictam, ut aliunde nobis
remedia conquiramus, they would certainly interpret it, that they were left to
themselves to take care of themselves, to seek their remedy from elsewhere.
This was a fair intimation, and they were as good as their words. This was the
man who writ the book de vera obedientia, downright for the Kings Supremacy
against the Pope. Lastly, this is who published to the world, that all sorts of
People with us were agreed upon this point with most sted fast consent, that no
manner of person bred or brought up in England, has ought to do with Rome. It
had been strange indeed that all sorts of People should be unanimous in the
point, and the King alone go against his conscience.

His later witness, Nicholas Sanders, is just such another, whose Book de
schismate is brim full of virulent slanders and prodigious fictions against
King Henry. He feineth that when his death did draw nigh, he began to deal
privately with some Bishops of the way, how he might be reconciled to the Sea
Apostolic. Testimony he produces none, but his own Authority. They who will
not believe it may choose. But that which follows, spoileth the credit of his
relation, That one of the Bishops being doubtful whether this might not be a
trap to catch him, answered that the King was wiser then all men, that he had
cast off the Popes Supremacy by divine inspiration, Consilio divino.
and had nothing now to fear. That a King should be laying snares to catch his
Bishops apprepinquante hora mortis when the very hour of his death was drawing
near, Sand. de S^hism. p. 102.
and that a Bishop should flatter a dying man so abhominably against his
conscience, (as he makes this to be) is not credible.

But there is a third Author alleged by others who deserved more credit, Lord
Cherb fol. 398.
That it was but the coming two days short of a Post to Rome, which hindered
that the reconcilement was not actually made. But here is a double mistake,
first, in the time, this was in the year 1533. before the separation was made,
currente Rota. Some intimations had been given of what was intended, but the
Bell was not then rung out. Certainly the breach must go before the
reconcilement, in order of time. Secondly, in the Subject; this treaty was not
about the Jurisdiction of the Court of Rome over the English Church, but about
the divorce of King Henry and Queen Katherine. The words are these, That if the
Pope would supersede from executing his sentence, until he (the King) had
indifferent Judges who might hear the business, he would also supersede of what
he was deliberated to do in withdrawing his obedience from the Roman See. The
Bishop of Paris procured this proposition from the King, and delivered it at
Rome. It was not accepted. The Kings answer came not within the time limited.
Thereupon the Pope published his Sentence, and the Separation followed. So this
was about the change of a Wife, not of Religion, before either King Henrys
substraction of obedience, or the Popes fulmination.

In the next place he distinguishes between the Pope and the Papacy,
acknowledging That it may be lawful in some cases to substract obedience from
the Pope, but in no case from the Papacy, which he presumes but does not prove
to be of divine institution, whereas Protestants (says he) for the faults of
some Popes, have separated themselves both from Pope, Papacy, and Roman Church.
And here again he falls upon his former needless Theme, That personal faults
are no sufficient ground of a revolt from a good institution. If he had been
pleased to observe it, I took away this distinction before it was made, P 128.
showing that the personal faults of Popes or their Ministers ought not to
reflect upon any but the persons guilty; but faulty principles in Doctrine or
Discipline, do warrant a more permanent separation, even until they be
reformed.

Our separation from the Papacy was not for the faults of Popes but of the
Papacy it self
I do acknowledge the distinction of Pope, Papacy, and Church of Rome, but I
deny that we have separated from any one of them for the faults of another. As
the Pope may have his proper faults, so may the Papacy, so may the Church of
Rome. We have separated our selves from the Church of Rome only in those things
wherein she had first separated her self from the ancient Roman Church. In all
other things we maintain communion with her. We are ready to yield the Pope all
that respect which is due to the Bishop of an Apostolical Church, and
whatsoever external honor the Fathers did think fit to cast upon that See, if
he would content himself therewith. But the chief grounds of our separation are
those which are inherent in the Papacy it self, qua talis, as it is now
defended, as they seek to obtrude it upon us; the lawless exorbitant oppression
of the Roman Court; the sovereignty of the Pope above general Councels; his
legislative and judiciary Power in all Christian Kingdoms, against the will of
the right owners; his pretended right to convocate Synods, and confirm Synods,
and dissolve Synods. and hold legantine Courts, and obtrude new points of Faith
as necessary Articles, and receive the last appeals, and dispose of all
ecclesiastical Dignities and Benefices at his pleasure, and impose Tenths and
First Fruits and Subsidies and Pensions, to invest Bishops, and sell Pardons,
and Indulgences, and Palls. These and the like are not the Faults of Innocent
the tenth, or Urban the eighth, or Sextus, or Pius, or Alexander, or Clement,
or any p^rticular Pope. But they are the Faults of the P^pacy it self, woven
into the body of it, and without the acknowledgement of which, they will suffer
us to hold no communion with the Papacy. I do not say that they are
insep^rable, for the time has been when the Papacy was without those
Blemishes; but that it is folly at this time to hope from them for the anceient
liberty of the Church, as the Countryman expected that the river should be r^n
out, and become dry, Rusticus expectat ut defluat amnis, at ille
Labitur and labetur, in omne volubilis aevum.


We expected remedy, and hoped for reformation from the time of Henry the
first, in whose reign their encroachments did begin to grow signal and
notorious, until the days of Henry the eighth, throughout the reigns of
seventeen succeeding Kings, and found not the least ease from them, but what we
carved out our selves. No Law of God or man does require that we should wait
eternally. The Lord of the Vineyard thought three years enough to expect fruit
of the fruitless Figtree, and when it improved not in the fourth year, the
Sentence issued against it, Luke 13.7.
cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground.

whether Popes have done more good or hurt to England not material.
He urges that if some Popes have wronged England temporally, far more Popes
have benifited it much more both temporrally and spiritually; Sufficit unus
huic operi: This were more comely in our mouths then in theirs. Some man would
go make an estimate of Papal Importations, as Parchment, and Lead, and Wax,
and Crosses, Agnus dei's, and Relics. And their Exportations, Gold, Silver,
Jewels, and whatsoever the land afforded either for nec^ssity or delight. But I
will spare his modesty, and suppose more then ever he will be able to prove.
Ancient virtues or benefits do not justify an old institution, when it is
grown useless and subject to desperate abuses. The brazen Serpent was
instituted by God himself; it was a singular type of Christ; it saved the
temporal lives of the Israelites, and pointed them out the right way to
eternal life. Yet when it was become useless and abused over much, Hezekiah is
commended for breaking it in pieces, 2 King. 18.4.
and calling it Nehushtan, an useless piece of common brass, that had quite
lost its ancient virtue. The Order of the Templers was instituted about the
year 1120. Scarcely any Order can show such an hopeful beginning at their
first institution, or such an huge progress toward grearness in so short a
revolution of time. He who shall read these extraordinary praises which are
given them by St. Bernard, (who is thought to have been the Author of their
rule) will take them rather to have been a Society of Angels then of mortal
men. Yet in the days of Clement the fifth, they were generally suppressed
throughout the whole world as it were in an instant, not for common faults, but
horrid crimes, and prodigious vilanies, by the joint consent of the occidentall
Church and sovereign Princes. I inquire not whether their accusation was just
or not; but from hence I do collect, that in the judgment of this occidentall
world, a good institution may be deservedly abrogated for subsequent abuses. As
we had not the same latitude of power, which they who censured them h^d; so we
did not act without our own Sphere, or the Bounds of the English Dominions.

In the vindication I urged three points, Sect. 2.
wherein the Romans do agree with us. First, that sovereign Princes not only
may, but in justice are obliged to repress the tyrany of ecclesiastical
Judges, and protect their Subjects from their violence, and free them from
their oppressed Yoke. To this he answers nothing. Secondly, that Princes may
be enabled either by grant or by prescription (I added by their sovereign
authority over the whole Body politic) to exercise all external
ecclesiastical Jurisdiction by themselves or by fit Delegates, and to make
ecclesiastical Laws for the external Regiment of the Church, to which their
Subjects owe obedience. This alone were sufficient to free us from Schism. But
to all this likewise he says not one word good or bad. Thirdly, that it is
lawful in several cases to substract obedience from the Pope. And among other
proofs I cited the Council of Towers. To this only he answers, Conc. Turor.
R^sp. ad Art. 3. 48.
That they acknowledged it lawful to withdraw obedience from this or that
Pope, in this or that case, but not from Papal Authority it self. Whereas I
showed him in the vindication, that the same equity which does allow
substraction of obedience from this or that Pope for personal faults, It was
lawful to withdraw obedience from Pap^ll Authority corrupted.
as Schism or Simony, does likewise allow substraction of obedience from him
and his Successors for faulty Principles, as obtruding new Creeds, pressing of
unlawful Oaths, palpable usurpation of undoubted Rites, even until they be
reformed. Papal Authority without the Pope, is but an imaginary idea;
whosoever substracts obedience from the true Pope, substracts obedience from
the Papal Authority. Perhaps indeed not simply or absolutely, but
respectively, as he says in this or that case. But what if the Pope will not
suffer them to pay their obedience in part, so far as it is due, but have it
entire according to his own demands, or none at all. Then it is not they who
separate themselves from Papal Authority, but it is Papal Authority which
separates them from it. Either he understands Papal Authority such as it ought
to be de jure; and then we have subtracted no obedience from it, for we ought
it none, and are not unwilling for peace sake to pay it more respect then we
do owe. Or else by Papal Authority he understands a spiritual Monarchy, such
as it is now, with superiority above general Counsels, and infallibility of
Judgment and legislative Authority, and patronage of all ecclesiastical
Preferments, etc. And then the universal Church did never acknowledge any such
Papal Authority. And then to withdraw our obedience from it, is not to
substract obedience from a lawful, but from an unlawful and tyrannical
Power. Princes the last Judges of the injuries done to their Subjects by Popes.
When sovereign Princes do withdraw obedience from this or that Pope, in this
or that case, they make themselves Judges of the difference between them and
the Court of Rome, as whether the Pope have invaded their privileges, or
usurped more Authority then is due unto him, or in contemning his censures
(which the Council of Towers does expressly allow them to do) and judging
whether the Popes Key have erred or not. Yield thus much, and the question is
at an end, That sovereign Princes within their own Dominions are the last
Judges of their own Liberties, and of papal oppressions and usurpations, and
the validity or invalidity of the Popes censures.

There is one thing more in this discourse in this place which I may not omit,
That Papal Authority is instituted immediately by God, but not Regal. Cujus
contrarium verum est. He was once, or seemed to be of another mind. Bish.
Epist. ad Reg. Iocob. p. 11.
For of almighty God his mere bounty and great grace they (Kings) receive and
hold their Diadems and Princely Scepters. Saint Paul says expressly, speaking
of civil Powers: Romans 13.1, and 2.
The Powers that be, are ordained of God: and whosoever resists the Power,
resists the Ordinance of God, and they that resist shall receive to
themselves damnation. The eternal Wisdom of the Father has said* Prove. ^.15.
By me Kings reign, and Princes decree Justice. If they be ordained by God,
Kingly Authority from God, not Papal.
and reign by God, then they are instituted by God. Therefore they are justly
styled the living Images of God that saves all things. He who said, by me
Kings reign, never said by me Popes reign. Kings may inherit by the Law of man,
or be elected by the Suffrages of men. But the Regal Office, and Regal Power
is immediately from God. No man can give that which he himself has not. The
People have not power of Life and Death. That must come from God. By the Law of
nature Fathers of Families were Princes, and when Fathers of Families did
conjoyn their power to make one Father of a Country, to whom does he owe his
power but to God, from whom Fathers of Families had their power by the Law of
nature? As for the Pope he derives his Episcopal power from Christ, his
Patriarchall power from the Church, and Monarchical power from himself.

After this in the vindication I descended to several new considerations,
Sect. 3.
as namely the power of Princes to reform new Canons by the old Canons of the
Fathers, the subjection of Patriarchall power to Imperial, which I showed by a
signal example of Pope Gregory who obeyed the command of Mauritius the
Emperor, The grounds of our s^paration.
though he did not take it to be pleasing to Almighty God, the erection of new
Patriarchates by Emperors, and the translation of primacies by our Kings. And
so I proceeded to the grounds of their separation: first, the intolerable
rapine and extortions of the Roman Court in England: Secondly, their unjust
usurpations of the undoubted rights of all orders of men, and particularly how
they made our Kings to be their vassals and the Succession to the Crown
arbitrary at their pleasures. Thirdly, because our Ancestors found by
experience that such foreign jurisdiction was destructive to the right ends of
Ecclesiastical discipline. Fourthly, sundry other inconveniences, to have been
daily subject to the imposition of new Articles of Faith, to be exposed to
manifest peril of Idolatry, to have forsaken the Communion of three parts of
Christendom, to have approved the Popes rebellion against general Councels,
and to have their Bishops swear to maintain him in his rebellious usurpations.
Lastly, the privilege of the Britannick Churches, the Popes disclaiming all
his Patriarchall authority, and their challenging of all this by Div^ne right,
which made their sufferings irremediable from Rome. Lastly, I showed that our
Ancestors from time to time, had made more addresses to Rome for remedy then
either in duty or in prudence they ought to have done. All this he passes by
in silence, as if it did not concern the cause at all. Only he repeats his
former distinction between the Pope, the Papacy, and the Roman Church, which
has been so often confuted already, and blames Protestants for revolting from
the Roman Church for the faults of some few Popes. As if all these things which
are mentioned here, and set down at large in the vindication, were but some
infirmitives, or some petty faults of some few Popes. I have showed him
clearly, that the most of our grounds are not the faults of the Popes, but the
faults of the Papacy it self. And as for forsaking the Church of Rome, he does
us wrong. I showed him out of our Canons in this very place, An. 30.
that we have not forsaken it, but only left their Communion in some points,
wherein they had left their Ancestors, we are ready to acknowledge it as a
Sister to the Britannick Church, a Mother to the Saxon Church, but as a Lady or
Mistrisse to no Church.

Afterward he descendth to two of the grounds of our Reformation, Sect. 4.
to show that they were insufficient, The new Creed of Pius the 4th, and the
withholding the Cup from the Laity. Two of two and twenty make but a mean
induction. He may if he please see throughout this Treatise that we had other
grounds besides these. Yet I confess that in his choice he has swerved from
the rules of prudence, The Popes new Articles of Faith a just cause of
separation.
and has not sought to leap over the Hedge where it was lowest. First (says
he) The new Creed could not be the cause of the separation, because the
separation was made before the Creed. He says true, if it had been only the
reduction of these new mysteries into the form of a Creed, that did offend us.
But he knows right well that these very points which Pius the 4th
comprehended in a new Symball or Creed, were obtruded upon us before by his
predecess ors as necessary Articles of the Roman Faith, and required as
necessary conditions of their Communion. So as we must either receive these, or
utterly lose them. This is the only difference* that Pius the 4th dealt in
gross, his predecessors by retaile. They fashioned the several rods, and he
bound them up into a bundle. He says, That the new Creed is nothing but
certain points of Catholic Faith proposed to be sworn of some Ecclesiastical
Catholic persons, as the 39 Articles were in the Protestants new Creed*
proposed by them to Ministers. Pius the 4th did not only enjoin all
Ecclesiastics, Seculars, and Regulars, to swear to his new Creed, but he
imposed it upon all Christians, as veram fidem Catholicam extra quam nemo
salvus esse potest, (they are the very words of the Bull,) as the true
Catholic Faith without believing of which no man can be saved. This is a
greater Obligation then an Oath, and as much as the Apostles did impose for the
reception of the Apostolical Creed. We do not hold our 39 Articles to be such
necessary truths, extra quam non est salus, without which there is no
Salvation, nor injoin Ecclesiastic persons to swear unto them, but only to
subscribe them, as theological truths, for the preservation of unity among us,
and the extirpation of some growing errors.

The de^^ining of the Cup in the Sacrament a just cause of separation.
Secondly, He adds that the deteyning of the Cup, could be no sufficient grounds
of separation, because Protestants do confess, That it is an indifferent
matter of it self, and no just cause to separate Communion. Does the Church of
England confess it to be an indifferent matter? No, nor any Protestant Church.
All their public confessions do testify the contrary. Nay more, I do not
believe that any one Protestant in his right wits did ever confess any such
thing. But this it is to nible at Authors, and to stretch and tenter their
words by consequences quite beyond their sense. It may be that Luther at some
time said some such thing, but it was before he was a formed Protestant,
whilst he was half sleeping half waking. Bellarmine styles it in initio
Apostasiae. But after his eyes were well opened, he never confessed any such
thing, but the just contrary. Suppose that Brentius says, that abstemious
persons, such whose nature does abhor wine, may receive under one kind; what
a pitiful argument is this drawn from a particular rare case of invincible
necessity, to the common and ordinary use of the Sacrament? The Elephant was
exempted from doing obeisance to the Lion, because he had no knees. But it is
the height of injustice to withhold his right from one man, because another
cannot make use of it. Suppose that Melancthon declare his own particular
opinion, that those Countries where Wine is not to be had should do well to
make use of honied water in the Sacrament. What does this signify as to the
cause he has in hand, whether they use some other liquor in the place of Wine,
or use no liquor at all? Invincible necessity does not only excuse from one
kind but from both kinds. And where the Sacrament cannot be had as it ought,
the desire to have it suffices before God. We read of some Christians in India
where they had no Wine, that they took dry Raisons and steeped them in water a
whole night, Odoardus Barlosa forma Celebrandi etc.
and used that liquor which they squeesed out of them in the place of Wine for
the Sacrament. It would trouble one as much in many parts of the World to find
right Bread, as Wine. That nourishment which Indians eat in the place of Bread,
being made of the roots of Plants, does differ more from our Bread made of
Wheat, then Cider or Perry or honnied water do differ from the juice of the
Grape, which are such many times, as are able to deceive a good taste. If Wine
were as rare and precious in the World as right Balm, which they make to be the
matter of a Sacrament, there were more to be said in it. They themselves do
teach that it is absolutely necessary, that the Sacrament be consecrated in
Wine, and that it be consumed by the Priest. They who can procure Wine for the
Priest, may procure it for the People also, if they will. The truth is, all
these are but made Dragons. No man ever was so abstemious but that he might
taste so much Wine tempered with water, as they use it, as might serve for the
Sacrament, where the least imaginable particle conveieth Christ to the
receiver, as well as the whole Chalice full. Neither is there any Christian
Country in the World, Papists right, Heirs of the Donatists.
where they may not have Wine enough for this use, if they please.

So notwithstanding any thing he says, to the contrary their daily obtruding
new Articles of Faith, and their deteining the Cup in the Sacrament were just
grounds of separation, but not our only grounds. We had twenty other grounds
besides them. And therefore he had little reason to say, That at least the
first Protestants were Schismatics, and in this respect to urge the authority
of Optatus against us, Optat. l. 2.
to prove us to be the Heirs of Schismatics. Optatus in the place by him
cited, speaks against the traditors, with whom we have nothing common, and the
Donatists their own Ancestors, not ours, whose case is thus described there by
Optatus, cujus in Cathedra tenet, quae ante ipsum Majorinum originem non
habebat, whose Chair thou possessest, which had no original before Majorinus,
a schismatic Donatist. This is not our case. We have set up no new Chairs
nor new Altars, nor new Successions, but continued those which were from the
beginning. There is a vast difference between the erecting of a Chair against a
Chair, or an Altar against an Altar, which we have not done, and the repairing
of a Church or an Altar wherein it was decayed, which we were obliged to do.

In the next place he endeavoreth to prove by the general Doctrine of
Protestants, Whether Protestants and Papists differ in Essentials.
that they differ from Papists in fundamental points necessary to salvation.
If they do, it is the worse for the Romanists. In the mean time the charity
of Protestants is not to be blamed. We hope better of them. And for any thing
he says to the contrary we believe that they do not differ from us in
fundamentalls. But let us see what it is that the Protestants say. Some say
that Popish errors are damnable. Let it be admitted many errors are damnable
which are not in fundamentalls. Errors which are damnable in themselves, are
often pardoned by the mercy of God, who looks upon his Creatures with all
their prejudices. Others say, that Popish and Protestant opinions are
diametrally opposite. That is certain, they are not all logomachies. But can
there be no diametrall opposition except it be in fundamentalls? There are an
hundred diametrall oppositions in opinion among the Romanists themselves, yet
he will not confess that they differ in fundamentalls. Lastly, others say that
the Religion of Protestants, and the Religion of the Church of Rome, are not
all one for substance. I answer first, that the word substance is taken
sometimes strictly, for the essentialls of any thing, which cannot be separated
without the destruction of the subject. Thus a man is said to be the same man
in substance, while his soul and body are united, though he have lost a leg or
an arm, or be reduced to skin and bone. And in this sense the Protestant and
Popish Church and Religion are the same in substance. At other times the word
substance is taken more largly for all real parts, although they be separated
without the destruction, and sometimes with the advantage of the subject. And
so all the members, yea even the flesh and blood and other humors are of the
substance of a man. Psalm. 139.16.
So we read, Thine eyes did see my substance being yet unperfect, and in thy
books were all my members written. And in this sense the Protestant and Popish
Religion are not the same in substance. Secondly, the word substantialls may
either signify old substantialls, believed and practiced by all Churches in
all ages, at all times, which are contained in the Apostles Creed. And thus our
Religion and the Roman Religion are the same in substance. Or new substantialls
lately coined and obtruded upon the Chrurch; as those Articles which are
comprehended in the Creed of Pius the fourth: And in this sense our Religion
and theirs are not the same in substance. The former substantialls were made by
God, the later substantialls devised by man.

I pleaded that when all things were searched to the bottom, Sect. 5.
Roman Catholics do acknowledge the same possibility of Salvation to
Protestants, Papists acknowledge possibility of our salvation as much as we of
theirs.
which Protestants do afford to Roman Catholics: And for proof thereof I
produced two testimonies of his own. To this he answers first, that Protestants
do allow saving faith and salvation to the Roman Church and to formal
Papists. But Roman Catholics do deny saving faith and salvation to the
Protestant Church and to formal Prrtestants, and grant it only to such
Protestants as are invincibly ignorant of their errors, who are not formal
Protestants, but rather Protestantibus credentes, persons deceived by giving
too much trust to Protestants. We say the very same, that we allow not saving
faith or salvation to the Popish Church, as it is corrupted, but as it reteins
with Protestants, the same common principles of saving truth, and is still
jointed in part to the Catholic Church. Nor to formal Papists, but to such as
err invincibly, and are prepared in their minds to receive the truth when God
shall reveal it. Such are not formal Papists, but Papist is credentes, such as
give too much trust to Papists.

His second answer is a second error, grounded only upon those imaginary
ideas which he has framed to himself in his own head, of the opinions of
particular Protestants, and labored much to little purpose, to prove by
conjecturall consequences, which hang together like a roap of sand, That
Protestants affirm that such as err in fundamental Articles, and such as err
sinfully in not fundamentalls may be saved. Neither the Church of England,
against which he ought to bend his forces in this question, nor any genuine
son of the Church of England* nor any other Protestant Church ever said, that
Papists might be saved, though they held not the fundamentalls of saving truth,
or though they held lesser errors pertinaciously without repentance. If any
particular Protestants were ever so mad to maintain any such thing in an
ordinary way, for we speak not now of the extraordinary dispensations of Gods
grace, in case of invincible necessity, we disclaim them in it. Let him not
spare them. But I believe that when all is done, about which he makes such a
stir, it will prove but Moonshine in the water.

To what I said, Sect. 6.
that our separation is from their errors, not from their Church, he
answers, Our separation only from errors.
that it shows my ignorance what their Church is, For their Church is a society
partly in their pretended errors; and therefore they who separate from them,
separate from their Church. In my life I never heard a weaker plea: But I
desire no other advantage then what the cause it self affords. Does he himself
believe in earnest, that any errors are essentialls of a Church? Or would he
persuade us that weeds are essentials of a Garden; or ulcers and wenns and such
superfluous excrescences essentials of an humane body? Or do weeds become no
weeds, and errors no errors, because they are called pretended weeds or
pretended errors, or because they are affirmed to be essentials? This is enough
to justify my distinction. So it was not my ignorance but their obstinacy thus
to incorporate their errors into their Creeds, and matriculate their abuses
among their sacred Rites. In vain do they worship me (says God) teaching for
Doctrines the commandments of men. Math. 15.9
Suppose an Arrian or a Pelagian should charge him to be a Schismatic or an
Apostate, because he deserted their communion: To which he should answer, that
his separation was from their Arrian or Pelagian errors, not from their Church
as it was a Christian Church, and that he held all other common principles of
Christianity with them. And suppose the Arrian or Pelagian should plead as he
does, that their Church is a society partly in their pretended errors, or that
their pretended errors are essentials of their Church and of their Religion.
This might well aggravate their own faults, but not infringe the truth of his
answer. Errors continue errors though they they be called essentials. There was
a time before Arrianism did infest the Church, and there succeeded a time when
it was cast out of the Church. Their old essentials which were made essentials
by Christ, we do readily receive: Their new essentials, which were lately
devised by themselves, we do as utterly reject; and so much the rather,
because they have made them essentials. Their Church flourished long without
these errors; and we hope the time will come when it shall be purged from these
errors. We arrogate to our selves no new Church, etc.


In setting forth the modderation of our English Reformers, I showed that we
do not arrogate to our selves either a new Church, or a new Religion, or new
holy orders. Upon this he falls heavily two ways. First he says, it is false,
as he has showed by innumerable testimonies of Protestants. That which I say
is not the falser because he calls it so, nor that which he says the truer
because I forbear. For what I said I produced the authority of our Church, he
lets that alone, and sticks the falsehood upon my sleeve. It seems that
he is not willing to engage against the Church of England: For sti^l he
declineth it, and changes the subject of the question from the English Church
to a confused company of particular Authors of different opinions, of dubious
credit, of little knowledge in our Eng^ish affairs, tentered and wrested from
their genuine sense. Scis tu simulare Cupressum, quid hoc? It was not the drift
or scope of my undertaking to answer old volumes of impertinencies. If he have
any testimonies that are material, in the name of God let him bring them into
the lists, that the Reader may see what they say, and be able to compare the
evidence with the answer, and not imagine more then is true. Let him remember
that I premonish him, Whether our Religion be the same with theirs or not, we
are no Schismatics.
that all his innumerable testimonies will advantage him nothing.

Secondly, he would persuade us, that if it were so that our Church, Religion,
and holy Orders, were the same with theirs, then what need had we to go out of
theirs for salvation? then we are convinced of Schism. Alas poor men! what will
become of us? Hold what we will, say what we can, still we are Schismatics
with them. If we say our Church, Religion, and holy Orders are the same with
theirs, then we are Schismatics for deserting them. If we say they are not the
same, then we are Schismatics for censuring and condemning them. But we
appeal from the sentence of our Adve^sarie, to the sentence of that great
Judge who judges righteous judgment. We are either Wheat or Chaff, but neither
their tongues nor their pens must winnow us. If we say our Church, Religion,
and holy Orders be the same with theirs, we are no Schismatics, because we do
not censure them uncharitably. If we say they be not the same, we are still no
Schismatics, because we had then, by their own confession, just reason to
separate from them. But to come up closer to his argugument: Religion is a
virtue, which consists between two e^treams, Heresy in the defect, and
Superstition in the excess. Though their Church, Religion, and holy Orders be
the same with ours, and free from all heretical defects, yet they may ^e and
are subject to superstitious excesses. Their Church has sund^y blemishes:
Their Religion is mixed with errors: And gross abuses have crept into their
holy Orders. From these superstitious errors and abuses we were obliged to
separate our selves, wherein they had first separated themselves from their
Predecessors. So if there be Schism in the case, it was Schism in them to make
the first separation, and Virtue and Piety in us to make the second. I said
most truly that our positive Articles are those general truths about which
there is no controversy. Our negation is only of humane controve^ted
additions. Against this he excepts sundry ways, Quaest 14. de side A^t. 1.
First, Because our principal positive Article is that of justification by
special Faith, which (as he says) is most of all in controversy. Aquinas
makes a great difference between opinari and credere, between a scholasticall
opinion and a necessary Article of Faith. Sometimes the understanding does
fluctuate indifferently between the two parts of the contradiction: and this is
properly doubting. Sometimes it inclines more to the one part then to the
other, yet not without some fear or suspicion of the truth of the other part:
This is properly opinion. Sometimes the understanding is determined so as to
adhere perfectly to the one part: And this determination proceeds either from
the intelligible object, mediately or immediately; and this makes knowledge: Or
from the will upon consideration of the authority and truth of the revealer;
and this makes faith. Justification by special fa^^h no A^^icle of our Church.
Justification by special faith was never accounted an Article of the English
belief, either by the English Church, or by any genuine Son of the English
Church. If he trust not me, let him read over our Articles, and reading
satisfy himself. I confess some particular persons in England did sometimes
broach such a private Opinion, but our most learned and judicious Professors
did dislike it altogether at that time, as I have heard from some of
themselves. But shortly after it was in a manner generally rejected, as
Franciscus a Sancta Clara ingeniously confesses and jam hic novus error vix
natus apud nostrates sepultus est, Probl. 22.
and now this new error being scarcely born among our Countrymen was buried.
And more plainly elsewhere; Probl. 26.
quibus omnibus been pensatis, saene nulla body reperietur differentia in
confessione Anglica, and sanctissima definitione Tridentina, all which things
being duly weighed, truly there will be found noe difference at this day, in
the English confession, and the sacred definition of the Tridentine Council,
meaning about this Subject of justification.

But says he, if they be not points of our Faith, what do they in our
confessions of Faith? I answer they are inserted into our confessions, not as
supplements of our Creed, or new Articles, but as explanations of old Articles,
and refutations of their supposititious Principles. Contraries being placed
together by one another, do make one another more apparent.

Our negatives no Articles of Faith.
He proceeds. Have not Protestants a positive faith of their negative
Articles? as w^ll as of their positive Articles. Commandments may be either
affirmative or negative; and the negative Commandments bind more firmly then
the affirmative, because the affirmative bind always, but not to the actual
exercise of obedience at all times, semper, but not ad semper. But negative
Commandments bind both semper and ad semper, both always, and to all times.
But we find no negatives in the rule of Faith: For the rule of Faith consists
of such supernatural truths, as are necessary to be known of every Christian,
not only necessitate praecepti, because God has commanded us to believe them,
but also necessitate medii, because without the knowledge of them in some
tolerable degree, according to the measure of our capacities, we cannot in an
ordinary way attain to salvation. How can a negative be a means. Non entis
nulla est efficacia. In the Apostles Creed, from the beginning to the end, we
find not the least negative Particle: And if one or two negatives were added
in the subsequent ages, as that, begotten not made, in the Nicene Creed; they
were added not as new Articles, but as explanations of the old, to meet with
some emergent errors, or difficulties, just as our negatives were.

Yea though perhaps some of our negatives were revealed truths, and
consequently were as necessary to be believed when they are known as
affirmatives; yet they do not therefore become such necessary truths or
Articles of Religion, as make up the rule of Faith. I suppose yet further, that
though some of our negatives can be deduced from the positive fundamental
Articles of the Creed, some evidently some probably, as the necessity of the
consequence is more or less manifest: For it is with consequences as it was
with Philo's row of iron Rings; the first that touched the Lodestone did hang
more firmly; the rest which were more remote still more loosly. I say in such
a case that no man was bound to receive them, either as Articles, or as
Consequences, but only he that has the light to see them, nor he further then
the evidence does invite him. And howsoever they are no new Articles, but
Corollaries or deductions from the old. So grossly is he mistaken on all sides,
when he says that Protestants (he should say the English Church if he would
speak to the purpose,) have a positive belief, that the Sacrament is not the
body of Christ. Which were to contradict the words of Christ, this is my body.
He knows better, that Protestants do not deny the thing, but their bold
determination of the manner by transubstantiation; themselves; confessing that
the manner is incomprehensible by humane reason. Neither do Protestants place
it among the Articles of the Faith, but the opinions of the Schools.

Sect. 7.
He acknowledges, That if I had a true preparation of mind to believe
whatsoever the true real Catholic Church universally believes and
practices, An implicit submission to the Catholic Church sufficient to
salvation.
the matter were ended. But he adds that by the Catholic Church, I mean an
imaginary Church, or multitude of whatsoever Christians, Catholics, Heretics,
Schismatics, w^^ agree in fundamental points, but disagree in other points of
Faith, and wholly in communion of Sacraments, and ministry of them. I accept
this offer, and I tie him to his word. If he stand to this ground, there are no
more controversies between him and me for the future but this one, what is the
true Catholic Church, whether the Church of Rome alone with all its
Dependents, or the Church of the whole World, (...)
Roman, Grecian, Armenian, Abyssene, Russian, Protestant, which after all their
brags of amplitude and universality, is three times greater then themselves. I
desire no fairer issue between him and me. I do from my heart submit to all
things which the true Catholic Church, diffused over the World, does believe
and practice. And if I should err in my judgment what the Catholic Church
is, as I am confident that he and his fellows do err, though I have no
reason in the world to suspect my present judgment, I do furthermore pro^ess
my readiness to submit to the right Catholic Church, whenever God shall be
pleased to reveal it to me. This is sufficient to preserve me from being a
Schismatic: This is sufficient for the salvation of a Christian.

He tells us indeed sometimes that the Roman Church is the true Catholic
Church, and is diffused all over the World. Let him take Roman in the largest
sense he can; yet still it is but a particular Church of one denomination, not
Catholic or Universal. Whom have they of their Communion in the large
Abystene Empire, consisting of seventeen Kingdoms? Not one. Whom have they of
their Communion in the Russian Empire nearer home? Scarcely one. Whom have they
of their Communion in all the Eastern Churches? perhaps two or three
hand-fulls, in comparison of those innumerable multitudes of Christians, who
are subject to the other Patriarchs. Papists agree not what is their infall^ble
proponent.
Before they were so forward and positive in voting for themselves, that they
are the Catholic Church, that they are the infallible Judge, it had been meet
that they had first agreed among themselves what this Catholic Church is, to
which every Christian is bound to submit, whether it be the virtuall Church,
that is the Pope, or the Pope jointly with his Conclave of Cardinals, or the
Pope with a provincial Council, or the Pope with a general Council, that is
the representative Church, or a general Council without the Pope, or lastly
the essential Church dispersed over the face of the World; for into so many
opinions they are divided.

He adds that these great multitudes of Christians, whereof we speak, are not
united among themselves, but divided in points of Faith, in communion of
Sacraments, and the ministry of them* Aust. epist. 48. The name of Catholic
from universal Communion, not right belief.
Let Saint Austine answer him, Acutum autem aliquid videris dicere, cum
Catholicae nomen non ex totius orbis Communione interpretaris, sed ex
observatione Praeceptorum omnium divinorum, atque omnium Sacramentorum. Thou
seem to thy self to speak very wittily, when thou do not interpret the
Catholic Church by the Communion of the whole World, but by the Catholic
Faith, and the right observation of all the Sacraments, and true Discipline,
that is, in their sense, submission to the Roman Court. This last badge, which
Saint Austin did not know, is the only defect of those multitudes of
Christians, that they will not acknowledge the monarchical Power of the Roman
Bishop. As we have seen by experience, that when some few of these Eastern or
Northern Christians have reconciled themselves to the Sea of Rome, and
acknowledged the Papacy, they were straight adjudged Orthodox and sound
Christians, in all other things. And the latter of these did provide expressly
for themselves at the time of their submission, c. 2 sect. 6.
that they would retein their Greekish Religion and Rites. He himself in this
very place confesses them to agree in fundamental points, that is, to be free
from fundamental errors. And for other lesser Controversies, they have not
half so many among them, as the Romanists among themselves.

As to his marginall note out of Turtullian, That Heretici pacem cum omnibus
miscent, Heretics mingle themselves with all Sects, making it a Symtome of
Heresy, to be over easy in admitting others to their Communion. More
dangerous to exclude then to include others in our Communion.
I do confess it is a fault indeed. But first what does this concern the
Church of England? Secondly, the greater fault lies on the other hand, to be
over severe, and over vigorous and censorious in casting out, or holding others
from their Communion, and more dangerous to the Church of Christ. In this kind
offended the Donatists, the Novatians, the Luciferians of old: And the
Romanists at this day. This has more of the Patriarchall Garb in it, stand
from me for I am holier then thou.

CHAP. 7. That all Princes and Republiks of the Roman Communion, do in effect
the same things which King Henry did.
WE are come now unto his seventh Chapter, The politic Supremacy of Princes in
Ecclesiastical causes.
wherein I am much beholden to him for easing me of the labor of replying. For
whereas I proved my intention at large by the Acts, Laws, and Decrees of the
Emperors, with their Councels, and Synods, and Electorall College, by the Laws
of France, the Liberties of the Gallicane Church, the Acts of their
Parliaments, and Declarations of their Universities, by the practice of the
King of Spain, his Councels, his Parliaments, in Sicily, in Castile, in Brabant
and Flanders, by the sobbes of Portugal, and their bleatings, and the Judgment
of the University of Lisbone, by the Laws and Proclamations and other Acts of
the Republic of Venice, throughout 68 pages. He vouchsafes not to take notice
of any one particular of all this, except only some few heads, of what I urged
concerning the Emperors, which he recites in less then one page, and never
attempts to answer one syllable of them in particular. Yet are these so
diametrally opposite to the pretended rights of the Pope, his Legislative
power, his convocating of Synods, his confirming Synods, his sending out Bulls,
his receiving Appeals, his Patronage of Churches, his Pardons and
Dispensations, his Exemption from all humane judgment, his sending of Legates,
his Tenths and first Fruits, his Superiority above general Councels, his
Excommunications, and in a word his whole Spiritual Sovereignty, that nothing
can be more opposite. In these presidents we did clearly see that essential
power and right of Sovereignty, which I plead for in this Book, to make
Ecclesiastical Laws for the external regiment of the Church, to dispose of
Ecclesiastical preferments, to reform Ecclesiastical errors and abuses, to be
the last Judges of their own liberties and grievances, to restrain
Ecclesiastical tyranny, and to see that all Ecclesiastical persons within
their Dominions do their duties. And if these instances were not enough, many
more might be produced of the best Christian Princes. Paul the third writ to
Charles the fifth, Hist conc. Trid. An. 1544
That the Decrees of Spira were dangerous to his Soul, commands him to put away
all disputes of Religion from the Imperial Diet, and refer them to the Pope,
to order nothing concerning Ecclesiastical goods, to revoke the grants made
unto the Rebels against the Sea of Rome. Otherwise he should be forced to use
greater severity against him then he would. An. 1545.
Yet Cardinal de Monte was more angry then his Master, saying, That he would
put his Holiness in mind, rather to abandon the Sea, and restore the Keys to
Saint Peter, then suffer the Secular power to arrogate Authority to determine
causes of Religion. The Emperor did not trouble himself much at it. But the
Pope having created three Spanish Cardinals he forbad them to accept the arms,
or use the name or habit. And not long after published a Reformation of the
Clergy, An. 1548.
containing twenty three points, First, of Ordination and Election of
Ministers, Secondly of the Office of Ecclesiastical Orders, Thirdly of the
Office of Deans and Canons, Fourthly of Canonical hours, Fifthly of
Monasteries, Sixthly of Schools and Universities, Seventhly of Hospitals,
Eighthly of the Office of a Preacher, Ninthly of the Administration of the
Sacraments, Tenthly of the Administration of Baptism, Eleventhly of the
Administration of Confirmation, Twelfthly of Ceremonies, Thirteenthly of the
Mass, Fourteenth^y of the Administration of Penitence, Fifteenthly of the
Administration of extreme Unction, Sixteenthly of the Administration of
Matrimomy, Seventeenthly of Ecclesiastical Ceremonies, Eighteenthly of the
Discipline of the Clergy and People, Nineteenthly of plurality of Benefices,
Twentithly of the Discipline of the People, One and twentithly of Visitations,
Two and twentithly of Councels, Three and twentithly of Excommunication.
Charles the fifth and the German Diet did assume to themselves a Legislative
power in Ecclesiastical causes. None of our Princes was ever more devoted to
Rome then Queen Mary, yet when Paul the 4th revoked Cardinal Poolos Legantine
power in England, and designed one Petus a Franciscan to come Legate in his
place, She shut all the Ports of England against all messengers from Rome, and
commanded all the Briefs (and Bulls) to be taken from the bearers and delivered
unto her. So well was she satisfied that no Roman Legate has any thing to do
in England, without the Princes license. But I have brought instances enough,
until he be pleased to take notice of them.

To all which he returns no answer, but these general words. Seeing L. D. has
alleged diverse facts of Catholic Princes in disobeying Papal Authority, and
thence infers that they did as much as King Henry, who not only disobeyed,
but denied Papal Authority, let us allege both more ancient and greater
Emperors who have professed that they had no Authority in Ecclesiastical
causes, and avowed Papal Authority. After this rate he may survey the whole
World in a few minutes. Let the Reader judge whether I have not just cause to
call upon him for an answer. Are they only diverse facts of Catholic Princes?
By his leave they are both facts, and decrees and constitutions, and Laws and
Canons, of the most famous Emperors and Princes of Christendom, with their
Dyets and Parliaments and Synods, and Councels, and Universities. Or does it
seem to him that they only disobeyed Papal Authority? When he reads them over
more attentively, he will find that they have not only disobeyed Papal
Authority, but denied it, as he says Henry the 8th did, in all the principal
parts and branches of it, which are in controversy between them and us. Nay
they have not only denied to the Pope that which he calls Papal Authority, to
Convocate Synods, to confirm Synods, to make Ecclesiastical Laws, to dispose
of Ecclesiastical preferments, to receive the last Appeals in Ecclesiastical
causes, but they have exercised it themselves: They have disposed of the
Papacy, they have deposed the Popes, they have shut out his Legates, they have
Appealed from his sentences, they have not suffered their Subjects to go upon
his Summons, they have caused his Decrees to be torn in pieces most
disgracefully, and made Edicts and Statutes, and pragmaticall sanctions against
his usurpations, they have regulated the Clergy, and reformed the Churches
within their Dominions. And when they thought fit during their pleasures they
have stopped all entercouse with Rome. The Kings of Spain suffer no more
Appeals from Sicily to the Court of Rome, then our Princes from England, and
exercise all manner of Ecclesiastical Jurisdction by Delegates, which certainly
neither they, nor other Princes would do, if they did at all believe, that the
Papacy was an universal Spiritual Monarchy, instituted by Christ.

But it seems that he delights more in the use of his sword then of his
buckler, and in stead of repelling my arguments, he busieth himself in making
new knots for me to untie. He knows well that this is no logical proceeding.
And I might justly serve him with the same sauce. But I seek only the clear
discovery of truth: and will pursue his steps throughout his oppositions. The
Oath of Supremacy justified.
The first thing that he objecteth to me is the oath of Supremacy made by King
Henry and his Church, in which oath (says he) are sworn five things: First,
that the King of England is not only Governor, but only and supreme Governor.
Secondly, not only in some, but in all ecclesiastical things and causes.
Thirdly, as well in all ecclesiastical causes as temporal. Fourthly, that no
foreign Prelate has any spiritual Jurisdiction in England. Fifthly, all
foreign Jurisdiction is renounced. This he is pleased to call the first new
Creed of the English Protestant Church, by which it is become both heretical
and schismatic. Before I give a distinct answer to this objection, it will
be needful in the first place to put him in mind of some things which I have
formerly demonstrated to him touching this particular, which he has been
pleased to pass by in silence. First, Sand. de Schism. p 59. De Schis. Ang p.
57. Hail an. 22. H. 8.
who it was that first presented this Title to King Henry, Archbishop Warrham
(whom Sanders calls an excellent man) and a Popish Convocation? Secondly, who
confirmed this. Title unto him? Four and twenty Bishops, and nine and twenty
Abbats in Parliament, none dissenting. There was not one Protestant among them
all. Thirdly, who were the flatterers of King Henry, that preached up his
Supremacy, and printed books in defense of this Supremacy, and set forth
Catachism^s to instruct the Subjects and teach them what the Supremacy was; who
contrived and penned this very Oath, and were the first that took it
themselves, and incited all others to take it, even Bishop Gardener, Tonstall,
Heath, Bonner, Stokesley, Thurelby, etc. all R. C. his Friends, the greatest
Opposers of the reformation, and the roughest Persecuters of Protestants.
Lastly, consider what I cited out of Cardinal Poole, Pol de Conc Resp. ad qu
74. and 75.
That God the Father has assigned this Office to Christian Emperors, that they
should act the part of Christ the Son of God, And again, the Pope as a Priestly
Head does execute the Office of Christ the true Head, but we may also truly say
that the Emperor does execute the Office of Christ as a Kingly Head.

These things being premised to dull the edge of his argument, now I proceed to
a direct answer: and first I charge him with chopping and changing the words of
the Oath. The words of the Oath are these, That the Kings Highness is the only
supreme Governor in this Realm: But in paraphrasing upon them, and pressing
them, he renders them thus, not only Governor, but only and supreme Governor.
There is a vast difference between these two, to say the King is the only
supreme Governor of the Realm of England, which signifies no more but this,
that there is no other supreme Governor of the Realm but he, which is most
true: and to say that he is the only and supreme Governor, which implies that
there is no other Governor but he, which is most false: There are both
spiritual and civil Governors in England besides him. To say the Pope is the
only supreme Bishop in his own Patriarchate, is most true, but to say that he
is the only and supreme Bishop in his Patriarchate, is most false: this were to
degrade all his Suffragans, and allow no Bishop in his Province but himself.

Secondly, I answer that there is no Supremacy ascribed to the King in this
Oath, but merely political, which is essentially annexed to the Imperial
Crown of every sovereign Prince. The Oath says, that the Kings Highness is the
only supreme Governor of his Highness Realms and Dominions. What does Saint
Peter himself say less to his own Successors as well as others? 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King as supreme. How often does Saint Gregory acknowledge the Emperor to
be his supreme Governor, or sovereign Lord? and profess obedience and
Subjection unto him, and execute his commands in ecclesiastical things? That
Commonwealth is miserable and subject to the clashing of Jurisdictions, where
there are two Supremes, like a Serpent with two heads at either end one.

The Oath adds in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or causes. This is
true with some limitations; as first either by himself or by fit Substitutes,
who are ecclesiastical Persons. For our Kings cannot excommunicate or absolve
in their own persons. Secondly, it is to be understood of those causes which
are handled in foro contentioso, in the exterior Court, not in the inner Court
of Conscience. Thirdly, either in the first or in the second instance, by
receiving the appeals and redressing the wrongs of his injured Subjects. Some
things are so purely spiritual that Kings have nothing to do in them in their
own persons, as the preaching of the Word, the administration of the
Sacraments, and the binding and loosing of Sinners. Yet the persons to whom the
discharge of these Duties does belong, and the persons toward whom these
Duties ought to be discharged being their Subjects, they have a Power paramount
to see that each of them do their duties in their several stations. The
causes indeed are ecclesiastical, but the power of governing is political.
This is the true sense of the Oath, neither more nor less, as appears plainly
by our thirty seventh Article. A^t. ^ccl. Angl., Art. 37.
Where we attribute to our Princes the chief government, by which Titles we
understand the minds of some slanderous Folks to be offended; we give not to
our Princes the ministering either of Gods Word or of the Sacraments, but that
only prerogative which we see to have been given always to all godly Princes
in holy Scriptures by God himself: this is that they should rule all Estates
and Degrees committed to their charge by God, whether they be ecclesiastical
or temporal, and restrein with the civil Sword the stubborn or evil doers.
Here is no power asserted, no punishment to be inflicted by the King in his own
person, but only political. I confess persons deputed and delegated by the
King, do often excommunicate and absolve, and act by the power of the Keys,
but this is by the virtue of their own habit of Jurisdiction. All which the
King contributes by his Commission, is a liberty and power to act in this
particular case, and an application of the matter, which a Lay Patron, or a
Master of a Family, Memor. de Samag. Catholic^. cap. 10.
or a subordinate Magistrate may do, much more a sovereign Prince. This power
many Roman Catholic Doctors do justify. The King of Spain cites above twenty
of them. Let the Princes of this World know that they owe an account to God of
the Church, which they have received from him into their protection, for
whether peace and right ecclesiastical Discipline be increased, or decayed by
Christian Princes, God will require an account from them, who has trusted his
Church unto their Power. All this Power the King of Spain exercises in Sicily,
in all ecclesiastical causes, over all ecclesiastical persons, as well in the
first instance as the second. This Power a Lay-Chanceller exercises in the
Court Christian, This Power a very Abbess exercises in the Roman Church over
her Nuns. Whilst all the Mariners are busied in their several employments,
the sovereign Magistrate sits at the Stern to command all, and order all for
the promotion of the great Architectonicall end, that is the safty and welfare
of the Commonwealth.

It follows in the O^th [ as well as temporall] that is, as truly and as
justly, but not as fully, nor as absolutely. [ And that no foreign Prelate has
or ought to have any Jurisdiction or Authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual
within this Realm. That is to say, neither the Pope nor his Court. For a
general Council which is no standing Court, but an aggregate body, composed
partly of our selves, is neither included here nor intended. If this be the new
Creed of the English Protestant Church, as he calls it in scorn, it was the old
Creed of the Britannick Church, as I have proved evidently in the vindication.
If this profession of Royal Supremacy in our sense do make men Heretics and
Schismatics, we shall sweep away the most part of the Roman Doctors along with
us. And for Sovereign Princes we shall leave them few, except some necessitous
person, who could not subsist otherwise then by the favorable influence of the
Roman Court. A Sancta Clara. Expos. Parapb in Art. 37
Very many Doctors do hold that for the common good of the Republic, Princes
have Jurisdiction in many causes otherwise Subject to the Ecclesiastical
Court, not only by the positive Law of God, but by the Law of Nature. And many
more give them a power indirectly in causes Ecclesiastical over
Ecclesiastical persons, so far as is necessary for the preservation of the
Peace and Tranquillity of the Commonwealth, nec putem ullum Doctorem Catholicum
refragari, Ibidem.
says the same Author in the place cited, Neither do I think that any
Catholic Doctor will be against it.

Now I have said my mind concerning the Oath of Allegiance, who they were that
first contrived it, and in what sense we do maintain it, I hope agreably to
the sense of the Christian World, except such as are prepossessed with
prejudice for the Court of Rome. As our Kings out of Reverence to Christ did
freely lay by the title of Supreme heads of the English Church, so though it
be not meet for me to prevent their maturer determinations, I should not be
displeased if out of a tender consideration of the consciences of Subjects, who
may err out of invincible ignorance, they would be pleased to lay by the oath
also. God looks upon his Creatures with all their prejudices, why should not
man do the same? It seems to be hard measure to destroy men for mere
speculative opinions, which it may be are not in their own power, so long as
there is neither blasphemy nor sedition in the case. It is often easier to
secure a man's actions, then to cure the errors of his judgment.

In the next place he charge me with contradicting of my self, Sect. 2.
because I say, the Emperors and other Princes of the Roman communion have done
the same things in effect, No contradiction in my words.
with the King of England; and in another place I confess, that the Kings of
England have abolished the Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome, but the Emperors
have not. This, he faith, is to give myself the lie. Certainly he was in some
heat or passion when this word of disgrace dropped from his pen, as commonly
disputers are, when they find that they have gotten the wrong end of the
staff. If he had advisedly read over my assertion it is this, that either they
have done the same thing in effect, or at least have pleaded for it. If either
part of the disjunction be true, my assertion is a truth, and no contradiction,
much less a lie, which implies that it is both against truth and against
conscience. Now I have showed clearly in the vindication, that they have not
only pleaded it, but sworn it, that they would maintain the Rites, Liberties,
and Customs of the Empire inviolated, against the Pope and the Court of Rome.
And that they have protested that they would not have his Holiness to be
ignorant that they neither could nor would endure his intolerable pressures
any longer, but would vindicate themselves.

Further, to do the same thing in effect, does not signify to do the same
individual action, nor always the same specificall action, but only that
which argues the same power, or implies the same consequences. If an ordinary
do suspend a Clerk from his Benefice, or degrade him from his holy Orders, so
long as the question is only whether he be under Jurisdiction of the ordinary,
it is all one in effect, whilst the one proves the intention as well as the
other. If a thief st^ale a shilling or a pound, it is not the same thing in
effect, because the Thief pretends no right to what he takes; But if a
Magistrate impose a tribute of a shilling or a pound, where the question is
only whether he have power to impose tribute or not, it is all one in effect;
for his title is as just to the one as to the other, and as he imposes a
shilling to day, so he may, if he have occasion, impose a pound to morrow. The
whole and all the parts are the same in effect: The Emperors have done all the
particular Acts which the Kings of England have done concerning Patronage,
Investitures, Legislation, Reformation, Legates, Appeals, Tenths, first Fruits,
etc. And moreover have deposed Popes, which the Kings of England never
attempted to do, though they have not made one general Act of abolition. Why
is not this the same in effect? He that satisfies a debt in Pistols and he who
satisfies it in cracked Groats, do both the same thing in effect. To
conclude, they who assume the right to be the last Judges of their own
Liberties and Privileges, in all differences between them and the Court of
Rome, do the same thing in effect, whether the respective Privileges of the
one or the other be more or less; But the Emperors and the Kings of England did
assume to themselves the right to be the last Judges of their own Liberties and
Privileges, in all differences between them and the Court of Rome. And
therefore though the one might take or mistake himself to be within the old
Roman Patriarchate, which the other was not, or whatsoever other differences
there might be in the extent of their Liberties, or in their claims, yet they
did the same thing in effect. The only difference between the Emperors and
Henry the eight is this, that they denied the Papacy in parcells, and he denied
it in gross; They denied his Sovereign Legislative power they denied his
Patronage of Churches, they denied his Investitures of Bishops, they denied his
Superiority above general Counsels, they denied his Tenths, and first Fruits,
and Pardons, and Indulgences, and Dispensations. So they pulled away his stolen
feathers one by one, and Henry the eighth uncased him all at once, but except
some Patriarchall Rites, (which Britain never acknowledged, which are no parts
of the Papacy,) they left him as naked the one as the other. This I might well
call the same thing in effect.

Sect. 3.
Now are we come to take a view of his witnesses, to try if he be more fortunate
in offending then he is in defending. Constantine.
But truly they are such, that their very names and their well known acts do
sufficiently confute all his evidence. Ruffin. l. 1. c. 2.
The first is Constantine the great, who professed openly that he could not
judge of Bishops. No such thing. He said only, that they could not be judged of
all men. When all men have imperial power his argument will have more force in
it, but nothing to his purpose. The only question between us is about the
Papacy, and his proof makes only for the privileges of Episcopacy. Whatsoever
Constantine did at this time was a mere prudentiall act. He had convocated the
Bishops together against Arrius; and instead of endeavoring to suppress the
common enemy, they fell into quarrels and mutual complaints one against
another, about businesses of no moment. Constantine seeing, quod per hujusmodi
jurgia causa summi negocii frustraretur, that the main business against Arrius
was hindered by these unreasonable brawlings, and ne innotesceret ulli hominum,
etc. to prevent scandal, that the faults and contentions of Priests might not
appear to the world, he suppressed them, and referred them to the judgment of
God. This was a more prudent course, and more conducible at that time to the
advantage of Christian Religion, then to have examined every scandalous
accusation of one against another. Theodorit. l. 1. c. 11.
Yet even in this there appears sufficient proof of Constantines judiciary
power over the Bishops. First, they did all offer their mutual accusations one
of another to him, as to their proper Judge: Secondly, he commanded them all to
put their accusations in writing, and to deliver them to his hands: Thirdly, he
bound them all up in a bundell and sealed them: Fourthly, he made them friends,
and then burned them in their presence, and imposed upon them a perpetual
amnesty or law of forgetfullness. All these were judiciary Acts. It is true
Constantine honored Bishops very much; he made them his companions in his
voyages, his fellow commoners at his table; he cast his Cloak over their
faults. But this was not for want of judiciary power over them, Eusebius. de vita
Constant. l. 1. c. 35.
but because they were consecrated to God, and he believed that in thus doing
God would become propitious to him. But at other times, the case is as clear as
the Sun, Idem, l 3. c. 23
He prescribed to the Bishops those things which did pertain to the profit of
the Churches. He referred the cause of Caecilianus (an Ecclesiastical cause)
to Miltiades Bishop of Rome, and Marcus, and Rhetecius, and Maternus, and
Marinus, as his Delegates or Commissioners, Eusebius. hist. l. 10. c. 5. Aust.
epist. 162.
visum est mihi, it has seemed good to me, etc. He accepted Appeals from the
judgment of the Bishops: He commanded Caecilianus to repair to Anilinus the
Proconsul, Eusebius hist. l. 10. c. 6.
and Patritius Vicar of the Prefects, as deputed and authorized by him as
Judges to do justice upon Ecclesiastical Delinquents. He sent for the Bishops
assembled by his commandment at a Council first at Tyrus, then at Jerusalem,
that they should repair with speed to Constantinople, Socrat. l. 1. c. 22.
evestigio ad castra nostra maturetis, to give an account to him of their
actions, and to show how sincerely they had behaved themselves in their
judgments. Sozom l. 2. c. 27.
In a word, he meddled so much in Ecclesiastical affairs, that he made himself
as a common Bishop constituted by God. Eusebius. de vit. Constable. l. 1. c. 37.
I will conclude with his own profession in an Epistle to the Nicomedians, If
we have chaste and orthodox Bishops and endowed with humanity, we rejoice; but
if any one shall audaciously and unadvisedly be vehemently affected to the
memory and praise of those pests Theodor. l. 1. c. 19
( Eusebius and other Bishops) he shall straight be repressed by my execution as
the Minister of God. And accordingly they were spoiled of their dignities, and
cast out of the Cities.

His second witness is Valentinian in an Epistle to Theodosius, Valentinian.
but which Valentinian, which Theodosius, where this Epistle is to be found, he
is silent, and leaves us, if it were worth the labor, to seek for a needle in
a bottle of hay. But the truth is, there is nothing in it which concerns this
question, nothing which we deny. The words, as they be alleged by him, are
these: All antiquity has given the Principality of Priesthood over all to the
Bishop of the City of Rome. Our question is concerning the Political
Principality of Kings and Emperors, and his answer is concerning the
Principality of Priesthood. Let them retain their Principality of Priesthood,
so they leave to Sovereign Princes their just Principality of Power. We are
ready to give them a principality of Priesthood if that would content them. And
neither all antiquity nor any antiquity did ever give them a principality of
Power: Or at least such a Supremacy of single, sovereign, monarchichall Power,
as they require, about which our controversy now is. A Lord chief Justice has
a principality of Order among his brother Judges of the same Coyfe and Bench,
and in some circumstantiall respects a kind of eminency or principality of
Power, but no single supremacy, so as to be able to cross their votes with a
non obstante. Such a supremacy of sovereing, single, universal power of
Priesthood the Church of God did never know, either at Rome or elsewhere. The
Bishops of Rome were so far from having power over general Counsels, that
they had no single power over their fellow Patriarchs. So far from having
power over Emperors, that they have been delegated by Emperors as their
Commissioners in Ecclesiastical causes, have been convened before Emperors,
and deposed by Emperors. Primitive Bishops use to style Popes their brethren,
their colleagues, their fellows, but never Ecclesiastical Princes. If he mean
the second Valentinian, his authority weighs nothing; he was a young Novice
misled by his Arrian Mother, a wilful ill-advised woman. If he mean another
Valentinian, I shall show him that he exercised this political Supremacy in
Ecclesiastical affaies, it may be to the questioning of his Prince of Priests.

Theodosius
His third witness is Theodosius the younger, in his Epistle to the Synod of
Ephesus, his words are these: It is not lawful for him that is not a Bishop to
meddle with Ecclesiastical matters. Yet he did meddle with Ecclesticall
matters. Socrat l 7. c. 22.
This is that Theodosius that argued with the Bishops upon the holy Scriptures,
as if himself had been a Bishop. This is that Theodosius which made this
following Law, Evagr. l. 9. c. 12.
We decree that who follow the ungodly faith of Nestorius, or obey his wicked
Doctrine, if they be Bishops, be cast out of the holy Churches; but if Lay men,
anathematized. This is that Theodosius that convocated the general Council of
Ephesus by his Authority Royal, and sent Candidianus thither to be his Deputy,
among other things set diligenter inspiceret, etc. to look diligently to the
behaviors of the Bishops, so see that no dissensions did arise among them, to
disturb the consultations of Synods; and to repress them likewise, otherwise
he might as well have staid at home. Among the instructions of Theodosius given
to Candidianus are the words alleged, Candidianum ad banc sacram Synodum abire
jussimus, sed eae lege, etc. We command Candidianus to go to this holy Synod,
but upon this condition, that he should have nothing to do with questions and
controversies which concern Doctrines of faith, for it is unlawful for one not
registered in the catalogue of Bishops, to thrust himself into ecclesiastical
affairs and consultations. This is as much as to say that Candidianus was not
sent by the Emperor to dispute in the Council about Theological questions,
which it is probable he did not understanding, nor to overawe the Bishops or
controlle their votes. We are of the same mind with Theodosius, and say as
much as he, that it is not fit for every man promiscuously to dispute of
Theological questions: And though we give the severeign Regiment of the Church
in some sense to Princes within their own Dominions yet we would not have them
to govern it upon their own heads, but upon mature advise of free Synods of
Ecclesiastical persons, who are their proper Counselors in Church affairs.
All men know that Candidianus could have no decisive voice in a general
Council. So we would not have Princes meddle with the Keys of the Church,
either the Key of Knowledge or the Key of Order. We confess that some causes
in the first instance belong properly to Bishops, yet the last Appeal may be to
the King. We say there are many things which Kings cannot do in their own
persons, and yet may be done by fit Delegates by their Royal authority.

Valentinian the elder.
His fourth witness is Valentinian the elder: It is not lawful for me who am of
the People, to search curiously such matters; Sozo. l. 6 c. 7.
let Priests who have care of these things meet where they please. The case was
this, Valentinian had associated his Brother Valens with him in the Empire.
Idem l. 6. c. 6.
Valens was an Arrian, Valentinian an orthodox Christian; yet so as he troubled
not those who were of a contrary Opinion. He being at this time in his voyage
through Thracia toward Rome, the orthodox Bishops about the Hellespont, and in
Bythinia, sent their Depuities unto him, to request him to give them leave to
assemble together in Council, for the establishment of the right Faith,
wherein they acknowledged him the political Head of the Church. It was
concerning the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, in so sublime a
question, concerning the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, in this
exigence of affairs, being in his voyage, in the presence of his Brother and
fellow Emperor, who was an Arrian, and a great persecutor of all those who held
the consubstantiality of the Son with the Father, whose Subjects these Bishops
were, as they found to their cost presently after his return from accompanying
of his Brother some part of his way; what more prudent or more plausible answer
could so moderate a Prince have given, then that he did give? Though we give to
Sovereign Princes within their own Dominions a Legislative power in
Ecclesiastical causes, yet not without good advise, especially in such high
points of Faith as that was, and who are more fit Counselors for Princes in
such cases then Synods, and Bishops? The same method is observed by us at this
day. The Synod contrives fit Articles and Canons, and the King confirms them
and makes them Laws. But did Valentinian nothing himself in such cases, but
leave all to Priests? No. He himself confirmed the consubstantiality of the Son
with the Father, quam etiam nostra celsitudo passim praedicari mandavit, Theod.
l 4, c 7, and 8.
Which our Highness has commanded to be Preached every where. This very
Valentinian was one of the Authors of that famous Law to repress the
covetousness of the Clergy, which Saint Ambrose and Saint Hierome do so much
complain of, not against the Emperors who made the Law, but against the Clergy
who deserved it. cod.
In the Code we find Ecclesiastical Laws made by this very Valentinian, as
that to Florianus, That a Bishop rebaptizing one who had been formerly
Baptized, out of ignorance of the Law, should be deprived of his Bishopric. It
was this very Valentinian of whom Theodorit, speaks, that in Occidentem
profectus, etc. Going into the West he furnished that Region with excellent
Laws, and did begin with the Preaching of true Piety. He convocated the
Bishops and commanded them in the place of Auxentius an Arrian, to choose an
Orthodox Bishop for the Sea of Millaine, and after some debates they did choose
Saint Ambrose. Some may say if it was his right, why did he not choose him
himself? I answer that the Synod of Bishops did desire him to choose one, as
knowing his right, and when Saint Ambrose was chosen and refused for a time,
jubet Ambrosium extemplo and initiari mysteriis, and Episcopum ordinari, The
Emperor commanded him forthwith to be initiated in the holy Mysteries, Th^od l
4. c. 5.
and to be ordained Bishop. Neither was this the case of Constantine, In
praemio l. 5.
or Theodosius, or Valentinian alone, Socrates writes more generally, That from
Constantines time when the Emperors became Christians, Ecclesiastical affairs
seemed to depend upon their beck.

His fifth witness is Basilius. Basilius.
Basilius Emperor in the seventh Synod, speaks thus to the Laity. He is
mistaken, Basilius was no Emperor in the time of the seventh Synod, but
Constantine and Irene, but it is true that in the time of the 8th Synod
Basilius was Emperor and made a Speech to the Laity. The case is this, one
Bardas a Patrician and Michael the former Emperor by their unseasonable and
preposterous intermedling in Ecclesiastieall businesses had brought the
Oriental Church into great dangers, whereupon Basilius then Emperor uses
these words, An. 869.
Nullo modo nobis licet, etc. It is no way lawful for us (Laymen) to move
Speech of Ecclesiastical causes, nor at all to resist the whole Church, and
oppose an universal Synod. For the searching and inquisition into these things
belongs to Patriarchs, Bishops, and Priests. Basilius was in the right. It is
not lawful for Laymen to treat of Ecclesiastical causes in general Councels
as Bishops do, that is to say, to have decisive Voices, or to meddle above
their capacities, much less ought they frowardly to oppose general Councels,
or to vie reason for reason with them. The Bishops form of subscription was
this, Ego B. definiens subscrips^, I B. have subscribed to this as my
definition. The Laymans form was this, Ego L. consentiens subscrips^, I L. have
subscribed to this as giving my consent to it. There is a great difference
between defining, and consenting. But as Kings are never minors, because they
are presumed to h^ve a wise Council, so they are never to be considered as
ignorant Laymen, who have a learned Council of Ecclesiastical persons to
direct them. All this while he troubles himself to no purpose about the
deliberative part but medleth not at all with the authoritative part, which
only is in question between us. Sovereign Princes by their Royal Authority
have power to incorporate the Decrees of Councels into the Laws of the Land,
and to subject the violaters of them to civil punishments.

Charles the great
His sixth witness is Charles the great, Charles the great in Crantzius
professes that he gave the Church of Breme to Saint Wiliha^e by command of the
high Bishop and universal Pope Adrian, Albert Crantz. metr. l. 1. c. 7.
etc. by which words we see by whose Authority he meddled in Spiritual
matters. It is a great degree of confidence to dare to cite Charles the great,
to prove that it is not lawful for Sovereign Princes to meddle in
Ecclesiastical affairs, To cite him who convocated Councels yearly by his own
Authority, Vindicat. c. 7. page 167.
and reformed the Church. Who sat himself in Synods, not only as a hearer but
as a Judge, that is, with the advice of his Ecclesiastical Council, Auditor and
Arbiter adfui, and made Ecclesiastical Decrees in his own name, discernimus
and Deo donante decrevimus. Who made himself Judge of the Popes themselves, who
disposed by his own Authority not only of the Bishopric of Breme, which was
then a place but newly conquered by himself, and newly converted, but of all
the Bishoprics throughout the Empire, not excepting the Bishopric of Rome it
self. To whom this very Pope Adrian, whom he cites, with the Clergy and People
of Rome did solemnly resign, release, and acquit for ever all their claim,
right, and interest in the election of succeeding Popes. The case cited was
this. Saint Willehade was an Englishman sent by the English King and Bishops to
convert those Countries to the Christian Faith. Charles the great who had newly
conquered those parts, and desired much their conversion, finding the great
merits of this Wilehade remunerare se digno consti^uit Episcopatu, He resolved
to bestow a good Bishopric upon him. And therefore he called him forth and
commanded him to be consecrated Bishop of Breme. The case is as clear in the
history as the noon day. Charles the great founded and erected Bishoprics at
his pleasure, Episcopalem constituimus Cathedram, and gave them such
privileges as he thought fit, extat privilegium eidem Ecclesiae a memorato
Rege Collatum. He endowed the Churches, and commanded the inhabitants to pay
their Tithes and other duties to them, hoc nostro Majesta^is precepto. That was
not by the Authority of Pope Adrian. All the poor pretense which he catches
from hence, is, that Charles the great said that summi Pontificis and
universalis Episcopi Adriani praecepto, by the precept of the chief and
universal Bishop Adrian he had bestowed this Bishopric upon Wilehade. Yet all
men know, that praeceptum signifies a lesson, or instruction, or advise, as
well as a command. At the most it was but a complement, or command of courtesy,
or a ghostly advise, honored with that name, which is familiarly done. True
Patrons do dispose their Churches themselves, not give mandates to others to
dispose them for them. It were ridiculous to imagine that Charles the great was
the Patron of the Bishopric of Rome it self, (as without doubt he was,) and
that he was not the Patron of the Church of Breme which he had newly conquered,
or that Adrian who resigned Rome should continue Patron of Breme.

Epist. ad Joan. 2. in Cedice
His seventh witness is Justinian to Pope John the second, We suffer not any
thing which belongs to the state of Churches not to be known to your Holiness,
who is the Head of all holy Churches. I wish he had been pleased to set down
the title of the Letter, Justinian
Victor Justinianus, pius, faelix, inclytus, triumphator, semp^r Augustus,
Joanni Sanctissimo Archiepiscopo almae Vrbis Romae, and Patriarchae, Where
Archbishop and Patriarch are his highest titles, there is no Monarchy intended.
The words are rightly cited, saving that he omitteth a clause in the middle, [
although that which is changed be manifest and undoubted,] and a dangerous
reason at the end [ for in all things as it is said we hasten to augment the
honor and authority of your See.] If the Papacy had been a Spiritual Monarchy
instituted by Christ, it did not lie in Justinians power to augment it. But it
is plain the honor and authority of the Roman See proceeded from the bounty of
Christian Emperors, and the Decrees of the Fathers. Neither is there any thing
in the words above mentioned worthy of a reply. Suppose Justinian made known
his own Ecclesiastical Ordinances to the Pope, to the end that he might obey
them and execute them. This is no great matter. So does a Sovereign Prince to
every Governor of an inferior Corporation. Laws are no Laws until they be
promulged. If the Pope had made the Laws, and made them known to the Emperor
it had been more to his purpose. But all the strength of his argument lies in
these words who is Head of all holy Churches. And yet he cannot choose but know,
that Justinian does mean and must of necessity mean an Head of Order, and
cannot possibly mean an Head of Power and Jurisdiction, having himself exalted
several other Churches as Iustiniana and Carthage to an equal degree of Power
and Privileges with Rome it self. A man may see to what streits he is driven,
when he is forced to produce such witnesses as Charles the great and Justinian,
I say Justinian who banished Pope Silverius, who created Iustiniana prima and
Carthage new Patriarchates by his Imperial Power, who made so many Laws
concerning Ecclesiastical persons, and Benefices, and holy Orders, and
Appeals, and the Patronage of Churches, concerning Religion, the Creed,
Sacraments, Heresy, Schism, Sanctuaries, Simony, and all matters of
Ecclesiastical cognizance, that if all other presidents ancient and modern
were lost, Justinians alone, who was the Father of the Imperial Law, were
sufficient to evince the political Supremacy of Sovereign Princes over the
Church within their own Dominions.

His three last witnesses, are King Edgar, King Withred, and Edward the third.
But these three have been produced by him before in this very treatise and
there fully answered, Sup. c. 4. sect. 1.
and seeing no new weight is added in this place to his former discourse, I
will not weary the Reader or my self with unnecessary repetitions.

CHAP. 8. That the Pope and Court of Rome are most guilty of the Schism.
WE are come now to my sixth and last ground that the guilt of the Schism rests
upon the Pope and the Court of Rome. The first thing which I meet with is his
marginall note out of Saint Austin, L 2. Cont. Petili. c. 51.
Cathedra quid tibi fecit Ecclesiae Romanae? What hurt has the Sea of Rome
done thee? But first, Petilians case to whom those words were spoken, is not
our case. He called all the Catholic Sees thoughout the World, Chairs of
Pestilence, so do not we. Neither does Saint Austin attribute any thing
singular to the Sea of Rome in this place, more then to the Sea of Jerusalem,
or any other Catholic See. Si omnes per totum orbem tales essent quales
vanissime criminaris, Cathedra tibi quid fecit Ecclesiae Romanae, in qua Petrus
sedit, and in qua hodie Anastatius sedet, vel Ecclesiae Hierosolymitanae in qua
Jacobus sedit, and in qua hodie Joannes sedet? Quibus nos in Catholica unitate
connectimur, and a quibus vos nefario furore separastis. It is not we that have
furiously separated our selves from either of these Sees. But it is the Court
of Rome which has made the separation both from Jerusalem, and from us.

In the next place he inquireth what I intend by this present Schism, whether
the Schism of Protestants in general, or of English Protestants in particular?
and whether by causually I understand a sufficient cause that freeth from
sin? Doubtless I must understand a sufficient cause that freeth the innocent
party from sin, or understand nothing: For an unsufficient cause is no cause:
But his induction is imperfect. I do neither understand the Schism of the
Protestant Church in general, nor the Schism of the English Church in
particular, but directly the Schism of the Roman Church, which did first give
just cause of separation, not only to Protestant Churches, but to all the
Eastern Churches; and then did make the separation by their unjust and
uncharitable censnres. But he says there can be no just cause of Schisms. The
greater is their fault who are the true Schismatics; first, by giving just
cause of separation from their errors, and then making the separation by their
censures. It is true, there can be no just cause of criminous Schism, because
there can be no just cause of sin: It is not lawful to do evil that good
may come of it. But there may be both just cause of separation, and just
separation without any crime or sin, yea virtuous and necessary, as is
confessed by themselves. Sup c. 2. s. 4 infid. unmasked c. 7 s. 112. p. 534.
In all such cases the sin of criminous Schism lies at their doors, who
introduced the errors, and thereby first separated themselves from the
uncorrupted Church which was before them.

Before he come to answer my arguments he proposes an objection of his own,
that neither the Church, nor Court of Rome did give any sufficient cause of
separation either to Luther or to Henry the eighth. In prosecution whereof he
supposes that Luther had no cause of separation but the abuse of some
Preachers of indulgences, Indulgences.
whom the Pope of that time rebuked severely. Nor Henry the eighth but the
excommunication of Clement the seventh. That of Luther is altogether without
the compass of the question between him and me, which concerns only the
Church of England. I shall only make bold to tell him that whenever it comes
to be examined, it will be found that Luther had many other causes of what he
did, then the abuse of some Preachers of Indulgences. If he will not give me
credit, let him cousult the hundred grievances of the German Nation. That the
Pope rebuked those Preachers of Indulgences severely, is more then I have read:
only this I have read, that Carolus Militius did so chide Tecelius the Popes
Pardoner about it, that shortly after he died of grief. The excommunication of
Henry the eighth.


Concerning Henry the eighth, the excommunication of Clement the seventh was so
far from being a total adequate cause of his separation, that it was no more
but a single occasion. The original privileges of the British Churches, the
ancient liberties and immunities of the English Church, daily invaded by the
Court of Rome, the usurpation of the just Rites and Flowers of his own Crown,
the otherwise remediles oppression of his Subj^^ts, and the examples of his
noble Predecessors were the chief grounds of his proceedings against the Court
of Rome.

He asks, could not Henry the eighth have been saved though he was
excommunicate? yes, why not? Justice loses unjust bonds. But I see that this
question is grounded upon a double dangerous error. First, that all reformation
of our selves is a sinful separation from other Churches. Whereas he himself
confesses that it is sometimes virtuous and necessary. Nay every reformation
of our selves is so far from being a sinful separation from others, that it is
no separation at all, except it be joined with censuring and condemning of
others.

The second error intimated in this question is this, that so long as there is
possibility of salvation in any Church, it is not lawful or at least not
necessary to separate from the abuses and corruptions thereof. A Church may
continue a true particular Church and bring forth Children to God, and yet out
of invincible ignorance maintain material Heresy, and require the profession
of that Heresy as a condition of communicating with her, in which case it is
lawful, nay necessary after conviction to separate from her errors. Those
errors and corruptions are pardonable by the goodness of God to them who err
out of invincible ignorance, which are not pardonable in like manner to them
who sin contrary to the light of their own conscience.

He adds, that this excommunication was not the fault of the Roman Church,
which neither caused it nor approved it. Yea says he, diverse of them disliked
it both then and since, not as unjust but as imprudent, and some have declared
themselves positively that a Prince and a multitude are not to be
excommunicated. It were to be wished for the good of both parties, that all men
were so moderate. To his argument I give two answers: First, as the Church of
Rome did not approve the excommunication of Henry the eighth; So neither did
Henry the eighth separate himself from the Cchurch of Rome, but only from the
Pope and Court of Rome. Secondly, what are we the better that some in the Roman
Church are moderate, so long as they have no power to help us, or hinder the
acts of the Roman Court. They teach that a Prince or a multitude are not to be
excommunicated. But in the mean time the Court of Rome does excommunicate both
Princes and multitudes, and whole Kingdoms, and give them away to strangers.
Whereof there are few Kingdoms or Republics in Europe that have not been
sensible more or less: and particularly England has felt by woeful experience
in sundry ages. Clement the seventh excommunicated King Henry, but Paul the
third both excommunicated and interdicted him and the whole Kingdom; and this
was the first separation of the Church of England from the Church of Rome, and
the original of the Schism, wherein the Church of England was merely passive.
So the Court of Rome was the first cause of the Schism.

Sect. 2.
We are come now to my first argument to prove the Court of Rome to be causually
schismatic: My proposition is this: whatsoever does leave its proper place
in the body, either natural or political or ecclesiastical, to usurp the
Office of the Head, or to usurp an higher place in the body then belongs unto
it, is the cause of disorder, disturbance, confusion, and Schism among the
Members: my assumption is this; but the vertuall Church of Rome, that is, the
Pope wi^h his Court, being but a coordinate Member of the Catholic Church,
does seek to usurp the Office of the Head; being but a Branch, does ch^llenge
to himself the place of the Root; being but a Stone in the building, will
needles be an absolute Foundation, for all persons, places, and times; being
but an eminent Servant in the Family, takes upon him to be the Master.

To the proposition he takes no exception: And to the assumption he confesses
that the Church of Rome, in right of the Pope, does seek to be Mistress of all
other Churches, and an external subordinate foundation of all Christians in
all times and places, which is no more then is contained in the new Creed of
Pius the fourth, B^^ Pii 4.
I acknowledge the Roman Church to be the Mother and Mistress of all Churches,
And I promise and swear true obedience to the Bishop of Rome as to the Vicar of
Jesus Christ. But all this he justifies to be due to the Pope, and included in
the Supremacy of his Pastoral Office: But he says, that it is not the
Doctrine of the universal Roman Church, that the Pope is the root of all
spiritual Jurisdiction. Though it be not the Doctrine of the whole Roman
Church, yet it is the Doctrine of their principal Writers at this day. The
Church of Rome no foundation of Christians.
It is that which the Popes and their Courtiers do challenge, and we have
seldom seen them fail, first or last, to get that settled which they desired.
The Pope has more Benefices to bestow then a Council. If the Church of Rome
be the foundation of all Christians, then Linus and Cletus and Clemens were the
foundations of St. John, Rev. 21.24
who was one of the twelve foundations laid immediately by Christ How can the
Church of Rome be the foundation of all Christians, when they do not agree
among themselves that the Chair of St. Peter is annexed to the Sea of Rome by
divine right? How can the Church of Rome be the foundation of all Christians at
all times, when there was a time that there were Christians and no Bishop or
Church at Rome? when it happens many times, as in this present vacancy, that
there is no Bishop at Rome? St. Peter was Bishop of Antioch before he was
Bishop of Rome, then there was a time when Antioch was the Mistress and
foundation of all other Churches, and not Rome. St. Peter might have continued
Bishop of Antioch until his death, and then Antioch had still been the
Mistress and foundation of all other Churches. He might have been neither
Bishop of Antioch nor Rome, and then the other Churches had wanted such an
hereditary Mistress. All this is confessed by Bellarmine. l. 2. de Pont. Romans
c. 12.
Does Paul the ninth make us new Articles of Faith, of so great contingency,
that were not of perpetual necessity? How can the Church of Rome be the
foundation of all Christians in all places, when there have been so many
Christian Churches ever since the days of the Apostles, who never had any
thing to do with Rome, nor scarcely ever heard of the name of Rome? If the
Pope be the Master of all Christians, he is but a young Master; for we find no
such expression in all the primitive times. Why were the ancient Bishops so
grossly over-seen to style him their Brother, their Colleague, their Fellow, who
was their Master. It might be modesty in the Pope to use such familiar
expressions, as a General calls all his Army fellow Soldiers; but it was
never heard that a private Colonel or Captain did call his General fellow
Soldier, or a Servant call his Master fellow Servant, or an ordinary Clerk
call his Bishop his Brother. 1 Pet 5.1.
St. Peter writ himself a fellow elder, not a Master. If St. Paul had known
that the Roman Church had been the Mistress and foundation of all other
Churches, he would have given them their due title, and the whole Scripture had
not been so silent in so necessary a point.

But he says, the Popes Supremacy is neither against the two Creeds, nor the
first four general Counsels, intimating thereby that it excludes none from
salvation, and consequently is no sufficient cause of separation. I answer
first, that it is against the four first general Councels, if this were a
proper place for the discussion of it. I answer secondly, that though it were
not opposite to the Creed, or the first four general Counsels, yet if it be
not virtually included in the Creed, being, as it is, by them obtruded upon all
Christians as an Article of faith, or a necessary part of saving truth, extra
quam non est salus, without which there is no salvation, it becomes a just and
sufficient cause of separation to all those upon whom it is so obtruded. Of
this more in the next argument.

Sect. 3.
My second argument may be thus reduced, That Court which obtruded newly coined
Articles of faith, The Church of Rome obtrudeth new Articles of Faith, and
excommunicateth for not receiving them.
such as the Doctrine of the seven Sacraments, Transubstantiation, Purgatory,
Invocation of Saints, worshipping of Images, Indulgences, and especially the
Popes Supremacy, upon the Christian world, as absolutely necessary to
salvation, and necessary conditions of Catholic communion, and
excommunicateth and anathematizeth above three parts of the Christian world for
not admitting them, is fearfully schismatic; But the Court of Rome does all
this. That these are no old Articles appears by all the ancient Creeds of the
Church, wherein they are neither explicitly nor virtually comprehended. That
they are made new Articles by the Court of Rome, An. 1564.
appears by the Bull of Pius the fourth, wherein they are added to the old
Creed, ut unius and ejusdem fidei professio uniformiter ab omnibus exhibeatur,
that the profession of one and the same faith may be declared uniformly by all,
and one certain form thereof be made known to all. And lastly, That the Court
of Rome has solemnly excommunicated with the greater excommunication, and
anathematized, and excluded (so far as lies in their power) from the
communion of Christ, all the Grecian, Russian, Armenian, Abyssen, and reformed
Churches, being three times more in number then themselves, for not receiving
these new Articles, or some of them, and especially for not acknowledging the
Sovereign Power and Jurisdiction of the Roman Bishop and his Court appears
undeniably by the famous Bull of Pius the fifth, An. 1569.
called Bulla caenae, because it is read in die caenae Domini, or upon Thursday
before Easter.

In way of answer to this, he asks how this was any cause of King Henry's
revolt? I reply first, that though Henry the eighth had not thought of this,
and so it had not been causa procreans, a productive cause of the separation,
yet to us it is a most just cause to condemn them of Schism. Secondly, the
revolt, or more truly the separation of the Church of England from the Church
of Rome, was not made by Henry the eight or the English Church, but by the Pope
and Court of Rome, who excommunicated him and his Kingdom for not enduring
their encroachments and usurpations. He and his Kingdom were passive in it,
only the Court of Rome was doubly active, first in revolting from the right
Discipline of their Predecessors, and secondly in excluding the party wronged
from their communion. But in the separation of England from the oppessions of
the Court of Rome, I confess that Henry the eighth and the Kingdom were
active. And this very ground to avoid the tyranny, The Papacy a cause of
separation.
and ambition, and avarice of the Roman Court was the chief impulsive cause,
both to the English and Eastern Christians. For though the Sovereignty of the
Roman Bishop was not obtruded upon them in form of a Creed, yet it was obtruded
upon them as a necessary point of Faith. If Henry the eight had any other
private sinistre grounds known only to himself, they do not render the
Reformation one jod the worse in it self, but only prove that he proceeded not
uprightly, which concerns him, not us.

Secondly, he answers, that though they profess that it is necessary to
salvation to be under the Pope as Vicar of Christ, yet they say not that it is
necessary necessitate medii, so as none can be saved who do not actually
believe it. If all this were true, yet it were too much to oblige the whole
Christian world to submit to the Pope as the Vicar of Christ, by virtue of the
commandment of God. But I fear that Pope Pius by his Bull, and all they by
their swearing in obedience thereunto, do make it to be necessary necessitate
medii, so as none can be saved who do not actually believe it. And then there
was little hope of salvation throughout the whole Christian World in the times
of the Counsels of Constance and Basile, out of the Popes own Court, which was
then the only Noah's Arc. The words of their Oath are these, Hanc veram
catholicam fidem, extra quam nemo salvus esse potest, etc. This true catholic
faith without which no man can be saved, which I profess freely, and hold truly
in present, I do promise, Bull. Pauli 4.
vow, and swear by the help of God to retein and confess perfect and inviolated
most constantly, to my last gasp; and will take care (so far as in me lies)
to cause it to be taught and preached to all that shall be committed to my
charge. If it were not necessary necessitate medii, some might be saved without
it, namely all those who are invicibly ignorant of it. But they swear expressly
that no man can be saved without it: And so make it to be an essential Article
of the catholic Faith.

Thirdly, The Pope excommunicates the Eastern Churches.
he answers, that the Roman Church (he should say the Roman Court) does not
excommunicate all the Christians of Africa, Asia, Greece, and Russia, but only
such as do err vincibly or sinfully, such as are formal or obstinate
Heretics or Schismatics. There are innumerable in those Churches who are but
credentes Hereticis and Schismaticis, because the Catholic Faith was never
sufficiently preached to them. And these the Pope does not excommunicate. I
wish he did not: But his own Bull speaks the contrary, that he excommunicates
them all solemnly, anniversarily, with the greater excommunication. The Bull
makes no such distinction between Heretics or Schismatics, and those who give
credit to Heretics or Schismatics. The Bull has no such exception of those
who err out of invicible ignorance. If the Grecians be not all excommunicated,
then by the same reason the Protestants are not all excommunicated, there is no
difference. Yet he seems to extenuate their fault, because the Faith was
never sufficiently preached to them, whereas in truth they hold the Popes
declaration to be a sufficient proposal. I do not say that the efficacy of
this rash censure does extend either to them all, or to any of them all. But
they owe no thanks to the Court of Rome for sparing them, but to Christ for
annulling their sentence. So much as lies in them they exclude them all from
the communion of Christians and all hope of salvation. How comes it to pass
that he who pleaded but even now, that a multitude ought not to be
excommunicated on a sudden, is contented to give way to the solemn annual
excommunication of such innumerable multitudes of Christians? to whom himself
confesses that the catholic Faith (he meaneththeir newly coined Articles) was
never sufficiently preached.

Fourthly, he answers, that the Pope does not exclude them by his
excommunication, but only declares that they are excluded by their own Heresy
or S^hism. It is a great question in the Schools, whether any sentence of
binding and loosing be more then declaratorie. But this is certain, that as to
this case now in question between him and me it is all one whether the sentence
of the Pope do cut them off from the communion of the Catholic Church, or
only declare them to be cut off. For still the same rupture or schismatic
separation of one part of the catholic Church from another, does follow
thereupon. If the Pope do justly exclude them, or declare them to be excluded,
the Schism lies at their own doors. If the Pope do either unjustly exclude
them, or declare them to be excluded, the Schism lies at his door. I know
Ecclesiastical Canons do sometimes inflict penalties upon Delinquents ipso
facto, or by the sentence of he Law: Sometimes they do moreover require the
sentence of the Judge. The sentence of the Law takes place sooner then the
sentence of the Judge: But the Delinquent stands not legally convicted, until
a juridicall declaration. And in all such cases the Law must be confessed, the
fact notorious. But in this case of the Eastern Churches, there is no Law,
there is no Canon that inflicteth any penalty of Heresy or Schism upon them,
their Delinquency is not notorious, or rather it is evident that they are no
Delinquents. They have no competent Judge except a general Council, whereof
they make the greatest part themselves. Finally, the proceeding against them
was illegal, temerarious, and coram non Iudice.

I said that for diverse years in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign, there
were no Recusants known in England, No Recusants in England, or few, in the
beginning of Q Elizabeth's reign
until Papists were prohibited by a Bull to join with us in our public form
of serving God. This (he says) is most false. If it be so, I am more sorry:
It was before my time. But I have no reason to believe it to be false. If I had
the use of such Books as I desire, I should show great Authors for it. And as
it is I shall produce some not to be contemned, who say not much less. First, I
cite a Treatise printed at London by John Day, about the time when Pius the
fifths Bull was published against Queen Elizabeth, The disclosing of the great
Bull.
called the disclosing of the great Bull that roared at my Lord Bishops gate,
with a declaratorie addition to the same. In hope of the success of this Bull
a number of Papists that sometimes did communicate with us, or at the least
came ordinarily to our public prayers, have of late forborne. With which
Author Mr. Camden agrees, Camd Elizab an. 1^70.
who says that the more modest Papists did foresee an heap of miseries hanging
over their heads by the means of this Bull, who formerly could exercise their
own Religion securely enough within their own private houses, or else without
any scruple of Conscience were content to go to Church to hear the English
service. The reason of this indifferency and complyanee is set down by one of
their own Authors, Image of both Chu^ches edit. an. 1653 p. 442.
because the Queen, to remove, as much as might be, all scruples out of the
Peoples heads, and to make them think that the same Service and Religion
continued still, etc. provided that in the Common Prayer Book there should be
some part of the old frame still upheld, etc. by which dextrous mannagement of
affairs the common People were instantly lulled a sleep, and complied to every
thing.

Concerning that catalogue which he cites out of Mr. Camden, Camd. Elizab. an.
1559.
of so many Papists that were deprived in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's
time, it makes nothing at all against that which I said. More Protestants
suffer now then Roman Catholics at the Reformation.
They were not deprived for being Recusants, or refusing to hear the English
Service, but for refusing to take the Oath of Supremacy, as the same Author
says. Neither is that account Mr. Camdens account, but the account of the
Roman Catholics themselves. His words are these, The number if these,
according to their own account, throughout the whole Kingdom. Which account
Mr. Camden does in part correct and contradict. For he tells there of three
popish Bishops that changed their Religion of their own accords, the Bishops of
Chester, Worcester, and St. Asaph. But suppose this account were true, what
great matter was it for an hundred and ninety at the most, of all ranks and
conditions, high or low, to suffer deprivation for their Religion throughout
the whole Kingdom of England, wherein, without his Abbats and his Abbesses,
which he reckons among the rest to make up the number, there are above nine
thousand Parish Churches, besides all Dignitaries and Prebendaries of
Cathedral and Collegiate Churches, and Masters and Fellows of Colleges. It
was a very small inconsiderable proportion. He will not vouchsafe our present
sufferings the name of persecution; yet there is neither the City of London,
nor either of our Universities, wherein more of us have not suffered for our
Consciences, then of Papists in those days throughout the whole Kingdom of
England. In the City of London alone we find an hundred and twenty Pastors of
Parish Churches, whereof forty were Doctors in Theology, turned out of their
Benefices and homes, plundered, imprisoned, and many of them dead under the
burden of their grievous pressures, besides all the numerous Dignitaries,
Prebends, and inferior Clergy men belonging to the Cathedral Church of St.
Paul, and the Collegiate Church of St. Peter, and their respective Quires. I
could say more touching your Romish Confessors at that time, That they refused
the Oath of Supremacy more out of compact then Conscience, hoping by their
unanimity, and for fear of wanting means of ordination, to necessitate the
State to continue them all. But when they see how miserably they were deceived,
and their Churches filled with such as were returned from banishment, of whom
they dreamed not, conjurationis eos poenituit, they repented of their foolish
plot. And when it was too late, Acworth Cont. Sander l. 2. p. 197.
multi ad Iudices recurrunt contumaciam agnoscunt, ac petunt sibi contra
pontificem jurare licere, many of them run to the Judges, confessed their
obstinacy, and desired leave to take the Oath, as they had done in King Henry's
days. But let the faith of this rest upon the Author.

To my third Argument he gives no answer in his Survey, Sect. 4
but what was taken away in the vindication before it was made. The sum of my
Argument was this: That Court which rebelleth against the highest tribunal of
the Church, and assumeth a sovereign Power over it to it self, is
schismatic; but the Court of Rome rebelleth against the supreme Tribunal or
Judicatory of the Militant Church, that is, the Representative Church, or a
general Council. The Reader will excuse me if I do sometimes complicate two or
three medios terminos together for brevity sake.

His first exception is, That whereas I should prove that the Papacy is the
cause of Schism: I do seek to prove that the Papacy is Schism. To say the
Papacy is Schism is non sense. I hope I may have leave to write common sense.
But I did say, and I do say that the Court of Rome is in Schism, or
Schismatic. To say it is in Schism, and to say it is the cause of Schism, is
the same thing; for it is not the separation but the cause that makes the
Schism. They who give just cause of separation are Schismatic, and they who
take it are innocent.

Secondly, he demands, how the Papacy, as it is now maintained by many, could
be a sufficient ground of separation to the Protestants, especially of
separation from the whole Roman Church? I answer very well, because it was then
and two or three ages before that, maintained in the same manner, or rather an
higher degree, by the Court of Rome and some others of the Roman Church, though
not so many as at this day. Our separation from the Court of Rome is total and
absolute, because we know no legal Subjection which we owe to the Court of
Rome. But I know no such absolute separation on our parts from the Church of
Rome, but only a difference from them in their erroneous Opinions, and a
forbearance to practice some other things, which are made by them conditions of
their external Communion, wherein we cannot join with them with a good
conscience. The making of their errors to be essentialls and necessary
conditions of Catholic Communion, makes the breach appear greater then it is.
That this is clearly the sense of our Church I have showed out of the thirtieth
Canon. Vind. c 6. s.


So he comes to his main answer, That to rebel against a complete general
Council, A general Council complete without the Pope.
joined with the Pope as Head thereof, is gross Schism: But not to resist an
incomplete general Council without the Pope. This answer is sufficiently
confuted in the vindication; first, by the authority of Saint Gregory, who
makes it to be schismatic in the Pope to challenge such an universal
headship of Power. Secondly, by the Popes own Laws, and by their professions of
obedience to the Canons. Thirdly, by the Appeals made by Princes, and
Prelates, and Universities from the Popes to general Counsels. And lastly, by
the express Decrees of the Counsels of Constance and Basile in the point. To
which I add, that those very Decrees of general Counsels which have been not
only not ratified but opposed by the Popes, have nevertheless been evermore
received and obeyed as Laws in the Catholic Church, for the authority of the
Council. As the Decree of the Council of Chalcedon for equalling the
Patriarch of Constantinople to the Patriarch of Rome, was protested against by
the Popes Legates in the name and on the behalf of their Master, and yet was
ever held and practiced as an authentic Rule by the Catholic Church, and
reverenced by Saint Gregory as a part of the Gospel. Justinian the Emperor
called the fifth general Council, at which Vigilius the then Pope refused to
be present, or to give any consent unto it, for which his frowardness he was
banished by the Emperor. This in R. C. his judgment was an incomplete general
Council: Yet in all succeeding ages and by the Popes themselves, Greg l. 1.
epist. 24
it was honored and esteemed as a true general Council. Bron. Annot. in Conc.
5.
I confess a general Council was not held complete in the primitive times,
when such an assembly might be had, without the presence of the five
Protopatriarchs by themselves or their Deputies. But to think that any one of
these, either the Roman Patriarch or any other had an Headship of Power over
the Council, or a negative voice against the Council, is a most groundless
fancy, whereof we find not the least footstep in all antiquity. And therefore
R. C. might well have forborne his comparison of King and Parliament as
altogether impertinent. The King was confessedly an Head of Power over the
Parliament, so was not the Pope over a general Council. The King had evermore
a negative voice in Parliament, so had the Pope never in a general Council.
When the Parliament had made up their Bills they preferred them always to the
King by way of petition, but the Bishops in a general Council by way of
definition. Ego A. definiens subscripsi. In a general Council the President
(who is no more then a Prolocutor or Speaker in Parliament) makes his last
address to the body of the Council in this sort, placet? aut non placet? does
it please you, or not? But in Parliament after the Members have voted content,
or not content, the last address must be to the King; and he is free to say the
King will have it, or the King will advise. If a general Council have not the
Rites and Privileges of a general Council, unless the Pope be present as the
Head thereof, and concur with it, to what purpose were those questions so
canvased in the Western Church, whether a general Council be above the Pope?
and whether a general Council can depose the Pope? Does any man think that
our Ancestors were so simple as to question whether the Body be above the Head?
or to hope that the Pope would concur willingly to his own deposition? This
we know for certain, that the Council of Constance without the presence or
concurrence of the Pope, did Decree themselves to be a lawful complete
general Council, superior to the Pope, and that he was subject to their
censures. And deposed three Popes at a time. And their acts were confirmed in
the Council of Basile.

To this Decree of the Council of Constance he gives two answers: The Decree
of the Council of Constance for its superiority above the Pope lawfail.
First, That it is probable that the Council meant only of doubtful Popes.
But I did take away this answer in the vindication two ways. First, because it
is contrary to the text. The words of the Council are these [ the Pope] that
is, a Pope truly elected and lawfully admitted: It is uncertain whether a
doubtful Pope be Pope or no [ is subject to a general Councel] that is, a
general Council without the presence or concurrence of the Pope, such as the
Council of Constance was, [ As well in matter of faith as of manners.] This is
more then doubtful titles, [ so as he may not only be corrected, but if he be
incorrigible be deposed.] So a Council may correct the Pope, and if they
please continue him, or if they find him incorrigible depose him. Men are not
corrected for weak and litigious titles, but for faults in faith or manners.
Neither can they be said to be deposed, who are only declared to have been
usurpers. Secondly, I confuted this answer by the execution of the Decree. The
Council did not only declare who was the right Pope, which is a judiciary act,
and may be done by an Inferior toward his Superior, but they turned out three
Popes together, whereof one without controversy was the right Pope. And so
made right to be no right for the public good of the Church, which is a badge
of sovereign and legislative Authority.

His second answer, is, That this Decree was not conciliarly made, and
consequently not confirmed by Martine the fifth. This answer was likewise taken
away in the vindication. First, because the Popes confirmation is but a
novelty, never practiced in the ancient Church, and signifies nothing. The
Pope and his Legates did subscribe in the same manner and form that other
Bishops and their Legates did. And that was all. Secondly, because Pope
Martines title to the Papacy did depend merely upon the Authority of the
Decree. If this Decree were not a lawful Decree of a lawful general
Council, and such a Council as had power to depose the former Pope, then Pope
Martine was no Pope, but an usurper, and then his confirmation signified
nothing also in that respect. Last I showed that it was conciliarly made. And
what the word conciliarly there signifies out of the Acts of the Council. And
that passage was not intended for a confirmation, but an occasional Speech
after the end of the Council, after the Fathers were dismissed, in answer to
an unseasonable proposition made to the Pope, by the Ambassadors of Polonia and
Lituania, about a seditious Book, which they alleging to have been condemned by
the Deputies of the Nations, but not being able to affirm that it was condemned
in the public Acts of the Session, the Pope answered, that he approved what
had been conciliarly done. To all this he answers nothing, but that the word
[conciliariter or conciliarly] signifies rather the manner of a Council, then
of a Council. Let it be so. Is not the decreeing of any thing publicly in the
Session the manner of the Councels Acting? The Duputies of the Nations were
like a Committee of Parliament, who have no power to Decree, though they be a
Commit of the whole House, but only to prepare things for the House. Now
suppose the King at the close of the Parliament, being requested to confirm
some Acts of a Commit, should use the very same expression which Martine the
fifth did, That he would hold and observe inviolably all things determined and
concluded by that Parliament, Parliamentariter or Parliamentarily. Does not
this evidently confirm all the Acts and conclusions of the Parliament? Or what
can this in reason exclude but only the Acts of the Committees. To say as R. C.
says, That he confirms only those Acts which were done with due liberation,
is as much as to say, that he confirms just nothing at all. How shall it be
known, or who shall be Judge, what was done with due deliberation, and what was
not? Neither does it weigh any thing at all to say (as he does) that the word
concilium does exclude the Deputies of the Nations, without adding
conciliariter, for first, it is a rule in Law that abundans non vitiat, A word
or two too much do no hurt. Secondly, the Deputies of the Nations did sit and
Act by the Authority of the Council, and consequently their Acts were mediatly
and in some sort the Acts of the Council. Lastly, whether the Decree of the
Council were confirmed or not, to me seems all one. The end of Convocating so
many Bishops is to represent the consent of all those respective Churches from
which they are sent, and to witness the received belief. We see by their Votes
what was the received opinion of the Occidentall Church. And we see otherwise
suffi^ently what was the received opinion of the Eastern, Southern, and
Northern Churches. So as the Roman Court will not be able to find one
national Church of that age throughout the World, to maintain their exorbitant
claims.

To my fourth argument drawn from the Popes challenge of all Episcopal
Jurisdiction, and consequently the breaking of all the lines of Apostolical
Succession except his own, and to my two additionall arguments concerning the
infallibility of the Popes judgment and his power over Princes, he answers
nothing, but that they are not defined by the Roman Church, and therefore
cannot be a cause of departing from her communion. Neither have I indevoured to
charge the crime of Schism upon the Roman Church in general, but upon the
Roman Court, and the violent propugners thereof, whose Tenets these are. I wish
the Roman Church restored to its ancient splendour of an Apostolical Church,
and the principal Protropatriarchate, and its beginning of unity.

Notwithstanding the weakness of his answers, yet he lays down this for a
conclusion, That whatsoever I now pretend, our separation was schismatically
begun. And thence inferres upon a ground brought by me, Quod ab initio fuit
invalidum tract is temporis non convalescit, That it is schismatic still.
First, I deny his ground, the separation was not made by us, but by them. what
we did was not schismatic but just and necessary. Secondly, his inference is
grossly mistaken, and the rule which I brought altogether misapplyed. That
which was invalid from the beginning, cannot become valid prescription or tract
of time, but it may become valid by subsequent Acts of Parties interessed. And
that which was uncharitably begun and schismatically, may be charitably,
piously, and necessarily continued, as by many reasons and instances may be
made appear, but that it is besides our question.

CHAP. 9. A defense of our Answers to the objections of the Romanists.
Sect. 1.
IN the first place he observes a difference between Protestants and Roman
Catholics, Some Romans Cath. formal Schismatics.
That Protestants do not charge Roman Catholics with formal Schism, but only
with causall Schism, whereas Roman Catholics do charge Protestants with
formal Schism. To which I give three answers. First, if Protestants do not
charge them with formal Schism, their charity is the greater, and the Roman
Catholics are the more obliged to them. Certainly we have better grounds to
charge them with formal Schism then they have to charge us. But indeed
Protestants do charge the Roman Court, and all Roman Catholics who maintain
it, and adhere unto it out of ambitious, avaritious, or other sinister ends,
and not out of simplicity of heart and invincible or at least probable
ignorance, with formal Schism.

Secondly, causall Schism may be, and in this case of the Romanists is as well
formal, nay sometimes more formal then actual Schism, or to speak more
properly then actual separation. Whosoever give just cause of separation to
others, contrary to the light of their knowledge, out of uncharitable or other
sinister ends, are causall and formal Schismatics. Whereas they who separate
actually and locally upon just cause, are no criminous Schismatics at all, and
they who separate actually without just cause, may do it out of invincible
ignorance, and consequently they are not formal but only material
Schismatics.

Thirdly, when the case comes to be exactly weighed, it is here just as it is
in the case of possibility of Salvation, that is to say, the very same.
Protestants do not charge all Roman Catholics with formal Schism, but only
such as break the bond of unity sinfully, whether it be by separating
themselves, or others, unduely from the Catholic Communion, or giving just
cause of separation to others. Nor does R. C. himself charge all Protestants
with formal Schism. For he confesses that all those Protestants who err
invincibly do want neither Church nor Salvation. Formal Schismatics, whilst
they continue formal Schismatics, want both Church and Salvation; therefore
whosoever want neither Church nor Salvation are no formal Schismatics.

The reason of his former assertion is this, because Protestants can name no
Church out of whose communion the present Church of Rome departed. His reason
shows that he confounds material and formal Schism, with causall and actual
Schism. Whereas actual Schism may sometimes be only material, and causall
Schism may also sometimes be formal. To his reason I give two clear answers.
The present Roman Church d^parted out of the ancient Roman Church;
First, Protestants can name a particular Church out of whose Communion the
present Roman Church departed, even the pure and uncorrupted Church of Rome
which was before it, by introducing errors, abuses, and corruptions into it.
There is a moral departure out of a Church as well as a local, and
acknowledged by themselves to be culpable and criminous Schism. Secondly, That
Church which departs out of the Communion of the Catholic or universal
Church, is more schismatic then that which departs only out of the Communion
of a particular Church, both because our Obligation is greater to the Catholic
Church then to any particular Church, And, which is worse, out of the Catholic
Church.
and because the Catholic or universal Church does comprehend all particular
Churches of one denomination in it. When the Court of Rome by their censures
did separate three or four parts of the Christian World, who were as Catholic
or more Catholic then themselves, then they departed out of the Communion of
the Catholic Church, as the Donatists did of old. There is but this difference
between the Donatists and them, that the Donatists did it only by their
uncharitable opinions, and verbal censures, but the Court of Rome did it
moreover by a solemn Juridicall Decree, which is much the greater degree of
Schism.

He tells us, That it is vain to liken them to the Donatists, because the
Donatists said that the Catholic Church of that time, was but a part of the
Church, (as Protestants say now of the Roman,) for which Saint Austine laughed
at them. Lib 2. Gent. Pet. c. 38.
The truth is, the Donatists said, that they being but a small part of the
catholic Church, (if any part,) were the true catholic Church, The Romanists
true Donatists.
and that the true catholic Church was no catholic Church, nor any part of
it, which is expressly contrary to what he says here. Just as the Romanists say
now, that they themselves being with all their dependents not a fourth part of
the Christian World, are the catholic Church, and that the Patriarchate of
Constaentinople which is as large as theirs, and the Patriarchate of
Alexandria, which including the seventeen Kingdoms of Prester John, all
Christians, and dependents upon that Patriarchate, is likewise as large, and
the Patriarchates of Antioch and Jerusalem, and all the lesser Patriarchates
in the East, and the whole Empire of Russia, and all the Protestants in Europe,
are no parts of the catholic Church. Is not this to make the part to be the
whole, and the whole to be nothing beyond that part, as the Donatists did. Ovum
ovo non similius. And therefore Saint Austine might well laugh at them or
rather pity them as indeed he did, for speaking such evident absurdities. Si
mihi diceres quod Ego sim Petilianus, non invenirem quomodo te refellerem, nisi
aut jocantem riderem, aut insanientem dolerem. Sed quia jocari te non Credo,
vides quid restet. Ibid.
If thou should tell me that I am Petilian, (or any such thing that is
evidently falls,) I should not know how to confute thee, unless I should either
laugh at thy folly, or pity thy frenzy. But because I believe not that thou
jeastest, thou see what remains. When they tell us in such earnest, that
the Roman Church is the catholic Church, they might even as well tell us that
Petilian was Saint Austine.

Sect. 1. and 2.
Their first objection is, that we have separated our selves from the Communion
of the Catholic Church; to which I gave this answer, that we had not separated
our selves from the Communion of the Catholic Church, for we are ready to
believe and practice whatsoever the Catholic Church does unanimously believe
and practice. No, nor yet from the Roman Church in the essentialls of Christian
Religion, or any of them, but only in their errors and innovations; and that it
was the Court of Rome that made the separtion. To this answer he takes great
exception, but as it seems to me in a most confused manner. For method sake I
will reduce all which he says to four heads. First, that the Church of Rome is
the true Catholic Church. Secondly, That we have separated our selves from it
in essentialls. Thirdly, That all the other Patriarchates (except the Roman)
are no parts of the Catholic Church. Fourthly, That we hold no Communion with
them. To all these I have answered formerly in this Treatise, and therefore now
I shall touch them more lightly.

That the Roman Church is the Catholic Church he proves thus, The Roman
Church not the Catholic Church.
because it is a company of Christians, instituted by Christ, spread over the
World, and entirely united in the profession of faith, and communion of his
Sacraments under his Officers. And therefore he bids us out of St. Austin, L.
de unit. c. 6.
either give or take, either receive their Church, or show one of our own as
good. This Argument is grounded upon a wrong supposition, that the Catholic
Church is a Church of one denonination, as Roman, or Grecian, etc. which we do
altogether deny as implying an evident contradiction. Secondly, we deny that
the Roman Church, including the Papacy, in respect of which it challenges this
universality, and to be the Foundation of Christian Religion, and the Mistress
of all other Churches, is instituted by Christ, or by his Church; this is their
own usurpation. Thirdly, we deny that the Roman Church is spread over the
World. Divide Christendom into five parts, and in four of them they have very
little or nothing to do. Perhaps they have here a Monastery, or there a final
handful of Proselytes. But what are five or six persons to so many millions of
Christian souls, that they should be Catholics, and not all the others? This
was not the meaning of Saint Austin in the place alleged. Date ni hi hanc
Ecclesiam si apud vos est, ostendite vos ommunicare omnibus Gentibus, quas jam
videmus in hoc semine benedici. Date hanc, aut furore deposito accipite, non a
me, sed ab illo ipso in quo benedicuntur omnes Gentes. Give me this Church if
it be with you: Show that you communicate withal Nations which we see to be
blessed in this seed. It is not a few particular persons, nor some hand-fulls
of Proselites, but multitudes of Christian Nations that make the catholic
Church. The Romanists are so far from communicating with all these Nations,
that they excommunicate the far greater part of them. Fourthly, we deny that
such an exact entire union in all points and opinions which are not essentialls
of Christian Religion, is necessary to the being of the catholic Church, or
that the Romanists have a greater unity among themselves or with others, then
sundry of those Churches which they have excommunicated. Fifthly, I deny that
the Officers of the Conrt of Rome or any of them ( qua tales) are either the
Officers of Christ or of his Church. And lastly, if all this were true, well
might it prove the Church of Rome a catholic Church, that is, a part of the
catholic Church, but not the catholic or universal Church. Still there would
want universality. To be spread through the Christian World is one thing, and
to be the common faith of the Christian World another thing.

Secondly, If denial of the Popes Supremacy makes Protestants, the World is
full of Protestanns.
he proves that they did not exclude us, but that we did separate our selves,
because England denied the Popes sovereignty by divine right, before the Pope
excommunicated them. And so though it was not perfectly Protestant, yet it was
substantially Protestant. I take him at his word. Then all the Eastern,
Northern, and Ethiopick Christians are substantially Protestants as well as we:
for they all deny the Popes sovereignty either by divine or humane right. Then
all the world were substantially Protestants in the time of the Counsels of
Constance and Basile, except the Court of Rome, that is, the Pope and his
Officers. Then we want not brethren that are substantially Protestants as well
as we, in the bosom of the Roman Church at this day. To seek to obtrude this
spiritual Monarchy upon us was causall Schism, to excommunicate us for denying
it was actual Schism.

Our separation not in essentialls.
To prove that we have departed from them in essentialls, he only says, that we
have left them simply, absolutely, nay wholly in the communion of Sacraments,
and public worship of God, and the entire profession of faith, which are
essentialls to a Church. How often has this been answered already? That every
Opinion which a particular Church does profess to be essential, is either an
essential or a truth, or that every abuse crept into the administration of the
Sacraments, is of the essence of the Sacraments, is that to which we can never
give as^ent. Let them keep themselves to the ancient Creed of the Church, as
they are commanded by the Council of Ephesus, and we shall quickly join with
them in profession of faith. Let them use the ancient forms of administration
of the Sacraments, which the primitive Roman Church did use, and we shall not
forbear their communion in Sacraments. Did the ancient Roman Church want any
essentialls: Or are the primitive Roman and the present Roman Church divided in
essentials. If they differ in essentialls then we ought not to join in
Communion with the present Church of Rome. If they differ not in essentialls,
no more do we.

Thirdly, he proves that the other Patriarchates are not the Catholic Church,
not true parts thereof, because they are divided in profession of faith, in
communion of Sacraments, and in Church Officers. Yea (says he) it were dotage
to think that the Catholic Church can consist of heretical and schismatic
Churches, as I cannot deny but they are, except I will deny the thirty nine
Articles of the Church of England to which I have sworn. I answer that those
Churches which he is pleased to undervalue so much, do agree better both among
themselves and with other Churches, then the Roman Church it self, The Eastern
Churches true parts of the catholic Church.
both in profession of Faith, for they and we do generally acknowledge the
same ancient Creeds, and no other; and in inferior questions, being free from
the intricate and perplexed difficulties of the Roman Schools. In point of
Discipline they have no complaint against them, saving that they and we do
unanimously refuse to acknowledge the spiritual Monarchy of the Roman Bishop.
And concerning the administration of the Sacraments I know no objection of any
great moment which they produce against them. How should they, when the Pope
allowed the Russians the exercise of the Greek Religion? It is true, that they
use many Rites which we forbear; But difference in Rites is no breach of
communion, nor needs to be, for any thing that I know, if distance of place
and difference of Language were not a greater impediment to our actual
communion, so long as the Sacraments are not mutilated, nor sinful duties
injoined, nor an unknown tongue purposely used. How are they then schismatic
Churches? only because they deny the Popes Supremacy. Or how are they
heretical Churches? Some of them are called Nestorians, but most injuriously,
who have nothing of Nestorius but the name. Others have been suspected of
Eutychianism, and yet in truth orthodox enough. They do not add the word [
filioque, and from the son] to the Creed, and yet they acknowledge that the
holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Son, which is the very same thing in sense. It
is no new thing for great quarrels to arise from mere mistakes. He would
persuade the World that there is something in our English Articles which
reflects sadly upon the Greek Church, to declare them guilty of Heresy or
Schism. Either he is deceived himself, or he would deceive others. There is no
such thing, nor the least insinuation against them, either directly or by
consequence. But he is fallible, and may err in this as well as he does in
saying that I have been sworn to them: we do use to subscribe unto them
indeed, not as Articles of Faith, but as Theological verities, for the
preservation of unity among our selves; but never any Son of the Church of
England was obliged to swear unto them, or punished for dissenting from them in
his judgment, so he did not publish it by word or writing.

Secondly they charge us with schismatic disobedience to the determinations
of the general Council of Trent. Sect. 3.
To which I answered that that Council was neither general, The Council of
Trent not general.
nor free, nor lawful. First, not general, because there was not one Bishop
present out of all the other Patriarchates, and but a part of the occidentall
Church: Secondly, of those who were present, two parts were Italians, and many
of them the Popes Pensioners: Thirdly, at the definition of some of the
weightiest controversies there were not so many Bishops as the King of England
could have called together in a month within his own Realms: Fourthly, it was
not generally received by the Romanists. To this he answers that there were
some Grecian Bishops there. Perhaps one or two titular Bishops without
Bishoprics, not empowered by commission, nor sent with instructions from any
Patriarch: These were no Grecian Bishops. He adds that it is not necessary
to summon heretical or schismatic Bishops. Yes the rather before they be
lawfully condemned, as these never were. Besides this is begging of the
question. When or where were they convicted of Heresy or Schism? This is but
the opinion of the lesser and unsounder part of the Church, against the greater
and sounder part. Upon this ground the Donatists might have called a Council in
Africa, and nicknamed it a general Council. He says, it is obeyed by all
Catholics for matters of faith, though not for matters of fact. He means by
all Roman Catholics. But if it were the supreme Tribunal of the militant
Church, it ought to be obeyed for matters of fact also, so far as they are
Ecclesiastical. Break ice in one place and it will crack in more. He says,
Pius the fourth sent most loving letters to Queen Elizabeth, but his messenger
was not admitted into England. As we have in horror the treacherous and
tyrannical proceedings of Paul the third and Pius the fifth against our
Princes and Realms: So we acknowledge, with gratitude, the civilities of Pius
the fourth. Certainly he took the more prudent way for a Christian Prelate.

Nor free:
Secondly, The Council of Trent was not free, First, because the place afforded
no security to Protestants. Secondly, the accuser was the Judge. Thirdly, any
one who spoke a free word, was either silenced or thrust out of the Council.
Fourthly, the Protestants who came on purpose to dispute, were not admitted.
Fifthly, the Legates gave auricular votes, and some of the Council did not
stick to confess that it was guided by the holy Ghost sent from Rome in a male.
Sixthly, new Bishoprics were created during the Session, to make the Papalins
able to overvote the Tramontains. To all these exceptions he answers, That if
the Pope had been their Judge, it had been no more unjust then for a King to
judge his own notorious Rebels; but the Pope, out of his abundant favor, made
the Council their Judge, which he needed not, their Heresies having been
formerly lawfully condemned. He supposes, without any proof, that the Pope is
an absolute Monarch of the Church, which all the Christian World except
themselves does deny. He should remember that these are their own objections,
and that he is now to prove, not to dictate. Whether the Pope did judge the
Protestants by himself, or by a Council consisting for the most part of his own
Clients and Creatures, who knew no motion but by his influence, is all one in
effect. He knew that he had made his game sure enough underhand, whilst the
Italian Episcopalls were so numerous and partial: If the Pope did rather choose
to refer the Protestants to the Council, it was not out of favor to them, as
a more equal and indifferent way, but to take the envy off from himself. If
Christian Princes desire to have a free Council, they must reduce it to the
form of the Council of Constance, and revive the Deputies of the Nations.
Whereas he says, that the Protestants were formerly lawfully condemned, either
they were strange phantasms of Protestants, or it was a strange prophetical
Decree. Lastly, he demands how I can say that it was not a free Council, where
two or three safe conducts were granted, where the Council bound it self to
determine the controversy by holy Scripture, Apostolical tradition, approved
Councels, consent of the catholic Church, and authority of holy Fathers? Yes I
can say well enough for all this, that the Council was not free, fistula dulce
canit volucrem dum decipit auceps, the pipe plays sweetly whilst the Fowler
is about his prey. No man, s^ith Tully, proclaims in the Market that he has
rotten wares to sell. When men intend most to play tricks, they do often strip
up their sleeves, to make a show of upright dealing. Scriptures, Tradition,
Councels, Fathers, Churches, are excellent rules beyond exception, yet an
inexpert or partial Artist may make a crooked line with them. Any one of these
proofs would satisfy us abundantly, but this was a mere empty flourish. The
Protestants had safe conduct granted, but yet those that repaired to the
Council were not admitted to dispute.

Nor lawful.
Thirdly, As the Council of Trent was not a general, nor a free Council, so
neither was it a lawful Council, First, because it was not in Germany: A
guilty person is to be judged in his own Province. Secondly, because the Pope
alone by himself or his Ministers acted all the four parts of accuser, witness,
guilty person, and Judge. Thirdly, because the Protestants were condemned
before they were heard. To this he answers first, That Trent is in Germany:
wherein he is much mistaken, for proof whereof ^ produce first the public
protestation of the Germane Protestants, That to promise a Council in Germany,
and to choose Trent, was to mock the World, That Trent cannot be said to be in
Germany, but only because the Bishop is a Prince of the Empire, Hist Conc.
T^id. l. 2. an. 1545.
otherwise that for security it is as well and as much in Italy and in the
Popes power as Rome it self. To which the Pope himself gives testimony in his
answer to the Cardinal, Bishop, and Lord of Trent, when he desired maintenance
for a Garrison from the Pope to secure the Council, That there was no fear so
long as none but Italians were in Trent, and ingageth himself to secure it. The
grievances which they complained of were done in Germany* the redress which
they sough was in Germany. Germany, not Italy had been the proper place for the
Council.

R. C. proceeds, the Protestants were the first accusers of the Pope. It may
be so, but not in a legal or judiciary way. He confesses, That in doubtful
cases there ought to be four distinct persons, the accuser, the witness, the
person accused, and the Judge, but not in notorious rebellion, in which case
there needs neither witness nor accuser. And does not this merit the reputation
of a doubtful case, wherein so great a part of the occidental Church are
engaged? who are ready to prove evidently that he who is their accuser, and
usurps the office of their Judge, is the notorious Rebel himself. I confess
that in some cases the notority of the fact may supply the defect of witnesses;
but that must evermore be in cases formerly defined by the Law to be Rebellion,
or Heresy, or the like. The Popes Rebellion has been already conde^^ed in the
Council of Constance, and his heretical maintaining of it in the Council of
Basile; But the Protestants renouncing of his usurped authority, has never yet
been lawfully defined to be either the one or the other.

The Protestants not condemned by the Patriarch of Constantinople, but the
Romanists.
Yet he says, The Protestants were condemned not only by the Council of Trent,
but by the Patriarch of Constantinople, to whom they appealed. One that reads
this and knows not otherwise, would believe that the Protestants in general
had appealed from the Council of Trent, and were juridically condemned by the
Patriarch of Constantinople. Who gave the Appellants procuration to appeal in
the name of the Protestants in general? Who gave the Patriarch of
Constantinople power to receive the Appeal? Where is the condemnation? Is the
English Church included therein? No such thing. The case was this. One or two
foreign particular Protestants made a representation to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, of some controversies then on foot between the Church of Rome
and them: And he delivered his opinion, it should seem, as R. C. conceives,
more to the advantage of the Romanists th^n of the Protestants. This he calls
an Appeal and a condemnation. I crave pardon of the Reader if I do not in
present give him a punctual and particular account of the Patriarchs answer: It
is thirty years since I see it: Neither do I know how to procure it. Thus
far I will charge my memory, that the questions were ill chosen and worse
stated, and the Patriarchs answer much more to the prejudice of the Church of
Rome then of the Church of England. The right stating of the question is all in
all. When the Church of England have any occasion to make their addresses that
way, they will make them more apposite, and more to the purpose.

But since he has appealed to the Patriarch of Constantinople, to the
Patriarch of Constantinople let him go, I mean Cyrillus, since the time of
Hieremy, whom that learned Gentleman Sir Thomas Roe, then Ambassador for our
late King at Constantinople, had better informed of the true state and belief
of the English Church. He published a Treatise of his own much about the year
1630, which he called (...), or a confession of the Christian Faith, so
conformable to the grounds of the Church of England, that it might seem rather
to have been written by the Primate of Canterbury then by the Patriarch of
Constantinople. I will cull out a few flowers and make a posie for him, to let
him see whether the Patriarchs of Constantinople do condemn the Church of
England or the Church of Rome. In the second Chapter he declares, That the
authority of the Scripture is above the authority of the Church, (...), etc.
for it is not equal (or alike) to be taught of the holy Ghost and to be taught
of man. (...)
In his tenth Chap. he declares, That (...), mortal men can by no means be
the head of the Church, and that our Lord Jesus Christ alone is the head of it.
In the thirteenth Chapter he asserteth justification by Faith alone, just
according to the Doctrine of the Church of England. In the fifteenth Chapter he
acknowledges but two Sacraments. In the seventeenth Chapter he professes a
true real presence of Christ the Lord in the Eucharist, just as we do; and
rejects the n^w devise of transubstantiation. In the eighteenth Chapter he
disclaimeth purgatory, etc. All this he declar^th to be the Faith which Christ
taught, the Apostles preached, and the orthodox Church ever held, and
undertaketh to make it good to the World. And after, in his answer to some
questions which were proposed to him, he excludes the Apocryphal Books out of
the Canon of holy Scripture, and condemns the worship of Images. In a word,
he is wholly ours. And to declare to the World that he was so, Knolles Turk.
bist. in the life of Am. ^. p. 1503.
he resolved to dedicate his confession of the Faith of the Greek Church to the
King of England.

When this Treatise was first published, it is no marvel if the Court of Rome
and the congregation for propagating of the Roman Faith in Greece did storm at
it, and use their uttermost endeavor to ruin him. But he justified it before
the Ambassadors of Roman Catholic Princes then remaining at Constantinople,
and came off fairly in despite of all those who did calumniate him, and cast
false aspersions upon him. Besides his own autograph, and the testimonies of
the Ambassadors then present, if there had been nothing else to justify this
truth, the instructions given by Cardinal Bandini to Cannachi Rossi in the name
of the Pope, Ib p. 1500.
alone had been sufficient proof, and the plots which they contrived against
him, either to have him taken away by death or deposition: For at the same time
they decryed the Treatise here as supposititious, and accused him there as
criminous, for being the Author of it. But God delivered him out of their hands.

He pleads moreover, That the Bishops assembled in Trent were not the Popes
Ministers. Yet he knows right well that they had all taken an Oath of
obedience to the Pope, for maintenance of the Papacy. Were these equal Judges?
I confess there were many noble souls amongst them who did limit their Oath
according to the Canons of the Church. But they could do nothing, being
over-voted by the Popes Clients and Pensioners.

He asks who were the accusers, witnesses, and Judges of the Pope in the
Parliament 1534, but King Henry himself and his Ministers? I answer that they
were not King Henry's Ministers, but the Trustees of the Kingdom; they were
not sworn to maintain King Henrie's usurpations; they acted not by a judiciary,
but by a legislative power; neither did they make any new Law, but only declare
the ancient Law of the Land. Otherwise they meddled not with the person of the
Pope or his Office. If Luther proceeded not in form of Law against the Pope, it
is no marveil. I remember no process in Law that was between them. He
challenged only verbum informans, not virgam reformantem. Do you think that if
he or any other had cited the Pope to have appeared in Germany or England, he
would have obeyed the Summons? They might as well have called again yesterday.
Howsoever Luther's acts concern not us.

Sect. 4. Why R C. not willing to argue of the Popes Patriarchall Power.
Their third objection is, that we have quitted our lawful Patriarch, which
argument he says he will omit, because we have spoken enough of that before.
Either I am mistaken, or this is a fallacy of no cause for a cause. The true
cause why he omitteth it being not because we have spoken enough of it, (for he
has continually declined it) but rather because he sees that it is
incompatible with that sovereignty and universality of Power which the Roman
Bishops do challenge at this day. Let them lose the substance, whilst they
catch at the shadow.

But in the place of this he proposes another objection which he calls their
most forcible argument against us. which in brief is this. No Church is to be
left in which salvation is to be had, but we confess that the Roman Church is a
true Church in substance, the true Church, etc. I cannot but observe what
difference there is in the judgments of men, for of all their objections I
take this to be the weakest. And so would he also if he would cease to confound
the Catholic Church, with a Catholic Church, that is, the universal Church
with a particular Church, and distinguish the essentialls of a Church, from the
corruptions of a Church, and make a difference between a just reformation of
our selves, and a causless separation from others. But be the argument what it
will, forcible or weak, it has been answered abundantly in this Treatise over
and over again. Answ. to the pres. S. c. 1. s. 1.
And therefore though he pleased (I use his own expressions) to say it often,
to repeat it often, to inculcate it: Yet I dare not abuse the patience of the
Reader with so many needless tautologies.

He taxes me for not answering some testimonies which he has collected in a
book of his, called the Protestants plain Confession, which he says I have
read, and therefore I ought not to have dissembled them, but perhaps I thought
them too hard to be answered. I confess I have read some of his books formerly,
but I deny that I have one of them in-present. If I had, does he think it
reasonable or indeed possible that in one Chapter I should take notice of all
that has been written upon this Subject. I confess I have answered many
impertinences in this Treatise, but a man would not willingly go so far out of
his way to seek an impertinence. When I did read some of his Treatises, I
pitied the mispending of so much time, in weeding and wresting of Authors, of
several reformations, who writ in the beginning of the Controversy between
sleeping and waking. Sometimes he condemns us of Schism for communicating
with them; some other times he cites them as our Classical Authors, and at
other times from the different Opinions of the Sons of the same Church, he
impugneth the conclusion wherein they do all accord. As if I should argue
this: If the bread be transubstantiated into the body of Christ, it is either
by production or a^duction, but such and such Roman catholic Authors do deny
that it is by produduction, and such and such other Roman catholic Authors do
deny that it is by adduction, therefore by the plain confession of Roman
Catholics there is no transubstantiation. If I had omitted any testimonies of
weight cited by him in this Treatise, as he has done the most of all my
grounds, then with better reason he might have called it dissembling.

He seems to me to take this course, only to make his credulous Reader
believe that there is more in his books then there is. It is the Church of
England which he has undertaken to combat. Let him not leave his chosen
Province to seek out petty adversaries among strangers, and think to wound the
Church of England through their sides. He needs not to be so much abroad,
whilst he may have enough to do at home.

He urges that there is no salvation out of the Church, no more then there was
out of the Arc of Noah, howsoever or for whatsoever one went out. 1 Pet. 3.20.
The Church of Rome St. Petes. Boat, not Noah's Arc.
That Noah's Arc was a figure of baptism, St. Peter does assure us: and it may
also very fitly represent the Church, but that is the catholic or universal
Church, and then we yield the conclusion, that there is no salvation out of the
Church. But particular Churches are like several Chambers, or Partitions
within the Arc of Noah. A man might go out of one of them, until it was
cleansed, into another without any danger. The Church of Rome is not Noah's Arc
but St Peter's Boat. The rest of the Apostles had their Boats as well as Saint
Peter. He beats but the air in citing Saint Austin and Saint Hierome against
us, who have neither left the Church, nor the Communion of the Church.

He makes our Church to be in worse condition then the Church of the
Donatists, because Protestants grant that the Church of Rome does still retein
the essence of a true Church, but the Donatists did deny that the catholic
Church of their time was a true Church Does he not see that he argues
altogether against himself? The Schism of the Donatists consisted therein, that
they did uncharitably censure the catholic Church to have lost the essence of
the Church; Our charity freeth us from Schism.
this was indeed to go schismatically out of the Communion of the Church: and
on the other side this is our safety and security, that we are so far from
censuring the catholic Church, that we do not censure the Roman Church, which
is but a particular Church, to be no Church, or to have lost its Communion with
Christ, nor have separated from it in any essential of Christian Religion, but
only in corruptions and innovations. Our Charity freeth us from Schism. The
uncharitableness of the Donatists rendered them Schismatics. It may be a good
lesson for the Romanists who tread too much in the steps of the Donatists.

Sect. 6.
What Calvine says, That God accounts him a forsaker of his Religion who
obstinately separateth himself from any Christian Society which keeps the
true Ministry of the Word and Sacraments. Call. Inst. l. 4 c. 1. etc.
Or that there may some vice creep into the Ministry of the Word and
Sacraments, which ought not to alienate us from the communion of a true Church,
Or lastly, that we must pardon errors in those things which may be unknown
without viola^ing the sum of Religion, or without loss of Salvation, or we
shall have no Church at all, does not concern us, who do not dream of an
Anabaptisticall perfection, and upon this very ground do admit them to be a
true Church, though imperfect, who have not separated our selves, but been
chased away, who have only forsaken errors, not Churches, much less
obstinately, and least of all in essentials, who would gladly be contented to
wink at small faults, so they would not obtrude sinful duties upon us as a
condition of their communion.

The same answer we give to Perkins and Zanchy cited only in the margent, whose
scope is far enough from going about to persuade us that we ought not to
separate from the Church of Rome, for which they are cited by him. Rather on
the contrary, if they or any of them have been over rigorous toward the Church
of Rome, and allow it not the essence of a Church, what does that concern the
Church of England? Will he blame us for being more moderate? Trust me, these
Authors were far from extenuating the errors of Popery.

He tells us. That they say unto us as Saint Austin said unto the Donatists,
If ours be Religion yours is separation. They may rehearse the same words
indeed, but neither is Saint Austins case, their case, nor the Donatists case
our case. Sometimes they cry down our Religion as a negative Religion, as
faulty in the defect. And now they accuse us of superstition in the excess. We
approve no Church, with which they communicate, and we do not.

Doctor Field says, that if they can prove the Roman Church to be the Church,
they need not use any other Argument. It is most certain, we all say the same.
But still he confounds the Church, that is the universal Church, with a
Church, that is a particular Church, and a metaphysically true Church, with a
morally true Church. Why does he cite Authors so wide from that which he
knows to be their sense?

Sect. 5.
In this Section there is nothing but crambe bis cocta, a repetition of what he
has formerly said over and over, of Protestants separating themselves from the
whole Christian World in communion of Sacraments. Only he adds the
authorities of Master Calvine, Sup. c. 1. sect. 1.
Doctor Potter, and Master Chillingworth, which have already been fully
answered.

Sect. 6.
He says, I endeavor to prove the lawful Ordination of our first Bishops in
Queen Elizabeth's time by the testimony of public Registers, and confession of
Father Oldcorne. He knows better if he please, that the first Protestant
Bishops were not in Queen Elizabeth's time, but in Edward the sixths time. If
they were not Protestants they did them the more wrong to burn them for it. The
Ecclesiastical Registers do make their Ordination so plain, Our Ordination
justified.
that no man who will but open his eyes can be in doubt of it. He confesses
that Father Oldcorne did say our Registers were authentical. So must every one
say or think that sees them, and every one is free to see them that will. But
Father Oldcorne was a prisoner, and judged others by himself. Yet neither his
imprisonment nor his charity did make him swerve in any other point from his
Roman Catholic opinions. Why did he change in this more then in any of the
rest? Because there is no defense against a Flaile, no resisting evident
demonstration, which does not persuade but compel men to believe.

But wherefore were not these Registers showed before King James his time? They
were always showed to every man that desired to see them. Registers are
public Records, the sight whereof can be refused to no man. The Officers hand
is known, the Office is secured from all supposititious writings, both by the
Oath and by the honesty of him that keeps the Register, and by the testimony
of all others, who view the Records from time to time. He might as well ask why
a Proclamation is not showed? Which is first publicly promulged, and after
that affixed to the gates of the City, and of the Common Hall, and all other
public places. If he could have excepted against the persons, either
consecraters or consecrated, as that there were not such persons, or not so
qualified, or not present at that time, he had had some reason for himself. But
Episcopal Ordination in England was too solemn and too public an Act to be
counterfeited. And moreover the Proceedings were published in print, to the
view of the World, whilst there were very many living, who were eye witnesses
of the Ordination.

And yet by his favor, if there had not been so many Protestant Bishops there,
as there were, it might have made the Ordination illegal, but not invalid, for
which I will give him a president and a witness beyond exception. The
president is Austine the first converter of the English, the witness Saint
Gregory. Greg. Resp. ad Int. 8. August.
Et quidem in Anglorum Ecclesia, etc. And truly in the English Church, wherein
there is no other Bishop but thy self, thou can not ordein a Bishop otherwise
then alone, etc. But when by the grace of God, Bishops are ordained throughout
all places, Ordination ought not to be made without three or four Bishops.

He asks why Bishop Jewel or Bishop Horn did not allege these Registers
when they were charged by Doctor Harding and Doctor Stapleton to be no
consecrated Bishops? I might even as well ask him when he cites an authority
out of Saint Austin, why such or such an Author that writ before him upon that
Subject, did not cite it? and thereupon conclude that it was counterfeit. An
argument from authority negatively is worth nothing. Perhaps, for I can but
guess until he cite the places, Doctor Stapleton or Harding did not except
against the number or qualification of the Ordeiners, but against the matter or
form of their Episcopal Ordination. Perhaps judging them to be Heretics, they
thought they had lost their character, which yet he himself will acknowledge to
be indeleble: Perhaps the accusation was general against all Protestants, and
they gave a general answer. Perhaps they were better versed in the Schools then
in Records: or lastly perhaps, or indeed without perhaps, they insisted upon
the illegality of their ordination, in respect of the Laws of England, not upon
the invalidity of it, as shall clearly appear in my next answer. In all these
cases there was no occasion to allege the Registers.

Why were they not showed (says he) when Bishop Bonner excepted against the
said Horn at the bar? What need had the Bishops to desire that their
ordination should be judged sufficient by Parliament eight years after? Now let
him take one answer for all. There was an Act passed for authorizing the Book
of Common Prayer, and the Book of Ordination, as an appendix to it, to be used
throughout England, in the reign of Edward the sixth. This Act was repealed in
the time of Queen Mary, and afterward revived by Queen Elizabeth, as to the
Book of Common Prayer, intending, but not expressly mentioning the Book of
Ordination, which was an appendix to it. So it was restored again, either
expressly under the name of the Book of Common Prayer, as containing the public
Prayers of the Church for that occasion; or at least implicitly, as being
printed in the Book of Common Prayer from the beginning, as an appendix to it.
Upon this pretended omission Bishop Bonner excepts against Bishop Horne's
Ordination, nor against the validity of it, what have Parliaments to do with
the essentials of Ordination? but against the legality of it as to the Realm of
England, by reason of the former pretended omission. So to take away scruple,
the Parliament enacted that it should be deemed good in the eye of our English
Law. The Parliament knew well that they had no power to make that Ordination
valid in it self which was invalid in it self, nor to make that invalid which
was valid. This had been to alter the essentials of Ordination. But they had
power, for more abundant caution, which never does hurt, to take away that
scruple which was occasioned by a Statute of Queen Mary, which in truth was
sufficiently removed before. What is this now to our Registers, whether they be
authentic or not? No, we beg no help from any civil Acts or Sanctions to
maintain our Ordinations, either for matter, or form. But we are ready to
justify them by those very rules which he says the Council of Trent offered
to the Protestants, namely Scripture, Tradition, Councels, Fathers, and
especially the practice of the catholic Church.

But he says, we are not ordered to offer true substantial sacrifice, Not
expressly indeed. No more were they themselves for eight hundred years after
Christ, and God knows how much longer. No more are the Greek Church, or any
other Christian Church in the World (except the Roman) at this day. Yet they
acknowledge them to be rightly ordained, and admit them to exercise all offices
of their Priestly Function in Rome it self, which was alleged by me in the
vindication, and is passed over in silence by R. C. in this survey. The Greeks
have no more mention of a Sacrifice in their Ordination then we. The grace of
God promotes such a venerable Deacon to be a Presbyter, yet the Church of Rome
approves their Ordination and all their other Rites, so they will but only
submit to the Popes spiritual Monarchy, as we have seen in the case of the
Patriarch of Muzall, and the Russians subject to the Crown of Polonia; and the
like favor was offered to Queen Elizabeth, upon the same condition. It is not
so long since Pope Gregory erected a Greek College at Rome, to breed up the
youth of that Nation where they have liberty of all the Greekish Rites,
Continuation of the Tuck Histin the life of Amurath 4.
only acknowledging the Supremacy of the Pope.

But though we have not express words for offering of Sacrifice, nor the
tradition of the Patine and the Chalice (no more had their own Ancestors for a
thousand years) yet we have these words, No diffrence about sacrifice if
rightly understood.
Receive the holy Ghost: whose sins thou do remit, they are remitted, etc.
Be thou a faithful dispenser of the Word and Sacraments, then which the
Scriptures and Fathers did never know more, which their own Doctors have
justified as comprehending all essentials, which being jointly considered, do
include all power necessary for the exercise of the Pastoral Office. We
acknowledge an Eucharistical Sacrifice of Praise and Thanksgiving; a
commemorative Sacrifice, or a memorial of the Sacrifice of the Cross; a
representative Sacrifice, or a representation of the Passion of Christ before
the eyes of his heavenly Father; an impetrative Sacrifice, or an impetration of
the fruit and benefit of his Passion, by way of real Prayer; and lastly an
applicative Sacrifice, or an application of his merits unto our souls. Let him
that dare go one step further then we do, and say that it is a suppletorie
Sacrifice, to supply the defects of the Sacrifice of the Cross. Or else let
them hold their peace and speak no more against us in this point of Sacrifice
for ever.

Yet in his margent he has placed a cloud of our Doctors, Whitakers, Morton,
Chillingworth, Potter, Fulke, Reinolds, Latimer, without citing a syllable of
what they say, saving only Latimer and Reynolds, that the name of Priest
imports Sacrifice or has relation to Sacrifice. In good time; to do him a
courtesy we will suppose that all the rest say as much. Such Sacrifice such
Priest. Let the Reader learn not to fear dumb shows. There is nothing which any
of these say which will either advantage his cause or prejudice ours.

Here he professes to omit the survey of my last chapter, Sect. 7.
yet because he touches some things in it upon the by, I am obliged to attend
his motion. First, I wonder why he should term us fugitives. If we be fugitives
what is he himself? No, we are Exules, excluded out of our Country, not
profugi, fugitives of our own accord from our Country. And we hope that he who
goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed, shall return with joy
and bring his sheaves with him. If not, God will provide a resting place for
us, either under heaven or in heaven. We praise thee O God, we acknowledge thee
to be the Lord.

In the conclusion of my Treatise I proposed three ready means for the uniting
of all Christian Churches, which seemed to me very reasonable. One of them was,
That whereas some Sects have contracted the Christian Faith over much, by
reviving some Heresies condemned by the primitive Church, and on the other
side, the Church of Rome had enlarged the Christian Faith over much, by making
or declaring new Articles of Faith in this last age of the World, the Creed or
Belief of the Church containing all points of Faith necessary to be known of
all Christians, should be reduced to what it was in the time of the first four
general Counsels (I might add) and many ages after. No man dare say that the
Faith of the primitive Fathers was imperfect or insufficient. Against this he
makes three objections; There are fundamentalls.
first, That there are no such fundamental points of faith as Protestants
imagine, sufficient to salvation, though other points of faith sufficiently
proposed be not believed. This objection is compounded of truth and falsehood.
That there are such fundamentals he himself confesses elsewhere, which are
necessary not only necessiate paecepti, but necessitate medii: Hebr. 5.12 and
c. 6.1 etc.
And if he did not confess it, the authority of the Apostle would evince it,
That the belief of these alone is sufficient for the salvation of them to whom
no more is revealed, he dare not deny: And that the belief of these is
sufficient to them who do not believe other truths which are reveled unto
them, no Protestants did ever imagine. Observe how cunningly he confounds the
state of the question. The question is not, what is necessary for a man to
believe for himself: This is as different as the degrees of men's knowledge, but
what may lawfully be imposed upon all men, or what may be exacted upon other
men to whom it is not revealed, or to whom we do not know whether it be
revealed or not. Then if he would have objected any thing material to the
purpose, he should have said, That the belief of all fundamentals is not
sufficient to salvation, unless other points of Faith be imposed or obtruded
upon all men, whether they be revealed or not revealed to them. And this had
been directly contrary to the plain Decree of the general Council of Ephesus,
That no new Creeds nor new points of faith should be imposed upon Christians,
more then the Creed then received.

His second objection is this, though there were such fundamentals, yet seeing
Protestant confess they know not which they are, one cannot know by them who
hold so much as is necessary to a true Church. I do not blame either
Protestants or others, especially private and particular persons; How much is
necessary to be believed to salvation ordinarily.
if they be very tender in setting down precisely what points of faith are
absolutely necessary to salvation, the rather because it is a curious,
needless, and unprofitable salvation. Since the blesed Apostles have been so
provident for the Church, as to deposite and commit to the custody thereof the
Creed, as a perfect Rule and Canon of Faith, which comprehends all doctrinall
points which are absolutely necessary for all Christians to salvation, it were
great folly and ingratitude in us to wrangle about circumstances, or about some
substantial points of lesser concernment, whether they be so necessary as
others. This is sufficient to let us know, who hold so much as is necessary to
a true Church, in point of faith, even all those Churches which hold the
Apostles Creed, as it is expounded in the four first general Councels.

His third and last objection follows: All revealed truths not ess^ntialls.
All points of faith sufficiently proposed are essential and fundamental, nor
can any such point be disbeleeved without infidelity, and giving the lie to
God, as Protestants sometimes confess. If by sufficient proposal he understand
the proposal of the Church of Rome, I deny both parts of his assertion: Many
things may be proposed by the Church of Rome which are neither fundamental
truths, nor inferior truths, but errors which may be disbeleeved without either
infidelity or sin. Other men are no more satisfied that there is such an
infallible proponent, then they satisfy one another what this infallible
proponent is. If either a man be not assured that there is an infallible
proponent, or be not assured who this infallible proponent is, the proposition
may be disbeleeved without giving God the lie. But if by sufficient proposal
he understand Gods actual revelation of the truth, and the conviction of the
conscience, then this third objection is like the first, partly true, and party
false. The later part of it is true, that whatsoever is convinced that God has
revealed any thing, and does not believe it, gives God the lie; and this the
Protestants do always affirm. But the former part of it is still false. All
truths that are revealed are not therefore presently fundamentalls or
essentialls of faith, no more then it is a fundamental point of faith that
Saint Paul had a Cloak. That which was once an essential part of the Christian
faith, is always an essential part of the Christian faith, that which was
once no essential is never an essential. How is that an essential part of
saving faith, whithout which Christians may ordinarily be saved? But many
inferior truths are revealed to particular persons, without the actual
knowledge whereof many others have been saved, and they themselves might have
been saved, though those truths had never been proposed or revealed to them.
Those things which may adesse or abesse, be present or absent, known or not
known, believed or not believed, without the destruction of saving faith, are
no essentialls of saving faith. In a word, some things are necessary to be
believed when they are known, only because they are revealed, otherwise
conducing little, or it may be nothing, to salvation. Some other things are
necessary to be believed, not only because they are revealed, but because
belief of them is appointed by God a necessary means of salvation. These are,
those are not, essentialls or fundamentalls of saving faith.

Another means of reunion proposed by me in the vindication, was the reduction
of the Bishop of Rome from his universality of soveregin Jurisdiction jure
divino, Ancient Popes challenged not sovereignty jure divino.
to his exordium unitatis, and to have his Court regulated by the Canons of the
Fathers, which was the sense of the Councels of Constance and Basile. Against
this he pleads first, That ancient Popes practiced or challenged Episcopal
or pastoral Authority over all Christians, jure divino, in greater
Ecclesiastical causes. And for the proof thereof refers us to Bellarmine.
To which I answer first, that the Pastors of Apostolical Churches had ever
great Authority among all Christians, and great influence upon the Church, as
honorable Arbitrators, and faithful Depositaries of the Genuine Apostolical
tradition; but none of them ever exercised sovereign Jurisdict ion over over
all Christians. Secondly, I answer that the Epistles of many of those ancient
Popes, upon which their claim of universal Sovereignty jure divino is
principally grounded, are confessed by themselves to be counterfeits. Thirdly,
I answer that ancient Popes in their genuine Writings do not claim, nor did
practice monarchical Power over the catholic Church, much less did they claim
it jure divino, but what Powet they held they held by prescription, and by the
Canons of the Fathers, who granted sundry privileges to the Church of Rome, in
honor to the memory of St. Peter, and the Imperial City of Rome. And some of
those ancient Popes have challenged their Authority from the Council of Nice,
though without ground, which they would never have done, if they had held it
jure divino. Of the Church l. 5. a c. 31. ad c. 36.
And for answer to Bellarmine, whom he only mentions in general, I refer
him to Doctor Field.

In the next place he cites Saint Heirome that Christ made one Head among the
twelve to avoid Schism. L. 2: Cont. Iovin.
And how much more necessary (faith R. C.) is such a Head in the universal
Church? It was discreetly done of him to omit the words going immediately
before in St. Hierosme; But thou say the Church is founded upon St. Peter.
The same is done in another place upon all the Apostles; they all receive the
keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, and the strength of the Church is established
equally upon them all. I have showed him formerly in answer to this place, that
in a body endowed with power, as the Church is, an Headship of Order alone is a
sufficient remedy against Schism. Sup. c. 5. sect. 1.
His [ how much more] should be how much less: a single person is more capable
of the government of a small society then of the whole world.

After this, he cites Melanchon, Cent. Epist. Theol. ep 74.
As there are some Bishops who govern diverse Churches, the Bishop of Rome
governs all Bishops, and this Canonical policy I think no-wise man does
disallow. I cannot in present procure that century of Theological Epistles,
but I have perused Melancthons Epistles published by Casper Pucerus, wherein I
find no such Epistle. I examine not whether this Epistle by him cited, be
genuine or counterfeit, and if genuine; whether Melancthons words be rightly
rehearsed, and if rightly rehearsed, at what time it was written, whether
before he was a formed Protestant or after. It appears plainly in the words
here cited, that Melancthon was willing to acknowledge the Papacy only as a
Canonical policy. And so we do not condemn it, whilst it is bounded by the
Canons of the Fathers But then where is their jus divinum or the institution of
Christ? Where is their absolute or universal Sovereignty of Power and
Jurisdiction? In all probability if these be the words of Melancthon, his
meaning was confined to the Roman Patriarchate, which was all the Church that
he was much acquainted with. And that either these are none of his words, or
that they were written before he was a formed Protestant, or that he intended
only the Roman Patriarchate, is most evident from his later and undoubted
writings, wherein he does utterly and constantly condemn the Papal universal
Monarchy of the Roman Bishop. A moderate Papacy might prove useful, but
dangerous.


And lastly, what Melancthon faith, is only in point of prudence or discretion,
[ he thinks no wise man ought to dislike it.] We are not so stupid as not to
see but that some good use might be made of an exordium unitatis
Ecclesiasticae, especially at this time when the Civil Power is so much
divided and distracted. But the quere is even in point of prudence, whether
more good or hurt might proceed from it. We have been taught by experience to
fear three dangers, First, when we give an Inch, they are apt to take an Ell,
Tyrants are not often born with their teeth, as Richard the the third was, but
grow up to their excess in process of time. Secondly, when we give a free
Alms, (as Peterpence were of old) they streight-way interpret it to be a
tribute and duty. Thirdly, what we give by humane right, they challenge by
Divine Right to the Sea of Rome. And so will not leave us free to move our
rudder according to the variable face of the Heavens, and the vicissitude of
humane affairs.

These are all the testimonies which he cites, but he presents unto us
another dumb show of English Authors in the margent, Whitakers, Laud, Potter,
Chillingworth, Mountague, besides some forreiners. But if the Reader do put
himself to the trouble to search the several places, notwithstanding these
titles or superscriptions, he will find the boxes all empty, without one word
to the purpose, as if they had been cited by chance, and not by choice. And if
he should take in all the other writings of these several Authors, they would
not advantage his cause at all. Bishop Mountague is esteemed one of the most
indulgent to him among them, (though in truth one of his saddest Adversaries,)
yet I am confident he dare not stand to his verdict. Mont. Orig. Eccles. part.
post. p. 185.
Habeat potestatem ordinis, directionis, consiliis, consultationis,
conclusionis, executionis, dellegatam. Subsit autem illa potestas Ecclesia,
auferibilis sit per Ecclesiam, cum non sit in Divinis Scripturis instituta, non
Petro personaliter addicta. Let the Bishop of Rome have delegated unto him,
(that is by the Church) a power of Order, Direction, Counsel, Consultation,
Conclusion (or pronouncing sentence,) and putting in execution. But let that
power be subject to the Church; let it be in the Churches power to take it
away, seeing it is not instituted in the holy Scriptures, nor tied personally
unto Peter.

The Conclusion.
To conclude, the same advise which he gives unto me, I return unto himself.
Attendite ad Petram unde excisi estis, Look unto the rock whence ye are hewn.
Look unto the Church of Jerusalem, and remember. That the Law came out of
Sion, and the Word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. Look unto the Church of
Antioch, where the Disciples were first called Christians. Look unto the other
Eastern Churches in whose Regions the Son of Righteousness did shine, when the
day of Christianity did but begin to dawn in your Caosts. Look to the primitive
Church of Rome it self, Whose Faith was spoken of throughout the whole World,
and needed not the supplementall Articles of Pius the 4th. Lastly, look unto
the true catholic oecumenicall Church, whose Priveleges you have usurped, and
seek not to exclude so many millions of Christians from the hope of Salvation
and the benefit of Christ's Passion, In whom all the Nations of the World were
to be blessed. This indeed is the only secure way both to Unity, and Salvation,
to keep that entire form of Doctrine without addition or diminution, which was
sufficient to save the holy Apostles, which was by them contracted into a
Summary, and deposited with the Churches to be the true badge and cognizance of
all Christians in all succeeding ages, more then which the primitive Fathers,
or rather the representative Church of Christ, did forbid to be exacted of any
person that was converted from Jewism or Paganism, to Christianity. And as many
as walk according to this rule (of Faith,) Peace be upon them and Mercy, and
upon the Israel of God.

FINIS.
A REPLY TO S. Ws. REFVTATION OF The Bishop of DERRIES just Vindication of the
CHVRCH of ENGLAND.
THE most of S. Ws. Exceptions have been already largely and particnlarly
satisfied in the fotmer reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon. Yet lest any thing of
moment might escape an answer, I will review them, and answer them generally
and succinctly, as they are proposed by him. To his Title of Down derry I have
nothing to say, but that it were strange if he should throw a good cast, who
seals his bowl upon an undersong.

Sect. 1.
In the first place, he professes to show the impertinency of my grounds, and
to stick the guilt of Schism not only with color, but with undeniable
evidence, upon the English Church, by the very position of the case or stating
of the question between us; and this he calls a little after their chief
Objection against us: what then? is stating of the question and objecting all
one? I confess, the right position of a case may dispell umbrages, and
reconcile controversies, and bring much light to the truth. But as the lion
asked the man in the Fable, who made the picture? we may crave leave to demand,
who shall put this case? surely he means a Roman Catholic. For if a
Protestant state it, it will not be so much for their advantage, nor the bare
proposition of it, bear such undeniable evidence in it.

I hope a man may view this engine without danger. In the beginning of Henry
the eighths reign, and immediately before his sustraction of obedience from
the Sea of Rome, The Church of England, agreed with the Church of Rome, and all
the res^ of her Communion in two points, which were then and still are the
bonds of unity, betwixt all her members, the one concerning Faith, the other
Government. For Faith, her rule was, that the Doctrines which had been
inherited from their forefathers as the legacies of Christ and his Apostles,
were solely to be acknowledged for obligatory, and nothing in them to be
changed. For Government, her principle was, that Christ had made S. Peter
first, or chief, or Prince of his Apostles, who was to be the first mover
under him in the Churth after his departure out of this world, and that the
Bishops of Rome as successeours of S. Peter inherited from him this privilege,
etc. A little after he acknowledges that ^he first principle includes the
truth of the second. And that there is this manifest evidence for it, that
still the latter age could not be ignorant of what the former believed, and
that as long as it adhered to that method, nothing could be altered in it.

Before we come to his applicarion of this to the Church of England, or his
inference from hence in favor of the Church of Rome, it will not be amiss to
examine his two principles, and show what truth there is in them, and how
falsehood is hidden under the vizard of truth. In the first place, I desire the
Reader to observe with what subtlety this case is proposed, that the Church of
England agreed with the Church of Rome and all the rest of her Communion. And
again, that the Bishop of Rome exercised this power in all those Countries
which kept communion with the Church of Rome. So seeking to obtrude upon us the
Church of Rome with its dependents for the Catholic Church. We owe respect to
the Church of Rome as an Apostolical Church, but we owe not that conformity and
subjection to it, which we owe to the Catholic Church of Christ. Before this
pretened separation, the Court of Rome by their temerarious censures had
excluded two third parts of the Catholic Church from their Communion, and
thereby had made themselves Schismatic. The world is greater then the City,
all these Christian Churches which are excommunicated by the Court of Rome,
only because they would never (no more then their Ancestors) acknowledge
themselves subjects to the Bishop of Rome, did inherit the Doctrine of saving
Faith from their forefathers, as the Legacy of Christ and his Apostles, and
have been as faithful depositaries of it as they. And their testimony what
this Legacy was, is as much to be regarded as the Testimony of the Church of
Rome, and so much more, by how much they are a greater part of the Catholic
Church.

Secondly, I observe how he makes two principles, the one in doctrine, the
other in discipline; though he confess that the truth of the latter is included
in the former, and borrows its evidence from it; only that he might gain
themoreopportunity to shuffle the latter usurpations of the Popes into the
ancient discipline of the Church; and make these upstart novelties to be a part
of that ancient Legacy.

Frustra fit per plura quod fieri potest per pauciora; It is in vain to make
two rules, where oue will serve the turn. I do readily admit both his first
and his second rule reduced into one, in this subsequent form: That those
doctrines and that discipline which we inherited from our forefathers, as the
Legacy of Christ and his Apostles, ought solely to be acknowledged for
obligatory, and nothing in them to be changed, that is substantial or
essential.

So the Church of England maintains this rule now as well as they. The
question only is, who have changed that Doctrine or this Discipline, we or
they? we by substraction, or they by addition? The case is clear, the Apostles
contracted this Doctrine into a Summary, that is, the Creed; the primitive
Fathers expounded it where it did stand in need of clearer explication. The
General Council of Ephesus did forbid all men to exact any more of a
Christian at his baptismal profession. Into this Faith were we baptized, unto
this Faith do we adhere; whereas they have changed and enlarged their Creed by
the addition of new Articles, as is to be seen in the new Creed or Confession
of Faith made by Pius the fourth: so for Doctrine. Then for discipline, we
profess and avow that discipline which the whole Christian world practiced for
the first six hundred years, and all the Eastern, Sowthern and Northern
Churches until this day. They have changed the beginning of unity into an
universality of Jurisdiction, and Sovereignty of power above General Councels,
which the Christian world for the first six hundred years did never know, nor
the greatest part of it ever acknowledge until this day. Let S. Peter be the
first, or chief, or in a right sense the Prince of the Apostles, or the first
mover in the Church, all this extends but to a primacy of order, the
Sovereignty of Ecclesiastical power was in the Apostolical College, to which
a general Council now succeeds. It is evident enough whether they or we do
hold our selves better to the legacy of Christ and his Apostles.

Thirdly, whereas he adds, that The Bishops of Rome as successors of S.
Peter inherited his privileges, and actually excercised this power in all
those countries which kept Communion with the Church of Rome, that very year
wherein this unhappy separation began; as it comes much short of the truth in
one respect, for the Popes exercised much more power in those Countries which
gave them leave, then ever S. Peter pretended unto; so it is much more short of
that Universal Monarchy which the Pope did then, and does still claim. For,
as I have already said, two third parts of the Christian world were not at that
time of his Communion, but excommunicated by him, only because they would not
submit their necks to his yoke. And those other Countries which yielded more
obedience to him, or were not so well able to contest against him, yet when
they were overmuch pinched, and his oppresons and usurpations did grow
intolerable, did oppose him, and make themselves the last judges of their own
liberties and grievancies, and of the limits of Papal authority, and set
bounds unto it, as I have demonstrated in the ^indication. So whereas this
refuter does undertake to state the case clearly, he comes not near the true
question at all, which is not, whether the Bishop of Rome had any authority in
the Catholic Church; he had authority in his Diocese as a Bishop; in his
Province as a Metropolitan; in his Patriarchate, as the chief of the five
Protopatriarchs; and all over, as the Bishop of an Apostolical Church, or
successor of S. Peter. But the true question is, what are the right limits and
bounds of his authority? whether he have a legi^lative power over all
Christians? whether the patronage and disposition of all Churches does belong
unto him? whether he may convocate Synods, and exercise Jurisdiction, and sell
palles, pardons and indulgences, and send Legates, and set up Legantine Courts,
and impose pensions at his pleasure, in all kingdoms without consent of
Sovereign Princes, and call all Ecclesiastical causes to Rome, and interdict
whole nations, and infringe their liberties and customs, and excommunicate
Printes, and deprive them of their Realms, and absolve their subjects from
their allegiance? Let these pretended branches of Papal power be lopped off,
and all things restored to the primitiye form, and then the Papacy will be no
more like that insana Laurus, the cause of contention or division in all
places. In the mean time, if they want that respect which is due unto them,
they may blame themseves, who will not accept what is their just right, unless
they may have more.

Fourthly 'that which follows is a great mistake, that it was and is the
constant belief of the C^thelick world, that these principles are Christ's own
ordination recorded in Scripture. What? that S. Peter had any power over his
fellowApostles? or that the Bishop of Rome, succeeds him in that power? It does
not appear out of the holy text that S. Peter was at Rome, except we understand
Rome by the name of Babylon. If it be Christ's own ord^nation recorded in the;
scriptures, that S. Peter should have all these privileges, and the Bishop of
Rome inherit themashis successor, thenthe great general Council of Chalcedon
was much to be blamed, to give equal prviledges to the Patriarch of
Constantinople, with the Patriarch of Rome, and to esteem the Imperial City
more then the ordination of Christ. Then the whole Catholic Church was much to
be blamed, to receive such an unjust coustirution not approved by the then
Bishop of Rome. Lastly, this is so far from the constant belief of the
Catholic world, that it is not the belief of the Roman Church it self at this
day. The greatest defenders of the Popes Supremacy dare not say that the Bishop
of Rome succedeth S. Peter by Christ's own ordination, but only by S. Peter's
dying Bishop of Rome. They acknowledge that S. Peter might have dyed Bishop of
Antioch, and then they say the Bishop of Antioch had succeeded him, or he might
have died Bishop of no place, and then the Papacy had been in the disposition
of the Catholic Church, though he died at Rome, as without doubt it is, and
may be contracted, or enlarged, or translated from one See to another, for the
advantage of Christian Religion. His manifest evidence which he styles so
ample a memory and succession as is stronger then the stock of humane
government and action; That is, that still the latter age could not be ignorant
of what the former believed, and as long as it adhered to that method, nothing
could be altered in it, is so far from a demonstration, that it scarcely
deserves the name of a Topicall argument. For as an universal uncontroverted
tradition of the whole Christian world of all ages united, is a convinclng and
undeniable evidence, (such a tradition is the Apostles Creed comprehending in
it all the necessary points of saving Faith, repeated daily in our Churches,
every Christian standing up at it, both to express his assent unto it, and
readiness to maintain it, professed by every Christian at his Baptism,
either personally when he is of age sufficient, or by his sureties, when he is
an infant* and the tradition of the universal Church of this age a proof not
to be opposed nor contradicted by us.) So the tradition of some particular
persons, or some particular Churches, in particular points or opinions of an
inferior nature, which are neither so necessary to be known, nor so firmly
believed, nor, so publicly and universally professed nor derived downwards
from the Apostolicalages by such uninterrupted succession, does produce no such
certainty either of evidence or adherence. When the Christian world is either
not united, or divided about particular opinions or inferior points of faith,
it proves most probably that there was no Apostolical tradition at first, but
that particular persons or places have assumed their respective opinions in
succeeding ages. Or otherwise there is a fault in the conduit-pipe, or an
error and failing in the derivatton of the tradition. And both these do take
much away from assurance, more or less according to the degree of the
opposition. In such questionable and controverted points as these, which are
neither so universally received, nor so publicly professed, his assertion is
groundless and erroneous, that the latter age cannot be ignorant what the
former believed. Yes, in such controverted points this present age may not
know, yea, does not know what it self believes, or rather opiniateth, until
it come to be voted in a Synod. The most current opinions in the Schoos are not
always the most generaly received in the Church, and those which are most
pla^sible in one place, are often hissed out of another. And though it were
possible for a man to know what opinion is universally most current, yet how
shall he know that the greater part is the sounder part? or if he did how shall
he know that what he believes in such points is more then an indifferent
opinion? Or that it was deposited by the Apostles with the Church, and
delivered from age to age by an uninterrupted succession? No ways, but by
universal tradition of the Christian world united, either written or
unwritten: but this is all the evibence which they can expect, who confound
universal tradition with particular tradition, the Roman Church with the
Catholic Church, the Christian world united with the Christian world divided,
and Scholasticall opinions with Articles of Faith.

Yet from these two principles he makes two inferences, the one against the
Church of England, that since the reformation neither the former rule of unity
of Faith, nor the second of unity of government have had any power in the
English Church. Whilst he himself knows no better what we believe, who live
in the same age, how does he presume, that the latter age cannot be ignorant of
what the former believed? I have showed him already how we do willingly admit
this principle, wherein both his rules are comprehended, that the doctrines and
discipline inherited from our Forefathers as the legacies of Christ and his
Apostles, are solely to be acknowledged for obligatory, and nothing in them to
be changed. This is as much as any person disinteressed can or will require.
And upon this principle we are willing to proceed to a trial with them. There
is a fallacy in Logic, called of more interrogations then one, that is, when
several questions of different natures, to which one uniforme answer cannot be
given, yea, or no, are mixed and confounded together. So he does not only set
down this second rule concerning government ambiguously, that a man cannot
tell whether he make S. Peter only an head of order among the Apostles, or an
head of single power and Jurisdiction also over the Apostles, but also he
shuffles the Bishop of Rome into S. Peter's place by Christ's own ordination, and
confounds S. Peter's Ex o dium Vnitatis with the usurped power of Popes, as it
was actually exercised by them in latter ages.

His second inference is in favor of the Church of Rome, that the Roman Church
with those Churches which continue in communion with it, are the only Churches
which have true doctrine in virtue of the first principle above mentioned, and
the right government in virtue of the second; and consequently are the entire
Catholic or Universal Church of Christians, all others by misbelief or
Schism being excluded. Our answer is ready, that the Church of Rome, or the
Court of Rome have sophisticated the true doctrine of Faith by their
supplementall Articles and erroneous additions, contrary to the first
principle, and have introduced into the Church a tyrannical and unlawful
government contrary to the second principle, and are so far from being the
entire Catholic Church, that by them both, they are convicted to have made
themselves guilty of supertio n and Schism.

And lastly, where he says, that my only way to clear our Church from
Schism, is either by disproving the former to be the necessary rule of unity
in Faith; or the latter the necessary bond of government, he is doubly
mistaken. First, we are the persons accused, our plea is negative, or not
guilty. So the proof lies not upon us, but upon him to make good his
accusation by proving us Schismatics.

Secondly, if the proof did rest upon our sides, we do not approve of^his
advi^e* It is not we who have altered the Doctrine or Discipline which Christ
left to his Church by our substractions, but they by their additions. There is
no doubt but Christ's legacy ought to be preserved inviolable; but we deny that
Christ bequeathed spiritual Monarchy over his Church to S. Peter, and that the
Bishop of Rome is S. Peter's heir by Christ's ordination. And that this was the
constant belief of the Catholic world at any time. This is his province; let
him either make this good or hold his peace.

Sect. 2.
So his Prologue is ended, now we come to his animadversions upon my arguments.
My first ground was, because not Protestants, but Roman Catholics themselves
did make the first separation. To which his first answer is, If it were so, how
does that acquit us since continuance in a breach of this nature is as culpable
as the beginning? Many ways. First, it is a violent presumption of their guilt
and our innocence, when their best friends and best able to judge, who preached
for them, and writ for them, who acted for them, and suffered for them, who in
all other things were great zelo^s of the Roman Religion, and persecuted the
poor Protestants with fire and Faggot, did yet condemn them, and justify this
separation. Secondly, though it does not always excuse a t^to, from all guilt
and punishment, to be misled by others into error, If the blind llead the
blind, both fall into the ditch, yet it does always excuse a tanto, it
lesseneth the sin, and extenuateth the guilt. Persons misled by the example and
authority of others are not so cuipable as the first authors and ringleaders in
Schism. If this separation be an Error in Protestants, the Roman Catholics
do owe an account to God both for themselves and us, did they find cause to
turn the Pope out of England, as an intruder and usurper, and could
Protestants, who had no relation to Rome, imagine that it was their duties to
bring him in again?

Thirdly, in this case it does acquit us not only a tanto, but a toto, not
only from such a degree of guilt but from all criminus Schism, so longas we
seek carefuly after truth, and do not violate the dictates of our Consciences.
If he will not believe me let himbeleeve S. Austin. He that defends not his
false opinion with pertinacious animosity, Epist. 161.
having not invented it himself, but learned it from his erring parents, if he
enquire carefully after the truth, and be ready to embrace it, and to correct
his errors when he finds them, he is not to be reputed an heretic. If this
be true in the case of heresy, it is more true in the case of Schism. Thus if
it had been a crime in them, yer it is none in us; but in truth it was neither
crime in them, nor us, but a just and necessary duty.

Secondly, he answers, that it is no sufficient proof that they were no
Protestants, because they persecuted Protestants. For Protestants persecute
Protestants; Lutherans, Calvinists; Zwinglians, Puritans; and Beownists
persecute one another. What then were Warham and Heath, and Thureleby,
Tunscall, and Stokesley, and Gardener, and Bonner, etc. all Protestants? did
Protestants enjoy Arch-Bishopricks and Bishoprics i^ England, and say Masses
in those days? will he part so easily with the greatest Patrons and Champions
of their Church, and opposers of the Reformation? If he had wri^ thus much
whilst they were living, they would have been very angry with him. Yet at the
least if they were Protestants, let him tell me which of these Sects they were
of, Lutheran^, etc. But he tells us, that the reouncing of the Pope is the
most essential part of our reformation, and so they had in them the
quintessence of a Protestant. He is mistaken. This part of the reformation was
done to our hands; it was their reformation, not ours. But if he will needs
have the kingdoms and Churches of England and Ireland to have been all
Protestants in Henry the eighths days, only for renouncing the Popes absolute
universal Monarchy, I am well contented, we shall not lose by the bargain.
Then the Primitive Church were all Protestants, then all the Grecian, Russian,
Armenian, Abyssen Christians are Protestants at this day, then we want not
store of Protestants even in the besome of the Roman Church it self.

Sect. 3.
My second Ground (says he) was, because in the separation of England from
Rome there was no new law made, but only their ancient Liberties vindicated.
This he is pleased to call notoriously false and impudence it self, because a
law was made in Henry the eighths time, and an oath invented, by which was
given to the King to be head of the Church, and to have all the power the Pope
did at that time possess in England. Is this the language of the Roman
S^hooles? or does he think perhaps with his outcri^s and clamours, as the Turks
with their Alla, Alla, to daunt us, and drive us from our cause? Christian
Reader, of what Communion soever thou art, be but indifferent, and I make thee
the Judge where this notorious falsehood and impudence does rest, between him
and me. I acknowledge this was the Title of my fourth Chapter, that the King
and Kingdom of England in the separation from Rome, did make no now law, but
vindicate their ancient Liberties. It seems he confureth the Titles, without
looking into the Chapters: did I say, they made no new statutes? No, I cited
all the new statutes which they did make, and particularly this very statute
which he mentions here. Yet I said, they made no new law, because it was the
law of the land before that statute was made. The Customs and liberties of
England are the ancient and common Law of the land; when soever these were
infringed, or an attempt made to destroy them, (as the liberties of the Crown
and Church of England had then been invaded by the Pope) it was the manner to
restore them, or to declare them by a statute, which was not operative to make
or create new law, but declarative to manifest or to restore ancient law. This
I told him expressly in the vindication, Vind. chapter 4. page 86.
and cited the judgment of our greatest Lawyers, Fitz Herbirt, and my Lord
Cook, to prove that this very statute was not operative to create new law, but
declarative to restore ancient law. This appears undeniably by the statute it
self. That England is an Empire, and that the King as head of the body
politic consisting of the spirituality and temporality, has plenary power to
render final Justice for all matters. Here he sees expressly that the
dolitcall supremacy or headship of the King over the spirituality as well as
temporality, which is all that we assert at this day, was the an e nt
fundamental law of England. And lest h^e should accuse this Parliament of
partiali^y, I produced another that was more ancient?

^^. H 8. c. ^2.16. R. 2. c. 5.
The Crown of England has been so free at all times, that it has been in no
earthly subjection, but immediately subjected to God in all things touching
it is Regality, and to no other, and ought not to be submitted to the Pope. Here
the Kings political Supremacy under God is declared to be the fundamental Law
of the Land. Let him not say that this was intended only in temporal matters,
for all the grievances mentioned in that statute are expressly
Ecclesiastical. What was his meaning to conceal all this and much more, and to
accuse me of impudence.

Secondly, he says, that I bring diverse allegations wherein the Popes
pretenses were not admitted, or where the Pope is expressly denied the power
to do such and such things. Do we profess the Pope can pretend no more then
his right? Does he think a legitimate authority is rejected, when the
particular faults of them that are in authority are resisted? He styles the
Authorities by me produced mere Allegations, yet they are as authentic Records
as England does afford. But though he be willing to blanch over the matter in
general expressions of the Popes pretenses, and such or such things, as if the
controversy had been only about an handful of goats wool, I will make bold to
represent some of the Popes pretenses, and their declarations against them. And
if he be of the same mind with his Ancestors in those particulars, he and I
shall be in a probable way of reconciliation as to this question. They declared
that it. was the custom or common law of the land, ut nullus praeter licentiam
Regis appelletur Papa, Malm. l. 1. de G^st. pont. Aug. Reg. Honed in h. ^.
that no Pope might be appealed unto without the Kings license. They made a
law, that if any one were found bringing in the Popes letters or mandates into
the kingdom, let him be apprehended, and let justice pass upon him without
delay, as a Traitor to the King and kingdom. They exercised a legislative
power in all ecclesiastical causes, concerning the external subsistence,
Regiment, and regulating of the Church, and over all Ecclesiastical persons, in
all ages as well of the Saxon as of the Norman Kings. They permitted not the
Pope to endow Vicars, nor make spiritual corporations, nor exempt from the
jurisdiction of the ordinary, nor appropriate Churches, nor to dispose
Benefices by lapse, nor to receive the revenues in the vacancy, but the King
did all these things, as I showed at large in the vindication. 20. H. 3. c. 9.
They permitted not the Popes canon law to have any place in England further
then they pleased to receive it. They gave the king the last appeal of all his
subjects, they ascribed to him the patronage of Bishoprics, and investitures
of Bishops. They suffered no subject to be cited to Rome without the Kings
license. They admitted no Legates from the Pope, but merely upon courtesy, and
if any was admitted, he was to take his oath to do nothing derogatory to the
King or his Crown. Stat. Clarendo. Stat. Carlisle. Art Cleri. 25 Ed. 3. 37 Ed.
*3. ch ^. ^6. Rich. 2. c. ^. Placit an: 1. H. 7. Placit. an. 32. and 34. Edv, 1.
If any man did denounce the Popes excommunication in England without the Kings
consent, or bring over the Popes bull, he forfeited all his goods. So the laws
of England, did not allow the Pope to cite or excommunicate an English Subject,
nor dispose of an English Benefice; nor send a Legate a latere, orso much as an
authoritative bull into England nor to re^eive an appeal out of England, without
the kings license.

But says he, To limit an authority implies an admittance of it in cases to
which the rsstraints extend not. This was not merely to limit an authority, but
to deny it. What lawful Jurisdiction could remain to him in England, who was
not permitted by law to receive any appeal thence, nor to send any Citation or
sentence thither, nor execute any authority over an English Subject, either at
Rome by himself, or in England by his deputies without license? That he
exercised all these acts at sometimes there is no doubt of it. But he could not
exercise them lawfully without consent. Give us the same limitation which our
Ancestors always claimed, that no foreign authority shall be exercised in
England withour leave, and then give the Pope as much authority as you please,
volenti non fit injuria, consent takes away error. He is not wronged who gives
leave to another to wrong him.

He demands first, were not those bawes in force in the beginning of Henry
the eighths reign? Yes: but it is no strange matter to explain or confirm or
renew ancient laws upon emergent and subsequent abuses, as we see in magna
Charta, the statute of proviso's, and many other Statutes. Secondly, he asks
whether we began our Religion there, that is, at that time when these ancient
laws were made? no, I have told him formerly that these statutes were only
declarative what was the ancient common law of the kingdom. We began our
Religion from Joseph of Arimathea's time, before they had a Church at Rome. But
it is their constant use to make the least reformation to be a new Religion.
Lastly, he enquireth whether there be not equivolent laws to these in France,
Spain, Germany, and Italy it self, and yet they are Catholics, and hold
communication with the Pope? Yes, there are some such laws in all these places
by him mentioned, perhaps not so many, but the liberties of the French Church
are much the same with the English, Chapter 7. p. 196.
as I have showed in the vindication. And therefore the Popes friends do
exclude France out of the number of these Countries which they term Pays d'
obedience, loyal Countries. What ^use some other Countries can make of the
Papacy more then we in England, concerns not me nor this present discourse. And
here to make his conclusion answerable to his preface in this section, he cries
out, How ridiculous, how impudent a manner of speaking is this? to force his
Readers to renounce their eyes and ears, and all evidence. Nay Reader, it is
not I that about to force thee to renounce thy Eyes or Ears; or thy evidence,
but it is he that is troubled for fear thou should use thine Eyes and Ears
to look upon the evidence. And therefore like the Priests of Cybele on purpose
makes all this noise, to deaf thine Ears, lest thou should hear the loud
cries of our laws.

Sect. 4.
The scope of my fifth Chapter was to show that the Britannique Churches (that
is, the Churches of the Britannique Islands) were ever exempted from Foreign
Jurisdiction for the first six hundred years, and so ought to continue. His
first exception to this is, How the Britannique privileges do belong to us?
Have we any Title from the Britannique Churches, otherwise then by the Saxon
Christians, who only were our Ancestors? etc. Yes, well enough. First Wales
and Cornwall have not only a local, but a personal succession. No man can
doubt of their right to the privileges of the Britannique Churches. Secondly,
there is the same reason for the Scots and Picts, who were no more subjected to
Foreign Jurisdiction, then the Britons themselves. All these put together,
Britons, Scots and Picts, did possess about two third parts of the Britannique
Islands after the Saxon Conquests were consummated. Thirdly among the Saxons
themselves the great kingdoms of Mercia and North umberland were converted by
the ancient Scots, and had their Religion and ordination first from them,
afterward among themselves, without any foreign dependence, and so were as
free as either Britons or Scots, and ought to continue so. Fourthly throughout
the rest of England a world of British Christians after the Conquest did still
live mixed with the Saxons, such as they had no need to fear, such as might be
serviceable to them, as it commonly fall h out in all Conquests, otherwise the
Saxons had not been able to people the sixth part of the Land. Who can deny
these poor conquered Christians, and their Christian posterity, though mixed
with Saxons, the just privileges of their Ancestors. Lastly, the Saxon
Conquest gave unto them as good Title to the privileges, as to the lands of
the Brittons, so soon as they were capable of them. And so at their first
conversion they were free, and continued free, and further then themselves
pleased to consent ought to continue free for ever.

Secondly he objecteth that this pretended execution of the British Churches is
false. For nothing is more evident in History, then that the British Churches
admitted appellation to Rome at the Council of Sardica. Before he can allege
the authority of the Council of Sardica, he must renounce his divine
institution of the Papacy. For that Canon submits it to the good pleasure of
the Fathers; and groundeth it upon the memory of S. Peter, not the institution
of Christ. Further, how does it appear, that the British Bishops did assent to
that Canon? This is merely presumption without any proof. The Council of
Sardica was no general Council after all the Eastern Bishops were departed,
as they were before the making of that Canon. Neither were the Canons of the
Council of Sardica ever received in England, or incorporated into the English
laws, and without such incorporation they did not bind English Subjects.
Lastly, this Canon is contradicted by the great general council of Chalcidon,
which our Church receives. There appears not the least footstep of any Papal
Jurisdiction exercised in England by Elutheri ns, but the contrary, for he
referred the Legislative part to king Leucius, and the British Bishops. And if
Pope Coelestin had sent S. Germain into Britain, to free the Britains from
Pelagianisme, or converted some of the Scots by Paladius, as we have very
little reason to believe either the one or the other, yet it makes nothing at
all for the exercise of any Papal Jurisdiction in Britain, Preaching and
Converting, and Baptizing, and Ordaining, are acts of the key of order, not of
Jurisdiction. But these instances, and whatsoever he has in answer to the
British observation of Easter, are pressed more home by the Bishop of
Chalcedon, and clearly satisfied in my reply to him. Chapter ^.
Whither I refer the Reader.

But (says he) that which is mainly to the purpose is, that since this
privilege (he means the Supremacy) descends upon the Pope as successor to
S. Peter, how far it was executed may be unknown, but, that it was due, none
can be ignorant. Words are but wind, when they are utterly destitute of all
manner of proof. We acknowledge the Pope to be successor of S. Peter, and (if
he do not forfeit it by his own fault) we are ready to pay him such respect as
is due to the Bishop of an Apostolical Church; but for any spiritual Monarchy,
or Universal Jurisdiction, we know no manner of Title that he has. His
pretense is more from Phocas the Usurper, then from St. Peter. And here though
I know not this hereditary privilege of the Pope descended from St. Peter,
(there is no knowledge of that which has no being) and the burden of proving
it lies upon him; yet he taxes me for leaving it, and spending my time about
the Popes Patriarchal power. I observe how ready they are all to decline all
manner of discourse concerning the Popes Patriarchal power; And yet for a long
time, it was the fairest flower in their Garland, I know not what is the
Reason, but we may well conjecture, because they find that their spiritual
Monarchy, and this Patriarchal dignity, are inconsistent the one with the
other, in the same subject. They might as well make a King to be a Sheriff of
a Shiere, or a President of a particular Province within his own Kingdom, as
make a spiritual Monarch to be a Patriarch. And yet a Patriarch he was, and so
always acknowledged to be, and they cannot deny it.

Among other proofs of the British Liberty, I produced the answer of Dionothu
to Austin, no obscure person as he makes him; but a man famous for his
Learning, Abbot and Rector of the famous University of Bangor; wherein there
were at that time above 2100 Monks and Students, at the very close of the first
six hundred years, That he knew no obedience due to him whom they called the
Pope, but obedience of Love: And that under God they were to be governed by the
Bishop of Caer^eon. This Record he calls, a piece of a worn Welsh
manuscript, and a manifest forgery of a Counterfeit knave. And to prove it
counterfeit, he produces three reasons. First, That the word Pope without any
addition is put for the Bishop of Rome; which if our great Antiquaries can show
in these days, he will confess himself surprised. I shall not need to trouble
any of our great Antiquaries about it. It will suffice to commit him and his
friend Cardinal Bellarmine together about it. I see, friends are not always of
one mind. L. 2. de Ro^ Pont. c. 3^, Act. 16.
Thus he, Cum absolute pronunciatur Papa, ipse solus intelligitur, ut patet ex
confilio chalcedonensi: Beatissimus et Apostolicus vir Papa hoc nobis
praecipit. Nec additur Leo, aut Romanus, aut nobis Romae, aut aliquid aliud.
When the word Pope is put alone, the Bishop of Rome only is to be understood,
as appears out of the Council of Chalcedon, [ The most blessed and
Apostolical man the Pope does command us this] Neither is there added Pope Leo,
or the Pope of Rome, or the Pope of the City of Rome, or any other thing.

His second exception has no more weight then the former. That there was no
such Bishopric as Caerleon in those days, the Sea being translated 50. years
before that to St. David's; Where is the contradiction? The name of the old
Diocese is Caerleon. The new See or Throne was the new Abbey Church erected a^
Menevia, which place posterity called St. David's. But St. David's could not be
called St. David's whilst he himself lived, nor afterward, until custom and
tract of time had confirmed such an appellation. Some would make us believe
that St. David and St. Greg^ry dyed upon the same day, and then he was still
living when Dinoth gave this answer; But let that be as it will, for it is not
much material. St. David after the Translation of his See dyed Archbishop of
Caerleon. Britt. hist^ L. 11. c. 3.
Tunc obi^t sanctissimus urbis Legionum Archiepiscopus David in Meneviae
Civitate, etc. Then dyed the most holy Archbishop of Caerleon St. David in the
City of Menevia; Page 106:
And long after his death it still retained the name of Caerleon, even after it
was commonly called St. David's. So much Sr. Henry Spilman might have put him in
mind of: Discesserat ante haec dignitas a Caerlegione ad Land^viam sub
Dubr^tio, et mox ^ Landavia ad Meneviam cum sancto Davide, etc. Sed retento
pariter Caerlegionis titulo. And least he should account Sr. Henry Spilman
partial, Let him hear Giraldus Cambrensis, Habuimus apud Meneviam Vrbis
legionum Archiepiscopos successive viginti quinque, Dialog. de Eccles. Mcne.
distinct, 3.
quorum primus fuit sanctus David etc. We had at Menevia, five and twenty
Archbishops of Caerleon, whereof St. David was the first. What can be more
plain? should a man condemn every Author forcounterfeit, wherein St. Albans is
called Verolam presently after St. Albans death? It is an ordinary thing for
the same City to have two names, and much more the same Bishopric: one from
the old See, another from the new: or one from the Diocese, another from the Sea: as the Bishop of Ossory or Kilkenny indifferently.

His third exception is so slight, that I cannot find the edge of it, because
Sr. Henry Spilman found no other antiquity in it worth the mention, which
shrewdly implies, that the Book was made for this alone. And how does he know
that Sr. Henry Spilman found no other antiquities in it? There might be many
other British Antiquities in it; And yet not proper for a collection of
Ecclesiastical Councels: Or if there had been no other Antiquity in it, Would
he condemn his Creed for a counterfeit, because it is not hudled together
confusedly, with some other Treatises in one volume? But to demonstrate
evidently to him how vain all his trifling is against the testimony of
Dionothus, Why does he not answer the coroberatory proof, which I brought out
of venerable Bede and others, of two British Synods held at the same time,
wherein all the British Clergy did renounce all obedience to the Bishop of
Rome, of which all our hystoriographers do bear witness? Why does he not answer
this, but pass by it in so great silence? He might as well accuse this of
forgery as the other, since it is so well attested, that Dionothus was a great
actor and disputer in that business.

Sect. 5.
In my sixth Chapter, I proved three things: First, that the King and Church of
England, had sufficient authority, to withdraw their obedience from the Roman
Patriarch. Secondly, that they had just grounds to do it. And thirdly, that
they did it with due moderation.

Concerning the first point, he charge me the second time, for insisting upon
a wrong Plea; that is, their Patriarchal Authority, which he confesses to be
humane and mutable. I have formerly intimated, why they are so loath to
entertain any discourse concerning the Popes Patriarchate: because they know
not how to reconcile a Monarchy of divine institution, with an Aristocracy of
humane Institution. When I first undertook this subject, I conceived, that the
great strength of the Roman Sampson did lie in his Patriarchate; But since this
Refuter quitteth it, as the Pope himself has done, not for six hundred years
only, (he speaks too sparingly) but for a thousand years, ever since Phocas
made Boniface universal Bishop, I am well contented to give over that subject,
upon these two conditions; First, that he do not presume that the Pope is a
spiritual Monarch, without proving it. Secondly, that he do not attempt to make
Patriarchal Privileges to be Royal Prerogatives.

Yet he will not leave this humane Right before we have resolved him three
questions. First, (says he) suppose the Christian world had chosen to
themselves one head for the preservation of unity in Religion; What wrongs must
that head do, to be sufficient grounds, both for the deposition of the person,
and abolition of the Government? Nay, put the case right, Suppose the Christian
World should choose one for order sake, to be their President, or Prolocuter in
their General Assembly, and he should endeavor to make himself their Prince,
upon some fained Title, Did not he deserve to be turned out of his employment,
and if they found it expedient to have another chosen in his place?

Secondly, He supposes, that this alteration should be made by some one party
of the Christian Commonwealth, which must separate it self from the communion
of the rest of Christianity; Ought not far weightier causes then these to be
expected? One mistake begets another, as one circle in the water does produce
another^ We have made no such separation from any just Authority, instituted by
the Catholic Church: We nourish a more Catholic Communion then themselves.
But if our Steward will forsake us, because we will not give him leave to
become our Master, who can help it?

Thirdly, He supposes, that by setting aside this Supreme Head, eternal
dissentions will inevitably follow in the whole Church of Christ; and then
demands, Whether the refusal to comply with the humors of a lustful Prince,
be ground enough to renounce so necessary an Authority? How should the refusal
to comply be any such ground? Certainly he means, the compliance with the
humors of a lustful Prince. I pass by the extravagancy of the expression.
Whatsoever they have said, or can say concerning Henry the eighth, so far as it
may reflect upon the Church of England, is cleared in my reply to R.C.

First, He begs the question, Christ never instituted the Apostles, never
constituted the Catholic Church, never acknowledged any such Supreme Head of
Power and Jurisdiction.

Secondly, The Church and Kingdom of England, had more lawful, just and noble
grounds for their separation from the Court of Rome, then any base parasitical
compliance with the humors of any Prince whatsoever, as he cannot choose but
see in this very Chapter. But who is so blind as he that will not see?

Thirdly, We do confess, that the Primitive Papacy, that is, an Exordium
unitatis, a beginning of unity; was an excellent means of Concord. We do not
envy the Bishop of Rome, or any Honor which the Catholic Church did allow
him; But modern Papacy which they seek to obtrude upon us, is rather (as Nilus
says) the cause of all dissentions, Nilus de primatis.
and Controversies of the Christian World.

Lastly, To his demand concerning the English Court and Church, Whether I would
condescend to the rejection of Monarchy, and to the extirpation of Episcopacy;
for the misgovernment of Princes, or abuses of Prelates? I answer, No; But this
will not advantage his cause at all, for three Reasons; First, never were any
such abuses as these objected, either to Princes or Prelates in England.

Secondly, we seek not the extirpation of the Papacy, but the reduction of it
to the primitive constitution.

Thirdly, Monarchy and Episcopacie are of divine institution, so is not a
papal Sovereignty of Jurisdiction. His parliamentary Prelacie has more sound
then weight. We need not be beholden to Parliament for the Justification of our
Prelacie, as he will find that undertakes it.

Sect. 6.
We are now come to the grounds of our separation from the Court of Rome.
Reader, observe and wonder! All this while they have been calling to us for our
grounds: they have declaimed, that there can be no just grounds of such a
separation. They have declared in the Hypothesis, that we had no grounds, but
to comply with the Humors of a lustful Prince. Now we present our grounds
being reduced to five Heads.

First, The most intolerable extortions of the Roman Court, committed from age
to age without hope of Remedy.

Secondly, Their most unjust usurpations of all Rights, Civil, Ecclesiastical,
sacred and profane of all orders of men, Kings, Nobles, Bishops, etc.

Thirdly, the malignant influence, and effects of this foreign jurisdiction,
destructive to the right ends of Ecclesiastical Discipline, producing disunion
in the Realm, factions and animosities between the Crown and the Mitre,
intestine discord between the King and his Barons, bad intelligence with
neighbor Princes, and foreign wars.

Fourthly, a list of other inconveniences, or rather mischiefs that did flow
from thence: as to be daily subject to have new Articles of faith obtruded upon
them, exposed to manifest peril of Idolatry, to forsake the Communion of three
parts of Christendom, to approve the Popes rebellion against general Councels,
and to have their Bishops take an Oath contrary to their oath of Allegiance, to
maintain the Pope in his rebellious usurpations.

Lastly, The weakness of the Popes pretenses, and the exemption of the
Brittannique Church from foreign jurisdiction by the Decree of the General
Council of Ephesus: Certainly, he ought to have showed, either that these
grounds conjoined were not sufficient, or that they were not true, or that
there were other remedies; But he is well contented to pass by them all in
silence, which is as mueh as yield the Cause.

Thus he, It is then of little concernment to examine, whether his complaints
be true or false, since he does not show there was no other remedy but
division? What? is it of little concernment to examine whether the grounds be
sufficient or no? It belongs not to me to show that there was no other remedy,
that is, to prove a negative; but if he will answer my grounds, it belongs to
him to show that there was other remedy; yet so far as a negative is capable of
proof, I have showed even in this Chapter, that there was no other remedy: I
showed that the Pope and his Court were not under the Jurisdiction of the King
or Church of England, so as to call them to a personal account, I showed that
the English Nation had made their addresses to the Pope, in Council, out of
Council, for ease from their oppressions, in diversages, and never found any
but what they carved out to themselves at home after this manner. He adds, And
much more since it is known, if the authority be of Christ's institution, no
just cause can possibly be given for its abolishment. This is a very
euthumematical kind of arguing, If the sky fall, we shall have larks. He knows
right well, that it is his assumption which is latent, that we deny, that we
have abolished any thing which either Christ or his Church did institute.

He proceeds, But most, because all other Catholic Countries might have made
the same exception which England pretends; yet they remain still in communion
with the Church of Rome, and after we have broke the Ice, do not hold it
reasonable to follow our example. Few or no Catholic Countries have sustained
so great oppression from the Court of Rome as England has, which the Pope
himself called his Garden of delight, a Well that could not be drawn dry. All
other Countries have not right to the Cyprian Privilege to be exempt from
foreign jurisdiction, as Britain has. Yet all other Catholic Countries, do
maintain their own Privileges inviolated, and make themselves the last Judge
of their grievances from the Court of Rome. Some other Catholic Countries know
how to make better use of the Papacy then England does; yet England is not
alone in the separation, so long as all the Eastern, Southern, Northern, and
so great a part of the Western Churches have separated themselves from the
Court of Rome, and are separated by them from the Church of Rome as well as we;
yet if it were otherwise, we must live by precepts, not by examples.

Nay, (says he) The former ages of our Country had the same cause to cast the
Popes Supremacy out of the Land: yet rather preferred to continue in the peace
of the Church, then attempt so destructive an innovation, Mistake not us so
much, we desire to live in the peaceable communion of the Catholic Church, as
well as our Ancestors, at far as the Roman Court will give us leave: neither
were our Ancestors so stupid to see themselves so fleeced and trampled upon,
and abused by the Court of Rome, and to sit still in the mean time, and blow
their noses. They did by their laws exclude the Popes supremacy out of
England, so far as they judged it necessary for the tranquillity of the
Kingdom, that is, his patronage of Churches, his Legates and Legantine Courts,
his bulls and sentences, and excommunications, his legislative power, his power
to receive appeals, except only in cases where the Kingdom did give consent.
They threatened him further to make a wall of separation between him and them.
We have more experience then our Ancestors had, that their remedies were not
Sovereign or sufficient enough; that if we give him leave to thrust in his
head, he will never rest until he have drawn in all his body after, whilst
there are no bonds to hold him but national laws.

Lastly, he pleads that the pretenses on which the English Schism was
originally made, were far different from those which I now take up to defend
it. What inward motives or impulsives our Reformers had to separate from the
Court of Rome, God knows, not I, that concerns themselves not me. But that
there were sufficient grounds of separation, I demonstrate, that concerns the
cause, that concerns me. Their inanimadvertence might make the separation
less Justifiable to them, but no less lawful in it self, or to us. These
causes are as just grounds to us, now to continue the separation, as they could
have bin to them, then if they had been observed, to make the separation, and
most certainly they were then observed, or the greatest part of them, as the
liberty of the English Church, the weakness of the Popes pretenses, the
extortions of the Court of Rome, their gross usurpation of all men's rights, and
the inconsistency of such a foreign discipline with the right ends of
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction. These things he ought to have answered in
particular, if he would have said any thing at all, but it seems he chose
rather to follow the counsel of Alcibiades to his Uncle, when he found him
busy about his accounts, that he should study rather how to give no account.

Sect. 7.
The next thing which I set forth, was the due moderation of the Church of
England in their reformation. This he calls a very pleasant Topic. Qu^cquid
recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis. The saddest Subjects were very
pleasant Topics to Democritus. The first part of our moderation was this, we
deny not to other Churches, the true being of Churches, nor possibility of
Salvation, nor separate from the Churches, but from their accidental errors,
and this I showed to have been S. Cyprians moderation whereby he purged
himself and his party from Schism, neminem judicantis, etc. judging no man,
removing no man from our Communion, for difference in opinion. This is, says
he, to declare men Idolaters, and wicked, and nevertheless to communicate with
them, reconciling thus, light to darkness, and making Christ and Antichrist
to be of the same Society. I spoke of our forbearing to censure other Churches,
and he answers of communicating with them. That is one aberration from the
purpose. But I may give him more advantage then that in this case. It is one
thing to communicate with material Idolaters, Heretics, or Schismatics in
their Idolatry, Heresy, or Schism, which is altogether unlawful: and it is
another thing to communicate with them in pious offices, and religious duties,
which may in some cases be very lawful. The orthodox Christians did sometimes
communicate with the Heretical Arreans. And the primitive Catholics with the
Schismatic novations, in the same public divine offices, as I have formerly
showed in this treatise. But they communicated with them in nothing that did
favor the Heresy of the one, or the Schism of the other. The Catholics
called the Donatists their brethren, and professed that they were obliged to
call them brethren, as we read in Optatus. But the Donatists would not
vouchsafe to acknowledge the Catholics for their brethren, upon this refuters
principles, that a man cannot say his own Religion is true, but he must say
the opposite is false, nor hold his own certain, without censuring another
man's. Yet it was not the Catholics, but the Donatists that did mingle light
and darkness together. These following princlples, are so evident and so
undeniable, that no man can question the truth of them, without questioning his
own judgment. That particular Churches may fall into errors. 2. That all
errors are not essentials, or fundamentals, 3. That those errors which are not
in essentials do not destroy the true being of a Church, 4. That nevertheless
every one is bound according to the just extent of his power, to free himself
from them. To dote so upon the body as to cherish the Ulcers, and out of hatred
to the Ulcers to destroy the being of the body, are both extremes. That is, so
to dote upon the name of the Church as to cherish the errors of it, or to hate
the errors so much as to deny the being of the Church

Preposterous zeal which is like Hell, hot without light, makes errors to be
essentials, and different opinious different Religions, 1. Cor. 3.12.
because it will not distinguish between the good foundation which is Christ,
and the hay and stubble that is builded thereupon.

The second proof of our moderation is our inward Charity; we leave them
unwillingly, as a man would leave his fathers or his brothers house infected
with the Plague, desirous to return so soon as it is cleansed. His answer is,
that if we did manifest it by our external works, they might have occasion to
believe it. I did prove it by our external works, namely our daily prayers for
them in our Letany, and especially our solemn aniversary prayer for their
conversion every good Friday, though we are not ignorant how they do as
solemnly anathematise us the day before

The third proof of our moderation was this, that we do not challenge a new
Church, a new Religion, or new holy orders; we obtrude no innovation upon
others, nor desire to have any obtruded upon our selves; we pluck up the weeds,
but retain all the plants of saving truth. To this he objects two things:

First, to take away goodness is the greatest evil, and nothing is more
mischievous then to abrogate good laws and good practices. This is not to
fight with us, but with his own shadow: I speak of taking away errors, and
he speaks against taking away goodness: I speak of plucking up weeds, and he
speaks against abrogating good laws and practices, yea, of taking away the new
Testament. Where is the contradiction between us? These are no weeds but good
plants. We retain whatsoever the primitive Fathers judged to be necessary, or
the Catholic Church of this present age does unanimously retain, which is
sufficient. We retain other opinions also and practices, but not as necessary
Articles or Essentials. Let him not tell us of the Scots reformation, who have
no better an opinion of it then it deserves.

His second Ojection is, that he who positively denies, over adds the contrary
to what he takes away, he that makes it an article that there is no Purgatory,
no Mass, no prayer to Saints, has as many Articles as he who holds the
contrary. Therefore this kind of moderation is a pure folly. It may be he
thinks so in earnest, but we know the contrary. We do not hold our negatives
to be Articles of Faith. How should a negative, that is, a non em, be a
fundamental? This is a true proposition, either there is a purgatory, or there
is not a purgatory. But this other is a falls proposition; either it is an
Article of Faith that there is a purgatory, or it is an article of Faith, that
there is no purgatory. Faith is a certain assent grounded upon the truth and
authority of the revealer, opinion is an uncertain inclining of the mind more
to the one part of the contradiction then the other. There are an hundred
contradictions in Theological opinions between the Romanists themselves, much
grearer then some of these three controversies, wherein he instanceth. Yet they
dare not say, that either the affirmatives or negatives are articles of Faith.

In things not necessary a man may fluctuate safely between two opinions
indifferently, or incline to the one more then the other without certain
adherence, or adhere certainly without Faith. We know no other necessary
Articles of Faith, but those which are comprehended in the Apostles creed.

The last proof of our moderation was our readiness in the preparation of our
minds to believe and practice whatsoever the Catholic Church, even of this
present age does universally believe and practice. This he says is the
greatest mock fool proposition of all the rest. Wherefore? For two reasons.
First we say there is no universal Church. Then we have not only renounced
our Creed, that is, the badge of our Christianity, whereof this is an express
Article, but our reason also. If there be many particular churches: wherefore
not one universal Church, whereof Christ himself is head and king? His only
ground of this calumny, is because we will not acknowledge the Roman Church,
that is, a particular Church to be the universal Church.

The second reason is because we say if there be a Catholic Church, it is
indetermined, that is, no man knows which it is. Then it is all one as if it
were not. Non existentis and non apparentis eadem est ratio. It is a brave
thing to calumniate boldly, that something may stick. We know no virtuall
Church indeed, that is, one person who has in himself eminently, and virtually
as much certainty of truth and infallibility of judgment, as the universal
Church; but we acknowledge the representative Church, that is, a general
council, and the essential Church, that is, the multitude, or multitudes of
believers, either of all ages which make the Symbolicall Church, or of this age
which make the present Catholic Church; but mala men's, malus animus. He
knows right well that they themselves are divided into five or six several
opinions what that Catholic Church is, into the authority whereof they make
the last resolution of their Faith. So it is not true of us, but of themselves
it is true, that their Catholic Church is indeterminate, that is, they know
not certainly what it is.

Sect. 8.
My fifth ground was, that what the king and Church of England did, in the
separation of themselves from the Court of Rome, is no more then all other
Princes and Republics of the Roman communion have done in effect, or pleaded
for, that is, made themselves the last Judges of their own liberties and
grievances. For proof whereof I instanced in the Emperors, the Kings of France,
and the liberties of the Sallicane Church, the Kings of Spain in their
Kingdoms and Dominions of Sicily, Castile, Flanders, the Kings of Portugal,
the Republic of Venice, and in all these particular cases which were in
difference between the Popes and us, concerning the calling of Ecclesiastical
Synods, making of Ecclesiastical laws, disposing Benefices, reforming the
Churches within their own dominions, rejecting the Popes sentences, bulls,
Legates, Nuncios, shutting up their Courts, forbidding appeals, taking away
their tenths, first fruits, pensions, impositions, etc. To all which neither R.
C. nor S. W. answers one word in particular. Yet he paies me in generals. Vir
dolofus versatur in generalibus. If his cause would have borne it, we had had a
more particular answer.

First he asks what nonsense will not an ill cause bring a desperate man to?
Concedo omnia. I grant all saving only the application. He must seek for the
nonsense, and the ill cause, and the desperate man nearer home. But what is the
ground of his exception? nothing but a contradiction, first I would persuade
the world that Papists are most injurious to Princes, perjudicing their Crown,
and subjecting their dominions to the will of the Pope, and when I have scarce
done saying so, with a contrary blast I drive as far back again, confessing all
I said to be false, and that the same Papists hold the Doctrine of the
Protestants in effect. If he will accuse other men of contradiction, he must
not overshoot himself so in his expressions, but keep himself to the rules of
opposition, ad idem, secundum idem, and eodem tempore. Papists may be injurious
to Princes in one respect, and do them right in another. They may be disloyal
at one time, and loyal at another. Here is no shadow of contradiction. But his
greatest fault is to change the subject of the proposition I did not plead
either that Papists were injurious to Princes, or that the same Papists did
hold the very doctrine of the Protestants, nor so much as mention Papists in
general, either to justify them or to accuse them. But I said, that the Pope
and the Court of Rome had been injurious to Roman Catholic Princes, and that
Roman Catholic Princes with their party had done themselves right against
Popes and their Court. Here is no contrary blast, nor contradiction, any more
then it is a contradiction to say, that the Gnelphes maintained the Popes cause
against the Emperor, and the Gibilines maintained the Emperors cause against
the Pope, because both factions were Roman Catholics, both Italians.

He urges, that the Popes did not cast out of their Communion those Cotholick
divines who opposed them, which argues, that it is not the Roman Religion, nor
any public tenet in their Church that binds any to these rigorous assertions
which the protestants condemn. I know it is not their religion. Our Religion
and theirs is the same. I know it is not the general tenet of their Church.
But it is the tenet of the Court of Rome, and the governing party amongst them.
It is but a poor comfort to one that is oppressed by their Court, to know that
there are particular Doctors which hold that he is wronged. But to his
question. Did the Pope never excommunicate those Doctors that opposed him? Yes,
sundry times, both Princes and Doctors, and whole Nations. Sometimes he spared
them, perhaps he did not take notice of them whilst they were living, the Pope
and his Court have somewhat else to do then to inquire after the tenets of
private Doctors. perhaps they lived about the time of the councels of Constance
and Basile, when it had been easier for the Pope to have cast himself out of
his throne, then them out of the Church; or perhaps they lived in places
without his reach: he knows who it was that said, my Lord the Emperor defend
me with the sword, and I will defend thee with my pen. What did the Sorban
Doctors in former ages value the Court of Rome? Now of late the Court of Rome
have learned another method to purge their Doctors, when they displease them.
It is a shrewd sign when men are glad to cut out the tongues of their own
witnesses.

Here he falls into a bitter invective against our bloody laws, and bloodier
execution. It is hard when they come to accuse us of blood guiltiness, I could
require him with a black list of murders and Massacres to the purpose indeed:
the Waldenses alone might furnish me with overmuch store of matter, whose first
beginning is so ancient, that it seems to me like the Spring head of Nilus,
scarcely to be searched out, but innocent blood cries loud enough of it
self, without help. I choose rather at this time to use the buckler then the
sword: the accusation of them is no acquitall of us; whatsoever he says here
against the Church or State of England for cruelty, is clearly and
satisfactorily answered in my Reply to the Bishop of Chalcedon, C. 3. Sect. 4.
whither I refer him.

Afterward he tells how unlucky I am in this Chapter, that do absolutely
clear their Religion of Calumny, which Protestants most injuriously charge upon
them, that their Vassalage to the Pope destroys their subjection to their
Prince, by citing so many instances, where Catholics remaining such, have
disobeyed the Pope. Their Religion is the same with ours, that is, Christian,
and needs not to be cleared from being a source of sedition, or an incentive
to rebellion. It is not accused by us, but the envious man has sowed tares
among the wheat. No man can deny but that seditious opinions have been devised
and dispersed and cherished in the Church of Rome in this last age, which were
destructive to Loyalty, and due subjection to Princes; and how some of our own
country men came to be seasoned, with these pernicious principles more then
other nations, Sop. cap. 3. Sect. 4.
I have partly showed in the place alleged. The instances by me cited in this
chapter were before these poisonous opinions were hatched, and so are alogether
impertinent to that purpose for which he urges them. They prove that those
Roman Catholics at that time were loyal Subjects: they do not prove that all
Roman Catho^icks at this time are loyal Subjects; that were to infer a general
conclu^i^n from particular premises, or to argue aminore ad majus affirmative,
which is mere Sophistry. But I shall readily grant more then he proves, and as
much as he can seek with reason, that those sediti^us doctrines were never
generally received, nor yet by the greater and sounder part of the Roman
Church, and that at this day I hope they are almost buried. If ever God be so
gracious unto us, as to suffer us to meet together in a Council or Assembly,
either of the Christian world, or of the Western Church; the first thing to be
done were to weed out all seditious opinions, both among them and us, which are
scandalous to Religion, and destructive to all civil societies.

In the next place he fancieth to himself a platform of the Christian Church.
That Christ being to build his spiritual Kingdom upon the Basis of a multitude
of earthly Kingdoms, saw it necessary, to make a bond of unity betwixt the
Churches; that for this reason he gave the principality among his Apostles to
St. Peter, and consequently to his Successors the Bishops of Rome, which one
See might by the ordinary providence of Almighty God, keep a continuance of
succession from St. Peter to the end of the world, which the vicissitude of
humane nature, permitted not to all the Apostolical Sees. Hence Rome is
invested with the privilege of Mother and Mistress of the Church, and the hinge
upon which the common government and unity of the Church depends, which being
removed the Church vanishes into a pure Anarchy. Excellently well contrived.
Sr. Thomas Moors Eutopia, or my Lord Verulams new Atlantis may give place unto
it: What great pity it was that he had not been one of Christ's Counselors
when he first formed his Church; Only it seems a little too saucy with
Christ. Christians should argue thus, Christ formed his Church thus, therefore
it is the best form: Not thus, this is the best form; therefore Christ formed
his Church after this manner.

The old Hermit prayed to God for rain, and fair weather for his Garden, as
he thought most expedient for it, and had his desire; yet his Garden did not
prosper, whereas other Gardens which wanted that special privilege prospered
well; his brother Hermit told him the reason of it. Thou fool, di^st thou
think thy self wiser then God? I wonder he did not go one step higher, to make
the Bishop of Rome universal Emperor also; for prevention of Civil Wars, and
bloodshed among Christians, and so he might have been Rex idem hominum d^vumque
Sacerdos.

Now let us take his frame in pieces, and look upon it in parcels. St. Paul
reckons up, not one but seven bands of unity among Christians, one body, one
spirit, one hope of our calling, one Lord, one faith, one baptism, Ephesians. 4.4.
one God and father of all. First, one body, What can be more prodigious then
for the members of the same body to war one with another? One Spirit, that
is, the Holy Ghost, which is the soul that enliveth the Church; Can there be a
better bond of unity to the body, then the soul? One hope of our Calling, we
must be all friends in Heaven, Why do we bite and kick one another in the way
thither? One Lord, by whose blood we are redeemed, Should they pursue one
another as mortal enemies, who serve the same Lord? One faith delivered by the
Apostles, do not adulterate it with new devises, to raise contentions. One
Baptism, we are marked with the same cogniscance, we use the same word, we
fight under the same Standard, why do we mistake one another for enemies?
Lastly, One God and Father of all, who is above all by his excellency, through
all by his providence, and in all by the inhabitation of his grace; Above all
as Father, through all as Son, in all as Holy Ghost; for Christian to fight
against Christian, is to divide this one God, and commit him against himself.
Among all these bands of unity, why did St. Paul forget ( unus Papa) one Bishop
of Rome, or spiritual Monarch. If there had been any such thing, here had been
the proper place for it.

Secondly, I will not dispute with him about this, whether Christ did give St.
Peter a principality among the Apostles, so he do not rob Paul to cloth Peter,
but likew^se consent to me, that this was but a principality of order; and that
the principality of power, did r^st in the College of the Apostles there: and
now in their Successors a General Council, which is a sufficient band of unity,
as I have formerly demonstrated. I wish this Refuter had expressed himself more
clearly, whether he be for a beginning of order and unity, or for a single head
of Power and Jurisdiction; for to me he seems to hover between two, as if he
would gladly say more for the Pope if he could.

Thirdly, it follows, and consequently to his Successors; I like the general
proposition well enough, and consequently to his Successors. For the reason of
the first institution being of perpetual necessity, seems to imply strongly,
that such an headship of order ought to continue in the Church, or at least may
lawfully be continued in the Church. But I like not his application to the
Bishops of Rome, or his Successors in the Sea of Rome; That consequence is but
like a Rope of sand. There is no necessity at all, that he who succeeds a man
in a particular Bishopric, should succeed him in a higher office, which is not
annexed to that Bishopric. As if a man should argue thus, Such a Bishop of
such a See dyed Lord Chancellor of England; therefore all succeeding Bishops
of the same See, must succeed him likewise in the Chancellor ship of England.
If the Catholic Church do nominate the Bi^hop of Rome for the time, that is
another matter; but that is no perpetuity to the Bishops of that See for ever,
whether the Church will or not.

Certainly, Christ did leave the chief Mesuagery of his family to his Spouse,
that is, the Church, and not to any single servant, further then as subservient
to his sp^use. But to make Rome to be the M^stris of the Church, as this
Resuter does, and the Bishop o^ Rome the Master of the Church, is such an
indignity and affront, as no husband would tolerate, much less Christ, Ephesians. 5.^
who is proposed to all husbands as the perfect pattern of co^jugal love
Husbands, love your wives as Christ loved the Church.

His argument drawn from the vicissitude of humane affairs, cu^s the throat of
his cause; for, what privilege has Rome from this vicissitude more then other
places? It may be demolished and destroyed by enemies, it may be swallowed by
an earthquake as some great Cities have been, it may become heretical, or
Mahumetan. And in all these cases must it still continue Mistress of the Church?
That were an hard condition, Nem^ sapiens Ligat sibimanus, The Church never
disposes so of her offices, that she may not be able to move the rudder,
according to the change of wind and weather, and to change the mesuagery of
Ecclesiastical affairs, according to the vicissitide of humane things.

Let not the Refuter trifle between a primacy of order, and a Supremacy of
power: a Tyranny and an Anarchy are the two extremes. The Church may shake off
tyranny, and yet not vanish into a pure Anarchy, nor the frame thereof be
utterly dissolved; these are but made Dragons. Between a tyranny and an
Anarchy, there is an Aristocracy, which was the ancient Regiment of the
Christian Church; they know no Monarch but Christ their spiritual King. A
primacy of order is as sufficient, nay more sufficient in this case, to prevent
all these dangers which he seems to fear, and to procure all those advantages
which he mentions, than a Supremacy of power. And I hold it a reasonable
proposition, that whosoever is admitted to the one, should disclaim the other.

In the next passage, he forgets himself over much, when he makes the Popes
principality to be the bridle which our Savior has put into the mouth of his
Church: So he makes the Church to be the Beast, and the Popes office to be to
ride upon the Church; No, he quite mistaketh the matter. Our Savior has put
the bridle into the hand of his Church, D^c Ecclesiae, tell it to the Church,
not into the mouth of his Church; and the Pope at the best is but one of the
Churches Escuriers. Next, he proclaims the advantages of the Papacy. He does
well to cry up his cause: No man proclaims in the market that he has rotten
wares to sell. But it is but with an if, If this authority were duly preserved
and governed, no dissension in faith or discipline, nay not any war among
Christian Princes, could annoy the world. What Christian Prince can choose but
be glad to have an arbitrator so prudent, so p^ous, so disinterressed as a good
Pope should be? He brings to my mind, our old distinction between Plato and
Aristotle, Plato script sit somnians, Aristoteles vigilans, Plato writ
dreaming, and Aristotle waking: the one looked upon men as they ought to be,
and the other as they were, which was much more proper for one that was to
write politics.

If all things were as they should be, we should have a brave world: bu^ if we
look upon the case without an if, or as he should be, we shall find the Papacy
as it is settled, or would have been, so far from deserving these ^ulogiums
which he gives it, that it has been the cause either procreating, or
conserving, or both, of all the Schisms, and all the greater Ecclesiastical
dissentions in Christendom, and rather an incentive to wa^ for its own interest
and advantage, then a means of peace and reconciliation among Christian Princes.

But now Reader, look to thy self that thou receive no hurt; for he has
undertaken to let us see all the arrows which I have shot against them,
falling down upon mine own head. Yes, at the Greek Calends, when an oblique and
a perpendicular motion are the some. But let us see how he attempts to prove
it: Because the Papacy stands firm, and strong in all these Countries which
have resisted the Pope, when they conceived that he encroached on their
liberties, etc. whereas as the Reformation has made England an headless
Synagogue, without brotherhood or order. Neither ^o, nor so, the Eastern,
Southern, and Northern Churches admit no Papacy, nor any thing higher then
the chief^st Patriarch. A great part of the Western Churches, have shaken off
the Roman yoke; and the rest who do still acknowledge the Papacy, do it with
such cautions and reservations, and restrictions, especially France and
Sicilly, that I think the Cardinal Legate in the Council of Trent, had reason
to say, that he would rather persuade the Pope to give up his Keys to St.
Peter, then hold them upon such terms. I believe, not one of them all does
admit such a Papacy, as the Roman Court endeavored to have obtruded upon them.

Whereas he styles England, an headless Synagogue, without brotherhood or
order, he sees or may see, that for order, we are as much for it as himself:
for Christian Brotherhood, we maintain it three times larger then himself; and
for his headless Synagogue, they want no head who have Christ for a spiritual
head, a General Council for an Ecclesiastical head, and a gracious Christian
Prince for a political head. That Title would better have become themselves
about two or three months since, who sometimes have two or three heads,
sometimes a broken head, sometimes never an head.

The Protestants do not attempt to make themselves a distinct body from the
rest of the Christian world, much less do they arrogate to themselves alone the
name of the true Church, as the Romanists do; but they content themselves to be
part of the Catholic Church. That they have any differences among them either
in doctrine or discipline, it is the fault of the Court of Rome, which would
not give way to an uniforme reformation of the Western Church; But that their
controversies are neither so many, nor of any such moment as he imagines, the
Harmony of Confessions published in print, will demonstrate to all the world.
So far is he wide from the truth, that they have no more unity then a body
composed of Turks, Jews, Heretics and Christians; who have neither the same
body, nor the same spirit, nor the same hope of their calling, nor the same
Lord, nor the same faith, nor the same baptism, nor the same God to their
Father: But he faith, our faith consists in unknown Fundamentals, which is a
mere sh^ft, until we exhibit a list of such points. We need not, the Apostles
have done it to our hands in the Creed, and the Primitive Church has ordained,
that no more should be exacted of any, of Turks or Jews in point of faith,
when they were converted from Paganism, or Jewisme to Christianity.

Sect. 9.
In the eighth chapter, I proved that the Pope and the Court of Rome, were most
guilty of the Schism, and shall not need to repeat or fortify any thing; that
which he opposes being of so little consequence.

To the first argument, he denies that the Church of Rome is but a sister or a
mother, and not a Mistress to other Churches: It is their saying it, and our
denying it (says he) till they have proved what they affirm. To gratify him,
I will do it though it be needless. Let him consult with St. Bernard in his
fourth Book of consideration, to his most loving friend Eugenius the Pope, so
he styles him, Amantissime Eugeni. If they would listen to St. Bernards honest
advice, it would tend much to the peace of Christendom. Si auderem dicere, If
I durst say it, these are the pastures of devils rather then of sheep. And, Exi
de Hur Caldeorum, or, Go out of this Hur of the Caldeans, (Rome) It will not
repent thee of thy banishment, to have changed the City for the world. But to
satisfy his demand. Bernard. de consider. l. 4.
Thus that Father, Consideres ante omnia sanctam Romanam Ecclesiam cui Deo
auctore praees Ecclesiarum matrem esse non Dominam, te vero non Dominum
Episcoporum sed unum ex ipsis. Above all things consider, that the holy Roman
Church over which thou art placed by God, is a Mother of other Churches, not a
Lady or Mistress, and thou thy self art not a Master of other Bishops, but one
of them.

Secondly, He denies that the Church of Rome obtrudeth any new Creeds, whereas
I accused not the Church of Rome for it, but the Court of Rome, and for proof
produced the Bull of Pius the fourth in the point, as it is set down at the end
of the Council of Trent; wherein he sets forth a new form of confession of
faith, containing many new Articles, which he enjoyneth all the Clergy, and all
Religious persons to swear unto: and that they will teach it to all others
under their charge, that there may be an uniforme confession of faith among
Christians, Extra quam non est salus, without which there is no salvation; If
he deny this authority, he and I are nearer an union then the Court of Rome and
he.

My third argument was, because they maintain the Pope in his rebellion
against a general Council. To this argument he answers not a word, so as I am
confirmed more and more in my suspicion, that notwithstanding all his specious
pretenses for the Papacy, he himself is one of those, who prefer the Council
before the Pope, and attribute to the Pope only an Exordium unitatis. But he
spares me not upon the by, telling the Reader that I lay the axe not to the
root of Schism, but to mine own legs, and bids me good night, my wits are in
the dark. If it were so that I should steal a nap, it is neither felony nor
treason, Aliquando bonus dormit at Homerus. But what is it that raises this
great wind of words? forsooth because I say, that (the Papacy) ( qua talis) as
it is now maintained by many, with Superiority above General Councels, etc. is
the cause, either procteant, or conservant, or both, of all, or the most part
of the Schisms in Christendom. To say as it is maintained by many, does imply
that it is not so maintained by all, and therefore not the Papacy qua talis;
for so Catholics have not the least difference among them. He might as well
tell us, that wherein they all agree, they have no difference. But do not some
Roman Catholics subject the Pope to a General Council? and other subject a
General Council to the Pope? Do not the greater part of them, both for number,
dignity and power, who sit at the stern, who hold the bridle, (that he spoke
of even now) in their hands, to govern the Church, subject a General Council to
the Pope? And then might not I say well [the Papacy qua talis] my conclusion
was not against the Church of Rome in general; but against the Pope and Court
of Rome, that they were guilty of Schism. And now to let him see that I did not
sleep, I will reduce mine argument into form, without a [ qua talis.] They who
subject a General Council, which is the highest Tribunal of Christians to the
Pope, are guilty of Schism; but the Pope and Court of Rome, with all their
maintainers, that is, the much greater part of their writers, do subject a
General Council to the Pope; therefore they are guilty of Schism. Of the same
nature is his exception to my fourth charge, They who take away the line of
Apostolical succession throughout the world, except in the Sea of Rome, who
make all Episcopal Jurisdiction to flow from the Pope of Rome, and to be
founded in his Laws, to be imparted to other Bishops, as the Popes Vicars and
Coadjutors, assumed by them into part of their charge, are Schismatics; but
the Pope and Court of Rome, and their maintainers do thus. To which his only
answer is, that this is a more gross and false imputation then any of the
rest. Because it is not their general tenet, neither did I urge it against them
all in general.

But because he takes no notice of these tenets, but as private opinions, If
you will dispute against private opinions, cite your Authors, and argue against
them, not the Church. Let him know, that these are the most common, and most
current opinions of their writers. Of the former, De council. l. 2 c. 17. De
council. l. 2. c. 13.
Bellarmine says, that it is almost de fide a point of faith. He says that
the Council of Florence seemed to have defined it, though not so expressly; and
that the Council of Lateran has defined it most expressly. And the words of
that Council seem to import no less, that it is most manifest that the Bishop
of Rome has authority over all Councels. Tanquam super omnia Consilia
authoritatem habentem. And for the latter opinion, Bellarmine declares it to be
most true, quae sententia est verissima, cites great Authors for it; and says,
that it seems to have been the opinion of the old Schoolmen, De Roma. Pont.
l. 4. c. 22. and 24
That Bishops do derive all their Jurisdiction from the Pope, as all the virtue
of the members is derived from the head, or as all the virtue of the branches
springs from the root, or as the water in the stream flows from the fountain,
or as the light of the beams is from the Sun. This is high enough.

Sect. 10.
I answered, that we hold communion with thrice so many Christians as they do.
He replyeth, that if by Christians I mean those who lay claim to the name of
Christ, he neither denies my answer, nor envies me my multitude; for Manichees,
Gnostics, Carpocratians, Arrians, Nestorians, Eutychians, etc. without number,
do all usurp the honor of this title, adding that he does most faithfully
protest, he does not think, I have any solid reason to refuse communion to the
worst of them. O God how is it possible that prejudice and partiality, or an
habit of alteration should make Christians and Pastors of Christ's flock to
swerve so far, not only from truth and charity, but from all candor and
ingenuity? Wherein can he or all the world, charge the Church of England, or
the Church of Greece, or indeed any of the Eastern, Southern or Northern
Christians, with any of these Heresies? It is true, some few Eastern
Christians, in comparison of those innumerable multitudes, are called
Nestorians, and some others, by reason of some unusual expressions suspected of
Eutychianisme, but both most wrongfully. Is this the requital that he makes to
so many of these poor Christians for maintaining their Religion inviolated, so
many ages under Mahumetan Princes? Yet Michael the Archangel, Judge. 6.
when he disputed with the devil about the body of Moses, durst not bring a
^ailing accusation against him; but said, the Lord rebuke thee. The best is, we
are either wheat or chaff of the Lords ffoare; but their tongues must not
winnow us. Manes a madman, as his name signifies, feigned himself to be Christ,
chose twelve Apostles, and sent them abroad to preach his errors, whose
disciples were called Manichees; they made two Gods, one of good called light:
another of evil called darkness; which evil God did make impure creatures of
the more faeeulent parts of the matter; he created the world; he made the old
testament; Hereupon, they held flesh and wine to be impure, and marriage to be
unlawful, and used execrable purifications of the creatures; They taught that
the soul was the substance of God; that war was unlawful; that brute beasts
had as much reason as men: that Christ was not true man, nor came out of the
womb of the Virgin, but was a phantasme; that John Baptist was damned for
doubting of Christ; that there was no last Judgment; that sins were
inevitable: many of which errors they sucked from the Gnostics and
Carpocratians. The Nestorians divided the person of Christ, and the Eutychians
confounded his natures; what is this to us, or any of those Churches which we
defend? we accurse all their errors. If he be not more careful in making his
charge, he will soon forfeit the stock of his credit.

He ingageth himself, that if I can show him but one Church, which never
changed the Doctrine which their Fathers taught them, as received from the
Apostles, which is not in communion with the Roman Church, he will be of that
ones communion. I wish he may make good his word. I show him not only one, but
all the Eastern, Southern, Northern, and I hope Western Churches, who never
changed their Creed; which comprehends all these necessary points of saving
truth, which they received from their Ancestors, by an uninterrupted Line of
Succession from the Apostles. As for Opinions or Truths of an inferior nature,
there is no Church of them all, that has changed more from their Ancestors,
even in these very controversies that are between them and us, then the Church
of Rome. For the clear proof whereof, I refer him to Doctor Fields appendix to
his third book of the Church, and the first part of his appendix to four books,
at the latter end of the first Chapter.

I pleaded that the Council of Trent was not general; I had reason. The
conditions of a general council recited by Bellarmine are, that the summons
be general; there none were summoned but only out of the western Church. That
the four Protopatriarchs be present by themselves or their deputies; there was
not one of them present. That some be present from the greater part of all
Christian Provinces; there were none out ^f three parts of four of the
Christian world. Bellarm^ce council. l. 1. c. 17.
He says, the other Patriarchs were Heretics. Though it were true, yet until
they were lawfully heard and condemned in a general Council, or refused to come
to their trial, and were condemned for their obstinacy, they ought to have
been summoned; yea, of all others they especially ought to have been summoned.
But where were they heard, or tried, or condemned of heresy, by any Council or
person that had Jurisdiction over them? Others of his fellows will be contented
to accuse them of Schism, and not pronounce them condemned heretics. Guido
the Carmelite is over partial and t^merarious in accusing them without ground,
as some of his own party do confess, and vindicate them: And Alphonsus a
castro takes his information upon trust from him. The plain truth is, their
only crime is, that they will not submit to the Popes spiritual Monarchy, and
so were no fit company for an Italian Council.

His demand. (Is not a Parliament the general representative of the nation,
unless every Lord though a known and condemned Rebel be summoned? or unless
every member that has a right to sit there be present?) is altogether
impertinent. Neither has the Pope that power over a general Council that the
king has over the Parliament; Neither are the Protopatriarchs known condemned
Rebels; Neither is this the case, whether the necessary or neglective absence
of some particular members, but whether the absence of whole Provinces, and the
much greater part of the Provinces of Christendom for want of due summons, do
disable a Council from being a general representative of the whole Christian
world. And as it is impertinent, so it makes altogether against himself. Never
was there a session of a national Parliament in England, wherein so few
members were present, as were in the pretended general Council of Trent, at
the deciding of the most weighty controversy concerning the rule of Faith.
Never was there lawful Parliament in England wherein there were more Knights
and Burgesses out of one Province, then out of all the rest of the Kingdom;
Never was there lawful Parliament in England, the acts whereof either of one
kind or of another might be questioned by any single Province, as the acts of
the Council of Trent in point of discipline are questioned by the Church of
France. The question is not, whether Ecclesiastical superiors may forbear to
execute, but whether inferiors may renounce and protest against the execution.
One of the prime privileges of Parliament is to speak freely; but this was not
allowed in the Council of Trent.

He excepteth against some angry expressions of mine, Where I call the Bishops
of Italy hungry parasiticall pensioners, not foreseeing it might be retorted
upon mine own condition. And here he adds in a scoffing manner, It seems,
my Lord, you keep a good table, speak the truth boldly, and have great revenues
independent of any. I spoke not there out of passion against them, nor of
ancient Italian Bishops, but mere Episcopelles, a great part of which were
Italians; nor all of them, but only such as were the Popes creatures, raised
and maintained by him for his own ends: whether these were his hungry
parasitical pensioners, they know best, who know most. As for my self, I never
raised my self by any insinuations: I was never parasiticall pentioner to any
man, nor much frequented any man's table. If mine own be not so good as it has
been, yet contentment and a good conscience is a continual feast, and a golden
bed of rest. And I thank God, I can say heartily with holy Job, The Lord gave,
and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord. What was this to
his cause?

To prove the Council of Trent was not free, I cited somethings out of the
history of that Council, and somethings out of Sleidan. To which he answers
nothing but this, That it is a false injurious calumny, taken out of Sleidan,
accounted by their party a stark liar and forger. This is a very easy kind of
refuting, as good as Bellarmine thou lie.

To the plea of the Patriarchal authority of the Bishop of Rome over Britain,
I gave three solutions.

First that Britain was no part of the Roman Patriarchate.

Secondly, that although it had been, yet the Popes have both quitted, and
forfeited their Patriarchall power, and though they had not, yet it is lawfully
transferred.

Thirdly, that the difference between them and us is not concerning any
Patriarchall rights. To none of these does he offer to give any answer, but
only to one passage, where I endeavor to prove that a spiritual Monarchy
from Christ, and a Patriarchall authority from ^he Church are inconsistent.
From whence the Reader may make this collection, that bec^^se the Pope was
undoubtedly constituted a Patriarch by the Church, therefore as undoubtedly he
was not instituted a spiritual Prince by Christ. And all the answer that he
gives to this is, that I argue weakly and sillily, Satis pro imperio. This is
magisticall enough: as if he were another Pythagoras, that we must receive his
dictates for oracles. I will set down the argument for the Readers satisfaction.
It may be at the second reading, this Refuter will not find it altogether so
weak and silly. To bea Patriarch, and to be an universal Bishop in that sense,
are inconsistent, and implie a contradiction in adjecto. The one professes
human, the other challenges divine institution; the one has a limited
Jurisdiction over a certain province; the other pretends to an unlimited
jurisdiction over the whole world: the one is subject to the Canons of the
Fathers, and a mere executer of them, and can do nothing either against them or
besides them; the other challenges an absolute Soveraignity above the Canons,
besides the Canons, against the Canons. To make them, to abbrogate them, to
suspend their influence by a non obstante, to dispense with them in such cases
wherein the Canons give no dispensative power, at his own pleasure, when he
will, where he will, to whom he will. Therefore to claim a power Paramount,
and Sovereigne Monarchical regality over the Church, is implicitly and in
effect to disclaim a Patriarchall Aristocraticall dignity; and on the other
side, the donation and acceptance of such a Patriarchall Aristocratical
dignity, is a convincing proof that he was not formerly possessed of a
Sovereigne Monarchical Royalty.

To the point of sacrifice, he says, that I hide it in obscure terms, and
shuffle certain common words. In answer, I believe his meaning is quite
contrary, that I have set it down over distinctly. If I shuffle any thing, I
must shuffle my own words, for I see no answer of his to shuffle among them.
His exception against our Registers, that he could never hear that any
Catholic esteemed indications was ever admitted to a free perusal of them,
Shows only, that he understands not what our Registers are. They are public
offices, whither every man may repair at his pleasure, And if he will be at the
charge of a search and a transcription, may not only peruse them freely, but
have an authentic copy of any act that is there recorded

Toward the conclusion of his treatise he inveigheth against our
uncharitableness, that it is not enough to satisfy our uncharitable eyes,
that so many of them have been hanged, drawn and quartered for their Religion;
telling us, that on all occasions we are still upbraiding the liberty given to
Papists. And advises us, never hereafter to be so impertinent as to repine at
their liberty. Doubtless, he found this in his own fancy: for in my discourse
there is nothing either of repining or upbraiding: but this point of the penal
laws has been formerly handled at large.

Lastly; to his expedient to procure peace and unity, that is, To receive the
root of Christianity, that is a practical infallibility in the Church: We do
readily acknowledge that the true Catholic Church is so far infallible, as is
necessary to the salvation of Christians, that is the end of the Church. But
the greater difficulty will be, what this Catholic Church is, wherein they are
not only divided from us, but more among themselves.

But because he has another exception to a testimony of mine in his Schism
disarmed. Page 24^
I will make bold to give it an answer here also: Even when the Grecians were
disgusted, and refused unity, they acknowledged the power of the Bishop of
Rome, Vind. page: 101.
as appears by a testimony of Gerson, cited by your friend Bishop Brounhall
against himself, which witnesses that the Greeks departed from the then Pope,
with these words, We acknowledge thy power, we [cannot satisfy your
covetousness, live by your selves.] Does he think that power is always taken
in the better sense? The words are not potestatem tuam recognoscimus, we
acknowledge thy just power, yet even potestas is taken sometimes in the worser
sense: as, potestas tenebrarum, the power of darkness: but potentiam tuam
recognoscimus, we acknowledge thy might; which words might be used by a true
man to an high way robber. The Greeks accounted the Latins Heretics and
Schismatics, and principally upon this ground of the Popes claim of a
spiritual Monarchy, And that Gerson apprehended their words in this sense, it
may appear by the context. His position is this, that men ought not generally
to be bound by the positive determinations of Popes, to hold and believe one
and the same form of government in things that do not immediately concern the
truth of our Faith, and the Gospel. From thence he proceeds to set down some
different Customs of the Greek and Latin Churches, both which he does
justify, citing S. Austin to prove that in all such things the custom of the
country is to be observed. And among the rest of the differences, this was one,
that the Greek Church paid not such Subsidies and Duties as the Gallicane
Church did. It seems that the Pope would have exacted them, Gers. p. 4. Sermon.
de pace and unit. Cyril. considerat. ^^
and that thereupon the Grecians did separate from him, using this free
expression, potentiam tuam recognoscimus, avaritiam tuam implere non possumus,
vivite per vos, We know thy might, we are not able to satisfy thy
covetousness; live by your selves. And from thence the aforesaid author draws
this conclusion, that per hanc consider ationem been captam etc. upon this
consideration, they might proceed to the reformation of the French Church, and
the liberties thereof, notwithstanding the contradiction which perhaps some of
the Court of Rome would make. There is not one word or syllable herein that
makes against me, but there is both the practice of the Greek Church, and the
opinions of Gerson, for the justification of our Reformation, and Separation
from the Court of Rome.

FINIS.

