Living Water: OR WATERS FOR A Thirsty SOUL, Drawn out in several SERMONS upon
REV. 21.6. By W. BAGSHAVVE, Preacher of the Word, and Minister at Glossoppe.

LONDON, Printed by E. Cotes for Henry Seile over against S. Dunstans-Church in
Fleetstreet, 1653.

To the Right Worshipful Col. JOHN BRIGHT, Grace and Peace be multiplied.
Ever Honored Sir,
IT is commonly storied concerning one of the Persian Princes, that he kindly
entertained a Peasant, who being destitute of a better Present, presented him
with a litte Water; And I question not, but conclude that you will show your
self as truly (and more spiritually) noble in bidding your deeply engaged
servant welcome, who is bold to meet you with a little of this Cordial (not
common) Water. So has the Lord (who calls things that are not as if they were)
honored me in your eyes, that you may (as too many do) ever-value the
messenger; And I hope the Lord will so honor himself in your heart, that you
shall never (as the most do) undervalue the message. Long may you live to
receive a cup of this Water from, and to give more then a cup of other Water to
a Prophet in the name of a Prophet! Blessed be the Fountain of living Waters,
who has caused this Dew of Heaven to lie long on the place near you; And oh
that poor souls may for ever call the Lord blessed, who through four such
precious (though earthen) channels, causes this River to empty it self among
you, the streams whereof make glad the City of God. The Lord shewre down this
rain of spiritual blessings upon you and yours; and continue you to be an
owner (in disowning times) of him and his! So prays he who desires ever to
entertain you in his heart, who has been so deceptably entertained in your
house;

Sir, Your very obliged Servant, especially in the Lords Work, W. BAGSHAVVE.

REV. 21. part of the 6. verse. I will give unto him that is athirst, of the
Fountain of the Water of life freely.


THe chief points of this Book are reduced under three heads, cap. 1 v. 19.
John being commanded to write things past, present, and to come.

The last and greatest part is Prophetical, referring to the greater and
lesser world.

That which concerns the Church or less world, is that wherein is foreseen,
and foresaid, the Church her Conflicts. her Conquests. her Triumphs.


Whether the former part of this Chapter set forth the state of the Church
triumphing on Earth, or triumphant in Heaven; I shall not absolutely determine.

Yet though the connection of this with the precedent Chapter, seems to him that
this glorious day shall be in the day of Glory, after the Great day of
Judgment; that the time of it shall be after Time: And though the 4. verse of
this Chapter seems to second this Interpretation, seeing that Saints are like
to go with tears in their eyes to Heaven gates; they being (whilst under the
Mount) in a vale of Bacah:

I humbly conceive,

Order of place will neither prove the former argument undeniable, neither yet
(if we understand the verse comparatively) will the latter be sufficiently
available, especially if we consider other phrases in this place.

1. Verse. 2.
The New Jerusalem is said to come down from God out of heaven, and so seems
not to import the state of the Church with God in Heaven.

2. Verse. 3.
The Tabernacle of God is said to be with men; which (some conceive) is an
allusion to the Jewish Tabernacle, and an intimation that the state here
described is unglorified; Saints then abiding with God in his Tabernacle, and
not yet all dwelling in his holy Hill; in an estate resembling a Tabernacle
which may be changed, not Mount Sion. which cannot be moved.

3. In this estate, God is said to be with his Saints, not they with God.

4. It rather appears to be a Prophecy. Now (with submission I suppose)
though promises may not be fully accomplished till we come in Heaven; yet we
may expect the fulfilling of Prophesies on earth; and wait till that be seen
which has been foreseen.

Howsoever it is safe to say that those (who yet are no Millenaries) hence may
hope for the enjoyment of special and evident manifestations of God to his
people in the state of grace, though the complete and full discovery be
reserved for the state of glory.

Now because good men cannot hear of these excellent things, but they will long
for them; here is added this free and gracious Proclamation -- I will give unto
him that is athirst, etc.

In these words we may observe,

1. The Division of the words.
A gracious promise proclaimed I will give of the Fountain, etc.

2. A gracious disposition declared -- To him that is athirst.

In the Promise, we have included,

1. The greatness of the Giver -- I, who am Alpha and Omega.

2. The graciousnesse of the Gift; set forth

1. By the substance of it -- Water.

2. The substantialnesse of it -- Water of Life.

3. The durablenesse of it; Of the fountain of the Water of life.

4. The freeness of it, in that God gives it, and in that he gives of it,
freely.

The first Doctrine clearly employed in, That there is Water of Life.

In the prosecution hereos, I shall first endeavor to show what we may
understand by this Water of Life, viz.

1. The merits of Christ, Water in the ceremonial washings under the Law, and
in the Sacramental washing under the Gospel, has been, and is used to
signify the Blood of Christ sati^fying, as well as the Spirit of sanctifying.
Heb. 10.19
That Blood which some are supposed to tread under foot (having been herewith
sanctified) as it cannot be soundly understood of the Blood of Christ, Macula
sunt peccata, qua estendit lex; aqua est sanguis Christi, quemosten. dit
Evangelium.
as if they were therewith sanctified really and internally; so it may be
safely understood of Baptismal water (representing the Blood of Christ)
wherewith they were sanctified visibly and externally. And we may therefore by
this Water of life under stand his merits, and not only his Spirit; because
that deliverance by his merits in respect of price, is the ground of the
deliverance by his Spirit in respect of power. The foundation of that
reconciliation which the works in souls, being laid when he wrought
^^econciliation for souls.

2. The Spirit of Christ. Christ comes to poor souls by Water and Blood; and
not by Blood alone, but by Water and Blood. He who did much for them on earth,
does much in them from heaven. And in Scripture the Spirit is compared to
Water, and to Water of Life; and the Holy Ghost expounds the Text of Christ
having spoken of Rivers of living Water, Joh. 7.38, 39.
that this he spoke of the Spirit.

3. Ezekiel. 47.1, 2.
The free grace of God the Father, flowing through the Son by the Spirit. We
read of Waters of life issuing out of the Sanctuary, which as they are
understood of the grace of God in soul; so may be understood of the grace of
God to souls; especially considering that the latter is the spring of the
former; these streams coming from that Fountain: and that they are set forth
not only as containing, Verse. 9.
but as causing life.

That this Water of life is to be interpreted not only of Christ but of they
Fathers love flowing through Christ, appears,

1. Because Christ is the Channel, the Fathers grace the Spring; Christ is the
Conduit through which the Fathers grace, the Fountain from which the Water of
life comes. Philemon v. 3. Ephesians. 1.2. Caput Electorum, non Electionis.
Hence it is that the Scripture runs thus -- Grace from God the F^ther, and
from our Lord Jesus Christ: Electing love being in Christ, but not for Christ;
Christ being the Head of the Elect, not of the Election: and it is something
observable, that God says -- I will give of the Fountain of the Water of life.

2. That is the Water of life promised to souls, which can quench and satisfy
the thirst of souls. Hie sat lucis est. Psa. 4.6, 7.
Now what is it which such souls desire, but that God would lift up the light
of his countenance? The feet of Faith ascends these three stairs: 1. It comes
to the Promise. 2. To Christ, in whom all the Promises are Yea and Amen. 3. To
the Father, who gave Christ to purchase an interest for souls in these
Promises. When such souls look at the Jacobs Ladder (the Top whereof reaches
Heaven) viz. the mediation of Christ; they desire to see God the Father at the
Top. Show us (say they) the Father and it suffices us.

Q. I shall now (through Heavens help) show you why this Free Grace of God
flowing through Christ is compared to Water of Life, viz.

Chiefly, from that influence which it has upon a Believers spiritual life.
Yet I humbly conceive, to denote three things.

1. The Purity of it. It is therefore said to be a River pure as Crystal; Rev.
22.1.
A river, not a pond; standing waters usually gather filth and mud: a (...)
River, not a black dark River, but clear as Crystal Pure formally; pure
efficiently; purisying others, as it is pure.

2. The perpetuity of it; It is water always flowing, putting forth new
waters; A Fountain; not a stream, which might be stopped; not a river only,
which might be turned: and in Scrip^^^^, Waters which come from a Fountain are
called living waters. Genesis 26.19.
This Fountain is ever filling others, and yet it self ever full.

3. The efficacy of it: it being efficacious

1. To the begetting of spiritual life: resembling Ezekiels waters; Ezekiel. 47.9.
where ever this water comes, souls live and move, and have a spiritual being.
Souls like dry bones lie dead, til by these Gales of free grace, God breaths
into them the breath of supernatural life. By sprinkling this water upon them,
dying, yea dead men are recovered.

2. In the preserving spiritual life begotten: In, and as well as from Gods
grace we live and move spiritually; in it as the preserver, as well as from it
as the author. These herbs of Grace in the Gardens of our hearts would soon
wither, were they not watered from heaven. Joh. 15.5. (...) secorsum a me. vid,
Leigh. Critica sacra.
The building stones, as well as the foundation stones, are free stone. *
Except we abide in the vine we are dead branches. Without Christ, we can be, we
can do nothing. In the repairing of this spiritual life when impaired spiritual
children as well as natural are often sickly, have fainting fits; this is the
strong water whereby they are revived. God gives if not wine to them that are
of heavy hearts, yet this his love, which is better then Wine. Sin and Satan
shoot their arrows, even bitter arrows, which would wound Saints mortally;
were not this water like those in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 47.8. Hos. 14.4.
healing waters; Did not God heal their back slidings, by loving them freely.

4. In the strengthening of this spiritual life. Saints are strong in the grace
which is in Christ Jesus; 2 Timothy 2.1.
not only in the grace received from Christ Jesus; not in the stream, but in
the Fountain: Should we not keep the pipe of Faith open, thereby to have
conveyed fresh streams of living water; how soon should we (like Reuben) be
weak as water? Our waters (if this be (as to us) stopped) are not strong enough
to carry to the enjoyment of God in heaven, or honoring God on earth. From
these supplies it is, that the lame man leaps as an Heart; Ego, and Rex meus
says a Christian. A Saint should be (...) i. e. totis viribus retinens.
that (with Jacob) having seen the fresh favor of God, we lift up our feet and
take long strides. Our strength lies not in our hair, but in our Head: and if
we hold not the Head, we are but as other men.

(I name no more.)

5. In the perfecting of spiritual life. This Water rises, and raises, as
high as the Fountain, and where the lowest stone is laid, the Head stone shall
be laid, with shoutings, crying Grace, Grace. Heb. 12.2.
That love which works toward souls from Heaven, will work souls up to Heaven:
those two are joined together, the Author, and Finisher of our Faith, where
grace has begun a good work it will perfect it, until grace be swallowed up
in glory, a spiritual in an eternal life; till the Kingdom of God within
souls (being at first like a grain of Mustard seed) become a tree, the top
whereof reaches Heaven.

I shall now come to Application: for no reason can be given of Gods grace, but
it self. That being (as one sweetly observes) the glory of Gods love, which is
the fondness of man's, viz. to have no reason for it; Gratia, quia gratis data.
The ground and motive of this love, lying only in the breast of the Lover: So
that as it is said of the River Nilus in Egypt, that the overflowings thereof
are precious, but the spring of it is not known; Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8.
so we may say of this Water of life, this free grace of God; that the
redundancies of it are ever famous, but the rise of it is not, cannot be known
to be otherwise then from it self. God loves his people because he loves them.
The Lord saves souls but of mere prerogative; Has mercy, because he will have
mercy.

The first Use is a Use of Information,

Though all men be lost in Adam, yet they are not all lost irrecoverably. Poor
souls, you who groan under the body of death, may this day hear glad tidings of
the best things; that there is yet hope in Israel. You who are sin-sick,
spiritually wounded, may answer the Prophets Question affirmatively; There is
Balm in Gilead, Jer. 8. two last verses.
there is a Physician there. I am this day come as one who carry the water,
hold forth the Word of life, assuring, that whereas other Aqua vitae may be
isntrumental to recover a dying body, here is Aqua vitae effectual to recover
a dead soul: You who are dead, may be alive; you who are lost, may be found.

There Is ground of hope for such souls, if we look,

1. viz. Gods eternal love; and that either if we consider,

1. The fullness of it. Ps^. 31.19.
Oh how great is Gods goodness! The Psalmist speaks of it, Hoc admirari, prope
res est una salaque quae p^ssit focere, and servare beatum.
as that which may be admired, but cannot be apprehended; the largeness of
Gods affection cannot be contained in the narrowness of man's expression. The
streams of man's gracelesness may rise high, but those of Gods graciousness rise
higher; the Lords love is (as the Lord himself is) Infinite, and is therefore
compared to the Sea, Mic. 6.18.
where Mountains as well as Mole-hills, sins of a larger as well as of a
lesser size may be hid; How easily is the greatest spark of sin quenched in
this Ocean of saving mercy!

2. The freeness of it. The Lord gives liberally, his gifts are not fetched from
him (as fire out of a flint) with much striking, but come as water out of a
Fountain which comes freely: Jam. 1.6. (...) simpliciter without any mixture of
byrespects.
God is neitheir moved to give (as often men are) for hope of recompense
without, nor from corrupt interest within. Gods grace is therefore compared to
water, to show that souls may be as welcome to it, English Annotat.
as if it were water; Wine is locked up, but water, that runs indifferently
through every man's ground; the Lord keeps open house, Whosoever will, Rev.
22.17.
may come and take of this water of life, freely.

2.

(1.) To the greater, yea, the great Channel, viz. the Lord Jesus Christ: in
whom souls may consider,

1. His preciousness. There being no corner empty in our hearts, but there is
enough to fill it in Christ's heart; It mattering not what is the disease, if
Christ be the Physician. Christ spreads himself upon children spiritually dead,
as Elisha did upon the child naturally dead; to our weakness he applies his
strength, his wisdom to our folly, his riches to our poverty, his
alsufficiency to our all-necessity: we cannot want that which Christ cannot
supply, not beg that which Christ cannot bestow.

The preciousnes and sutablenes of Christ to the necessities of souls appears
in that he is compared,

1. Zach. 13.1.
To a Fountain. Though souls be unclean, there is water enough in a Fountain to
wash them; though souls be thirsty, there is enough in a Fountain to quench
them: there is a spring of corruption ever issuing in sinners; there is a
fountain of righteousness ever issuing in their Savior.

2. To a Sun. Mal. 1.2.
As the Sun like a Bridegroom goes forth to run its race, being never weary of
shining, of communicating its light and heat to the greater world, so this Sun
is unwearied in communicating the rays and beams of his grace to the lesser
world.

As we may consider in Christ his preciousnes, so,

2. His proneness to give out to poor souls of that pretiousness. Some might
say, Christ is a Spring, but a Spring shut up; a Fountain, but a Fountain
sealed: nay, but Christ is a Fountain set open; Zach. 13.1
not that stands shelving only, but wide open.

The readiness of Jesus Christ to make out to poor souls of his preciousness
appears,

1. By his sweet counsels. Christ counsels souls to buy of him gold tried
in the fire, Rev. 3.18.
that they may be rich; as if he should say, If a receipt prescribed by such a
Physician may be prised; If you will follow my light, who have been so followed by
my love, then buy of me gold tried in the fire.

2. By his serious commands. Mat. 11.28.
Come unto me (says Christ) which may be understood per modum imperit, as well
as per modum consilii; as an injunction, and not only as a direction; We may
come, it is our privilege; We must come, it is our duty.

3. By his heartbreaking Lamentations. Joh. 5.40.
Ye will not come unto me, that ye might have life; As if he should say, though
you search the Scriptures (which are the field, wherein I am the Pearl; the
Ring, wherein I am a Diamond) though you assent to their truth, which assent to
this truth, that you may have life for coming, yet you will not come unto me.
Some conceive, that one thing which sadned Christ's heart at his death, was the
consideration that so few would be saved by it. And we may conceive the Lord
Jesus in his Ministry weeping over poor souls, and saying, Shall my blood he as
water spilt on the ground, which cannot be gathered again?

4. By his sinner-accepting (not excepting) proclamation. Him that comes to
him, he will in no wise cast out. Did Christ ever beat beggars from his door?
Joh. 6.37.
did ever any lie at the beautiful gate of mercy, who went away without an
alms?

There Is ground of hope likewise for poor sinners, if we look,

(2.) To the lesser channels; viz. the Ordinances. In the use of these, souls
may come to Christ, Christ does come to souls, heaven comes down to earth, and
earth may come up to heaven. These are the lesser Conduit-pipes through which
souls receive Canales gratis.
living water. These are,

1. Converting. Such is the Word; Joh. 5.25.
wherein dead souls may hear the voice of the Son of God and live. At this
pool may, ought, such unhealed souls to lie: 1 Pet 1.19 ^ Pe^ 2.2. E^ to be
and nascimu^, and nu^in u.
The Word is the seed, by which souls are bred, as well as the milk whereby
they are fed; and in that respect Ministers are compared to Fathers, as well as
Nurse: Such is Prayer (as Stephens prayer is conceived to be) For though in
respect of the manner of prayer, we speak to God; yet in respect of the matter,
God may speak to us.

2. Confirming. Such is the Word (as is before hinted) Such are the Sacrments
are like pillars to^ house which are not the foundation, but a streng hening to
a house which has a foundation.
Sacraments: which God has appointed that through them we might have life, and
that we might have it abundantly; that this water might rise higher, that we
may have grace upon grace.

Quest. But some may say, seeing the spring of the Water of life is so free,
and the channel so full; whence is it that poor souls no more thirst after, set
no higher price on this water of life?

Ans. It is from It is from Satan. It is from Ourselves


Satan herein prejudiceth poor souls,

1. the want of this water, whilst they see not,

(1.) A true fight of sin. Psalm. 42.1.
The thirst in poor fowls after living water, is resembled by the thirst of
the Heart after other waters: As the Hearts panting is chiefly occasioned and
increased by the chasing of the hunter; so the Hearts panting after these
living brooks, is chiefly caused by its being chased with sin, or with the
wrath of God for sin. A false fight of sin will hinder us from desiring a true
fight of Christ. Satan keeps souls from seeing sin, (1.) As it is that which
God will not own. If there be this evil in a City, God has not done it. (2.)
Malum Culpae.
As it is that which God will not spare. God spa^ed not his Son, Christ was
sine flagitio, non sine flagello. Quod effien tale, est magis tale.
when sin was on him, not in him; this Son who was without corruption, was not
without correction. (3.) As it is the worst of evils. Worse then Satan, who
was a fair Angel till sin stained him.

So ill is sin, that a man had better be possessed with many devils, then one
reigning sin.

1. A man may be possessed with devils, and yet that be but an affliction. Now
(1.) Privatio ban^ V^ilis au^ Iacundi, non Honesti.
Affliction is the absence or privation of the less good, and therefore is a
less evil then sin. (2.) Affliction is the fruit only, but sin the bitter
root.

2. A man may be possessed with Devils, and yet be a good man; But the waters
of reigning sinfulness, cannot consist with the least spark of real goodness.

3. A man may be possessed with Devils, yet his soul may be free from the
Devil. They may prevail over his body, when his soul prevails over them. But
one reigning sin (without repentance) carries the soul to darkness from light,
to the power of Satan from God; and therefore we should not so much fear Satan,
whiles he can only hurt the body; as sin, which may cause body and soul to be
cast into hell fire.

Thus Satan (that soule^ may not see the want of living water) hinders them
from a true sight of sin. And,

Secondly, Gives them a false sight of themselves; which falls in with the
second head, or way whereby Satan hinders fouls;

2.

1. With the waters of our own riches. 2 Timothy 4.10. Those two are joined
together, Demas his following the world, and forsaking Paul.
Souls are much satisfied with silver stream. The Moon betwixt us and the Sun
causes an Eclips; so does the world (which is compared to the Moon) when
betwixt us and the Sun of Righteousness. Souls take such hearty draughts of
the waters of Samaria, that they have little drought for the waters of Israel.
Too too many never set forth in earnest for Heaven, because they are loath to
leave the earth behind them.

2. With the waters of our own right cousnesse.

1. Civil righteousness, many have their Indentures for Heaven running in the
Pharisees strain; Luke 18.11.
they are not as other men. Their Religion lies much in the Negative, they
cease to do gross evils; (and I wish all went thus far) yet we may say to them
as Christ to the young man, Mark 10.21. (...). Thou come short in the Race,
though thou runnest far.
There Is one thing wan ting. If civility be thy best title to heaven, it has a
flaw in it. He that buried his talent was condemned, as if he had spent it;
Non-improvement will undo souls as well as misimprovement. And they that
clothed not Christ are sentenced as if they had stripped him; Mat. 25.
they who gave him no meat, as if they had taken it from him.

2. Religious righteousness,

(1.) Forms Whiles some rest without forms, others rest in forms; 2 Timothy 3.5.
having and holding a form of godliness, yet falling short of the glory of
God; Romans 2.29
of that whereof they may glory before God: like those who shoot at a star,
that can never hit it. These conclude they are Jews, because they are so
outwardly; that they are gold, because they glister; that they shall be saved
from the deluge of Gods wrath, Baptismus flumints, non flaminis.
by hanging on the sides of the Ark: that bare circumcision or uncicumcision
avail sufficiently.

(2.) Performances. These which may be used for evidence, are abused for
confidence. Because they manifest souls are apt to eye them, as if they did
merit interest in Christ. Whiles some deny to do them, others deny not to
deifie them. Good services are bad Saviors; Phil. 3 ^.
good means are bad Mediators: these two are joined in one, being found in
Christ, and thus not having our own righteousness.

3. By prejudicing souls against those who especially carry this water. People
are apt to think that the treasure is not heavenly, because they know that the
vessels are earthy. Two great prejudices people take up;

1. Because Ministers would have them to observe Gods order in his promises, to
look to Promises of grace, before they look for promises to grace; to wait for
the promise of the Spirit as convincing, before they conclude they shall find
the performance of it as comforting. Ministers would have those who climb
Jacobs ladder, to begin at the foot, at the lowest staire.

2. Ministers would have men to observe Gods order in his Ordinances; Prius
nasci, quampasci.
to wait in those ordinances appointed for conversion of finners, til they be
fit for those which are appointed for confirmation of Saints; to wait on the
audible word, that faith may be begun by hearing, till they be fit for the
visible word, that faith may be perfected by seeing.

5. Lastly, Satan prejudiceth poor souls, by causing them to rest contented
with a fip of this water, Joh. 17.37 Heb. 6.5.
they that thirst should come unto Christ and drink: Now poor souls who drink
where they should but sip, do but fip where they should drink: thus poor souls
rest with bare tasting of the good word of God, and the powers of the world to
come.

1. They are not wholly satisfied with this water, they are like that creature
that lives partly upon the water, and partly upon the land. Christ in their
eyes (in point of Justification) is only as a Star which shines with others;
not as the Sun which shines alone. They are not only (as good men may be)
doubting, whether Christ has chosen them; but wavering whether they should
choose Christ. Joh. 4.14. siti totalis indigentiae.
But he who drinks of the water of life, thus thirsts no more.

2. They are not transformed by this water. 2 Cor. 3.18.
They are not like those who beholding in a glass the glory of the Lord are
changed; this water does not make them clean. Their hearts (at least) are but
swept, not washed from wickedness. They only make the out side of the platter
clean. Asto internal purity, they who are filthy, are filthy still. The eyes (
viz. the judgments) of these that see, are yet dim; their affections heated,
not thoroughly warmed; they are but almost persuaded to be Christians, and with
Herod do (but many) not all things gladly.

The next use is of Instruction: and let us see,

1. the water of life. Now herein is the love of God manifest, that this water
has a new issue to us, we have a new recourse to it; especially if we consider
this way, vi^. the Covenant of grace, and therein,

(1.) 2 Cor. 2.8
Gods wisdom in his purpose before time. Here we have the wisdom of God in a
mystery; Two things ingredient to the execution of this intended work, the
conveying of the water of life to poor souls, 2 Timothy 3.16.
speak Gods infinite wisdom.

1. God and man were to be united. He alone who was both God and man, could
bring God and man together. The Word must be made flesh: great is this my stery
of godliness.

Medius inter Deum and Homines. h. e. Deus and Homo simul fuit Christus, ut
quae apud Deum and homimineserant peragenda, expediret. Wolleb. us.
As a Priest, the Mediator of the New Covenant, must be God, that he might
satisfy; Man, that he might suffer: Man, that his sufferings might be
existent; God, that they might be effectual.

As a Prophet, the Mediator must be Man, that he might teach us familiarly;
God, that he might teach us fully.

As a King, he must be God, that he might rule our enemies with an Iron Mace;
Man, that he might rule us with a golden Scepter: God, that he might conquer
our enemies by his power; Man, that he might command us by love.

This Mediator must be God, that he might render his Saints amiable: Man, that
he might render himself amiable: God, that we might be made partakers of the
Divine nature; Man, that we might be fitted to live with God in our Humane
nature.

This Mediator must needs be God,

1. That he might appease his Fathers Justice None but this Saviors revenues
can discharge a sinners debt. He alone could pay the uttermost mite. Heb. 7.26.
(...).
He that saves to the uttermost, must be higher then the Heavens. Angels may be
said to be as high as the Heavens, because they have Heaven in possession;
Saints, because they have Heaven in reversion: but a higher then Saints or
Angels must be here.

2. That he might remove the Fathers wrath. Gods wrath would soon have crushed
the highest creature; this weight (as to their shoulders) was insupportable;
This burden too great for their backs. For which of them can dwell with
everlasting burnings? Isai. 63.3.
Christ trod the winepresse of the Fathers wrath alone, and he alone could
tread it.

3. It was requisite that the Mediator should be God to procure the Fathers
favor, Qaisjustitram vivis donare posset nisi qui est ipsa just^^a? Vide
W^le^. p. 75.
to purchase righteousness for souls, to apply righteousness so purchased to
souls, as might be more largely showed.

And as the root of these good things is in his Godhead, so they are conveyed
to us through his Manhood. Had not Christ took upon him the seed of Abraham, he
could neither have been so familiar with us, nor yet so experimentally
compassionate toward us; He could neither have satisfed for the sin of our
nature, neither had he ever so highly advanced our nature.

As God and man were to be united,

2. Gods justice is showed in damning. Both mercy and justice in saving.
So Justice and Mercy were to be reconciled. Now how could Mercy and Truth (in
the business of man's salvation) have met together? How could it have been the
fruit of mercy, and yet the effect of Justice? If the person offended had not
concurred to, and acted in making satisfaction for the offense; had not God
given man, viz. humane nature, wherewith to pay, the debt could never have been
paid.

If the Father had not accepted satisfaction in the principal, which he might
have demanded personal. In this eternal contrivance, infinite wisdom does
evidently appear.

The graciousnesse of God further appears, if we consider the love of God in
the prosecution of that purpose in time. 1 John 4.9.
God the Father sent his Son to be debased, that poor creatures might be
exalted; to die, that they might live; to drink of the bitter cup of death,
that they might drink of the sweet Water of life. A stone was rolled to the
mouth of the well of life, not such a stone as the Angel removed, but such a
stone as neither man nor Angel could remove; till the Angel of the Covenant,
Jesus Christ, came. Now we may say, It is done, It is done, the Lamb is slain
actually, who was slain virtually from the beginning of the world.

Thus you see the Heart of God set his Head on work from eternity, his Hand
when the fullness of time was come. So we come to the second Branch: Where.

We may further see the preciousnesse of the Gospel. Branch 2d of the Use of
instruction.
And that,

1. In reference to the publication of these glad tidings, Romans 10.15.
viz. of the Water of life. Beautiful are (or should be) the feet of those who
come upon this embassage. The Letter kills. The Law like a shrill trumpet
sounds nothing but Death. The Law shuts Heaven gates; but the Gospel opens
them. The Law leaves souls in the vale of Achor; the Gospel gives them a door
of hope.

2. In reference to the application as well as the publication. 2 Cor. 3 5 (...)
juvat.
The Gospel gives life, and not only declares it. The Gospel not only
points out the way, but is isntrumental (in the hand of the Spirit) to put us
on in the way. The Law requires a full tale of brick, but allows no straw;
exacts duty, but affords not ability; The Gospel effects in souls, what it
expects from souls. The Gospel comes to the Elect not in word only; it brings
not only the water of life unto us, but into us; and brings us to the Water of
Life.

I come now to the third Use which is of Reprehension, 1. To unbeleevers. 2 To
true Believers.

If there be water of life, Jacob. This Water is as water spilt upon the
ground, souls refuse the Waters of Shiloah, Mat. 22.5.
and make light of them.

Such are souls, who.

1. Will not come to the channels, viz. the Ordinances, through which this
Water of Life is conveyed. Many who are below Heaven, conceit that they are
above duties. Alas poor souls, are you so afraid of healing, that you will not
come at the Pool? Because light comes originally from the Sun, will you
therefore stop the windows? Because we cannot work without God, will you (in
an ordinary way) conclude that God will work without us? It Is the deaf Adder,
that shuts the Ear; And if we shut the Ear, God may in justice shut the Heart.

As there are some who will not come, So

2. There are others who will but come to the Channels. Such are those,

1. Who abuse the Channels, taking them for the water of life. Too many rest in
the earthly part of heavenly institutions; in the Boat in stead of the Haven.
Too many prize the milk for the nurses sake, when they should prize the nurse
for the milks sake. Ordinances are not our Heaven, though our baits in the way
to Heaven. The Symbols of Gods presence are not to be preferred before his
presence it self. 1 Samuel 4.3.4.
We may not (as the Israelites) think that the Ark of the Lord, without the
arm of the Lord, can save us.

2. Those who use not the Channels so, as take out of them the Water of life,
who use not the Ordinances.

(1.) Constantly. Many poor creatures (in their use of Ordinances) have their
fits (like men in an Ague) their good days, Hos. 6.4.
they take a turn or two with Demas; but do not (with Enoch) walk with God. Too
many neglect to sail with every wind, to set forward with every gale; Are
often absent from Wisdoms gates when her dule is dealing. Though God causes
the evening as well as the morning to rejoice; yet many have not twice on the
sabbath ears to hear what the Spirit says unto the Churches. As these use not
Ordinances constantly, so others not (2) Carefully. Those are to be reproved,
who are not careful,

1. To come to these Channels with their hearts open, i.e. emptied,

(1) of Earth linesse. It Is sad when being sequestered from worldly occasions,
we are surrounded with worldly affections; when coming from the world without
us, we carry a world within us. Through these veins of earth, the Water of life
can get no passage: for these thorns of earthlinesse, Mat. 13.7. compared with
22.
the Seed of life can take no rooting: like ships, the more we are tossed, the
less we get forward. These Flies upon the wheel make us drive heavily.

(2) Of profaneness. We should lay aside all superfluity of naughtiness, Iam.
2.23.
that we may through the Word receive this Water of life. Fleshly lusts in the
soul, (as corrupt humors in the body) hinder food from being nutrimentall. As
it is with the Water of the sea running through the veins of the earth, which
receives a tincture from the earth through which it passes; so it is with this
Water of life running in the Ministry through the world, Quicquid recipitur,
recipitur per modum reciptentis.
it receives different entertainment according to the different dispositions of
the entertainers. The same word is to one the favor of life, to another the
savor of death. The same Sun which softens some, hardens others. And if we
regard iniquity in our hearts, God has not more promised to prepare our hearts
to hear him, then his ear to hear us.

(3.) Of selfishnesse. Ps. 66.18.
If a vessel be stopped (whether it be with rags or gold) it cannot receive
the Water; If our hearts be filled (either with our goods or goodness, Luke
1.53.
our unrighteousness or our own righteousness) they cannot receive in this
Water. The hungry God fills with good things: Now a hungry soul is not only
pinched with the sense of its sin, but of that insufficiency which is in it
self. They who come to the Fountain of living Waters, must not draw out of the
cisterns of self-sufficiency which will hold no waters. As some are reprovable
for not being careful to come to the Channels with their hearts open: So
others,

2. For not going away from them with their hearts shut. It Is sad that they who
will not put their money into a bag with holes, will yet put the precious
treasure of Divine truths into their hearts with holes. We should give more:
earnest heed to the things which (...) hear, ^eb. 2.1. (...). A Metaphor drawn
from Riven dishes. Vid. Leighs Crit. sacra.
lest at any time we should let them slip. The vessels of our hearts are like
vessels full of chinks, and if we stop not these chinks, the Water of life is
like to run out. I wish we might not too truly say of many of our hearers,
Godw. I^wish Antiq. p. 31.
what the Rabbines use to say of some of their Scholars; that they resemble an
Hour-glasse; what is taken in at one ear is let out at the other. Much of the
seed which we sow, is as seed sown by the highway side.

I shall a little back this reproof by showing, (1) What Water it is which we
disesteem.

It is Cordial Water. They that prize not pools of com^on water, yet prize
drops (...) stomach water. Men would not lose the least filing of gold. A
precious stone men prize highly, lock up safely that rust may not corrupt it,
that thieves may not break through and steal it. Mat. 13.4. compared with 19.
But alas' this water much more precious then gold that perishes men watch
not, then comes the evil one and steals it out of their hearts.

This Water would be cordial,

1. In a time of sickness When a fainting fit comes, what would a soul give
for a draught of this Aquae vitae? When thy head aches, what would thou give
for Christ to hold thy head? when other Waters are Marah bitter, how sweet
would this be? when like winter bournes they are drawn dry, how pleasant is it
to have a Fountain to go to which can never be drawn dry? When thou lie on
thy sick bed, to see God (as a Father) stand with a cup of this Water at the
beds head, Oh how sweet is it!

2. In the hour of death, when there is but a step betwixt us and the grave;
when our sun is setting, to see this Sun of Gods love clearly rising; to see
that God will not leave us then, when life leaves us, this is life in death. It
was usual to give a cup of consolation to the friends of men departed, Godw
Jewish Antiq. p. 243.
but this is the cup of consolation which God give to men departing. And a
draught of this is a thousand times better then a Cleopatra's draught. Cant.
1.2.
This Water is better then Wine.

(2) I shall show you, that none-esteeming, is likely to bring

1. None enjoying of it. They who know not the worth of it, are likely ere long
to know the want of it. Amos 8.5. compared with 12.
Those (in Amos) who wanted a thirst, were not long, before they wanted Water.
When we prize not grace in the means, we may justly provoke. God to deprive us
of the means of grace. Many want meat who have stomachs, but we have mean and
want stomachs. When we play so long with the candle, may we not justly cause
God to blow it out? When the bread lies under the table, may not God call for
the enemies to take away? When the water of life follows us, we flee it; the
time may come ere long, this generation may not pass away, till when we follow
it, it flees us.

2. Not esteeming the sweet water of life, may and (without repentance) will
cause us to taste the bitter waters of death. Waters of a full cup shall be rung
out to them in hell, who esteem not this water of life on earth. They who will
not have a drop of living water to heat their hearts here, shall not have a
drop of common water to cool their tongues hereafter. Mat. 22.5. comp. with 6.
and 7. v.
They who made light of this water, neither were guilty of a light sin, neither
yes were punished with a light suffering.

As this Use reproves unbeleevers, so true believers:

As the most are reproved for not esteeming, so the best for not improving this
water of life,

1. To the further evidencing of their justification. Rev. 2.17. Giving a white
stone was a token of Absolution -- Mo^ erat antiquis niveis atrisque capillis.
-- vid. God. wyn 188.
Generally, Christians rest in affiance, without assurance: in a direct act of
faith, without a reflexive act* The white stone, and new Name few know, even of
those that have grace. Saints get not their evidences for heaven transcribed in
the blood of Christ; they are content to hang at May be for Eternity.

2. To the further advancing of their sanctification. Ezekiel. 47.2, 3.
This water of life should resemble the waters of the sanctuary, which still
rose higher; from the anckles to the knees, from the knees so high, that they
were impassable. Bruised reeds should become trees, and smoking flax break
forth into a flame. The new creature should resemble that creature which grows
while it lives. Both parts of sanctification should be promoted.

1. Mortification of our lusts. This sea of grace should be to our sins, as the
Dead sea, wherein they cannot live. 1 Cor. 15.31.
In this respect we should die daily; our sins must be (as our Savior was)
crucified: The house of sin (like the house of Saul) should grow weaker and
weaker. But alas how little is the viper cast into the fire of Mortification?
Free grace is compared to water, to show that it should wash away our filth; to
fire, to show that it should burn up our dross: but this water does little
cleanse us, this fire does little refine us. We little resemble the creatures
(called Cynocephales) which died piece meal, and were buried long before their
death.

2. Vivification of our graces. How little do we out of weakness become
strong? Our hand of faith is yet subject to the Palfie. We are like those
stars which do much twinkle: Our eye of knowledge has many skales on; we know
but in part. The fire of our love (if like the fire of Sanctuary, it be at all
kept burning) burns little hotter. We are low shrubs, who should be tall Cedars.

That this reproof may prove effectual, let us consider,

1. Want of improvement will sadly speak want of enjoyment. It will be much
feared, whether there be any spark of fire or no, if it always lie under ashes.
It is a great Question (if a Question) whether they were ever entrusted with a
Talent of grace, Mat. 25.25 compa. with 29.
who let it lie long buried in a Napkin. Can a man have this fire in his
bosom, and not be warmed with it? It is the painted child which grows not.
From him that has not, i. e. that improveth not what he has, shall be taken
away. A good servant will say to his Lord, Thy pound (though not my pains) has
gained ten pounds.

2. Want of improvement of this grace of God, will render thee,

1. More unusefull to others. The Conduit cannot convey to the vessel, except
it receive continually from the Fountain. The light of the Saints is like the
light of the Stars a borrowed light; they strine through the shining of the
Sun. Amos 7.16.
Ministers are said to drop the Word, in allusion to the Clouds which receive
water from the Sea, which they power down upon the earth: how soon would these
Clouds be (like those in Jude) Clouds without water, should they not have
recourse to supply it? Thy candle will soon be lightless, if it be not freshly
lighted at this torch.

2. More uncomfortable to thy self. The waters of our sanctification, and the
waters of our consolation are usually at the same ebb. Though the smallest
waters of grace will carry thee to Heaven, yet they will not carry thee
comfortably through earth. Though it is only want of the truth of grace, which
will deprive thee of eternal comfort, yet want of degrees of grace will
diminish thy spiritual comforts; Babes in grace (as well as in nature) are
often crying.

If there be water of life, Isa. 55.2.
Why lay you out your money for that which is not living water? Those are not
living waters;

1. Which spring from below us, viz. Worldly riches. These are dug out of
the bowels of the earth, Itum est in viscera terrae.
and out of the earth comes no saving good thing; Jam. 1.17. (...).
Every good and every perfect gift comes from above. Some have observed, that
in Canaan (which was the land of grace) there was no gold found; and that in
India (where there is most gold) there is least grace. The world is compared to
the Moon, Rev. 12.1.
and the woman clothed with the Sun, ( i. e. Christ's righteousness) is said to
have the Moon under her feet. But alas, our heads, nay, our hearts are, where
our feet should be: God has placed heaven above us, and earth below us, to
show that we should aspire toward the one, and trample on the other.

2. Those waters are not living waters, which spring from above us: such are,

(1.) Worldly pleasures. How many bees are drowned in this hive! It Is hard to lie
in Dalilahs lap, and not to fall asleep; to feed on these sweet meats, and not
to surfeit. It Is dangerous (with Dives) to fare deliciously every day. Religio
licet sit lata, non est dissoluia.
Religion (if it allow mirth) allows not madness; and even in lawful
pleasures we should but sip, not drink too deep, lest there be poison in the
bottom. 1 Timothy 5 6. (...).
A man (as well as a woman) that lives in pleasure, is dead while he lives.

(2.) Worldly honors. Every one would be (as Saul was) higher by the head then
other people. That bait was very taking, Genesis 3.5.
Ye shall be as Gods. But alas! why should we not rather aim at goodness then
greatness, at holiness then at highness?

(3.) Worldly friends. They who trust to these staves, will one day find them
staves of reed, if not like the staff of Egypt; they will fail our
expectation, if not cut our hands. We may go to these waters of the river,
strong and many; but we shall find these rivers turned into a dry land. Isa.
8.6, 7.
We may think that our Mountain stands strong, and yet see these Mountains
skip like Rams. We may think that our waters are sure, and yet (one day) say
of all these friends (as Job said of his) Miserable comforters are ye all:
their arms may be short, that they cannot; their hearts so strait, that they
will not help.

3. Those waters are not living waters, which spring from within us. Hereby I
understand our own duties. It Is true, duties are the channels through which this
water is conveyed to us; the chariots, by which we are carried to it. Yet our
salvation depends not upon the works which are done by us; Tit 35.
but the works which were done by Christ for us. It Is not man's merit, but Gods
mercy: not man's works, but Gods grace, upon which the new Covenant is founded.
Yet as some of old are said to mix water with the wine Sacramental, (being the
outward sign;) so too many mix (in point of Justification) this water of
their own doings, with the wine of Christ's sufferings, (being the inward thing
signified.)

4. (...). Gratiae gratis datae, non gratum sacie^es.
Some Waters are not living Waters which yet spring above us. Such are gifts
given for edification of others, not for salvation of our selves. Like Candles,
we may give light to others whilst we are consuming: We may (like those
Workmen in Noah's time) help to build an Ark for others, and yet we our selves
be drowned. The Sun of Righteousness, in respect of Gifts, rises upon the
just and unjust. These Waters will one day be like those Brooks to which the
Troops of Tema came. Job 6.19. Mat. 7.22, 23.
The lowest grace (but not the highest gift) will rise up to glory. These
skirts will not cover us at the day of Judgment.

Quest. Some may say, Must we have no recourse at all to these Waters?

Ans. 1. We may suck, but not be satisfied with these breasts of Consolation:
we may taste of these Brooks in the way; we may do (as Jonathan did) take a
little of this Honey with the end of our Rods; we may (with Gideon's chosen
Soldiers) lap of these Waters with our tongues, Judge. 7.5, 6.
but not bow down on our knees to drink. We may, nay we must bring forth the
fruit of Duties; but we must (like good ground) bring forth this fruit
upwards, to the glory of God; not downwards, to our own glory. Gifts should be
improved, not idolized. We should covet the best of them earnestly, and yet
know that there is a more excellent way.

Ans. 2. These Waters must be used as sweetened by Christ, but not be abused as
satisfying without Christ. These comforts (like the Sieve) are full whilst in,
Stultus ad cribrum.
but empty when out of this Water. Deus sis vult amari, ut nihil prater ipsum
ametur, and tamen sic vult amari ut o nnia cum ipso (vel in ipso) amentur.
We may eye these as our Privileges, but not enjoy them as our Portion. And
indeed this would be the sweetest drinking of these Cups, when they are sugared
with Christ's merits, when they swim to us down the stream of Christ's blood,
when with Christ we enjoy these other things. Those bits are best which are
taken out of the Ark of the Covenant. Those enjoyment; purest (though little
ones) which we are sure that Christ has paid for. These like Ciphers are as
nothing in themselves, but added to this figure, increase the number.

That I may more dissuade you from pursuing so earnestly these Nether-spring
waters, The First Motive.
viz. Riches, Profits, Pleasures;

(1.) Consider the Nature of these Waters.

1. These Waters are less full then the Water whereof we are treating.
Suppose you should enquire out the quintessence of Creature Comforts, Quo plus
sunt potae, plus sitiuntua aquae.
thy soul could not get a hearty draught. Nay, it is usually with those who
drink of these Waters, as with one in a Dropsy, the more they drink, the dryer
they are. The fullness of Creatures is a fleeting fullness, Aes in praesenti
perfectum non format.
the fullness of a vessel which may soon be emptyed: But the fullness of the
Creator is as the fullness of a fountain; In him all fullness dwells. He is ever
emptying himself, Isa. 66.11.
and yet himself never emptyer. Other waters may seemingly content thee, but
cannot truly satisfy thee; yet thou may here suck and be satisfied.

2. These Waters are more fading. Prove. 23.5.
Riches (like Eagles) make! themselves wings and fly away. Divitiae
ostenduntur, non possidentur.
They fly away, not like Hawks, which return again, but like Eagles, which
return no more. Yet a little while and we see them, yet a little while and we
see them not; If they go to the grave, there they will leave us. But the Water of
life runs to all Eternity; the further we go, the bigger this stream is.

3. These Waters, as they are not full, but fading, so they are not pure
Waters, they are but mixed and muddy. These Apples are but (at the best)
Bitter-sweets. (...). Is^. 1.22.
There Is some Marah in these Rivers. Our Silver is mixed with dross. These
Roses seem fair, but they have their prickles: These Bees have their sting as
well as their honey. But the Rose of Sharon has no pricks: The River of God
is free from filth: The worst of Christ is good: The chips of Christ's Cross
have no rottenness in them: His Judgments are sweeter then the honey and the
honeycombe. This Tree of life will sweeten the most bitter waters.

(2.) The second Motive.
Consider the Nature of the Water of life.

1. The Water of life is of a Quenching nature. If thou be so dry for the
Water that perishes, it will be questionable, whether thou have drunk of that
which endures to Eternal life. Joh. 4.14.
The Sun alone can make a Day; it is the Night that needs many stars. Why do
thou go so much to the Conduit-cocks to fetch thy comfort by drops, if thou
know the way to the Fountain? Whom have I in heaven but God, (if I have God)
or what is there on earth that I can desire besides God? If I have God, I have
all, and more then all I cannot have.

2. The Water of life is of a Quickening nature. As souls are not satisfied
without this, so neither are they satisfied with a little of this. If thou have
tasted of the goodness of God which is laid out on souls, thou will thirst
ardently for that goodness which is laid out for souls. Isa. 28.16.
He that believes cannot make haste after earth, because he is so eager in his
pursuit of heaven. And this falls in with the next head.

3. There is an Inconsistency betwixt the eager pursuit of the Cisterns and
this Fountain. The same eye cannot be fixed upwards and downwards: The
streams which run toward the Creature, will dry up the fountain of our desire
which should run toward the Creator. Lively desires of earth, will cause lazy
desires of heaven. If we love the world, 1 Jo. 2.15.
the love of the Father is not in us: As it is not in us actively, our love is
not expressed to the Father; so it is not in us passively, the Fathers love
has not been evidenced to us.

If thou eagerly pursuest these Waters, The third Motive.
it will sadly speak two things.

(1.) That thou have a deceived heart; otherwise, thou would never feed upon
Ashes. Isa. 44.20.
The curse of the Serpent lies upon thee, upon thy belly thou go, and dust
do thou eat. Thou buyest gold too dear. Thou make thy employment where thou
should only take some refreshment. Thou abusest the Creatures as weights,
when thou should only use them as wings.

(2.) That thou art a man of this world, Ps 17.14.
whose portion is in this life. It will be sad, if thou have no more Heavens
but what thou have on Earth; if thou should lose two worlds by catching too
greedily at one. Thou who (with the Mole) art rooting here below in the Earth,
may fear lest God should execute upon thee the judgment written in that of
Jeremiah; lest thy Name should be written in the Earth. Notus nimis omnibus,
ignotus si by.
A Worldling often dies too much known to others, unknown to himself; leaves
nothing behind him but the memory of his sins; whilst Saints (like perfumed
Gandles) leave a sweet sent in the world when they are put out; and being dead,
Extinctus amabitu^ idem.
by their works yet speak.

If there be water of life, Exhortat.
Who would not dig deep if he might find a Well of living Waters?

I shall under this Use lay down some Motives to quicken us in endeavoring
after this Water.

Consider the virtue of this Water.

1. This Water is of a Quenching nature. Water quenches fire; so does this
Water quench the fire of Gods displeasure. Gods anger smokes against finners,
Isa. 27.4.
and if these briars and thorns were set in battle before him, how soon would
he burnt them up? This spark, all the waters in the world cannot quench; though
we should bring thousands of Rams, and ten thousands of Rivers of Oil. But
this Free Grace of the Faclier which flows through Jesus Christ, is as a cloud,
and a thick cloud, under the conduct whereof, fouls are preserved from the
scorching heat of Divine wrath. When fire is at the door of the Tabernacle,
souls may look to the Propitiatory; when wrath is awed, this Mercyseat may be
eyed.

2. This Water is of a Refreshing nature. Act. 3.19. (...), of (...) and (...),
or, of (...) and (...).
The time when God comes with mercy is a time of refreshing. The soul is often
laboring under the convictions of the Law, (as one who works in an iron
furnace) til God cause these gales of love, these cooling winds to blow on it.
The spirits are sometimes in a swoon, fainting, and ready to give up the ghost,
till God sweetly with the Fan of his Grace blow upon the soul, and cause it to
return. This Free Grace is a Downie pillow whereon sick souls may lay their
heads. This cloud of Gods mercy resembles the cloud in St. Tho. Island;
Herewith the land of Canaan is watered. This is a cloud of the latter rain, and
as showers on the mowen grass

3. This Water is of a Cleansing nature. Hereby Men may be purified as well as
God pacified. The waters of Civility may sweep the heart, but this Water alone
can wash the heart. This does not leave souls who were unclean, Ezekiel. 36.25.
unclean still. This can fetch out the deepest stains; wash out the blackest
spots. Hereby the Leopards spots may be cleansed, the Ae^hiopians skin changed.
The foulest Sinners made fair.

4. This Water is of a Healing nature. This Water resembles the water of the
Pool of Bethesda (when the Angel had moved it). Eze. 47.8.
By being laid upon this sofe cushion, hard hearts are broken. In this fire
cold souls are thawed. Hereby things that remain and are ready to die are
strengthened. Never did soul die which took this Physic. Never was wound
mortal to which this Balm was applied. It Is true of the herb of Grace which is
reported of the herb Panace, it heals all diseases: It Is a salve for every
sore; this remedy is universal.

5. This Water is of a Satisfying nature. The soul (like Noah's Dove) may fly up
and down, but can find no rest for the sole of the foot till she come to this
Ark. It Is observed, that the Raven which went out of Noah's Ark returned no
more, she (says a sound Pen) found Car^on on the face of the waters; Mr.
Shepherd.
Domine fecisti no^ pr^ te, irrequietum est cornostrum d^nec acqu^escat in ^e.
4 Joh. 14.
Worldlings (as has been formerly hinted) can feed on the Cari^^ which they
find on the top of the waters. But Sain^^ are not satisfied without this
Water, whereof when they drink, they thirst no more.

6. This Water is of a Fructifying nature.

(1.) It makes the soult bring forth the first fruit. Our hearts are like the
barren heath, til this rain fall on them; but this rain (like the rain which
comes down from heaven) causes the ground of our hearts to bring forth and
bud. Our Natural estate is a Winter state, dead and fruitless; but when the
Sun of P^ighteousness darts forth the warmth of his grace, Malac 4.2.
the roots in our hearts are loosned, the fruits of holiness in our lives are
produced; then we got forth of this Spiritual unactivenesse. Every branch in
Christ (really, and not only visibly; Joh. 15.2.
by inward implantation, and not only by outward adhaesion) brings forth
fruit. There Is nothing barren in the land of the Living.

(2.) This Water makes the ^oul still to bring forth more fruit. Joh. 15.2.
This Water causes the trees of Righteousness to be clagged and laden with
the fruits of holiness. This Water (like other waters) is still returning
toward the Sea. Some say that sparks of fire do therefore ascend, because they
tend toward the element of fire. The graces of God like the sparks fly
upwards, Ps. 92.11, 12.
Glory being Graces center. Spiritual men when old (as well as Natural men when
young) are still growing higher: This Water is water springing up to
Everlasting life.

7. This Water is Homogeneall. The least drop of this Water is Water. Vid. Isa.
42.3. It Is a Meiosis. Minus dicitur, plus intelligitur.
If thou can but get grace as a grain of mustard seed, thou art as truly
gracious, though not as perfectly gracious, as the most eminent Christian^.
Though it is of the nature of true grace to be thriving, and if we grow not
better, it is to be feared we were never truly good; yet at the day of
Judgment, God will not (says one) bring a balance to weigh thy grace, but a
touchstone to try it. Many have been shut out of Heaven for want of truth of
grace, but never any for want of degrees of grace.

We should therefore endeavor for the Water of life, The second Motive.
because without endeavoring there is no hopes of attaining it. The Well of
Salvation is deep, the Tree of Life is high. Jacobs ladder has many stairs.
This honey must be fetched out of the rock. The gate of Heaven, that gate by
which the righteous people do enter in, is a narrow one, Mat. 7.13.
and souls must strive to enter in at the strait gate. The choycest Mines
usually lie lowest.

Object. But some may say, How is the Water of life free, seeing it must be so
labored for?

Ans. 1. Man (not God) is advantaged by this labor: God makes use of our
duties, as the Sun draws up vapors, not for it self, but for the fattening and
refreshing of the Earth: So the Lord requires our endeavors, Psalm. 16.2.
not as if our goodness extended to him, but that his goodness may be
communicated to us. We throw not in one mite to the treasury of Gods
essential glory, but he throws in more then many millions into the stock of
our eternal good. Nothing of Man can be added to God, though much of God is
evidenced to Man.

Ans. 2. Romans 8.26. Bona opera fiunt a nobis, non tamen ex nobis.
God (not Man) is principally assistant in this labor. Gods Spirit takes by
the heavy end, and his little singer does more then our whole hand in helping
our infirmities. He who requires that we should come to the Waters, gives us
feet wherewith to come. Isa. 26.12.
Thus he works all our works in us, and for us; Duties in us, as well as
Mercies for us; that which is done by us, as well as that which is done to us.

The next use may therefore be a word of Direction, By way of Direction.
to show, How we should come to, and for this Water of life, viz.

1. With Compunction. They who come to this Pool, must come inwardly pinched
with their infirmities. They must be sin-sick, who come to the Physician of
Israel for healing. Here the weary be at rest. Mat. 9.12.
They who believe are said to cast their burden upon the Lord: Now, How can
they cast their burden on him if it be not a burden to them? It Is observable,
that Christ asked the blind man what he would have him to do; not but that
Christ knew his infirmity well, only he would have him to know it better.
Souls must be stung (not only pricked) with the fiery Serpents, who look up unto
the brazen Serpent.

2. With Contrition: with tears in their eyes must souls go toward Sion; and
these tears will not cloud, but clear up their eyes, that they may see their
way better. In this sense we must bring water to the Sea. God restores comfort
to Sion, and to her Mourners. Deus non infundit oleum miscricordia, nisi in vas
tritum. Psa. 126.5.
The best Wine which we read of in Scripture was made of Water. Into broken
vessels does God pour the oil of his mercy. Light is sown for the righteous;
and as the seed-time is often a long time, (this seed lying long hid) so it is
usually a wet time; they sow in tears.

3. They who come for the Water of life must come with resolution, Mat. 13.45.


(1.) To part with all for this Water. The wise Merchant sold all: Most would
sell some; many would sell much. The Bucket wherewith we draw out of the Well
of life must be an empty one. The Bottle which receives of this Water must not
be stopped. The Bottles of our hearts must not be stopped with rags, nor yet with
gold (as I have before showed). We must neither be unwilling to part with our
sins, which are not worth keeping; nor yet with our selves, seeing that they
who seek themselves most, lose themselves most; and that the ready way to
advance our selves is to deny our selves.

2. We must come with a resolution to take all of this Water of life: We must
like this Water as it is purifying, and not only as it is pacifying. We must
delight in this Honey, not only as sweet to our souls, Act. 5.31.
but as as sharp to our sins. We must thirst for the Water of Repentance, as
well as of Remission. These two do not lag one after another, but (like Jacob
and Esau) one takes the other by the heels. We must so understand that Phrase
of Gods Justifying the ungodly, that ungodlynesse is the Term from which Gods
mercy moves, not the Term wherein it rests; God finds (but leaves not) us
ungodly.

(4.) We must come to and for the Water of life Desiringly. To this I shall in
another Doctrine speak more fully.

(5.) We must come Beleevingly.

1. Looking off from our selves.

2. Looking unto Christ.

3. Looking unto the Father through Christ.

Fit objects for the Believer to eye, who reads this Use, are presented in the
former Branch of the first Use. And indeed, faith is not only an Eye to see
the truth of those things, but a Hand to apply the goodness of them. And this
leads me to the last Direction I shall give under this Doctrine.

(6.) Wait for the Spirit.

1. In respect of its light to guide thee.

2. In respect of its strength to guard thee.

God must first take hold of us by the hand of his Spirit, Isa. 49.10.
before we can take hold of him by the hand of Faith. God has promised that by
the springs of Water he will guide souls.

HAving laid the foundation in some things spoken to and from the first
Doctrine, I shall (through the help of Heaven) build up, and lay some more
stones in the prosecution of the second.

That there is a Fountain of the Water of life.

By the Water of life I understand as before, The free love of God the Father
flowing through Jesus Christ.

This being the Water down which good things are brought from heaven, up which
good men are carried to heaven, by which life comes to us, and we to life.

This being the only Soulquickning Water. This being the only Soul-quenching
Water. Nothing can satisfy the soul pinched with the sense of its own misery,
but a draught of the Brooks which rise from the spring of Gods free mercy.

I shall endeavor in the handling of this Point to dispatch these things; to
show,

1. Why it is here said, The Fountain of the Water of life.

2. That there is such a Fountain of this Water of life.

(1.) What this Phrase imports, That there is a Fountain, etc. viz.

1. The Pureness of it. The Fountain is the purest. Water may be mixed as it
runs through the channel, which is clear as it rises from the spring. Here we
may distinguish betwixt the graces of God as exercised by us, and the grace of
God as displayed on us.

The graces of God as exercised by us are imperfect; our Wine is mixed with
Water. Isa. 1.22.
The child of Grace in us is very weakly, and we are but as newly born Babes.
Such is the corruption of our nature, that (like pitch) whatever they touch,
they defile; and we (like corrupted vessels) do pollute the gifts that are
poured into us; those graces, which are pure and excellent, as bestowed on us,
are not without some savor of our corruption, as put forth by us. But,

The Grace of God in it self is free from mixture. This tiver is clear as
crystal. Rev. 22.1.
This ocean of sweetness is without a drop of bitterness. This honey is
without gall. (...).
The milk which comes out of this breast, is styled Sincere milk, milk not
mingled.

2. The sweetness of it. Dulcius ex ipso soate bibuntut aquae.
The Fountain is the sweetest. Some Waters are (like those Waters in Exodus)
Bitterwaters, whereof the people could not drink; others are like some
streams, which (through mud and filth cast into them) lose much of their
pleasantness; but this Water of Gods free grace, is like Water at the Well
head; sweeter then the honey or the honey-combe. So sweet is this Water, Melius
sentitur, quam definitur.
that the sweetness of it is better experienced then expressed. They who have
not drunk of it, speak of its sweetness rather as Orators then as Preachers.
The soul which by the hand of Faith can gather the fruit of the tree of life,
Cant. 2, 4.
sees these Apples not only (as Eve saw the fruit) pleasant to the eye, but
feels sweet unto the taste.

3. The Fullness of it. The Fountain is fullest. Gods free grace is compared
to the sea, not to the Rivulet, not only to the River, but to the Sea whence
all Rivers issue. Mic. 7.18.
There are bounds beyond which the sea cannot pass: But this sea is as
boundless as bottomless: The depth thereof can none fathom. This sea is
ever-flowing and overflowing. The Lord proclaims his Name, that he is abundant
in goodness.

I shall only speak of the Water of life (in this Doctrine) in the third
Consideration; and a little lanch into this great Ocean. And when I speak of
the fullness of Gods grace, I shall desire to consider God

(1) As a subject recipient. Plenitudo Abundantiae.
So God is as full of grace as the Sun of light: as the sea of water: as Hell
of sin: as Heaven of glory. Thus Christ is likewise said to be full of grace as
the only begotten of the Father; Joh. 1.14.
infinitely full.

(2) As a fountain redundant. Plentitudo redundantia.
In God there is not only a fullness of plenty, but also a fullness of bounty;
not only a full fullness, but a filling fullness, Job. 1.16.
a fullness of grace out of which souls receive grace for grace. As the Sun is
full of light and heat not for it self, but for the greater world; so the Son
of God (if we look to his Mediatory fullness) has rays and beams of the
Fathers free grace not properly for himself, but for the elect, the lesser
world. Christ was filled that he might fill, He received gifts for men.

To this latter, this fullness of redundance, or as redundant, we shall
especially speak, and show the truth of the position: That Gods grace redundant
and redounding to souls is full,

1. Demonstration
If we look to the Giver of this Grace, or Water; it will appear to be full;
Nihil an Deo est, quod non sit ipse Deus.


1. The nature of all Gods Attributes. Gods Attributes are as his Essence, yea
they are his Essence. Gods Justice, Gods Power, Gods Wisdom, Gods holiness,
yea all his Properties, and therefore his Love (as displayed on creatures) have
a fullness. If God be the giver, there must needs be greatness in the gift.
It Is said of David, when he gave to Araunah, that he gave as a King; we may say
of God, as giving to men, that he gives as a God. A King can better, give
pounds then a beggar pence. A Creator can better give rivers, then a creature
drops. That grace which might be thought too great for us to beg, cannot be
thought too great for him to bestow.

2. We may especially consider this Attribute of love. Love is the Attribute
which God most delights to magnify: Mic. 7.18.
this arrow the Lord draws up high. God is not only loving, 1 John 4.16.
but love it self. And (one observes) that though we cannot say so of Gods
power, or of other Attributes, yet of his love, of this Attribute; he has
extended it to the utmost. Greater love has none.

2. look to the Receivers,

1. To the Number of them. Rev. 7.5, 9. Numerus certus pro in certo.
We read of 144000 out of the tribes of Israel, which yet (I conceive) sets
forth many, not how many. And likewise of a numberless number out of all
nations, all of which have drunk and shall drink of this living water. Now
certainly it can be no less then a Fountain which fills so many vessels; must
needs be a Sun, whence so many Stars receive their light: especially if we
consider that though all these are drawing, yet the well is never dry.

2. To the Nature of them. They who receive of this grace are

(1) Undeserving; less then the least of common, much more then unworthy of
special mercies; Genesis 32.10.
not worthy to gather the dogs cru^^ from under the Table of Providence, much
less worthy to receive childrens Bread from off the Table of the Promises. 1 John 4.10. This is love worth pointing ^t.
Herein is love, love in its eminency, love in the flower of love, that God
loves us; that when we are not worthy that he should love us, he should love
us that we may be worthy.

(2) They who receive of his grace are ill-deserving. The Sun of Gods love
rises upon the unjust. They might look for troubles who behold peace; they
might expect frowns, not favors; smiting, not smiling. Should God bend his
Bow, and shoot his arrows of displeasure at us, we should yet be punished
beneath our iniquities. It is the Lords Mercies (not only Mercy) that we (we
who were in Adam, Lam. 3 2^.
who fell with Adam, who derive a corrupt nature from Adam) are not consumed;
much more that we are comforted, that we are reprieved, carried by this Water
of life from Hell; much more that we are recovered, carried to Heaven.

They who receive of this Water of life, are

(1) Those who once left it. This water follows them who forsake it. This was
one of the two great evils which all men in one committed, Jer. 2.13.
forsaking the Fountain of living Waters; and that

1. Wilfully. Man being left to the freedom of his own will chose evil rather
then good. Satan did counsel, but could not compel.

Satan came in the shape of a Serpent, not of a Lion.

2. At the persuasion of Gods and man's greatest enemy. This sounds high base!
that sacrifice should be offered to the filthy-ghost, by man who was made a
Temple for the holy Ghost; that he who had God for his head, should fall down
at the Devils feet. Man chose the father of lying, rather then God who speaks
righteousness.

(2) Those who still leave it. Ps. 66.18.
Free grace overtakes them who would overrun it. Gods eye is good, when man's
eye is evil; and Christ has received grace (as well as gifts) for the
Rebellious. Now lay all these together, and you may conclude that those are
full streams of goodness, which break in upon these high and heightened banks
of our wretchedness.

The fullness of the water of life appears, Genesis 2.10.
We read in Genesis of a River in Paradise, which became into four heads. 1
Cor. 1.30.
We read in Corinthians of this river of the Water of life becoming into four
heads likewise. Christ is made unto us (Christ being the channel as God is the
spring) Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification and Redemption. Now certainly
that is a sea which feeds and fills four so great rivers. That Is a huge river
which sends forth four such full streams to refresh and make glad the City of
God.

I should now come to the Reasons of the point, whereof (as I have before
showed) no reason (besides it self) can be given; the Water of life herein
resembling the water of the sea, in that it is its own spring.

I shall only here insert one great end why the Lord displaies such abundance
of grace upon poor souls, which is

1. That the recovery by the second Adam might (as to the elect) extend as
far as the Apostasy by the first Adam.

There is abundance of grace evidenced in a souls recovery, if we look

(1) Whence souls are recovered: in a word, from death.

1. From death for sin. Our debts were so great, that there must be great sums
of grace to forgive them. Our souls are so leprous, that nitre and soap cannot,
only Christ with his Fullers soap (his durable righteousness) can cleanse
them. Our sins are mountainous, and there must be depth, Mic. 6.19.
yea the depths of the Sea to cover these mountains. To cancel so many, and
those so large bands; to fetch out such deep and deadly stains; To cure such
mortal wounds; all these loudly speak, and call upon us to speak aloud, Grace!
Grace!

2. From death in sin. To quicken souls who are dead in sins and trespasses,
Ephesians. 2.1.
is a high work; and so high does this water rise. I have heard of the Lioness
bringing forth her young naturally dead; I am sure that men and women are
brought forth spiritually dead. Here our mothers brought us forth, here she
brought us forth that bare us. We are spiritually dead, when naturally alive.
Now that dead souls should arise out of the grave, this proclaims Gods
goodness. Christ is said to groan when he raised Lazarus out of the earth, but
(question less) his heart was hotter, and fuller of love infinitely when he
raised the elect from hell.

To make Black mores white, to wash crimson sinners clear Saints, this argues
abundance of grace. God does not only sprinkle but pour clean water upon souls,
that they may be clean.

Again abundance of grace is discovered, if we observe,

(2) Whitherto souls are recovered, viz. To life Spiritual. life Eternal.


1. To live to God, Rom 8 14 (...); Gods Spirit is to the soul, as the Stern to
the ship.
which (as Amesius notes) implies three things: To live

(1.) Deo intens argente, Gods Spirit being a man's guide. Herein is grace that
God by his Spirit should dwell with us who dwell in houses of clay; that God
should not only dwell with us as Christ did when he came in the Flesh; but in
us, as Christ does when he comes in the Spirit. Herein is love, that the holy
Ghost should ever prepare and possess the unholy rooms of our hearts, that we
should be led by the Spirit.

(2) Gods Word being a man's rule. Secundum voluntatem Dei.
That the Lord should ever make crooked things in our souls so straight; that
his Word should be a light to our feet, as well as to our eyes; that our will
should be melted into and molded into Gods will; that his forbidding should be
the ground of our forbearing, his enjoyment of our employment; that we should
prove and approve the good, and holy, and acceptable will of the Lord, this
sets forth the fullness of his grace to us.

(3.) Ad Dei gloriam.
Gods glory being our end. The torrent of grace must needs be strong which
carries us from self to saving intereft, from seeking our own things to seek
the things which are Jesus Christ's. There must needs be abundance of this
water, which so clean seth us, impure vessels, that we may be vessels of the
Sanctuary, fit for the Masters use, prepared unto any good work. That stream
must needs be big wherein all those lesser streams (down which our hearts
naturally run) are swallowed up.

Lastly, There must needs be abundance of grace evidenced in the recovery, when
we are recovered to live with God. Those waters of grace rise high which rise
as high as Heaven. Full as well as free grace must needs be the spring, if
glory be the center. Ephesians. 10.39 (...).
There is a height as well as a depth in the love of God; a height to raise us
to the highest heaven, as well as a depth to raise us from the lowest hell. Oh
the abundant goodness of the Lord! Souls may not only be vessels giving honor
to God, but receiving everlasting honor from God; They may not only speak to
God, but live with God, who are but dust and ashes*

I shall now come to Application.

(1) If there be a Fountain of the Water of life, 1 Use by w^^^of ^nformation.
this may inform us that that emptiness which is found in men, is not for want
of fullness in God: if our souls be dark, we cannot thence conclude, that the
Sun wants light; if the vessel want water, it is not because there is want in
the Sea which should supply it; but because there is want of a conduit-pipe
which should conveigh it. The Well is full, had we but our buckets ready to
draw. Gods hand is open, when our hearts are shut. Did we but incline our ears
and hearts diligently to God, Isa. 55.2.
our souls might live, and delight themselves in fatness.

(2) Poor souls should not rest contented in and with a little of this water.
Psa. 81.10.
We should open our mouths wide, that God might fill them. The narrowness of
our hearts hinders the largeness of Gods hand; The wider is the bore of the
vessel, the fitter it is to receive from the Fountain. As the Minerals are
called Metals, Quasi (...).
because there is still more to be found; so truly may it be said of Gods
grace, there is still more to be setcht. They that have seen furthest, may yet
say that eye has not seen half of the glory which is to be discovered. You
that have gone up some stairs of Jacobs ladder, must yet be like the Angels
ascending; fit not down till you come to the top.

If there be such fullness of grace in God, 2. Use of C^^tion.
Let me speak to weary souls,

(1) Take heed of sinful discouragements. Say not (thou weary creature) that
thou art a dry tree, that for thy part thy bones are dry, thou art cut off,
though thou be (in thy own thoughts) a most dry land and barren wilderness
where no water is, God can open Rivers in that wilderness. Be not so
discouraged, as not to sue to God

1. For pardon of sin. Thy sin may be greater then thou can bear, but not
greater then God can forbear. Art thou so naked that the long robes of Christ's
righteousness will not cover thee. Can a beggar run into so much debt, as a
Prince cannot defray? Are the mountains so high, that the sea cannot hide them?
Wherein can thou frail flesh sin, for which the Son of God (being made flesh)
could not satisfy? Though sins be as scarlet, of a double die, that the color
of agg ravation amount to more then the transgression, yet they may be as snow.

2. For power against sin. Souls are ready to say that they shall one day fall
by the hands of the Philistines; that the proud waters of lusts (which go up)
will go over their souls. Because Saints are sometimes ducked deep, they
readily conclude that at some time they shall be drowned. But let not your
hopes give up the the ghost: Though lusts be potent, yet the Lord is
omnipotent. Though he be a strong man armed who keeps the house, yet there is a
stronger then he. God can rebuke the raging of these waters: The pit is deep,
but the Lords arm is long.

I shall give you two bladders to bear you up. Consider,

1. The more great and grievous is our sin, the more need we have to go to our
Savior. Will thou not send for the Physician because thou art dangerously
sick? David's argument seems to ran strangely, Is. 25.11.
when he urges God ^o pardon his sin because it is great. One would rather have
thought he should have said of it as Lot said of Zoar; It is but a little one.
Were not this more true then strange, that the bigger our burden is, the more
need we have of Christ's back to bear it. Shall we not run faster to the city of
refuge, because the pursuer is at our heels?

2. The more manifold and manifest is our wretchedness who receive, the more
exalted and advanced is the Lords goodness who gives. If it be the glory of
man, then much more of God to pass by a transgression. Yea, it is Gods
greatest glory to pardon sinners whereof thou art chief. 1 Timothy 1.15.
This commends; the Balm of Gilead, that it cures deadly wounds; the Physician
of Israel that he heals desperate diseases. The Blood of Christ is not to be
counted a common thing, H^b. 10 29 (...).
as if there were spots which it could not wash out.

Another Caution I shall give to wanton souls.

Take heed of sinful encouragements. Despair is not the disease which most
souls dye on. There Is usually the most conceit where there is the least receipt.
We read of two who built houses, but we do not read, Mat. 7. the latter end.
that he who built upon the Rock, built higher. Whereas good men usually think
the worst of themselves, bad men usually think the best of themselves. The
superstructure is often seemingly lofty, where sand is truly the foundation.
Some are more bold with grace, then welcome.

Take heed that the consideration of Gods grace do not,

1. Cut off thy actings. Do not say, Though I be not so careful as others in
my family, though I be not so constant in my closet, yet the Lord is abundantly
gracious. I shall hit the narrow mark of Heaven as surely, though I do not aim
at it as seriously; I^ shall be as happy, though I be not as holy. The Lord is
gracious. Will thou not therefore bring thy bucket because there is so much
water to draw? Will thou not work out thy salvation, because God works in
thee? Phil. 2.13, 14. (...). i. e. Accurate, magis mogisque ^poramini. Ad fiaem
usque, opus perducite.
this is to be cooled by that whereby thou should be quickened. Because thou
can not sail to heaven without wind, will thou not therefore hoist up thy
sails when the wind blows?

2. Countenance thy misactings. Do not say, What? though I be now and then so
drunk that I reel through all the Commandments; though I shoot my arrows even
bitter oaths; there is free grace enough for me. Because thy stock is great,
will thou therefore lavish it? Whilst thou pretendest to fredome from sin,
will thou practice sinning freely? Rom 6.1.
Will thou turn the grace of God into lasciviousness? Because the Gospel
proclaims a liberty from sin, will thou take a liberty in sin? Ah sinful
liberty!

Hence to take encouragement to sin, argues

1. Gross Ignorance. Father forgive such souls, they know not what they do. It
argues ignorance, (1.) Of the truth of God, and especially of these truths.

1. God will not more brook a heinous fin because it comes in a holy shape. The
Devil is never the better, because he wears Samuels mantle. Hab. 1.13.
The Lord is of purer eyes, then that he should behold other sins, and of a
purer heart, then that he should behold this sin of hypocrisy. God hates a
soul hand worse because a fair glove is drawn over it. He who loves a broken
heart best, Deus amat contritum, non fissum.
lowres upon a cloven heart most. It adds deformity to an Ape, to be so like a
man. It makes sin exceeding sinful, when it comes under a form most beautiful.

2. Laesa patienita fit furor.
Abused mercy will turn to fury. Mercy (says one) is the sorest enemy, as well
as the sweetest friend. If the goodness of God lead us not to repentance, Romans
2.4, 5.
then we treasure up wrath against the day of wrath. The more (like stubble) we
are dried in the heat of the Sun, the fitter fuel are we for hell fire. If a
man sin against justice, mercy may plead for him; But if he sin away mercy,
whither will he appeal? Poison made of this honey is most deadly.

3. Gospel privileges are all to be under stood in a way of perfection. Good
cordials against despair, are bad arguments to presumption. Christ de frayed
the debts of humble sinners, but will not defend the wastfulnesse of proud
prodigals.

(2) To take sinful encouragement from the consideration of Gods abundant
mercy, argues gross ignorance of the nature of the mercy of God.

Gods mercy is

1. A wise mercy. We may not blasphemously think that the end of Gods love
manifested in the Gospel is, that men may reject his will propounded in the
Law. There is mercy with God, that he may be feared. Psalm. 130.14.
I have heard of a King who built cottages to shelter Serpents, because they
could kill men so suddenly; But far be it from us to think, that this King
would build shelters for sin, because it so suddenly kills not men's bodies only
(as those Serpents did) but bodies and souls. God in mercy spares sinners, but
in justice will not spare sin.

2. Gods mercy is a pure, yea a purifying mercy; Purifying souls

(1) By way of engagement. The consideration of the love of Christ should 2
Cor. 5.14 (...). Nos totos possidet, vel undique circumsistit, sicut fit in
obsidiombus. Leigh Cr. S.
constrain souls to live to him, who died for them. This is the strongest cord
to draw, the strictest band to tie us. Though it is very high and hard to get the
heart under the power of love; yet (as the heaviest bell which is most hardly
got up) it gives the biggest sound. The ship of the soul is never carried so
swiftly and strongly as before these gales. This hems in the thoughts, when
they would go away, and off from duty. This would therefore be exceeding sad,
that souls should draw iniquity with cords of mercy; that the oil of grace
should feed the flame of our corruption, in stead of the flame of our devotion.

2. By way of enablement. Christians may do great things through grace
strengthening them. Phil. 4 13.
One gale of wind is worth a hundred strokes of oars. One drop of oil upon
the wheel of the Chariot, will further its motion more then the strength of a
horse. A little of this grace will avail more then all the powers of nature.
When our hearts are upon the shore, and stick in the mire of deadness, these
winds alone can fetch us off: 1 Cor. 15.10.
Paul labored abundantly, yet not he, but the grace of God in him.

Again to take encouragement in sin from the consideration of Gods full mercy,
argues gross unbelief.

1. This sets up self, even corrupt self. This makes grace the string by which
profane self gets into the saddle. This is to use Gospel liberty as a cloak
for licentiousness. This is exceeding sad, when men bring the river of sin to
get life from the fire of grace. Men are not content with poison except (with
the Spider) they do suck it out of sweet flowers. When men will turn prodigals,
will no cheaper stuff then grace serve them to spend? will men make mortal
that which is medicinal?

2. This does (as much as in creatures lies) debase God. It veils the glory,
(1.) of God the Father, in effect accusing him

1. Of fondness: As if God should any way patronize men's gracelesnesse,
because they pretend to an interest in his graciousnesse. Faith, though it
ascribes every thing which savours of perfection, yet nothing which savours of
imperfection, unto God. Shall this King approve of rebellion in men, because
they are his professed subjects? Will a wise earthly father be so indulgent, as
that his children may thereby be exorbitant? Nay, 1 Pet. 4.17.
are not the flames of wrath hottest near the Ark? When the destroying Angel is
upon his march, does he not begin at the Sanctuary?

2. This charge God the Father with Injustice. Shall God exclude one out of
heaven, who is in the same disposition, fitness, and capacity with another who
is admitted into heaven? It Is true, Heaven is designed for some, Hell deserved
of all: Hell is of merit, Heaven of mercy. Yet, Col 1.13. (...).
it is as true, that souls are made meet (though not worthy) to be partakers of
the Inheritance with the Saints in light. The stones of the Temple in heaven
are first polished by grace, before they be placed in glory. Shall not the Judge
of the world do right? Shall he absolve a wicked soul continuing such? This
would be a justifying the wicked.

(2.) Taking encouragement from the fullness of Gods grace through Christ to
live in sin, dishonors God the Son.

1. This thwarteth the end of Christ's death. Such sinners justify in their
living what Christ condemned in his dying. Sin never received so fatal a blow
as when this Samson died. 1 Jo. 3.8.
Christ died that he might destroy the works of the devil, and shall we build
what he destroyed? Faith nails sin to Christ's Cross, and says, when Christ
came in the flesh we crucified him, when he comes in the spirit, shall he not
crucify us?

2. This denies the Compleatnesse of Christ's Redemption. The Recovery by
Christ answers the Apostasy in Adam. Christ procured for souls, not only the
Favor of God which they before enjoyed, but also the Image of God which they
before possessed. Christ redeemed men not only from sins Condemning, but also
from sins Commanding power. Christ redeemed souls that they might be a peculiar
people; Tit. 2.13, 14.
Peculiar, not only in respect of the grace of God displayed on them, but also
in respect of the graces of God exercised by them; Peculiar, in respect of the
white robes of Christ's Innocence, as well as the purple robes of his
Satisfaction, in respect of inherent, and not only in respect of imputed
righteousness.

3. This derogateth from the efficacy of Christ's Intercession. Christ prays to
his Father that souls may be sanctified through his truth, as well as
justified by Gods grace; Joh. 17.17.
that souls may be guided by Gods counsel, as well as received into his
glory. Christ intercedes for his people, that God may be best of all to them on
earth, as well as all in all to them in heaven; that here they may be
Holiness to the Lord, as well as hereafter Happiness in the Lord; that his
Kingdom of grace may enter into us, as well as that we may enter into his
Kingdom of glory.

4. This cloudeth the Glory of Christ in all his offices.

1. In his Priestly office. Faith looks at Christ as a Priest dying to save men
from their sin, Mat 1.19.
not to save men in their sin. Christ's love was a Purging as well as a
Pardoning love, Renewing as well as Redeeming. Libertines pull down True grace,
whiles they pretend to set up Loose grace; they straighten it, when they
pretend to enlarge it. Had Christ so much love to souls that he would purchase
Robes for souls, and yet not so much love as to put these Robes on souls? Has
he delivered their souls from death, and will not he deliver their Feet from
wilful falling?

2. This cloudeth the skill of Christ as a Prophet. Jer 31 33. Christ with his
finger can write on Tables of stone.
This great Doctor does not only teach souls things to be believed, but he
teaches them also things to be done, not only to talk of him, but also to
walk with him. The light which Christ gives to the Elect, is (like the light of
the Summers Sun) joined with heat; They have not only the Law by heart, but a
heart to the Law: Had Christ so much skill as to prepare heaven for men, yet
not so much skill as to prepare men for heaven?

3. This derogateth from the power of Christ as he is a King. This King will
not suffer sin (another Lord) to have dominion over his Subjects. Romans 6 14
(...) Sin will be in, it may tyrannize over, but shall not be as Lord of Saints.
This King is a King in the midst of his Kingdom. His throne is in the heart:
His dominion extends through the life. Will Christ suffer his Subjects to be
the devils Slaves? Sin (surely) shall shall be here mortified, though not
nullified; thrown down, though not thrown out.

(3.) Taking sinful encouragement from the fullness of Gods grace draws a veil
over the Holy Ghost. The Spirits work in respect of Sanctification, reaches as
far as the Fathers work in Election, or as the Sons work in Redemption. The
Spirit delivers from the filth of sin those whom the Son delivered from the
power of sin. The Spirit comes to them as a Reformer, for whom the Son came as
a Redeemer.

I shall only add one thing more.

To take encouragement to sin from the doctrine of Free Grace, argues a heart
desperately wicked; A heart

1. Rushing into misery, (as a Horse into the battle) running upon the sharp
Pikes.

2. Refusing the Remedy; yea, not only refusing, but abusing the Remedy. And
(as some diseases in the Body) this disease of the Soul is most dangerous,
because of the opposition of it to the Cure. These Patients throw their Physic
and their Phyfician from them: These are in a great measure guilty of
crucifying the Son of God afresh.

And that I may (if possible) make our hearts tender of this sin, by setting
forth its heinousness: Consider,

1. There seems to be some kind of preciousnesse placed in the blood of
inferior Creatures. But, Genesis 9.4.


2. There Is a preciousnesse evidently placed in the blood of a man. Genesis 9.5, 6.
Unjustly to take away the life of a bad man is a very foul sin. Men may not
turn Wolves. There are some relics in him of Gods image. And it argues
extreme malice in the Panther, in that he will tear a Man's image when it cannot
come at him. And it is observed by one, Diodati.
that it was the cry of violence (in the old world) which came into the ears of
the Lord of Sabbath. It was this cham which pulled down destruction from heaven
on earth.

3. It is an aggravation of sin to take away the life of a Righteous man To
condemn the Just is an abomination to the Lord; Mat 27.19
Pilate's Wise could not swallow this camel; neither could he in a little
water wash off the deep stain of inn^cent blood.

4. It yet heightens sin to shed the blood ^f a good man. Psalm. 116.1^.
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the blood of all his Saints. Jerusalem
stoned the Prophets till one stone was not left upon another.

In these glasses may Souls see something of the wretchedness of that sin, To
be guilty of the Blood of Christ. Nay, that the Soul may see further, it may
ascend some stairs higher.

1. Christ was a pure man, holy, harmless, undefiled. This Sun had no spots.
There were o^ clouds in the clear day of Christ's life. Christ was thrice
pronounced Just by his very enemies. Man. 27 4, 19, 2^.


2. Christ was a Public man. He that touched Christ, touched the Lords
anointed. David was tender of cutting off the skirts of a Kings garment, surely
he would have been tender of cutting off his Kings head. He that brought news
of Readiness death (though he was a wicked King) carried his own Mittimus, rung
his own Passing bell.

3. Christ was more then a Man. Though as God he had no blood to spill, neither
could the Creator suffer by the Creature; yet (by virtue of the union of
Natures in Christ) his blood is called the blood of God; Act. 20.28.
and wrong done to Christ reaches as high as Heaven.

Thou who take liberty to sin because God the Father sent Christ to die for
sin have a heart harder then a Jew. Thou rendrest thy sin greater then theirs.

1. The Jews crucified Christ ignorantly, thou do it knowingly. Luk 23.3^
Had they known, they would not have crucified the Lord of glory. Thou go
wrong with a Candle in thy hand. A sin against knowledge is a sin of a double
dye, it is two sins bound up in one.

2. They crucified Christ in his state of Humiliation; thou (to thy power)
crucifiest him in his state of Exaltion: Heb. 6.6. (...). Crucifigunt ipsis, i.
c. quantum in se est.
They when he wore a crown of Thorns, thou when he wears a crown of glory. This
is certain that we cannot actually commit this sin, yet we may virtually bring
our selves under the guilt of the sin.

3. The Jews crucified Christ once. Thou crucifiest him often. Every sin which
thou committest under the shelter of Free Grace, is as a sharp spear thrust
into Christ's sides; as a Pilate to condemn Christ. Yea, thou art as Judas, thou
betrayest the Son of man with a kiss. Thou professest him, and yet persecutest
him. How sad will it be, if this Blood of Christ be upon thee or upon thy
children!

If there be abundance of Free grace in God,

(1.) Those are here to be reproved who advance too high the light of Nature.

It Is true, There are some remains of light, some glimmerings in man since the
Fall. Occasus Solis and Occasus Luminis.
As there is the setting of the Sun and a setting of the Light, (some twy-light
remaining when the Sun is set) so there is some twylight in the Sons of Adam,
though that clear Sun be set which rose in Adam.

(...) likewise true, that Grace does not put this Candle out, but snuff it;
Faith being above, not against rightly regulated Reason. He must needs have a
Reason for his Faith, who is commanded to render a Reason of his Faith. 1 Pet.
3.15.
Yet

They advance Natural light too high, who say,

That a man without the special light of Gods grace can come to the saving
knowledge of God.

The light of Nature may discover God as a Creator, Joh. 1.18.
but cannot discover God as (through Christ) a Father.

The light of Nature may show a man something of the equity of the Law, Rom
1.20.
but can not let him see the truth and goodness of the Gospel.

In reference to the Law: The light of Nature may more clearly inform men of
the duties of the second Table, but very darkly in the duties of the first
Table.

In reference to the first Table; the light of Nature rather discovers that God
is to be worshipped, then how he is to be worshipped; the matter rather then
the manner of Gods service.

Nay, consider the light of Nature in its primitive Iustre: It served to
discover to man the way of Life, but not the way from Death. The light of the
Sun guides men till they come to the grave, but shows men no way ba^k again
from the grave. I shall further present three Scriptures.

1. 1 Cor. 2.14.
The natural man perceives not the things of God, neither can he. Spiritual
objects cannot be discerned by carnal organs. There is neither light enough in
a Natural air (the letter of the Creature being too small) neither is there
sight in a Natural eye for such a Discovery. Eye has not seen thus far.

2. God brings souls by a way they never, knew of. The way of Works man once
knew, Isa. 42.16.
he has now some aim of that way, and therefore it is that naturally men seek
life in their own doings. But the way of grace is a hidden Path, (even from
Angels) and it is hard to seek lise in Christ's sufferings.

They who had this Candle of natural light snufl'd by industry and education,
when they knew God glorified him not as God. Romans 1.21.
They stumbled at their Noon day, they went astray whilst they carried this
Lanthorn. It was not a Lanthorn to their paths. This light shining into the
rooms of their souls (if it was clear) was not cleansing; (if it was directive,
teaching them to know) it was not persuasive, teaching them to do their duty.
This light (at best) was but (like the light of the stars) a weak, not a
warming light.

2. This reproves those who advance too high the strength of Nature. Whilst
some derogate from the fullness of the grace of God as enlightening the
judgment, so others derogate from it, as enclining the will. Sub ^^libus
^at^r^e (...): inimici gratiae.
Thus do they, who under pretense of being Natures friends, are in reality
Graces enemies; who cry up Free Will, to the crying down of Free-love.

This they are guilty of, who say:

1. That man's Will can hinder Gods grace. Can the Creature (says a Scotch
Divine) hinder its creation? Can the Child hinder its generation? Can
darkness hinder its illumination? Men will undertake to answer that Question
of the Apostle affirmatively, Romans 9.19.
Who has resisted his Will? This is in effect to say, that the Potter has not
power over the Clay; That the thing framed is not in the hands of him that
forms it. The decree of heaven cannot be frustrated by them that dwell on
earth.

2. This they are likewise guilty of, who say, that man's Natural Will can
further his Spiritual conversion, that man has Natural power to Spiritual
good.

Divines grant that there is a Passive concurrence in Man's Will to conversion.
As hard wax is capable of being melted, and a dark room of being enlightened.
Though Man's heart be a heart of stone, yet out of this stone may (by divine
power) be raised a Child unto Abraham.

We may likewise consider Gods grace, as Preventing, Perfecting,


In reference to preventing grace we are merely passive. We are as paper in
Gods hand, who holds us down that he may write on us. God so does all, that
man does nothing but resist.

In reference to Perfecting grace: Being acted we act; Acti aginius.
we apprehend that for which also we are apprehended. Our Will is free when
freed. V^luntas (...), (...).
As the lesser wheels we move, though it is from the great wheel of Gods grace
that we move.

Conversion is either active, whereby being turned we are enabled to turn; or
passive, whereby we are at first turned. Psa. 110.3.
Though God save us not against our wills, yet he saves us against the
corruption of our wills. Souls are made willing in the day of Gods power.

Thus some affirm, that Conversion consists barely in a moral suasion. As if
in Conversion the Spirit did not effectually persuade and incline the Will, as
well as the Word propound the object to the Understanding. When the Scripture
says, Ezekiel. 36.^6, 27.
that God causes Souls to walk in his statutes; He does not only call them
and invite them outwardly, but cause them and enable them inwardly.

To the clearing of this, it is worthy of our thoughts to consider,

1. That the ablest Preachers are not always the most effectual Prevailers.
Psalm. 8.2.
The most skilful Seeds-men have not always the largest crops. This heavenly
treasure is often conveyed through the most earthen vessels; to show, that it
is not of him that wills or runs.

2. Those expressions in a Sermon which Ministers look at least, oftentimes
people are taken with most. Those arrows which we apprehend as bluntest, our
hearers feel as sharpest. It Is a known story of Austin, who found a soul in a
Sermon where he lost himself.

3. That though our Savior Christ spoke as never man spoke, yet there were far
more converted by the Ministry of the Apostles then by Christ himself; to
show, Joh. 16.7.
how Christ is pleased to magnify his spiritual presence, and the presence of
his Spirit in the work of Conversion.

This use serves further to reprove those who derogate from the fullness of the
grace of God in ascribing worthynesse to the works of natural man. As if God
did love souls, because he finds them worthy, when it is Gods love alone that
makes them worthy. As one says of some Authors, that because they could find
no other spring for the River Nilus, they found one in their own brains: So we
may say of those men, that because they can find no other spring for the River
of God, they go about to find one in their own breast.

Now this conceit is easily confuted, if we consider:

1. That oftentimes God pitches on the vilest sinners These streams of grace
oftentimes break in upon the highest banks. 1 Timothy 1.15. Is. 1.18.
The Sun of Gods love often rises upon the f^^ulest dunghils. The most filthy
vessels are often cleansed. Two sinners may be grinding at the same mill of
Iniquity, whereof the grosser may be taken where the other is left.

2. The time when God comes to convert a sinner, is many times when sin is at
the highest. He overtakes us when we overrun him fastest Grace unhorsed Paul
when he was riding post towardsh^ll. Act. 9.
Thus when (like the wild Ass in the wilderness) we snuff up the wind of
Iniquity at our pleasure, it is Gods time to find us.

If there be a Fountain of the Water of life, I shall speak a word by way of
Direction: How we may come to draw out of this Fountain.

Would thou fetch Water from this spring?

1. Get other springs stopped. Whilst the heart finds contentment in the Nether
springs, it will not seek refreshment from the Upper spring. God is a Father to
the fatherless. Hos. 14 2.
In him the fatherless find mercy, and indeed, Christ, may say to us, Qaum
nemin^ obt^udi potest it^r ad me.
they alone seek it. God deals with us (as we with a bes^eged City) he stops
all ways of supply, that he may force us to yield. When other Wels are drawn
dry, then will we desire to draw water out of this Well of salvation. When
others cannot, we try whether God will.

Those springs which we should get stopped, are

1. Unlawful springs. The heart naturally thinks stolen Waters sweet, loves to
pluck Apples of the forbidden tree. Thou should therefore go to God to work
in thee a disrelish of these waters of Death, that thou might be fit to
relish this Water of Life. Take with thee words, and say, Lord, Why should I
drink of these pots where death is in the bottom? Psalm. 119.37.
Let the Sun of Divine love put out this Kitchen fire of Impure love. Turn away
mine eyes from beholding vanity; that looking off from it I may look up to thee.

2. As we should labor to wean the heart from unlawful things, so from
lawful things used unlawfully; from the unlawful use of our temporal
enjoyments. These things below should not

Take up too much of our time. Earth should not justle out Heaven. There is a
time for every thing (says the Wise man) yet it is to be feared, Eccl. 3.1, 2.
that many who find a time for other things, scarce ever find a time for
prayer. I wish that known story was not too much verified of us, as well as of
him, who being asked whether he had observed the Eclipse? answered, That he
had so much employment on earth, that he could not attend to look up to heaven.

I might here seasonably advise men to beware lest earthly employments should
occasion their neglect of, or in family, or closet prayers; and especially in
reference to morning exercises. To speak after the manner of men: Christ comes
many times to thy closet or family, with his bottle to put up thy tears, with
his Aquavitae bottle to pour upon thy heart, to cause thee to hear his loving
kindness in the morning; But when he comes, Cant. 5.4.
thou art gone abroad; or if thou be at home, thy eyes and thy heart are
shut, thou art asleep when thy Beloved knocks.

And because men are apt to apprehend that morning Duties are so prejudicious
to them in their daily Calling:

I shall desire them to consider;

1. The prejudices and inconveniences are more in fancy then ever they will be
in reality. Thy heart herein writes not in the same style with the unjust
steward, who for a hundred wrote fifty, and for forty, twenty. But for one it
writes ten, and for ten an hundred. That which thou fancyest as a Mountains
thou will feel but as a Molehill: Parturiunt montes, etc.
Thou make things that are not, as if they were.

2. It is (or ought to be) thy work to consult Duty, not Danger which may
follow on Duty. Thou should follow God (as Abraham did) blinde-folded. Heb.
11.8.
And indeed this right eye of Carnal reason must be put out, that thou may
see the way to Heaven better.

3. Those inconveniences which are fancyed might easily be avoided:

(1.) By rising so much more early: When Nature says, Yet a little more sleep,
a little more slumber, a little more folding of the hands; Grace should stir
thee up (as it did David) early to seek God, Psalm. 63.1.
That thou might sow to the Spirit: In the morning thou should sow thy
seed. The first fruits of the Day (as well as of the Year) should be given to
God.

(2.) Thou should order thy business so much more wisely. Psalm. 112.5.
A good man should guide his affairs with discretion; It Is for want of this eye
in thy head, that thou can not make the Duties of thy particular Calling, as
helps (not hindrances) to the Duties of thy general Calling. Suberdinata non
pugnant.
These two (being subordinate) may agree in on^; and the latter thou should
have done, and not have left the other undone.

(3.) Thou should apply thy self to thy work so much the more diligently:
Thou might gain more in a day then thou can lose in an hour. We have heard
of those that have labored when they should have slept, that they might pray
and preach at the ordinary time wherein they should be awake; who have given
themselves to Civil works in the night, rather then to free themselves from
the opportunity of Religious works in the day.

4. Though some inconveniences should be unavoydable, yet godliness has the
Promises of this life; 1 Timothy 4.8
and it is good (though it will be better) for thee to draw near to God. Thou
layest out thy money for that which is Bread. Money thus lent will come in with
advantage, and such Usurers plowes go lawfully on the Sunday. It Is an old
Axiom, and true, that, No man was ever loser by serving God. Applicable
(though to many not amiable) is that Jewish proverb, Pay tithes that thou may
be rich.

I shall only add a word more under this head.

As our earthly employments should not take up too much of our time, so they
should not take up any of Gods time. Would thou be drawing Water out of the
Well of life? As thou should have much of the Sabbath on the Week, Isa.
58.13.
so none of the Week upon the Sabbath. Every day should be the Lords day, but
the Lords day not as every day. Thou should be heavenly when about the
business of Earth, but not earthly when about the business of Heaven. On
other days God pours out drops, on Sabbath days showers of the Water of life;
then the dew lies most on his peoples fleece; then God opens his hand, even his
right hand, and fills souls with his blessings. As you would be Receivers,
so you must be Givers unto God on the day which is Gods. Date Deo, quae Dei
sunt.


2.

In two glasses thou may see a Necessity of Abundance of grace, or the
Fountain of the Water of life.

1. In the glass of the Law; and herein thou should look,

(1.) To the rule of the Law. The streams of Grace must needs rise high, 1 Jo.
5.4.
which carry thee to the love and obedience of every precept; to the ridge of
the Rule, to the top of this Mount of Holiness, in respect of thy aim, though
not in respect of thy attainment. If thou keep the Commandments, the
Commandments be not grievous. If these great burdens seem little ones, they
must be laid on Free-graces shoulders. If thou be one who have respect unto
all Gods Commandments, thou must needs say, By the grace of God I am what I am.

(2.) If thou look to the rigor of the Law. Thou can not carry fire in
one hand and water in the other. Thou can not set thy good works over against
thy bad ones, thy praving against thy sinning; and so think to make even. Thou will find that when thou have shot highest, thou have fallen short of the White;
Isa. 64 6.
thy very right^ousnesse will appear to be but as rotten rags, which will not
hide thee from the wrath of the Lamb, and of him that sits upon the throne. So
exact is the Law, that if thou could make straight paths to thy feet all thy
life, and yet but take one false step at thy death, it would send thee to Hell.
Therefore, if an infirmity would damn thee, there must needs be abundance of
grace, which (notwithstanding all thy enormities) does yet save thee.

2. Another glass wherein thou may see need of abundance of grace is the
glass of Affliction. Therein thou shall or may see thy fin, (probably thy
sinful nature) brought to remembrance. Therein thou shall or should see
earthly Phycians of no value. Then may the wind of temptations be high, the
wrath of God seem hot; and then how needful will these long robes of grace be
to cover thee, these living Waters of Gods love to cure thee? If thou can not
endure the little finger, how would thou bear the loins? Isa. 33.14.
if not a spark, how would thou dwell with everlasting burnings?

Concerning the excellency of this Fountain of living Water, I have spoke so
much that I leave that, and proceed.

If thou drawest out of this Well,

I shall only name four buckets, viz. Two spiritual graces, and two secret
duties.

1. Bring the bucket of humility. God gives grace to the humble. 1 Pet. 5.5.
The Sun is highest when the shadow is shortest: They are highest in Gods eyes,
who are lowest in their own. To him will God look, Is. 66.2.
even to him who is of a contrite spirit. Christ vouchsafed to dwell in the
Centurions heart, Verba netitiae denotant affectum.
who thought that he was not worthy that Christ should enter into his house.
It Is storyed of the Egyptians, that they dig ditches to contain the water of
the River when it overflowes; Humility is that ditch which we should ^et dug
in our hearts, to receive the overflowings of this River of God. The streams
are sweetest where the valleys are lowest.

2. Bring the bucket of Faith. He that comes to God must believe, Heb. 11.6.
though he may come to duty who does not believe. This is the Conduit pipe
through which that River em^ties it self, the streams whereof make glad the
City of God. As we must have one eye downwards, so another upwards; as
Humility must carry us out of our selves, so Faith must carry us unto our
Savior. We may lay those Scriptures together; With joy shall ye draw; and,
Isa. 12.3. 1 Pet. 1.8.
In whom believing you rejoice; and those two will speak this one truth.

3. Exercise thy self unto Meditation. Though the Water of life descend
plentifully into the public Ordinances, yet it is but usually like a
landflood, some flashes whereof are upon the superficies of the soul for
present, whiles for want of Meditation it soaks not into the heart for future.
Eating without digestion neither nourishes body or soul. Col. 3.16.
Hereby it is that the Word of Christ dwells in us: (...), est fixum and
perenne domicilium habere.
Otherwise it is but at the best as a way faring man that stays for a night.
To chew the cud is a sign of cleanness real, and not only ceremonial.

4. Be diligent in the use of secret prayer. When thou prayest, Mat. 6.5, 6.
often (though not always) enter into thy closer. Self-love and the wind of
spiritual pride may carry men to pray with others; but that wind does not
usually arise from this point of the compass, which carries men constantly to
pray alone. The more secrecy, usually the more sincerity. Those duties are
most done without suspicion which are done within doors.

When we are in Closet prayers, usually,

1. Our hearts are most open, our confessions are most free. There may we pour
out our hearts like water. Lam. 2.19.
In public prayers we rather pour out our hearts like oil: Now (you know)
when oil is poured out, there will yet some stick and remain within; but water
may be clean poured out. In public confessions we are more general, and
desire to hit upon others sores; but in private we touch most upon our own.
Here we strike at the right vein to let the bad blood out.

2. In private our petitions are more particular. We usually run most where the
breach is widest; and oftentime there is one thing which we defire of the Lord,
Psalm. 27.4.
one string upon which we most strike, one nail which we most hammer.

And as our hearts; so

Then Gods heart is most open. Hypocrites (like the Nightingale) may wind up
their hearts to a high pin; when many are auditors, they may pray to be seen of
men: But that voice is sweetest in Christ's ears which comes from his Dove,
Cant. 2.14.
when she is in the clefts of the rock, and secret places of the stairs. Christ
(says one) herein seems to be bashful, in that he most kisseth his undefiled
when alone. Thou may be (as that Ancient was) never less alone then when
alone. Nunquam minus solus quam onm solus.
Thou may have sweetest converse with God when thou art most retired from men.

I shall only add a word, that when thou come to draw with these buckets of
duties,

1. Thy buckets must be wide. Qui timide rogat, docet negare.
Thou must in thy prayers be importunate: Knock hard at Heaven gates, if thou
would have them open. Be not a dull beggar, lest thou beg a denial. Strike
upon the rock (as Moses did) once and again; yea, leave not striking till these
waters of Grace gush out. Romans 12.11. (...), Boiling hot.
Be fervent in spirit (when in this duty) serving the Lord. Go to the top of
the Mount, not only sevne times (as the Prophets man did) but seventy times
seven, till thou see the cloud of Gods goodness appearing. Urge God,

(1.) With thy own wants. Present him with thy misery as a fit object of his
mercy, with thy wounds as an object fit for his cure. He who has formed bowels
in us, has bowels infinitely more sounding in himself. His compassions fail
not.

(2.) Urge God with his promise and power to supply those wants: Say thus,
Lord, thou art as faithful to make good, as thou art free to make promises.
Thou have said, that thou will give to souls that are athirst this living
Water, Rev. 22.17
that they may drink. Lie at the foot of the promise, and be not beaten off;
give God no rest till he give thee rest. Say further, It Is easy with thee,
Lord, to fill my soul, and to say, Be filled. Thou may but speak, and it will
be done; Thou can fill me, and yet thou thy self not be emptyer. It Is as
eafie with thee to make alive as to kill, to lift up as to cast down.

2. Thy bucket must be empty. Thou should prepare for thy prayer, and yet
not rest in thy preparation. Do not so much as whisper that thou have any
strength or merit of thy own: Deuteronomy. 9.4.
Say not in thy heart, For my own righteousness; say not this, no not in thy
Bedchamber. Our very preparations for Duties, herein are like those
Posthorses, which will not go beyond their stage: They will go with thee to
the door of Duty, but there leave thee; and there thou should leave them, and
lean only upon Christ, expecting assistance (yea, and acceptance too) as if
thou had made no preparation.

Above and in all thy endeavors, let thy eyes be toward God, that what thou
know not, he will teach thee; and that wherein thou can do nothing, he will
do in and for thee.

HAving spoken something to the two first Doctrines, I now come to speak
something of the third.

God will give to souls that are athirst of the Fountain of the Water of life,
or of the fullness of his grace in Christ.

In the prosecution of this Doctrine, I shall endeavor to show in the first
place,

Quest. What I understand by this thirst, or being athirst.

Answ. 1. If we look to the Word, (...).
is by a Metaphor signifies an earnest breathing, a vehement desiring of the
soul, such a one as resembles the thirst of the body. And is here used to
denote, not that natural thirst which is in all men; nor yet that carnal
thirst which is in bad men, who drink iniquity like water; but that spiritual
thirst which is in good men, whereby they do strongly and ardently breath after
Gods love in Christ.

Answ. 2. If we look to the thing, it implies chiefly two things.

1. An inward sense of our own vileness. Bodily thirst implies a pain in the
bottom of the stomach, for want of natural moisture; Spiritual thirst, a
pain and grief in the bottom of the heart, for want of spiritual moisture. A
thirsty spirit is one that is poor and needy, and wants water: Rev. 3.17.
Others indeed are poor, and yet rich, because insensible of their poverty: But
such a spirit is not only a poor spirit, but poor in spirit; others are as
poor as they, but not poor as they.

2. It implies an earnest seeking after Gods goodness: Thirsty spirits are not
only poor and needy that want water, Isa. 41.17.
but that seek water. As the heart of a thirsty man after the waterbrooks, so
pant such souls after the Lord their God.

I may distinguish of spiritual thirst, which is either

1. A thirst of Indigency. Sitis indigentia.
Such a thirst as is in souls, who want (if not faith, yet) assurance; who
though this Water of life be come to them, are not yet (in their own
apprehension) come to it, who see themselves fallen, and yet hearing of a Jacobs
ladder by which they may be restored, are thus breathing: On that I might
climb up this ladder! Ps. 63 1, 2.
Oh that in this dry land and barren wilderness, where no water is, we might
see Gods power and his glory! As it is said of one, that hearing of two kind
and cordial friends, he wished he might make a third; so the thirsty spirit
(at the first conversion, or in after desertions) assenting to Gospel promises
as good in themselves, and as better to it then all the world, could it but
attain to them; does earnestly long, and constantly pant and gasp after them.

2. There is a thirst of complacency. Such a thirst is in souls, Sitis
copi^sioers siu^tionis.
who having tasted the Water of life here, do yet breath after a freer and
fuller enjoyment of it hereafter. Rev. 22.17
Thus the Spirit and the Bride say to Christ, Come. They who have Christ with
them, are panting that they may be with Christ. A fish may have so much water
in a little paile as she may live by; but what is that to the whole Ocean?
Saints have so much of Gods grace manifested to them here, as may serve to
maintain their life; But what are these drops to the whole Ocean? these morning
glympses to the noonday? This life is therefore a life of desire, the future
life a life of satisfaction.

I shall now come to some Demonstrations, to show, that God will give of the
abundance of his grace to thirsty souls.

The truth hereof may be demonstrated, if we look to all the Persons in the
gloririous Trinity.

If we look to the Father, Demon. 1.
and especially to the three attributes of his, Mercy, Justice, and Truth.

If we look to the Fathers mercy. Mercy respects objects of misery; and shall
not Gods heart work toward them whose hear^ are working toward him? Shall
wounded souls lie (like the wounded man between Jerusalem and Jericho) and the
good Samaritan (with the Priest and Levite) pass by them? When souls lie in
their blood, and no eye pities them, shall not the Lord cast an eye of pity on
them? Eze 16.6.
Others pour in vinegar, but surely he will pour in oil. Shall not the Father
of mercies show mercy? God is styled the Father of mercies:

(1.) To show us that mercies issue freely from him. 2 Cor. 1.3.
God is no where styled the Father of Judgments; though they come from God
efficiently, yet they come from Man meritoriously. They are (as to merit of
them) spun out of our bowels, whilst mercy springs merely out of Gods own
bowels. Judgment is called Gods work, even his strange work; to show, that
this fire is fetched from God (as fire out of a flint) not without much
striking. But, Mercy, that is (as we may say) Gods Penjamin; Mic. 7.18.
the attribute of Gods right hand: Mercy pleases him. Mercy comes from God as
Water from a fountain, freely.

(2.) God is styled the Father of Mercies, to show, that those mercies or
bowels which are in others are infinitely more in him. Yea, man's mercies (if
compared with Gods) are but as the drop to the bucket, and the small dust to
the Balance. As a Father pityeth his Children, Ps. 103.13.
especially when sick, opening his heart widest, when their straits are
narrowest: So (and infinitely more) does the heavenly Father pity his wounded
children, holding their heads when they ache, pouring his Aqua vitae into them
when they faint. He that formed the eye, shall not he see? He that teaches
Man pity, shall not he pity?

2. The truth of this Doctrine will appear, if we look to God the Father's
Truth. God has said, Isa. 44.3.
that he will pour out water upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry
ground. God will not only drop, but pour, and he will pour out not only
streams, but floods upon thirsting souls. They shall have grace, and they shall
have it in abundance. Now if in Pythagoras his school [he has said it] was
ground sufficient for doing: (...).
in Christ's school, God has said it is ground sufficient for believing.
Faithful is he that has said it, who also will do it. You have heard
(probably) of the King who had one hand longer then another; Many earthly
Princes have (if not one hand longer then another) their tongues longer then
both their hands. But the Prince of heaven his performances never are beneath
his promises.

3. The truth of this Doctrine is evident if we look to God the Father's
Justice; and this falls in with the second Demonstration.

That God will give of the abundance of his grace to those who are a thirst,

1. If we look to Christ's paying for such souls when he was on earth. Christ
has opened a vein whence grace may issue out to them with his own blood.
Sanpuis Christi est clavis Pata^^ss.
His blood is as the key of heaven to open it to them and for them. If we
(with this spiritual thirst) confess our sins, 1 ^e. 1.7.
God is faithful and just to forgive our sins. God is not only merciful, if
we consider who are the Receivers; but he is also just, if we consider who was
the Redeemer.

2. If we look to Christ's praying for such souls now when he is in heaven.
Heb. 2.17, 18.
This High Priest is touched with their infirmities; Manet cempassio in
statuim^^ ^^^luatis.
yet he is full of compassion. In thirsty spirits Christ sees a special
reflection of himself; He was tempted that he might know (experimentally) how
to succor those who are tempted. He bore the heat and burden of the day, that
he might help those who follow him in the evening. And certainly if Christ
pray, he will prevail. If God the Father be loath to deny the Saints prayers,
he will not deny their Saviors prayers. If he will not deny those who are
Sons by grace of Adoption, will he deny him who is the Son by eternal
Generation?

That God will give of the abundance of his grace to thirsty souls

The holy Ghost has fitted thirsty spirits for grace, and therefore will fill
them with grace. If Nature does not, (...).
certainly God does not, make any thing in vain. Has God opened their mouths
wide, and will not he fill them? Has God prepared the room, and will not he
possess it? Ps. 24.7, 9.
Are the everlasting doors of these spiritual Temples lifted up, and will not
the King of glory come in? Shall not such de^^ing hearts have the desire of
their hearts? Has God wrought the affection, and will he not reach the object?
(...) 145 6.
Does God satisfy the desire of every creature, and shall he not satisfy the
desire of the New creature?

I come now to the Reasons why God will give of the abundance of his grace to
thirsty souls.

Thirsty spirits are made ready to receive of Gods grace.

1. They are great vessels. The soul of man is of a large capacity. Man is by
some called, A little World, but in respect of his soul, he is the greater
World of the two, greater then the lower World.

2. These vessels are open. Though you cast a great vessel into the sea, if it
be shut it cannot receive Water. Hence is it that profane persons, whose hearts
are shut with gross evils; and Justiciaries, whose hearts are shut with a
false conceit of great good; in the midst of plenty are scarce, in the midst of
riches poor; want the grace of the Tender in the midst of the Tenders of grace.

3. Those vessels are opened wide Thirst does enlarge the desires, it widens
the soul. Though a vessel be great, yet if the mouth of it be little, it
receives in little water, it is long filling; Psa. 81.10.
but these mouths are opened wide, and therefore will God fill them.

Thirsty spirits are made willing to accept of those terms upon which God gives
his grace. but will not come up to the market. As it is with a Chapman, who
likes a piece of ware, but likes not the price. So other men's desires after
Christ are conditional, not absolute; but those men are willing to deny
themselves, Mat. 16.24.
to take up their cross and to follow Christ.

1. A thirsty spirit will be content to deny it self, yea, that which we call
Religious self: Formal Hypocritical spirits are ready to say, Shall we leave
our fatness and sweetness, shall we lay our honor in the dust? The full soul
loathes a honeycombe. Mat. 9.12.
The stomach of a Pharisee surcharged with the superfluity of its own
righteousness, loathes and likes not the honey-combe of Christ's righteousness.
But when God has wrought this spiritual thirst in us, then skin for skin, and
all that we have we would give for his grace. When we are thus hungry, we shall
not stick for our birthright. Phil. 3.8.
Those things which to us were gain, we shall then count loss for Christ. The
skale will be turned, then shall we rather cast all our wares overboard, then
not embarque with Christ.

2. A thirsty soul will be content to take up its cross. A thirsty man will
break through fire; hunger and thirst will break through stone-walls. A thirsty
Christian will go to the Well of life, Per mare, per ignes.
though (with the Martyrs) he go thorough the fire of death. Such a one will
not stumble at a block if it lie in the way to heaven. Such a one will take up
its cross, not only bear it, but take it up. As it will not step out of the
way to incur, so neither will it step out of the way to avoid trouble. Heb.
10.37
Such souls will take joyfully the spoiling of their goods; will unlade, rather
then their passage to heaven should be stopped; they will rather choose to meet
with stakes and faggots, then to part with Christ.

3. A thirsty spirit will follow Christ. Such a spirit will follow the Lamb
whithersoever he goes; its endeavors will be proportionable to its desires.
It Is not a Lion in the way which will make it turn back. A thirsty man will not
only labor, but sweat to obtain water: Can. 3.1, 2.
A thirsty Christian (like the Spouse) if he find not Christ on his bed by
night, will get up, and go up and down the streets. Such a soul will not only
dig, but dig deep. And certainly when they follow on to know the Lord, his
going forth is prepared as the morning; though the night may be long and dark,
yet shall the Sun of Gods grace in due time dawn and arise upon them.

On thirsty souls God does most attain his ends in bestowing his grace.

1. Thirsty spirits will prize grace most highly. Some say that there are stars
which may be best seen in deep pits; in the deep pit of its own nothingnesse
can a thirsty soul best discover the clear star of Gods graciousnesse. It is a
Proverb; As waters to a thirsty soul. When we draw so near to the grae, if
there be a Messenger to show unto us our uprightness, Job 33.2^, 23.
he is to us one of a thousand. One ship of light breaking into the dungeon,
does much revive the Prisoners of hope.

2. Thirsty spirits will peaise God for his grace most cordially. Ps. 63.3. v.
comp. with 1, 2.
How will they praise God for heaven, who have come away by the gates of hell?
How sweet will the haven be, when we have long been tossed? When such souls
taste Gods loving kindness better then life, their lips will praise God; they
cannot farewell and say nothing. The longer a Christian has been winning a
mercy with prayer, the longer will he be wearing that mercy with praise.

3. Thirsty spirits will use grace most carefully. They that live prodigally
never knew what it was to come by an estate of grace. They will not lavish
grace away, who have bought it so dear. They who experience how rich stuff
this is, will be very tender of it. God forbid that they should sin, Romans 6.1.
that grace may abound; who for this are grieved that they sin, though grace do
abound. Shall we spend because. God does send? Let not such a secret enter into
our souls.

I now come to apply this Doctrine, and shall look upon it (as upon all
Scripture) profitable for Doctrine, for Reproof, for Correction, and for
Instruction in righteousness. (...). Branch.


We may here be informed

1. Of the great reason why souls receive no more out of the Fountain of the
Water of life. Did the children cry, this breast should be opened; We receive
not because we ask not. Jam. 4.2.
They that seek find, and to them that knock is opened the door of hope. We
are all a dry land, because we are not as a thirsty land.

2. Branch.
This may inform us of the Graciousnesse of God, in that he requires no more of
souls but that they should be athirst. God looks for no more in them to whom he
gives, but only that they have a hand to receive. And consider,

(1.) This hand is an empty hand. Isa. 55.1.
They who buy of Christ, buy without money.

(2.) This hand whereby we receive, is a hand which God himself does give; of
his own we bring him.

3. Branch.
We may^ here be informed of the difference between that thirst which God will
fatisfie, and that thirst which God will not satisfy.

Though God will thus respect thirst, yet not the thirst of Reprobates, whose
consciences are awakened on earth. Thou who do not thirst whiles the Water of
life is near thee, may thirst when it is turned away from thee; yea, thou
may live to see a famine in the land, Amos 8.11, 12, 13.
not a famine of bread, nor a thirst of water, but of hearing the Word of God;
thou may with the fair Virgins faint (yea fall) for thirst. When God cries,
thou do not answer; when thou cryest he may not answer. Prove. 1.24.
Thou may be paid in thine own coin, and have Gods deaf ear turned upon thee,
whose deaf ear has been turned upon God.

2. God will not satisfy the thirst of the damned in hell. Luke 16.
He who would not give a crum, could not get a drop. In hell thirsty creatures
cannot procure a drop of puddle water, much less of precious water. In hell is
a worm ever gnawing, a fire ever burning, which the breath of the Lord as a
stream of brimstone does kindle. Is. 65.13, 14.
In hell (if not on earth) shall that word be made good -- Gods servants shall
eat, when the wicked shall be hungry; Gods servants shall drink when they shall
be thirsty.

Now consider, that herein differs the thirst of a Saint from that of the
Reprobate.

1. The thirst of a Regenerate man may be (yea, often is) joined with doubting,
2 Cor 4.8. (...). Non in angustias redigimur, sic ut evadere non possimus.
but not with despairing. There may be in a Saint a prevalency of fear, but not
a nullity of faith. A Saint may be troubled on every side, yet not distressed;
perplexed, but not in despair. The flood may compass a good man about, yet so
that he is not without all hope of a Creek whereby to escape to the haven.
Ducked deep Saints are, drowned they are not. They dare not altogether deny God
to be on their side; whence it is, that the proud waters (which go up) do not
go over their souls.

2. The thirst of a gracious man is, not only to be freed from evil, but to
be put into the fruition of God the chiefest good: Neither is the thirst of a
Saint only, that it may enjoy God hereafter, but also, that it may honor God
here. Mat. 3.7.
A generation of vipers desire to flee from the wrath to come: It is the evil
after sin, not the evil of sin, which Reprobates thirst to avoid. Non peccare,
sed ardere metuunt impii.
It is the burning of hell fire without them, not of the fire of lusts within,
whereof they are weary. But Saints thirst to live in Gods fear, as well as to
die in his favor; to be ruled by Christ, and not only to rule with Christ; to
be subject to God, as well as to be saved by God.

I shall only add this Caution.

That it is hard (if possible) to say, that any particular man's thirst is the
thirst of a Reprobate, whilst he yet lives.

That thirst which is kindied by fire from hell, may make way for that thirst
which is kindled by fire from heaven, (as the Needle makes way for the thread.)
Good men generally have received (though not again) the spirit of bondage unto
fear. Conviction usually goes before Conversion, John Baptist before Christ.
And therefore is it, that we have better hopes of our people when they are
sick, then when they are whole; when their consciences are so awakened, then
when they are asleep. To this purpose I have heard of one, who hearing one cry
out in a Sermon that he was damned, wished that a hundred of his people more
were so damned.

The second use of this Doctrine may be for Reproof. (...).


If God will give of the abundance of his grace to them that are athirst,

This reproves those who do not so much as truly thirst after this grace of
God. The Well of Jesus is little desired, though very desirable. Many have not
so much grace as to breath after grace. They desire not the knowledge of Gods
ways. Job 21.14
It Is sad that men have not the knowledge of his ways, but sadder that men
will not have it. It Is sad that the Gospel Remedy should be so undervalued,
that men should so lightly esteem the Gospel of their salvation.

1. This remedy (...) recovery by the grace of God is an easy one. God
requires no more but that souls should thirst; and surely, Mat 11.29
had God required great things of men, they would not have done them; when he
requires but this, and yet souls will not do it. This yoke of Christ is easy,
and this burden light. God having promised to work in his Elect what he has
commanded should be wrought by them. We may well say to God, Give what thou
command, Pa qued jubes, and jubc quod vis.
and command what thou please.

2. This remedy is the ultimate one. The bells of Christ ring the last Peal.
Heb. 2.3. It is a Quomodo non dubitantis, sed vehementer negantis.
How shall we escape if we neglect this great salvation? We shall not escape.
This is the condemnation (the highest step of the ladder next turning off) that
light is come into the world, and we love darkness. Now is the accepted time.
Now or (it may be) never. This is sure, that none ever entered heaven but by
this door. None ever had the gares of heaven opened, but they who had a
Mediator for their Porter.

The third use is for Correction.

This use may serve to correct the error of those who mistake a Formal for a
Spiritual thirst.

If thy thirst be a Spiritual thirst.

1. It is not only a desire after grace, but an earnest desire. It is true,
that the Saints breath is not always so strong: They are sometimes
short-winded; yet it is as true, that this stream is ordinarily far stronger
then that which springs in and from the heart of a hypocrite. As new born
babes, 1 Pet. 2.2. (...). Adauget (...) significa^^^nem verbi simplicis. Vid.
Leigh c. 3.
Saints desire the sincere milk of the word. New born babes catch at their
Mothers breasts; and in spiritual life (as well as natural) may be discovered
by crying.

2. A good man's desire after grace is an active desire. A gracious hearts
desires are not choking desires. Many content themselves barely with desiring.
Their affections are like Rachel, if beautiful, yet barren. But good souls are
not as the soul of the sluggard, which desires, and has nothing, they will up
and be doing; yea, they will come to Christ (as Christ came to them) leaping
over mountains, and skipping over hills.

3. A good man's desire after grace is an inward desire. The desires of
Hypocrites are (but at the surthest) outward desires. Their inward desire is,
Ps. 49.11.
that their Houses shall continue for ever; They desire grace and glory, but
it is from the teeth outwardly; They are (as the standing pool is) clear at the
top, but muddie at the bottom. On the other hand, a good man's outward desires
may sometimes be for earth (in a gracious heart the skum may be on the top) but
his inward desires are for heaven. If a gracious man was ripped open, if his
inside was turned outward, the desires of grace would be found lying next his
heart.

4. A good man's desire after grace is a Prevailing desire. Vt in stella^ luna
minores.
Grace is the fairest flower, the brightest star in a believing eye.

1. Such a man is unsatisfyed in the want of grace. What is Paradise to him
without this Tree of life? It is not hearing, or praying, or meditating, but
Christ in these, and the Fathers free grace in these which the soul seeks.
Their desire is not after the Kings favorites, but after the Kings favor.
They are not like those Suitors who embraced the Handmaids in stead of the
Mistress. It was (as I have heard) an usual petition in a good man's prayer,
Give us Christ, or give us nothing. Let him kiss me (says the Spouse) There Is
a Relative without an Antecedent; Cant. 1.2.
she speaks of an Individuum vagum: As if every one knew her meaning, as if
there were no more [Hims] but one; as if the cleernesse of this star clouded
all the rest.

2. Such a man is sweetly solaced and satisfied in the enjoyment of Gods grace.
If God will show such a soul his face, Genesis 33.9, 11.
it says (with Esau) that it has enough; yea, with Jacob (as some read it
from the Original) that it has all things. If after all the souls sore
travel, this blessed Babe be born; if after a long and dark night this
day star dawne, then the soul is even in a corner of heaven upon earth. There
is a rest for the people of God, Quis has no Plural number.
though there be no more rests then one: This is that wine that makes glad the
heart of a good man, Psa. 4.6, 7.
and that oil which makes his face to shine. Under this shadow the soul sits
down with delight, and takes it rest.

5. A gracious man's desires are constant desires: Their goodness is not as a
cloud, Hos. 6.4
or as the morning dew, that passes away. Though these winds may seem strong
in Hypocrites, yet they are soon over; it is but a blast, it is a falling wind;
though it was strong at first, yet its strength decays; whiles in good men
this wind is a rising wind, though it may fall for a little, yet it rises
higher afterward. The stream of a hypocrite resembles a flood; whilst the
desire of a true Believer is as a river which runs continually. The bigger
spiritual children grow, the louder they cry.

The last Use which I shall make of this Doctrine is for Instruction in
righteousness. (...).


In this I may endeavor to show, (1). Whence it is that we do not more thirst
after this Water of life.

(2.) The way wherein the Spirit ordinarily works this thirst.

1. It is from the loss of original integrity. Before the Fall there were no
Malignants; Man was a well-affected person. Those wheels of our desires moved
regularly, whilst Innocence was the first mover. Sin (...) the sharp end of
man's heart downwards; sin-set our affections upon these things on earth, and
took them off from the things above, where Christ fits at Gods right hand. And
as in the first Adam we lost, so should we labor through the second Adam to
regain these spiritual desires. The constitution of our souls will never be
healthful till they return to their native air.

2. It is from the temper of Man's body. Good men (whilst below) are but like
Meteors that hang betwixt earth and heaven; As they do not (with others) sink
down to earth, because of a spiritual soul which carries them up; so they
cannot fully and vigorously (as they desire) soar up to heaven, because of an
earthly body which keeps them down. In this sense where the spirit is willing,
the flesh is weak. How often do Saints find, that when the soul should sally
forth, they hear the voice of flesh behind them, saying, This is not the way,
walk not in it! And certainly (if good men's bodies be) bad men's bodies are
heavy clogs to them. There Is a stone (if not at a wicked man's leg) in a wicked
man's heart, which keeps him quite down.

3. It is from the power of our corruptions within. Bad men are wholly in the
bond of Iniquity; Acts 8.23.
like the Woman in the Gospel, they are so bowed down, that they cannot bend
up: Through the dominion of sin, To will is not present with them. The unruly
horses of lusts run away with the chariot. As ever we would run the race which
is set before us; we must, through the strength of our hair, but of our head,
break these Bonds asunder.

4. It is from the strength of temptations from without. He that lets will
let. 2 The. 2.7.
The Prince of the power of the air, the spirit that works in the children of
disobedience, goes about to blunt the edge of our desires toward heaven, to
nail down our hearts under the power of these things on earth. They strive
against the strong stream of Satan's temptations, who advance heaven-wards.

Further, that poor creatures do not desire the Water of life (the Free Grace
of God)

(1.) It is because they live too much by sense. Man being in honor, and
understanding not, is become as the beasts that perish. We look too much at
the things which are seen. Our wisdom is (as that wisdom which is from below
is) sensual. We are too apt to build Tabernacles, when we should be building
Tombs; to say in this Valley (what Peter said in the Mount) that it is good
for us to be here. We judge by outward appearance, not much unlike her who
conceited (whilst she was turning her Wheel) that her Wheel was bigger then
the Sun. 2 Cor. 4. vlt. (...). Not looking at those things that are seen as at
our mark, scope, and aim.
We should not thus look at the things that are seen, so as not to look beyond
them, at the things which are not seen.

(2.) It is because men live too little by Reason. The unruly Army of the
Affections have pulled down the Parliament of Reason in the soul. We naturally
look at spiritual things with the owle-eye of corrupted reason, which cannot
judge of things that differ, and so not approve of the things which are more
excellent; and thence is it that the verdict is not rightly given up, because
the Judge is not rightly informed.

Reason rightly regulated will dictate to us, that this Water of life is most
desirable.

1. If we look to the souls spiritual nature. The things below do not deserve
nor bespeak the souls condescension to, or compliance with them. Spiritualia
sunt animae cognata. (...)
The fish might as well live in the air, and men's bodies might as soon live in
the water, as their souls can live out of, and without the Water of life. It Is
pity that the soul (like the Fly) sits upon sords, when (with the Be) she may
fit on the sweet hear^s of grace. If Themistocles would not stoop to gather the
spoils, as thinking that below a Soldier; much less should we stoop so low as
to gather up these earthly contentments eagerly, as thinking it below
Christians. Yea, it is much more unworthy of the better part of a new man,
seeing it is unworthy of the better part of a mere man.

2. If we look to the souls vast capacity. Puddles might sooner fill the sea,
stars might sooner supply the want of the sun, then other waters can fill the
soul. There is a kind of infiniteness in man's desires in this respect, they
run in infinitum, because they run to him who is infinite. Man's soul till she
comes to God, is herein like the Philosophers Materia prima, Semper in appetitu.
in that she is always desiring. She is in the World (as Israel in the
wilderness) wanting water, till she strike upon the rock of ages.

3. If we look to the souls endless duration. Other waters will not run to
Eternity, only grace and the things which are not seen are eternal. 2 Cor. 4.
ult.
Thou who make houses of clay thy dwelling place, where will thou dwell when
those houses are pulled down?

(3.) Lastly, that souls do not prize, or thirst after the Water of life, is
from this:

Because most men live not at all by grace: It Is for want of grace that men do
not desire grace. Col. 3.1.
If men were risen with Christ, they would seek this river which runs above.
They who live a spiritual life, desire spiritual food for the preservation of
that life.

More particularly, natural men want,

1. A spiritual knowledge to discern the worth of the Water of life. Was grace
in oculis, it would be in osculis.
They who know it love it; and the reason why any love it not, is, because they
know it not: Did our Apprehensions lead, our Affections would follow; our eyes
would affect our hearts. A Pibble and a Pearl are both as one in a blind man's
eye. That connection is observable, Is. 53.1.
There is no form, nor beauty, nor comeliness in him, that we should desire
him.

2. Natural men want a spiritual faith, whereby to obtain an interest in
this Water of life. Propriety is the fuel of affection. It Is but little of life
which Saints have in possession, the most of it is yet in reversion. And faith
alone is the evidence of things not seen. Heb. 11.1.
Without faith we can neither truly have that which is laid out on Saints, nor
surely hope for that which is laid up for Saints.

3. Natural men want experience whereby to taste the sweetness of the Water of
life. Did men experimentally know this gift of God, Joh. 4.10.
they would earnestly ask of God, and he would give them of this living Water.
1 Pet. 2.2, 3
Men would desire the sincere milk of the Word, if so be they had tasted that
the Lord is gracious. Are there not Abnah and Parphar rivers in Damascus? say
they who never washed in Jordan. Earth is not bitter to them, in whose
experience Heaven was never sweet.

In the last place, I shall show, that the Spirit of God (in its usual method)
when it comes to work this thirst; does,

1. Enlighten the Understanding.

2. Incline the Will.

The Spirit in enlightening the Understanding, shows the soul,

1. The Want:

2. The Worth of this Water of life.

The Soul comes to see the Want of the Water of life,

1. By seeing the fire of Gods wrath burning against sin. Sin looked at in the
red glass of the Law, appears red; and God appears as a consuming fire. Sin
appears as a Serpent, carrying not heaven (as the Poets feigned concerning
Atlas) but hell on its back. The soul which has been long asleep, when it is
awakened, apprehends it self upon the brink of everlasting torments, Isa. 27 3,
4.
and looks upon it self as a bryar and thorn, which (if set in battle before
him) God will burn up.

It Is true, all are not at Conversion put in the fire so long; the oven is
(like Nebuchadnezzar's) sometimes seven times hotter then ordinary. Yet it is
as true, that through this Purgatory Saints generally pass, and are saved as
by fire.

2. The soul sees an insufficiency in all other waters as to the quenching of
this fire. Many waters cannot quench, nor the floods drown this spark of divine
displeasure. Though a man could pray, and hear, and read through his whole
life, though rivers of waters should run down a man's eyes, yet these payment
to being finite could not fatisfie the Justice of God who is infinite. Nay, (if
we set these up as meritorious) these waters will rather he (as water is to
lime) they will make the fire burn hotter. A weary soul which comes to lie down on
the pillow of Gods free grace, is a soul not only weary of sin, but of seeking
for help in it self.

God having showed the soul the want of this Water, comes to show it the Worth
of it.

To the fullness, freeness, and preciousnesse of this Water, I shall not
speak, having spoke so largely to it elsewhere.

I shall further show, that the Spirit when it works this thirst does incline
the Will,

By stirring up strong and ardent breathings in the heart after this Water.

The strength of these breathings appears,

1. Inwardly. In that (in Scripture phrase) it is set forth by longing: the
soul thinks a short time long till it come to this Water, till this Water come
to it. The heart cries out, Ps. 119.18
Why stays the Lord so long, and why are the wheels of his chariot so long in
coming? The heart of a Christian is said to break for the longing that it has,
as if these heartstrings were strung so high, that they were ready to break in
pieces.

The inward breathing of the soul is set forth likewise by Panting, Psa. 42.1.
(as the chased Heart pants after the waterbrooks:) As also by following hard
after God, Ps. 63.8.
or cleaving, clasping, and clinging to God (as the Ivy cleaves to, and
claspeth about the Oak.)

The strength of these Breathings appears likewise outwardly:

1. By the souls crying for this Water of life. A poor man speaks
supplications, others study and compose them. It Is true of those who are poor
in spirit, as well as of those who are poor in outward things: Their wants will
dictate words, and if not words, yet sighs and groans which are unutterable.
The eloquence of thirsty spirits is not affected, Verba pectoris.
their words are hearty words; Christ himself (as man) cried out, Joh. 19.28.
I thirst; so unsufferable is thirst to humane nature.

2. Such spirits will (as has been showed) endeavor for as well as cry for this
Water. This thirst will set the hand as well as the heart on work.

3. Such spirits will be restless till they have drunk of this Water. Give a
thirsty man silver, or gold, or precious stones, and all these are nothing,
except you give him Water. Take a thirsty spirit as high as the Devil took
Christ, and show is the Kingdoms of the world, and the glory thereof, and what
are all these to it, if it go Christlesse? If Grace can fill bags, then Gold
may fill hearts. If bodies can live (as by their ordinary food) upon things
that are not seen, then can souls (I am sure not before then) upon things
which are seen.

I Now come to speak something to the last Doctrine drawn from the last word in
the Text.

That the grace (or Water of life) which God bestows upon poor souls,

I shall first endeavor to show what this phrase imports, in that God is said to
bestow his grace freely.

1. In reference to the principle of Gods bestowing; it implies, that God is
not moved to bestow from others merits, Ez. 36.22.
but from his own mercy; that the spring of Gods grace is not in others, but
in himself. The web of mercy is spun out of Gods own bowels, not out of man's.
What God does, he does it, not for our sakes, but for his holy Names sake.

2. In reference to the manner of Gods bestowing, it implies, that God bestows,

(1.) Readily. God is said in Scripture to open his hand, Psa. 86.5.
and he is said to be ready to forgive.

(2.) Plentifully. God gives liberally. Jam. 1.6.
He is not straightened, though his people be straightened in their own bowels.

3. In reference to the end of Gods bestowing mercy. He has mercy because he
will have mercy. He expresses his love to his people here, that he may
express it more hereafter. The sun of Gods love dawns upon his people on earth,
that it may arise to a noonday height in heaven.

The truth of the Doctrine may be evidenced,

1. From the Text.

2. From other texts.

That God gives his grace freely, appears, if we consider,

1. Who it is that gives it. I (says God) will give. And if God give, it is
freely.

(1.) God is an agent purely independent. Should not God give freely, the
Creator would have dependence on, and so act from the creature: The first Mover
should not (upon this supposall) move only from himself. God does not
therefore will things because they are good, but things are therefore good
because God wills them. Gods Will is the highest reason. God does in heaven and
on earth whatsoever pleases him. Ps. 115.3.
This King does act (as other Kings would act) arbitrarily.

(2.) God takes delight in mercy, mercy pleases him; yea, Gods great design
is to advance mercy, Mic. 7.18.
and therefore will show mercy freely. This would be as a cloud drawn over the
clear Sun of Godi grace, if it should arise only upon the just. If man's merits
should be the term from which Gods mercy moves, then would not mercy alone be
exalted in that day.

2. The freeness of Gods grace may be demonstrated from the Text, in that God
is said to give of the Fountain of the Water of life. God gives (and so sells
not) his grace: And what can be freer then gift?

From other texts the freeness of Gods grace may be evidenced, 1. If we look
to the time. 2. If we look to the subjects of this grace.


1. If we look to the time of Gods intending grace, it will appear to be free.

That time was, when time was not. The world had no groundwork when Gods love
had one in his own breast. Ephesians. 1.4. Non (...) ^^entes.
God loved his people when they were not. Now consider,

Of that which was not, Non ertis nulla sunt praedicata.
what could be said? In that which was not what could be seen?

2. If we look to the time of Gods expressing his grace (which will fall in
with the next head, viz. the subjects of Gods grace) grace will appear to be
free.

Consider the subjects or souls Recipient of Gods grace.

(1.) Comparatively. Compare those who receive grace,

1. With Angels. Would not Angels have been vessels more capable of honor,
fitter for the Masters use? Would not these channels have been more excellent
for grace to run in? Heb. 2.16. (...).
Yet herein is grace free, that Christ took not Angels by the hand; the Angels
who kept not their first estate are left, when fallen Man is taken.

2. Compare those men and women who are converted, with those who are
unconverted; and we shall find grace free in that it pitcheth often,

1. Upon those whose parts are less. 1 Cor. 1.26.
The Apostle does not say, Not any wise, but not many wise men after the flesh
has God chosen.

2. Upon those whose sins (as to the outward act) are greater. The Publicans
enter Heaven before the Pharisees. Two are often walking in the same field of
Iniquity, whereof the more vile is taken, when the less vile is left.

(2.) Consider those who receive grace absolutely; and it will appear to be
free.

1. They are those who have broke the first Covenant (the Covenant of Works)
who are taken hold of by virtue of the second Covenant (the Covenant of grace.)
They have lost God, whom God seeks; they have run away whom God follows.

2. They have often withstood the tenders of grace, whose hearts grace has
conquered in those tenders. That is (to Reason) a strange inference, that
because they (spoke of in Isaiah) said, Isa. 30.17.
that they would flee away, therefore the Lord would follow them; because they
would not wait upon him, therefore he would wait upon them that he might be
gracious. It Is wonderful, that God should be a Suitor at our doors, because we
will not be Suitors at his door.

I shall only add two things more, whereby the freeness of Gods grace
appears.

1. It Is free, that some (more then others) should have the outward means of
the Word. Every ones Plow does not go upon the Wheat land. Psa. 16.7.
Lines do not fall to all in so pleasant a place; all have not so goodly a
heritage. This dew lies not all the Lands over. God has not dealt so with
every Nation. Ps. 147.20.
Some parts are like Egypt, where darkness covers the earth, and gross
darkness the people; whilst other places are (as Goshen) full of light.

2. Grace is free, if you look to the inward efficacy of the Spirit: Joh. 3.8.
this wind blows where it lifts; and we know not from whence it comes in
respect of the cause, (...), referatur ad causam, non ad locum.
though we know whence it comes in respect of the place. These gales blow not
upon every soul. Some are only (even amongst us) persuaded morally, whilst
others are prevailed with effectually. Yea, many are called where few are
chosen.

Some Ends there are why God bestows his grace freely: Whereof I shall only
name three.

1. That God might take away all ground of Boasting from the Creature. 1 Cor.
1.29.
It Is Gods work to stain the pride of flesh, and to show us, that the glory of
man is as the flower of the field. Isa. 42.
Glory is one of those things wherein God will have no sharers, which God will
not give to another. Though there be many stars, yet there is but one Sun.

2. That grace might appear to be grace inded. Grace would not be Grace, if it
were not every way free. Romans 11.6.
Mercy and Merits are in this case inconsistent. Salvation is either all of
grace, or not of grace at all. In Gods spiritual Temple either there is no free
stone, or else it is all free stone.

3. That poor dejected souls might take encouragement. They who have nothing to
bring, may be herein comforted, that God expects they should bring nothing.
This Doctrine is a shelter to souls from the storm, and as a shadow, from the
heat of Divine wrath. Those whom God has brought into the wilderness, may
bear him herein speak comfortably to them.

For Application.

This Doctrine may serve,

1. To convince of danger.

2. To quicken in duty.

3. To comfort under trouble.

In that God gives his grace freely, This shows us the danger of neglecting
Gods grace: Will not souls come to this Market, where they may buy without
money and without price? It Is sad that men do not hear the voice of him who
speaks from heaven; that Gods Messengers should so justly complain in the
words of the Prophet -- Who has believed our report? 2 Cor. 6.1. Grace for the
Doctrine of Grace.
that men should receive the grace of God in vain.

Consider, that neglect of the voice of the Gospel is a more heinous sin, and
will bring a more heavy suffering then the neglect of the voice of the Law.

1. Thou can not sin so cheap who thus fin'st against the Gospel, as they who
sinned in the time of the Law.

(1.) The light in the Gospel is far cleerer. Heb. 1.1.
It Is exceeding sad, that men should go astray with this torch in their hands.
Heb. 11.13 Testamentum novum in veteri later; vetus in novo patet.
We that have the light should walk in the light, that we might be the children
of the light. They who lived under the Law, though they saw the promises, yet
they saw them but afar off. The Old Testament was the New veiled, the New
Testament is the Old revealed.

(2.) The task is far easier. The yoke is broke off which neither we nor our
Fathers were able to bear, in respect of which yoke of Ceremonies Christ's yoke
is easy.

(3.) The tender is far sweeter. The chariots wherein Christ rides (are like
Solomon's) paved with love. Christ holds forth not a rod of iron, but a golden
scepter.

And as the sin is hainouser, so the sorrow is heavyer of those who neglect the
Gospel; when the Lamb turns Lion, 1 Cor. 16.22.
he is most fierce. The Gospels little finger will be heavyer to such then the
Laws whole hand. All the Bells of Moses seem to be cast into that great Bell
where the Apostle denounces an Anathema Maranatha. They who do not kiss the
Son, Ps. 2. ult.
will find, that if his wrath be kindled a little, a spark of it (like a spark
of fire) will go far.

As this Doctrine convinces of danger; So it should quicken to duty. In that
God gives his grace freely,

This should teach us,

(1.) To be less carkingly careful, and more cordially thankful.

1. Why should not Saints cast their cares upon God, who so freely cares for
them? 1 Pet. 5.7.
Why should we take Gods work into our hands? Which of us by taking
distractfull thoughts can add one cubit to our spiritual stature? There
should be a care of diligence as to duty, Cura officii non eventus.
where there should not be a care of diffidence as to success. By committing
our ways to God our thoughts will be most established. Psa. 37.3.
In stead of committing, we are too often caring.

2. Again, as we freely receive, so we should freely give. Those streams of
grace which flow from God in mercy, should carry our hearts back again to God
in duty. Psa. 149.6.
The high praises of God should be in the Saints mouths. Do mercies come from
God as water out of a Fountain, and shall praises come from us as fire out of a
Flint? Are we backward in pursuing Gods glory, when he is forward in pursuing
our good?

(2.) We should do duties more, and yet trust in duties less.

1. What cords will hold us to duty if we cast away the cords of love from us?
If the bands of free grace will not tie us, what bands will tie us? The light
of the Gospel leads men to the love of the Law. Rev. 1.5, 6.
Unto him who freely loved us, be glory and dominion for ever and ever.

2. When we have wrought as if we would have earned heaven by working, we must
yet acknowledge that it is God that works in us to will and to do. They may
not so much as whisper of merit, who speak aloud of mercy. The Wine of Gods
grace must not be mixed with Water.

(3.) We should be more dependent on God, and more communicative to man.

1. Seeing the Water of life runs so freely, Isa. 55.1.
let us still be coming with our vessels to these Waters; whilst the dew of
heaven is dropping, let us hold our hearts under.

2. Let us be followers of God as dear children; imparting freely (in our
places) to others, what God has freely imparted to us. To do good and
communicate forget not: Shut not your breasts upon others, seeing God has
opened his breast to you. Ministers should feed the flock of God, not of
constraint, but with a ready mind. 1 Pet. 5.2.
God loves a cheerful giver; to see men's hearts, and not only their hands.

The last word drawn from this Doctrine, is that which naturally and
necessarily flows from all the Doctrines.

If God give his grace freely, then here is comfort for drooping spirits, who
think that they could fetch comfort from God, if they had but such and such
degrees of holiness to carry to God.

1. Would thou bring water to the sea? Come to free grace for all, but with
nothing.

2. What personal worthynesse had the most glorious Saint in heaven, more then
there is in the most vile sinner on earth?

The emptyer thou art, the more thou art invited, and the more thou art fitted
to come for this fullness (to this Fountain of the Water of life.) And herein
may souls take comfort, that this spring cannot (like that in Paradise) be
stopped; Eccl. 3.3.
this Water is in Christ's keeping: Our life (in point of safety) is hid with
Christ in God. This river (as a river of pleasure) runs at Gods right hand for
evermore.

THE END.

