TO The Right Honorable, the Supreme AUTHORITY of this Nation, The Commons
Assembled in PARLIAMENT:

AN APPEAL IN THE Humble Claim of JUSTICE Against Tho. Lord Fairfax, General of
the English Army, raised, and declared to be raised, for the propagation and
defense of impartial Justice, and just Liberty in the Nation; By Captain
WILLIAM BRAY.

For, and on the behalf of himself, and all the Officers and Soldiers, and
other the free People of this Nation, that are for Righteousness, Settlement
and Peace.

PROVE. 24. 23. These things also belong to the wise: It is not good to have
respect of persons in Judgment.

PROVE. 28. 21 To have respect of persons is not good, for a piece of bread that
man will transgress.

PROVE. 29. 25. The fear of man brings a snare: but whose puts his trust in
the Lord, shall be safe.

London, Printed in the Year 1649.

To the Right Honorable, the Supreme Authority of this Nation, The Commons
Assembled in Parliament:
An Appeal, in the humble claim of Justice against THOMAS Lord FAIRFAX,
General of the English Army, etc. By Captain WILLIAM BRAY.
Right Honorable,
I Have traced the Actions of men in Authority, and I find, that (to my grief)
Justice and Righteousness (as names) are but a stalking horse to the designs
of mere Power and Greatness, and to be in a capacity to lead whom it will,
like sheep to the slaughter, without the bounds of Law or Reason. It will be
admired at by some, that I should contend against so great a Personage: But
truly, Right Honorable, there is nothing that makes me willing to be silent
now, but this, That I my self am compassed about with infirmities: But this is
no argument why I should not seek Justice; but be destroyed, (together with
others) inslaved, and wasted time after time, by the wills of men, or of a man.
It is true, I see the favor of my Enemy (he being great and potent) will make
me many enemies, because many gain honor and greatness merely by it: But
there is a God that impartially judges the earth, and the small and the great
are all one with him, and with just men. It is true, I expose my self by this
to the power and stratagems of the General, and all his Politicians, to undo
me, and to work their revenge upon me, if the Lord of righteousness and
justice does not restrain them: but in this consideration (whatever my Enemies
power and policies are) I shall give up my self wholly to the great Judge of
the Earth, and trust him, come life, come death.

It is true, He is great and potent by the blood, adventures and ruins of the
people (the effects of War;) and to me this is a great argument against the
engrossing of all power and authority into his breast; and much more against the
acting arbitrarily and unlimitedly against any member of the people or
Commonweal: and to my reason, it is to make such an end of War and blood, as
that it is not worth the blood of one man (as it may probably extend) much
less the blood of so many thousands as have been slain in the War, -- Civil
War. --

1. Me thinks, I cannot but consider the contest betwixt the King and this
Honorable House: and surely, I cannot believe, but that, had it not been for
injustice, Monarchy had still remained; and I do not think that any just man
would have lift up his hand to engage in War -- Civil War --, for my part, I
shall profess, I should not: for I am not against Government, but can live
with satisfaction either in Monarchy, Aristocracie, or Democracie: for to me
nothing is essential, but Justice and Righteousness in a Commonweal.

2. I cannot but consider the glorious expressions of Justice and
Righteousness in the many Declarations of the Army; by which the Penman
thereof, and the chief heads did seem to be taken up conscientiously with the
power of Justice, in their engagement against the Parliament, and excluded many
that had formerly appeared valiant and fighting men in the cause of the Nation,
to their dishonor and infamy; with this pretense, That Justice and Reason did
only justify them, and an intention of a speedy Settlement, of Justice, and
Laws of reason to the people. But there was a declining of that solemn
Engagement, which was like to have made all former Victories hazardous, and to
have totally endangered the A mie, and all the well-affected people in the
whole Nation. And it was Mr. Edward Hide's Speech at a Conference of both
Houses, 6. Julii, 1641. against the Lord chief Justice, Baron Davenport, Baron
Trevor, and Baron Weston, in the Case of Ship Money: These are the men, says
he, that by doing, or not doing, have brought this War upon us: By this means,
says he, the Peace of this Island is shaked, and frighted into Tumults,
Commotions, poverty and rage of War. And it had been an abuse of Providence
for these men to have pretended providence for their desisting from good, or
their doing of evil: And I believe, it would not have been received as an
excuse to save the King, to have used the expressions of providence; which is
much in use these times to countenance the Throne of arbitrary Power and
Dominion over the People, by men that are now made great and potent by their
blood, ruins, and adventures in War, -- in Civil War --.

3. I shall present my observation to you and the people concerning the latest
Remonstrance from the Army at St. Albans. Page 10. speaking against the King,
(viz.) Thus the people were made to depend mainly upon the King for all, and
his Interest made necessary to all; the other pretenses were but made use of to
serve his ends, and an easy way to set up Him an^ his Interest above all.

Pages 16, 17. That no Common Council or Parliaments at all should check him;
but that all matters of supreme Trust, concerning safety, and all things else,
might rest in him, without limit from, or account to any upon earth; and that
all those extraordinary and arbitrary powers over the People; yea, their
persons and consciences, might be exercised at pleasure by himself, and such as
he pleased to derive the same unto.

Page 20. Snares and chains were laid upon conscientious and zealous men, and
the generality of people held in darkness and superstition, and a blind
reverence of persons, and outward things, fit for Popery and Slaverie.

Page 21. It was a brand of dishonor laid upon the King, to prefer such as had
a mixture of ambition and vainglory, with a servile spirit, rendering them fit
to serve another Power and Greatness, for the enjoying some share therein to
themselves.

May it please this Honorable House to give me leave to speak a few words, in
order to the good of many of the Commons of England, the Officery and Souldie^y
of this Nation, bone of my bone, and flesh of my flesh, now in being and
hereafter to be; men that have or shall adventure their precious blood for the
Rights of the Nation; but not so, as unnaturally and unreasonably to exclude
themselves, after their Successes and Deliverances, from justice and right?

The disadvantages of Arbitrary power to reside in any person over all or any
of the people, may become at length to be so settled, as that it will be a
personal Interest in him and his Creatures, and a pretended Prerogative against
the Public Interest of common right, peace and safety; and at length this
Maxim will be brought in in time, That the General can do no wrong; even as it
was said, that The King can do no wrong; which (as Mr. Solicitor Cook says in
King CHARLES his Case) is Blasphemy against the great God of Truth and Love;
for only God cannot err; because, what he wills is right because he wills it:
And it is a sad thing, says he, to consider that learned men, for unworthy
ends, should use such art to subdue the people, by transportation of their
senses, as to make them believe, that the Law is, That the King can do no wrong.

In these times of confusion, evil, apostacy, and warring unto blood [which
cries,] I have weighed much with my self what is the only way to compose our
differences amongst our selves, and make a complete reconciliation: and I find
nothing so likely as a mutual Agreement amongst the People, by making of just
Laws, agreeable to the Law of Nature; which is undemonstrable, which needs no
demonstration, were it not for corruption and interests. It is, as Mr. John
Cook says in his book against the King, the unanimous consent of all rational
men in the world, written in every man's heart with the pen of a Diamond, in
Capital Letters, and a Character so legible, that he that runs may read. And it
is nothing else but the policy of Politicians, to live honorably by the
ruins and warrings of the people, to keep off an insisting upon Laws of
Settlement and Agreement; and to insinuate into corruption and interests that
are strongest and most prevalent, that so they may keep themselves in the power
of the Sword without reason, in War, and after War: O sad end of War to the
People! But now every drop of blood and injustice will be recorded in minds of
just men. England has eyes; the people thereof will not be deluded after so
much blood: And for my part, I cannot but think, that all impartial men,
whether Presbyterians or Independents, or any else under any other name, (that
are not choked by preferments from the present Power, or in expectation of
Honor by favor and promise) would have impartial justice and an equal
distribution according to principles amongst the people: And I hope, there be
many impartial men that have places of Honor, who (for their Countries sake)
would willingly adventure; but it is not common: Dominion and Avarice are the
great gods of the world. But when Politicians do wave the Agreement of the
People in the Laws of Nature and Reason, then we may justly fear a Design; for
it is because they would not have the people see, nor understand: for then they
know they could not do what they please, and continue in the Throne: they could
not get Persons to be esteemed more then Principles.

But I shall show unto this Honorable House, how his Excellency the General of
the English peoples Army, has dealt with me, as well as with other of the
people; and how such actions are the paths of former Powers. And I shall show
of what a dangerous consequence the actings of the General are, and how
consonant to the late Kings actings amongst the people. And indeed, Mr.
Solicitor Cook says, That if any of those that tried the King shall turn
Tyrants, or consent to set up any kind of Tyranny by a Law, or suffer any
unmercifull domineering over the consciences, persons and estates of the free
people of this Land, they have pronounced sentence against themselves.

Master Solicitor Cook has these several Arguments against the Kings Tyranny
and Policies, cited in King Charles his CASE.
First, The King, when there ever was a spirit of Justice stirring and
discovered in the House, he sends the Black Rod, and dissolves the Parliament;
and so the Parliament men were fain to go home with a flea in their ear, and
tell the Freeholders in the Country of the bravery of the King and Lords. So
the General, etc. when he saw the spirit of Justice stirring in the Army
amongst the free people and Soldiery of this Nation, that had adventured their
blood, he dissolved their General Council of two Officers and two Soldiers
of every Regiment, etc.

Secondly, If the people clamor for another Parliament, then there goes out
another Summons; yet a way made to make all fruitless, by a negative voice
that the people cannot save themselves without him; and must cut their own
throats, if commanded so to do. So if any of the people in the Army claim and
clamor for their Rights, even for their indisputable rights of Petitioning;
then presently there is an Order from the General and some other Officers, or
a Command and negative Voice, to hinder the same: Whereas they charged Hollis
and Stapleton for overthrowing the Rights and Liberties of the Subjects of this
Nation, in arbitrary, violent, and oppressive ways, and endeavored by
indirect and corrupt practices to delay and obstruct Justice, to the great
damage and prejudice of diverse of the poor Commoners of England petitioning
for the same.

Thirdly, Another means he had to put some others between him and the Peoples
hatred, by a pretended prerogative to be the sole Judge of Chivalry; and to
have the sole power of conferring Honors; that so he might be sure to have two
against one to stand for his Prerogative against all right and reason. And so,
What gaping and depending upon the General after Places of Honor and Profit;
What undermining any one that is out of favor (though without cause;) and what
snares there are and have been laid for the casting out of those that have
appeared conscientiously steadfast to their principles, for the Rights of the
People, Let all rational men judge.

Fourthly, Another means he had to delude the People, to make the People
believe, That he had committed all Justice to the Judges, and distributed the
execution thereof into several Courts; and that the King cannot so much as
imprison a man without Law or reason. But see what a mockery this was to
Justice: If the King have a mind to have any public spirited men removed out
of the way, this man is killed, the murderer known, a Letter comes to the
Judge, and it may be it shall be found but Manslaughter. So, when the Lord did
(though with much temperance, as I appeal to the world) make me to own things
that are just, according to their own former words and actions (as after
appears in my Case;) then I was presently a mark to shoot at; and though this
has not extended to murder me as yet: yet it has extended (as much as in
him lay) to dis-repute me, and undo me; snatch me off by force from the
common Cause of the Nation, and unmercifully make me liable to Insurrections
and Invasiens, if any shall be.

Fifthly, For matter of Liberty; if the King, or any Courtier sends a man to
Prison, if the Judge set him at liberty, then he puts him out of his Place:
which is (says he) a temptation too heavy for those that love money and
Honor more then God. So, if any one appears out of a real affection to
Justice, for any one that is extremely oppressed; then there is suspicion and
jealousy; and as the new Colonel John Reynolds said to one, If he should
speak for me, he should prejudice himself*

Sixthly, The King pretended a Prerogative, That he might avoid any of his
Grants; and so might cozen and cheat any man by a Law; and the ground thereof,
That the Kings Grants shall be taken according to his intention: And by this
means the Kings Grants have been like the Devils Oracles, taken in any contrary
sense for his own advantage. Whereas Master Solliciton Cook says, All the
Judges in England cannot make one Case to be Law, that is not Reason. But the
General (though he has joined in many good things) has made void his own
solemn Engagements to the Soldiers and People, has imprisoned and cashiered
those that have appeared conscientious to their Principles; and used diverse
arbitary and oppressive ways, to make himself and his Creatures absolute and
unlimited, tending to the extreme prejudice of many of the Commonweal; (viz.)
Officers and Soldiers of this Nation, as appeared by his actions of
Cashierement, of Captain Ingram, and then the Lifeguard, my self, and diverse
others in the Engagement equally concerned; and so he goes on to an absolute
will, divided interest, and conquest over many of those that have engaged in
England's blood, and appear for England's Liberty, and at length may over all
others; contrary to the Declarations of the Army in opposing the Parliament, in
the Declaration of the fourteenth of June, 1647, in the Volume, pages 40, 41,
42. But Conquest or Power makes a Title amongst Wolves and Bears, but not
amongst men, as Master Solicitor Cook says against the King. What a sad thing
is it, that after our Engagements, double and treble Engagements against
Absoluteness, Tyranny, Conquest, Arbittarinesse, the same things must be done
amongst our selves?

And now I appeal to you for Judgment and Justice that may appear without
partiality to the understandings of all unbiassed men.

I shall only hint unto you the business of War in a few words, (viz.) if I
had deserted the Regiment at the time of the Agreement of the People, I had
been a perfidious fellow to my Principles, and the Nation, and Army; and by
that means the Nations interest in that Regiment had been the Kings* for there
were some Lords in the Quarters courted them to it. But this Honorable House,
and all rational people may see how inhumanely I was used.

After my being apprehended in the Field, I was six weeks in custody at
Windsor, or thereabouts: I was justifiable in my grounds and reasons, which did
relate to the Engagement of the Army, The Agreement of the People, and the
Generals just Authority: And I was declared justifiable by Lieutenant General
Cromwell, as many can witness; and Commissary General Irevon told one in
private (viz. Mr. Sexbye) that there was nothing against me. I was appointed my
Command again under the notion of an holy Fast, and of their desiring an union,
and embracing one another in love, (oh sad hypocrisy!) but it was to juggle me
out of my right: (Reason and Justice being for me, as does after appear;) that
what Reason and Justice could not do, Power should. After that, the General
seemed to be dis-satisfied: though Commissary General Ireton said, That God did
incline the hearts of the General and General Council to desire a union, and
embrace one another in love (his very expressions, as many were witness;) and
so I had Lieutenant General Comwels Letter to Newcastle: But that Apostate, my
deadly enemy, Henry Lilburn (having influence in the General, when I came from
Newcastle, two hundred and ten miles from London) got me presently suspended my
Command: after some five or six weeks stay, suspension or confinement there, a
Commission was sent from the General for another to have my place. I had some
loss also by the tedious journey: Lieutenant Colonel Henry Lilburn had also
broken open my Trunk, and seized upon my Commission, and kept it. I was fain
after all this to return to London. I had been four or five months or
thereabouts struck out of the Muster-Rols of the Army without cause. When I
came to London, I made my appeal to the General and his Counsel of War, and
delivered it to himself to be heard, and for justice; but I spoke to the air, I
could not get it granted. After that I made many private Addresses by my self
and others: He told me, It was his pleasure. I offered to refer it to some
Parliament Men to hear the business, I could not have that granted: I offered
to refer it to some conscientious Officers of the Army in private, I could not
have that granted: Which actions were (under correction) contrary to the solemn
Engagement of the Army, the Articles and Discipline of War, and all manner of
Christian Society and reason amongst men. -- Oh unreasonablenessel -- And at
length, all that I could get from the General, was but twenty pound out of the
contingent moneys. And the truth of it was, it was extreme grievous to me to
bring Odum upon the General and others, with continual hope: of his and
others resurrection, or standing for Principles of Justice and Freedom to the
People: But now I see it is of such an extension, as a continued design to
disparage, dishonor, and destroy me, and consequently others; I hope I shall be
excused in the eyes of all rational men, that I now speak: Though, for enemies
to me, and Apostates, I care not what they say.

After all this injustice and dissatisfaction, when others would have wrought
upon these things, and used it, as an argument to me, to revenge my own wrongs,
and public injuries; another pretending for the King and Justice,
insinuatingly, politiquely, and privately, That if I would, I might be a
Colonel against the Grandees. But the Lord made me to abhor such motions, and
the Lord kept me firm, steadfast, and sincere in the times of temptations,
wrongs, apostasies, and danger, to the Nation, the Army, and this House; and so
to their persons, though my person have been tossed like a Tennis-ball by them:
And I raised a Troop against the bloody Insurrections, and in constancy to my
Principles, and by the Generals own privitie, unto whom I did in my affections
and civility go for that end. And when I was dismissed out of the County of
Kent. I have ever since kept up my Troop, in order to the Freedom, Justice, and
Peaceable settlement of the Nation, in Colonel Reynold's Regiment, and upon
the same Account that the Army and the well-affected of the House have
manifested themselves, have been at most excessive charges and damages this
Five months in order thereunto; and have been entrusted with the guard of the
Kings own person, at Hurst-Castle by the authority of the Army, and command of
Col. John Reinolds, (voted a Col. of the Army by this House.)

Yet notwithstanding may it please this supreme Authority, I being at the
Generall-Councell of the Army, on, or about the first day of March last past,
and there being a Letter presented by some Sou ldiers, to the General, and the
Council; it was put to the question and the Poll, whether the Letter should be
owned or not owned: And when I was demanded my Vote in the Council, (which
should be free:) I told them, That though I could have wished that many
expressions that were taken offense at were left out; yet in my Judgment the
substance of the Letter did relate to the right of petitioning, and to a
petition that was presented in Parliament, and therefore I thought the work of
that Court was to consider of it, and so I owned it, though I had some
temptation upon my spirit not to own it, because I saw a design upon me. A
little after, I was ignominiously and unreasonably cast out of the Council,
and had not liberty (though I desired it) to speak, as if it were now grown a
Capital offense to speak a man's judgment in a Council, (which should be
free) and as capital a sin to speak a word for a private Soldier (though with
never so much temperance) if contrary to the judgment of some Officers; whereas
it was offered by the Army, as a necessary expedient that there might be a
liberty of dissents in the House of Commons, that the Nation might readily come
to know, who they are that perform their trust faithfully, and who not; and
this was offered to render a Parliament less nocent, Remonst. of 23 June, and
in the Volume of Declar. page 143. We appeal to all men whether it be just or
tolerable, that any privilege of Parliament, should contrary to the Law of
Nature make a man judge in his own case on concernment. But the General would
have that unreasonable power and dominion which he would not give to
Parliaments, amd will not give that liberty that he takes to himself: Unto
what pass will this Nation come to, unless this honorable House justly
interpose with their just Authority. But I humbly conceive, That this honorable
House, the well-affected in Army and Nation, are bonnd in conscience, to
interpose in their dying Liberties; for what man in the earth knows where such
practices and designs will end; for after I was cast out of the Council
without just cause, my Troop was given away to another, and a Commission given
to another to be in the Regiment, and I could not have that indisputable
Justice from the General, to suspend it till the business was determined in
Parliament, though I desired it in private of him.

I shall desire the honorable House to consider the two Cases before laid down
(not mentioning my former Arrears and losses in your service, and for your
sakes) by which injustice and wrongs will appear, and by reason of which I am
engaged in the world: and to consider that the General would by virtue of his
negative voice, (which the King so much stood upon under the specious notion of
the use of his reason) deprive me of my right, and give it to his creature; and
pretend that he has an unlimited power to give; and deny, to whom he please,
which may extend as well to kill, and save alive, as to honor and dethrone, in
an unreasonable arbitrary manen; just like the Kings practice, as I have showed
before. He himself can receive a Commission from Parliament, against the King,
and after that withstand the Parliament, again and again, and rend and tear in
pieces all power, and break all the reins of government, as to former
constitutions, and tell them, That it is not the me^r punctilio of a
Commission? but impartial Justice, and Freedom, principles of nature and right
reason is his Commission, (which actions are only justifiable before God and
Man, in order to Justice and Freedom) but he can act arbitrarily, unreasonably,
and fly to his own Sword and power, without reason, when he pleases, to destroy
the Nations friends, and his own too (though not flatterers) in their freedom
and Justice. This corruption may destroy the wel-being of this Army and
Commonweal; for if this House, or any Officers or Soldiers in this Army, do
walk and speak never so reasonably, yet power and Will may destroy and cast out
both, or do both; for by it he may do one as justifiably as the other. And if
God in his appointments should give a great part of this Army into the hands of
future Enemies, by future War and Blood, then another part of the people of
this Nation must be invited out with the names and expressions of Judgment and
Conscience; and after they have obtained Victory also with the loss of many
thousands, and the hazards of many more; all their liberties, and equal good
and right, shall be usurped and swallowed up into the hands of one man, (or a
few men) who may be partially swayed to destroy and save alive whom he please;
if he prove corrupt and apostatize as former powers have, and so one corrupt
man in power corrupts many more, until at length they will come to call
corruption Justice; and it must be so, because they call it so; and then he is
worthy of death and cashierment, that will not say, The Crow is white.

For my part, I shall profess my self to the world to be for the Generals
personal Authority, and power of Conduct (so long as this entrusted Authority
thinks fit and just; and as may appear by an address unto his Excellency
written by my own hand, and consented to by the Troops about two months last
past) as much as any insinuater or flatterer that has interposed between the
General and me, in order to the Rights of the People; and I should be glad if
the General did walk truly, justly, and honorably, suitable to such an
Authority. But to have (as much as in him lay) my body, little estate, and more
especially, or above all, the Liberties of my Country, the liberty and freedom
of my Conscience, to be all enslaved at once by him, I had rather be racked to
death or destroyed by the General, or by any unworthy, mercenary-spirited,
insinuating Officer or Soldier, then subscribe in that sense. And I profess
impartially, I know not what sense is expected from me else, by these and the
like actings: just like the actings of Willam the Norman Conqueror, who
deprived the English Natives of the comforts of Riches, and Places, and their
smallest offenses against his will and Norman Laws, were made grants to
entitle him to their Lands, and places of Trust, to fulfill his lust, satisfy
his Creatures, and carry on his Tyrannous designs over the People. And I do
find it a very great evil, that when the People and the Soldiery claim just
and undeniable things; then presently some men commonly fly to a deceivable
mistaking of the Question, and subvert the People and Soldiery in their Cause;
and say that the men are against Authority, as the King did against the
Parliament: and so the People and Soldiery are jugled out of the Question.

But I desire this Honorable House to consider, That Injustice is the
foundation of almost all evils in the world: and when Politic Murderers
(which are the greatest Murderers in the world) give continued occasion, then
they cry out against the evil, and rend and tear like unreasonable beasts of
prey; and cry out upon the Lamb, if it seek but his just, righteous, natural,
and reasonable safety; they extremely offend, and then they are offended if a
man speak in his just cause; like Tiberius the successor of Octavius, who after
a feigned clemency at the beginning of his Reign, suffered no day to pass
without shedding the blood of poor innocents; and he prohibited on pain of
death, that no one should be so bold as to weep or to manifest sorrow: They
make occasions; they cry out of passions, though they abundantly provoke.

And therefore Right Honorable, sithence Authority is merely for that end, to
do Justice impartially, that one might not oppress another, that Might may
not ovorcome Right; and since you have overturned the face of other personal
Authorities, cast out, and imprisoned diverse Members of your own House, to
their ignominy and dishonor, nulled the House of Lords, impartially beheaded
the King and some Lords, and Declared to the people, That it is out of an
affection to impartial Justice and Righteousness, according to the first
Institution of authority by Judges, according to the Scriptures, Deuteronomy. I. 16,
17. I shall desire you would do Justice for Justice sake, that it may appear
to the People, and to the Officers and Soldiers of the Nation, whom it justly
concerns, and unto whom I am deeply engaged, whose Cause I make my own, and
whose blood I esteem as my own, and unto whom I have now discharged my
Conscience, and then you will justly oblige me to manifest my self yours, and
to employ my small talent of reason and understanding for your service, and in
defense of your supreme Authority.

FINIS.

