A Ship of Arms, Useful for all sorts of people in this woeful time of War.

Fashioned by a plain Country-Farmer, SAMUEL BRASS, Nigh the River of Tease,
Com. Ebor:

Printed at London, in the Year 1653.

To the rightly Noble, and worthily honored Lady, The Lady ELWES, Wife to the
Right Worshipful Sir JERVACE ELWES Knight.
MAdam, well may you wonder at the audacious impudence of a stranger shall fix
your Name in the frontispiece of his simplicity: But though I never saw your
face, I have often heard the fame of your pious zeal to Godward, confirmed by
those set hours daily put apart in your private Closet, no doubt for his service
(the only real ground of all your shining virtues) which out the boldness
upon me to present you this plain piece of rustic Northern work savouring its
Clymate) containing a few wandering thoughts of a decrepit miserable wretched
Old man, humbly entreating you will vouchsafe him the favor at some spare
hours of your life (if any such can be found) to open and read, and what you
find unworthy your judicious eye, to raze out, and the poor remainder (if any
such can be found) to place at the threshold of your Library, where the hem of
your vesture may preserve it from the viperous tongue of the venomous Spider.
And as you now live eminent amongst the best of Ladies, in that famous yet
terrestrial City of London: So that you may hereafter live glorious among the
best of Saints in that heavenly City new Jerusalem, shall be the prayer of

Your Servant deeply devoted, SAM. BRASS.

To my loving Countrymen, the Commons of ENGLAND.
Dear Brethren, and loving Countrymen,
I Have lavisht out 80 years in jollity and pleasure, loosing the reins of
liberty to all libidinous desires, glutting my self with the vain delights of
this wretched world, mispending that precious time my gracious God of his
abundant goodness bestowed upon me for his own service solely. So as I am now
become that Dives our Savior spoke of, daily tormented with the pain of
fore-passed pleasure: And lest you my Countrymen should not hear Moses or the
Prophets, I have sent you this message from a dying man, To amend your Lives,
lest you fall into the Lake where you may cry for a cup of cold water to cool
your tongues, and be denied it. Happy is he whom other men's harms do make to
beware. For your souls sake, and for Jesus Christ's sake, lay to heart what is
here in charity presented, by a plain Countryman, your friend and well-wisher,

Samuel Brass.

To the READER.
READER,
I Wrote this little Book chiefly for my self and familiar friends; yet if any
other can get good by it, I shall be glad. It Is a Collection of a few wandering
Thoughts of an Old man, lame both in body and mind; Written in his bed the
other Winter, occasioned with want of rest by reason of pain. His intention is
good, if expressed by finer fingers: But bear, with infirmities, and make that
use he desires, who is your friend and wel-wisher,

Sam. Brass.

Fly foolish Fashion ('cause a novel friend)
You Will read perchance until you see its end,
Then lay't aside: but good friend do not so,
Keep't near your heart, and it will cure all woe.
Read it, re-read it, read it over again;
The matter's good, though the method poor and plain.
S. B.

Of the Author and his Book. An Anagrammatical Motto of Samuel Brass.
Brass se Emanuel, is his exhortation:
Emanuel se Brass, is his approbation.
Both these united in him do appear;
Love of Christ's members, of his precepts fear.
Of the Book.
His book his honor; for its revealed light
A lanthorn is to walk in Christ his sight.
Here Is no new light, nor any old tradition,
Nor Heresy, nor Romish superstition:
But he that reads it, may in it truly find
Full great contentment for a Christian mind.
William Kay, Minister at Stokesley.

Upon perusal of this book, I find it plenteously to perform what it promises;
to be a ship full fraught with Arms, and represents David's Tower, wherein are a
thousand bucklers, all shields of mighty men, (Can. 4.4.) It Is indeed full of
divine Meditations, sweet Allusions, concin^ Comparisons, da^ting Penetrations;
and concludes the Authors conversation to be in Heaven: It is Heaven upon
Earth. And I may truly say of this, as Nazianzen of Basils; It is Devotionis
maribus occusta Navis, A Shipfull fraught with the rich merchandise of
Devotion. This is the opinion of

Tho. Oddir, Minister at Kirby.

To the Author.
Go vend these Arms throughout the Christian world,
Now all in war; more precious they then gold,
Being parcel gilt, all of them Cannon-proof;
Where they are in use, the Enemy stands aloof:
And though his power be limited to offend thee,
Fear not but Christ thy Savior shall defend thee.
So thou make use of what is here set down,
Thou may be sure in heaven to wear a crown.
By a Friend, E. A.

A Ship of Arms.
O Sinful soul, O sinful soul,
Shall Christ be born for thee,
And thou not live and in his service die?
O cruel Caitiff, cruel Caitiff,
Was It born tormentor be
Of him Laid down his dear heart blood for thee?
O wretch, O wretch; O wretch, O wretch,
That erst thou should be be bore
Love Satan serve, and leave thy Savior;
Who in that night the Jews did him betray,
Went forth to the fields, as he was wont, to pray;
Unto the Garden called Gethsemane,
Where he and his did sometimes use remain;
Attended that night only with his own,
For his going thither was no further known
To any of them that were his followers more,
Or else no doubt of followers had been store:
And being there, he went himself apart,
That he to heaven might raise and lift his heart:
And wil'd the Apostles they should watch and pray
Lest that the Tempter might take them away.
But he being gone, his follow'rs fell asleep,
Whom he reproved, because they could not keep
Themselves awaking for so short a space,
And then did he return to's former place:
And they like men unto their sleepy vain,
Which he well knowing, turned back again,
And wil'd them sleep and fear not, he would be
Their keeper, during all eternity.
And then fell he upon his bended knees,
And prayed for those that were his enemies.
That done, he called, and willed them to awake;
For they were nigh intended him to take:
Who suddenly were then hard by at hand,
Attended strongly with a Soldiers Band;
All who were furnished, each one Soldier-like,
With burnisht sword, with staff, or else with pike:
And when they came to our sweet Savior nie,
He did demand whom 'twas they came to spy:
They said, For Jesus, he of Nazareth;
That Is I (said he) and pray now what pleases
You do with him? whereat all being aston'd,
They started back, and fell upon the ground:
And when they did from that amazement wake,
He said, It Is I whom ye are come to take.
Now Traitor Judas did before combine,
Whom he should kiss, might be a certain sign
For them, whereby to know him from the rest;
Which proved a worm within his bosom breast:
Who said Hail Master, then he did him kiss,
Not knowing, wretch, how much he did him bliss
By that foul act, but yet whenas he saw
The event thereof, he then did stand in awe;
And gave again the Pieces, price of blood,
In hope thereby he might receive some good:
But his repentance 't (seems) came too late,
Because he proved a wicked Reprobate;
And hanged himself, for that his Treason done
To his own Master, who was Gods own Son;
Whom now the Soldiers had with them in Hold,
And with our Savior were more saucy bold
Then fitting was; if they vile men had known,
That they should reap such seed as they had sown.
Then Simon he drew forth a sword, and there
Did quite cut off the Highpriests servant's ear:
But's Master bade him sheath his sword again,
For who use swords, with swords shall sure be slain.
And do not know, if so it were my mind,
I could of Angels thousands Legions find,
For to confound that cruel company?
But now is the hour, and so now let it be.
And then he called for Malchus to come near,
And with a touch did heal cut Malchus ear.
O blessed touch might that to Malchus been,
If Malchus heart, had Malchus ear but seen.
But he was like the rest his company,
Whose lighted torches could not make them see
Within their breasts, where they might easily find,
Even hearts of stone; but Satan made them blind;
For the blind are often found to be most bold,
An ancient Adage, true as it is old.
Then on went they with their resolved design,
As Satan did their wicked hearts incline,
And tugged their Prisoner with all foul disgrace,
Until they brought him to a public place,
Where multitudes were ready tending there,
In hope that they might something of him hear,
At Caesar's Hall, where some did cause to make
A fire, but not for our sweet Savior's sake,
But for themselves, that it might keep them warm
For fear lest they by cold might catch some harm.
Amongst whom was Peter got, into the throng;
To whom one said, he surely did belong
Unto the Prisoner there was standing by:
But he poor man his Master did deny.
And after that, there was another said,
You Are one of them whom we this night betrayed;
But he did still maintain his former Plea,
And said, Till then he never his Master see.
And then anon there was a Damsel came,
And challenged him, and said he did remain
With that same man; and then weak Peter swore
That he did never see that man before.
With that his Master turning back his eye,
And so beholding Peter steadily,
The Cock did then begin his first to crow,
And Peter out, and seemed to make a show
Of grievous anger; but the truth was so,
His heart was like within him burst for woe,
That he his own good Master had denied,
Whom he had vowed to serve until he died:
And called to mind, how had his Master said,
By him ere long, that he should be denaid
Even thrice, before the Cock should twice but crow,
As he had then done, all even on a row:
Which made his eyes gush out with brinish tears,
And eke his heart with dreadful horrid fears
Of cruel torments, due for his desert,
And grieved him greatly at the very heart,
That he should prove to be so weak in mind,
Whom God himself before that had assigned
To set in heaven, and be a Judge of them,
Who were the twelve Tribes of Jerusalem.
And now the Soldiers, where they do abide,
Our Savior still they shamefully deride;
Abusing him with scorn disdainfully,
As though that he had had no Deity;
And spit upon his sweetest tender face,
Abusing him with all the foul disgrace
They could devise, to make themselves but merry,
Not thinking he was able make them weary
(If so he pleased) but he good man did bear,
Even whilst these Jews did box him on the ear;
And for their sport our Savior they do scorn,
And with a fools-coat him they do adorn:
And first blindfold, and then they do him beat;
And bid him guess who 't was that did the feat:
And at the dawning of the day they call,
And him convey into their common Hall;
Where, when there could no cause be justly found
For to condemn whom they had now fast bound,
They forge false men for witnesses to swear,
What wretches they from his own mouth did hear,
That he their stately Temple would pull down,
And in three days set one up in the room
Should equal it, in every each kind degree,
For glorious beauty and for dignity.
And thereto he good man did not reply,
For which they deemed him worthy well to die:
Still heaping on him more and more disgrace,
By hurrying him from this unto that place;
And carrying him from this, unto that Judge,
For of their pains these Jews they did not grudge.
And thence to Pilate him these wretches bear,
That he their wicked witnesses might hear;
And judge him worthy therefore for to die:
But he as yet could nothing in him spy
(Deserving death,) and so caused him be sent
To Herod Tetrarch, then b'ing President,
Who was full glad that he might see him there,
Of whom he did so many wonders hear.
But he could nothing of our Savior get;
Which made him grieve, and inwardly to fret:
So he returned him back to Pilate's place,
Where he received all the foul disgrace
That either hatred, malice, or envy
Might throw on him, to make the innocent die.
Then Pilate's wife in have a message sent,
And willed her husband he should be content,
And have no meddling with that good just man,
For of him she had had a fearful Dream,
And suffered much, and therefore humbly prayed
He rather God then any man obeyed:
Which struck Judge Pilate to the very heart,
And caused in him an inward grievous smart:
And then he said, that he could find no cause
To judge him dye, no not by their own Laws;
And washed his hands, if so he had his heart,
To keep him free from the unjust Judges part.
But it is conscience in a Judges breast,
Which makes the Judge prove either man or beast;
And yet because the peoples earnest cry,
He gave him judgment worthy well to die:
So he was condemned and without any cause;
But that the Jews made Will to stand for Laws:
And then cried out, O horrid shameful thing!
That I should thus be drawn condemn your king
But they denied, and thereto gave no ear,
That he the name of King of Jews should bear.
Now custom was, at that first set one free,
Who for desert was judged worthy to dye,
And therefore moved that they would Jesus choose,
But they did Jesus utterly all refuse;
And cried aloud that they might crucify
Him, whom indeed most willing was to die:
And made their choice of a wicked murderer,
For him that was our blessed Savior.
But Pilate he (b'ing stung) continued still,
To try if he by means might win their will
For to accept of that just man Jesus,
In stead of that most unjust Barabbas.
But they still cried, that they might crucify
Him, whom they rather ought to Deifie.
And then did Pilate cause to chasten him,
And ordered he should be delivered them;
And over his head he then did write this thing,
This is the man who is of Jews the King:
And it was writ in diverse several Tongues,
That al who list might read and see their wrongs.
But they required he would be pleased to add
To this inscription only so he said:
But he did answer them, What I have writ,
I am resolved I will not alter it.
Then they with joy began to lead away
Toward the place is called Golgotha;
And forced our Saviors tender back to bear
His heavy Cross, which he could hardly rear;
And there were multitudes did follow him,
Some crying, and some other pitying:
And many women were the crowd among,
Who wept so high for all that mighty throng,
That Jesus heard, and he cried unto them,
Weep for your selves and for your own children;
And for Jerusalem.
For the time shall come, and now does draw fas^^ on
That there shall not be left one little stone
Upon another, in that stately Town;
Although it be now of such great renown.
But most of them to him no credit gave,
But still they do themselves so mis-behave,
As they had done until he had got his grave;
And when they came unto that bloody place
Assigned, as they thought, for a great disgrace,
They then began that heavy tree to rear,
And eke his sweetest tender skin to tear,
Between two thieves; a horrid shameful thing,
Though good enough to crucify our King.
The one of which thieves, in most sconrful wise,
Our Sovereigne thus did jeeringly despise.
If thou be God, or the Son of God, Jesus,
Go down from the tree, and save both thee and us;
But the other he in zeal reproving him,
Said, We are punished justly for our sin,
But this man he has done (at all) none ill,
Yet suffers only cause the Jews so will,
Against all law: and then with heart said he,
Vouchsafe good Lord be pleased remember me
When thou do come in thy glorious Majesty,
Who answered him in mild and humble wise,
This day shall thou be with me in Paradise.
O happy thief that was inspired with grace,
To come to heaven within so short a space.
When all sorts scoffed our blessed Savior,
As Well the Priest as did the soldier;
Who cast their Dice upon his seamless coat,
And his it was to whom it fell by lot,
All this that mild man took most patiently,
To teach us sinners how that we should die;
And yielded up his dearest humane breath,
To free thee sinner from eternal death.
Now let us all with joy due praises sing,
To God our Savior and our heavenly King.
For the thorny crown which he (good man) did bear
Was due by right for wretched thee to wear.
Then do thou suffer freely for his sake,
And to him thou, do thou thy self betake.
The drops that trickled down his tender cheek,
Would force the hardest stony heart to weep:
For without sorrow for thy deadly sin,
Thou may be sure thy heart is hard within.
His arms he stretched out upon the tree,
By sweet embracements calling unto thee.
Then do not fly, as father Adam did,
For Adams sin by flight could not be hid:
But lovingly do thou his love embrace,
Who Is all only giver of heavenly grace.
His hands were rent with cruel iron pins,
To gain thee pardon for thy cruel sins.
O then for pardon do thou humbly pray,
Or look to have none at another day.
The watery blood that issued out his side,
Will wash off sins, if it be well applied.
Apply it then, if thou have any grace,
Or never expect in heaven to have a place.
The nails which fastn'd down his tender feet,
Will work in the hard'st flinty heart regreet.
Then beat thy heart, and strive to break it often,
If thou intend by grace to make it soft;
For broken hearts are they will only win,
And gain us pardon for out grievous sin.
His cruel pains endured in every part,
Will mollify the hardest flinty heart.
Then search thine own, and soundly do thou try it,
If these his pains with grief do mollify it.
Examine strictly even every each hollow part,
For many such be sure is in thy heart:
And thus must thou, and thou thy self alone,
Or else thou know within it can come none.
Then do it daily, if so thou do mean
These hollow places in it to keep clean:
For there the tempter loves to lurk and lie,
If he can compass any harborie;
Who 'll promise fair, if thou will in him trust,
But fairest words are often found unjust.
Then do thou fear, and from the tempter fly,
For few that strive do obtain victory;
But to thy Savior do thou boldly go,
For he does use put no man off with no:
He neither sinned in thought, nor word, nor deed,
And yet for thee his heavy heard did bleed,
And yielded up his blessed heavenly Ghost,
Which was conveyed by glorious Angels host
Up to the heavens, from whence at first it came,
And where it shall for evermore remain.
And then the earth did quake for very fear,
And stony Rocks themselves in sunder tear:
The famous Temple rent it self in twain,
And so ere since it does and shall remain.
The heavens forsook their spangled wonted light,
And eke the Sun, which then did shine so bright,
For grief and sorrow did it self close hide,
And underneath a thick cloud did abide,
Whereat the watchmen were so sore aston'd,
And struck with fear, as they fell all to ground.
And when they wak't, then each of them did swear,
'Twas the Son of God whom they had hanged there.
O praise, sing praise to him that sits on high,
Who thought no scorn for wretched thee to dye.
O that he should be cruelly crucified!
Who did deserve be mightily magnified.
Him serve, him fear, him let us still obey,
On whom depends our only hope and stay.
O praise, sing praise to his most holy name,
Who was, is now, and ever shall be the same.
Sing praise to him who lovingly died for thee,
Yet still does live, and shall eternally.
Let all the earth conjoyn with one accord,
To sing the praises of that heavenly Lord,
Who made the heavens, the earth, the sea, and all
That in them is, come at his only call.
He spoke the word, and they were all made then,
The word was this, Let it so be, amen.
These creatures all, of him do stand in awe,
To them his word is for a binding law;
They never do use oppose his sacred will,
But all obey their heavenly maker still,
Save only man, this sinful wretched man,
For whose sole use all these good creatures came;
Who was at first created good and free
From thought of sin, or any malady.
And Maker-like thou (sinner) might have stayed,
If thou thy maker had in heart obeyed:
But willingly thou wretch did lose that grace,
And so became a miserable sinful race,
Of runagates from ought that tends to good,
But that thy Savior shed his precious blood,
To bring thee back to that happy state again,
If thou had grace being there, in it remain.
Praise him, praise him, and for thy self do pray,
That thou in him may ever live and stay,
And on his passion daily ruminate,
To work in thee of horrid sin a hate;
And keep in heart for what cause he was sent,
To call poor sinners that they may repent.
For without that, be sure thou have no part,
Nor any portion in thy Saviors smart.
But thou thy self do him still crucify,
Whom thou oughtst rather even to glorify.
Repent betime, if thou have any grace,
Or else in heaven expect to have no place:
For no unclean thing can ascend on hy,
Where Angels sit and sing continually
The Praises due to that heavenly holy one,
Who made all creatures by his word alone,
And is desirous for to have them all
To come to him, and does them often call.
Then go with speed, thou wretch, and do not stay,
For great's the danger of one hours delay.
And if thou shall thy Savior now deny,
He Will not be heard when thou do to him cry.
Then thou beware of being drawn away
By him that seeks thy ruin and decay,
And does delude thee by some sly deceit,
Enticing thee with his sweet sinful bait;
To overthrow thy soul and body there
Where naught appears, but only horrid fear
Of ugly feinds, whose mouths like lions roar,
And with their teeth do rend and eke devour
All such as come within their hellish reach:
Then learn by others thee thy self to teach.
Of sinful life and death to stand in fear,
Lest soul and body both, these hell hounds tear,
And torture them in that most fearful place,
Where all must live do not partake of grace.
Then fast and pray, and fast and pray again,
That thou with Christ in heaven may aie remain;
And do repent thee of thy sinful crime,
And be thou sure thou do it whiles thou have time,
For time's not tied, no not to the best man's leisure,
Therefore this day do thou give ore thy pleasure;
And strive to please thy heavenly God and King,
And to him always his due praises sing,
And give him thanks that he has spared thee,
Till thou have time thy sinful life to see;
And blame thy self for thy hard stony heart,
Since that thy God has played a loving part,
In often calling and recalling thee,
To search thy heart, and secret sins to see;
For though thy conscience hourly thee accuse,
Yet to repent, thou sinner do refuse:
So that death's due for this thy great neglect,
But that thy God does lovingly thee respect.
And though thy sins do justly death deserve,
Yet still thy life this good God does preserve,
And stead of death, he heaps on thee blessings,
By sparing thee, and eke long-sufferings;
To try if thou wilt thy sinful life forsake,
And to this good God thee thy self betake,
Who pours out his blessings on thee still,
To try if he by gifts may win thy will
To follow him: O do thou follow then,
And follow fast withouten all delay
This thy good God, and from him do not stay;
With all thy heart, and that unfeignedly,
And free from (that vile sin) hypocrisy;
Lest sleeping conscience justly thee accuse,
That thou thy self do thee thy self abuse,
By seeming other then indeed thou art,
But God above sees the secrets of thy heart;
Though man believe thou art the very same
Which thou do seem, as if free from all blame
Or blot of sin, but what to them appears
In outward show, or to their fleshly ears
Report does bring: but sinner be thou sure,
Thy Savior cannot this vile sin endure,
Thus to be mocked with that the outward part,
Which differs far from the inward sinful heart;
For he desires to have thy heart alone:
Then give him that, or else thou give him none.
For soul and body are ordained to go,
At the end together, whether they will or no,
To the great account, and therefore do thou see
Thou daily use to obey the Deity:
And be not thou with this wicked world beguiled,
For then a sinner thou art sure be styled.
But have a care that thou do daily use,
Of daily sins thy self for to accuse.
And keep a strict account of thy weak state,
And then by that thou will discern thy fate;
Which must be hell, or else that heavenly bliss,
Fie, fly from that, and care to cleave to this;
Where be assured thy Savior thou shall see,
Who has endured the torments due to thee;
To suffer death as Christ himself has done,
For all of them that to him freely come.
Then freely go, and that without delay,
To him that puts no man off with nay,
But willingly with love embraces all,
Who on the name of Jesus only call.
Then call and call, and do thou call again,
That thou in him may evermore remain:
And then fear not, but thou shall with him find
Eternal joys, yea far beyond thy mind;
For be assured, no earthly creature can
Express the real happiness of that man
That comes there; and therefore do thou strive
At that great happiness that thou may arrive:
Where Saints and Angels sing continually,
To him that lives, and shall eternally.
O let both heart and tongue, and all agree
To sing his praise; so lovingly dyed for thee:
Let all the earth, the worthy praises sing
Of Christ our Savior, and our heavenly king;
And join themselves in prais with one accord
To sing the praises of the heavenly Lord,
On whom the archangels daily do attend,
And shall for aye e'n world without all end.
And all of them do all times sing,
To God our Savior, and our heavenly king.
O mount my soul, and strive to apprehend
These heavenly joys, which never shall have end:
And set thy song to that glorious Angels
Who joys enjoy beyond all hearts desire quire
Even that the presence of our Savior sweet,
The very Essence of all joy complete:
Sweet Jesus please my soul may there reside
And in thy Passion faithfully confide,
And thereby draw from hence this terren part
As only guided by a fleshly heart,
Subjects it self unto the inferior power,
Who does not cease torment it every hour:
With sundry passions it cannot resist,
But willingly complyes to what he list
For to command, until he so shall please,
My Savior sweet to grant to me some ease,
Of this tentation, wherewith wretched I
Have still been governed from my infancy:
Then come sweet Jesu, and that presently;
Or else Lord Jesu I shall surely dye:
In this my sin, except good God, thou will
With thy dear blood wash of my sinful guilt,
And take from me this wicked Legion out,
Of my poor heart, and cause be put to rout.
All the tentations wherewth, (helhound) he
Continually (poor wretch) tormenteth me;
And bind him lord, I thee most humbly pray,
That he do never more lead me away,
As he has done, but that I sinful may
From this fowl Legion totally fall away:
But it is not in me, nor my power, O Lord,
Except thou pleas vouchsafe to me the word:
Then please sweet Jesus, I thee humbly pray,
That blessed word of comfort to me say;
That thou in me, and I likewise in thee
Shall rest, and so for evermore shall be
Freed from tentation of that wicked fiend,
The mortal enemy of all humane kind.
Which hurrieth this my weak and fleshly mind,
More wavering much, then is th'instable wind,
Which wandreth like the sun, from east to west,
And when it comes there, then there it does not rest.
But roving runs up to the Starry Skies,
And by and by unto the Deep it dives;
And mounts again up to the highest air,
But yet can find no firm fast footing there:
For though it be even now at hand hereby;
It Is gone again in th'twinkling of an eye:
For it is so swift, as there is nothing can
Force it to stay so long as man is man.
Not much unlike unto that Noah's Dove,
Which found no footing, but in th'Ark above.
It flies aloft, and hovers in the air,
To find that rest which cannot be found there.
Except thou please vouchsafe to take it Lord,
As thou have promised by thy sacred word,
For to safe keep all whom soever shall,
Upon the name of our Lord Jesus call.
Then bend you knees of my most wicked heart
Which guides all this the inferior part:
And humbly pray, and pray, and pray again;
And in that posture do thou still remain,
Until our Savior please thy suit to hear,
And to thy prayers vouchsafe to turn his ear.
And do not thou, if so, at this repine,
That he hears not these sinful prayers of thine.
For many causes (doubtless) there may be,
That he as yet does turn his ear from thee;
And all of them of thee thy self arise:
Who is at best but only worldly wise;
And savours not the things that are above,
Which do proceed from that good God of love.
But diving down-wards seldom or never heeds,
That althings good, from heaven alone proceeds,
And yet will thou unto the earth incline;
Distasting things are spiritual and divine:
And when thou see it is only real cause,
It may be then, th'wilt stop and take a pause,
And pray again; yet still thou sinful art,
Extremely troubled with a double heart
Which boat-man like does seem to make a show
Of looking upward, yet does downward draw
With all its force, unto this massy earth,
Where it at first received its vital breath;
And does so clog the inward spiritual part:
As it does yield unto the wicked heart.
And so they both are downward led away
From thee their Savior, and their only stay:
And runs so fast down Sions steepy hill,
As that to Babel needs these wretches will;
Except thou please, sweet Jesus, lend thy hand,
And force them both to stop and make a stand,
And climb with speed up Sions hill again:
Which cannot be without excessive pain
Unto the heart, whose loins are stife and weak;
And painful climbings forces them to break;
Unless sweet Jesu, thou will please to be
Their Comforter, in this extremity,
And grant them strength that they may re-obtain
The top of blessed Sions hill again.
Then come sweet Jesu, I the humbly pray;
Come quickly Lord and do thou make no stay;
For the glass is now at point to be outrun.
Then come Lord Jesu, come Lord Jesu come,
And send my soul some speedy present aid;
Or else, deer God, it merely is betrayed,
By a fawning friend, who seems to make a show
That he to it ent'rest love does owe.
And yet indeed its deadliest enemy,
Who kills it self to make my soul to die.
O help sweet Jesu, help, I humbly pray;
My silly mind, from thee thus drawn away:
By this foul flesh, that is foul in every part,
Because its governed by a fleshly heart,
That domineers within my hollow breast;
And will not let my silly mind take rest.
For all my members, they do so combine,
As that from heaven to earth they do incline:
Yea, even the head, wherein is only placed
The senses all, which neither live to taste,
Nor hear, nor see, nor scent, nor yet to feel
Ought what is good, but all whatsoever is ill.
And the apprehension it does still project,
Nothing that is good, but all things good neglect
And memory it ever more forgets.
These blessings great, and bounteous benefits,
Which thou have pleased in mercy heap on me
(The very picture of base misery)
Who cannot think so much as one good thought;
But it is mixed with something which is naught
Nor yet to press into the Lords presence
To pray for ought, without some great offense
For then and there, I often plainly find,
My mind is hurried, as if with the wind
Over all the earth, and well it know's not where.
Nor matter's much, so as it be not there
Where it should be; but always runs astray,
Like to the blind man that has lost his way,
And is in danger ever for to fall
Into a Ditch, where he does lie and crall,
And cry for help; but if there be none by,
The blind man's likely in the Ditch to ly.
Then help sweet Jesus, help, I humbly pray,
That this my wicked wandering mind may stay
And fix on thee, and on thy grievous pain
To bring it back, to that right way again:
And being there, I humbly pray the Lord,
Vouchsafe to bind it with strong Sampson's cord,
When his hair was cut, that it may always stay
And never more so gad and run astray;
But ever keep within those blessed bounds,
To think on thee, and on thy grievous wounds*
How thou endurd'st those bitter pains for me;
Of all mankind, a wretch most unworthy:
Except thou please vouchsafe give me a call,
As thou did Peter, or that blessed Saul,
Who persecuted thee and them were thine:
Yet at thy call did never once repine.
But presently he at that call became
A painful Preacher of thy sacred Name.
Now call sweet Jesu, call, I humbly pray;
That I from thee, in sin, no longer stay,
But come and wash thy blessed feet with tears,
Who has freed me from all those horrid fears,
Were justly due unto my stony heart;
If it had had its only due desert:
And then I hope my wearied soul shall rest,
In thee alone, by whom it is only blessed:
And wait on thee at this thy loving call,
Before that glorious heavenly Tribunal;
Where Angels sing before thee continually,
The praises due to the sacred Trinity.
There thou my mind, do now set up thy rest;
For therein shall thou certainly be blessed:
And in that place be sure to spend thy life.
And do not prove like Lot his foolish wife;
But still aspire, to mount aloft my soul,
That thou may be one in that blessed roll
Of them are marked to follow the holy Lamb
Who for thy sins from highest heavens down came
Then follow thou my soul, with speed I say
And to thy Savior, do thou always pray;
That thou in him for evermore may live,
And to his Name most worthy praises give,
For all the goodness he has given to thee;
So far beyond thine own expectancie.
For he has freely given to thee much more
Then erst was in thy wicked mind before
To crave of him, then do thou sing his praise;
And his great blessings do thou ever blaze
Over all the earth, that they may know and see
The bounty great of the blessed Deity.
To thee poor man who had a happy place
In Paradise; but thy own want of grace,
Did throw the thence, even unto the ground:
Where thou received's that deadly mortal wound
Which none can cure, but that the blessed Lord
Himself, did freely of his own accord,
Say he would send one of the woman's seed
Should bruise and break the wily serpents head;
Which he performed in this his only Son
Who from the heavens, down to this earth did come
And there endured as thou by faith may see,
The torments great (of right) were due to thee,
In lieu whereof thy Savior does but crave
That he thy heart to himself may only have.
A poor requital for his grievous pain,
Wherein he does not seek for his own 'gain;
But only thine: then do thou let him have,
That is his own, which he does only crave:
^or he has dearly purchased the same,
Which all in darkness did till then remain;
And into darkness shall again return:
And in that darkness evermore shall burn;
Except it please thy Savior thence it call.
For thou do naught, but he alone do all:
For thou still do as hereto thou have done.
Forsake both Father and his only Son,
To gain a thing which is at best but loss:
For fairest pleasures are (in substance) dross.
And now being got, they are with the wind now gone,
So that the pleasure proves to be none.
Then fie fond man, thus to be drawn forsake
Thy Savior sweet, who freely did thee make
To be capable of eternal bliss.
Then do not thou give him a Judas kiss.
For it was solely in his breast alone,
To have made thee tree, or liveles stock or stone
But he did breath upon thy slimy face,
The breath of life, for which his bounteous grace
Thou art bound to give him all whatso'r thou have:
Who in that posture thee (being earth) has placed;
Whereby thou now by faith may re-obtain,
The place if thou have grace in it t'remain,
And in him trust, who has so deerly bought
This place for thee; yet thou fond man do naught
But on this earth rest, and take thy delight
And for a babble sell even all thy right
And hope of heaven: O fie, most wicked, fie!
That thou hat'st life, and love so well to die;
Was ever madman seen so far bereaved
Of sense as thou, who have thy soul bequeathed
From him that bought it, and to thee it gave:
Then give't again, that thou with him may have
A blessed place, among that heavenly quire;
Where all enjoy whatsoever they do desire:
And more then so, for every one of them
That dwells with him in that Jerusalem
Are filled with joy, and so shall ever be,
From time to time, for all eternity:
To which they cannot with their wishes crave,
What they do want, or what they do not have?
O thither mount my mind, and do thou stay
Thy self in that the best and happiest way;
Which leads to life, where thou shall surely see,
The glorious face of the sacred Trinity;
Without all fear, which never yet any one
But Moses did, and only he alone
Was pent up close within the rockie cliff,
And there was covered in that stony riff
With Gods own hand, till he himself past by:
For none his face could ever see, but die.
Then God withdrew his hand, and Moses he
The hinder parts of this great God did see.
O joy, that is far beyond all other joys!
When thou behold's with these thy fleshly eyes,
Even every part of the sacred Trinity:
Which creature man, as yet, could never see.
Stay there my mind, and do thou ruminate
These heavenly joys which never determinate;
And only Saints and Angels do enjoy,
Who are solely freed from all kind of annoy,
And ever more in his glorious presence live;
Who for thy sins his life did freely give:
And yet does he, but even desire thy heart
In recompense of this his cruel smart.
O that he should thus easily be content,
To take again, what he has only lent.
And (yet vile) wretch, do thou at this repine,
So as thy heart does daily still decline,
From heaven to earth, and freely there complies
With him, with whom there is none deals but dies.
Then elevate my soul thy self again,
And strive an Angels glorious place to obtain.
For this a place of wicked warfare is;
Where all must strive that care to come to bliss
And that they conquer, then they may be sure
To gain a crown of glory shall endure
For evermore: and therefore do thou strive,
And do not thou at thy wicked heart connive,
Whose nature is to love this massy earth,
Whereon at first received its vital breath.
But do thou love the Lord thy God alone,
And to him only do thou make thy moan;
That he may please to elevate thy mind
Up to the heavens, where thou art sure to find
Thy Savior sitting in his glorious throne,
Who gladly hears all suites (denying none
Are made to him) then do not thou delay,
But fast and heartily to thy Savior pray
That he will please his spirit of grace thee send
That thou thereby thy sinful life may mend;
And do thou strive for to obtain that place
Which none can have but only by his grace.
Then lift thy heart up to the heavens, and say;
Come sweet Lord Jesus, come Lord, I thee pray,
And take my soul good God into thy hands
To free it from all these sinful earthly bands,
Which bind it strongly sore against 't will,
From what is good, to that is ever ill:
Safe keep it Lord, I humbly thee require
That it may have what is its soul desire,
Which is to dwell in thee my heavenly king,
And evermore thy worthy praises sing.
Lord keep me there, then I am sure to live,
And hearty thanks to thee shall ever give,
For all thy goodness freely given to me,
That am unworthy even to lift my eye
Up to the heavens, the place where thou do dwell,
Whose wondrous works there is no tongue can tell:
No not so much as th'wind which we do know
Does ore our heads and on us daily blow;
Yet cannot we with reason comprehend
From whence thou do it daily please to send;
For he that seeks, or goes about to find
The cause thereof, shall surely lose his wind,
And labor both; and therefore do thou see
That thou submit whatsoever he does, and thee,
Unto the Lord, who made the heaven and earth,
And all therein, even with his only breath.
O stay my soul, and there do thou admire!
The wondrous greatness of that flaming fire
Appeared to Moses in the pillary cloud;
Which did his chosen children Israel shrewd;
Until their sins stirred up his heavy wrath:
And then he did as now (of late) he has
Done to this I Will, wherein we wretched live,
To whom his goodness did such blessings give;
As never land on earth had more then we;
And yet of peace we (wretched) cannot 'gree.
So that, the son's against the father's set,
And father he against the son does fret;
And brother against his brother often wars,
And so will not let fall these woeful jars,
Till God shall please that his most heavy hand
For to withdraw from over this sinful land;
And give us grace we may in heart repent
And yield him thanks for his great blessings sent;
Which we (unthankful) did as yet forget:
And for that cause, each brother's blood is set
Against it self, like as did wicked Cain,
When as his brother Abell he had slain.
Sweet Jesus please to stay this thy sharp sword,
And stead thereof to send thy blessed word:
That thou thereby may beat down growing sin
The want whereof has doubtless only bin
The real cause of this our mortal fewd,
Which doubtless does from our hard hearts proceed.
Sweet Jesus please to mollify them so,
Like Peter's when he solely wept for woe:
Or like Manasses when he came be bound
By Ashurs host who fell upon the ground,
And gained pardon for his grievous sin,
Whereby with speed he was restored again
To Juda's crown, and it so long enjoyed
Until by death he was from thence destroyed.
Sweet Jesus grant that we have many such,
And then without doubt, it will help us much
To further peace, for which we daily pray,
That thou will please in thy great mercy stay
This sword of thine, and sheath it up again;
That we in peace may here hence now remain,
And live like loving brothers in this land,
Which thou have kept with thine own powerful hand,
From foreign fos, tho now there be none such
As we our selves domestic ones by much.
Sweet Jesus help, good Lord we daily pray,
This bloody war of ours with speed to stay,
And put us once in happy peace again,
That we in peace may here hence now remain;
And praise thy name, and that incessantly
For giving us this bounteous great mercy;
And this must thou, and only thou alone:
Or else Lord Jesus, other there is none
Can yield us help in this our greatest need:
For now is nothing can stand us in steed,
But only thou; then come Lord Jesu come:
Or else deer God we are utterly all undone;
For them elected to the public good
With purging ill have bred in some ill blood;
And the weaker sex it is become so strong;
It Is doubtful Lord the other sex to wrong,
So as between two are esteemed extreme
Most suffer much, tho they retain the mean,
For now there is no part of this wretched I Will,
Tho it enjoyed a blessed peace ere while:
But it is grown now unto a bloody war;
For many a one thinks their honest neighbor far
More quiet then he; and so with grief repines
At's neighbors good, and then his malice finds
Some hole or other in his neighbors coat
Tho the quarrel be but for one single groat:
To make complaint to them that are of power
To plunder him by strong hand in an hour
For some old wrong, as then but newly done,
Perchance betwixt the Father and the Son.
O blessed Lord that this the German plunder
Which whilom was in peaceful England wonder
Should now so well with us be understood,
As any other usual English word;
Whereby revenge in England's grown so rife,
It tends to take away non-nocents life:
For Satan over this Isle bears such a sway,
As by his wiles he draws many away
From thee that is their only God and King,
Who are rather bound thy worthy praises sing
For all thy goodness to this woeful land,
Tho now it feel thy dreadful heavy hand.
Sweet Jesus send some blessed Angel down,
To quell this hellish Satan's furious frown;
And force him Lord, as thou was pleased then,
When he made suit he might go into the swine,
Who huried him headlong into the sea:
Lord, drown him there, that he n're more have power
To come within this spacious I Will more;
But we instead of blood may ly and groan
In brinish tears, and therein make our moan
To God on high, he will vouchsafe to please
This cruel war of ours with peace to cease;
And then that we who are true English all
May all one way on the name of Jesus call.
Vouchsafe good God, that we may so accord
In holy service of that heavenly Lord:
As tho we differ some of us in part,
Yet we may all as one agree in heart:
And let our hearts good Lord in prai'r remain,
Lest in our sins we wretched may be slain.
When worthies dare to stand, and look on death
Tho with that look, they lose their dearest breath.
Brave Britains keep your 'forwon ancient fame
Least ancient terror turn to novell shame:
And since your valor cannot well be known
Until by you some valourous act be done:
Then look your swords be sharp for foreign foe
Whose joy's increased by our cause of wo's
Lest we bewail this great efflux of blood
When it is too late to do us any good;
And worthies all in time for death prepare
Since all in the end shall fall unto death's share:
But look you still prefer an honorable death
Before a shameful beastly cowardly life:
Seeing God alone the day of death does know;
But when or where, no earthly man can show.
O then lets pray, and that incessantly
To him that lives, and shall eternally.
Come let us sing, and all due praises give
To him that died, that we by him might live;
And always yield praise to his holy name;
Who was, is now, and ay shall be the same.
O let us all with heart due praises sing,
To this our God and glorious heavenly king;
Whose dwelling is above the heavens most high
Whereto the best of sinners come not nigh;
Whose heavy judgment is for to descend:
Since none come there but they who do ascend:
Then strive my soul, and do thou aye aspire
To keep thy self out of that irksome fire;
Which burns, and yet there is no light appears
But pain and grief, and dreadful horrid fears.
Sweet Jesus please to keep my soul from hence
And draw it up to th'high'st heavens that thence
I may have help; for without help from thee,
There is no comfort in extremity:
Then teach me Lord with heart and mouth to pray
That I in thee may ever live and stay;
And never more so wander up and down
From place to place, as I poor wretch have don
Sweet Jesus please to keep my soul with thee,
Or else dear God, I am sure it cannot be
Kept safe on earth where that fierce dragon flies,
And does so dazzle most of all men's eyes,
As few are able to behold the sun,
Except it please the blessed Lord to come
And clear their sight, that they with joy may see
There is no safety, but O Lord in thee.
Then come Lord Jesus, I thee humbly pray
And make my soul with thee to live and stay;
Or else good God, I can it no where hide;
Nor here on earth it cannot long abide,
Within this fleshly mansion of mine,
Whereon the sun has never power to shine
But by thy leave, then let it Lord so be
That this thy sun may please to shine on me;
And shield me safe from that common enemy,
Who does envy both thee and them are thine;
From whom good God be pleased keep me and mine,
We do not prove like to the Gadarens,
Forsake our Savior for to save our means:
But teach us Lord that we may call to mind,
How before all worlds thou said and so assigned
That man should spend his lifetime on this earth
Where he at first received his vital breath
And there should serve his maker God and Lord;
As is appointed in his holy Word.
That when this glass on earth shall be outrun
Then does an end (of all created) come;
And one land then against another rise,
And all men also arms shall exercise:
And yet as then shall sorrows but begin.
To them are clogged with their deadly sin:
For on this earth must be great tribulation
Before that dreadful day of desolation;
When shall the glorious sun all darkened be,
And eke the moon, at that day none may see;
And th^^e bright stars down from the sky shall fall
And powrs of heaven shall then be shaken al
Whereof our cannons thundering in the air
With fiery flashes flaming out their fire
Which sends its smoke up to the starry skies
And not unlike to mighty clouds there flies;
And trumpets echo sounding every where,
So as no place with us is thereof clear,
Are perfect types of that most dismal day,
When the trump shall sound and loudly call away
All souls on earth their bodies for to take;
And before the Lamb a perfect reckoning make
Of each man's talent, which the Lord them lent,
And for which cause they all were hither sent.
And then there shall be loud and hideous cries
For hills to fall and cover them from the eyes
Of him that does both see and knows all
That on this earth was done or did befall
Since Adams time; for there is nothing can
Be hid from him that first did make this (man);
No not the secrets of the best man's heart,
Tho he the same did never as yet impart
To any creature; for Jehovah he
Does all things know and eke does all things see,
This son of man whose glory shall appear
Above the clouds of heaven up in the air;
Whose glorious greatness then shall all men see
With thousand millions in his company,
Who shall collect from all these the four winds
Whom s're have bin, even so as he them finds;
And then laid open shall be a perfect Book
Wherein all flesh shall freely thereon look
And each one see as it were in a glass
His guilty conscience telling what he was?
And then shall he set th'sheep on his right hand
And keep his left side for the goatish band.
And then the King shall say unto the sheep,
Come now and take the kingdom I do keep
For you that are the blessed of the Lord
Who willingly obeyed and heard his word:
And to the wicked, then the King shall say,
Go ye accursed, and be you a pray
Unto the fire, which is in hell prepared
For cursed Satan, and his hellish guard.
O horrid fear, beyond all other fears;
Whose force even plainly in the face appears,
Which sends its blood unto the secret heart,
Who calls for help from every other part;
And leave the loins supporting so appal'd:
Like as if death on sudden had them called;
And thereby they are all so sore aston'd,
As that they fall down flat upon the ground;
Where they do differ naught from fearful death
But that as yet appears a parcel breath,
Which for a while a little life retains;
And in that passion death-like it remains;
Until it please the King our blessed Lord
To say to me that comfortable word;
Come now thou blessed, hear O do thou hear,
What difference great between this joy and fear;
To the righthand men, come, o come you blesd
And to the left hand, go, o go you cursed:
O joy beyond all other heavenly joys,
Which freeth the heart from all kind of anoys,
And is thereby so fully filled with gladness
That it expels from every part all sadness
And forces them which even now fell aston'd
To leap for joy and skip above the ground:
And tho with fear of late they looked like death
Yet now with joy the're filled with store of breath,
And those parts which with sorrow then were dumb
Do now aloud (with joy) cry come Lord come,
O come sweet Jesus, I thee humbly pray,
Vouchsafe be pleased in my weak heart stay,
And strengthen't so, as it may ever stand;
One of the blessed which are at thy right hand,
That I may there thy praises ever sing,
Which over the earth and all the heavens do ring.
O sing my soul, and be thou never weary,
But in thy Savior be thou always merry;
And have a care no earthly joy remove
Thy fleshly heart from th'heav'nly joy above:
But therein always do thou take delight,
And in it spend thy time both day and night.
O let thy solace ever be therein,
And it will keep thee from all deadly sin;
And teach thee loath all earthly things to love
And take delight in serving God above.
O love him love him, that thou dead may live
And to thy Savior be thou sure to give,
All that which he has freely given to thee:
And then shall thou no doubt his servant be.
O blessed Lord, where have I this while been;
Has not my soul my sweet'st Savior seen:
Or, it is some vision did to me appear,
Whereby it has discovered (plainly) where
My Savior sits in his glorious throne,
And judges all on earth, himself alone;
And there pronounces sentence (come or go)
The only words of greatest joy or woe
That ever came to any creatures ear,
To make a difference betwixt joy and fear.
And then shall sheep and goats, both of them see
What they have been, and what they now shall be.
And This sort shall of future hope despair,
Any that other not so much as have a care
For their downfall, but aye shall sit and sing,
Even allelua to our heavenly king:
Whose final sentence and pronounced decree;
Shall firmly stand for all eternity:
From which herehence there can be no appeal,
But all must then have either woe or weal.
O stay my soul a while and contemplate,
How far the cursed goats are separate
From the blessed sheep, who ever sit and sing
In the glorious heaven the praises of their king;
But they from thence are headlong thrown away
Down to hell pit, and therein made a pray
To the ugly fiends, whose cheerful office is
For to deprave them of all heavenly bliss.
O let this horrid fearful sentence move
Thy soul to elevate it self above,
Up to the highest heavens, and there upon
Spend thou some time in deep contemplation:
And then no doubt to thee it will appear
What difference great between this joy and fear
O have a care that these two never depart;
But always keep them close within thy heart,
And think upon them seriously day and night,
And they will teach thee keep thy way aright:
Forget them not when thou art in thy bed,
For they will cure a sick and troubled head
From all its grief, and further more then so,
They Will keep thee free from all eternal woe,
And be a means to bring thee to that bliss,
Whereas no doubt, but thy dead father is.
Stay there a while my soul, and do not range,
To think the things, whose nature may be strange
Or whch to these two are impertinent,
Lest they may prove to alter the intent
Of gaining that which is the souls desire,
To keep thee free from the deep infernal fire,
That Tophet which God has prepared of old,
Both deep and large, that it may sinners hold
The fuel wood which does maintain that fire,
By great Jehovah, kindled in his ire
By the only breath which from this great God comes,
And with fierce brimstone like a river runs,
The strange effects whereof some say are such,
As differs far from all other fire in much;
For this wee'r sure its nature's extreme hot,
There Is some do hold the fire of hell is not:
This comforts like the Sun from Sion's hill,
But that burns souls who yet with cold are chil
This we do see does cast a glorious light,
The fire of hell more dark then darkest night.
Though this be hot we can away from't turn,
But in that other sinners ever burn:
This fire on earth with water may be quenched
But that in hell not with the sea though drenched.
The fuel here in time consumes away
But that in hell it never does decay:
Here we receive great comfort by this fire,
But they in hell have naught they do desire,
All Dives wealth not worth one water drop;
Nor all on earth procure for meat one sop,
There souls desires are ay insatiate,
Without all ease, tho never so moderate;
There rules revenge with irefull anger raging,
Without all hope even of the least asswaging.
Here souls are free from bodies greatest pain;
But there the souls in torments aye remain.
Here greatest griefs are not without some ease;
There the tormenters rage does never cease.
Here each sense has its own particular grief;
There all do suffer without the least relief:
All sinful souls are very sensible,
There is no light in it which is visible;
But think black darkness does appear to th 'ey,
And so shall do for all eternity.
Here all created shall in time decay;
But them in hell shall therein live for ay:
Death here is a salve for every kind of sore;
But they does life torment still more and more.
Here we desire to live, and yet we cannot,
But there to die, yet so decreed we may not.
Make use of this my soul, and fly from hence
Up to the heavens and take thy recompense,
For all thy service to thy Savior done,
When thou with bread did feed the hungry one
The naked cloth, and eke thy neighbor love
Then thou did please thy Savior, God above
Whose will is such, that thou should ever do,
So as thy self desir'st be done unto:
Then do so still, and it will keep them free
From future woe for all eternity:
Here stay a while my soul, and think of this
What difference great between sad lore and bliss
And do reflect at present on thy self,
Who whilome was in good and perfect health,
And thy girt loins were all so firm and strong
As they presume, that naught could do them wrong,
But leading out a sullen skittish Jade
Tho having such provision therefore made,
As in man's judgment I was safe and free
From any danger of indempnitie,
When suddenly the horse did run about,
And with a fall my right hip he put out,
And I in danger was most imminent
To have had each part from one another rent
But that a stranger happily coming by,
Led by Gods spirit chancing me to spy.
God made a means whereby me to preserve
From sudden death which I did well deserve,
But that the Lord was pleased to give to me
A longer time, that I my sins might see,
And that of them I should in heart repent,
Which no doubt was the only cause he sent
Me help from heaven and cured my heart again
But wretched I did still in sin remain,
Forgetting also this his mercy great,
Tho carefully his Judgment did me threat,
Presuming still that he would always be,
As formerly he had been unto me,
Even heaping blessings upon blessings still,
Tho sinful I, did yet neglect his will;
and after that well nigh about a year,
Forgetting this, my gracious God to fear,
And being secure, as then was in my thought
From any danger could to me be brought:
When suddenly did my most gentle horse
Give me a fall, which proved to me much worse
then the other was, and also danger more,
But that God did as he had done before
With the second fall disjoynt my other hip,
When 'twas more danger with that suden skip
TO have broke my neck, but that my gracious God
Did in his mercy with his gentle rod
Me so correct as he before had done,
To try if I would yet unto him come,
And lest I should again now fall away
(As I had done) he forces me to stay,
And in a room my body does confine,
Yet sends his Son with comfort on it to shine,
For day and night I have therein a fire,
And all things else I do in heart desire;
So as if now I shall again neglect
My gracious God, who does me thus respec^
And be so still, as I have hereto been,
Sleeping securely in all deadly sin.
Unmindfull also of his great blessings
In sparing me, and eke long sufferings,
And all things else whats'ere befitting life,
A loyal loving, and a gentle wife,
And many children which are dutiful,
Obedient all, and also most thankful,
All of them able, and most willing be
TO afford all kindness freely unto me,
So as my conscience tells me now plain,
If I shall fall from this good God again,
I do deserve far worse then Sodom ever did,
In the dead sea for to be drowned and hid,
And to the world a common by word be,
There in that sea lies justly drowned he
Was so ungrateful to his gracious God,
Who did instead of his most heavy rod
Power blessings upon blessings even far more
Then erst was in my heart that time before
To ask of him O thou hard stony heart
That Is flinty grown in every sev^rall part,
Harder by much then the hardest marble made,
Which neither gifts, nor any threats invade,
Nor yet those judgments God has justly sent
On sinners such as did not then repent:
So as my sin in justice now does call
For vengeance great on me vile wretch to fall,
And if his mercy were not even much more,
And all his other Attributes before,
I do deserve in every minutes space,
To be cast out from off the massy face
Of this his earth whereon he has me set,
To serve my God, whom I do still forget
For every part of mine is set to sin,
And no part's free, but every several limb
Does smite with these my wicked sinful heart,
And each one does perform his utmost part
To further sin, for when did wretched I
Speak many words, which were without some lie
How often did I think but any thought,
Which had not in it something which was naught
Yea often tending unto murder much,
Revenge or envy, or some else was such,
As malice, lust, and other sin what not?
When as my Saviors sufferings are forgot,
Then presently the wicked enemie's in,
And every several part procures to sin
Until he please to let some Angel come,
And thrust this legion out his wonted room:
Sweet Jesus bind him, bind him blessed Lord,
As thou have promised by thy sacred word,
From all temptation for to keep them free
Who in tentation heart'ly come to thee.
Now take me Lord, and 't please me safe to keep
Who for my sins have justly cause to weep
For Satan's self yet still deludeth me,
By trusting him my utter enemy,
Who draws me to do whats're is ill,
That he by it my silly soul may spill,
Except thou please; good God vouchsafe me send
Some help from heaven, and further to me lend
Thy holy spirit that it may comfort me,
In this the greatest of extremity;
For he has hereto had on me such power,
As he has drawn me from thee every hour:
Vouchsafe good Lord, be pleased take him away
That he do n're overcome my longer stay
From thee my God, my helper and my King,
But that here hence I may for ever sing
Thy worthy praise for all thy blessings sent,
And by thy help my sinful life repent,
For without thee sweet Jesus I am naught,
Sinc Satan he has me and mine so wrought
As that no part thereof good Lord is free
From his most sleightfull guilefull gullerie.
Help Lord, help Lord, I on my knees do pray,
And keep me free from out this satan's way,
For where thou art good Lord, there dare not, he
Once to come near, nor in thy sight to be.
Sweet Jesus please, vouchsafe to keep me there,
That crafty Satan never come me near,
For if he shall, I know I have no power
Within my self to shut him out of door,
Except thou please good God the porter be,
And then away all hellish fiends will flee;
For the house that is built upon that stable rock
Will bide all floods, and subtle Satan's shock,
But mine is built upon the slippery sand,
Which either must be kept by Gods own hand
Or else it shakes with every rising flood
Because the foundation of it is not good,
Sweet Jesus please to set this house of mine
Upon that rock where it may stand and shine,
And 'bide all floods, whats're against it beat,
And ever force them from it to retreat.
Here stay my soul upon this firm set rock,
Where thou art free from wicked Satan's shock
And recollect thy self with joy and go
To the Savior sweet who suffered so much woe,
To bring thee back to that most happy place,
Where thou may live, if endued with grace.
My wandering thoughts be pleased good Lord to stay,
That they from henceforth never from thee stray
But always rest in thee both day and night,
And ever^ore therein take their delight;
Sweet Jesu let them never wavering run,
From place to place as hereto they have done,
But be thou pleased good God the mark to be,
VVhereat my thoughts may aim continually
And tho some times they do both rove and rome,
Vouchsafe good Lord to be their only home,
For they in thee good God are only blessed,
And out of thee they are sure to have no rest,
For they are boundless ever when they stray
From thee their God, their comfort and their stay
Then thou my soul be sure build there thy nest
And let him build within thy bony breast,
Whose presence onely's able to expel
Even all the fiends that do belong to hell,
O do thou make much of that blessed guest,
And always love to have him in thy breast,
O bid him welcome there with all thy heart,
And then be sure, that thou shall have a part,
And comfort great in his bitter sufferings
The very chiefest of those great blessings,
Which he so freely has bestowed on thee;
Until this time from thy very infancy.
O yield him thanks, for they are well deserved
It Is he alone, who has thy life preserved;
And saved the wretch from that eternal death,
Was due to thee, with the first received breath.
O do not thou so much neglect him then,
Who these great blessings gave unto thee, when
Thou knew'st not from whence this goodness came
But that his bounty was to thee the same
That formerly it has for ever been:
Tho thou did live so long in mortal sin:
Now then repent, and do no longer stay;
For there is no greater danger then delay,
And that is all the hope the cruel enemy has,
To bring thy soul unto eternal death:
For all his other cunning gullery's seen:
And no delay by him does interveen,
To keep thee still within his hellish power,
Who Is danger's great, tho 't be but for 1. hour
O fly fond man, O fly and do not thou
Delude thy self, and unto Baal bow,
Who seeks thy ruin and thy overthrow
By this delusion, which is now delay:
Whereby thine own heart does it self bewray
That thou art guilty of that horrid sin,
Whereto thy conscience has as yet not bin
Consenting, but have even most wilfully
Forsaken him, who did for thee so die.
O what a fearful horrid thing is this?
To sell all hope of that eternal bliss,
For less by far then Esau got for his.
Stay there my soul and deeply contemplate
In what great danger now is thy estate;
Whereon depends thine eternal bliss,
Or else the loss of all true happiness:
And think how thou thy time on earth have spent,
Which doubtless God has only to thee lent;
That thou in's service it should solely spend,
Since he ordained it for no other end.
And see how much thereof's already gone:
And how much now at most can be to come.
And how that is spent which is already past:
By which thou wilt have a good and perfect taste,
How much of it is drowned and gone in sleep;
And what thou did for sinful pleasure keep:
And what in deadly sin by thee committed:
What in good deeds by thee likewise omitted:
And then I fear that thou will quickly find,
Thou have misspent this time was so assigned
For the only service of thy Savior;
Whose part, I fear, will prove but very poor.
Then think how now to call this time again,
Which wretch'd thou have spent so long in vain
And what years yet are left to thee behind,
Wherein be sure thy sins must be redeemed;
And then th'wilt see that it will well appear
There Is hardly one week left for one whole year
Tho God should please to thee so many send,
As he to most men does not use to lend.
Then call to mind what now is to be done;
When as thy days are almost all outrun.
And what is past already spent in sin;
So thou art still but how for to begin;
To serve thy God, and also to repent;
And yield him thanks for his great blessings sent
And satisfaction must be likewise made
Before all debts by thee be duly paid.
O then my soul cast up a perfect count,
To what a sum thy several sins will mount;
And what is also due for them (of right)
Before thy soul can enter into light;
And then thy heart will bleed within for woe
And eyes with sorrow then will overflow
With brinish floods of tears for to regain
This time of thine, which thou have spent in vain:
And think what now there is, which must be done,
And how long time can be for it to come,
And then thy heart will certaintly relent
Which hitherto could never find time repent:
Or if it did, 'twas by and by even done,
With the first occasion that did offer come:
So as in me, there is nothing that is good,
Or thereunto of any likelihood;
To keep me there where I desire to be,
With thee alone deer God alone with thee,
Sweet Jesus please to call and call again,
That I in thee may evermore remain;
And think how I my time have lew'dly spent,
And then there is hope (if so) I may repent.
But come Lord Jesus come, I humbly pray,
That I in thee may ever live and stay,
And evermore thy worthy praises sing
Of thee my God, my hope and heavenly king.
And in thy service ever take delight;
And therein spend my time both day and night.
Bide there my soul, and call again to mind,
How much there is yet left of thy life behind;
And think how Judas did himself repent,
And yet to hell (no doubt) was Judas sent.
And do not thou my soul conceive it so,
That short repentance can keep thee from woe:
For thou that all thy life time have now spent,
In Satan's service with thy hearts content:
Can thou conceive that one hours time shall pay
For many years, which thou have gone astray.
O do not thou my soul presume that he
Who has spent all his time on earth in glee;
And following this vile wicked world wherein
He has known nothing but was wicked sin;
Shall leap from hell, as tho indeed it were
A thing of nothing for to get out there;
And thence above the highest heavens to fly
As if all parts were either thought or ey,
And if they were yet thou do know a Lake
Which Dives was not able to overtake;
But thou will say, that that most blessed thief
Did obtain heaven by his but short belief.
It Is true indeed, yet know that he is but one
Because Gods pleasure was that there should none
Presume too far, nor yet have cause despair;
Yet doubtless they in most great danger are,
Who do defer this great account to make
Before the hour that God's about to take
The soul from out the fleshly corpse, and then
Thou Wilt make a show like to the best of men;
And promise fair, but search thy heart and see,
If thou can find the thiefs true faith in thee;
Or if it were, that was a time of wonder,
When all the earth was in a kind of blunder.
Or, if thou have that king Manasses grief
For his offense, examine thy belief,
If such, there is hope, thou may thy Savior win
(So thou repent) for to remit thy sin:
But have a care (my soul) not to delay
This reckoning till that doleful day:
For be assured that great accounts
Must have great time to cast them up;
And therefore thou my silly soul be sure
Thou do not now delay the present cure,
Of this thy wound which doubtless mortal is;
But that thy Savior promised heavenly bliss
To all of them that with the Bridgroom come;
Yet want of oil, thou know, did shut out some
And he that did in ground his talent hide,
I am afraid did not the reckoning bide.
O deer my soul, have care make use of such;
And then no doubt 'twil help thy reckoning much
And do not thou as traitor Judas did
Despair of grace, and so his talent hid;
Nor do not thou presume of the blessed theif,
Least thou cannot show the blessed thief's belief
But do thou do as good Manasses did;
Or like to him that other king David,
Who wept with grief, and on the ground did ly
And to their Savior made such earnest cry,
That he them hard and granted to them all
For whatso're they in their hearts did call.
O follow, follow, these wise kings my heart;
And to this good God, thou thy grief impart:
Importune him with thy loud earnest cry;
And then fear not thy suite he 'l not deny;
Make thou good use of these two godly kings,
For uses good, are ever goodly things:
Examples always are before us set,
Of what is good, that they may good beget,
And what is ill, that we may ill forsake:
And so of all things we may good use make.
O thou my soul, make some stay here a while,
And walk along with these two kings a mile;
Thou Wilt find they were most grievous sinners both;
Yet both became their grievous sins to loath:
Follow their steps, and thou shall surely find,
In them a mirror of a godly mind;
For God himself did to the world impart,
The One was a man according Gods own heart;
Then follow him, yet do not follow in all;
For fear of this, lest in thy sin thou fall;
And being in it cannot rise again
And then thou art sure thou shall therein be slain.
in that thy sin, but have a care take
His better part, and it will ever make
Thee love thy Lord with a most joyful heart;
And with thy soul, and every other part:
And each of them shall with the rest comply;
Then all will join to love the Deity,
And in his service take their chief delight,
And therein spend their time both day and night
O do thou love to live as David did;
For tho his sins were such could not be hid:
Yet he did so repent him of the same,
As kept him free from all eternal blame,
And brought him back to enjoy that hapybliss
Where (without doubt) his blessed soul now is.
Then do thou strive to follow this good king;
And he will teach thee how that thou should sing
His songs are sweet, then do thou use them often,
For they will make thy soul to mount a loft.
Then sing my soul, and now lets jovial be,
Because here is now choice of good company:
And keep thee always with such company still,
Yet eschew none but them are counted ill,
Seeing such are aye the very worst of men,
For they will draw the soul to sin even then,
When better thoughts are musing in thy mind
Then do but mark and thou shall surely find
In such no good, and further thou shall see
Abundant harms come of ill company:
But yet when such cannot be well eschewed,
By their example be thou then renewed
Unto thy former thought of God again,
And by that means, let all that is ill remain,
And so there may good use be made of ill,
My soul have care that thou observe this still
And if thou intend for to retain this good,
Then go aside, that thou may chew the cud,
For meat in stomach will not well digest,
If 't be not chewed, before it come in breast:
Then think good thoughts, and be thou thinking often,
For they will make thy heart within thee soft;
Such jaculations thou my soul may use
Here on this earth, where most of men do muse
On earthly things, and all their chiefest care,
Is how to spend, and sometimes how to spare,
Yet not their time, but even their worldly wealth,
And oftentimes it tends not to their health,
Here stay my heart, and make good use of this,
And it may help to bring thy soul to bliss,
For all such meats, as do not the palate please
Go seldom down the throat with any ease,
And now me think I hear thee say thou fears
That God will not be moved with thy tears,
And that thou have not time sufficient,
Wherein thou may thy sinful life repent,
For that thy sins are grown to such a height
As they are become even numberless for weight,
And they are still increased every day,
So as from sin I wretched cannot stay,
For all my thoughts are such my sin increase,
And they from ranging cannot be made cease
For they never rest upon one stable theme,
But when I sleep, then they do wake and dream
And tho I do n't affect this augurisme,
Because it tends plainly unto augurisme:
Yet do I think I have not so esteemed
Of all strange things whereon I often dreamed,
As they deserve to have place in my mind,
For by observance I do in them find
There is good use if it be well applied
By him desires in God he may abide;
For I perceive my thoughts in sleeping such,
As do not differ from my waking much,
For then even then, when I do what I can,
They Will not be guided by this fleshly man,
Do but observe when two or three are met,
And for to make a meal of meat are set,
How many severalls they will treat upon,
Yet n're a word of Jesus passion,
Beside some wandering thoughts are then not uttered
But in each breast in private there is smotherd,
Which to set down would doubtless troublesome bin
To one in that of memory were well seen
So as I see my thoughts are without end,
Till God shall please some bounders to them send
As well in day time, as in deepest sleep,
Except it please our Savior them to keep,
Who Is only knowing whatso're is thought,
Or into mind, or day or night is brought,
And doubtless he does sometimes them direct,
That they might us from death or such protect
If we were able but to apprehend
The secrets which such dreams do comprehend
For Pharaoh's servants their dreams sure were such
As in man's judgment did not differ much
Yet did Jehovah put in Joseph's heart,
The truth to either of their dreams impart,
So as the Butler was restored again,
And the Baker he was put to hanging pain,
And Pharaoh's dreams could no southsayer expound,
Yet Joseph did, tho the mystery were profound;
And Joseph's own dreams, he being yet but young
Did God ordain his fathers life prolong:
And Pilates wife was certainly inspired,
If Pilate had his help from heaven required,
For tho expounding be not in man's power,
Without the help of our blessed Savior;
Yet doubtless he that does observe but well
May by his dreams be able somethings tell,
Whereby he can conceive the cause to be such
As in this pilgrimage his journey may help much
For tho that I in breast do often find
Dreams are much differing from my inward mind
Yet I conceive I may of them make use
And such as shall Gods service not abuse,
If I have but that heavenly happy grace,
For to retain some better in their place,
For I perceive observance may be such,
As that the use may make or mar all much,
Since whilome I have of my hunting dreamed,
Whereby I saw, I hunting more esteemed
Then fitting was, when I considered well
That such excess did draw down toward hell;
And sometimes other pleasures have so pleased
As in my dreams my heart was thereby eased;
Yet when I see what was thereof the end;
And knew it was the enemy did them send;
I then begun to check my idle thought,
And call to mind why they to me were brought
Sometimes I see that in my sleeping dreams
I Am drawn away by some strange idle theams;
And then awaked begin to call to mind,
How such vain toys I in my head should find.
When my desire is that some better thought
Should by the spirit of God to me be brought;
And for that purpose then begin to pray,
That God will please these wandering thoughts to stay;
And settle them upon his only Son,
Till he vouchsafe to let his kingdom come.
Sometimes my dreams they are of better things;
Yet not so good, as that which Angels sings:
And then for them, I give my God the praise
That he was pleased my thoughts so hiely raise
In hope thereby I might receive some good;
Because of it is retaining likelihood.
I often dream of things I cannot think,
Why they should come into my brain to sink;
And some which I did never hear before,
Nor can of them remember any more,
When they have once past through my fickle mind,
They often leave not any track behind.
So as I see by that my sins bide still;
Yea though it be even much against my will:
For sure my soul desires partake of bliss;
And to be there where my sweet Savior is:
Yet still within my claie breast I find,
Somethings averse unto my inward mind.
So I observe it is not in my power
Them to restrain, no not for one half hour;
Nor keep them there, where I wish they should be,
Which is deer God with thee deer God with thee
Except thou please good Lord to keep them so,
As they shall never here hence from thee go.
Then keep me Lord, and shield me with thy wing
That under it I may thy praises sing:
For out of thee good God, there is no rest;
Nor any safety in my fleshly breast;
For flesh and blood cannot in them contain
The thoughts are hourly hatched in my brain,
Which rovening run and reel from side to side;
And on no good thing they will be drawn abide.
Sweet Jesus please to bounder them in thee;
Or else they will not be boundered for me,
But wander often quite without my reach;
Which sometime causes in my soul a breach;
For that by force I cannot them retain,
That they in thee might evermore remain:
Call them good Lord, and do them firmly bind
That I may know with thee I shall them find.
For no occasion ever comes amiss
To draw my mind from the heavenly king of bliss.
O glorious king, vouchsafe it so command,
My thoughts b guided by thine own ^ight hand
For it alone most either make them stay
Or else good God they will not b drawn obey,
My silly soul within me drooping lies;
And without help good Lord in hell it dies.
Then help Lord help and let help come with speed
To rouse this soul that li^th with gri^f half dead
And of its health it justly might de^pair,
But that it knows my Savior is so near.
Yea nearer much then th'hart of man can ween,
But that his wonders have on earth been seen,
To save his chosen elect children all;
When in red Sea did wicked Pharaoh fall,
With all his host, and yet did Gods own hand
Bring his elected safe y to the land,
Whose way was after guided by a cloud,
And hunger staid by heavenly Angels food
In the wilderness, where they did ^eel no cold,
Nor yet their clothes did wear or waxen old;
And had a river brought out o^ the rock,
In great abundance with a little knock:
An Angel ever guiding them their way,
From all annoy, wheres'ere God le^s'd they stay
And when over all the face of earth was night,
Then did the cloud afford to them good light;
And yet even they for who is own only sake,
That great Jehovah did these wonders make,
Which they beheld with their own fleshly eyes:
And many more as great besides all these
Did they forget to bear them in their mind,
Tho in their breasts they might them easily find
Whereof they were themselves eye witnesses.
Yet when the Lord did but a while leave these,
Tho they were these the chosen and elect,
Whom he alone did to himself select,
Even them that were the seed of Israel,
Against this good God did trait'rously rebel,
And ^oully too from him did fall away,
Who was their sole preserver and their stay,
Unto a God which their own hands did make,
And this their kind and loving Lord forsake.
O stay my soul with ravishment admire,
That God sent not from heaven consuming fire
To burn them all from off the face of earth;
Whose horrid sins deserved horrid death;
Yet did this good Lord this vile deed forgive,
And on repentance suffer them to live,
And all those blessings they do still enjoy,
Whereby he freed them from all kind annoy.
O think, O think, and do thou think again,
What weakness did in these weak men remain,
Who left their God, and that so suddenly
When he left them awhile their strength to try.
May it be possible that there 's any can
Conceive such weakness in this creature man
Whom God was pleased, so far before the rest,
Of all he made this man has only blessed,
With a precious soul, in some is reasonable,
Thou of it self, it self is far unable
To guide it self by that its reasons power,
If God shall please to leave it one half hour.
Were these that seed the chosen of the Lord,
Who said his wonders also heard his word,
And all of them in compass of their sight;
Yea more apparent then the sun so bright,
Least that impression in their inward mind,
Could not be hid, but Satan made them blind;
For mortal eyes can have no power of sight,
When God's away by who^ they have their light
Since that the serpent he did make them so,
As of themselves nothing that's good they know
And what is ill they ever like and love,
But all that's good it comes from God above.
Now rest my soul and keep the ever there,
Where thou art freed from all this worldly care
And of his wonders do thou contemplate,
Who does thee thus poor soul illuminate
With these good thoughts, Odo thou them retain
And let them always with thee st^l remain
For they will banish those ^hy thoughts are ill,
Which often use restrain thee of thy will;
And bring thee this great God and Lord to love
Who sends al good things from the heaven above
And does them likewise plenteously bestow
On such as are his servants here below,
Then drooping soul do thou in me revive:
Now rouse thy self, and do begin to live,
For with Gods help thou may safely say
That cheerful hope has driven despair away.
Then put thy trust in him alone that lives,
And able is and also freely gives,
Even all good things unto all them that crave,
And do desire of him good things to have;
Then fast and pray my soul and do repent,
And give God thanks for his great blessings sent
And then of mercy the deepest sinners sure
For that his mercy does for aie endure,
From age to age to all of them believe
That he for them his dearest life did give:
Make use of this his bount'ous great mercy
Bestowed on them deserved well to die,
Besides the blessings he them freely gave,
The like whereof no other Nation have,
Nor ever had, but only them alone;
For he such blessings ever gave to none:
Besides his wonders they did daily see,
For to preserve them from indempnitie:
And yet from him ungrateful these did fall
And worshipped wors then that th'painted wall
And wilfully this gracious God forsake,
Who lovingly did them in mercy take
From danger great, which was most desperate;
But that their God himself besides them sat.
Then live by hope and do thou leave to fear,
Since God no doubt is all his servants near
That trust in him, then faithfully do so
My soul, and live, and to him freely go.
But stagger not my soul, nor do not shrink
As Peter did for fear that he should sink.
When Christ his Master walked on the Sea,
Whom his Disciples did afar off see;
And Peter prayed him that he might do so,
Then God him called, and willed him so to do.
With that did Peter leap out of the boat,
And walked along aloft the Sea^on foot,
Until the wind did cause a little wave;
And then cried Peter, good Lord do me save:
To whom did Jesus then put forth his hand,
And so brought Peter safe again to land.
Now thou my soul observe here Peter's says
With willing mind to do what is Mr. says,
Leap into Sea without delay or fear,
Because he saw his Master was so near;
And then his want of faith when as he saw,
His body like to sink with a little wawe;
And then his prayer to that blessed Lord,
Who did preserve him by his only word:
Observe my soul this passage seriously,
There Is in it great and deep divinity;
The Apostles being in a Ship aboard,
Upon the Sea they did espy their Lord;
But not discerning that it should be he,
They said it is some spirit which we do see;
But he well knowing this their cause of fear:
He cried to them, and said it is I is h re;
And then when Peter did his Master know,
He did entreat that he might to him go;
Desirous greatly to be him more nigh,
Whom at some distance he did then epsy.
And so by that it did right well appear,
His faith had then abandoned all fear;
For when his Master cried, and bid him come,
He did not then delay his time (as some
Do use to do) but suddenly he leaped down
Into the deep sea, and yet did not drown;
But on the same did stand aloft upright,
For then his Savior was within his sight;
His faith well knowing that there is none can
Sink where there is that blessed Son of man.
And now his faith here hoist him up aloft,
So as it bore him on the water soft;
As if it had bin on the Sea dry sh^a^e,
Because had faith his body then upboare;
And so presuming still that he had faith,
Which was sufficient for to keep him safe,
He went on boldly until that he saw
A puffed of wind did raise a little wawe,
And then his faith begun within him fail;
For faith in flesh is oftentimes but frail;
And being let but even a little down
Within the Sea, which now begun to frown;
His faith was then turned into white pale fear,
Although his Savior was hard by then near.
And then did Peter with himself thus think
Without some help I shall be sure to sink,
And knowing well where help did only ly
He to his Savior did address his cry;
So he never sought for help at th'wooden boat,
Although she were hard by on Sea a float.
But on his Savior solely set his eye,
And cried help Lord, help Lord, or else I dye;
And then his Lord did reach to him his hand,
And bid him boldly on the water stand;
But yet reproved him, and thus to him says.
O wretched thou can have so little faith;
Why did thou doubt, for surely thou do know
My power does reach unto the deeps below,
And out of them I Am able thee to fetch,
If It be my pleasure, O thou faithless wretch
Who have so long been in thy Master school,
And yet do show thy self to be a fool:
Can thou forget to think what Jonas did,
When in the Whales wide belly he was hid,
Or when the Sea did make it self a wall,
To save all them who on my name did call:
Or Jordan deep (was made like to a sand)
To bring mine over, as on hard dry land.
Then set thy self to go to school again;
And do thou learn where all help does remain
That thou may not be likened unto them
Who never seek for Christ but only then
When they have need, and then aloud they cry
Help Lord, help Lord, or I am sure to dye.
Stay here my soul a while and meditate,
And with thy self a little thus debate:
Can it be possible that Peter saw
His own good Master, yet did not him know;
His thoughts sure then were not with him at home
When he did not remember him on whom
His heart was always bent to think upon,
Which was on Christ, and only him alone
To serve with zeal until his dying day
Which as he did, good Lord grant that I may
But when at last he did his Master know,
His humble heart did then begin to bow,
And prayed that he might safely come to him,
To whom before he had vowed every lim,
Whom God accepted and strait bid him come.
Sweet Jesus grant that it may be my doom:
Then he neglected all that brittle hope
Of help might rise out of the wooden Boat;
Or yet by active laboring of the lim,
Tho he were skillful on the water swim;
Or any other help from earth may rise
For by such earthly helps there is many dies.
But putting all his trust upon the Lord,
Who to him now had only said the word,
Without all fear of greatest danger he,
Did boldly leap into the raging Sea,
Which stood as though it had been a rock of stone,
For God himself and only he alone
Was able, and the sea did so command.
And then did Peter light as on a Sand,
And walked along from imminent danger free
As on safe ground until that proudly he
Presuming faith in his own power too much,
For this presumption overthrows all such
As on their own strength only do rely,
If that their Savior please not to be nigh.
For when the wind begun a little blow
And force the sea to rise and make a show,
As if it meant to swallow Peter in:
Then Peter's faith begun to fail with him,
And he in lieu of faith had then some fear,
When as the Sea forbore him up to bear;
And he begun on it a little sink,
He then himself did of some help bethink
To save himself, for death was surely there,
But that his Savior did even then appear,
To whom with zeal he did himself address,
And prayed him pleas he would vouchsafe to bles
Him with some help; or else without it he
Might surely sink into the raging Sea.
Now God well knowing th'sorrow was in 's heart,
VVch did it self to his Savior Christ impart
He did with speed stretch forth to him his hand
And bid him boldly on the water stand.
O blessed Lord that thou should always be
So never to them that put their trust in thee,
Although their sins do prove be never so great,
If they from them do but in heart retreat,
And turn again and to their Savior go,
Who is only able, and says no man no.
And then had Peter strength of faith again,
So long as he in Jesus did remain,
And safely stood on the wavering sea upright,
Because he then was in his Saviors sight.
Now do thou think what joy was Peter in
When he repented of his faithless sin.
For God did hear him then most willingly
At the very first when he did on him cry,
O blessed Lord be pleased vouchsafe to be
On all occasions so never unto me,
As that this Legion thou may please to rout,
Which my weak strength O Lord cannot keep out
For he has hereto had on me such power,
As he still haunts me every day and hour:
Yea when my heart is set resolved to serve
My God and king even then I do observe
He Is bustling hard within my bony breast,
And will not let my silly soul take rest.
O thou blind soul which art not able see,
Where God is not, no good rest there can be.
The cause I fear thou have at all no faith:
Since faith is such as our sweet Savior says,
It Is able make the greatest mountain move,
Except thou can procure it from above,
Sweet Jesus help, this want of faith in me
Is so apparent unto every eye,
As each observer may discover well,
That by my actions I intend for hell;
Since my faith is not like to Peter's tho,
He saw his Master, yet did not him know;
Nor when he seemed in sea a little sink.
He well discerned it and of help did think:
Nor when he durst not on the deep sea go
Until his Master did command him so,
Or when as he his Master did forswear,
Because his heart was troubled then with fear.
Nor when his Master he did disobay
In sleeping then when his Master bid him pray;
For tho he did not know him at first sight,
He heard his voice and apprehended right;
And when in Sea he did a little sink,
He had hope raised him to the waters brink,
And when he durst not on the deep Sea go
He had faith to think that he might well do so
And tho his Master he did thrice deny,
He did it through the flesh infirmity.
And when for praying he did fall a sleep,
It was because his Savior did him keep.
O wretched beast look in thy breast thou wilt see
That thine to his is infidelity.
Confess a truth, do thou thy Savior know,
I fear thy heart within thee will say no:
Perchance thou wilt say thou could if should him see
O shameless man, then there is no faith in thee,
Since thou did see him nailed upon the cross,
For to refine thee from thy sinful dross.
May be thou wilt say that thou did not him hear;
It Is true indeed, or else thou would forbear
To pierce his side with every several sin,
Which like to darts thou freely throws at him
O wretch, O wretch, have thou a heart to think
If thou like Peter in the Sea should sink,
That thou had faith to raise thee up again,
Thy conscience tells thee thou shall there remain
And deeper far then that the deepest Sea,
Where seeming faith will stand for no good plea
Then have a face and faith for to confess,
Thy sins are such as well deserve no less;
And then there is hope, thou have some faith in
Be pleased good God vouchsafe this faith to me
Speak conscience speak durst to on deep Sea go?
I fear thy heart will tell thee truly no;
But thou will say thy Savior did not call;
Then have t'not seen him nailed on cross at all
For if thou did, thou might both hear and see
Him search his arms and loudly calling he,
Yea thee by name, If thou will but confess
Thy sins are such as well deserve no less:
Say so my heart, and thereof do repent,
And then thou wilt see that Christ for thee was sent
Now speak a truth, have thou not Christ forsworn,
Or can thou say that he for thee was born?
I fear that truth will in thee justify
Thou do thy Savior every hour deny;
For tho he call, and call, and call again;
Yet does thy heart even still in sin remain,
And tho sometimes thou do behold his blood
Thou can not say it does thee any good:
For thou at his loud cry forbears to come,
Sweet Jesus grant that word may be my doom;
Speak on thou conscience, have thou Christ obeyed
Thou Wilt say thou have him oftentimes denayd
And slept in sin when Christ was not the keeper
Peter's was great but thy sin much the greater:
His Savior then was praying hard for him
And now for thee, yet thou wilt not leave thy sin,
Tho Peter's fault were much against his mind,
Yet thou to Satan art in heart so kind,
As thou will follow him tho that Christ say no
Blessed Jesus free me from this word of Go.
And now do thine with Peter's faith compare
Thou Wilt say thy self that they much diffring are
And so much differ will thy conscience say,
As white from blak, or this word yea from nay
For if thou could do th'least what Peter did,
Then might thou say faith in thy heart was hid
But tho thou say that thou have faith in thee:
Yet I fear none nor thou thy self dost't see,
For that Christ says it is gift of God above,
And them that have it mountains can remove;
Which is well known thou art not able do.
Then cry for help of him who can do so,
For want of faith is cause of all thy sin.
Then break thy heart that faith may enter in;
For broken hearts are they will win the crown
Then break thy heart and beat presumtion down
For this presumption causes many a sin,
In hope of time for to repent them of in.
Beware of Satan such he often uses,
And with such shifts fond man he often abuses;
Then fly this fiend, and fear to come him nigh,
For he is subtle and in carriage sly;
And does delight in ranging the earth about.
Then hide thee from him lest he find thee out;
And do thou strive to mount thy self aloft,
And make thy prayers to thy Savior often,
That he will thee, and thy poor soul safe keep,
Both when th'rt waking, and when thou do sleep.
For except he please vouchsafe to set the scout,
Thou art not able keep the enemy out:
Then please good God to me some angel send,
Whom thou think good to my safeguard commend,
He that did father Abraham's servant guide,
When he went forth a wife for to provide
For's master Isaac, or did Lot preserve
From Sodoms plague, which it did so deserve,
Or he that opened Peter the iron gate,
When surely death was doomed to be his fate,
Or one of them our Savior said did keep,
These little ones as his beloved sheep,
Or whom thou please to my safeguard command
For to preserve me out of Satan's hand,
Sweet Jesus keep me, keep me Lord this day
From all tentation I thee humbly pray,
For Satan's rage increases every where,
Because the general Judgment draws near,
Or else that honest angel Raphael,
Whose company holp that young Tobias well,
But doubtless Tobies heart was firmly bent
For to obey that strict commandment
His father gave him long before his death,
Which was that he while there was in him breath
Should always set the Lord before his eyes.
And that his will should ever sin despise.
And he shall aye observe the Lords commands,
And duly labor with his fleshly hands,
And true and just in all his doings prove,
For such are they whom God does only love
Then to their actions he will surely send
A prosperous and a good successful end;
And have a care thou freely alms do give,
For so must they that do intend to live,
Enjoy where is their blessed Savior:
For none come there that do not pity th'poor
Seeing alms is esteemed a goodly gift
Before the most high to them that use to give 't.
From filthy whoredom do thou safely keep,
For all such sins will cause thy soul to weep.
Let no man's wages with thee longer stay,
But have a care each labourer duly pay:
Besure thou always to an other do,
So as thy self desires be done unto;
Beware thou do not drink till thou be drunk
For many such great sins to hell are sunk.
And be not slow to give the hungry bread,
Nor cloths to them that do of cloths stand ned
Take counsel always of them that are wise
In giving counsel be not too precise,
And of thy mother look to have a care,
For surely she for thee has had her share;
And be thou sure thou do not take a wife,
Among these where I am forced lead my life;
And look thou duly do observe my will
As thou wilt account on blessed Sion's hill;
Where no excuse for plea will be accepted,
Nor no man's person for his wealth respected,
But only such as seek and serve the Lord,
And in their lives have care to keep his word:
And fear not tho God suffer thee made poor,
So long as Christ thy Savior's at the door.
If thou do fear him and do fly from sin,
Then do not doubt he will keep thy soul with him
Then young Tobias to his father said,
That this his will in all should be obeyed;
Then the old man said that he had talents ten
In Gabarels hand, who dwelt at Ragues then,
And willed him search if he could find a man,
Might guide him the way to Ragues if he can;
Then Raphael he with young Tobias met,
And told him he was able there him set;
For he did know that land Media well,
And the way to Ragues he could also tell;
Then he that Raphel to his father brought,
And said that he had found who^ he had sought
Then the old man did desire his name
And kindred both which was the very same
Even with his own, and then they both agreed
For a guide a day, and also to have bread
And meat beside, and such provision
As should be made for Tobie his own son.
And if you make to me a safe return,
I Will add some more for your good service done
And now provision being ready made
For that great journey the old man to him said
On Gods name go, and I shall daily pray
That God will send some Angel guide your way:
But then the mother she begun to weep
For her great grief she could no longer keep,
And wished the silver might be rather lost
Then they should be at any further cost;
But chiefly sorrowed for her only son,
For want of whom they utterly were undone;
But the old man willd his wife to be content:
For he well hoped they had no cause repent.
And then the mother left her sorrowing,
And with the father fell to hearty praying.
The travelers now being well set on their way,
Never Tygres flood they meant one night to stay
Where in young Toby went himself to wash,
And out the river leaped up a Fish;
And Raphael willed him to put in's hand,
And take the fish and bring it safe to land;
And take out of it Liver, Heart and Gall,
And keep them safe for that these three were all
Good for some use, and then they broild the fish
Which proved to them a curious dainty dish;
Then on they went the way toward Ecbatane
Where they intended one night to remain;
And traveling Toby to his servant said,
Why is it we have this provision made?
To keep these intrails I have with me here,
I wish to know for what good use they were.
Then Raphael said, pray Sir observe with care
How God did these for your great good prepare
The Heart and Liver are by nature such,
As if an ill sp'rite do but trouble much,
Broile these upon a little pretty fire
And they will quench with speed the spirits ire,
And do but rub the Gall upon the eyes
Of them are troubled with the whitish skies
Will cure the same and make them very bright;
And so by that means gain again the sight.
And the servant he unto his Master said,
Our journey now is almost well nigh made;
And we shall this night lodge with Raguel
Who's of thy blood and kindred, I can tell
And has no children, but one daughter who
Is virtuous, fair, and wise, and loving too;
And there is none for ought that I do know
Can marry her but even only thou:
For I am sure by the law of Moses she
Of right belongs solely unto thee.
And when we are there, i will move her father t'it,
And do not doubt but he will be willing t'it.
And then unto him Toby did reply,
I doubt dear Raphuel I shall surely dye
If I shall but unto her chamber go,
For of a truth I hard reported so,
That she seven husbands has already had
And all of them dyed in the brideall-bed:
And my own parents have no children more
But only me, and if so be therefore
It be my fortune in this country dye,
Or in this journey for to miscarry.
I fear my parents shall such sorrow have
As will with grief bring them unto their grave
Then Raphuel he to his Master thus replied,
It Is true indeed there have so many died;
But do not fear for thou have means to fray
That wicked sp'rit, and force him fly away:
And thou do know that it is thy fathers mind
Thou should bestow thy self in thy own kind;
Then Iet no cause of fear possess thy heart,
But cheerfully perform the Bridgrooms part,
For this night will the match consumate be;
And this night will the Bride be given to thee;
And when thou come into the bridal room,
Take imbers hot, and thereon make perfume
Of this the Heart and Liver of the fish,
And fear not all shall be as thou would wish.
But look before you do your selves address
To go to bed, pray God he may you bless,
And all your acts, and look you thankful be
For his great goodness he has given to thee;
And do not fear for th'll sp'rit has no power
To trouble you or yours for one half hour;
And I suppose your wife shall then conceive,
And many children may she happily have
By whom you shall be greatly comforted,
When your own parents may perchance be dead
Then Toby did begin to feel in part,
How he did love the maiden in his heart.
And when they came unto that Raguels place,
Did comely Sarah meet them in the face;
And when with joy they had saluted her,
She prayed them please go in to her father:
And then did Raguel say unto his wife,
This is our kinsman I dare lay my life;
And quest'on'd them from whence, and what they be
They answered him captives at Ninive,
And of the tribe is called Nephtalim;
Then Raguel said and did reply to him,
Thou art my kinsman, pray thee when did see
That old man Toby in what health is he?
My father is (thank God) in health fulright,
But that said he, he has only lost his sight.
Then Raguel fell to kissing him and wept,
And he and his for present joy all leapt;
And then in haste did cause to kill a Ram,
And much meat more there was to th'table came
Then Toby's heart was set on fire to love
That comely Sara by the God above,
And spoke to Raphuel he would make it known
For he well hoped that now she was his own.
Then Raphuel he unto her father said;
I beseech you sir be pleased bestow this maid
Upon your kinsman that young Toby there
And greatly does desire to marry her.
Then Raguel said indeed it was so meet,
And willed them they should merry be and eat.
And then did he begin to them relate,
Of her seven husbands all the former fate,
Wherewith was Toby naught at all dismayed,
But prayed him please he would call in the maid
For he had vowed he would not eat nor drink
Until the contract were made sure with ink.
Then Raguel called his daughter Sara in,
And freely gave the damsel unto him,
To whom indeed she did belong of right
And prayed to God that they might live in's sight
And for more blessings prayed he with his heart,
And diverse secrets did to them impart.
Then Raguel called upon his wife Edna,
And to her thus he then begun to say,
Wife I have give our daughter Sara there
To this our kinsman that young Toby here,
And do expect that you will be content;
And eke our daughter Sara's free consent,
To which they both of them most willing were:
So was the match with speed consumate there,
And took a book, and then the contract writ,
As by their custom it was ever fit;
And then he willed his wife for to provide
A fitting chamber for the Groom and Bride,
Wherein there was a fire and all things meet,
Which were beseeming for the marriage night,
And then the mother did lead in the Bride,
And stayed a while by her daughter Sara's side,
Who then begun with sorrow shed some tears,
Her heart being full remembering former fears:
But now the mother willed her be content,
For that this man without all doubt was sent
From God above, who promised to defend
Both him and his from that same wicked fiend
Who was accustomed and had haunted there;
And therefore willed her sorrow to forbear.
And suddenly the Goom she then espies,
And wiped the tears from off her cheeks and eyes
And when they had co^ducted in th'bridgroom
Into that stately sumptuous bridal room,
Where Sara th'bride and eke her mother were
He willed them both they would be of good cheer,
For the spirit Asmodeus had no power
To trouble them or theirs for any more;
Since that the God of heaven and earth had said,
That he should be espoused to that maid;
And also promised he would them defend
From all tentation unto their lives end.
Wherewith was Raguel in his heart so pleased
As that all grief was thereby suddenly eased;
And when the old folks had their children blessed,
They took their leaves and then themselves addressed,
To pray to God and when their pra'rs were done
They dig'd a grave for their new married son,
Who now had made a little fire of coals,
Thereon the Heart and Liver both he broiles
From which proceeded such a mighty smell,
As drove the spirit down to th'deepest hell;
Where he is bound, and never hereafter shall
Return again to do them any ill.
And then they both on knees by their bed side,
Kneel on the ground, and thus to God they praid
O blessed Lord who has made heaven and earth,
And all therein, even by thine only breath;
And to our father Adam gave his life,
And also Eve for helper and a wife:
And thou O Lord in whom we only trust
Know we meet not for any fleshly lust,
But even in thee O Lord to live and stay;
And thy commands for ever to obey,
To this good God be pleased to say amen,
And to their bed they did betake them then.
Now when the night was well nigh past and done
Then Raguel sent a maid to see his son,
And bring him word if they were yet in life;
And then did he impart unto his wife
That if he now like to the other died,
He would him privily in that grave so hide,
That none might notice take of such a thing,
Least ill report abroad might thereof ring;
And when the maid returned who went to see,
She told her Master both a sl^ep they be:
Then Raguel caused with speed to fill the grave,
And praised that good God, that to him gave
Even such a son as did the Devil o'rcome,
And shut him out of that the marriage room;
And when the day begun to dawn they then
Do all rejoice and call unto their men,
And made provision for a sumptuous feast
Whereto was slaughtered many a goodly beast,
And thereof dainties was not any scant;
Nor change of wines at that feast was no want;
Yet none of them were there compelled to drink
More then for health was fiting they good think
And this feast lasted full for fourteen days,
Wherein they are jovial and sing worthy praise
To God our Savior and our only king;
And among their mirth his praises always sing
Now stay a while and leave these feasters here,
To praise their God, and yet to eat good cheer.
And let me view the face of this our time,
How it is altered from it was in prime;
And therein doubtless nothing is it bettered;
As if that man in it were nothing lettered:
But tho our language give to time the blame;
Time does not alter, but is still the same
It was at first, and such are creatures all
And stations keep whereto God did them call;
And therein they each in their several kind,
Observe his law according to his mind;
And all of them do in a sort rejoice,
And praise their God both with the heart and voice,
Save only man this wretched sinful man,
Who leaves all good and does all the will he can:
And yet for him and only for his sake,
Did the creator all these creatures make;
And great Jehovah further more then this,
Gave unto man a power to live in bliss,
Till wretched he more worse then all the rest
Did disobey his God who had him blessed;
And hid himself, and did his God forsake,
And against him with his enemy did partake;
And for an Apple sold his happy state.
O wretch that bought thy bain at such a rate;
Yet this good God whose goodness does abound
Was loath to leave this man wthout a ground,
Whereby he might repair his state again,
If he will but in's service yet remain,
And call on him who is his Savior,
And does desire his coming every hour:
But the creature man does still partake of the curse
And as we say oft-time, grow worse and worse
For men at first as I in scripture read,
When friends did meet were well content with bread,
With bread alone they are joviall and do sing
The worthy praises of their heavenly king;
And then their drink was suiting to their meat
They had no change but all one kind did eat:
And yet their mirth above the skies did mount;
Although their drink were water from the fount.
And afterward I read, when friends did meet
With th'fatted Calf or Kid they kindly greet
One friend another and are well content
To sing his praise who these great blessings sent
In after times I see they eat good cheer,
And many days of feasting as is there,
At Cana's marriage where no doubt was love,
And thereof doubtless did their God approve,
As by his blessings on them does appear,
They served God although they eat good cheer;
But present times are truly said none such,
For that from these they differ more then much
For now tho sometime we do make a feast,
Whereto we happily kill a little beast;
Perchance a fowl or some such other thing,
Yet we forget his worthy praises sing.
Seeing our discourse is most part idle chat,
Without so much as mention once of that
Whereon we always ought to think upon,
Which is on Christ his bitter passion;
And such feasts now are seldom with us used,
But other feasts where God is much abused:
Yet neither meat nor bread is there required,
But only drink and drink alone desired;
But it is not water, as in elder time,
But salt in some, and in some other lime,
To add a relish to the taste of malt,
Whereby they not discerning it be salt:
The stomach still desires more and more;
For thirst not so content with reason store
Will not be quenched til from words to blows
And meeting friends they often part like foes.
Good God that our feasts should thus differ far
Begin in freindship, yet to end in war:
And now we alter in our time of feasting,
And are some say to turn it into fasting;
And good cause why if so we weigh it well,
When hardly any who is his friend can tell
But in the south part of this wretched I Will.
We used to feast in Christmas time ere while;
And then again in Lent we used to fast,
In some sort till full forty days were past
Our ancients they about Lent differed much;
But it was not time, but it was the meat made such
And all of them of forty days agreed;
For fasting next before Pasche so decreed:
But some do hold no such decree is fit,
But better feast, then fast we think on it,
If this were all the matter were not much,
But now the difference is become be such,
As we shall hardly know when Christ was born
Or when he died, the times are now so torn,
Sweet Jesus please to be at Englands fasting,
As thou wast pleased to be at Cana's feasting
For there no doubt was feasting well approved
Of him who ought of all be best beloved.
And now let us back to the feast at Eebatane,
And see what is come of them did there remain,
For Raguel swore by that great God above,
Till the feast was done his children should not move;
And then they should have half of what he had
And then return to Niniveh without dread.
Then Tobie he his servant did entreat,
To go to Rages, and there he should meet
With Gabael and with him also bring
Both him and the silver to that great wedding,
Which so he did, and when the time was run,
Old Tobie did expect his sons return,
And sorrowed sore, for that he greatly feared,
Some strange disaster had to's son appeared,
Because his stay did prove to be so long
Beyond the time expected he should come,
And Anna wept and sorrow'd very sore,
Much sorer far, then ever she did before,
And every day she went and stood on high,
To see if she her son afar could spy,
And all that time she did forbear her meat,
And well nigh nothing, that while did she eat,
Her wonted sleep her eyes did quite forbear,
And she almost had lost her sight for fear,
And now did Tobie 'gin to think upon
his journey when the feast was almost done,
And prayed his father he would let him go,
For fear his parents might be dead for woe,
Then Raguel parted all his goodly store,
And gave him half of what he had and more,
His goods his servant, and his ready coin
The One half he had, and it was all his own,
Then Raguel he unto young Tobie said,
My God who heaven and earth and all things made,
Bless thee and thine, and do to them and thee,
As he has done both unto mine and me,
And to his daughter then he also said,
God make thee wife, as thou have been a maid,
Obedient ever to thy parents all,
And then fear not, but good shall thee befall,
If thou do prove to be a loyal wife,
God will defend thee during all thy life,
And then did Raguel and his wife Edna
Take leave of them and set them on their way,
And so they went with singing forth his praise
Who did so highly their great fortunes raise
Until they came near unto Ninivie,
And then did Raphael speak to young Tobie,
That they two might alone march on before,
And leave the rest to come along with the store,
And went so far till Anna them espied,
And then she ran and to her husband cried,
Our son is coming, him I do well see,
And eke the man that went along with he.
And then she back again to meet her son,
And prayed to God that his will might be done
And thanked him heart'ly she saw him indeed,
Whom she thought surely, that he had bin dead
Old Tobie also he did offer out,
But that his son did turn him round about,
And prayed him please to do as he had done,
Bestow his blessing on his only son,
My son said he, pray God he may thee bless,
And bid him welcome with a hearty kiss,
Then Tobie put gall on his fathers eyes,
Which pricked sore, and then old Tobie cries,
But then young Tobie to his father said,
Take comfort Sir, and be no whit afraid,
I hope your sight shall straight return again,
With that he cured his scaly eyes amain,
And then he saw his loving son and said,
All glory be to that great God that made
The highest heavens, and all that in them is,
Him let us laud, and his name ever bliss,
Then son to father did at large relate
What they had done, and also their estate:
Then Tobie out his daughter Sara meet,
And did her see and also kindly greet;
So now there was great joy in Niniuee,
The young man safe, and the old man also see,
And there they made another goodly feast,
Which did ^ndure for full seven days at least,
Whereat was both great comp'ny and great cheer
So as it did thereby right well appear
That Sara was a very welcome guest,
And so accounted and esteemed with the best
So many came on purpose visit her,
Which was great joy unto her old father;
And when the feast came to be well nigh done,
The old man said unto the young, his son,
What wages now must we for him provide,
Has been your servant, and so good a guide,
And then the son unto the father said,
We by his means so happy a journey made,
As I think half of what we have in store
Is little enough, if it were so much more,
With all my heart, the old man then replied,
For he has proved to us a blessed guide.
I am content he shall have half we have,
And more then half, if he do more but crave,
Then call him in, and know what is his mind,
Since he has proved to us so firm a friend,
Then Tobie called, and Raphael he obeyed,
And then unto him, thus the old man said,
We know not how we shall your pains repay,
But half we have do take with you away,
It is your own, for we do freely give it,
And more then half if you but please to have it
Then he replied give unto God the praise,
For he alone it was that did you raise,
And he alone it was did this great thing,
Then be you thankful and his praises sing,
For I am but that Raphael one of the s^ven
His holy Angels wait on him in heaven,
And did present to him your liberal alms,
And praises which you sung to him in Psalms,
So I am only but the instrument,
It Is he alone, who has me to you sent,
That I might show to you his wonders great;
For I as yet did never take any meat,
Although I seemed indeed to you to eat:
And therefore now give unto God the praise,
And do you laud his holy name always,
And fast and pray, from praying do not lin,
That he may keep you from all grievous sin,
And let your alms be suiting to your store,
Of less give less, and then of more give more,
And have a care you to him thankful be
For these great blessings he bestowed on ye,
And praise sing praise to him for evermore,
Who is sole giver of your plenteous store,
Him serve, him praise, him do you ever fear,
And then will he unto your prayers give ear;
And nothing will this good God now deny,
Then praise, sing praise to him that fits on high
And look that you do all these wonders write,
And so did he depart out of their sight,
Then they down on their bended knees did fall
And on the name of the only God did call
That he would please continue's blessing still,
If so it might stand with his blessed will,
And al their lives his praises they do sing,
Whose wondrous works o'r all the earth do ring
And thankful are for blessings he does send,
And so continue unto their lives end.
Observe my soul, what was old Tobies care,
To teach his son the way how to prepare
Unto the place which he in heart desired,
The place was heaven, and heaven alone required:
And for direction left his son his Will
To guide him the way unto Mount Sions hill;
For it appears by that his will it self,
He cared not much for any worldly pelf,
So he got heaven he sought not any more,
For he held that even alsufficient store,
But few such now, when most of men seek wealth
And more respect it then they do their health,
Since want does make most poor men be dejected
And worldly wealth most rich to be respected.
But thou my soul tho God have made thee pore
Fear not to want seeing Christ is at thy door,
And will come in, if thou will but provide
An upright heart that he, that may there abide
For he nor likes nor loves for to be there
Where the heart lives not within its Savior's fear
But if he find a heart which proves such,
Then that heart he respects very much,
And loves it dearly and will it surely keep
As one of those his well beloved sheep.
Here stay my soul, for here is perfect love,
Which comes solely from Jehova 'bove
Then gain this love, whats'ere it may thee cost,
For this love does of all concern thee most,
Make use of this, and here my soul observe,
What love it is which does a man preserve,
Not love of wealth as some men use to say,
Nor yet of health, as most do use to pray,
No nor of peace which all the earth desire,
When war has set this wicked world on fire,
But peace of conscience that is aye the best,
And that my soul hold thou worth all the rest,
And doubtless that shall thou thy self obtain,
And in that peace shall all thy life remain,
Until thou change this life on earth, and then
No doubt but this thy soul shall obtain heaven.
There stay my soul, and there set up thy rest,
For heaven of all homes is the only best,
And if thou can though dearly purchase that,
No King on earth is seized of such a state;
Then lay out all thou have for that rich field,
Where hidden treasure lies unreveal'd,
It matters nothing though thou have no more,
Thou shall be rich, although thou be made poor
Stay there my soul, and do not here hence range,
But think of heaven, and of this earthly change
Whose soul though bounder'd here on earth with clay,
Know then no bounders that this soul can stay
O what a weakness does abide in me
Cannot conceive, what this thing soul should be!
Which ought all other parts in me control,
Yet cannot my wit circumscribe this soul:
Which I well know I have in the somewhere
Within my corpse, yet do not I know where:
Though each sense have its several seat beget,
Yet do not I know which is my souls seat,
Whereby I see that I my self am such,
And weaker far then most of men by much,
Since I with all that little wit I have,
Where my soul is I can it not conceive,
For I can neither see, nor yet it feel,
Nor taste nor hear, nor yet it seent or smell,
Still am assured, and do right well it see,
That I have now a living soul in me,
And I do further perfectly it feel,
And chiefest care is for its only weal,
I do it likewise in me also taste,
And loath I am it should within me waste,
I well observe, my living soul I hear
Pray unto God that it may live in's fear,
And many a time in soul I use to smell
A seent of sin when as it is not well,
O what a strange and hard Enigma's this,
Which none does know, but only the God of bliss
For he alone did it unto me give.
And by him only it in me does live,
For he had power to have made me a stone,
And then a soul had I had in me none,
Or if he would pleased he might made me a tree,
Nor then had been a living soul in me,
But he infused into this clayie slime
A living Soul within his pleasing time
I hope with joy shall to him go again,
And with him ever shall in joy remain,
And then I hope my weary soul shall rest
In him alone, by whom it is only blessed,
O blessed Lord, which di^ to me it give,
Grant it may ever in thy service live
One of that glorious heavenly Angels quire,
And then shall I have what I do desire;
For there my soul in soul desires to be
Where it shall live in joy eternally,
Within the presence of that heavenly King,
And to him always alleluja sing,
Then sing my soul, and give to God the praise
Who has defended thee and thine always,
And if thou^'lt but apply thy senses there,
Unto them then thy Savior will appear,
And show to thee his bitter wounds and blood
Which he endured for thine eternal good,
Whereof he left to thee a monument,
Thou may behold that blessed Sacrament,
For fear that thou thy Savior should forget,
He in thy fight before thy face has set
A perfect sign to the eyes is visible
Of inward grace which is invisible,
Where senses all are fully satisfied,
If that his passion he by faith applied.
O blessed feast! where all are called to eat,
That heavenly sacred and that spiritual meat,
Which only's good, but yet to them alone
Who come prepared with wedding garment on
Then grant good God, that I may ever have,
This glorious garment when I do receive
This food of life, which thou art pleased to give
To all of them that in the Lord do live,
Which in them breeds a fervent spiritual love
To thee their Savior, and their God above,
Sweet Jesus please to feed me with that food,
That I done'r forget thee nor thy blood,
Nor those the bloody wounds thou did endure
My silly soul death-sick of sin to cure,
Grant gracious God that I do n're forget
Thy bitter passion, but before me set
The cruel torment thou endur'dst for me,
Of all mankind a wretch most unworthy,
Sweet Jesus please to send I humbly pray
Thy holy spirit, may guide me on my way
Which narrow is, and few there be it find,
For all men are by nature born be blind.
And follow the broad and that plain street wherein
All such do tread as traffic in their sin,
Dear God lead me out of that pleasing way,
Let me good Lord, no longer in it stay;
And then shall I with good King David sing
The praises due to the glorious heavenly King,
Who has so blessed me and them are mine,
As I well hope good God we are al thine,
Grant gracious God, that we may thankful prove
For these thy blessings, and that bounteous love,
And e're acknowledge them to come from thee
Who has so freely given them unto me.
Grant me that grace good God, I humbly pray,
That I do never from thee go astray,
But always love and honor thee aright,
Being not unmindfull I am in thy sight:
That of thy creatures I may make good use,
And their right end I no way do abuse
As some men do, who put their whole delight
In heaping up of gold which is not right:
And some there be delight so much in wealth,
The care of it does take away their health;
And some again do love their wealth to spend
Far faster then God pleases it to send:
And some are such so careful are to keep,
That fear of losing often breaks their sleep;
And some delight in living miserly
To be esteemed rich when they do die;
And some there are do to their children give,
The state whereon themselves have need to live;
And there be some have wealth and proudly live,
Yet will their hearts naught to their children give,
Some spend their time and all their means at drink,
And best bestowed as they themselves do think.
Some love their horses as they do their lives,
And some their friends before their loial wives
There Is some do love their hawks beyond their bounds
And some again that do delight in hounds
Good God that man these creatures should abuse
Which thou created only for man's use;
The several sorts of which do well declare.
What several uses of each of them are.
The Messet dandled in he ladies lap,
Which she does use with silken mantle hap;
The shepherds Cur which he is careful keep
To hound together his straggling fearful sheep.
The Irish Shock is tons'd and taught to wait
At's Masters elbow looking for a b^it;
Tlil country Cur does let his Master know
If thieves in night about his house do go;
The Mungrel he does take the harmfull swine,
And lull him soundly (so he be not mine)
The nimble Tumbler with his sudden turn
Will take the Rabber sitting at her urne;
The pretty Snack (with speed) will quickly teach
The harmless Hair to keep out of her reach;
The stately Greyhound that does seem to scorn
To run at ought which does not carry horn;
The Mastie he will take the ugly Bear,
On the fierce Bull if he be hounded there;
The pretty Spaniel, that does questretreat,
Does serve the Hawk with help to fill her feet
The Water Spaniel that does fine sport make*
In pond if there be either Duck or Drake:
The little Tarrier that does love to lie
As near the Fox as he dare well come by*
The pretty Beagle that does chanting run
The wiely Wat until her death she come.
The fleet-hound he does follow the game so fast,
The chase some time does but a little last.
The well-mouth'd hound does use his master tell
Where th'game does go by sound of his deep bell.
O blessed God, that thou should make all these,
Man's several fancies with delight to please;
And satisfy his wearied senses so,
As yields him joy sometimes in stead of woe;
And his dull spirits so to recreate
With gladness, such as might well animate
A thankless creature thankful for to prove
Unto this God, this God of peace and love,
Who greatly does desire most lovingly
This creature man should serve him cheerfully:
For God does like and love a cheerful heart,
And plenteously he does perform his part
To draw this man, this most ungrateful man,
Who of himself no good at all he can,
To serve his God with so much more delight,
If these his blessings he do use aright,
And in his pleasures always meditate
And with himself thus with himself debate.
How are my labors with my pleasure eased,
How have my senses all of them been pleased?
How senseless I of my laborious pain
Endured with ease my pleasures to obtain?
Although my wearied limbs right well do know
My pains were more then I of them make show;
And if my pleasure had not so well proved,
I think my pains should not so well been loved:
For I do find my pleasure to be such,
As feeling it, I feel my sorrows much;
And though my pleasure does in height abound,
What profit to me does thereby redound?
For now my pleasure it is past and gone,
And sense of it there now remains none.
To what end then have I took all this pain?
For some end sure, though it be not for gain.
If God saw all things he had made were good,
Then the use thereof it seems by likelihood,
Is that which brings either joy or woe;
For the end is it which always makes it so.
And have I then right end thereof observed,
And its right use have I therein preserved?
Has my delight been always moderate,
And has my tongue been also temperate?
Have I done this for to preserve my health,
And have I therein injured no man's wealth?
Have I in me a heart that is upright,
Being ever mindful I am in Gods sight?
Have I for these his blessings thankful bin,
In the use of them did I commit no sin?
Can I forget whenas the wind does blow,
It Is wind that does support me here below?
Did I lift up my heart to God on hie,
Whenas the heavens above I did descrie?
Have I observed the fairest flowers to fade,
And yet forget why I my self was made?
Did I see weeds and store of thistles grow,
And not remember th'cause why they did so?
Have I this day cast up this days account,
To what a sum my several sins will mount?
When have I took such pains my God to serve,
As now I have my health for to preserve?
And if thou do it really intend
That thou will solely in his service spend,
Then may thou say with safety that thou have
This time so spent, not to be spent in waste:
And give him thanks that he has so thee blessed,
As thou may now go home and take thy rest.
For man ought not to idleness be given,
Without all doubt in idleness is sin;
Since all must labor that do look to live,
Or else God will to them no blessing give:
For to the curses God himself does add,
Ith'sweat of brows that man should eat his bread.
And though that all men labor not with the hand,
Yet all do labor with th'unstable mind:
For its condition is not to be idle,
And therefore care for it to keep a bridle;
Lest th'mind do run out of that narrow way
Wherein thou do desire thy thought should stay;
For man does love to keep the plainest street,
Which broad and beaten is with many feet
And then make use of this thy harmless pleasure,
Since God has blessed thee with so much leisure,
And given thee time a perfect reckoning make
Before death come thy life away to take.
This blessed time, if thou will so but use it;
And cursed also, if thou do abuse it.
For its the use makes difference of the day,
And different uses do the most men sway
Without respect what may he the right end
For which God did to thee these pleasures send:
But thou my soul have care not to forget
The end for which thou here on earth wast set;
And always keep it constantly in mind,
And then fear not but thou shall ever find
Good use of all things this good God has sent;
Then use thy pleasure without discontent.
And be not thou unmindfull ruminate
Of that which does in time determinate
Both them and thee; and that ere long thou must
From whence thou came, return to be but dust.
And think my soul, and think of this again,
The end for which thou do on earth remain
Within this fleshly crazie corpse of thine,
Which of it self even daily does decline
Unto the earth from whence at first it came,
For the end of all flesh ever is the same.
Observe this end, and hereof be thou sure,
That on this earth thou can not long endure:
And then must thou a perfect reckoning make
Of this thy pleasure which thou here did take.
O make that reckoning here upon this earth,
Lest death do come and take away thy breath;
And then thy corpse unto its like must go,
But thou my soul be sure must not do so;
For thou shall then receive thy final doom,
Which grant good God it may to me be Come!
O stay my soul, and do thou think of this,
For in it is thine everlasting bliss
O think of this, and do thou think on it right,
And think on it still, think on it both day and night:
For now thy pleasure is come unto an end,
And thou my soul must now thy doom attend.
Then now, O now, do thou this reckoning make,
And to thy Savior thee thy self betake;
Who willingly was plea'd for thee to die,
That thou for him might live eternally.
O live in him, and do him ever l^ve,
Thy Savior sweet, who is in heaven above:
Let all thy thoughts (...) him alone attend,
Thy labors then in him will only end.
O happy end of all this earthly pain,
Whereby thy heavenly Savior thou do gain!
He will make all their labors be but light,
Who always love to be within his sight.
Live there my soul, and so thou may be sure
Thy life shall then for evermore endure,
In height of joy, and all true happiness,
The very essence of all blessedness.
Stay here my soul, and do thou now admire
The joys of that most glorious heavenly quire,
Where Angels always singing spiritual hymns,
Th'Archangels and the blessed Seraphims
Continually do praise his holy name,
Who was, is now, and aye shall be the same.
There mount my soul, and do thou ever stay
Amongst them in heaven, whose joys do never decay,
Nor yet admit of that the least decrease,
But ever live in sight of th'God of peace:
Then pray to him that he will please to send
His peace to thee for world without all end:
And do thou always give him praise therefore,
From this time forth, and so for evermore.
But stay my soul, remember before thou can
Ascend, thou must shake off this thing called man;
This case of thine, wherein thy soul does breath,
And leav't behind unto this earth beneath,
Where it shall reap such se^d as it has sown,
The End of all flesh, which is corruption;
Whereby it fears this thing is called pale death,
Because it only takes away this breath.
For man's of nothing on earth sensible,
But that which is on earth corruptible:
And so it comes that he does nothing fear,
But that which heart should wish and soul desire;
For death is such, and only terrible
To him whose conscience lives insensible.
The laboring man likes well to go to rest,
The weary traveller hastes to the June is best,
The mariner strives to get within the port,
Yet if there prove in it to be a fort,
And he no friend, then he has cause to fear,
And with great terror he will enter there*
The toiled traveller likewise fears his host,
Where theevish ruffians haunt and rule the roast:
The weary labourer does not l^ke that bed
Wherein he knows an ugly toad has bred:
The heathen they did much desire their death,
Because they knew not The Author of their breath;
For it they held to be their chiefest good,
Because that God they had not understood:
For they did dream that when this life was done,
That the end of all things was already come.
But thou my soul, I Am sure thou know more,
Thou know thou have a loving Savior,
Who conquered death, and of himself 't orecame,
That thou through him might likewise do the same.
Ask but thy conscience, it will freely tell thee
When death comes what it is that shall befall thee:
For though thy conscience now securely sleep,
Against th'day of death it will thee waking keep.
Then be not thou like to the Libertine,
Who guls himself with saying, All is mine;
Come eat and drink, and now let us merry be,
When morrow comes then we shall surely die.
But yet when death does to him come indeed,
Then this man's fear a deep despair does breed;
And he to death, as that King Ahab did
Unto Elias, thinking he was hid,
Have found me out! O fearful! than, O than
Comes death most dreadful to the dying man.
But thou my soul, thou know t^'assured way
To make this death thy only happiest day,
If that thy porters be not lul^'d asleep
Whilst they these outer gates of thine should keep
And suffer thieves at them to enter in,
Who Will steal thy good, and leave behind thy sin.
Then watch and pray, and do thou waking keep,
And fast and pray, and so prevent thou sleep:
And then let death come whenas God shall please,
Can do no hurt, but do to thee great ease;
For then shall thou from earthly labors rest,
And live with whom thou shall be ever blessed.
Live there my soul, and then thou needst not care,
Come life, come death, to thee both equal are.
The fool would fain he might do that at last,
Which the wiseman thinks fit be done at first:
For that thinks time is ever in his will,
But this does know that time is going still;
Seeing if man sleep, this time it does not rest,
But still keeps pace, and flies on full fast.
For though that all men are ordained to die,
Yet none know when, or where it is they must lie:
Man stands in need prepare for death, and will not;
But death will com to this man when he would not:
And such may well be likened to a beast,
Who Is feeding fat like this man at a feast,
Till th'slaughter-axe give him his fatal blow,
And then his stubborn heart begins to bow,
Yet struggles hard this death-stroke to resist,
But now too late he mourns out had I wist.
For all of life we very careful are,
But for this death we not at all prepare:
So many come this death-stroke to abide,
Before they do themselves for death provide;
And then are they to go to learn to die,
When death appears palpably in the eye.
Then willingly do thou perform that part,
Which needs thou must though it be against thy heart.
And thou my soul do thou in thy youth-dayes,
Remember death, for so the Wiseman says
Before that those thy ill days come along,
For then thou wilt sing another sorrowful song:
When age and sickness both of them appear,
Thou have no power good council then to hear,
But heart and mind are both so hurried hence
With age and sickness, they are void of sense.
Is this a time then to prepare for death,
When it is a burden heavy to have breath?
When Doctor physic for thee does prescribe,
And Lawyer he is going with his bribe,
And Parish-Parson for thy soul does pray,
And friends and neighbors round about thee stay,
And wife and children sadly weeping are,
Content of death to take from thee a share,
If so they might, to ease thee of thy pain,
Which all the earth unable is to gain,
But thou art left unto thy self alone
To make an answer for thy sins each one.
When powerful death has entered on thy eyes,
And into all parts of the body pryes,
And stays the organ of the nimble tongue,
Lest it might utter ought may tend to wrong;
And by chill cold does fall upon the feet,
And takes from them their blood and natural heat;
And so ascends to every other part,
And then at last it seizes on the heart,
Who now with sobs and sighs somes out its breath
Which by and by is staid by powerful death.
And at his entrance on this flesh and bone,
Gives Conscience leave to lord it all alone;
Who nere till now had audience of a word,
By help of death is made a puissant Lord;
And then that heart was stony-hard before,
Is now made soft, lamenting more and more;
But nere till death had struck him with his dart,
Gave any way for Conscience play his part,
Who has recorded all what heart has done,
And lays them open that it may see the sum,
And cast it up before the day of doom,
Which grant good God it may to me be Come;
Being hard at hand, as plainly does appear,
When heart and hands and feet are all in fear,
Who nere till now did ever think of death
That he would come to fetch away its breath:
For who by flesh was highly monarchised,
By Conscience now is basely vassalised,
And so does yield to what the conscience says,
That till death came he had not any faith;
For health and wealth so pufft it up with pride,
Save only pleasure it minded naught beside:
And now entreats to have a little time,
With full resolve for to amend its crime.
But Conscience says, whom now it does believe,
That death is sent it of its life bereave,
And so no hope of pardon to be got,
But like its life, so death falls to its lot,
Which conscience tells it: then it is dejected,
And does confess it justly is rejected,
Without all hope of any pardon sending,
For that this life is now at point of ending.
Then this proud heart with terror conscience pricks
And it to hell with horror down he kicks;
And tells him plainly that the poorest swain
Whom in his pride with scorn he did disdain,
Being naked begging at this proud hearts door,
In Abraham's bosom him shall sit before;
And in requital of this hard proud heart
Was loath to yield to Lazarus any part
Of his vast store wherewith he did abound,
Is now by Lazar trodden under ground,
And lets it see whom it did scorn before,
He would be glad he might beg at his door:
But conscience tells him he is now deba^'d,
'Cause pride in wealth did poverty not regard.
So this proud heart who poverty held in scorn,
Does beg of death a while to be forborne:
But conscience tells him it is not in deaths power
For that he cannot spare him now one hour,
Because his time is limited by God,
Whom he nere knew, so did not fear his rod;
Which now he feels by conscience information
That he must hence into some other nation,
Where soul must suffer for the bodies sin
And horrid life which it has lived in,
Without so much as any care for th'soul,
But all for the self, although in substance moul:
Which then by conscience is in heart confessed,
And better life (if time) is now professed.
When time is past, to it a period's put,
And against this soul the gates of heaven are shut:
So then in lieu of hope comes in despair,
And tells it now it must for hell prepare,
Because it did not think of this in time,
So soul must suffer for the bodies crime,
Which conscience offered often to inform,
But pride of heart held conscience aye in scorn,
And would not hear when it made suit to speak,
For worldly affairs such suits do always break;
And so the soul is now deprived of bliss
Or sight of heaven where its sweet Savior is:
And that proud flesh of earth at first was made,
Must to the earth, and there a while be staid
For crawlers meat, till that loud trump shall blow,
When soul and body both must undergo
That final doom by God himself pronounced,
Because in life this God they have renounced;
And that most justly does the conscience tell,
Deprived of heaven, and doomed to the deepest hell,
Where they must live, but wishing still for death,
Which they did fear at parting with their breath,
So what in heart in life was always loathed,
Will after death in heart he ever loved,
But not obtained, as Diver does thee tell,
Decreed for ever now to live in hell.
O eloquent death, has done more in one day
Then Moses did with all that he could say,
Or yet the Prophets by their crying out
These eighty years, or now near thereabout,
Yet all unheard, or not in heart believed,
Till this hard heart of life is like bereaved.
O powrful death, whose presence without speaking
Has done what Prophets could not by their preaching
This conscience knows, and does at large relate
What the heart has done, and what shall be its fate
But out of time, because it would not hear
That it should come be laid on the fatal bear,
Which now stands ready waiting at the door
To carry away who did it scorn before.
Is this a time then now for thee begin
To think in what state thou at death art in?
For now thy conscience guilty of sin will say
That th'weight of it to Topher does thee sway,
Without all hope of thee for ere returning,
When th'souls before, and in that Tophet burning.
So all thy helps are surely now but weak,
If thou did not in former times bespeak
Them at his hands, who always willing is
And able also to bring thee to bliss,
If thou have made the way for it before,
Or else there is danger of it at deaths door.
Thou foolish man, observe the harmless Be,
Who summertime does fill her downy thie,
And in her storehouse hoards up plenty of meat
Against the time when there is none to get.
Look likewise on that little creature Ant,
Who being careful how to prevent want,
Foreseeing winter to be coming on,
In time of summer makes provision.
These little creatures teach thee, time well spent
In its due time, and that with good intent,
May gain unto thee blessings happily,
Which shall continue for eternity.
But the old man he is blind and cannot see,
And th'young man he is stout and will not be
Correct with death; this death which only can
As all things else, unmake this creature man:
And that being done, then all this massy earth
Unable is for to regain him breath.
And therefore now be sure whils^ thou have power
For to remember death comes at an hour
When it is not looked for, like unto the thief,
When man's in health, and is of full belief
That he shall live, and so he still expects
The length of da^e^, but th'day of death neglects;
And yet does know that he before all the rest
Who dies well, thus only shall be blessed.
For if a man were able spend his time
D^void of sin or any sinful crime,
And prove an Atheist but for one half hour,
And therein comes his blessed Savior,
And does demand what only is his own,
And ro^peth there where he has never sown:
O what a case may this man now be in,
Who long lived well, yet died in deadly sin!
Since th'tree as't grows, that way it surely falls,
And as the thief does come, so God he calls.
For th'foolish Virgins had their final doom
For want of oil shut out of th'marriage room.
O what a fearful horrid case is this,
For one hours pleasure lose eternal bliss!
Then watch my soul, and do thou always say,
Good Lord give us our daily bread this day:
For after one day filthy worms did eat
That precious Manna which was heavenly meat;
Because that they who every day would have,
Should every day for daily blessings crave.
And knew those worms did food of Angels eat,
Within a while will of the flesh make meat:
And though thy soul it cannot then be there,
Yet soul and body are decreed to bear
Their share alike, at the last reckning day.
Then do not thou this reckoning now delay*
For (wretched man) this time does draw fast on,
Near unto death by computation;
And every day thy sins they do increase,
Time for repentance daily does decrease;
And if repentance (by grace) be obtained,
There Is satisfaction also must be gained,
Or else I doubt repentance very much
Without repayment cannot prove be such
As it should be, and then I greatly fear
There will no days be longer granted there;
For death is strong, and will not be overcome
By threats nor treats, whenas the day does come.
Then thou fond man who seeing thy sick friend,
Wilt not say to him he is near his end:
Till he be likely to yield up his breath,
And then thou wills him he should think of death;
Lest that the name of death should fearful be
To him that is now at the point to die.
Then fear this death before he so near come,
For it is too late to do it at th'day of doom;
Seeing if deaths warrant shall but once be sealed,
There is no wealth can cause it be repealed:
And therefore now have care prevent the worst,
Lest thou do hold thy day of birth accursed;
When hills nor mountains are not able hide,
But this thy life must then be justly tried
By thine own conscience before that dreadful King
Who knows and sees even every secret thing;
And sends this his servant powrful death,
To take away from thee thy dearest breath:
O then have care thou do thy days spend well,
If thou intend to keep thy soul from hell;
And be thou often thinking of this death,
How it is his office to take away thy breath:
And do it daily, since each day thou may
Even lose thy life in that one days delay.
And so by this accustomed daily count
Thou Wilt see thy sins how they decrease or mount.
And if the have wealth, thy care is so much more
To leave'^ then he that is esteemed poor.
O (living) look thou stare upon deaths face,
That dying thou may know his comely grace:
For familiarity will only bring
A loving liking of a loathed thing.
Then thou my soul acquaint thee with this death
Before he come to fetch away thy breath:
For tho his physnomie be pale and grim,
If daily seen, thou wilt stand no fear of him.
Then do thou look upon him every day,
As he were coming to call thee away:
By so much oftener that thou do him see,
By so much more familiar you will be.
And do esteem him always as a friend,
Seeing he may greatly stead thee at thy end.
Assure thy self he is stout and will not fly,
But he is always waiting on thee nie;
For he is one of whom thou shall be found
Tho thou were hidden underneath the ground:
And if thou think from him to run away,
Then he is so swift that he will make thee stay.
O view him, love him, and him look upon;
His countnance's comely, so's his complexion,
Though it be pale, yet sweet 'twill be to thee,
But th'hinder parts shall nere be able see;
For he does always forwards toward thee come,
And never backwards he is seen return:
He fears no man's face, nor yet his strength,
But overcomes all whatsoere at length.
There Is neither King nor Keisar he will spare,
But all in the end do fall unto his share:
Though there be millions of armed men in field,
If he but throw his dart at them, they yield:
There are no guns so great can make him flee,
For none on earth but only he is shot-free.
His dart is always very sharp and keen,
And flies so fast it cannot well be seen.
Do but observe the nature of his dart,
It always aims at the very heart:
The strongest walls that ere with hands were made
When he does come, by them he will not be staid.
He hits his mark as well in darkest night,
As when the sun does shine tho nere so bright.
Then do not thou this deaths acquaintance shun,
From whom the swiftest of all cannon run;
And who will cause the stoutest stand in fear,
If of his coming they by chance do hear.
Make much my soul of his acquaintance then,
If thou do love him, he will tell thee when
He means to come, if thou do often use
Of him and his condition for to muse.
O then love thou this death his company well,
There Is in it more then I am able tell:
Yet this my soul I do in him observe,
That his acquaintance may in time preserve
From second death, which is a kindness such
More worth by far then all the earth by much.
The make account of such a special friend,
Who is so powerful with thee at thy end,
As by his means there is hope thou may procure
A happy life which shall for aye endure,
Amongst that blessed glorious company
Who live and shall for all eternity,
And evermore the worthy praises sing
Of Christ our Savior and our heavenly King.
Then thou my soul make now a standing there,
And yet some more do thou of death enquire,
Since he is such, and of so sweet a nature,
Whom some esteem to be of horrid feature:
But by observance I do in him find
To those that love him he is very kind;
And th'more I look upon his comely face,
The better still I like his comely grace,
As though he scorned the greatest earthly Kings
Esteeming them to be but even base things.
And more then so, I in him this observe,
If I have grace my self in time preserve
From sin, that then he can do me no harm,
If I do so I do him quite disarm;
For he no weapons with him bears about,
But with my own sins he does beat me out
From off this earth where wretched I do live,
But mine own sins mine own death-stroke do give,
So as I find if I from sin were free,
That then were death not able conquer me.
For now I see it is only my own sin
The wicked harbinger to bring death in,
Then do thou beat this harbinger but out,
And then fear not thou shall put death to rout:
For if there were no sin within thy heart,
Then thou were able take away deaths dart.
O then my soul hear this, O do thou hear,
Thy sin's the cause of all thy greatest fear:
Then fear to sin, and thou art able fray
This thing cal^'d death, and force him fly away;
And if thou leave thy sin thou may be sure,
Thou Art able then the sting of death to cure,
Then use all helps to leave thy loved sin,
And let slip none may bring thy Savior in:
But set a watch and guard thy heart about
To keep thy Savior and shut Satan out*
For if thy mind be set on God above,
And thou resolved to follow him in love,
Then all thy actions which thou do intend,
Are helps to bring thee to a happy end;
And no occasion can come then amiss,
May help to bring thy soul to The King of Bliss.
Nor none let pass without some godly use
Which some are wont with wickedness abuse;
But godly minds are ever apt to good,
And more for th'souls then for the bodies food.
Think with thy self how do thou thee behave,
Can go to bed, and then not think on grave,
Since it is more sure then is thy (laid-down) bed
Shall not that surety enter then thy head?
Can thou prepare to go to take thy rest*
And naught prepare for him has so thee blessed?
Thou know thy sleep may well be said like death,
Save only that affoords a little breath
Which this does take, and all what else is thine.
Then think of death, and think on it now in time*
In sleep no sense, no not of greatest pain,
And so in death if heaven by it thou gain;
Then aim at heaven, let it be all thy care*
Or else be sure have hell fall to thy share,
Can thou uncloath thee to thy naked skin,
And then forget to cleanse thee of thy sin?
Have thou the care thy bed may be made warm,
And then no care to keep thy soul from harm?
Can thou be careful see thy linen sweet,
And not remember that thy winding she?
Have thou the sense to feel thy bed is cold,
And yet no feeling that thou art grown old?
Can thou have care thy bed should be made soft,
And then no care to lift thy soul aloft?
Can thou be careful for thy bodies rest*
Yet careless how the soul may come be blessed?
Is flesh and blood of more esteem with then,
Then th'soul for which thy Savior so did d^e?
Do thou not know when body goes to grave,
The soul expects a place in heaven to have?
Do pamper flesh for filthy worms to eat,
And starve thy soul for want of spiritual meat?
Thou say thou art sure of a living soul in thee,
And yet thy life does show it cannot be
Shall no occasion slip for th'bodies good,
And none be found to furnish ^h'soul with food?
Can any think that man has any sense
Cares all for th'corps, and naught for th'souls offense?
Is flesh and blood with thee of more esteem,
Then that thy soul whose care is only heaven?
Those go to ground from whence at first they came
But this to God, in whom is only its aim.
Let conscience say for soul and bodies care,
How little's that, how great this others share?
So as it seems thou more esteems of monle,
Then do of that thy precious spiritual soul,
Which flies a^^y when body goes to ground,
Let conscience say where then it must be found.
Which it well knows, and will not then dissemble,
When flesh and blood with fear shall shak and tremble
Then let thy bed be made to thee a grave,
If thou expect a room in heaven to have
Prepare for grave when do p^epare for bed,
So idle thoughts will vanish out thy head.
Think thou art dying when thou ghost to sleep,
'Twil be a means thy soul from sin to keep.
Or else take notice that thy heart is hard,
When thought of death with it is of no regard.
And that thy God has suffered it be so,
Lest it might melt, and to its Savior go.
O fearful fearful is thy God then gone,
And thought of him in thee remains none.
Are neither hope nor fear of any power,
But thou will still forsake thy S^viour!
O cruel, cruel, cruel stony heart!
Art so resolved that Christ shall have no part?
Can fear of hell not melt that heart of thine,
Nor hope of heaven with Christ in it to shine.
Do live to follow Judas in his sin,
That thou can find no time to repent in?
O wretched heart, are grown so obdurate,
As joy nor fear are able penetrate?
Is this the nature of that flesh and bloood,
As 'twil retain naught that may tend to good?
Art grown so sullen in thy own esteem,
As th'blood of Christ thou will not thee redeem.
O let that blood wash off beloved sin,
Or be assured thy Savior comes not in.
O do not shut the gate against that sweet guest
In whom alone thou shall be ever blessed;
For by him only, and by him alone
Thou must have help, or else thou must have none:
Then beat thy heart, and beat it under ground,
Or be assured that Christ will not be found:
For that which makes thy heart so hard is pride,
A sin sufficient, though naught else beside.
Then strive to gain humility in'ts room,
For humble hearts are they will win the crown.
Then strive and strive, and strive and watch, and pray
To him is able put that pride away,
Without great suit be sure he will not do it,
Then pray with zeal, and he'^l be willing to it;
And bend thou heart and hands, and knees and all,
And on thy Savior never lin to call,
Till he shall please to cleanse that hollow place
From pride, and then to fill it up with grace.
Grant gracious God to free it from this sin,
And many more which I have lived in.
Sweet Jesus help, help me good Lord with speed,
For without thee sweet Savior I am dead:
For my hard heart, good God, is hardened so,
As't never fears this fatal word of Go.
Sweet Jesus grant repentance to me, Lord,
As thou have promised by thy sacred word
To he^r all them that on thy name do call,
Then hear me Lord, or I am sure to fall.
Grant me good God, I thee most humbly pray,
That I from henceforth never fall away;
But still be lifting up my heart to thee,
And to thy name sing praise continually.
But how can I sing praises to the Lord,
When I have not observed his holy word,
No^ him regarded as indeed I ought
Who with his blood has me so dearly bought?
But his my sin deprives me of that good
To be obtained by Christ his precious blood:
For my hard heart in truth cannot deny
I Have turned back when I heard my Savior cry;
What hope have I then that he will hear me,
Though I come to him on my bended knee?
Then bend and beat, and break that wicked heart
Whose sin is cause of all my woeful smart:
And on thy knees lift up thy heart in prayer,
No way to heaven but by this only stair:
Then strive t'ascend this stair on bended knees,
Or nere expect thy Saviors wrath ^'appease:
And wash it likewise with thy briny tears,
For no unclean thing comes to the Saviors ears;
Or if it do, he will turn his back and frown,
And in his rage from heaven h^'^l throw it down
Then cleanse thy heart, eject all idle thought,
Let no unclean thing before the King be brought*
Search every corner in that hollow cave,
For Satan's cunning, and a hole will have
Where he may lurk and lie to the eye unseen,
Still waiting on thee when thou do not ween.
Be careful then he do not there remain.
For if he do he will leave behind a stain
Which will not out, no water will it cleanse
But only th'oyl of hearty penitence.
Use then this oil, and mix it with thy tears,
And wash the stair ascends up to the ears
Of great Jehovah sitting in his throne,
Who accepts all clean things, despises none.
Then cleanse thy heart from that foul stain of sin,
Or nere expect that it can enter in
Jehovahs sight, where nothing can appear
But such as are from stain of sin made clear.
Then strive to cleanse thee from all sinful thought,
The only means which have thy body brought
To be cast down from out thy Saviors sight,
Where Saints and Angels in continual light
Conjoyn themselves with those the Cherubims,
Th'Archangels and those blessed Seraphims,
And all the rest of that most glorious quire,
Who joys enjoy beyond all hearts desire,
The glorious presence of our Savior sweet,
The very essence of all joy complete;
To sing the praise of that most Holy one
Who Is God of gods, and other there is none.
Then sing my soul, and strive to apprehend
Those heavenly joys which never shall have end.
Use all the helps may bring thee to that place,
Let none pass by without some use of grace.
And so in time thou may thy Savior win
By earnest prayer for to remit thy sin.
Then without ceasing pray continually,
For such in time may gain eternity,
It is the counsel of that Preacher Paul,
Whose pains exceeded after that his call
To come to Christ; but first he fell to ground
Before his Savior could by him be found
Then fall, and fall, and fall upon thy face,
And cry to Christ that he may grant thee grace
To make good use of all occasions offered,
And so avert all are by Satan proffered:
For godly minds make godly use of all,
Where sinful hearts make such as tend their fall
By their submission to black Satan's wiles,
Whereby poor man of goodness he beguiles:
For man by nature's apt to what is ill,
Though soul and body both thereby he kill;
For man does aim to please this flesh and blood,
But sees not the end if it do tend to good:
For fleshly m^n sees naught but before his face
Without respect to that the spiritual grace
The soul aims at; and so this worldly man
Thinks worldly things, but heavenly none he can
For earthly substance earthly matter minds,
When heavenly substance heavenly matter finds;
And so by th'sequel man may easily know
When life is done, where then his soul shall go.
But few look further then this life alone,
And so for th'next their care is little or none.
Whereby appears to heaven there goes but few,
And so indeed our Saviors words made true:
For that gate's narrow, but the other broad,
And most men love the way that most is troad*
But thou my soul avoid this beaten path,
If thou intend t'avoyd the way to wrath.
For be assured there are no more but two,
Or that to Heaven, or that t'eternal woe.
Let all thy care then be to avoid this,
And eschew all may hinder the way to bliss;
So by observance thou may easily know
Which of these two thou do intend to go.
Then let thy care be always God to serve,
And by that means thou may thy life preserve,
Let conscience say what thy chief care has bin,
To serve thy Savior, or to commit sin.
Let no occasion pass thee without trial,
And this in time will free thee from denial
At that strait gate wherein so few must enter,
So make that sure without all peradventure.
Let this be th'chiefest of thy da^ly cares,
And it prefer before all worldly affairs.
For worldly actions aim at worldly ends,
But thou my soul at that which heaven intends:
For though thy flesh do follow earthly things,
Let inward mind be set on King of Kings,
Let him be always in thy outward mind,
And then shall thou in all thy actions find
A means to bring thee on that narrow way,
Where they must go, mean not to go astray,
And then thou wilt see thy mind is ever set
To serve thy God, and him thou wilt nere forget.
For if thou do but wash thy filthy hands,
Thou Wilt see thy Savior then before thee stands
To try if thou will wash thy heart from sin,
And horrid life which thou have lived in.
And when thou puts in mouth a piece of bread,
Think how thy Savior then for thee was dead,
And rose again and lives in heaven above,
And does desire thou come to him in love.
Then set thy self to serve this loving God,
And he will preserve thee in that narrow road
Which leads to heaven; then keep that narrow way
And in it serve thy Savior night and day:
Let all thy thoughts on him alone attend,
So be thou sure thy life in him shall end.
But then must thou have care to serve this God,
Or else expect to feel his heavy rod.
For though he gaeatly does desire thy life,
Yet thou do know he punished good Lots wife.
Presume not then that he will always be,
As he has hereto been to wretched thee,
By his long-suffering thee go on in sin,
As though his wrath had nere yet kindled b n.
But thou have seen his plagues on Egypt shown,
And then on them he chose to be his own.
Presume not then that he will pardon thee
(Superfluous branch of that wild Olive tree)
But fall with fear, and teach thy heart to tremble,
Whose nature is with God himself dissemble.
Because thou know his mercy does abound,
Ye thou have seen some sawallowd by the ground
For less offense then many of thine have bin,
Then strive to free thee from this horrid sin,
The only cause of Sodoms sinking there,
Where naught does live but only horrid fear;
Then fear this God though he be slow to anger,
He Will smite thee down when thou think least of danger.
Forget not this, but think on it seriously,
Lest thou repent it even immediately.
Can thou for pleasure in thy garden walk,
Then not take pleasure with thy Savior talk?
Can thou observe each herb in its own kind,
And have not then thy Maker in thy mind?
Can thou see Lilies in thy garden grow,
And not think Solomon never was clothed so?
When th'least of them to the world a wonder is,
Then let that wonder bring thy soul to bliss.
When all on earth can not make th'mean^st there,
Whereby the makers Godhead does appear
Who with his word did make them for thy use,
Then do not these good creatures thou abuse,
But thankful be for these great blessings given
To thee unworthy; lift thine eye to heaven.
For if such glory does on earth appear,
Can thou conceive what wonders may be there?
When great Jehovah by his word does make
Such herbs on earth that man may pleasure take
In serving him this gracious God above,
Who Is God alone, the God of peace and love.
Observe each herb in it a several smell,
But how infused no tongue on earth can tell,
Their several shapes by The King of heaven ordaind
And each of others by him are restraind:
Their virtues great to the world a wonderment,
Infused by th'maker to give man content.
Unthankful creatures here do meditate,
And of these wonders deeply contemplate,
And then thou^'t see the goodness of this God
To thee poor man who do deserve his rod,
But that his goodness does to thee abound,
Who well deserves be swallowed of the ground.
If so his mercy were not even much more
And all his other attributes before.
Then serve him, serve him, with a filial fear,
Who of his bounty has so placed thee he^e,
As thou may see thy God on every side,
Above, below, throghout the world so wide.
Where God himself saw all was good therein,
Then do not thou pervert it with thy sin.
For wicked man makes wicked use of all,
Make no such use, or else be sure to fall.
But thou my soul use all things to that end,
For which thy God did these great blessings send*
And then fear not bu^ he will bless thee so,
As from thy Savior thou shall never go,
But in his service take thy whole delight,
And therein spend thy time both day and night:
So every object will be then a mean
To make thee think of that good God of heaven.
And then thy mind will set it self to serve
Thy Savior Christ who does thee thus preserve
From wicked Satan and his hellish power,
Though he be still attending at thy door,
To put ill thoughts into thy fickle mind,
When thou forgets to serve thy Savior kind.
Forget not then to let each object move
Thy mind to set it self on God above.
For all the creatures which Jehovah made,
Do show to man that he should be obeyed:
For they were works of Gods own only hand,
And freely all submit to his command.
Save only man, the noblest of the res^,
Whom he does love, and wills he may be blessed.
And for that purpose he does daily send
Continual means to bring him to that end
For which he first created him on earth,
Where he infused with th'^oul a living breath.
And left him free from any thought of sin,
Till th'wily Serpent Adam en red in,
And did with pleasure this weak man persuade
To disrespect his God who had him made,
By tasting that but one forbidden tree,
The only cause of all man's misery.
Can then f^rget when do an apple see,
For Adams sin how God does punish thee?
And if for such a (seeming) small offense,
He punish all without a difference,
From high to low, to the end of generation,
No place exempt, but even in every nation,
Does Adams seed partake of th'punishment
For Adams sin without distinguishment:
Then fear to sin seeing God is so severe,
As for one sin to punish every where,
From time to time till the end of time be come,
Sweet Jesus grant that word may be my doom.
But how can I expect this doom to me,
Of many millions one most unworthy?
Or what is my hope who thousand sins committed,
That th'least of them to me may be remitted,
When many millions for one sin condemned,
And without Christ no hope to be redeemed?
O fearful, fearful! What more fearful is,
Then for one sin mankind deprived of bliss?
Consider wretch, what thy whole life has bin,
And then thou wilt see no hour without some sin:
If th'dost but mark what thou thy self have done,
Thou have forsworn both Father and tho Son.
For knowingly thou have him disobeyed,
Let conscience say if this can be denied.
See it be judge of all thou go'^t about,
It Will say tha'st sinned even all thy life throughout,
And so the sins to millions will amount,
If thou were able of them keep account.
But though thou fail in numbering of them all,
Thy Savior can and will t'account thee call.
And then thoult wish that thou had nere bin born
In sin to live, in sin to dye forlorn.
Then well consider what was Adams sin,
Once disobeying Gods command therein.
What for that sin was Gods just punishment,
And it will strike thee with astonishment.
Then think how many sins thou have committed,
And what is thy hope that they may be remitted?
When for one sin mankind was all condemned,
If that by Christ they shall not be redeemed.
And then thou wilt think what may be due for thine,
Think of this deeply, and think on it in time:
Keep't in thy mind, thou cannot keep't too much,
A goodly theme, do thou conceit it such:
And leave not thinking of it all thy life,
Lest justly thou be punished like Lots wife;
For God is ready of an instant smite thee,
And so is Satan ever to endite thee,
And for that purpose he is on thee attending,
And so will be until thy life be ending.
In thought of this be sure to have a care
That Satan do not smite thee with despair:
But still be mindful Christ did die for thee,
And will defend thee for eternity:
But then must thou obey him in thy heart,
And look each sin do breed in thee a smart.
When do remember Adams only sin,
For all of thine what danger thou art in;
But that thy God does suffer thee to live,
And for thy sins such blessings does thee give,
As thou may justly say his mercy's great,
When by his bounty he does thee entreat
To come to him, and faithfully him serve,
As conscience knows his goodness does deserve.
Then for his goodness fear him to offend,
Retain such fear until thy life shall end.
And it may help for to amend thy course,
Which conscience knows is each day wors and wors,
Because thou minds not that thy God is just,
And on a sudden may smite thee to dust*
Remember these, and none of them forget,
They Will be a means that Christ may come to set
Thee with himself, where thou shall live for aye,
And sing his praises in a joyful raye.
So sing my soul the praises of this God,
Who gives thee blessings in lieu of's heavy rod:
Be yielding thanks to his most holy name,
Who was, is now, and aye shall be the same.
Let all thy life show thou do thankful prove
To this good God, the God of peace and love;
Who does desire that thou may leave thy sin,
And lieu of Satan let thy Savior in:
Look he be always in thy inward thought,
And he will let no ill to thee be brought:
And aim at naught but what gives him content;
Or if rhou do, be sure of it repent.
Can thou observe the rising of the Sun,
And then not think the Son of man's to come?
Thou see the glory of it does appear
Throughout the world to all both far and near:
Thou do discern the greatness of that light
Does make a difference between day and night;
Thou have the sense to see it comfort brings
To every kind whatsoere created things,
The Effects of both to all on earth are shown,
As well to strangers as to those his own,
All creatures are of its great good partaker,
And in their kind for it they praise their Maker.
Observe the greatness of its glorious shine,
Whereto none's like it saving that Divine:
Then if in th'creature there such glory be,
What is in him that made both it and thee?
The Arabians, they do find its extreme hot,
But the English feel its goodness, tho remote.
The Indians, they some black, some tawny turned,
But the English, we with scorching are not burned.
With us it makes the earth it self rejoice,
And all therein with joy lift up their voice:
When Birds and Bees, and every creeping thing
Sing forth the praises of their heavenly King,
And every beast and creature of the field
To this their Maker all due thanks do yield,
Save thankless man who has received more
Then all the rest, of Gods abundant store,
Because forgetful of this gracious God,
And for our good beat with his heavy rod.
Thou shameless man let these poor creatures move thee
Like them with joy to praise this God above thee,
And yield him thanks for all his goodness given
To thee unworthy lift thy eye to heaven,
Where great Jehovah knows by his power
The lighting down of the sparrow at they door,
And every secret that thy heart can think,
Whereof take notice lest thou come to sink
Into that Tophet which God has prepared
For such as do not yield him due regard.
Thou thankles man, think how this God has blessed thee,
Before he send his servant Death t'arrest thee:
Observe with care of what good thou partaker,
When some do worship this the Sun for th'maker*
What difference great between the day and night,
They live in darkness, though we live in light.
Then since thy God has showed himself to thee,
Unworthy wretch, toward him to lift thine eye,
Prove not forgetful of this good the greatest
To thee poor man of millions one the meanest.
When thou perceives the Sun reflects on thee,
Forget not then for sinners Christ did dye.
And when he yielded up his glorious Ghost,
The Sun did then forgo his brightness most,
As though it sorrowed for to see him die,
Who yet does live, and shall eternally:
Can thou but mark the setting of the Sun,
And then forget the Son of man did come
Down from the heavens where glory does abound
Unto this earth, where nothing can be found
But earthly things, amongst whom he lived here,
And took on him the shape which thou do beat,
Both flesh and bone, and every several lim,
Yet always free from the least thought of sin,
Whereby he taught thee how thou ought to live,
In serving God, and to him praises give;
Praise him, praise him, praise him continually,
Who was so pleased for sinful man to die:
Forget not then when can not see the sun,
To think how Christ down to this earth did come
To gain thee to him, and with him to live:
Then yield him thanks, and to him praises give,
Who did endure the torments due to thee,
A wretch, a wretch, a wretch most unworthy.
Follow his example; then thou needst not fear
Tho the Prince of darkness do to thee appear:
For if he shall, he has no power to hurt thee,
If thou have faith, fear not, Christ will defend thee,
And grant thee strength for to withstand his power
Tho he assault thee every day and hour:
But thou must strive and never be drawn to yield,
For if thou do be sure to lose the field.
Expect this Fiend to have him fall upon thee,
Since he spared not thy Savior who did make thee
But carried him into the wilderness,
Making expression of great holiness:
For when he fasted had full forty days,
Being hungry then, the tempter to him says,
If thou be Christ the Son of God indeed,
Command these stones that they may be made bread
But he replied, Life's not by bread alone,
But by the words which come from God each one.
And yet the tempter did not leave him thus,
(No marvel then if he do so with us)
But set him on the Temples highest stone,
And willed him thence to throw his body down;
Seeing it is writ his Angels shall protect thee,
Lest dash of stone at any time may hurt thee.
But answering he replied this holy word,
It Is writ, thou shall not tempt thy God the Lord.
Yet still the tempter did not give him over,
But set him higher where he might discover
Even all the earths kingdoms then within his eyes,
And th'glory of them did to him descrie;
And said, if he would fall and worship him,
He freely would bestow them all on him:
But Jesus then bid Satan to be gone,
Saying, thou shall worship only God alone,
And only him, none other shall thou serve.
Do so my soul, 'twill thee from death preserve.
So Satan left him, and the Angels came
And fed him then in great Jehovah's name.
Observe, my soul, the subtlety of this Spirit,
Alleging Scripture against the meaning of it,
To private ends, his fancy for to please,
Without respect how it did God displease.
Then fear the spirit, make trial if 't be of God,
Or else be sure he will send his heavy rod
To punish such as aim to wrest the truth:
But cleave to it, as did to Naomi Ruth.
Take th'sacred sense, beware of any wresting,
With holy things be sure there be no jesting:
Apply not places to thy private sense,
Lest pleasing thee, may give thy God offense.
Read with great reverence when thou read such
An humble heart helps understanding much.
Make use of this, and here observe with care
How by ill spirits the Scaiptures wrested are,
And uses made unto some wicked end:
The Lord of life me from such spirits defend!
For these Expositors Scriptures do expound
Against ancient writers, men much more profound
Who spent their lives in following that profession
Which is now gained by some few mouths possession:
They studied hard before they could obtain it,
But some new teachers think but light to gain it;
And when they purpose to the people preach,
They think it Gospel whatsoere they teach,
Without respect what our forefathers told,
Or what has been in those the days of old:
As though by nature Learning now were gained,
When God does know it is by some profaned.
But thou my soul such shallow places read,
As thou may wade them without any dread;
And leave the deeps for such have art to swim
Whatsoever seas of deeps they do come in:
Learn no such art, but leave't to them that think
No sea so deep wherein they cannot sink.
The Lord of host deliver me from such thought,
For his sweet sake has me so dearly bought:
And keep me safe from this presumptuous sin,
And many more which I have lived in.
For 'spiring minds are seldom satisfied,
Although their wisdom be but folly tried.
But thou my soul, let others folly teach
Thee be content with that is within thy reach:
Make godly use of what thy God has given,
And by such use thou wilt keep the way to heaven:
Keep that way still, let nothing turn thee out,
Then God will prosper all thou go about.
Though for the present he may please to try
Lest in affliction thou will him deny:
As that just Job, whom Satan could not touch,
Although the Serpents power did tempt him much
But he used all temptations to good ends,
Observe his strength for to withstand his friends:
Take his example when thou tempted art,
And have a care thou do perform his part,
Observe his carriage, let his patience move thee
To serve thy Maker who entirely loves thee:
Although he teach thee with his heavy hand,
He will in the end give thee thy hearts demand.
But then thou must not curse thy God and die;
For if thou do, it is death eternally,
And such a death as cannot be redeemd
With all the earths wealth how much soer esteemd.
Respect no pleasure nor no cruel pain
Whatsoere thou suffer, so that heaven thou gain:
Let no affliction alter thy resolve,
Altho't be such as life on earth dissolve;
For that this life on earth cannot be long,
And then there is hope thou wilt sing a heavenly song
Among the Saints, where glory does abound
Beyond the reach of the best on earth are found:
For earthly minds unable are conceive
What heavenly comfort Saints in heaven receive
By th'glorious presence of that King of Kings,
Who does abhor the sight of sinful things,
But casts them down to that infernal lake
Where all must live that do of sin prrtake.
Then fear to sin, and always it eschew
Like death it self, lest thou may come to rut,
And fall to curse the time of thy birthday,
And to thy self thou thus lament and say:
Have I spent full out seventy years in sin?
Have I this while in them uncareful bin
What shall befall me after I am dead?
What is it I have often had in my head?
Have I esteemd this life as if immortal,
And after death of life to be but mortal?
Have I so much this wicked world esteemd,
As of this death I have but only dreamd?
Have I felt limbs how they grow stiff and weak,
And cannot see how fast my life does break?
Have I observed that my eyes grow blind,
And cannot know that even so does my mind?
Have I discernd my memory to fail,
And cannot find my vital parts to quail?
Have I seen wrinkles in my withered skin,
And cannot see my life is weak within?
Have I observd my hair to fall away,
Yet cannot feel my life is in decay?
Does not the baldness of my hoary head
Discover how my inward parts are dead?
Can I feel stitches in my hollow side,
And cannot feel my life away to glide?
Have I a shortness in my inward breath,
And will not know it tends toward death?
Has not my head endured excessive pain,
Not taking notice death has seized my brain?
Do I feel stomach grown exceeding weak,
And cannot feel how fast my life does break?
Do I perceive my ears grow thick of hearing,
And such my eyes will not see death appearing?
Shall I not taste this pill of bitter gall,
Though I discern that death does daily call?
Will nothing draw me th'scent of death to smell,
Till he have thrown me down to the deepest hell?
Are not my senses senseless grown even all,
Yet not discern it is death that does them call?
Will nothing make these senseless creatures fear,
Till they be thrown upon the fatal bear?
Are they all agreed to struggle with this death,
Tho with that struggling they do lose their breath?
Has not death taken my right eye away,
And I not think my left eye shall decay?
Do I know thousands, thousands slain in field,
And can forget that I to death must yield?
Can I think how my dearest friends are dead,
Yet my own death not once to trouble my head?
Are there not some my children gone before,
And I not think my self shall make them more?
Do I discern my bony teeth decay,
And cannot see my life's in the same way?
Have I felt weakness in my body all,
And cannot feel how God does on me call?
Are not my ears grown very slow to hear,
And such my eyes will not see death appear?
Have I been sick, and stood no fear of death,
But still in hope I should retain my breath?
Have I lived full out seventy years and three,
And still expect that I shall live till eighty?
Have I escaped dangers great and many,
And therefore think death will not come with any?
Has not my heart took much more great delight
In doing wrong, then doing that is right?
O wretched beast, art so to sin given ore,
As thou wilt comply with Satan more and more?
Will nothing draw thee for to serve thy God,
Till thou be beaten with his heavy rod?
Am I so taken with beloved sin,
As my amendment I will nere begin?
Wilt not be frighted with the sight of hell,
Till thou be thrown into it there to dwell?
Will my stiff heart for sickness sigh and groan,
And for its sin will not so much as moan?
Can I observe my marrowless bones grow dry,
And cannot see that now my death is nie?
Have I run out all this my life in pleasure,
And for repentance never could find leisure?
Has not my conscience often me reproved,
And have not I therewith been nothing moved?
Have not my senses all of them offended,
And have not I been often reprehended?
Heth not my heart been pleased even much more
In serving Satan then my Savior?
Has not my heart delighted in delay,
And have not I wished in my sin to stay?
Have I not dearly loved this fleshly lust,
And still forgot my self to be but dust?
Have I not watched opportunity
That I might sin with much more delecacie?
Have I such horrid wickedness committed,
And have I many such good deeds omitted?
Have I sought time that I might commit sin,
And none could find that I might repent in?
Have I had care for gaining worldly wealth,
And nere respected any spiritual health?
Have I been going Babels way t^ll now,
And shall I still my knees to Baal bow?
Have not my members always sin obeyed,
And spiritual motions have they not denied?
Has not my heart been ever hardened so,
As thought of death could breed in it no woe?
Has not my heart so hard and stony been,
As judgments moved not, though by me seen?
Have I seen some were suddenly struck dead,
And yet it bred no scruple in my head?
Have I heard sin reproved with greatest zeal,
And it from s n me naught at all repeal?
Have I heard hell to be at full described,
Yet I thereby was nothing terrified?
O wretched heart, thy conscience can thee tell
That thou have wished there was nor heaven nor hell;
For if not so, it surely would appear
That thou did stand of this great God in fear.
Say, could thou take it for a friendly deed
If friend with be^ting make thy body bleed?
Will thou imagine it a friendly part
For to endeavor stab thy friend to the heart?
Can thou presume retain a faithful friend
By abusing him for gaining thy own end?
Can thou conceive that flesh and blood should suffer
Such vile abuse as thou to Christ do offer?
Can thou ere think to gain thy fathers blessing,
When thou turn'^t back and with thy heel do kick him?
Can see thy father come unto thee kneeling
And yet it work in thy hard heart no feeling?
Can see thy father in thy quarrel suffer,
Yet no assistance thou will to him offer?
Can see thy father slain in thy defense,
And yet it work in thee no penitence?
Can see thy father only for thy sake
All bloody gasping, and no help wilt make?
Can see thy father by thy enemy slain,
And yet that enemy thou wilt in love retain?
Can see thy father kneeling fore thy face,
Yet thou wilt revile him with all soul disgrace?
Can see thy father kneel unto thee weeping,
Yet thou to slight him with a countnance laughing
Has any man a heart is hardened so
Will not relent to see his fathers woe?
Are these affronts unto an earthly father,
And yet are none unto thy heavenly Savior?
Can think no d fference 'twixt an injury done
Unto thy Savior and to thine own son?
Can thou presume that God will pardon such
Wherewith an earthly father would think much?
When father friend, nor son, nor self, nor all
Are with thy Savior worthy of name equal.
O wretched, wretched, wretched heart that sees
Thou Art filled with such, and some far worse then these;
And yet can think thy conscience may dissemble,
Because all these cannot make the heart to tremble?
Have I them all, and many more such seen,
And yet my heart thereby no better been?
Have I esteemed more of an earthly father
Then I have done of that my heavenly Savior?
Have I more dreaded father to offend
Then him who did my life unto me lend?
Have I beheld him bleeding for my sake,
And yet that blood my heart could nothing shake?
Do I delight in gulping up sweet wine,
And yet forget Christ shed his blood for mine?
Am I as joyful to Jehovah pray,
As with my friend to trifle time away?
Has not my heart been joyd in jesting more
Then pouring prayers to my sweet Savior?
Have I not joyd with friend to jest and talk
More then with Jesus sadly for to walk?
Have I in me a heart is made of steel,
^o hard as it no good at all can feel?
Can I retain a fear lest man should see,
And care not though my God beholds me?
Shall I fear more that brings a mortal shame,
Then that which does bring me eternal blame?
Does the eye of man deter me from my sin,
And the eye of God have no power me within?
Have I discerned this weakness in my mind,
And cannot see it is Satan makes me blind?
Examine conscience, see what it now says;
For it well knows thou have not any faith,
Not yet do think that there is any good,
Although he beat thee with his heavy rod:
Yet thou perchance wilt say thou do believe,
But that even then the serpent did bereave
The thought of heaven out of thy faint weak heart
And would not suffer conscience play his part;
Who knows well that though thy tongue say so,
Thy stony heart within thee will say no:
For it does use, and love with God dissemble,
Or else no doubt with fear 'twould shake and tremble;
Seeing neither hope of heaven nor fear of hell
Can win this heart as conscience can thee tell.
O hypocrite, leave off with God dissembling
And pray him please to smite this heart with trembling
This stony heart who thinks God does not see,
Because even then he is not in heart with thee:
But when thou comes unto thy God again,
And he so please with thee a while remain,
Thy tongue will then confess thou have offended
And for thy sin most justly reprehended;
But conscience knows thy heart is broken naught
But still the same, and aye does yield to ought:
The Serpent offers to the fickle mind,
Rejecting Christ thy God and Savior kind:
So as thy tongue may seem to praise his name,
Yet is thy heart even still the very same,
Involved in sin, and therein takes delight,
Although thy conscience tell thee it is not right;
And then perchance thou will presume that he,
Although thou sin, yet still will pardon thee:
And so thou spends this time of grace in sin,
As if for sinning death had never been.
But think not so, but think thy Savior stands
Before thy face, two tables in his hands,
Wherein are writ our duty there commanded,
And its observance now by him demanded.
Can thou reply, thou sinned in hope of grace?
Fie, sin not so, let such hope have no place
Within thy heart; but then think death is come
With thy desert; O fearful fatal doom!
Consider wretch, and think what this may be,
Thou Wilt find it prove a fatal doom to thee,
When neither hills nor mountains can thee hide,
But still before that just Judge thou must bide,
Till thou do hear this sentence there pronounced,
That for thy sin thou art of God renounced.
Can thou now sin, and then not think of this,
Thou must be cast from out eternal bliss?
Where Is then that hope wherein thou have presumed
When death is come, and all thy days consumed;
And then no hope of any longer stay,
But doomed by death to Satan for a pray.
Can thou now sin, and not lay this to heart?
O lay't betime, lest soul and body part?
O sinful soul, take notice of thy sin,
Lest death do come before thou do begin!
O now begin, and that without delay,
Lest death arrest thee'fore to morrow day.
When soul must suffer for the bodies sin,
And careless life which it has lived in,
Without so much as any one days account
To what a height thy sins that day will mount.
Begin this day, and so go on to the end,
And by that course thou wilt see how life does mend.
Neglect not this, but use it constantly,
Lest thou be taken unprovided die.
Be watchful then, and always be provided,
Against soul and body come to be divided.
Provide for this, can no way be eschewed,
And let this course by all means be ensewed:
And so in time there may be hope of gain,
Or else expect in heaven to have no place.
Strive for that place, and strive, and strive again,
For without Christ thy labor's all in vain.
And fast and pray upon thy bended knees,
To him, who thee and all thy actions sees;
And never forget thou can not void his sight,
Who does discern thy heart in darkest night.
And now my soul, do thou observe with care,
What over-weenings in thy judgment are:
If thou did know it be an others fact
Could thou approve on it for a lawful act?
Would thou allow that in thy only son,
Which thou thy self have now but newly done?
Art not ashamed that thou should do a thing,
Which were not lawful, though done by a King?
Can thou epsy thy brothers mote unknown,
Yet can not see the beam is in thy own?
VVilt thou be mindful of another ill,
Yet careless how thou bringst thy self to hell?
Were eyes, given thee to look into another,
And thy own sins in thy own breast to smother?
Can thou have feeling of thy friends offense,
And can not see thy self is void of sense?
Can thou see faults within thy brother shine,
Yet can not think that he again sees thine?
VVilt thou allow thy senses always rome,
And never attend to ought that is done at home;
Were senses sent to show thy brothers fail,
Without respect what tends to thine avail.
A wise man may make use of others ill,
And by their faults observe his own to kill.
VVilt thou it be foul if it be another fact,
And yet be fair if it be but thy own act?
Is there such difference in a brothers blood,
What Is ill in the one, is in the other good?
If any such, it is of their own making,
And not of judgment, but of mere mistaking.
Art thou resolved to dye as thou do live,
And can expect that God will thee forgive?
But though thy sins be to this world unknown,
Assure thy self that hell will have its own:
And though thy Savior still do suffer thee
In thy own sins which he makes known to thee
By his holy Spirit, who daily does attend
Upon thy heart to see if thou will mend;
Yet do not think he will do as he has done,
In often calling that thou wilt to him come;
But rather think that he has given thee over
Unto thy self, without hope to recover.
So as thou wilt see that thy sad and weak estate,
As Judas-like become, be reprobate.
O woe's my heart, neer' yet could harbor woe,
Though often threatened with this word of Go
Thou cursed, cursed, into the hell of fire,
Where thou must burn without hope to retire.
O cry, O cry, cry to thy Savior sweet,
And never cease till he shall please to meet
Thy humble heart, and grant it some remorse,
Which daily's grown each day be worse and worse.
Sweet Jesus come, good Lord I humbly pray,
And drive that Satan far from me away.
For he has drawn me from my God and King,
Who Is worthy praise I am ever bound to sing.
Sweet Jesus hear me, hear me Lord I pray,
And hear me so, as I may ever stay,
And never more so fall as I have done,
But aye expect this blessed word of Come.
But I am still as I have ever been,
Overcome with mine own best beloved sin,
And have no strength for to withstand his power,
Does thus torment me every day and hour.
O woe's my heart that erst it should be born
To live so long, and now to dye forlorn.
O wo's my heart, that Christ should weep for me,
And it not draw one tear from out mine eye.
O wo's my heart, that Christ should dye for me,
Yet wretched I by 's death no better be.
O wo's my heart, he calls me to embrace,
Yet I decline him by my want of grace.
O wo's my heart that erst it should be born,
To make my Savior wear a crown of thorn.
O wo's my heart, his tender hands should feel
These rents for me, and only for my weel.
O wo's my heart, his side was pierced for me,
And yet my heart from feeling thereof free.
O wo's my heart, his feet were nailed to the tree,
And yet that nailing nothing trouble me.
O wo's my heart, that cannot feel his stripes,
Were able fill a stony heart with gripes.
O wo's my heart, it is not in sunder torn,
To see my Savior bide for me such scorn.
O wo's my heart, he endured this for my weel,
And I want grace his grievous torments feel.
O wo's my heart, he gave his life for me,
Yet wretched I in him nor live nor dye.
O wo's my heart, he should for me be sent,
Yet want of grace will not let me repent.
O wo's my heart, it should so hardened be,
As that his sufferings have not softened me.
O wo's my heart, it is on sin so set,
As all his torments it does quite forget.
O wo's my heart, it will not bleed for woe,
To think that Satan has now made it so.
O wo's my heart, that nothing can it bring
To serve my Savior and my heavenly King.
O wo's my heart, he should me thus respect,
Yet want of grace to make me him neglect.
O wo's my heart, that he should shed his blood
For me, and yet it work in me no good.
O wo's my heart, can nothing thee remove
From love of hell, to look at heaven above?
O wo's my heart, so taken with thy sin
And horrid life which thou have lived in.
O wo's my heart, thou will not sin forsake,
And to thy Saviors service thee betake.
O wo's my heart, neglects Gods service so,
As breach of Sabbath breeds in me no woe.
O wo's my heart, will not spend Sabbath day,
In serving God, and in his service stay.
O wo's my heart, not one day in a week,
Shall I serve God, and his true honor seek?
O wo's my heart, I have delighted more
In serving Satan then my Savior.
O wo's my heart, that is drawn with such delight,
To follow the wrong, and forsake that is right.
O wo's my heart, that is from thy Savior straying,
Whenas thy tongue is for thy pardon praying.
O wo's my heart, I have less loved and used
The Church, then th'Alehouse, where God is abused.
O wo's my heart, that do haunt Taverns more
Then do the Church, to serve thy Savior.
O wo's my heart, thou should so graceless be,
To neglect him who thus respects thee.
O wo's my heart, it should so love its will,
As what is good it calls by name of ill.
O wo's my heart, as filled with such ill blood,
As what is ill it gives it name of good.
O wo's my heart, it should so stupid be,
As follow Mammon, though thou do him see.
O wo's my heart, that see thy way is broad,
And yet wilt not forsake that common road.
O wo's my heart, that sees hell before thy face,
And yet goes on for want of better grace.
O wo's my heart, will not be drawn return,
Although thou see black hell before thee burn.
O wo's my heart, shall neither hell nor heaven
Remove away from thee this wicked leaven?
O wo's my heart, that thou should be resolved
Forsake thy Savior till thou be dissolved.
O wo's my heart, shall nothing thee remove,
To leave this hell, and aim at heaven above?
O wo's my heart, it is not filled with woes,
To leave heavens path, and take that to hell goes.
O wo's my heart, it will not burst to think
What I am writing with this pen of ink.
O wo's my heart, that it should guide my hand,
And yet it self the way of God withstand.
O wo's my heart, my hand should point the path,
And yet my heart should follow the way to wrath.
O wo's my heart, it should this hell-hound love,
And so forsake this gracious God above.
O wo's my heart, it should so stupid be,
As 'twill go on, although it Satan see.
O wo's my heart, that Christ came me to call,
And yet toward him I will not go at all.
O wo's my heart, it is so idly given,
As that against idleness I have never striven.
O wo's my heart, so taken with delight
Of what is wrong, but seldom what is right.
O wo's my heart with more delight wilt look
On news, though toys, then on a pious book.
O wo's my heart, spends time in earthly toys,
Neglecting that which tends to heavenly joys.
O wo's my heart, that nothing will delight thee,
But things indeed which rather ought to fright thee.
O wo's my heart, will break thy sleep for sin,
Yet wilt not wake to let thy Savior in,
O wo's my my heart, that will to Satan yield,
When they must fight intend to win the field.
O wo's my heart, that is hollowed so within,
As twill retain naught but beloved sin.
O wo's my heart, how great has been thy care,
From time to time thy rent for to prepare,
Lest that thy Landlord might for it distraine,
Or turn thee out, though Term by Lease remain?
O wo's my heart, how little thy regard
To serve thy Christ, who with his blood prepared
A farm for thee in heaven, whose worth is such,
As there is no breast that can conceive how much,
O wo's my heart, what difference there has been,
Twixt this on earth, and that thy Farm in heaven!
How great thy care to pay thy Landlords rent,
How light regard for the Saviors discontent!
O wo's my heart, that strives to pass away,
What without pastime will not with thee stay.
O wo's my heart, that thy care should be more
To serve this Satan then they Savior.
O wo's my heart, love better Satan serve,
Then him who does indeed thy life preserve.
O wo's my heart, that hastens time to run,
But when the end comes, I fear thou will it shun.
O wo's my heart, still striv'st set that away,
Which tends to nothing but to thy decay.
O wo's my heart, that is careful for thy sleep,
Yet careless how thy self from sin to keep.
O wo's my heart, more curious of thy taste,
Then of thy time which hourly thou do waste.
O wo's my heart, so careful keep a watch,
How worldly toys thou may in time dispatch.
Yet careless how thou triflest time away,
Which tends to nothing but to thy decay.
O wo's my heart, will not observe that end,
For which thy God did time unto thee lend.
Thou art careful know by the clock what is time of day
Yet careless how thou setst this time away.
O wo's my heart, thinks time well spent in toys,
And cannot relish ought tends heavenly joys.
O wo's my heart, will spend thy time in play,
Which conscience knows thou wilt rue another day.
O wo's my heart, is ever apt to ill,
Though soul and body both of them it kill.
O wo's my heart, that conscience can me tell,
How I against conscience often did rebel.
O wo's my heart, shall conscience me accuse?
My conscience knows my Savior I refuse.
Must my own conscience make my sins account?
It knows that they do many millions mount.
O wretched heart, thy conscience can now say,
That thou thy conscience never would obey.
O wretched heart, conscience blames thee for all,
Thou would not hear, though God himself did call.
O wretched heart, thy conscience does now show,
How all thy life thou did to Baal bow.
O wretched heart, that is bewitched so,
With that which brings both soul and body woe.
O wretched heart, so taken with that is ill,
As to that is good thou wilt not restrain thy will.
O wretched heart, thus to be drawn away,
With that which only tends to thy decay.
O wretched heart, that have been hardened so.
As 't never stood in fear of this word Go.
O wretched heart, it is thee, and thee alone,
Who bears blame for senses every each one;
For they say plainly they were bound to obey:
To what the heart said, they did never say nay.
Thy ey sees nothing but what the heart approves;
Yet oftener ill then any good it loves.
The hands feel nothing but what the heart commands,
And sometimes that which the law of God withstands
The ears are deaf, unless the heart give way;
But to that is ill they seldom do say nay.
The palat's pleased with naught, if the heart say no,
Yet oftentimes with that brings the body woe.
The nose is stopped, except the heart comply;
But what does please, it seldom does deny.
The will among these does seem to carry a stroke,
Yet heart at pleasure can the will revoke.
All other members of the corpse give way
Unto the heart, and it they all obey:
So as the heart guides all by its own will,
And is the root of all the bodies ill.
O wretched, wretched, wretched, heart to see,
That all what is ill proceeds alone from thee.
Which conscience knows and will at large relate,
What thy sins are, and what shall be thy fate.
And then thou wilt see, that Apple Adam eat
Did prove to him and his a poisoned meat:
For thy desires are for the most part such
As do partake of Adams sin in much;
And are indeed even so insatiate,
As reason is not able moderate.
Say 'twere in thee for to obtain thy will,
It Is to be thought 'twould have less good then ill.
If thou might do whatsoere thou do desire,
Can think 'twould free thee from the infernal fire?
Have thou not been even often overtaken
Desiring things, though Christ thereby forsaken?
Have thy desires at best been ever such,
As they were free from wicked sinful touch?
Let conscience say what thy desires have been,
It Is but too true they will be condemned for sin.
Thou cursed heart, wilt never be able see
how subtle Satan has deluded thee?
Shall the Serpent dwell within thy hollow heart,
And will thou never admit him to depart?
Thou can not choose but know that he is there,
And yet thou will not will him to forbear.
It seems thou do approve on's company well,
Although thou know it does conduce to hell,
Or else would thou refuse to harbor him,
Who does endeavor invite all to sin.
O wicked heart, wilt never amend thy course,
But still continue each day worse and worse?
Lay but thy hand upon thy hollow heart,
And feel if heaven or hell have better part.
But it does use and love for to dissemble,
And hazard all, before 'twill turn or tremble;
And yet confess it follows needful things:
But hear thy Savior who is king of Kings,
And he will tell thy double fleshly heart,
That Mary she has chose the better part.
Then take this better, and forsake that worse,
Lest thou incur that fearful doleful curse
Of Go thou cursed, Go receive thy hire;
A just reward; even hell, eternal fire.
O turn, O turn, O turn, thou wicked heart,
Or never expect in Christ have any part,
Now hear thy Savior; hear him, he does call,
Thou Wilt be but so as Agrippa said to Paul,
Thou have almost turned me. O do thou turn;
Except thou mean in hell for ever burn:
Though It be but little, yet it may in time,
By help of Christ, wash off thy sinful crime.
Pray for his help, laid down his life for thee;
For he desires that thou may live, not dye,
Sweet Jesus further my desire of turning,
That it may free me from this fearful burning.
Examine the conscience, it will not dissemble;
But tell the truth, if thy hard heart do tremble:
Be often rubbing it, to keep't from sleep;
At death be sure it will thee waking keep,
Guide all thy actions by thy conscience square,
And it will help thy way to heaven prepare.
O sweep thy house, and let thy Savior come:
It Is he alone must free thee from that doom
Of Go thou cursed into fiery hell,
And there do thou with Satan ever dwell.
In that dark fire, which Dives knows is hot,
Although nor soul nor body there do rot,
But still continue fuel without wasting,
And so shall be without, end everlasting.
O horrid, horrid, will thou not return,
But still resolve in that black fire to burn?
Will nothing fear thee from this future woe,
As if thy heart did love this word of Go?
Art yet the same which thou have ever been?
Will nothing fright thee from beloved sin?
Can thou conceive 'twill equalize thy pain,
From whence be sure shall n'ere return again?
Bewail thy case; and now observe cock-crow,
And call to mind how Peter he did so:
When he heard cock, he went out straight to weep;
I hear him crow, yet keep my bed and sleep.
When he heard cock, he went out at first crow;
I hear him often, yet will not do so.
Peter's denials they were only three;
But mine, if counted, more then millions be.
He saw his sin, and then he did refrain it;
I see my sin, but yet I still retain it.
He loved his Master, and did follow him nigh;
But I loved sin* and from my Savior fly.
He heard the cock, and then he saw his sin;
But though I see it, I still retain 't within,
Peter was sent, that he to me might preach;
Yet have his words no power my heart to reach.
His words and life are both I see even such
I know they are, but not respect them much.
He heard the cock, and then he did repent;
I heard him often, yet will not relent.
Though Peter sinned, repentance gained remission;
I commit sin yet to repent omission.
When Peter sinned, he saw it, and did refuse it;
I see my sin, yet still resolve to use it.
O wretch, O wretch, O wretch, wilt never return,
Till thou be doomed in that dark fire to burn!
Will nothing draw thee say this Satan no,
As though thou love this fatal word of Go?
Can thou expect thy Savior shall retain thee,
When thou do know that Satan's self has gained thee?
Thou art ready pressed hear Satan at first call,
But thy blessed Savior thou wilt not hear at all.
Peter heard the cock and made use of his preaching,
Thou hear Peter, without use of his teaching.
Each creature taught this Peter for to pray;
But all created thy sin cannot stay.
Peter was left to bring unto thee life;
Yet thou love sin, as Satan loves strife.
Peter did weep, and did his sin forbear;
But thou sinn'st still, yet cannot shed one tear.
With Peter's sin, his heart was mollified;
But mine with sin is rather stupefied.
O wicked heart, art not ashamed to see
How all thy sins have nothing softened thee?
Art so resolved, as nothing shall remove thee
To leave this Satan, though thou see he loves thee?
Consider well the cause of this his love;
Because thou have forsworn thy God above.
O Jesu* Jesu, have I thee forsworn,
Who came from heaven and on this earth was born,
For to redeem me from this bond of sin.
And horrid life which I have lived in;
And here endured the pains of death for me
In hope I should from this foul Satan fly.
And notwithstanding shall I follow him still,
Forsaking good, and following what is ill?
O weep, O weep even rivers of salt tears,
To keep thee free from greatest of all fears.
Shall Satan say thy Savior is forsaken,
Who dyed on earth, and then to heaven was taken,
Desirous thou should do as he had done,
Live here a while and then unto him come?
Yet thou, a wretch, a most ungracious wretch,
Whose sufferings are not able thee to teach
That thy hard heart is harder far then steel,
Wilt not be drawn thy Saviors sufferings feel.
O weep, O weep; let tears fall from thine eye
For him who shed both tears and blood for thee.
O weep, O weep; now spend thy time in sorrowing,
For to redeem thy time is spent in sinning.
O weep, O weep; let Peter teach thee weep,
And it will teach thee from thy sin to keep.
O weep, O weep; let tears fall from thy eyes,
That they may prove for sin a sacrifice.
O weep, O weep; with tears produce thy grief,
If thou do hope for sin to have relief.
O weep, O weep; let tears make soft thy heart,
If thou expect in Christ have any part.
But how can I expect in Christ a part,
When there is in me not any good desert?
For I have spent most of my time in sin,
And my amendment is yet to begin.
Can I presume then God will pardon him
Who has lived all his life in deadly sin?
With what face can he now for pardon pray,
Has so offended deeply every day?
O hypocrite; thy conscience can thee tell,
That thou do think there is neither heaven nor hell.
For if thou did, it surely would appear
That thou did stand of this great God in fear;
Seeing thou did see his plagues on Egypt sent,
When Pharaohs heart would not be drawn repent,
Until the Lord had so decreed and doomed,
That he and his should in the sea be drowned,
And his elected safely brought to land,
Through the read sea, by great Jehovahs hand:
For which did Moses sing praise to the Lord,
Who did preserve them by his only word;
And Miriam she did lead the maids a dance,
Which highly did the praise of God advance.
Her Timbrel sure, did make a joyful noise,
With which hearts, hands, and feet, keep equal poise.
Good God! what difference now in this new world,
How it is altered from it was of old!
Though our solemn Revels make a stately show,
Yet these to them cannot compare I know.
Their dance set forth their joy was in their hearts;
But this, the practice of the outward parts:
That showed their thanks for a great deliverance;
These, only the state is in a courtly dance.
Such are the Masks and shows to court are sent*
Whose cost are cause make many a youth repent.
What other good in them I do not know,
Yet this new worlds proud humor it does show.
But there leave court; let country show its skill,
How apt it is to practice what is ill;
Where Pipes, and Shawms, and Fiddles fill the street
With filthy tunes, for chaste ears most unmeet:
And yet to these will men and women dance,
As though they meant the praise of hell advance.
Here Miriams timbrel sure has not been heard,
Or if it were, it was with light regard:
Her timbrel sounded out a heavenly tone;
But these do pipe or little good, or none:
Their music mounted hearts up to the heaven,
But these keep souls with bodies station even.
If one should dance as David did before the arc,
There Is many Nichals would him readily mark:
But now his like on earth's not to be seen,
Nor many such as he have ever been;
Or like to Miriam are not many more,
Though such as Michal now there are great store:
Not many Miriams on our English ground,
Though millions like to Michal may be found;
Whose light behavior in their dancing's such,
As does conduce to sinful lust in much:
And no great need, where all are apt to ill.
Though this their aptness soul and body kill.
When Miriam danced, 't was with fatal fear
Of that Jehovah who had placed them there;
And in their songs his praises they do sing,
Whose wondrous works over all the earth do ring,
But now our Michals songs are nothing so:
For they are such as bring their souls to woe.
Their dancing sent a most sweet smelling savor,
But ours casts us out of our Makers favor.
Good God! that this our English fertile land
Should harbor such as will not understand
How much they are bound unto this gracious God,
Though now we are beaten with his heavy rod,
Because we have neglected him to serve;
Who with his blood did us from death preserve
Within this Isle, wherein his Sun did shine,
Like to that blessed land of Palestine.
O Wicked world; behold how God has lest thee,
And Satan he of all good has bereft thee.
For Abraham's seed can hardly now be found,
Except it be in graves are under ground,
When who 's a Christian hardly can be known,
If by their works their faith it must be shown.
Though we profess and say that we have faith,
Our works deny it, so sacred Scripture says:
For all the world so madly runs awry,
As most forget they are born to live to dye.
O what a wicked wretched world is now,
When most of men do unto Baal bow;
Though they do seem to serve their God in show,
Their works set forth that God they do not know.
So now full time to turn our joyful singing
Into a tune of sorrow sadly weeping.
O weep, O weep; let all this Isle now weep,
When few or none are set the Lord to seek:
Though a world of people daily do increase,
Yet Gods true service daily does decrease:
When many sins are smoothed with seeming show
Of godly actions all the world does know;
For now dissembling most of men do use,
Whereby Gods honor they do much abuse:
So many think that they are free from sin,
When God does know they are filthy foul within.
And such do show Christ came not them to call,
Seeing he was sent solely for sinners all.
O blessed Lord, I do confess my sin;
Open thou the gate; that I may enter in:
For through thee only, and through thee alone,
I must have entrance, or I must have none.
Now help, Lord help; good Lord help me with speed;
Without thy help, sweet Savior, I am dead,
For with the world, good God, I am gone astray
From thee my help, my comfort, and my stay.
Since conscience says that heaven has justly left me,
Also it may that hell has justly gained me;
And so conclude there is no injustice done,
Though God refuse accept me for his son.
How do I use to make a formal lie,
Not thinking how did Ananias dye!
And yet it is held to be a slight offense,
Although for such, Sapphira carried hence.
But now we are come to such a woeful time.
As lying's thought of some to be no crime;
Because it is gilded with another name,
And yet in substance it is the very same:
We called dissembling, when we lying use;
And yet dissembling does the truth abuse;
So the nature is not altered with the name,
For this and that are both the very same.
And now it is grown to such a common sin,
As if for lying death had never been;
Seeing he that knows not how a lie to give,
He knows not how in this vile world to live.
So as it seems, who wants the art of lying,
He wants the art (in this vile world) of living.
But though this art may help a livelihood here,
Assure thy self it will not help thee there,
Where naught but truth can come to 'th' Saviors ear,
Before whom no shadows substance will appear:
He sees the secrets of each hollow heart
And will not swerye from truth in any part.
Then love this truth, and loath this art of lying,
Least thou repent it when thou art a dying:
For then thou wilt see no difference will appear.
When either of these come to thy Saviors ear.
Presume not then it is lawful to dissemble,
Lest flesh and blood too late will shake and tremble:
For though thy Savior prove to thee so kind,
As let thee live to see if thou will mind
To amend the fault so long by thee been used,
Though conscience tell thee God's therein abused;
Conceive thy heart is hardened in its sin,
And will not hear thy conscience speak within;
Who tells thee plainly that thou have offended,
And oftentimes for it been reprehended;
Yet thou do still run on in thy old course,
And in thy sin grow each day worse and worse.
But lay to heart how Ananias dyed.
And how thy self ere long must come be tried
Before a Judge admits of no dissembling,
But best of men will fall with fear and trembling*
Retain this fear, and from it never depart;
For this in time may mollify thy heart:
Or if it do not, think then it is hardened so,
As 't may expect this fatal word of Go,
Without so much as any warning given,
But for thy sin thou art deprived of heaven:
For be assured, when Ananias dyed,
He had no time to think he might be tried,
But struck to death before he answer made,
For this just Judge will not be disobayed;
And though his mercy greatly does abound,
Yet Ananias he was struck to ground,
When he had parted with a fair estate,
Intending it to help the poor man's fate;
So as it seems, to the poor his charity's such,
In our esteem, as might have helped him much:
Yet here observe that man can do no good,
How great soere, though it be his livlihood,
Which may withstand the justice of this God,
If he resolve to beat us with his rod:
For when thou have done all the good thou can,
Thou may conclude thy self a sinful man.
Then help, Lord help, good Lord help me with speed;
Without thy help, sweet Savior, I am dead:
For naught in me, but hearty penitence,
Can gain me pardon for my great offense.
Sweet Jesus teach my heart to fear and tremble,
And never forget Sapphira did dissemble;
And for that sin did suffer sudden death:
Let me retain this thought whiles I have breath:
And teach me, Lord for all my sins to weep,
And from tentation good Lord do me keep:
For my weak mind forgetful is of good;
But what is ill of me is never withstood:
For it. O Lord, I freely do embrace;
So as I see in me it is want of grace.
Supply this want in me, good Lord, I pray;
That in thy service I may every stay.
But sin is so ingrafted in my heart,
As it is loath from least of sin depart;
But rather smooth it with some seeming show,
Although 't be sin apparently we know,
So as it seems we are apt to foster ill,
But what is good, nor with good heart nor will.
Sweet Jesus help this frailty is in me,
And heal me Lord, of this infirmity:
For my weak flesh to ill says seldom No:
Sweet Jesus free me from this word of Go;
And grant me strength for to restrain my will,
That henceforth I be never overcome with ill;
But aye be lifting up my heart to thee,
And to thy name sing praise continually;
And with my tears wash off the guilt of sin,
Which my hard heart has hereto lived in;
And henceforth weep in heart, without dissembling,
To work salvation with my fear and trembling.
And teach my eyes good God, that they may weep,
And my weak flesh from sin it self to keep.
O weep, O weep; let all this Isle now weep,
If it expect from God's just judgment keep.
Let Britain weep, whose brackish sea does round it,
Lest God in justice in that sea do drown it.
Take notice now, of his most heavy hand,
In justice stretched over this woeful land.
O weep O weep; begin to weep in time,
Lest seas of tears will not wash off thy crime.
O weep, O weep, that all the world may see
How God in mercy has delivered thee.
O weep, O weep, to wash away thy guilt
Hangs over this Isle, for blood is therein spilt;
Which like to rivers on the land do run;
Lord stay it now, for Jesus sake thy Son;
That we may all with joyful noise accord
To sing the praises of the heavenly Lord,
For that his mercy great on us now shown,
When our desert is to the world well known,
O weep, O weep, that all the earth may see,
For our great sins how penitent we be.
O weep, O weep; let each one of us weep,
And every one strive from sin himself to keep.
But my hard heart, good God, is hardened so,
It often forgets the cause of all my woe.
O weep, O weep; let heart and eyes agree,
That it is for him who gave his life for thee.
O weep, O weep, with tears wash off thy sin,
If thou intend a new life now begin.
O weep O weep, now spend the night in weeping,
Which thou art wont to sot away in sleeping.
O weep, O weep, both day and night and all,
Least the wrath of God do justly on thee fall.
O weep, O weep, how great thy cause to weep,
Because thou will not from thy sin thee keep?
O weep, O weep, from morning until night:
Such weeping may help keep thy way aright.
O weep, O weep, spend all thy days in sorrow;
For such, in time, may help thy soul to borrow.
O weep, O weep, let eyes forbear to wink,
And let thy tears serve for thy daily drink.
O weep, O weep, in tears eat thou thy bread,
And with them likewise water thou thy bed.
O weep, O weep, at bed, and board, and all,
And never cease on thy sweet Savior call.
O weep, O weep, now when thy days are done,
Thy tears may help prevent thy death to come.
O weep, O weep, let never thy cheeks be dry,
And all too little, till the day thou dye.
O weep, O weep, and to thy Savior say,
Good God me pardon, I thee humbly pray.
O weep, O weep, till thou have pardon sent,
And till such time, never cease, but still repent.
O weep, O weep, to wash thy heart from sin;
Till it be clean, be sure Christ comes not in.
O weep, O weep, to cleanse that hollow place;
Mak't free from sin, and fill it up with grace.
O weep, O weep, till Christ shall to thee say.
Come now thou blessed, come, and with me stay.
O weep, O weep, until thou hear this saying;
And mix thy tears, be sure, with hearty praying.
O weep O weep till Christ be pleased to hear,
And to thy prayer vouchsafe to turn his ear,
O weep, O weep, with heart, and soul, and all,
Until such time as he shall on thee call:
For without him, thy tears are all but naught;
Receive me, Lord whom thou have dearly bought.
For my own strength good God,'s of no avail,
Except thy blood, sweet Christ, for me prevail:
For in my self, good Lord, help there is none,
But by thee only, and by thee alone.
For all my tears cannot me heaven obtain,
Except thou please, good God, with me remain.
Then come, sweet Jesus, and with me reside,
That I in thee may evermore abide.
But it is not in me, nor my power, O Lord,
Except thou please vouchsafe to say the word.
Then say to me that blessed word of Come;
Without it, Lord, I am utterly undone:
Then be thou pleased, good God, on me to call,
Else heart, and tears and soul, are wasted all.
Sweet Jesus send me, send me, Lord, I pray,
Thy holy Spirit, to keep me in the way;
The way to life I have so long neglected,
I do deserve of thee to be rejected;
And justly too, except thou so shall please,
Of thine abundant goodness, grant me ease
Of this illusion has me so deluded,
As I am justly now from heaven excluded;
But that I know that thou do not desire
A sinners death, but rather do require
That he may live, and praise thy holy name,
Who was, is now, and aye shall be the same.
Lord finish that, the great desire of me,
That I do never herehence from thee flee,
But love to follow thy most holy will,
And by thy help attain to Sions hill:
For by thy blood, Lord, and by it alone,
I must have help, or else I can have none.
For my hard heart, good God, is hardened so,
As it does deserve this fatal word of Go,
Except thou please to call unto me, Come:
Sweet Jesus grant that word may be my doom.
Then call, sweet Jesu, call me, Lord, I pray,
That I in thee for evermore may stay,
And by thy help I may have strength withstand
This fatal enemy of all humane kind,
Sweet Jesu help, help me, good God, I pray,
That I in sin do now no longer stay;
But at this present I may now begin
To make a reckoning of each several sin;
And by thy help call this day to account,
And therein see how those my sins do mount:
And not ingross them all in one gross sum,
Lest that their weight my memory may benum:
But let each hour arraigne its own offense,
And so the next produce its penitence.
Make this account from morning until night,
And well observe thou take thy aim aright,
From one till two, and then from two till three;
And in that order look thy reckoning be.
And when thou hear'st the Artists clock to strike,
Have care thy natural clock may do the like.
Observe thy care how great for earthly toys,
And then how light it is for heavenly joys.
Thou Wilt not forget to know when is time to eat;
But this thy care is not for spiritual meat.
Thou Wilt know by the clock when is time to go to bed;
But when to heaven, it does not trouble thy head,
All earthly actions by the clock thou wilt square;
Then look for heavenly such may be thy care.
Thou Wilt say the clock has struck, it is time to go;
But not to heaven; let once thy heart say so.
If thine occasions rest upon an hour,
Thou Wilt ask what is clock at every neighbors door:
And if thou find that thy set hour is past,
I hope thou wilt then redeem it by thy have.
Do these for earth with those for heaven compare,
And look for these, as for those, be thy care:
And then no doubt but thou shall surely find
Thy Saviors sufferings constantly in mind.
Begin at the secrets of thy hollow heart,
And then from thence to every other part;
And draw thy thoughts into a narrow room,
That thou may gain this blessed word of Come;
And call them all unto a strict account,
Lest, let alone, they may to millions mount:
For they are swift and like an arrow fly;
Once by their aim, they are sure to run awry.
Then have a care they always aim aright,
Or never expect that they can come to light.
Collect them often, lest thy memory fail,
Which if it do, thy conscience cannot quail.
Examine it, for each particular hour,
What service in it had thy Savior:
And then I doubt it easily will appear,
Thou have served Satan most part of the year.
For though it seem at present sound asleep,
Assure thy self a reckoning it does keep;
And will disclose all at that doleful day,
When for thy pleasure hell shall be thy pay.
Then let thy Sentinels always lie Pardue,
That they may tell when the enemy comes in veiw.
Make have to run, and think no shame to fly;
Without Christ's help thou shall be sure to dye.
For there is no hope thy conscience may forget,
But all thy sins it will before thee set:
And when thy conscience shall them so reveal,
Then shall that Satan to thy self appeal
For equal justice he may have his own:
Then by Jehovah thou shall down be thrown,
From out his presence to thee deepest hell,
And therein doomed with feinds for ever dwell;
And thenceforth never be admitted see
The glorious face of the sacred Trinity.
Sweet Jesus come, and come good Lord in time,
And with thy blood wash off my sinful crime.
That it in judgment never rise against me;
But with thy wing vouchsafe good Lord protect me.
Help Lord help Lord, and let help come with speed
To comfort him without it is but dead;
And when that thou have examined the inward thought,
Let the sentinels then be all before thee brought,
To give account of their fidelity,
Lest of their faith there may be jealousy.
Let none escape till he be soundly tried,
Lest any of them with the enemy have complied;
And so it prove, lest falsehood love may appear:
Without all pity do thou then cashere;
And let them have reward to treason due:
For never think a traitor can be true,
Since he that yields in hope of any gain,
Will stand in fear of no eternal pain.
And search each hollow in thy private tent,
For hidden treason from the enemy sent.
No law of Arms will bind him to be honest;
To breach of faith he is ever found the pronest:
And therein does he take his chief delight;
As if no good but doing that is not right.
Then be thou chary of these inward friends
Are friendly only for their private ends:
In all thy actions ever aim at the end,
And then, by that, thou wilt see whereto they tend.
A wise man will consider before he go,
His journeyes cause, and also whitherto:
And if appear some danger in the way,
And that the profit will not charge defray,
He 'l take a pause, and turn about again
Unto some other may requite his pain.
Observe that graceless gracious prodigal,
Who never bethought him till he had spent all;
And then resolved what was his best to do:
He would with speed unto his father go,
And on his knees confess what he had done,
And humbly pray accept him for his son.
Whereat his father, and most indulgent,
Was glad to see his lost son so repent;
And did retain him into former favor,
In hope of his thereafter good behavior.
Make use of this, and do apply it well;
For such in time may block up the way to hell.
So that false steward being in disgrace,
Because he had some way abused his place,
Bethought himself what then was best be done,
Whenas his Master thrust him out his room;
Since he was not inured with taking pain,
And that he could not live without some gain,
He did resolve his Master debtors call,
And set down less then by his book did fall
Due to his Master; hoping by that bout,
He might find favor when he was turned out:
Wherein his wisdom was commended more,
Then theirs of light, by our blessed Savior.
Observe, my soul, this counsel wise approve;
It came from him who is God of peace and love;
Assure thy self, these words fell from his mouth,
Who is the Essence of all real truth;
Even God of gods, and eke of might is most,
And were endited by the Holy Ghost:
Then lay them up in the closet of thy heart*
And have a care they do not from thee part.
Sow not this seed upon that stony ground,
Where there can be no firm fast footing found;
Nor yet ne'erhand that common high-way-side,
Where fowls of the air will not let it abide;
Nor where it may be chok'd with growing thorns
Will spring up faster then the growing corns.
But look it fall upon that wealthy mold,
Where every corn may bring an hundred fold;
That this thy care may prove a perfect token
Thou art one of them to whom these words were spoken;
Lest Esay's prophecy in thee be verified,
Although thou hear, yet still thy ears are tied;
And though thou see, yet still thy eyes will wink,
Because they shall not to thy hard heart sink;
Lest thou should see, and to thy Savior cry,
That he might heal thee of thy malady.
O look thou sleep not, lest the enemy come;
And sow some tares among thy winnowed corn;
And see thy salt be not without its savor,
Lest thou be cast from out thy Makers favor:
And have a care to keep this enemy out,
Who takes delight in ranging the earth about.
Avoid such sleep, and stand, and watch and pray,
That thou may drive this enemy far away.
But without help thou art not able do it;
Then pray to him who can and 's willing to it.
Sweet Jesus help this weakness is in me;
Without thy help Lord, I am sure to dye.
Then help, Lord, help; good Lord, help me with speed;
Without thy help, sweet Savior, I am dead.
For my hard heart, good God, is hardened so,
As 't does not fear this fatal word of Go.
O wicked heart, art still as aye have been,
Sleeping securely in all deadly sin?
Sweet Jesus, help; and wake me from this sleep;
And from tentation, good Lord, do me keep;
And grant that when I hear the cock to crow,
I then, like Peter, from my sin may go;
And so conceive that Princely bird was sent
To call upon me that I might repent,
And weep and grieve for all my sins, and say
Vouchsafe me pardon, good Lord, I thee pray;
And call to mind that gracious prodigal,
And not forget how I have wasted all
My life in sin; and so resolve this hour
To run with speed to my sweet Savior,
And on my knees say I have sinned against thee,
And then no doubt he will again retain me:
And that I may observe that stewards fact
Was so commended for a most wise act.
If I do so, I need not be afraid
My suit shall fail then not be denied.
Lord, sow this seed upon that fertile mold,
Where every corn may bring an hundred fold.
But I am still, as hereto I have been,
Overcome with mine own best beloved sin:
For all these are not able me remove,
But I will yet forsake my God above.
O cursed, cursed, cursed, cursed thou;
Why did so long unto this Baal bow?
What have thou got for all thy service done?
I fear thou wilt find this only, Thou art undone.
Stretch out thy hand, and show thy grath is gotten,
Thou Wilt see it (at best) 'twill prove to be but rotten:
Do but examine where lies all thy gain,
Thou Wilt find naught left, except it be some pain,
Where rests that profit by thy pleasure taken?
Even only in this; thou art of Christ forsaken.
O cursed, cursed, cursed, cursed thou,
Have had so much, and can show none on it now.
Thou Wilt say thou had pleasure; where now does it rest?
In a guilty conscience boiling in thy breast.
Tell now what part of thee thy sin did please:
Thou Wilt say thy heart did gain by it some ease:
Let Us see that ease thy pleasure has obtained,
Thou Wilt find this only, hell thereby is gained,
Ungracious he, which traveleth for such gain
As yields nothing but eternal pain.
O wicked heart, will nothing yield thee ease,
But only that thy Savior does displease?
Will nothing please, but what procures pain,
As if in loosing rested all thy gain?
What Is this thing Pleasure, which so much delights?
Even price of hell, the thought whereof me frighteth.
Hope of fruition, essence is of pleasure:
The insatiate mind is aye without all measure.
Naught can confine it in this earthly case;
Which kills it self, this pleasure to embrace;
And being had, no sooner got, but gone;
So as indeed it proves pleasure none.
Hope thou, my soul, thy Savior Christ to see:
What 's out of him, no pleasure it can be.
Look thy unlimited mind be ever set
Upon thy Savior; him do never forget:
For in him only 's pleasure worth the tasting,
Which will continue without end everlasting.
Hope for that pleasure who is delight is heavenly;
And hate all other are at best but earthly.
Buy that sweet hope at never so high a rate;
And of it be thou aye infatiate.
Hope thou in the fruition of this pleasure
Cannot be bought with any earthly treasure.
O thou proud heart, thy self wilt rather kill,
Then be abridged of thy wicked will.
Malicious heart, wilt make thy self be slain,
To gain thy corpse to get eternal pain.
Thou envious heart, because thy self condemned,
Wilt not thy precious soul should be redeemed.
Ask but thy conscience it will plainly tell thee
Thy sins are such, as hell has justly gained thee.
O fearful, fearful; when will thou begin
Forsake to fill thy hollow heart with sin?
O cruel, cruel; will thou never have done,
Till heart, and soul, and all be utterly undone?
O wretch, O wretch; will nothing turn thy course,
But thou will every day grow worse and worse?
O fly, man, fly; for thou have lost the field:
Make have to fly, or else be forced to yield;
And then thou know no quarter will be given*
But straight to hell; for the cannot come at heaven:
And so I fear I shall be loath to dye,
Because I may not come my Savior nigh;
But thrown out down unto the deepest hell,
And therein doomed with feinds for ever dwell.
Is nothing able thee for to avert,
But thou will yet unto thy sin revert?
Art so resolved to live in horrid sin*
As thy amendment thou will never begin?
Are all thy members still so stupefied,
As naught can work them to be mortified?
Wilt yet run on in this most wicked way,
Which leads directly into hell to stay?
Do all thy actions thither aim and tend?
And will thou never seek them to amend?
Now all thy life has Satan guided thee,
And will thou never from this feind to flee?
Will thou go on, as hereto thou have done,
Forgetting all what soever may be to come?
Shall I never venture once to look on death,
Until he come to take away my breath?
Have I spent all my years as yet in vain,
So as I am now to begin again?
Have I been going all my life awry,
And yet the right way could I not epsy?
Have I had eyes, and never yet could see
Nor Satan, nor his wicked treachery?
Have I been going full out seventy years,
And clean by that good way, as it appears?
What time can now be left to me behind,
If I should hap the right way once to find,
To travel this way against hill back again,
Which I have gone down hill so long in vain?
What means have I some blessed guide to get,
Shall me in that narrow way both keep and set;
The way to life, which I so much require,
And which I do with all my heart desire?
O wretched heart, for it is only thee,
Who has me brought to this great misery:
For thou have always loved to go astray,
And never yet would keep in the right way,
That way to life, which thou did love to shun,
So long, that now thy self art utterly undone;
And more then so, for thy sweet soul is lost,
Which thy deer Savior bought with so much cost.
O wretch, O wretch; now turn thy self aside,
And see if thou can find some blessed guide:
For now must thou thy compass either turn,
Or else be sure in deepest hell to burn;
Since of thy self thou have in thee no power
To keep the right way, not for one half hour,
If that by chance thou should it hap to find:
For thou by nature art become so blind,
As if thou were in that right way to day,
Thou art not able in it long to stay,
Without some help; and help there can be none,
But only Christ, and only he alone:
For there is none, thy Savior beside:
Can undertake to be to thee a guide.
Then bend thy knees, and to him heart'ly pray,
That he will take this stony heart away;
Which has misled it self and thee so far,
That without him thy wound is without cure.
But now me thinks I hear thee thus to say,
With what force can thou to thy Savior pray,
Whom thou have all thy life so long abused,
And have him likewise wilfully refused?
Neglecting him when he did lovingly call,
And to him never would give ear at all,
When he his messengers of purpose sent,
Entreating thee, for Jesus sake, repent,
And turn again unto thy Savior:
And this he did, even every several hour,
As thine own conscience can within thee tell,
That this is truth, it knows it but too well:
And yet did thou, vile wretch, most wilfully
Forsake thy God, and from thy Savior fly,
Though he did yet most lovingly follow still,
To try if he by gifts might win thy will
To turn again; and so thy Maker he
Became a loving suitor unto thee;
And with great blessings he did thee invite,
That thou would love to live within his sight.
Then thou sometime would to thy Savior cry,
O Lord, I come, or else in hell I dye:
But presently the tempter came again,
And would not let thee in right way remain:
And when the Serpent had beguiled thee,
And thou begun anew thy sin to see,
Then thou would gladly to thy Savior go.
And pray him please that he would help the fro
That man of sin, who had thee whilome gained
To act some sin from which thou not refrained;
And the pleasure past thou then again begun
To shame with that thou had but newly done:
And then would thou unto thy God again,
Who it may be should which thee a while remain;
But if he pleased but turned from thee aside,
Then thou again away from him did glide.
And this has been thy daily wonted use,
Unto thy God's, and thine own souls abuse;
Whereby he now in equal justice may,
If he thinks good, call thee from hence away:
But that his mercy's known to be much more,
And all his other attributes before:
So as there is hope if thou have grace to pray,
That this foul Satan may be driven away,
Where he shall never attempt on thee again,
If in thy Savior thou have grace remain;
And to him only thou thy self apply,
Who able is, and will most willingly
Help all of them that on his name do call,
If they bring with them heart, and soul, and all;
Or else it is bootless offer to him go;
For without the heart be sure he will say no.
Then call this heart of mine, thou blessed Lord,
Which thou have made in me by thine own word:
Vouchsafe be pleased, good Lord, to call it so,
As it from henceforth never further go
From thee my God, my Savior, and my King,
But ever more thy worthy praises sing.
And grant, good God, that though my body trade
In earthly things, because on earth 'twas made;
Yet that my soul may aye ascend on high,
And ever love the sacred Deity.
Then fast and pray, and fast and pray again,
That thou in sin do never more remain;
But herehence heartily thou thy self repent,
Performing duly wherefore thou was sent;
Which was, to serve thy God and King always,
And in his service ever live and stay:
For all the time that he to thee has lent,
Ought in his service to be solely spent;
Since thou thy self have many servants had,
Though some of them have been approved bad,
Yet thou did always this of them expect,
That they should thee and what was thine respect:
And if they careless disobeyed thee,
Then doubtless thou would very angry be;
But if they should against thee reply in word,
When thou wast ready smite them with thy sword:
And though their wages were but very small,
Yet thou expectedst they should spend even all
Their time as thou by order did direct,
Or else such servants thou would not protect
About thy house, but frowning thrust them out,
And then like vagabonds they went about.
Reflect, my soul, a while upon thy self;
Let conscience say what thou have done for pelf,
And pleasing this soul filthy flesh of thine,
Wherein is spent most part of all thy time:
For if thou did resolve one hour to spare,
In holy service of thy Savior there,
Where Saints should be, yet thou that hour did find,
Was long and tedious to thy tired mind;
Who then had thought of diverse several things,
And not attent to that which angels sings.
O what a wretched, wretched beast art thou,
Who seems to man thy knees to God to bow;
And yet thy heart is all a whoring gone,
So that thy God indeed has service none.
O wretch, O wretch, with what face can thou crave,
Or any spiritual blessings look to have
Of him who has so much increased thy store,
And does bestow on thee poor miscreant more
Then erst became that heart of thine require,
Or without shame thou could of him desire?
Yet thou a wretch, ungrateful wretch, to think
Thou art born to live for naught but eat and drink,
And so to do as though indeed there were
No place of reckoning any otherwhere
Then on this earth, where we do live, and see
Naught else but what appears to the eye
Of this our flesh, but not of that our faith;
For it has often said, and to thy soul now says
That thou art blind, and therefore can not see
That thou have any living soul in thee.
O wretch, O wretch, O thou most beastly wretch,
Have lived so long, and yet thou art to teach
That there is now a living soul in thee,
Which daily does expect eternity;
Which on this earth by no means can be gotten,
For earthly things, at best are all but rotten.
O thou my soul, shake off this clayie case,
This case of thine, which is so filthy base
As to forget that it ought ever live
For him alone who did this life it give;
Yet give he did not, but it only lent,
And looks to have it to him solely sent,
For to dispose of as he thinks best;
Or go thou down, thou cursed, or come thou up thou blessed.
O think, my soul, think seriously of this line,
In thinking of it, now spend all thy time.
A man of reason would esteem of this,
A theme sufficient for eternal bliss.
Then ruminate upon this pithy line,
And keep it always in that heart of thine;
And it will bring thee to thy way aright:
Then leave not thinking, neither day nor night;
But bear't about thee, ever in thy mind,
And thou shall surely in it treasure find.
But if thou think or intend to gain this treasure,
Thou must this day give over all earthly pleasure,
Or else be sure thou shall with sorrow prove
Thy self accursed by great Jehovah above.
Then look in time, and do thou fear this cursing;
And lieu thereof, do strive to gain this blessing.
Sweet Jesu grant that I may here so live,
As thou may please vouchsafe unto me give,
At my departure, this my latest doom,
Blessed of the Lord, do thou unto me come,
O here, my soul, be sure set up thy rest,
And keep this always in thy bony breast;
And write it there: thou wilt find it is so good,
It does deserve for to be writ in blood:
For here thy dearest blood were well bestowed,
To gain that blessing in these lines is showed;
Which thou must either now on earth obtain,
Or else thy days are all spent but in vain:
And if only so, the matter's so much less,
Though it were loss of thine eternal bliss:
But thou, in lieu thereof, shall surely gain
Both loss of bliss, and eke eternal pain.
O cruel, cruel, wretched, wretched thee,
That wilt not solely in his service be,
Who lost his dearest blood and life to bring
Thee to be capable of that great blessing,
Which none can have but only them alone,
Who come to gain it by his passion.
Then thou, my soul, his passion so apply,
As through it only thou may live, not dye.
Apply it then, and do apply it right,
And it will keep thee always in his sight,
Who dyed for thee, and greatly did desire
That he may free thee from the infernal fire,
Wherein thy conscience tells thee thou must burn,
Except thou quickly to thy Savior turn.
Then turn thou to him, and turn to him so,
As thou gain not this doleful word of Go.
O fearful saying, of all the very worst,
That erst was heard these words of Go accursed.
O horrid, horrid, horrid, fearful thing,
To be cast out from sight of this our king,
Who lovingly did freely suffer death,
To bring thee sinner to eternal life.
Then gain this life, how deer soere it cost:
For this, of all whatsoere, concerns thee most.
Then think of this, and think on it seriously,
And it will teach thee live most virtuously;
And then be sure that thou in the end shall have
What this thy soul can in it soul but crave.
Then crave it, crave it; do thou crave with zeal
That Christ himself may to thy soul reveal
The secret virtue of his death and blood,
Which he so shed for thine eternal good.
Here do thou build; here is good foundation,
Freed from all danger of inundation;
The only rock whereon stands saving health,
Which is more worth then all this worldly wealth:
For herein solely's perfect happiness,
The very essence of all blessedness.
Here build, my soul, and do thou build so high,
That the building reach above the starry sky,
Where thy blessed Savior sits himself alone,
Upon that blessed glorious heavenly throne;
Which none beholds, but them are only his,
And by his passion enter into bliss:
For all the accursed are from thence thrown down
By God above, with such a furious frown,
As they shall never enabled be to see
The face of the sacred glorious Trinity.
O fear, O fear, beyond all other fears,
The thought whereof my very heart even tears.
Then if thou will this hideous fear prevent,
Remember the cause for which was it hither sent:
And if thou do not that thy end forget,
It may procure a place for thee to sit
Among that glorious heavenly angels quire,
Which is thy soul's it chief and sole desire.
O be not thou so far then overseen,
As thou have all thy lifetime hereto been,
To sleep in sin, and that so securely,
As though in it thou did intend to dye.
But now it is time to rouse thy self from sleep,
If thou intend from sin thy self to keep;
Or else be sure in lieu of sleeping sink
Into that horrid fearful place of stink,
Where thou shall live deprived of heavenly bliss,
Or sight of heaven, where thy sweet Savior is.
Then sleep no more, but rise, and stand, and pray,
And to thy Savior do thou always say,
Come, blessed Lord, vouchsafe on me to call,
That I do never herehence from thee fall:
But if I do, then call, good Lord, again,
That I from sin my self may now refrain,
And freely come to thee at this thy call,
And so in time prevent that fatal fall,
From whence no hope that thou can rise again,
But ever live eternally in pain.
Then stand in fear to fall, if thou be wise,
And from thy sleep (in have) do now arise;
And fast and pray, and fall upon the ground,
That blessings may from heaven on thee abound:
And these thy prayers do thou iterate,
That they thereby thy pains may mitigate,
And heav thy soul up to the heavens, from whence
(If not) thou must receive due recompense
For sin, the wage whereof assure thy self is death,
Which thou must pay, with loss of dearest breath.
Then do thou look upon this death again,
And see if he be now the very same
He seemed to be when justly thou condemned
Thy self of sin, which did so fore offend
Thy God and King, who't was did place thee here,
That thou might always live of him in fear:
And then thou should not need have any care,
Though death did come, and take thee to his share.
Death has no power that man at all to harm,
Who is defended by Jehovah's arm:
And though that death indeed o'recometh all,
He only comes when God himself does call.
For God makes death to be his instrument,
To strike when he by God alone is sent.
Then make thy suite to thy blessed Savior sweet,
As it is thy duty, and not all is meet,
That he will please both thee and thine defend
From deadly sin, until thy life have end;
And then fear not, for sure thou shall not miss
Of gaining that, is thine eternal bliss,
Which is prepared for all that only cry
Upon their blessed Savior heartily.
But this most sinful hollow heart of mine
Does stay my soul, that it can never shine
As it desires, but forced is comply
With my hard heart, which daily does deny
To entertain ought that shall tend to good,
But ill it loves, like as does stomach food.
Vouchsafe, good Lord, I do most humbly pray.
Be pleased to take this tempter quite away:
For it is he who makes me thus blind,
And leads this man even up and down with the wind:
For wheresoere the wind does turn to blow,
That way does he entice me likewise now.
O teach, O teach me, Lord, I humbly pray,
That I in thee may ever live and stay;
And so to shun each ill occasion,
Which does proceed of that illusion
Of him is wont, and yet still leads me
To take his bait, and so to forsake thee.
Deceitful bait, which did me so entice
The apple eat, and yield my life the price.
O wretch, O wretch, that will so wretched be;
Was never born a man so blind as thee?
Thus to be gulled, as thou have ever been,
To loose thy life in lieu of a little sin?
Was ever sinner seen so fooled as thou,
To such a feind as Satan is, to bow?
Yea, though thou see him plainly before thy face,
Yet thou do hold it for no great disgrace
To be led by him as thou willing art,
Because he is harbored close within thy heart.
O call thy wits about thee now at last,
When all thy days are done, and life is past.
Look at thy end thou can not choose but see
How subtle Satan has deluded thee;
Whereby thou now art brought to such a stay,
As neither devil, nor yet this death can fray
Thee from thy sin. O see, man, do thou see
What is that sweet in pleasing sin can be,
Whereby the art brought to be so overcom'd,
As all thy senses are indeed benumbed.
For Satan makes thee so insatiate,
As thy case now is grown be desperate.
Did ever man by any pleasure gain,
When by that pleasure he was in it slain?
Is not he mad, that will of poison eat,
Although he have not any other meat?
Will any drunkard pleasing poison drink,
When sudden death does make him down to sink
To the deepest hell, and there in it remain
Without all hope of turning ere again?
And yet art thou more mad by much then he,
And wilt not from this thy great madness be
Reformed, but still in madness thou runst on,
Till thou have gained thy self confusion
Both of thy body and thy soul: and yet
Thou (wretched) do thy self so far forget,
As thou will not so much as think of the end
For which thy God did to this earth thee send.
Have thou thy sense to take a taste of food,
And difference make betwixt the ill and good,
And which of them does best thy pallat please;
And by thy sense art able judge of these?
But yet if thou did know of poison there,
I hope thou would not take it without fear,
And yet (mad man) so taken art with sin,
Though worse by much then poison be therein,
As that thou will not this thy sin forbear,
But thou will act it boldly without fear?
Art thou not mad? nay further, more then so,
Thou runst from heaven, that thou to hell may go:
And yet 'twixt these there is a difference great.
He that is mad, has no taste of his meat,
And so with madness may be overtaken;
For want of reason makes man be mistaken.
But thy case differs from this mad man's much:
For thy mad senses they cannot be such,
Seeing they their reason with them do retain,
And commit sin, in hope to get some gain;
As pleasure, profit, or some private end,
Or somewhat else may unto pleasure tend;
Which to the senses plainly do appear,
Although in that (they surely senseless are)
And thereby they of selves and souls make sale,
To gain a thing being got's of no avail,
And yet by it they lose eternal bliss,
The only end of perfect happiness.
O fondling, fondling, do not fool away
Thy soul, as thou have done this present day,
For want of good and due consideration,
Which is a maine step to confusion.
Do but consider what is the end of all,
And then there is hope that thou shall never fall,
Except thou be as hereto thou have been,
Most wilfully bent to be loved sin;
And then there is not any hope of thee,
But for thy sin thou shall be sure to dye:
And thou shall reap the wages therefore due;
For pleasing sins ill pleasing death accrue.
Are there no threats can mollify this heart?
Is It hardened so, in every several part,
As threats nor treats have power to enter there,
Till death do come, and with his dart appear?
And then will thou begin with sorrow find
How Satan he has made all of thee blind,
And gulled the so as thou shall then well see
Thy very soul within hell gates to be;
And then, O then, with sorrow thou wilt begin
To weep and grieve for this thy deadly sin:
When time is past, and days one earth are done,
Then it is too late for thee thy sins to shun:
And then thou wilt see that thou thy self wast mad,
To sin so long, and that without all dread;
And never look nor aim at that thy end,
For which thy God did to this earth thee send:
Or if sometimes thou did, yet presently
Thou felst to sin, and from thy Maker fly;
And though thy Savior called on thee again,
Yet still did thou in that thy sin remain,
And turn thy back when God himself did call,
And would not turn thy self to God at all.
So as thou can not now of right repine,
If he should smite this wicked heart of thine,
And in his anger from heaven throw it down
From out his presence, with an angry frown;
And further say unto thee, Cursed, go
To hell, which is prepared for thy woe.
O woe beyond all other kind of woes,
To him that runs from heaven, to hell that goes.
O wretched, wretched, wretched miscreant thou,
To leave thy God, and to his enemy bow:
For both of these do admit of no mean,
Since God and Mammon they do differ clean.
Then leave thy madness, and do now become.
A new man before that dreadful day of doom.
There Is yet some hope, if thou have any grace,
By help of Christ, for thee to gain a place
Within that City new Jerusalem,
Which is prepared for every each one of them
That to him come with humble heart and voice,
And in his service do live and rejoice;
And do repent them of their former sin
And wicked life which they have lived in.
Then do repent, if thou have any grace,
Although for it there is but a little space:
The lesser time, the sorrow's so much more;
Then fill this short time now with sorrow store;
And weep and grieve for all thy sins and groan,
And to thy Savior make thy sorrowful moan.
It may be he will please to lend his ear,
If that thy sorrow from heart roots appear:
But if thy sorrows should not come from thence,
Never think that he will pardon thine offense.
Then search each hollow in thy sinful heart,
And look that Satan have not any part:
For if that feind shall have but the least share,
Be sure thy Savior he will not come there:
For he will have thy heart himself alone,
And partners in it he 'll admit of none.
Then bend thy knees, and lift to heaven thy heart,
That God on high may hear, by whom thou art
In some hope yet of gaining heavenly bliss,
If he will but say that thou art only his;
Which he has promised faithfully perform
To all of them that to him heartily turn.
Then turn, my soul, with heart, and mind, and all,
To this good God, who thee does often call,
And is desirous for to receive thee,
If heart and mind do thereto but agree
To leave thy sin, and of it to repent,
And really, with good and true intent,
Resolve for ever to continue free
From Satan's subtle slightful gullerie,
And further make good restitution
Of all the wrongs to any thou have done;
Then willingly be sure he will thee hear,
And to thy suite he will apply his ear,
And yield thee comfort from the heavens above,
Thy Savior sweet, who is God of peace and love;
And is desirous to have sinners all
To come to him, and does them often call.
Then to him, to him, do thou freely run;
For he does no man's prayers use to shun
Are made in zeal, but willingly will them hear,
And to them then most lovingly will appear,
And grant them all their hearts petition,
And of their sins a full remission:
But this remission thou thy self must gain,
With grief and sorrow, and some bod'ly pain:
For all thy members must of pain partake,
As well thy aged limes as that thy heart.
Then teach thy knees, that they may bow and bend
To God on high, who did them to thee lend,
Not for to serve his cruel enemy,
But rather 'twas to eschew his company.
Then fly him, fly him, and do him forsake,
That he be never able thee overtake:
For he is always waiting opportunity
To wind himself into thy company;
And there he seems a faithful friend to be,
When he is professed thy deadliest enemy;
And fawnes, and flatters, and does love to lie,
For fear that falsehood thou in him might spy:
For he is cunning in each one of these,
And does desire thy senses for to please,
That he with slight might so to them wind in,
As he may keep them still in their own sin,
By offering some fair goodly gilded pills,
Who Is golden outside's stuffed with inward ills.
Beware of such, for such he often uses;
And with such shifts (fond man) he thee abuses.
O trust him not; for he is at best a thief,
And seeks his own ends, but in fine thy grief;
For he delights himself in nothing more,
Then to see a man who is to sin given over;
And such a one he likes and loves well,
And to him will he pleasing stories tell
Of great contentment he shall surely have,
But never a word as yet he will speak of grave:
Or if he do, there is time enough, he will say;
Thou may do that upon some other day.
But take time now, whenas the time does serve,
If thou intend thy soul for to preserve:
For time will not be tied to the best man's leisure,
Therefore this day do thou give over thy pleasure;
And think of death, who is knocking at thy door,
And enter may, perchance, within an hour;
Except thy hearty prayers him prevent,
Being made to that Jehovah has him sent.
Then sue to him, who is thy Savior sweet,
And on thy knees most humbly him entreat,
That he will please to safe keep thee from sin,
Which all thy life thou have loved and lived in;
And pray that henceforth thou may live aright,
Being ever mindful thou art in his sight;
As if this were of life thy longest day,
And thou might here on earth no longer stay,
But yet before this day might have an end,
Thy Savior should for thee this servant send,
And call of thee to make a strict account
Of sins whose sum I fear will highly mount;
As well thy thoughts, and idle words and deeds,
As what thou do nor do, nor think, nor heeds:
And then will thou entreat him he will spare
Thee yet a while, that thou may thee prepare
To make thy reckoning such as may be straight,
Which thou never dream'dst it should ere come to light;
Or if thou did, thy sin's so much the more,
That being known, thou did not do it before,
Whilst thou had time; because in time thou might
Have made thy reckoning such as should be right;
But now the art taken in that Satan's snare,
Because thou did not thee in time prepare.
Then think, my soul, in what case thou art in,
Overcome with thy own best beloved sin,
Whereof thou always have more reek'ning made,
Then of thy Savior was for the betrayed,
And suffer pains of death for thy sins sake,
That free from death he might thee (sinner) make;
Although himself did never sin at all,
But to preserve thee, that thou should not fall.
O what a loving kind, sweet Savior's this
Who came from heaven, that glorious place of bliss
Down to this earth, where he did freely give
His life, that thou through him might ever live.
Then live in him, and do him ever love,
This thy good God, Jehovah, who is above:
Here stay, my soul, a while, and ruminate
What blessings came by Christ to thy estate,
Even the only death of this thy God and king,
And evermore to him due praises sing:
For he does well deserve the same always;
Then sing with joy to him eternal praise.
O sing, my soul, and now let us jovial be,
That this thy Savior pleased to dye for thee.
But if it were for thee thy Savior dyed,
Then must thy life to his be thus applied.
Have I lived so as my Savior Christ has done,
Although he were God's own and only Son?
Who never had but one poor simple coat,
And that even plain, not laid with lace, I wot,
But was all woven without any seam:
Mark well this coat, for it is a worthy theme
To think upon, since it so well became
Both child and man, and always was the same,
And grew as he grew, yet it did not wear,
Nor waxed old, but did indeed appear
As fresh at last, when as it was put off.
As 't was at first, when as it was put on.
He had nor hat, nor band, nor had he boots,
Nor any change had he of other suits.
For head and feet he did not like thee care,
But all his life he ever ware them bare:
And when he prayed* his knees were ever such;
For his fleshly corpse he never respected much,
But kneeled always down upon the ground;
For cushions were as yet not to be found,
I do not hear that he did eat his fill;
Of too much meat there ever comes ill:
But I am well assured that he did fast
Till forty days were ended all and past,
Nor do I read that he did use drink much;
For doubtless sin is often seen in such:
Nor did he look to lie so very soft,
As most of men will now a days do often,
But on bare earth was ever his best bed,
Whereon he always used to lay his head,
If lie at all. And yet for all of this,
The earth it self, and all therein, were his.
Now thus, my soul, say to my sinful heart,
If thou expect in Christ have any part,
Do thou not fine apparel like and love?
For by it thou thy self art set above
Some neighbors, who much better do deserve,
But that thy clothes before them do thee prefer;
Whereby thy heart is somewhat touched with pride,
If there be nothing in it else beside.
He was not wont to alter his old fashion,
But used the same in every several Nation.
Have thou done thus? I stand in fear on it much;
For now in England fashion is not such;
But thought it better out of the world have been,
Then out of fashion in the world been see.
But know betimes, who use this fashion follow,
Shall bring their soul in the end to mickle sorrow.
Have thou, my heart, observed his bare head?
Or do thou keep thine own uncovered,
Even in the temple? since example's much;
For there be many fools are led by such.
Or do thou use in thy privy chamber so,
When to thy Savior art resolved to go?
I know to the most thou will put off thy hat,
And yet sometimes there may be pride in that.
And here observe what thou thy self have seen,
How many fashions have in England been
Of these same hats, which sure at first were sent
But for an idle needless ornament;
And yet of them one fashion will not stand
Scant twice twelve months within our English Land.
If thou have a suit unto an earthly lord,
That he will but please to speak for thee a word,
I hope thou wilt then come with thy hat in hand,
Although't be made but for some small demand;
And yet now when thy life and all 's at stake,
And thou alone must to thy Savior make,
Who 's King of kings, and also Lord of lords,
And makes them by his own and only words;
Yet in his presence thou (base earth) wilt stand,
Yet not vouchsafe to have thy hat in hand.
Consider well, and think what this may be,
I am sore afraid of a fearful sin in thee.
When thou do kneel, are both thy knees then bare?
Or do thou kneel at all, but only there,
Among the chosen congregation
Whereas this kneeling is an usual fashion?
And do thou do it then on God's bare ground,
As thy sweet Savior oftentimes was found?
If not, I fear thou have thy God offended,
Because thou prayedst and yet thy knees unbended.
Have thou been used barefooted for to go?
I fear thy heart will tell thee truly no.
Have thou forborne, being hungry, eat thy fill?
Or have not thou oft-times even eaten till
Thy stomach did desire to have no more,
If so there were of pleasing viands store?
Nay has not thine offense been sometimes such,
As that thy stomach did desire too much?
Or have not thou been often choice of meat,
Or else with pleasing pallat could not eat?
Nay, have not thou sometimes with too much cost,
Provided what was pleasing to thee most,
For to content thy dainty appetite?
I do much fear, herein thou did not right.
Have thou forborne at all to drink thy fill?
Or did not thou even drink so long until
Thy stomach did desire to have no more,
If pleasing wine there were but any store?
Especially when the drink did prove be such,
Wherein thy pallat was but pleased much.
Nay have not thou thereby been sometimes made
So very drunk, that thou would not be said?
Then was it not sin, in taking of this drink?
Yes sure there was, and so I know do think.
Have thou forborne sometimes to eat thy meat,
Whenas thy stomach did desire to eat,
And had it ready then within thy power?
Did thou forbear to eat for forty hour?
And if thou did, then say now for what end
Did thou so fast? was it from heart to send
Thy prayers up unto thy God on high,
Who for his service only did make thee?
And was it thus thy fleshly lust to tame,
Which needs would force thy body be to blame?
The tempter he did move thy Savior much,
Yet Satan's self thy Savior could not touch:
For he would not believe the Serpents wiles,
Since it is trust which most of men beguiles.
Then fast and pray, and do thou put thy trust
In God alone; for he is only just:
And fear this feind, and him forsake and fly,
And trust him not, for he is too too slye.
But have an aiming always at thy end,
And in thy way expect to meet this feind:
For he at all times well prepared is,
For to advise thee do what is amiss.
And therein he does take his most delight,
And will persuade thee that thou art in right.
Have thou been used to lie upon the ground?
I fear there will but a very few such be found.
Nay, have not thou delighted often lie
On the softest bed thou could well come by?
And say, have thou forborne thy bed at all,
That on thy Savior thou for grace might call?
Nay have not rather much more loved sleep,
Then that thou should from rest thy body keep?
Nay, have not thou committed horrid sin,
And without pardon on thy bed down lain?
Nay, have not thou even often fallen asleep,
Without entreating God would please thee keep?
Nay, have thou thought how thou thy life have led,
That day before thou wentst unto thy bed?
Did thou cast up that day its sin's account,
Or to such custom art thou daily wont?
Did thou give thanks to God for blessings sent?
Of sins committed did thou thee repent?
Nay rather, did not thou omit them both,
Because leave sleeping thou wast very loath?
Nay, have not thou sometimes thy sleep forsaken,
To commit sin, whenas thou wast awaken?
Nay, have not thou forsaken thy sweet sleep,
That thou thy self in pleasing sin might keep?
Nay, have not thou spent many a life-long night,
To follow that, which was thou know not right?
Nay, have not thou delighted more in night,
Yea often better then thou did in light?
Examine truly the cause of this thy love,
If so it were to serve thy God above;
Or rather was it not to avoid his sight,
Who thou did dream unable see in night?
O wretched beast, can thou conceive it so?
Then be assured that God thou do not know.
But 't cannot be that thou art of that mind,
But that the devil has made all of thee blind,
For fear thou should thy sensual sin now see,
Which thine own conscience knows a shame to be.
For never man on earth so brutish born,
But brutish sin (if in his sight) did scorn:
And therefore such as work of darkness named,
Because, if seen, that man would be ashamed.
O shameless man that is blind, and cannot see
How subtle Satan has deluded thee,
To act a sin in darkness of the night,
As though thou were (then) out Jehovah's sight!
Yet though thy sin were such, and ended were,
Thy conscience tells thee that thy God's not there,
Yet saw thy sin, and also punished will
Except thou do repent thee of that ill.
O then, for shame, repent thee of that fact.
Wherewith thou blushed to have been seen in the act.
For though that mortals have no power to see,
Without the light comes from the Deity;
Yet God himself, who Maker was of light,
Did likewise make, for the good of man, the night;
But not to hide our sin it was he made it,
Although the Devil by cunning so abuse it:
For he delights himself in darkness much,
And so do all of them are sinners such;
Whereby their conscience does them plainly tell,
They darkness love, and therefore shall have hell.
O horrid, horrid, fearful horrid mind,
Which can not see that thou art even stone-blinde.
But thou will say, that thou did so much know,
But that even then thou did forget it though.
O wretch, O wretch, that can so soon forget
That thou have any soul within thee yet;
And that thy Savior suffered death for thee,
If thou do fear and from this Satan fly:
But thou do yield to follow this feind still,
And love him dearly with good heart and will;
Yet think that God himself cannot thee see,
Because he is secret in thy heart with thee,
Which keeps close within thy brazen breast,
Where none can come but them whom thou like best.
Yet outwardly it plainly does appear,
Whom inwardly thou love and harbourst there:
For the very secrets of thy heart are shown
By the outward actions which are too well known.
For, to proceed, thy conscience can thee tell,
Not from above, but even from lowest hell:
For 'twixt these two thou can not find a mean,
But thou must either go to hell or heaven.
Then blame thy self, if that thou do amiss,
To make thy choice of that, and forsake this,
Has ever man been born so blind as he,
Which can, and may, and yet (often) will not see?
For such are all of them are so behaved,
Whose sin to Satan has their bodies slaved:
For they are well said slaves to death and sin,
Who faithful servants to the Devil have been.
O horrid, horrid; what more horrid still,
To think of this which is the end of ill?
Can it be possible man's Reason should forget,
Before all his actions the end thereof to set?
But if a man be able see yet's blind,
No marvel then if he forget in 's mind;
For that proceeds out of his wilfulness,
But this out of defect, forgetfulness:
And both these weapons does the Serpent use,
And many more besides, this man to abuse:
And no great need, for that this man alone,
Even of himself, to sin is ever prone;
And does in's pleasure take so much delight,
As what is wrong he will it shall be right.
Yet cannot he from such vain thoughts be brought,
Cause blind to good, yet willing see what is naught.
O wretched man, to be of such a feature,
And yet overcome by such a wicked nature!
And then thou wilt say, that this thy nature's such,
And that thou art not able alter't much.
Art now become a very naturalist?
Even such is every senseless natural beast.
As are the untamed Lion, Bear, or Bull,
Or like to that the beastly horse or mule:
Yet all of these their nature so do heed,
As bounds of nature they do never exceed.
For can thou make a horse by force to eat,
When stomach does not serve him to his meat?
Or can thou make him's belly for to fill,
Or yet to drink, if 't be against his will?
Examine conscience, it may chance to say,
There is some man offended has this way;
So as these creatures may right well arise,
To teach fond man how to become be wise.
But thou, I hope, have more in thee then so,
Or else had thou never been made man, I know:
Thou have, I am sure, a living soul in thee;
But thou being blind, this soul thou will not see.
Yet when thy eyes are open, thou plainly do,
And careful art that it should not be lost.
O then have care, keep open these eyes of thine,
That they may make thy soul within thee shine
In sight of him who did it in the make,
And gave his life even for thy own souls sake.
Then to him, to him do thou freely go,
And pray that he will please thy eyes keep so,
Thou may be bold to look up unto him
Without all dread, or any deadly sin:
For he alone it is must thee defend,
Or else there is danger great of thee at the end.
Then fall before him on thy bended knees,
Who heart, and thought, and all thy actions sees;
And pray, and pray, and pray to him again,
That he will please within thee to remain,
And open thy eyes, so as thou may well see
The cruel torments he endured for thee;
And ever have them constantly in mind.
And then thou shall not fear to become blind:
But such thou art, and such wilt ever be,
If that thy Savior shall a while leave thee.
Then pray to him, and pray continually,
That he will keep thee for eternity.
Pray without ceasing, do thou never lin,
Lest that thou enter into horrid sin:
For if thou should neglect to God to pray,
Be well assured he will no longer stay.
O stay with me, sweet Jesu, in my heart,
That I from thee herehence do never depart;
But ever praying to thee night and day,
That in thy service I may always stay,
With heart, and soul, and all is in my mind;
But all of these are apt to become blind.
For now my conscience does me plainly tell,
That all, even all of me is nothing well,
For that I see my thoughts do love to range,
And think of things are uncouth and most strange,
Against my settled resolution quite,
From what is good, to that which is not right:
And yet, O Lord, it is not in my power
To make them stay, no not for one half hour;
But they are gone, I do not well know where,
Sometimes far off, and sometimes also near;
And never rest upon one stable theme,
But often flying out beyond the Realm.
So as from gadding they will not stay for me.
I know not well what the cause thereof should be.
But by experience I do too well find,
They Will not be guided by that is my mind;
Which solely's set to serve my God and King,
And evermore to him due praises sing;
And strive to keep them in that blessed way,
Nor never wander out, nor go astray.
But then, even then, my wandering thoughts are gone,
And that perchance to some strange region,
And never use ask of me any leave,
But of my good thoughts they do me bereave;
Whereby apparently I understand,
That my own thoughts are not in my own hand:
Nor is it in me with force them to restrain,
Where I desire that they should aye remain;
But suddenly they roam and run about,
To find that rest which cannot be found out,
So as I am not able make them stay,
But they are gadding still some other way.
For though I strive with heart to make them think
What I am writing with this pen of ink,
Yet before I get but half of one line done,
They are to seek, and from me quite out gone;
Though I desire with all my very heart,
That they should stay, and not from me depart
Till I have done what I in heart desire,
And what my soul does in it soul require:
Which is to cause them rest alone in thee
Who has me made, and likewise them in me.
But sure if God did them unto me send,
He sent them doubtless for some other end,
And not to reel and ramble up and down,
From this to that, and then to the the other town;
And never stay where I wish they should be,
But always running out abroad from me;
Whereby does rise a case full of some doubt
What this may be which runs thus about
From heaven to hell, and then to heaven again;
But yet being there, will not in heaven remain,
Where I desire that they should ever rest,
Because I know that place is ever blessed
With the glorious presence of my Savior sweet,
With whom my heart desires my soul may meet;
And there to stay, and ever with him live,
Whose goodness did it freely to me give:
And then I doubt not but my soul shall rest
Where I desire, and do in heart request
Thou will vouchsafe within me bless them so,
As they shall never from thy service go.
In the mean time, till thou vouchsafe to say,
Come thou the blessed, come, and with me stay,
Here bide, my soul, and now set up thy rest;
For by him solely thou art only blessed:
And have a care thou from him never depart,
Nor in thy thought, nor in thy very heart;
For this, I fear, will prove too much in blame,
Because I am not able the other tame:
For if my heart were of it self upright,
It would not wander, nor be out on's sight,
Who freely gave it for no other end,
But him to serve even world without all end.
O wretched, wretched, beast that thou should be;
Have lived so long, and yet live wretchedly?
Not minding the end for which was it hither sent,
Forgetful also of thy sins repent.
What shall I think of this vile ill condition,
That after so much godly admotion
Of weakness great, if so I rightly call it;
But I think rather strength I may so term it:
For sure I am that it does overcome me,
And by my mind it will not ruled be:
For I desire, with all my very heart,
My secrets solely to my God impart,
And in him wholly by true faith confide,
And in him solely in my soul reside;
Yet I am drawn, I cannot well say how,
To think of things which I do not know now:
For such are often got into my thought,
Which are not worthy of remembering ought,
If I should have desire them to recall,
Which is a thing not possible at all;
And if they could by me be spoke again,
As they are hourly hatched in my brain,
A man might well be thought to be but mad,
Who in his head such idle thoughts has had,
Wherein is neither sense, nor any reason,
Nor ought which is befitting any season.
And some will say such has a giddy head:
I think most men are of that stamp indeed.
When they are not stable in their inward mind,
But alter so as does the inconstant wind.
I marvel not if some such there should be;
For such I am sure is I my self, I see;
And yet my wit cannot it comprehend,
Why I this madness in me cannot mend;
Though I resolve to force it with me stay
Within an instant it will me oresway,
And many times to somethings that are ill,
And that directly against what is my will.
So I am not able of my self to say
What this may be which hurrieth me away:
For though I set my mind to accomplish this
I am about, which is not much amiss
(As I conceive) yet in me is it so,
My wandering thoughts are carried to and fro,
So as I cannot these my thoughts confine,
From end to end of one poor silly line;
Though I do strive, and often them invite
Help me these mean and simple lines endite,
Which I begun in hope of gaining good
To be obtained by Christ his precious blood;
Though still I find, to my no little grief,
I have as yet received but small relief;
Because my thoughts they will not be my own,
But from my Savior they still press me down,
So as I cannot in sweet Jesus stay,
Not one half hour, no not in one whole day,
Without some idle interruption,
Intending deeply my destruction.
For I do plainly of it thus conceive,
It Is want of grace which cause my thoughts to rave;
Since I may well compare them to the Kite,
Who puling soars aloft a mighty height,
Until he spy some beastly carrion;
Then down he comes, in have to seize upon
That filthy thing, whereon he falls and feeds
His gorge so full, that he for ease must needs
Take rest a while, and after that again
He does return, and feeds thereon amain;
And never far is drawn depart from it,
So long as there is left one little bit,
But flies about within sight of his prey,
Except he be by a stronger forced away;
And if he be, he will by and by retreat
To feed again upon that pleasing meat:
Even so these wandering thoughts of mine surmount
The starry sky, where I do make account
That they should stay; but presently they come
Down to this earth, where they do love to roam
And roave (yea rave) and there do run about,
Until they find some pleasing pleasure out;
Whereon they rest themselves a while, and then
They reel again, and ramble like mad men
Are fighting for they cannot well tell what,
Nor matters much, so as it be not that
Whereon they ought in heart to think upon,
Which is my Savours bitter passion;
And it they neither relish, sent, nor feel;
So as by that I see they are not well,
Nor will not be, except sweet Jesus please,
Of his abundant goodness, grant me ease
Of this my madness: for indeed so it is,
It does deprive me of that heavenly bliss
Which thou, O Lord, of thine abundant love,
Have promised them are marked for heaven above;
Who only call on thy most holy name,
And in thy service do resolve remain:
For calling is but to a little end,
Without my life I seek for to amend;
And that I see is not in my own power,
Except, good God, thou please shut out of door
This wicked legion that still leads me
From heaven to earth, and then unto the sea;
And back with speed unto the earth again,
And there he suffers me a while remain,
Till I begin, O Lord, to come to thee,
Then he begins (that legion) trouble me
And puts me off with some fair slighty tale.
Whereby I set all former hopes to sale,
For some fond pleasure the subtle Serpent shows,
Which I accept, and so it down me throws
From out the presence of my blessed Lord,
Who has me promised by his sacred word,
If that I will but to him freely come,
He will redeem me from that doleful doom
Of Go thou cursed into the hell of fire,
Which all thy actions seem for to desire;
Since thou thy self do lovingly embrace
Whatsoere is set before thy sinful face
By that foul feind; and even with greatest joy,
Though it do tend to thy greatest annoy,
And utter ruin of thy whole estate,
Which few but fools will buy at any rate;
Who never aim at any other end,
But what this earth to them on earth does send:
For hence these wretches never think to go,
Till they be hurried hence into all woe.
For though my conscience even now tells me,
That death at door I do most plainly see,
Yet I presume that he will make no have,
And so in sin my life I utterly waste;
Not minding these thy bounteous great blessings
God gives to me, by his long-sufferings,
In hope that I Will my sinful life repent,
Performing duly wherefore I was sent;
Which was to serve my God both day and night,
As all they do who love to live in's sight.
But I, poor I, a miserable wretched beast,
Of all things else of that (most needful) least;
So as I find there is nothing is in me,
But only death-deserving cruelty;
And that I do with very great hearts delight,
And the reason is, because it is not right:
For what I only ought to think upon,
That either's now from me already gone,
Or else I do it with a most dull sprite,
Which shows I have but an ill appetite
For to perform that which I ought to do
Both with a mind and willing heart thereto;
But these I find always are always apt to ill,
And that they will do, though it be against my will:
And further, therein they do take delight,
Though conscience say that they are not in right:
But conscience is not able these two guide;
For even against conscience they away do slide
From heaven to earth, where these two both do lie,
Without respect who it is that sits on high:
So as with grief I do most plainly find,
That there is always something in my mind
Which should not be, if I could tell to mend it;
But 'twill be so, till God shall please to help it.
Sweet Jesus therefore please to come to me,
That I in heart may also come to thee,
And on thy passion steadfastly e're think,
And never depart, or from thy suffering shrink,
But always have it constantly in mind,
And there my thoughts be well assured to find,
Where I desire that they should ever be,
With thee, dear God, dear God, alone with thee.
Sweet Jesus grant, if 't be thy blessed will,
Vouchsafe be pleased to keep them with thee still,
And never let them far from thee depart,
But keep both them, and also my poor heart,
Out Satan's reach, that he do never more
Me overcome, as he has done before,
This my weak heart, who is faint, and has no power
Within it self, no not for one half hour,
It self to keep, except it so shall please
My Savior sweet this great tentation cease:
For thou O Lord, and only thou alone
Must either help, or other I have none.
And therefore now I humbly to thee pray
Thou will vouchsafe with me good Lord to stay,
And safe me keep from all tentation
Of that most subtle wicked Legion,
Who winds himself into my very heart,
And will not thence (by me) be drawn depart,
Except thou please good Lord to cast him out,
And let him range this terrene world about.
And nere attempt to set on me again:
But cause me still good God in thee remain,
That I O Lord may ever in thee live,
And heart and mind unto thee freely give;
That with good conscience I may safely say,
Thou'^t in my heart, and there do live and stay,
'Cause in my thoughts I do it surely find
That thou art firmly seated in my mind,
And will not suffer idle worldly toys
For to deprive me of those heavenly joys,
But that in them I may put my delight,
And banish all whatsoere that are not right:
So as no pleasure shall be able move
My heart from thee my Savior God above,
But that in thee I may repose my rest
In whom alone I shall be only blessed,
So I from thee do not again now fall,
But on the name of my sweet Savior call,
When Satan does my weak faint heart delude,
And on my weakness does himself intrude,
Whereby he seeks to draw me still away
From thee my Savior and my only stay,
By some deceitful bait which he has set
To overtake me in that woeful net,
Wherein are taken every one of those
Who in that Fiend do any trust repose:
For who him trust, them surely he deceives,
And of all goodness he them quite bereaves:
Then trust him not; for if that so thou do,
Assure thy self thy soul is utterly lost:
For there was never any gained by him,
Who does endeavor invite all to sin.
Whatsoere he seems in show for to pretend,
Be sure to find a horrid death in the end:
For all his projects are but crafty wiles
Whereby poor sinners he of good beguiles,
And does not suffer them to see their sin
Till they be taken in his hellish gin:
And if by chance poor man it hap to spy,
Then he will have some other readily,
Whereby he may entrap this silly man,
Who of himself no good at all he can;
So as he is not able senses use,
But their right end he utterly does abuse.
And here my soul do thou observe with care
How by good use all parts assistant are
With help to bring thee to that happy place
Where all shall live who are endowed with grace,
And in their journey care to keep the path
Which leads to life, or else they gain the wrath
Of that great God whose wondrous works are such
As in this pilgrimage our journey may help much,
If we but mark and to the Spirit give ear
When God himself does in each part appear,
And every minute does some warning give
Which may direct us how on earth to live,
So as with care we attend unto his call
Who takes no pleasure in the sinners fall,
Although in them he will be glorified
Because his name we have not magnified.
Have I received my senses all in vain,
So as their use affords to me no gain,
But loss of life, and my sweet Savior,
Who does not cease to call me every hour.
O now, O now begin to look at home,
And see thy senses how they all do come
Without respect of him who has them sent,
Or the end for which they were unto thee lent:
And do not quench the Spirit of God in thee,
Lest thou be blind when do desire to see*
O then use eyes, and use them to that end
For which Jehovah did them to thee send:
For wheresoere thou turn'st this eye of thine,
The work of God most plain in it does shine.
If to the heavens, thou see his glory there,
Who for thy sins was pleased on earth appear:
If to the earth, each herb a wonder is,
And by that wonder help thy soul to bliss.
Look in thy heart, and there thou may behold
How Satan's black, although he shine like gold.
Then see thy soul, the chiefest of thy rest,
How it desires to be where^t may be blessed.
O further that desire with every sense,
Who shall for it receive good recompense.
Observe how God bestowed on thee a Taste,
And in that part of th'body it has placed,
So as there is nothing into th'corps can go,
But it gives warning whether't be so or no.
Then use this taste unto its own right end
Thou Wilt see that God did it unto thee send;
Not for to taste that Evahs bitter apple,
Lest thou want strength with Satan for to grapple:
But 'twas to taste the things for th'body food,
Lest ought may enter there which is not good.
O then do thou of good have only care,
And all things ill of them be thou aware,
Lest that thy soul may lose its spiritual health,
Which is more worth then all thy worldly wealth,
O be thou curious of thy bodies taste,
Lest pleasing sins may make thy soul to waste;
Li^e as the body with it is poisoned pills,
Tho gold without, within they are stuffed with ils,
Another Sentinel has Jehovah sent,
Lest thou should smell something thou might repent
Thou Wilt stop thy nose when it feels a scent is ill:
Then stay each member, and restrain thy will,
Which are delighted with each pleasing smell,
But have a care such scent not toward hell.
All finest flowers have not the sweetest smell,
Scent thou then such as to thy soul scents well:
Let that scent only please thy inward mind,
Although thy corpse esteem it most unkind:
For soul and bodies scent have several sense,
This loves sin, but that loves penitence:
O then prefer that which thy soul does scent,
Lest that in the end thy corpse have cause repent:
Use that restriction with this Sentinel,
That it scent nothing but that does scent well
Unto thy soul, let it thy scent approve,
Who hates all ill, and what is good does love.
Another sense has this great God thee sent,
To feel thy sins, and of them to repent:
Thou well can feel a small stroke of thy skin,
Yet wilt not feel the Spirit how quenched within.
Can thou feel hurts, if in thy bodies members,
But thy souls hurt thou wilt not be drawn remember
Consider well how God has placed this sense
In the outward part, of the inward for defense:
Thou will prevent the falling of a tree,
But th'greatest sin thou think cannot hurt thee:
Can thou be careful of thy bodies food,
And have no feeling of thy soul its good?
Can thou feel prickles in thy tender skin,
And cannot feel thy soul is pricked within?
Do thou not know that when thy soul is gone,
Thy body then has feeling in it none?
Examine conscience whether's greatest care
For this thy body, or thy soul is there?
I fear thou feel'st this of thy body more
Then do thy soul, though smitten nere so sore.
O senseless man! have feeling of thy sin,
Or else thou wilt feel that God is not within.
Another member has Jehovah given,
Using all helps to bring this man to heaven:
On either side of the head has set an Ear,
That either side the Spirit of God may hear.
Then hear this Spirit which loudly cries on thee,
Lest thou too late may cry, Good Lord help me!
Thou know that God has promised all to hear
That call on him; then do not thou forbear,
But call in time, lest it may prove too late,
When death has deemed deep hell to be thy fate.
Does not God send a tinkling in thy ears
To make thee think it is th'passing bell thou hears?
O do not stop thy ears from this sweet bell,
For it may help to stop thy way to hell.
Say, have not heard thy sins oft-times reproved,
And notwithstanding thou thy sins have loved?
Remember Adam, he heard Evahs voice,
And left his seed by it no cause rejoice.
Then stop thy ears against the Sirens song,
For sweetest singers often lead to wrong:
But open them wide unto thy Saviors cry,
And then fear not, he will not thy suit deny:
But then must thou leave off thy pleasing sin,
Or else be sure thy s^ul is lost within.
But there is nothing that is in man's power
Without the help of his good Savior.
Then to him, to him, to him freely go,
And be not thou put off from him with no:
But fall down flat upon thy bended knees,
And nere rise up till such time he shall please
To call thee thence, and show to thee the way
Wherein with safety thou may walk and stay.
But before thou art able to accomplish this,
Which is no doubt a perfect heavenly bliss,
Thou must repent thee of thy former sin
And horrid life which thou have lived in:
And that being done from th'bottom of thy heart,
With resolution nere from him depart,
Nor be overcome as hereto thou have bin
With willing mind to commit any sin;
Assure thy self he will thy prayers hear,
And to thy soul he will himself appear,
And yield thee comfort from the heavens above,
Even from thy Savior who is God of love.
Then may thou think that there is hope of rest
In him by whom thou shall be ever blessed:
For only by him, and by him alone
Thou must have rest, or rest there will be none.
Then since thou know where rest is to be had,
Be not dismayed in any sort with dread;
But let him always be to thee a guide,
And stand resolved thou never from him slide:
But have a care to keep him in thy mind,
And then be sure that thou shall ever find
That saving health thou did in heart desire,
If thou do it with heart and soul require,
Without all fear of any opposition
Of that most hellish and most wicked Legion:
For if thy blessed Savior be but there,
Assure thy self be will not come thee near;
But if that Christ shall once but turn his back,
Then look about thee, have care be not slack;
For if thou be, then thou shall surely find
That he will quickly enter on thy mind;
And if by cunning he get in a foot,
Thou art not able get his body out,
But he will have all, and then he there will dwell
Until he draw thee down with him to hell.
Then he thou careful of thy inward mind,
To fix it always on thy Savior kind:
And then fear not, but well assured be
He Will keep it during all eternity.
For now I find what I have so long sought,
That the only cause of my unruly thought
Is want of constant settling them on thee,
On whom they always solely ought to be.
Since I now know that never sin was seen,
Which to this wicked thought did not prevene:
For first it is hatched in my barren brain,
Before in heart it can come to remain;
And thence it spreads it self to every part,
Because that all the whole man should feel smart:
For doubtless know that every several sense
Shall suffer deeply without penitence;
For every part of pain participate,
Of weal or woe, of love or else of hate.
Then keep a good guard of thy outward thought,
Lest ought may enter in it which is naught:
For there will Satan's battry first begin,
To bring thy body into deadly sin;
Then look thy guard be watchful, good and strong,
That it may always walk with thee along,
To give thee warning of thy enemy,
That thou may ay be ready from him sly;
For few that strive do obtain victory,
And to some strong force do thou thee betake,
Even him alone who died for thy sins sake.
And will safe keep thee unto thy lives end;
But then must thou thy life on earth amend,
Else little hope that he will keep thee free
From this deceitful watchful enemy.
Then give thy heart unto thy God alone,
For he will have that, or else he will have none.
Nay give him all, even all whats'ere thou have,
For what he wants be sure thou do but wast;
And more then so, for that which he has not,
Shall surely fall to Satan's only lot,
Seeing he is watchful, ever ready pressed
To thrust himself into thy bony breast,
If that thy Savior be not biding there.
And therefore see that thou my soul do nere
Depart from out Christ's blessed company,
For if thou do, assure thy self to die,
Since Satan he is always at the door,
To enter there, if that thy Savior
Be out of the way, and therefore have a care,
That Satan nere have power to enter there:
For if he do, then sure thou art but gone,
Seeing Christ will all, or else he will have none*
Then giv't him, giv't him, give thy Savior all,
And never lin, but to him heart'ly call,
That he will please this all of thine accept,
Which he alone with his right hand has kept
Out Satan's power, who has so long led thee
Until this time from thy very infancy,
So now full time from this foul Fiend to fly,
Or else nere look to live, but look to die:
For death's the best that he is able give
To any of them who in their sins do live;
So if thou purpose now to prevent death,
It must be done whilst thou on earth have breath;
For when thy life upon this earth is done,
Then does that dreadful day of judgment come,
And it is decreed that all must undergo
Their latest doom, which is, or Come, or Go,
And that pronounced, thou may of this be sure,
Or weal or woe shall then for ay endure.
And after that decree is done and past,
There is no hope it can be ere reverst.
Then pray that this may be thy final doom,
Blessed of the Lord, do thou unto me come.
Was ever comfort heard of like to this,
Which brings thy soul into eternal bliss?
Where all the Saints with joyful noise accord
To sing the praises of the heavenly Lord,
Who was, and is, and evermore shall be,
Till the end of Time, and thence eternally.
Let all the earth join and due praises sing
To this our God, and glorious heavenly King.
Amongst these, my soul, do thou set up thy rest,
Here none abide but them are only blessed.
Then do thou strive this blessedness to gain,
That thou with them may evermore remain,
And always joyful Alleluja's sing
To Christ thy Savior, and thy heavenly King,
Who has thy soul thus far enlightened so,
As 't may be freed from that most doleful woe,
And woeful word of Go from hence thou cursed,
Of all that ere was heard the very worst.
Sweet Jesus please for to preserve me so,
As I may never hear this word of Go,
Which is so fearful to my fleshly heart,
Which makes it grieve, and inwardly to smart.
Come blessed Lord, be pleased vouchsafe me cure
Of this my grievous pain which I endure,
For very sorrow of this horrid fear,
More heavy then I am able to bear,
To think what danger this my soul is in,
By my long life spent all in deadly sin,
But that my Savior pleases comfort me,
When I remember how he died for me,
And that his coming was for this intent,
To call me to him that I might repent:
Then please sweet Jesus (sinful me) to call,
And so as I do never from thee fall.
But ever worship thee my God and King,
And with a joyful heart thy praises sing,
Amongst that glorious heavenly Angels Quire,
Whose joys are full beyond all hearts desire,
And with them sing to thee continually,
And so shall do for all eternity,
The worthy praises of that heavenly King,
Whose wondrous works ore heaven and earth do ring.
Then sing, my soul, and ever jovial be,
The praises due to him that died for thee,
Let all the earth conjoyn, and praises sing
To this our God, and glorious heavenly King,
Both Father, Son, and eke the holy Ghost,
Who Is God alone, and of all might is most,
And worthy is of all be ever blessed,
And here my soul do now set up thy rest.
And have a care serve him continually,
And then be sure that thou shall never dye.
Vouchsafe, good GOD, to this to say, Amen. SAMUEL BRASS.

O Almighty, ever-living, most merciful God, and to me a most loving and kind
Father, I the work of thy hands, unworthy even the very least of thy benefits,
unworthy so much as to lift up mine eyes toward thy divine Majesty, much less
worthy to call unto thee for mercy, or to receive any mercy thy hands; Yet,
gracious God, for that thou have appointed all them that are heavy laden to
come unto thee, and thou will ease them, I most entirely beseech thee of thy
abundant goodness, to ease me of this burden of sin, under which I have spent
most part of that time thou have been pleased to bestow upon me for thy own
service soly, Lord lay them not upon my soul now at my departure, but wash them
away with the precious blood of thy dearly beloved Son Jesus Christ, bury them
in his wounds, dear Father, that they may never rise up against me either in
this life, or that everlasting: but please, good Lord, at my death to vouchsafe
me this comfort, of all others most comfortable, Come thou blessed, receive the
Kingdom I have purchased for thee. In full assurance whereof I commend my soul
into thy hands, Lord keep it there for his sake who so dearly bought it with his
precious blood, in whose Name I make bold to call unto thee in that perfect
form of prayer he himself has taught me, saying, Our Father which art in
Heaven, etc.

To my dear and only Son, WILLIAM BRASS.
SON, these three letters imply three distinct persons, Father, Mother, and
Child; these their several offices, the Father to educate his child in the
fear of God, and provide for his livelihood: the Mother to assist as a helper:
the Son to obey both, and observe them with a filial care. I thank my God
there has been no neglect of any part since you had your being; and now at my
departure I have left you this little Book, useful in this woeful time of War,
though not against lime and stone, yet against that active Enemy is ever ready
upon all occasions to assault you; and therein also you may view the
infirmities life, and by them apply some good use to your own. Other wealth I
am likely leave but a little, since God has so appointed it should be reft
from me by the Sabeans. Esteem this as your Fathers last Will, read it with
deliberation, meditation, and contemplation; there may (happily) some thing be
found in it, will redound to your good when I am in grave. Keep it in your
pocket, and peruse it often, it may prove more worth then much wealth; and as
you tender your own good, or your Fathers command, I charge you upon all
accasions, which (doubless) will be many, have recourse to the first Lines, and
in assurance thereof I shall live and die your loving Father,

Samuel Brass.

A Note of the principal Points casually handled in this Book.
OF our Saviors passion 1 Of the Mind 18 Of Englands broils 30 Of Moses 25 Of
Doomsday 35 Of joy and fear 37 Of Hell 39 Of lameness 41 Of account of time 48
Of repentance 49 Of King David 53 Of dreams 56 Of wonders 59 Of man's frailty 60
Of Peter's walk 63 Of Faith 67 Of Angels 72 Of Toby 72 Of the alteration of
times 82 Of the Soul 91 Of the Sacrament 93 Of the abuse of creatures 95 Of
hunting 96 Of Death 52 Of the Bed 69 Of the Stair to heaven 73 Of the Garden 77
Of Adams fall 79 Of the Sun 82 Of the Spirit 86 Of Jobs patience 88 Of
lamentation 89 Of woe 99 Of the Heart 105 Of Peter's Cock 108 Of dancing 112 Of
dissimulation 114 Of Englands tears 118 Of account of sin 122 Of the Prodigal
125 Of Pleasure 128 Of the end of man's creation 134 Of Madness 143 Of
Repentance 146 Of our Saviors life 150 Of wandering thoughts 160 Of the use of
Senses 220 Of sinful thoughts 224 The Authors Prayer 229
Reader, Some Numbers of the Pages are mistaken in the book; but the order of
the Contents is rightly observed.

FINIS.

