THE CAPTIVE-CAPTAIN: OR, THE RESTRAINED CAVALIER; Drawn to his full BODY in
these CHARACTERS; I. Of a Prison. II. The Anatomy of a Iayler. III. A Iaylers
Wife. IV. The Porter. V. The Century. VI. The Fat Prisoner. VII. The Lean
Prisoner. VIII. The restrained Cavalier, with his Melancholy fancy.


Presented, and ACTED to LIFE in a Suit of Durance; an HABIT suiting best with
the Place of his Residence.

Nullus extra te Carcer.

London Printed by I. Grismond, 1665.

FOR THE WORTHILY HONORED, RICHLY ACCOMPLISHED; AND ABSOLUTELY COMPLETED, Sir
THO. PRESTON, BARONET; HIS MOST AFFECTIONATELY OBLIGED SERVANT R. B. PRESENTS
THESE CHARACTERS: (BEING NATIVE and GENUINE DISPLAYERS of the HUMORS OF THESE
TIMES;) IN LIEU OF THOSE GRACEFUL RESPECTS, SO AMICABLY and AMPLY RENDERED;
And by the AUTHOR HUMBLY ACKNOWLEDGED.

The Number and Order of these CHARACTERS, interlac'd with sundry other
emergent Subjects, properly and ingenuously dilating on the Humors of these
Times.
I. THe Character of a Prison. Page 1 II. The Anatomy of a Iaylor. 3 III. A
Iaylors Wife. 5 IV. The Porter. 7 V. The Century. 9 VI. The Fat Prisoner. 10
VII. The Lean Prisoner. 13 VIII. The restrained Cavalier, with his Melancholy
Fancy. 15 I. Advice to a Peer. 21 II. Advice to a Pesant. 24 III. Advice to a
Landlord. 28 IV. Advice to a Farmer. 32 V. Advice to a simple Country Curat.
36 VI. Advice to a Country Justice. 40 VII. Advice to an Heir. 43 VIII. Advice
to a younger Brother. 47 IX. Advice to a Gallant. 50 X. Advice to his Mistress.
54 XI. Advice to him that will take it. 58 I. A Countrey-Commissioner. 70 II. A
State-Competitor. 77 A Phanatick. 92 The Black Rod. 101 State-Dimensions. 115 A
smart Reply. 116 Letters of Advice; or, The Friendly Monitor. 119 A Defensive
Letter. 143 To a Malignant. 151 Upon the late Plot. 155 Upon the Face of
Rebellion. 159 A Farewell Carol. 161 The Sequestrees Sonnet. 165 No Mean, no
Man. 167 The Interest of Westmerland. 171 The Interest of Cumberland. 181
THE CAPTIVE CAPTAIN: OR, The Restrained Cavaliere. IN VIII. CHARACTERS.
I. The Character of a Prison.
A Prison is a Cage of unclean Birds; not that they are unclean of themselves,
but that their nasty Attendants desire to have them appear unclean Beasts like
themselves. Augeus Stables had dainty Grooms, if compared to their
Chamberlains. The whole Prospect of this forlorn Room is a Grate; where through
every transenn, every stancher, those incaged Birds may take a view of the Iron
Age. They say, Spirits walk there; but very few Spirits to entertain the least
portion of Compassion. This Cacus Cave is compared to the Lions Den; Turn once
the Ward, -- Et vestigia nulla retrorsum. Her Walls, instead of Darnicks,
Arras, and Tapistry, are commonly interwoven with Ariadnes Cawls, Spider-webs,
and such like over-worn Trophies of Antiquity. The Cimmerians in their
Dwellings, resemble these in their Lodgings; only their Lights are different:
Those receive some scattered Beamlings by their Mountain-Crannies; these by
their forlorn Loop-holes. Her constant Inhabitants, to their dis-comfort,
retain such Back-biters, that though they give them sustenance, yet they
startle them sleeping and waking with their too obsequious adherence. The
Music of this House, holds in consort with the Trapezites, all Iron. If her
Meniey were as constant in their Affection, as in their Mansion; as firmly
linked in the bonds of fidelity, as in their Links of a necessitated Society,
they were a brave amicable Family. Either her own parcimony, or her In-mates
penury is such, as she keeps no Open-house. So short is she in her wages, and
so spare in her solace, as her Servants are weary of her before an end of their
first quarters service. She Is careless from whence they come, but infinitely
cautious how they go away. And if they go away without her favor, they are
in great danger to break their necks for their labor.

II. The Anatomy of a Iaylor.
HE is a brave boisterous Blade; one who has made a contract with his tongue
and look: with the latter to look ugly; with the other to speak harshly. He is
a cunning Falconer; and with his imperious Whistle keeps his mu'd fowl in such
command, as they hold themselves blessed when they are without the sound of his
call.

He is active in the exercise of his Mannacles, Boults, and Fetters. He binds
his Apprentices to such hard conditions, as some are enforced with the loss of
their lives to purchase their freedom. He is so richly disciplined in the Array
of Oaths and Curses, as he has learned to damn his unhappy Family with no less
facility than felicity. This makes the Devil hugg him Morning and Evening,
charging him to go on in his Work, and he shall be sure of his Wages. His only
Fees derive their gratuities from the sins of the people. If you tell him of
the Iaylor in the Acts; he either believes not the Story: or he calls him a
Whiteliver'd Officer to make Conscience his Commander. He is of such a base
quality, as to feed himself, he starves his Meniey. Shreeks, groans and
Lachrymae are his delicious harmony. He has so dis-used himself to Civility, as
he cannot utter one word of comfort, to gain him a Kingdom. If his poor
famished family receive a reward; it returns to his Ward. While they, poor
Souls, pray for their Benefactors: He becomes whole Sharer. The poor Prisoners
Box is his Exchequer; his Prisoners, his Spongies; their ruin, his raising;
their famine, the improvement of his fortune. All his Keys are made for
Spring-locks; they will shut of themselves, but never open.

This surly Mastive glories in nothing more than in displeasing; and where he
dare not bite, to be snarling. He makes more disheartened Spirits tremble one
day, than he did for his sins all his life. His only triumph is over misery:
and his resolution to exclude mercy. He has no time to pray, lest he should
neglect his charge. Yet for a fat bribe in a Corner, he will not stick to truck
with his well-lin'd Prisoner: though by his voluntary escape he hazard an
halter. Generally, he never looks up to heaven, but when he is posting to hell:
and now the unaccustomed thought of his sins makes his Journey seem long and
heavy: but let him comfort himself; it is all down-bank, and that will make it
seem more easy.

III. A Iaylors Wife.
WE have done with Pluto; we are now to pluck one feather from the Wing of his
dainty Duckling Proserpina. Would you have her Picture drawn to life? That
curious Holland Artist Hans Carvile, though he had the absolutest fancy in
pourtraying the Devil, could not do it if he were living: yet we will shadow,
though we cannot to her full body so exquisitely limn her.

For her Constitution and Composition, they suit as nearly with her Iaylors
Disposition, as Charon and Acheron. Since the very hour that she put her
Wedding-ring on her knotty finger, it has been her highest ambition to mould
her self to her surly Husbands humor: and to observe his deportment in every
posture. The Wheel of her tongue is of a perpetual motion; yet generally she
spits as much as she speaks; wherein I must caution you to keep your distance;
and not to come within the compass of her Sent; for the very steam which drills
from her fluets, retains more venom than the foam of a mad Dog. She Is an
intolerable Slut; yet he that should venture to call her so, might be sure to
have a dark Lobby for his lodging. Any one may smell her, before he see her; so
strongly is she chafed with Kitching pomander. She has usually more fat on her
skirts, than many of her starved Meniey have on their Ribs. Her A pricock Nose
is a common Sewer, ever running; so as her tongue cannot be more active, than
that is fluent. To save a Faggot, every Winter Morn, she makes fuel of her
Maids; bestowing more basting of them, than she does on her meat. Her
complexion (lest you should neglect her when you see her) holds near
resemblance to a parcel of scorched Lard: yet she has a conceit there is not a
morsel about her, but infinitely deserves love. If she take notice of an
handsome well-timbered Prisoner, that promises ability in his feature; She will
not stick to reserve some of her best reversions for him, and cram him, not by
way of Alms, but for her own benevolence. She changes not her Clothes half so
often as she does her Maids. For her heavy household, though their appetite be
strong, their repast is weak. Thus in a double restraint these poor wretches
suffer; air and fare; thraldom and hunger; and in these, He has vowed to keep
them as short in the One, as She means to abridge them in the Other. Yet it is
strange; amidst all these dis-gusts, She Is infinitely dear to her Guests. Now
to bring her to bed, if her Iaylor lose her, you may be confident who will have
her. But I perceive her diving, like the Spirit in the Vault; we will leave her
to her long sleep; and thrice happy had many of her In-mates been if she had
never wakt.

IV. The Porter.
ALL hail to Cerberus! how desperately the Tartarian Cur looks? His uncertain
revenues consist wholly of rewards: and these his unhallowed Keys keep in the
circumference of their Wards. He has no other vails to support him; so as he
becomes no less unnecessarily lasie, than necessarily lousie.

The only way to act Malevolo, is to fall into poverty. And he is already
fallen upon that Rock. He cannot speak affably, if you should hang him; unless
he observe an hopeful visitant approaching his Gate: and then he labors to
strain courtesy with his ingenerous inbred quality; and to open to him with an
unmannerly congy. He is infinitely weary in doing nothing; and yet should you
take him from his unprofitable vocations, he would adventure to do something
worse than nothing. He sleeps as much as he either eats or drinks: but that is
not his fault, but his slow Benefactors: for he has Ericthous bowels to
receive, if he had any open-hearted Vitellius to give. He counterfeits a
pleasant shrug, upon the admittance of a well-crammed Prisoner; and his first
morning visit must be reserved for his Chamber. Now, you must not conceive this
to be out of any love to his Guest; but merely for his Morning Draught and a
Canonical Toast: which many times (bar basket reversions) serves him for his
whole days repast. This Dog in a doublet, should he be called to an account of
his life, you should hear such a reckning as would partake more of Cannibal
than Christian. He had retired hours enough to say his Prayers in: but he held
Devotion such an Antipos to his profession, as he mightily feared he should
lose his place, by inuring his idle hours to any such pious pratice.

And now after his long useless service, wherein neither he himself reaped much
profit, nor his Prisoners solace; looking with the Swan upon his feet, he
perceives he has purchased something that will stick near him, when all his
acquaintance leave him: Gout and Dropsy, which hale him along from his
Porters-lodge to a lower Century.

V. The Century.
ARe men of the Livery. Red-coats, Blew-coats, Green-coats, White-coats; nay,
Turn-coats in hope of better pay. They are as vigilant and as prudent (for
ought I know) as those watchful Birds of the Capitol. They are sufficiently
indoctrinated in their words of command; which they use upon all occasions:
Stand, who goes there? -- Corporal! They are principally versed in Parades and
Reliefs. They hold themselves privileged men by the Law of Arms: and scorn the
repulse of a stranger, so long as they cling together. Night rovers are their
best Benefactors. These, what occasion soever they pretend, must untruss, or
let them be sure to suffer disgrace. Now should you single them out, and put
them to any Interogatories, you were not to expect from them any resolutions in
affairs of discipline (wherein they are generally better fed than taught:) for
they hold it sufficient knowledge to return an account under what Captain they
serve. For any other questions, it were needless for you to demand: seeing they
are bound to answer no more than they know. Those Golden and Silver Shields in
the Athenian Guards, were to their glory none of this Century. These are only
known to their Country Arms: which they mean more ordinarily than orderly to
manage upon any State-service. Some of these, to save their Hamlet an
unnecessary charge; by their provident husbanding of their Powder; have not
discharged their Muskets, since their first admittance to that military Order.
They hold shedding of blood, be the quarrel never so fair nor cause just, to be
a crying sin; therefore to clear their innocent souls from that soil, they have
religiously vowed never to draw (unless it be upon great advantage) in their
own defense. Yet like Garden-Doggs, they are very fierce on the night;
especially if they be backed, and find a remisseness of spirit in their
Assailant. Yet I would have their Spectators retain this opinion of them; that
they are brave metall'd Blades, Sparks of honor; and such as will make their
Centuries smoke again to display their valor. There is nothing but it may be
usefully employed to some end or other: this makes these terrible Myrmidons use
their Match instead of Tinder, while others (more active in tossing a Pipe than
a Pike) receive light from their labor. But nights are cold and long; and if
Moonlight, fuller of danger; for then Trees send forth their shadows, which at
first fight resemble enemies: But perceiving those shady Bushes to be no Foes,
but mere Apparitions to delude them, they are content before their Reliefs to
take a Nap; where we do leave them.

VI. The fat Prisoner.
IS one that is given to the flesh, as the flesh is given to him; for if
otherwise, he might be as thin as other of his fellow-Rats, who feed on the
same Commons, but batten not so well, for want of concoction; or in that they
have not such merry hearts to allay their affliction. This May-Bird can sing as
sweetly in a Cage, as if he were in a Forest. He accounts his imprisonment the
Emblem of his life: and his life neither unhappier nor shorter by being a
Prisoner. He finds freedom in his greatest restraint; and that inward liberty
which many Libertines who have the wide world to walk in, could never purchase.

But these are Contemplative men, who make Heaven their Object; and
consequently, whatsoever is here below, their Subject.

Now, there be other fatlings who cram themselves in security. Their Pot, Pipe
and merry company so besots them, as they make no difference at all betwixt
bondage and liberty. These have put off all cares; and like Porkets in a Sty,
feed without thought of provision; and like loose Epicures, turn from their
Troughs without thansgiving. Wherein, though they ow to God for their Ordinary;
yet such debts retain least hold in their memory. You may see the world here
drawn up in a small Epitome. This Prison holds as much as the world: all her
inhabitants are either good or bad. Here is a good Prisoner; and he makes
contemplation his reflection: Divine Service is his Souls Solace. Nothing can
confine him, because he finds nothing fit to entertain him, that Earth may
afford him. This apprehension moves him to esteem of a Prison as a place of
more freedom than the world; because he finds fewer inducements to decline him
from pursuit of his future liberty, than he found in the world. Whereas that
bad fatling or sensual Prisoner is content with any place, that may be-lull his
cloudy understanding in a careless sleep. Freedom and bondage are indifferently
equal to his fruitless pilgrimage; being neither beneficial to himself nor his
neighbor in the One nor the Other.

Now he who fats himself with true Hearts-ease, feeds his appetite with diviner
hopes, than to satisfy it with the Prodigals husks.

VII. The Lean Prisoner.
HE is a living Sceleton; a breathing Ghost; the remainder of a greater work;
or the wasted portion of his Purveyors provision; or a shadow that has lost his
substance. This Iack-a-Lent, an old In-mate in that ancient Fabric of John a
Gant, promises at the first sight as if he had put on the habit of some Hermit
or Anachorite; having procured such a divorce from his flesh, as he had only
entered into Covenant with his spirit. But all is not Gold that glisters.
Sanctity is not wholly confined to an Hermitage, nor Mortification to lean
Chops and a pale visage. Spare bodies may have strong appetites. Cambletes was
lean, though gluttonous; and Camillus fat, though abstemious. Wood of Kent had
sere ribs, but a sore stomach. The lean, with Pharaohs Kine, are apt to devour
the fat. But let us judge the best; for if his weak exhausted feature proceed
from the defective reversions of a trencher, he merits pity, bearing the
Characters of his penury in such dying colors in his physnomy; but if
marrow-eating Envy bring him to this infirmity, he may thank himself for his
own malady. Now you shall take this for a constant rule, by how much more this
Scarecrow is estranged from the flesh; by so much nearer is he allied to the
Spirit: you shall scarcely find one in an age to parallel Galba's constitution,
to have a quick enlivened brain, and a gross corpulent bulk. The leanest body,
the activest spirit. Nay generally partaking most of that ingenious humor of
Melancholy, he becomes a singular proficient in Machavels policy. Brutus was
fatter than Cassius; but less dangerous. But our poor Mammet, as he depends
upon the Basket, so he studies no Maxims of State. He proves that Axiom good,
It is more miserable to have a stomach without meat, than to have meat without
a stomach. Now his dogged Jailer, according to his wonted humor, will tell you,
that he fares as well as the rest, but he has a Caninum appetitum, which makes
him eat more than he can digest. But believe no such Cheats; he could digest
far more than he eats. But having long ago left his flesh; he is now bethinking
himself to leave the world. That was a burden he did so little love, as he
desired to leave; and now loath any longer to live: next to his sins, he
repents himself of nothing more, but that He, who has held all his time for an
upright Dealer, should now for want of flesh, become a Worm-cheater.

VIII. The restrained Cavaliere, with his Melancholy Fancy.
IS John for the King in all parts of the Kingdom. He had a brave spirit before
he was impounded; and now in his restraint he has a desire to fight; but
Fetters instead of Indentures have so bound him to good behavior, as his
appetite is cooled; his approved valor must thaw and resolve to vapor, and
content himself with the recollected honor of being once a Soldier; yet like
gumm'd Grogram, he will fret, though he cannot fight; and if his Genius be so
happy, conjure up all the Muses to assist him in his Satirical humor, and twist
him some whip-cords to lash his unconscionable flint-hearted Jailer; and this
he does metally, like a daring Retainer: Did thou but know, dogged Iaylor,
whom thou have
In those vast jaws of thy damp Prison placed;
With cheerful rays thou would look upon thy guest,
And hold thy Mansion by his seizure blessed.
Pure Nectar Rivolets drained from our brains
Like Aqua fortis shall eat through thy chains.
Grumble not, Island Curr! Here is a man
Would hook thy Nose, were it thou Leviathan.
Wits slight restraint! our Spirits never felt
Cares of those keys hang dangling at thy belt.
Thus this impaled Minotaur domineers within his own Grate; while looking about
him, and observing his mean accommodation, he begins to take a more curious
survey of his incurious Lodging; which he calls The Captains Cage; and with a
Jaylors curse, in this sort he anatomizeth his despicable case. A
Captive-Captain lay in such a room,
He held his Bed the Emblem of his Tomb.
Dark as a Charnel-house: no spirit did move
But Rats and Mice below, and rain above:
So as he need't not wash his Couch with tears,
Such streaming showrs drilled down about his ears.
Besides, an Herd of grunting Hoggs so nigh,
None could discern his Lodging from their Stye.
A kennel too of bawling Curs lay there,
Which all night long were yelping in his ear.
Near this a chimney that would keep no fire;
"Thus did his passive pensive hours expire.
"If this a thraldom might not styled be,
"Prisons are Paradoxes unto me.
It is great pity that his friends and fortunes should so neglect him; or his
own meriting parts become such strangers to him, as he can neither find the
one to comfort, nor the other to support him. He concludes therefore, that it
is a Mad world; and those that fawn on it, the maddest fools in it. He hears of
Sallies, Skirmishes, and Battles; but what are these to his Bolts? The report
of the change of a Prisoner would enliven him far better. But Valor must not
be redeemed with Copper. Though his Field-actions deserved Praise, yet must
they not purchase his person freedom without a Price. And poor restrained
Cavalier, he is as far from giving as lending.

He remains dis-roab'd, and dis-arm'd: his only shift then must be
Best-be-trust, or he must stay there without Bayl. Others may be enlarged by
Public Faith, which he cannot. Well, this is his comfort, though he be
restrained in body, he has derived from his mind that liberty, as he can fight
without Arms, and conquer his Passions in their highest extremity. Let him then
dying, be honored with an Hearse, whose living valor was never rewarded
worse. Nay, should his Body want the honor of a Shrine, yet let his Memory
live in the Calendar of Fame, while we indorse this Inscription upon his
neglected Grave.

CHOICE CABINET COUNSEL.
Aperiatur Scrinium,
Ut reperiatur Consilium.
Proclus. Sperate Miseri,
Cavete Foelices.
What precious treasures best enrich the mind,
Unlock this Cabinet, and you shall find.
Gemms may be stolen, or luster lose with rust;
But these more pure than to resolve to dust.
CHOICE CABINET COUNSEL.
SALVIAN. O calame adjuro te, ne literam trahas nec lineam; in qua pro viribus
non delineas Dei gloriam.


I. Advice to a Peer.
YOU are a Person of Descent; ennoble it with actions of Desert. There is
nothing that detracts more from the splendor of an eminent Family, than to be
ignorant in that which may most and in the liveliest colors pourtray it self
noble.

The ancient Roman Peerage became not only distinguishable by their House or
Coat, but by one peculiar virtue or other lineally descendent and inherent to
that Race: As the Publicolae for Curtesy; the Scaevolae for Sobriety; the
Lentuli for Liberality; the Gracci for Gravity; the Appii for Equity; the
Coriolani for Majesty; the Aureliani for Piety; and the Marii for Magnanimity.
Which ornaments dignified them much more than all that blood which ran through
their veins.

I have been known to some persons equal to you in rank, and equipage of State,
though different in their Extraction. For some of these were Born, others Made
great. And in these may be found as great a difference in their Humor, as was
in the lineal derivation or accidental constitution of their Honor. The one
had received a native freedom, such a genuine and unaffected comportment, as
his very Carriage might play the Herald, and deblazon his Lineage. The other
equally great, but his demean so levelled that greatness, as it laid it flat,
and mis-shap'd the person for acception of any such state. So as, it had been
much better for that surreptitious Mushrom to have held still to his slow, but
safe private growth; than by his undeserved rise to expose his pitiful
grandeur to a scornful censure.

Some of these we have known, even in the flowrishingst States, who during
their times of privacy, lived in fair repute; more loved than envied, though
after swollen high, more envied than loved: and never less pitied, than when they
stood in most need on it.

These, likewise, in their first Entrance to State Affairs, were accounted
Grave and Prudential Men; and, in the opinion of those who perused the Draught
of their Actions, Passages and Debates, held most fitting to become great,
before they came to be great.

This was the opinion which most men had of Galba, whose unexpected Ascent to
Honor, had so estranged him from his native humor, as he appeared not the
same Man in Command, which he showed himself to be when Commanded: And no
doubt, but this change of disposition took it is origin from some sociable
infection, by consorting with such, whose Applauses deluded him; and by their
palpable Parasitism so madded him, as it made him forgetful of his Rise, and
unmindful of his Fall.

Whence I collect, that there is nothing that may improve, or disadvantage
Greatness more, (whether it be derived from eminence of Life, or dignity of
Place) than the Company which he frequents.

It is an excellent Advice therefore of that Divine Moral, in wishing us to
make choice of such Companions, in whose Society we have hope, either to better
them, or be bettered by them. Stains are ever most discernible in purest
Clothes. Neither can Greatness in a Civil State become any subterfuge to
Guiltiness: whence it was, that the Spartans held ever the Crime of a Peer most
worthy of imparallel'd punishment. And hence it was, that their Great Men were
called Optimates: Great, because Good. Peers, says that ancient Sage, as they
over-peer others in Greatness, so should they surmount others in Goodness;
otherwise they build a Low Story upon an High Foundation.

Now, as Ambition can find you no wings to mount up higher; so be it your care
to prepare you Arches to make your high-rais'd Structures appear stronger; let
Amity be your best Monopoly, which is procured with least cost, and at best
hand by debonair Carriage and Affability. Add to these, Acts of Piety; being
seasonably performed, they will incomparably become you. Go to the Forest; it
will inform you: The highest Trees give the fairest Umbrage; They stand for
Shrouding, not Crushing their Inferiors.

II. Advice to a Pesant.
LEt not the lowness of thy present Condition inslave thee to a Pesantly
resolution. If thou really partake of Man, thou will lose nothing of thy
dimension. Thou can not be outwardly so despicably low; as thy
rightly-aspiring thoughts shall not make thee intellectually high.

Though The like we read of Abdolominus in Curtius. lib. 4.
Codrus had ragg'd Clothes, he could imbroder them with Royal thoughts. It is
only in thee, that has power to ennoble thee, and imbellish thy poverty with a
rich and graceful Livery. But, methinks I see thee, like a poor Malcontent,
throwing thine Eyes abroad; as if thou sentst them forth as spies, or scouts,
to make a discovery of all the Estates of such Persons as confine, or neighbor
near thee. And, what return do these envious Sentinels render thee? In their
Relations, I must no less freely than friendly tell thee, how infinitely they
abuse thee: These suggest unto thee (and such Counselors be the worst
Consorts) that Nature has played the part of a niggardly and unjust Step-Dame
with thee, in drawing in the Breasts of her Bounty toward thee and thy
Relations; and so freely laying them open unto others. And is this all those
Corrupt Agents can whisper to thee? Let me advise thee, lest thou become
depraved before thou converse with Reason. A persuasive Enemy, under pretense
of a palliated Amity, may make his surprise of thee, and that with small
difficulty, when he finds no considerable Force to resist his Fury. Admit thou
were the poorest and contemptiblest wretch that ever breathed; born naked, and
born to a naked Fortune: yet, for all this, thou can not live so naked as
thou were born. Thou wantedst then the strength of those active faculties
which thou now enjoyest, appearing then so helpless, as thou wantedst Native
Supplies to help thy self. Tell me; what want thou in thy self, unless thou
want the enjoyment of thy self? And, what is it that deprives thee of this
essential Liberty? I shall briefly inform thee in that, which may infinitely
improve thee. There is a webb in thine eye; which attracts unto it the steam of
Envy. This brings thee to expostulate too arrogantly with thine own thoughts,
and to overvalue thy self in the Balance of Native worth; above others whose
Descent or Providence has raised them to more Wealth. Let not this grieve thee:
these may harbor more needy and beggarly thoughts than thy self; unless
Discontent have thrown thee below thy self.

It is the property of humane felicity, to involve those who hugg it, in mazy
and inextricable precipices of misery. Forerunning times do not only afford us
plenty of Tragical Examples: but if we look homeward, we shall find variety of
such deplorable Objects and surviving Presidents of Our own. Such, who have
tasted bitterly of this Wormwood-Lecture, and sensibly felt how the grandeur of
Surreptitious Honor, purchased more by the hand of Fate, than any visible act
of Merit, has become destructive to the Safety of the Pursuer, and an
inevitable Snare to the Enjoyer. For, having their wings once dipped in the
Birdlime of Ambition; the more they struggled with it, the more they were
enwreathed by it. A serious Consideration of our own Condition would perfect
the Work; and fortify his Resolves, who in the Eye of the World is most
despicable, against all the insults and braves of Fortune: nay, make him such a
Complete Man, as his outward contempt may beget in him an inward content. The
Way is short and easy; and not only so, but of a daily presidential
occurrency: there is no corner in any Street, nor walk in any Field, that will
not afford thee a Receipt; the fault is thine, if thou make not Application for
thy Cure. Thou art sick to see others whole: and in opinion most poor, when
thou see an other rich. This is a dangerous Eyesore, and requires a
sovereign Eye Salve. To have ones eye evil, because an other's good, is an
Emblem of extremest envy. To bring thee then to partake more of Man than
Satan, for no fury more Satanical; wheresoever thou sojournest, look not upon
the state nor style of the mighty; but on the shroud, and skrip of the needy.
Not on the Highest, but on the Lowest: and then balance thy condition with
his. Peruse this Lecture seriously, and it will highly improve thee. Thou have
received more than thou deservedst: and in an ampler manner, and greater
measure, than those who were much better. And know thus much, for no knowledge
more advantageous, that by getting Mastery over thy self, thou becom'st Master
of the whole World: And though thou be but a Little One, yet by reducing those
Passions in thee, and making them loyal subjects to thy Sovereignty, the
Commander of the Universe, as HE styled himself, might not compare with thee.
He is no Pesant but a Prince, who can subdue himself, and make him affections
his Vassals.

III. Advice to a Landlord.
YOu are a Man in Command: and a petty Prince within your own Manor. You say
to one, Go, and he goes: and to another, Come, and he comes. Do not abuse
your power. Confine it, lest you be confined by it. It was an excellent Lesson;
and if you follow it, the practice will redound much to your benefit. Live
after that manner with your Inferiors, as you would have your Superiors live
with you. It would disgust you to be insulted over by another: Observe the same
Rule, it will guard you in your height, and secure you from hate.

There is no danger more incident to Greatness, than to be blown up by the
Bladder of their opinionate grandeur; which with a Lethaean draught, brings
them to forget their friends, but themselves most. It is Honors that changes
Manners; and in short time thaws those Manors which changed their Manners,
into nothing. Promotion is a perilous bait to an insolent and inconsiderate
spirit: who can better lord it, than define it. He no sooner begins to nible,
than the Hook fastneth on his Gills, exposing him for a Prey, to what he meant
to make his Prey on.

There be two menacing Shelves, which it were fitting Persons of Quality and
Command in their Sea-Fare, should be cautious of: 1. Light Counsel. 2. Loose
Company.


Of these I shall advise our young Masters, who, Lapwing-like, be newly crept
out of the thin shell of their Guardianship, to carry their eyes about them,
and by timely prevention divert a surprise. It shall be your fortune sometimes
to encounter such Counsel, as under shady and plausible pretenses, seconded
with Ceremonial Protests, will go along with you in the quest of your own
fancy. These cunning Coyducks are so well trained in the Discipline of Youth,
as they have got the Art of Diving, and in the next place of complying with any
humor: and to mould themselves in all Formality, to their temper. If Sensual,
Sense is the only string they strike on. They will Chalk out a way to this
Prodigal Sensualist to complete al his illimited desires, by satisfying all his
Sense in the Epicureal enjoyment of one Nights dalliance: whereof a debaucht
rioting Ranter, within the Walls of this City not many years ago left to
Posterity a fearful Example: bestowing on his five Senses on one Night, by the
persuasive suggestion of his vicious Consorts, five hundred pounds: Which
profuse spending brought him to leap at a Crust before his dying. Thus did this
lavish Landslord by his over-eager hunting and hugging of his own Humor, not
only detract from his Native Honor, but by his careless course become the last
of his House: Flying out of his Estate, before his wings had raised his flight
to half his age.

But though Examples be held so moving, a they ever leave the deepest
impression: yet Moral Advice operates strongly upon the Affections, being
rendered by a modest Pen, and without color of Self interest; being the only
Coloquintida that disrelisheth this Service; making it most suspected, where it
should be most employed.

The safest and securest way then, that you can possibly walk in, is with a
circumspect eye to reflect upon your own condition; and in no wise to suffer
either the pravity of Counsel, nor corruption of Society to have that influence
over you, as to mis-guide you, or make you swell above your self; which many
have done, and willingly perished under their own weight: and fatal is that
Burden which crusheth down the Bearer. Let me then advise you (for your
attention to it may be infinitely useful to you) not to magnify your self in
the Priority of your Place, nor Precedence of Command. Your Tenants be your
Oeconomick Servants; play you the part of a discreet and temperate Master. Make
them yours by the Cement of Love, not the extremity of Law; for that were the
way to crush them, rather than cherish them. They hold on you; uphold them who
rely on you. It were very rare to see indigent Farmers to have a thriving
Landlord. Oppression is such a Ring-worm, as it spreads all over the face of
his Estate, and blemisheth the beauty of it. If your desire be to live well and
happily, let them live well and peaceably that are ranked under you. That
Master either imprudently or parcimoniously manageth his Family, who suffers
his Meniey to starve through penury. What is it, or whereto avails it to
command Men without hearts? The way to gain their Affections, is to acquit them
of Exactions. Affability is the Adamant to attract them; and Bounty the Balm to
preserve them. Dead Flies spoil the sweetest Ointments: Breathless and feeble
Offices in their Chief, beget disesteem in his Relations.

IV. Advice to a Farmer.
YOu are called to a Vocation; and it is such a commendable Station, as no
Commonwealth, whereto Monarchies are oftimes reduced, can possibly subsist
without it. The Royal Pale, says the Italian Proverb, must receive it is
nourishment from the Milk payl. It is not so low; but that the High may derive,
not only an usual Supportance, but an essential Subsistence from it. Gordian,
Probus, Timoleon, and Codrus might promise themselves much more composedness of
mind, and happy retirement from the various bickerings of this Surging Main,
the World, I mean, in their enjoyment of privacy, wherein they were educated;
than the attainment of an higher Estate, whereto they were afterward advanced.
I would not, said that Tarentine Farmer, change my Cultre for a Scepter.
Content is worth a Crown: for many Crowns fall short of Content.

Now in this homely condition, wherein you are stated, it behooves you to walk
warily, lest you make your too sollicitous care your greatest enemy. Be it your
Principal Design then (seeing every Vocation, be it Public or Private, is
measured forth by its own proper line, or dimension) to consider the aim and
end of your Calling. Your sole Management consists in Manuring, Maturing and
Cultivating your Ground: and accommodating your Grainge, the Seat of your
Family, with all Accommodations suitable to a Person of your quality;
concluding handsomely with the Poet: Sit mihi compta domus; sit frugibus aptus
agellus;
Sint mea culturae praedia nota meae.
Alem.
"Neat be my House, my Pastures richly grown,
"My Cornfieldsd tilled by no hand but mine own.
But in this care of their culture, you have an Inner Field that must not be
forgotten. Your security or neglect in this, would argue your remissness of
Husbandry in all.

You have your Weedhooks, with other necessary Instruments, for ridding your
ground of all noxious or unprofitable Weeds. Not a Brake, Thorn, nor Bramble,
must stand in your way, to hinder the increase of better fruits. Now, Weeds are
but the Emblems of Vices; just as the purest grains, or choicest flowers are
the representatives of Virtues. Let no Misselto spread near your Vine; no Ivy
intwist your Elm; no Darnel infect your Field. Aug. Med. c. 36.
If Thou will Sow in the Soil of mine heart (said that Glory of the Eastern
Church) the Seeds of Virtues; needful it will be, that thou first weed out of
mine heart the Thorns of Vices.

Whence you may gather, that it is your Inward Culture that conduces most to
your honor: and that good Manners lay the best foundation to any Manor.

But, as all rubbish is to be removed, before the Groundwork be laid; so in
your Cultivage, there be three Infectious Seeds, wherewith you are never to be
acquainted, if ever you expect success, or a fair account from your harvest.

It has been the constant custom of some Farmers, in imitation of that
miserable Bithinian; to carry ever about them an Erra Pater, to inform their
Sollicitous Knowledge what years are, by that erring Divination, probably
conjectured to prove dear, or cheap. If dear, the Farmer, to increase his
profit, makes it his Design to raise the Market, by digressing from the Course
of a Farmer, and playing the part of a Forestaller, or Ingrosser. But this
advantageous Contractor of Mammon, many times dis-inherits him of his future
hopes in Sion: when his mouth shall be filled with gravel, how empty shall
those Barns appear to his infinite thoughts, which were lately so much
enlarged? Let it be then your happiness to confine your desires, by making them
suitable to your Calling. Covetousness is such a spreading Tetter, as it
blemisheth the favor of the Owner. The Postil of Content is an excellent
Lesson; not only to improve, but complete the Work of your Vocation.

There is another Locust which feeds often on the fruits of your Providence; and
seazeth on you when least suspected. You see your Neighbors Pastures look more
cheerfully; his Cornfields promise more plentuously; his Vineyards, Hop-yards,
with whatsoever else may appear most commodious, increasing more fruitfully:
and these beget in you Envy. Estrange this from you; let your eye rejoice in
the Welfare of your Neighbor: it will redound richly in Success to your Labor.

Lastly, should Passion transport you, may Architas temper lessen your Anger,
who told his lazy Hind, He would have beaten him, if he had not been angry with
him.

Be it your care to continue and end the Lease of your Farm for Life, with this
constant Rule, To keep a good Conscience in all things, both toward God and
Man. Acts 24.16.

V. Advice to a simple Country Curat.
I Am doubtful now whether I speak to a Mechanic, or a Scholar. If to the
former, a good homely Homily is the highest pitch of his Divinity: which,
having read Understandingly, Distinctly, and Audibly; he rests confident that
he has sufficiently performed a Curats duty. Small Tithes exact small Pains.
These Places be for most part bestowed on such, who remain destitute of all
Places: And like some poor maimed Hospitallers, become ravished with Devotion;
not so much with it, as to it: being forced thereto rather through need than
zeal. These, as they know not what metal Latin is made on: so their greatest
study is (unless it be the Art of catching of Flies with Domitian, or some
other trifling pursuit) to keep their shallow Sconces warm. Numerous Night-caps
must secure them: for those Night Mounteroes reach to the highest purchase,
unless it be a neighbourly-morning Noggin, which wheels about with much
cheerfulness: drilling along with no less freedom in frivolous impertinences.

For the Curat, as it is his least care to Teach; so is it in the lowest of his
Fellows desires to be taught. Doctrine and Use they never heard of: and for
Application, they know not what it means. Though this Countrey-Coridon Curat,
never heard of a Peripatetick all his time, he resembles him much in his
gradual-motion. For, he walks circularly, sits rarely; fearing, belike, it
might bring him into an acquaintance with a Study; wherewith he has ever held
distance, as an Enemy to his Health, and an unseasonable Guest to his House.
Night-watchings, intending Studies, are held dangerous; but these are such
strangers to him, as he has professed to all his penurious Family, that they
shall never trouble his sleep: nor procure disquiet to his ignorant Meneiy.
Now, to acquaint the World, that he partakes of a Scribe (for his creeping
thoughts fall many paces below a Pharise) his illiterate Girdle is constantly
furnished with Pen and Inkhorn: which he usually imploys upon occasion (and
with a glad welcome entertains he such occasions) of making Last Wills and
Testaments; whereof, though he retain some antiquated Presidents, he acts so
illegally, and errs so egregiously, as his Pen occasioneth much expense: As
many Lines; so many grounds of Suits. Much like the Spanish Curat; who could
set down large Legacies, but find no means, from whence those Legacies should
arise. The Annual, Revenue of these Contingences, though they be but small: his
hopes are, they will prove more permanent than Tithes. These have been
oft-times questioned, and whether legal or no, stoutly and strongly canvased:
But his Instruments never, unless by the Testators, and that concerned not him.

This unscholiastick Curat, as he never took breath from an Academy; So it is
vehemently to be suspected, that he was some Mechanic Bungler, before he was
raised to the Degree of a Reader: which you shall easily discover by the
Impression, or colorable Character of his finger; which usually leaves the
mark, or badge of his Profession, upon his Homily, or accustomed place of his
Reading. The Privilege of his Ignorance, being no Companion to late Studies,
secures his Person from three notable inconveniences. For, in the first place,
it is the least of his fears to lose his sight with too much Reading; or lose
his wits with too long plodding; or be taxed of maintaining either Scism or
Heresy, by his subtilty in disputing. Besides these three Assurances, he has
one advantage more above the Rank of his higher qualified Brethren: for, as his
Patron needs not fear any Lapse, so his poor Clark stands in no fear at all of
a Competitor: so bare is the Pasture as he is an hungry Pastor that would seek
it: Yet were it sitting to help him, by way of Advice; though he need small
assistance for gathering his Tithe. The Advice I shall give you, my Shallow
Teacher, shall be this: You pretend to no Learning in the Pulpit; do not
senselesly vapor it in the Alehouse: For a Puppy to act the part of a Rabby,
were a daring fancy, or madding frenzy, which would admit no office in the
Sanctuary.

If you mean either to save your self or others by your Book; deliver nothing
by the Book. Sow no Pillows under your Patrons Elbows. As you are taken for an
ungifted and unordinated Man; be it your Gift; while others Preach, but will
not say the Lords Prayer; to say the Lords Prayer, though you cannot Preach.
Neither must you in this Trace the steps of that Timing Preacher, who to please
the Lord of the Manor, was persuaded to continue his Pater Noster, so long as
his Patron continued his ten pound Pension: which was an Action of Price, but
no Devotion.

Be it your care to be of the number of those Ignorant Ones, who catch Heaven
by their honest Simplicity; rather than those Learned Ones, who purchase Hell
by their too subtle Curiosity.

VI. Advice to a Country Justice.
WE are now to give Advice to One, who, by virtue of his Place, if that virtue
be not vitiated, nor the Eminency of his Condition debased, might pretend
justly to the Power of a Judicial Monitor, in giving Advice unto others. But
seeing how no Progress incountereth with more dangerous By-ways, than the
Circuit of Justice; our design shall be this: First, to propose a Directory in
the Course of his Proceeding; and in the second place, to caution him of some
perilous Occurrences, which not declined, might engage his repute to an
irreparable contempt, and his judgment to an apparent dis-esteem.

Neither is it our meaning in this Draught to enlarge our Discourse, by
defining, or dilating on the Office of Justice: seeing there be more Subjects
under that Notion published, and by that Title distinguished, than usefully
observed, or practically administered.

His Division was well approved, who, in his Itineray held, that the Duty of a
Justice wholly depended on these two particulars; 1. Execution of Justice; 2.
Exhibition of Mercy.


In the former, Consideration is to be had of the Quality of the Offender. Hope
of Conversion in a young bashful Transgressor, not only begs, but exacts
remission: at least a mitigation of Punishment, in comparison of an ancient
Offender, whose habitual misdemeanure has made him a stranger to Hope, and a
Decoy to the follies of our Time.

This Distinction requires great Discretion in a Country Justice: Let me then
advise him, for his better avoiding of a more dangerous precipice, to cloth
his countenance sometimes with a cheerful aspect, and show a mild spirit to a
penitent Peccant. Let him act the indulgent Barnabas, rather than a severe
Bonarges. No Son of thunder; but of a calm and compassionate temper:
Especially, where dispositions appear far apter to be won by mildness, than
reformed by roughness: For, these menacing and violent Reclaimings, do
generally harden, rather than soften an indulgent and ingenuous nature.

I have sometimes heard of a fiery-furious Justice, who usually breathed
nothing but Whipping and Commitment; and from the Authority of his Place,
publicly protested before the face of the Country, That if he might be
designed any long time to sit on that Bench, he would so secure the Country
from Felony, as a Bush should keep a Sheep; Yet, that very night, was an Ambush
laid for this severe Justices Horse, and stolen out of the Pasture.

Whence we conclude with that Excellent Moral, That Justice mixed with Mercy
wins most hearts, and reclaims vice best. Draco's Laws being writ in blood,
dispatched more than they reformed. Yet shall I ever firmly adhere to that
Position: That too much indulgence shown to the Evil, redounds ever to the
prejudice of the Good.

There be three fearful Eye-sores which darken the Light, and blemish the Sight
of Justice. Amity, Enmity, base Lucre, by prostituting Justice as a Mercenary
Commodity. This caused the Athenians to Emblematize Justice with Blind Eyes,
and Lame Hands. Blind, that She might not distinguish Persons: Lame, that She
might not receive Bribes. Whence our Country Justice may collect, how
derogatory those Noble Assertors held it to be to their Profession, to corrupt
Justice for Reward; much more to divide Stakes, or admit of Sharing with their
Puny Clarks.

Now to complete him; that he may appear not only a Reader of Statutes at
Large, but an approved Practiser of what he Professes, we shall present to him
such a President, whose Example, if he imitate to life, he shall need no other
advice to direct him, no other line to regulate him. His resolution in the
course of his Profession was this: I have offered my Sacrifice on the Altar of
Themis: and I mean to perform what I have already professed. Mine Ear shall be
open to the Orphans Cause; mine Hand ready to wipe off the Widows Tear. Active
shall every Faculty be to promote Justice, remove Injuries, and to render every
one his due. Observe this exactly, and you shall acquit your self, not only a
Justice, but a Patriot of your Country.

VII. Advice to an Heir.
HEre am I to bestow my Advice on an Heir; or a Thing that partakes more of Air
than any other substance: Yet furnished with substance more than enough to
pursue feathers in the Air. Give me leave now, after the long-wish'd departure
of your Father, to offer to you some Directions, which the heat and height of
your vast hopes would never till now afford you time to consider.

Now, in your Entrance into the World, this gorgeous Theater of humane glory;
where, if you please, you may act the part of the Prodigal Son, without hope of
returning to your Father: I should advise you to take special care of your
inward cure. You think all is well with you: and from thence arises your
greatest danger. A disease insensible, is ever most incurable. Youth is a
malady of it self, till it be purged of those malignant humors which deprave
it: and strengthened with such Sovereign Receipts as may preserve it. But, to no
condition is youth more troublesome than to his, who is advanced to fortunes.
Every Place to him is a Snare. No object of Beauty, but an attractive Lure to
Fancy: and an Ingredience to a Frenzy. Various faces beget in him distracted
affections. Privacy and Retirement breeds in his troubled thoughts sundry
discontents. He understands his Pupillage to be past, and that he is become his
own Guardian: which makes his Cinque Ports so weakly guarded. For Acquaintance
he needs not hunt after them; the report of his over-swoln fortunes plays the
Coy, and brings them in Sholes to his Storehouse: And these angle cunningly
after his humor. They will oppose him in nothing that may delight him. He must
be their Prince so long as his Conduit flows: the decrease whereof he either
minds not, or disvalues. Thus is this Paphlagonian Partridge no sooner sprung,
than caught in every Spring.

Yet though he has lost himself, we intend not to lose him; so long as there
appears the least hope of retriving him, or any probable means of recovering
him. Let us then apply a timely cure to this violent distemper.

I shall not wonder much at his boundless expense; it has been ever observed,
that a great Scatterer is the usual Successor of a great Gaherer. We may
imagine that this young Heir had such a Providor, as he left him a Nest well
feathred, before he adventured to flicker in the World. All was got to his
hand; which made him more ready to spend, what never troubled his sleep to get,
nor wrought upon his providence to keep. He has heard, perchance, his Father
say, that he had taken more delight in Sparing, than ever his Heir could do in
Spending. And to make an Experiment of his Fathers Observation, he meant to
take a Trial in this Seed-fur of his fortunes. Now, what is all this but a
Career of Youth; an Excursion so familiar, as it grows quite expunged out of
the Catalogue of Serious Errors? yet some Receipts must be used, lest too much
indulgence abuse his youth.

Go to then, Wilde-Oats, we must of necessity deal a little roughly with you:
We are to enjoin you a restraint. And Confinement being so Common a Censure,
cannot abridge much the pursuit of your pleasure. Retain that Maxim, for it
holds infallible: One Months liberty depraves Youth more, than a whole Years
discipline will reform. The benefit of Retirement, and recess from Society, we
shall not need to press much, variety of Instances may illustrate it. Grave and
Reverend Patriots have we had here within our Pale, whose Native dispositions
molded them Libertines; but by a prudent coercion of their straying
affections, they became high improvers of their Knowledge; and in the end, such
expert State-Pilots, as they were held fitting to sit at the Stern of the
State. This it is, at retired hours to read men; not such as the freedom of
folly has acquainted you withal; for those were attractive Lures to train you
to lightness: and expose your malleable nature to all looseness. The Perusal of
those whom I recommend to your choice, will season your youth so maturely, as
folly shall become a stranger to your fancy: All Extravagancy a Reformade in
your family. This will make you an Heir of fame, as well as fortune. Hold such
an even poize in the management of your Estate, as you may constantly observe
this Rule: Never to spend, where honest frugality bids you spare: nor spare,
where reputation bids you spend. This shall render you discreetly generous in
both.

VIII. Advice to a younger Brother.
NAture has brought you the later into the World, not to your disadvantage,
but improvement.

He only appears seated above the World, who intermedleth least with the World.
He only has the Earth at his command, who spears his divine thoughts above the
command of Earth. Your fortunes have exempted you from too much encumbrance
with these Inferiors: and consequently enlarged your affections to those
Superior.

From a Survey of your Extraction, you find your self behind your Brother in
nothing but time. And this redounds highly too, to your advantage. For it is
observed in Births, as well as Plants, that the later growths render the
maturest and fullest fruits. You know your self to be a Cyen of the same Stock
and Mould, and generally of a more purely-refin'd and rarifi'd Mind: (without
vanity or arrogance in relation to your quality be it spoken) if the liberty of
your own disposition, or some other malignant effects, impede not the
proficience of those Innate Seeds originally sown in you.

Those Privileges and Indowments given you by Nature, to parallel the Revenues
of your Elder Brother, are rich and exquisite. Pregnancy of Wit; Promptness in
Conceit; Quickness of Apprehension; and Happiness of Memory in reteining.
These abilities be generally intailed on you, to supply other temporary
defects, which the Poet handsomely glanced at, saying: Nature by secret
influence held it fit,
That the younger Brood should have the elder Wit.
What dishonor then were it unto you to debase, or debauch those Native Parts,
so richly imbellished, either by the foyl of worthless Society, or by an
ungenerous Education, which is a Second Nature, and usually corrupts the
Springhead with some impure mixture? Our Calidonian Neighbor is to be
commended in this (and really in little else;) where, if he be a qualified
Person, he will not suffer his younger Sons to nestle long under their Mothers
Wings; but sends them abroad to be Educated: and consequently by Language,
Discourse and Carriage so enabled, as their Demean appears graceful, their
Society grateful in all their Addresses. Which Improvement, by help of
Education (if we may believe ingenuous Barclay) raises it self to a Story
higher in his Country, than any other Nation in Europe: which he attributes to
the apprehensive capacity, observation and confidence of his own Natives, in
these words: For Education of their youngre Sons, the Nobility and Gentry of
our Country are praiseworthy; for, in stead of Manors at home, it is their
care to furnish them with Manners abroad. No convenient cost is debarred them,
nor divertisement admitted them, that may any way obstruct their proficiency.
Wherein their Native ingenuity, furthered by an industrious docility, acts so
happily; As, what Studies soever they incline to, they prosper in them with
wonderful success. None are more patient of Military duties, nor more valiant
in Fight, being led on by confident Leaders. Nor do the Muses ever appear more
beautiful, than when they inspire the breasts of Barcley
Scots. They are capable also of City-business, and can fit their industry to
any kind, either of Life or Fortune.

But those that travel, or rather wander in a poor fashion, and rely upon no
other means, than going to the Houses of their Countrymen, which are grown
rich in other Lands; and demand, as it were, the tribute of their Country, as
they partake not of that generous Rank, so are they most intolerable in their
proud beggary.

But there is nothing wherein they deserve more praise, than in their providing
so for the younger, as they shall never need to be pinned on the sleeve of the
Elder. A great fault in our English Gentry, who usually make their younger Sons
their elder Brothers Falconers: or expose them to such desperate fortunes, and
withal so incapable of any serviceable employment, as for want of a better
way, they oftimes make the Highway their Calling. Be it your principal care
then, hopeful Sir, (for so must I hold you, till vanity lose my hopes in you)
that as by course of Nature through your Minority, there is left to you less,
so by your pious industry you would improve it more. This will enlarge the fame
of your Discretion, as well as Fortune; And raise a fair Fabric to a younger
House.

IX. Advice to a Gallant.
YOur Profession is Gallantry: and standing on that Punto, you look to be
handled more softly and tenderly. Otherwise, you mean to act the Rantor, though
no Hector (for your thoughts have dispensed long ago with that Complement of
valor) in a fantastic shrug, or an impertinent vapor. Yet will not all this
avert a considerate Pen from coping with your dangling Plume. Neither shall we
lay our disgust, so much upon the vanity of your Habit; for that may suit with
the levity of our time: as that Epidemical Habit of Vice sufficiently
discovered in your fruitless expense of time. Shall we trace your Steps from
Morn to Night? we shall find in your Walls and By-ways a continued Night. The
first Idol you adore is your Glass; wherein you court your self in such an
accurate mean, as if Narcissus were revived, and presented there, purposely to
admire his own shadow. What a tricking and trimming, purfling and poudring,
painting and perfuming bestow you on the Case, while you neglect the
Instrument! which adulterate daubing makes Nature appear a stranger to her
self. And whereto tends all this? Truth is, I may safely conclude with that
serious Diog. Cyn.
Cynick: If it be done for your self, it is madness: and if for another, it is
sin. By this time we are to imagine you completely accoutred for the visit of
your Ladies chamber; which to your honor, flies quickly open, to give the
freer admittance to your amorous encounter. Present access promises no less
prosperous success: which, though it be sometimes in your thoughts to expedite
to your advantage; yet falling doubtful in your resolves, whether to suit her
for a Wife, or a Mistress, you grow cooler in your pursuit, than you were in
the beginning. This troubles you more, than the recollection of your misspent
hours. Let me draw near you; what do you pitch upon in this Contest? Have you
weighed her? Is she too light for a Wife: and too cunning for a Mistress? Leave
her, before your thoughts be too impressively fixed on her: lest she, indeed,
play the Mistress, and become your Commandress. Alcides was as strong as you;
and Omphale made him her slave. So imperious is licentious Love.

But, having taken leave of your Lovesick Lady (who at least pretends so) with
promise of an evening visit; your next Address must be to the Ordinary; where
you encounter with more variety of dishes to give relish to your luscious
appetite; than any useful discourse to improve your knowledge. Nay, should
occasion be offered, (as there will be some ever who take care to satisfy
their Brains as well as their Bellies) of helps that way; your Conceit, by
running a wool-gathering after lighter fancies, sends you away as empty as you
came. Gaming, Tennis, Baloun, Bilyard, with other light dalliance, have so
forestalled your unsettled judgment, as they will give no free admittance to the
intervene of any Serious Discourse. Neither could any thing more be expected
from you; seeing the Principles of those who had the greatest influence on you,
and nearest interest in you, could make you no dangerous person for Designs:
nor accurate for matter of Discourse, Your Mercer, Milliner, Tailor, and
Perfumer, though they made you a neat Outward Man, they could not with all
their Art so complete you, as to present you Inwardly suitable to an
Intelligible Company. It is your Ambition too, frequently to visit the Court;
whereto usually you no sooner come, than you are pitifully caught. Court-Baits
are cunningly laid: and your youthful eyes cannot discover them, till you are
taken in them. Masks, Presentiments, Revels, and Reer-Bankets, have been in our
calmer times, attractive Lures to gallant Fancies: which once set on fire, were
not quickly quenched.

There is one thing likewise, that you have been much noted for, in your very
gate: None who past by you, could do you a greater injury than not to observe
you. Such was your conceit, that a gallant Posture could attract nothing less
than the Eye of an Admirer. But this is such an easy error, as humane frailty
weav's it is Apology. Your thoughts in this aim at no more than a debonair
regreet: And, that Man is well bought, who costs but a Salutation.

As the Cinamon-Tree may be your emblem, whose Bark is better than the Body; so
may you expect justly for most honor to be done to that part, which your
esteem holds most worthy.

Thus Sir, have you heard your distemper: and the way to cure you, is to wound
you. No Sin-salve without sense of Sin. Corrosives must be used, before
Cordials be applied. You are to be launced, before the Cicatrice be closed.
Your wild affections spread so broad, they must be pruned. Your Ancestors have
left you a vast Estate: this should not make you a Libertine; but Liberal to
those that be indigent. Would you be called a Gallant? let your gallant actions
proclaim you worthy of that Style. He who goes forth to see a Man aray'd in
soft Raiment, disparageth his Judgment, in preferring the Cabinet before the
Jewel enclosed in it.

X. Advice to his Mistress.
Mistress;
YOu have got a gallant Platonic; but in relation to that Title, question may
be made whether you or your spruce Servant understand it. The Style is lately
minted: and strangely rendered. Plato, though he loved to go neat, he was too
wise, to appear phantastickly garish: Neither was he so effeminate, as to give
free reigns to his affections: though his desires sometimes cloz'd in this
period. So he might have his Eyes to read with, his conceit to apprehend what
he read, his memory to retein what he had read and conceived, and a Woman with
her necessary attendance to serve him; whatsoever might befall him, should not
perplex him.

Which sociable assistance holds concurrence with that best and most infallible
Directory: and may serve for a Rule to every distinct Family or Society. He who
saw all things, saw with his Providential Eye, That it was not good for Man to
be alone. And therefore gave him a Fellow-helper. This divine Plato.
Ethnic having attained the happiness (as is generally thought) of perusing
the Book of the Old Law; and of conference too with the profoundest Rabbis,
might be sufficiently informed touching the authority of this Precept: and so
captivate his understanding to the Letter of the Law, in honor to the
Lawgiver.

But, make search through every Coast, Creek and Corner of his Platonic
Commonweal; and find me one passage in it, that authorizeth you, my lovely
Mistress, being Married, to entertain any Platonic, or affectionate Confident.
Or any such Allowance as Alimony by a discontented Lady petitioned: or any such
suit by the Court of the Areopagites, Ephorists, or Roman Conclave admitted.
Defects in an Husband were in those times held so excusable to a Wife; that if
the Man chanced to have a Plutarch. in vit. Macrel. in Saturn.
stinking breath, the Woman, out of an honest simplicity, thought every Man had
the like. No deformity could estrange their fancy, after Hymen had tied the
Knot.

Now Madam, how differently play you your Game with these amorous Coyes!
Neither is one Favorite sufficient for your various appetite. Recollect
yourself; and value that most, which becomes a Woman best. Modesty is the
choicest Ornament that Beauty can put on. It takes in more Lovers and Admirers
in an hour, than wanding eyes can purchase in a year.

I would woo thee, if thou did not prevent me, said that witty Suter. How
many lose themselves by sending forth loose eyes? Had Dinah never stragled, she
had kept her fame unblemished. It was an ancient custom among the Romans, for
the Married Women, upon their first return home, and entrance into their
Houses, to put off their Shoes; implying, that they were no more to roam
abroad, but keep within doors. Whence it was, that the Dom. po^^.
Snayl became the Huswifes Emblem, carrying her house always about with her.

But it may be, Mistress, you to whom I direct my Discourse, and intend my
Advices, have not yet entered into that Honorable State. I will speak to you
therefore as to a Maiden-Mistriss, in which rank, howsoever it be with you, you
desire to be numbered: and acquaint you with some Caveats, which may highly
improve you, being duly observed.

Supposing you to be such a Person, as has a disposing power of your self and
Fortunes; beware that you make not your own breast a treacherous Guardianess in
betraying your trust. And herein your Sex oftimes suffers through too much
Credulity. Pretenders to love are dangerous Orators to taking Ears. If Vows,
Protests, or if need require, Decoys Dam's may work the feat, they will not
fall a grain short of Perdition, to purchase your endangered affection:
Whereof, should they once become Masters, They would render you of all others,
the unhappiest Mistrisses. No sooner loved than loathed, and in that notion
lost for ever.

But admit, Mistress, you were of another humor: and could stand strongly upon
your Guard, in defiance to all Assailants. Yet suffering Death to enter in by
the Windows, you may unawares make your self a Prey to a pleasing Pretender,
and become his Slave, who, with all his heart would have been your Servant. An
handsome feature, I confess, is the Object of Fancy: and this it is, you say,
has brought you to thraldom: and a Tyrant to your self. Nay, so far estranged
you from what you were, as it has brought you to be a Suter, where you were
before a Commander.

By falling into this precipice, you should irreparably lose your self. For
Women to woo Men detracts from the honor of Women. This Task lies properly on
the Man's side, as it is wittily made good by that ancient Arabian Aphorism:
where this Question being ask't, why Man should rather seek the Woman, than
Woman the Man? It is answered; Because Man has lost more by Woman, than Woman
by Man: having lost his Rib, he goes to seek it.

In one word, he contracted the Excellency of a Woman in a short, but exact
Epitome, who set forth his Mistress in these words: She is Modest, and knows
her self. Which President might make you a Complete Mistress; and your Servant
fortunate in his Choice.

XI. Advice to him that will take it.
WE are now to open our Mindian gate a little wider, by reason of the
Confluence of all sorts that are now to enter. As for those who appear so
opinionately wise, as they hold themselves sphear'd above the Tropical Point of
Advice; we shall leave them, without exception, to themselves, to negotiate
like active Brainworms in their Vtopian State; where their Conclusions may pass
for Current, and exempt from Censure; being wrapped up in such Cloudy Dictats, as
like those Egyptian Hieroglophicks, drained from Polyarchus Cave, they surpass
the understanding both of the Speaker and Hearer. Nunc loqu^^^^bus, and
pronunciantibus plenus est orbis: Docent quae non didicerunt. Magist: sunt, cum
discipuli ante non suerunt. Hier.
May Apuleius in his Golden Ass become their Tutor: for our Genius has
dis-claim'd the Charge of any such unprofitable Teacher.

We intend therefore our Advice to such only, who, according to the Title of
this Essay, will take it.

Neither shall we presume to give our Advice to the Counselor, whose
Profession consists in Advice, (though much might be spoken in it) how fat fees
open his Lungs; and discover his Receipts by the Eagre pursuit of his Clients
Cause; which Aeschines censured highly in Demosthenes Pleadings: arguing an Ox
to be in his mouth when he pleaded for an indigent Client, saying, Lean Fees
begot Low Friends. This might allude to a pleasant Passage obviously occurring
betwixt two eminent Counselors in our time; no less facetiously answered than
tartly objected: The one having received for his Fee a rich Chariot and four
gallant Barbs bravely equipag'd, was twitted by his Adversary, saying, Stay
Brother, drive not so fast; which the other no less pregnantly than presently
retorted in this sort: Give me leave Brother, I ride not Poast. Covertly
jerking at his Office, who by his Poast-Masters Place had vastly inhanc'd his
Revenues.

But so truly meriting be sundry Persons of Quality in this Profession, as
their alacrity in the prosecution of a poor Man's Cause, being grounded on
Justness, vindicates their uprightness from any such imputation. Let us then
divert our Course from Him, and make our Application to his Client; who with a
potent Purse labors to support an impotent Cause.

Our Advice to this litigious Agent then shall be this: that he be cautious in
the fullness of his Fortunes, of such Pursutes. Admit, he proceed, and by the
assistance of a Crammed Purse, prosperously succeed; that Success will prove a
Canker: for, by enjoying of what which is not his own, he shall ruin that
which is his own; and make his Posterity suffer, through his scandalous usage
of so injurious a Possessor. Many Rich Fathers have by this means made their
Heirs die Beggars. A Predecessors care avails nothing, unless it be seconded by
a Superior Blessing.

Our Advice to Persons of Quality, whose Descents and Estates have enstyl'd
them eminent in their Country, shall cloze in this. Let their Breeding be a
Signal Evidence of the Family from whence they came. Education is the best
Cognizance of an ancient Extraction. None can gather from what we wear, what we
are, or what we were. It is our language and demean that deblazon us best.
Metal upon Metal is false Heraldry: and so be all garish imbellishments to
the real Constitution of Gentry.

We might observe even in these later times, wherein Persons of Rank and
Quality are to be completely accoutred to the refinement of this Age wherein
they live; how much they prejudice those Native Abilities wherewith they were
at first endowed; as likewise that Splendour of an Ancient Family, from whence
they descended; by being left to themselves, and bestowing the first fruits of
their time, those prime Flowers of their Youth (wherein the choicest and
generoust Seeds are not only sown, but spring to their best proficience;) upon
debaucht Societies and unbred Consorts much below themselves. Their
acquaintance with a Country Can, quickened with the pleasing Title of a Brave
Lord, or a Gallant young-Master, madds them above measure. Whereas, if they
frequented Company suitable to their quality, they might find with less
expense, and more useful experience, what would best become them both in Places
of Pleasure and Judicature.

Now to propose them to whom we direct our Polemical Discourse, Places of
Improvement; as Universities are fittest for laying the foundation; So Inns of
Courts be the properest for Civil Mean and Deportment.

The one for grounding, the other for maturing.

Scholastical Breeding, if it rise no higher, may be accounted Pedantical; but
being completed by Conference, and choice Conversation, it becomes graceful.

There was nothing that could move Democritus to more vehement laughter, than
to hear the amorous discourse of a Stoical Scholar. His Passion was presented
with such unbecoming expressions, as if Pallas had been his Venus, or Minerva
his Mistress.

For Travel, it is such an Ornament to Gentry, as it affords in Table-treats a
voluble tongue; whereas a want of it begets silence: unless Ignorance assume to
it self so much confidence as to discourse of what it knows not; and
consequently discover want of Sense, without apprehension of shame.

An intelligent Traveller is the Expeditest Mathematician; for he carries his
Globe always about him. But some we have, who no sooner lose the sight of
their Country, than they lose themselves. These learn Foreign Fashions, but
never how to fashion themselves. They retein the Garb, but not the essential
Grace of Travel.

But set these Shools of Learning, Law and Travel aside; if our Gentry have a
thought of improving their knowledge at home (for all dispositions are not for
lanching the Depths) our own Metropolis, (having now recovered her
long-sequestred Wits) is such an Academy, as it may furnish you with a various
Society, stored with Wits of all sizes, humors and composures: Not only apt to
return pleasing accents to the Ear, but rich notions to the Intellect.

In which Allay, if your discretion make you so happy, as to entertain into
your intimacy the best: such I mean, as may rather improve you, than delude
you, and by their subtle impostures, usually practiced by our late Trap'nners,
surprise you. From which prudent Election, in relation to Society, you shall
reap this benefit: it will so clearly distinguish your quality, and in your
better parts so exquisitly accommodate you, that not one hour shall pass by
you, which may not highly redound to your advantage. Such Acquaintance will
beget in you no Repentance. It will appear by your demean, that you have read
men; the usefull'st knowledge for a Gentleman. Books are excellent means to
steal away hours; but serious Consorts render you the best Illustrations on
them: These return Spectacles for all Sights. Representing more true Lights
than all our New Lights can render. Communicable knowledge the fittingst
Chairman in public Societies and private Families.
For these effuse no deceiving, but an intellective splendour, operating
strongly upon the faculties of the Soul; and dilating their effects, not only
to the direction of themselves, but instruction of others.

There is an observable Error in this Nation, (which we could wish were a
stranger to it;) Many of our Pen-feathred youngsters be no sooner mounted to
their Fathers Saddles, than they become eagre hunters after Good-fellows: and
to ingratiate them the more, will make them rather their Pensioners, than lose
the benefit of their unnecessary Acquaintance. Their only care is, with the
Cumin of their inconsiderate bounty to lure those Wild Pigeons to their Coat.
Too fruitless a Charge to bestow on such a Covy.

It were easy to make a Dish of Meat worth a groat, at a crowns expense; or to
use that strict Laconian adage: It is an hard purchase to gain a Friend with
the Sale of a Farm. We shall conclude him then to have forfeited his Judgment,
who in his pursuit of Friends or Companions, entertains such a Choice as may
admit a Change.

A Bushel of Salt anciently was held a Measure little enough to Season
Acquaintance: It were too rash confidence then to make a Companion at first
sight his Secretary, or Bosom Friend. This has been the ruin of many.
Persons of all conditions may experimentally instance it.

Now for those who are cried up for the Wits of the time; we would advise them
to be well known to those with whom they converse facetiously, or vent their
Conceits.

Of all Creatures, none more dangerous than Satyrs: who, while they brush great
Men's Clothes, they fearfully trench upon their own safety, by exposing their
freedom to the various construction of the Company. Some there be, who would
rather lose their Friend than their Jest. But such Conceits cost too dear.
These had need of many Friends, or their Wits will protest against them, and
return them Bankrupts. It is the infelicity of some petulant wits to bring
their Owners Heads under the Hearers Girdle, by their indiscreet Flashes. To be
merry and wise is a good Rule; but many through intemperance, or too much
confidence, usually transgress that bound.

That Sage Precept deserves your remembrance: Be Stoical to none; affable to
all; but open thy breast to few.

By which means, he may sleep without fear, and awake without affront.

Of such we may justly conclude, that they have attained to an happy Period in
their Progress; who can look upon the World with contempt, and entertain their
Condition with content. These can fix the eye of their Contemplation with a
cheerful aspect upon Heaven, as their only Landmark. Whatsoever is below them,
they hold them such contemptible Objects, as they deserve not their Enterview.
These know how to put in practice that excellent Advice, in shutting up the
Windows, that their House may Shine. Their Eyes, those Windows of the Body must
not be employed in any Office that may unbecome them. Nor any other Sense in
that which may detract from her honor that commands them. Such a Regiment
cannot choose but atchieve brave acts, wheresoever engaged.

It is an infallible Maxim, that he who lives so as every day were his last,
must necessarily take his leave of the World without a Sigh: and entertain the
Summons of Death with a Smile.

The Consequence holds, that he who sets his rest upon the Place of true rest,
neglects not his Work, but makes Spiritual Labor his Convoy to eternal rest:
Such a Workman is no Idler in the Marketplace; but at the first hour of the
day goes down into the Vineyard: and having cheerfully performed the Course of
his employment, he makes the Evening his days Accomptant: closing his nightly
return with this useful question: O my Soul, what have thou done this day? A
mind so Devotionally exercised, makes the Natural Sun his Spiritual Emblem: The
Sun, as it shines brighter at its setting, than its rising; so the splendour of
his exemplary Life appears Clearest at his Ending.

There is nothing more inglorious to Age, than for an Old Man to have no other
Argument to prove his years, than his Gray Hairs. Like an Almanac out of date;
a neglected Address, or a defaced Record, he appears in every Conference, or
Passage of Consequence. Though his many misspent years have made him an Elder
in the Ward where he lives: and the Revestry admit him a voice in the Election
of a Lecturer; others, less old, but more ripe, supply the number; while he is
left to himself with leisure enough to wipe his reverend beard, and content his
weak sense with the place of a Cipher.

These would make rare Elders for deciding Doctrinal Controversies: or Stating
Cases of Conscience. What numerous emergent Errors have we known to have been
broached from the Principles of such pretending Rabbis; whose reverend esteem
lay only in the Color of their Hair? Such advantage had Time given them, as
their years authorized them with an ignorant confidence to set up, what the
succession of many years could not pull down.

Hence it was, that one of our Modern Statesmen, from his long Experience in
sitting at the Stern of the State, wisely concluded, That he never knew any
Constitutions all his time more inconsistent with a Politic State, than those
which came from a Gray Head, and a Green Brain. A face of gravity made them
appear what they were not; but a clear judgment would present them in their own
shape, and discover to the World what they were.

In Arguments of Discourse, the recollection of our own thoughts, assisted by
the observation of others, is the only way to gain Wisdom.

He that loves to hear himself talk, seldom improves his Knowledge.

Many by too much talk have lost themselves; few or none by silence.

Harpocrates with his finger on his Mouth was held the Wisest Sign in Athens.

That Spartan Sage seriously observing how one sufficiently ripe in years,
spoke like a young Man: I should have adjudged you (said he) worthy to sit in
the Highest Place, till I heard you speak; but your tongue has dishonored your
age: come then down, and give that young Man room, whose downy Chin pretends
more to age in his express, than you to Sense, with all your aged Experience.
It is the tongue that either betrays, or improves the Judgment. A Member better
ordinated for Service than Command.

Our Advice should now descend from the Laity to the Clergy; which admits
sundry Divisions. But those many Scisms and Divisions among themselves, may
save me that labor. Be it their Task to Preach both by Word and Work: that,
what their tongue speaks to others, their exemplary life may Preach to
themselves and others. A Lamp stored with such oil, will burn with pure Zeal.
One Accent breathing on the heart, is worth a thousand sounding in the Ear.

TWO CHOICE CHARACTERS Suitable to these TIMES. 1. A Country Commissioner. 2.
A State-Competitor.

1. A Country Commissioner
IS an Instrument pretending to Peace; and by his long employment might
effectually advance it, if his twilight Judgment could either contrive the way
of composing it, or some self-interest, or partial respect (dangerous Eye-sores
in all Commissional Courses,) did not obstruct his Proceedings in this Pathway
to Peace. Now there be two Instrumentals of this Profession, who run descant on
different keys. The one would seem to know more than they do: the other to know
more than they seem. It would make a Stoic laugh, were his thoughts never so
clowdy, nor confined to an unsociable privacy, to observe the Posture of that
seeming-wise Commissioner; how demurely he strokes his reverend Beard: and with
a grave politic nod, shaking his shallow nodle, (having heard an Intergotory,
which he understands not) most authentically concludes: -- There lies the knot
of the business. But it partakes too much Gordian for his numm'd fingers to
unty. Nor skills it much how the Commission runs; who bolder than blind Baiard?
His confidence will boulster out his Nonsense, and make him appear to the
judgment of those, whose brains were pounded in the same Mortar with his own;
and whose conceits might be found by a measuring cast of equal size, a Sage
Sophy.

His return home informs the whole Family with his Commissionary Carriage; how
he canvas'd the Cause; puzzled the Witnesses, and made black appear white to the
amazement of his Hearers. So highly transported is this Country Dottrell with
his wants, as he holds them for unparalled Parts.

It was my fortune, in my younger years, to be known to one of these Shallops;
a Person of a strong-pretending design, but weak dispatch. There was nothing
that contented him more, than to have an Oar in every ones Boat: his Sickle in
another Harvest. As for Commissionary Employments, though poorly versed in
such addresses, this officious Pragmatist would ever make one, if either his
Personal Application to the Parties interessed, or the free offer of himself
would procure his admittance. It happened one day, that this obsequious Agent,
who usually bestowed many days to small purpose, was nominated a Commissioner
in a business of Consequence, and distance to the place of his dwelling: which
quickened his morning awake for his more seasonable attendance. Yet, in his way,
resolving to call on his Neighbor, a downright Boor, and never acquainted
with such employments; Are you asleep, said this wise Arbitrator, that all
things are so hushed and quiet about you? Yes truly, answered his Neighbor, I
am taking my morning nap, for I have little else to do. O well are you, replied
this Sir Politic Pol, that God has lent you so small a Talent of
understanding; you may take your rest, while my abilities will not suffer me to
sleep: One or other is ever relying on my headpiece!

Now tell me, was not this a brave Arbitrary Squib to compose differences? And
should many of these wise Pretenders pass the Inquisition, we might find them
falling into the same rank or file: only deluded with Self-opinion, and
consequently in the Balance of Judgment, wherein all human actions are equally
poized, deservingly slighted and disvalued. But such simple arrogance is ever
most noxious to it self. He who would be thought wiser than he is, and to have
those Parts which he has not, lesseneth himself in the weak discovery of those
he has. Iugurth had a great advantage of Hyemsal. He had the happiness to speak
little, and do much: whereas the other had the property to speak much, and do
little. That Client gave good advice to his Advocate, in telling him roundly,
If he stood for him, let him speak materially, or not at all. Those who
over-doe the work, generally in affairs of this nature, pull down more than
they set up: and by their Superstructure give their Adversary ground for
erecting a Story higher than he intended: or upon the weakness of such a
foundation he could have probably expected.

But, such as these are fearless Bugbears in Commissionary Causes; they love to
hear themselves talk; which gives occasion to their solid Opponent, to use
those words with an acute, but composed passion, which Aeschines returned to
Pithias: Good God, when will this long-lung'd wittall leave his babbling! The
only office of these self-wits consists in a fruitless appearance to their
behalf, for whom they are named; but much to the Parties prejudice for whom he
appears: being no less ignorant than arrogant in returning what he should, or
discussing what he ought to his benefit; for whom, to his honor, he sat like a
Cipher, without advancing his cause for whom he stood.

Good Causes stand in need of wiser Commissioners, or they will in a Term or
two dwindle to nothing; and shape the Plaintiffs Suit to the neglected habit of
a Forma Pauperis: and so leave him like Plato's naked Man, with two feet, but
without feathers. A pitiful pittiless Spectacle in a Court of Justice!

We are now to return you the character of a Spirit more genuine, and of a
stronger temper. The last we presented on the Stage, spoke much, but knew
little; but you shall hear one now, who, though he speak little, knows much.
Empty Vessels send forth ever the shrillest sound: whereas deepest Foords
stream a-long with the calmest course. And experimentally shall that Man find
this close Politician, who takes occasion to employ him, no less full of
danger, than he is of depth. He has a self-interest in every Commission: and
can angle cunningly in troubled waters: and to display him in his native
color, Reward holds such influence over him, as it has power to over-byas him;
by tracing the steps of Coelius, who pleaded best with his left hand.

Such State-Cheats, though covertly carried, be frequently practiced. Hope of
profit, said that divine Cynick, beats strongly upon the pulse of honesty. His
previous intentions may be clear and integrious; his resolves for whom he
deals, rightly biased, and equally balanced; but some friendly
advertisements, enclosed in gilt paper, quite turn the hinges, and drive those
honest resolves upon nibling at a dangerous attractive bait, soon out of doors.

It was sometimes disputable, whether it were better for one, in a Case of
Judicature, to make choice of an Agent, who would betray his Cause through
simplicity; or of such an one, who would make a prey of him by his subtilty.
Neither of them is good; but the determination of this intricate question
closes in this: whether it were easier to digest (though they be both meats of
hard concoction) suffering under an apparent foe, or a pretending friend? Thus
have we found you two Commissioners, both appearing, but neither worthy
approving. For, as the one might by his ingenuous simplicity betray your Cause,
wherein he is interessed: So might the other, by his partial-gilt subtilty,
expose your credulity to prejudice, where you least suspected. To decline these
precipices, no course clearer nor safer, than to make choice of such, whom your
own assiduate experience, or repute of the Country wherein they live, inform
you sufficiently, both of their honesty and knowledge. And distinct notions you
may easily find in these, whether they in that qualification, merit your
approvement or no. For, if honest, they will return you that Answer which that
ancient Sage gave to his Son-in-Law, in a case of like nature: I am yours in
just Causes only. Neither will these Commissioners (presupposing them honest)
make it their only work to sit upon Examination of Witnesses (though of
principal concern to their office) but to address Proposals of Peace; and
pursue those Motions with that discreet moderation, as it may produce effect,
unless the spirit of contention, usually reigning in litigious Plaintiffs,
obstruct it: It is a grounded Maxim, that the best Commissioners be the
effectuall'st Peacemakers. They erect a Chancery within themselves, and
conscientiously compose the quarrel.

As for Knowledge, being the second requisite; Practical Experience is the best
Directory; chalking him forth the way wherein he is to walk; which accompanied
with Integrity, compleats the Work.

2. A State-Competitor
IS an High-Flyer; hatched in an airly Ayry; apt to mount before he find wings;
bred to the disquiet of all, but most to himself. For the Triumphs of Miltiades
will not suffer Themistocles to sleep. He is all quicksilver, and in his
career, of such a perpetual motion; as Phaeton-like, he gallops over the twelve
Signs in a moment: but resolves his ayry grandeur like a Squib, with the
presentment of a Flash, to nothing. Ambition, says wise Montpellier, though it
have a strong Constitution, it has a squeamish Stomach.
Having left the Country, breathing too foggy vapors for his queazy stomach,
his resolves hold for traversing the Court: where he takes notice of an early
State-Favourite, who by his timely rising had outrun him: but he means, if his
designs fail him not, to win ground on him, and outstrip him too; by fishing
so artfully with his golden hook, and strength of assisting Relations.

He has so much wit as to humor the Times: and to attempt with a conscientious
indifferency whatsoever may advance his own interest. But for as much as one
must creep before he go; he treads the Pallace-yard at first gingerly; talks
demurely: and in every Posture composeth his counterfeat garb to that gravity,
as if Ambition were his Alien, and Stoicall Civility his Darling. But, finding
the way of being great is to become popular; he makes it his only work to
ingratiate himself first with the Pedantry: and by their applause, easily
acquired by a graceful aspect, and arguments of bounty, to mount one story
higher. Hot Embers cannot lie long raked up in ashes, some sparks will break
forth, and discover their confined heat. Suppose him then entering the Lobby;
where he acquaints himself with some necessary Appendices to the Court; laying
his Project, how by their means he may raise his infant hopes to their intended
height. And it falls out seasonably; for by their conduct he makes way for his
future preferment.

In the mean time he moves slowly. Weak wings impt with such slender helps
cannot promise any speedy nor successive flight: He must not then rest here.
Neither can he expect by his early rise to find any firm footing. He has read
of Mazarella's fate; and by his example, loath would he be, that his fore-noon
honor should be crushed down by an afternoon fall: or suffer his infant-Glory
to set in a Cloud. But his attentive Ears open to all reports that may any way
conduce to his advantage; no less opportunately than fortunately hear of a
late-mounted Lord, highly advanced, but meanly gifted. One, who by his
immerited growth, having over-swoln himself, makes an Idol of his Titular
Honor. Yet this self-conceipted Pharisee stands in needs of a Scribe, to
supply his defects; having nothing to subscribe him great, saving an illegible
mould of dis-joynted Letters; which presents a name above the apprehension of a
Reader. This Place, though far below his aims, this fresh water Courtier
accepts: and within few Months, by his dextrous Pen, and the Grace his
insinuation has got, he becomes too big for his Place: and what might be
wondered at, Competitor to his Master: whom he oft-times out-strips, leaving him
as bare in esteem as he was of merit. But, no great Competition can be observed
in this: we are to climb higher; and in our ascent make choice of such
Subjects, who appear equally seated in a sphere of Greatness; but jealous of
one another rising; contrive ways of undermining them; though the issue tend
to their own ruin. And this we derive from the Main Wheels, and Principal
Movers in State Affairs: wherein every one sitting near the Stern, transported
with the height of ambition, and immoderate heat of preeminent desires, has
made a private contract by way of Covenant, with his endeered thoughts, that he
will either appear absolute in his commands, or fall under his own burden.

And to accomplish his ends (which many times bring him to an untimely end) he
neglects no opportunity, nor declines any difficulty. Relations in these
ambitious contests are wholly dis-valued. The nearer they be in blood, these
Competitions generally procure them more hate; which seldom ends without blood.
Of so high an estimate is the purchase of Honor, as it challenges a
Prerogative above affinity, amity, or what may seem dearest to Humane Society*
Caesar will admit of no Competitor. Two Suns cannot shine in one Sphere: nor
two Eagles sharers in one Prey. It is above belief to observe how Rivolets of
blood, streaming from one vein, should divide their course into several
Channels: and by their impetuous motion, make their influences appear so
brackish and distasteful one to another. Cast your eye aside, and you shall see
what a coil this State-negotiator makes, to make himself envied! Sleep is a
stranger to his eyes, and Rest an alien to those fruitless Projects of his
active Brain. He suspects a Foe, though he see none; but truth is, he has
reason to be jealous of none more than himself. For, Ambition has been held
the only self-betrayer of her Master. Any one might justly wonder, how Man,
indu'd with reason, and highly enabled by conference, should suffer himself to
be so deluded with the shadow of Greatness: which his Experience sufficiently
informs him, to be the most incentive fuel for kindling Enmity, and the
greatest disturber of Bosomquiet and security. For, how should those sacred
Palms of Peace flourish, where this Endive is planted? Neither is it the
fortune of these rising Gourds, by their premature growth, to beget Foes; but
to make Foes of their best Friends, and that deservingly: for the acquisition
of those immerited Honors usually so deprave their manners, and disorder their
affections, as their grandeur makes them forgetful of themselves; and with a
slight aspect to pass by their ancient Acquaintance. Philotas, when his Friend,
who might have formerly challenged an interest in him, preferred his Suit unto
him, hoping by his powerful mediation to prevail in his address, he
neglectfully rejected him; telling him, "He knew him not: But after that this
Petitioner had returned him sundry signal evidences of their former
familiarity; O, said that high-swoln Favorite, I must confess, I did sometimes
know you; but I am not the same I was then. Too much familiarity with Persons
of your quality might make me lose my self: and consequently eclipse that
splendour which the Princes favor has bestowed on me.

This it was, which made that Divine Moralist to define Honor an Imposture,
because apt to delude the Owner; by moulding numerous fancies in his brain: and
by too eagre a pursuit, and acquiesce to his humor; which in short time
exposes his distempered Fancy to that incurable Frenzy, as he becomes his own
Idolater: He holds himself secure, when most at distance with security: holding
that most dear unto him, which proves his assiduate enemy. Thus in this
State-Contest, it is their only labor to shoulder out one another; where the
stronger wins the Prize; whiles his disheartened Competitor sinks down with
dishonor: So as he may properly use those words, which Eumenes did to
Demetrius: I had been equal to thee in Honor, if thy Shoulders had not weighed
heavier. But what advantage gains the Conqueror by this Master-prize? A
disguise only, and an undermining danger.

His Disguise puts on a vizard of State gallantry, shrouded with converse, and
acquaintance from strangers; wherein he grows an infinite Proficient, both for
Dress and Language: Having got the Spanish Shrug, and the French Cringe, with
all those Courtly Garbs and Postures that may most estrange him from the
knowledge of his Familiars. His quaint Complement too has so well schooled him,
as he can cross Proverbs, and tell the World that Interest can lie: For, his
aims, in advantage to his own Interest, have altered his shape, by moulding him
much like Tiberius, walking in the Clouds, and dissembling a guize unknown to
his best Friends; seeming in appearance least, what he is is really most. But
it fares with him in his unexpected fall, as it does usually with all
State-Favourites in their decline. For, as they slighted their Friends in their
rising; they find none to commiserate their condition at their setting. By
showing to their Inferiors a scornful contempt in their Height; they became
contemptible to their deserted Acquaintance in their Ebb. His allusion was not
improper, who resembled State-Competitors to Court Combatants. Whence it was,
that that Heavenly Dog (for so Laertius calls him) being asked what was done at
Court? told them, That they were tripping up one another heels.

Now for that undermining danger, whereto (as we formerly touched) they are most
incident; they appear commonly nearest to it, when they hold themselves most
distanc'd from it. Though Damocles Sword hang over his head by an hair; the
sweetness of Sovereignty deludes him with the britle promise of Security.

This rising Sprig sprung up to a surreptitious growth, though numerous
Competitors, like cunning Pioners, labor to undermine him; and his timing
followers daily fall from him (for such Rats will not stay long, when they see
their House fall to decay) but in quest of better Masters swim with the stream,
pursuing the current of that time, which may afford to their hungry hopes most
advantage. Yet this secure Favorite, I say, is so belulled with the Lethargy
of his expiring honor, as he takes no notice of these previous signals, nor
divining Notions of his ensuing ruin: but conceits that he has clipped the
wings of Fortune, and that she has no power to fly from him. Mean while, his
feathers fall from him; finding by degrees that his seam-rent Estate falls
neither under any Predicament of quantity; nor his declining Honor under any
Predicament of quality: but both shrunk down into a desperate precipice,
without remedy, or hope of recovery.

And so good night Competitor. The Courtgate is shut, and no hope of admittance.

A PHANATICK
IS a State-Empyrick, who pretends, and prescribes too, sundry preposterous, or
adventitious (and to himself most advantageous Cures) to all diseases, but
effects no Cure. Yet the unbounded impudence of this Mercenary Mountebank is
such, as he must of necessity paste his poisonous Bills on every Post: and like
a cunning Impostor, disperse them in every blind Corner.

He pretends to Architecture, but acts more for Superstructure than Foundation.
He would play the Navigator too, but without direction of Card, use of Stern,
or Rudder: which must no less necessarily, than fatally, expose his misguided
Vessel to an inevitable danger. He has such Aerie Crotchets in his Whymsicall
brain, as he dare not safely discover, lest Common Sense should convince him of
Error: notwithstanding all this, he holds fast to his Phanatick Principles, and
maugre all opposition, scorns to bough a foot of ground from his groundless
Positions. He partakes of no Humor less than Loyalty: having professed himself a
Mortal Enemy to all Rules and Rights of Sovereignty. Yet should it be left to
his Choice to give Laws to a Nation, or Mould Principles for the Settlement of
a new Government; what an Vtopian State would he shape us? Our late cry'ddown
RVMP would appear a rare Commonwealth unto it! He Is a Bird of so changable an
Ayry, as he cannot hold to one Nest: Neither can he for a World make his latter
hour an approver of what he resolved on in the former. He attests his Life to
be a constant Duel; wherein for want of a Combatant, he will not stick to
present a Challenge to himself: and engage his own Person to be his own
Assailant, aspersing a dishonor on himself, should he chance to fail in
answering this self-quarrell: being incomparably at more distance with himfelf
than any other Creature. Were he a Master of Music he would fix much upon
Ayrs, wherewith his unsettled brain is more than sufficiently stored. His only
Musical Lecture would run wholly on Division; the highest Rapsody of his Fancy.
He holds it an impossibility for any Commonwealth to derive its Essence of
Government from Order: He finds no such Rule in his Syntaxis. For
recreation-sake he loves Fishing, but it must be in Troubled waters. Wherein if
it be his fortune to catch any nibbling too greedily at his Bait; he handles
them, and hales them to that Precipice, whereto his distractions have
irreparably thrown him. By this time, his irregular impudence has dragged him
to that desperate madness, as he starts at the name of a KING, as if it were
some Prodigious Title; and so it has ever appeared to his Anarchial
Conceptions. Would you have him discovered in his own posture? Trust me, he
were a rare Limner that could do it. Protean shapes cannot vye with his for
variety. Sometimes like a melancholy Don, with his arms a Kembo, he walks as
if he went to quarrel with his own Shadow. The Air breaths unkindly on him.
The Sun too untimely clothes his Beauty in a Cloud, purposely to dis-relish
him: nothing suits well with his humor, because he personates to life a Man
quite out of his humor. But truth is, he has lost himself, by losing the Issue
of his Designs. Either was his Plot too high for his Pate, or his Pate too open
for his Plot, as both failed him in his hopefullest addresses. Again, should
you see him in the Career of his successful Projects strut along like a Man of
a new mold, or rather like one made up of Wainscot, you would take him for a
nice Representative, formally modish all over; for as his look appears so
supercilious, as it redarts every eye with a scorn; so be his joints so
inflexible, as they will submit to no Civil-Salute. But thanks to his sinister
Stars, seldom, or never be his hateful Assays accompanied with such success, as
it may afford him occasion long to rejoice: or for Good Men who abhor his
Designs greatly to repine. States appear ever in their fullest Orb, and highest
Splendour, when this State-shark by a vertical Swinge, is at his lowest Ebb, and
quite driven out of his humor. Neither yet could any Sage, or apprehensive
Headpiece hold such a Shallop as this, a Person of considerable danger to any
well-managed State. For, observe him generally, and you shall find him without
much Scrutiny, that though he make villainy his Minion, and Treachery his
Bosom-Companion: yet he becomes so unfaithful a Secretary to his own
Counsels, as they either betray him, or he circumvents himself by discovering
them.

It was my fortune sometimes to be known to a Stirring Spirit of this Leven;
who, beside his transcendent dexterity in designing (the prime faculty of this
latter age) pretended to be a Person singularly gifted in the smooth art of a
Penman; and to complete the work which his Address shaped him to, he had a
Reserved Character of such intricacy as none ever attained the Use, or Clavis
of it beside himself. But see how far he went beside himself! For that artful
secrecy whereof he was foolishly confident, that by the Agency of his
Rebellious Sectaries, might procure him a badge of honor (as the Tide turned)
twicht up his blasted hopes in an halter. This was a Phanaticks fate of high
prize. May all such who nere leave a Civil State without a Flame, Perish in the
like Nouze.

Now to distinguish him, and display his native quality in his own posture and
color; I shall give you the trouble to render you this troublesome Creature in
a clearer Character. That as the Leper in the Old Law was to proclaim his
dangerous Infection, by crying out, I am unclean, I am unclean; or, as upon the
Door of any Person, whose house was visited with the Plague, this has been, and
is usually writ in fair Rubrick-Letters, Lord have Mercy upon us: so this
Contagious Member, whose Factious Nature out-strips the malignity of the worst
infectious distemper, may be publicly discovered, and his hateful Society
timely avoided: which, unless severely censured, might bring to that State
which he labors to imbroil, an Epidemical Infection.

It is neither the least, nor lowest of his mischiefs, wherewith his seditious
Forge is plentuously stored; of having the faculty of playing the
State-Libeller: And he holds correspondence with his Instrumental Ingles to
disperse those Tart Papers. Wherein it is the endeavor of these Phanatick
Malcontents to vilify the Quality of those Persons, whom in Loyalty they are
obliged to serve. And, from whence Originally springs this Anarchial Spleen?
Either from a private disgust, of being crossed in the pursuit of their
Preferment; which their daring confidence brought them into an easy belief,
that their Parts, and Qualities well deserved: or from an imbred hate to such
who were preferred before them. This begot amongst the ancient Ethnicks that
ingenuity of fancy, in their height and heat of Ambition, and violent torrent
of Competition, as they in short time practiced the art of teaching their
incaged Birds articulately to prate, and in their taught Diallect scornfully to
jeer their Contestees, whether they were in quest of Fancy or Honor. This it
was that made that egregious Buffoon of Mantua to prefer a Bill of Indictment
against a Scandalous Bird, as he called her, for impeaching his Fame; for which
damage, said he, the roguish Bird could never make him amends. But we have
here other Phanatick Fools to supply the office of those Canting Fowls, who
play the Night-walkers (for their works hate the light) making it their only
design to asperse dishonor upon Persons of Honor: nay, to blast Sovereignty
with an ignominious touch; purposely to weaken Loyalty, by alienating the
fluctuant affections of such Timists from their Allegiance; whose malleable
temper might have proved sound enough, if those poisonous Ingrediences had not
corrupted their Principles. And to effect their Essay, it is the usual Custom
of these Phanaticks, to lay plausive, and attractive Baits to catch those
unwary Novices. Privileges of Right; Liberty of Subject; and a Levelling Line,
Chalking forth a way to the freedom of a Platonic Commonweal, are specious
inducements to State-Libertines. They are weary of the Yoke of Subjection; and
hold it an Egyptian Bondage; till a legal Censure, or some other Contingency
(which must be of a corroding quality) reclaim them from their folly.

Truth is, this Phanatick, whose ranting humor convicts him a Phrentick,
having already forfeited his Wits, and exposed his Interest to all hazards, has
so desperately suffered that small pittance of Judgment whereto he pretended
(if any were extant) to be over-sway'd, and over-swoln with Passion, as his
distemper admits small hopes of recovery. Neither is this turbulent Spirit
only predominant over him; for it has begot in him such a self-opinionate
madness, as he would hold it a madder Parliament than that ancient Session at
Oxford, if he were not made sole- Chairman in it: yet were he designed for that
Place, he would vary so much in his distracted Judgment, from what he had
formerly stated, as if he had gone to Bedlam for some new advice. He would play
his part bravely with the Antipodes: for it has been ever his course to walk in
a Tract contrary to other Men: resembling none so nearly as Damocles, whose use
it was to sweat in the Shade, and shake in the Sun. He is naturally affected to
no humor more than an unsociable kind of Stoicism: and would gladly play the
downright Cynick, if he had so much wit as to present the Moral Dog in his
right posture. But, having neither read Books to inform him, nor Men to improve
him, he falls off pitifully, discovering his defects in all. For all this, that
un-steady Anvile of his Brain must be always set a-working; which, though it
prove no less useless to himself, than obnoxious to the State; that day passes
not over his head, which affords not new matter for some occasional Project or
other: but so imprudently carried, as in stead of the States, it falls out
happily the Projectors Traitor.

Shall we now suppose this Grand-Gull caught in his own Gin? But let him expect
no Reprieve, nor least hope of Indemnity. That Politic Tiberius who could walk
so covertly in the Clouds; and disguise his designs beyond the reach of
discovery; after his detection, and detention of some notorious Persons of this
quality, though he were much solicited by his nearest Favorites for their
enlargement, he returned them this unsatisfactory Answer: Lions and Leopards
may be kept in their Grates without fear; but so cannot these State-Whifflers:
for those wilde-Beasts are satisfied with their prey without further designing;
whereas these Tame-Beasts prey upon the fat of the Estate, and act our Ruin by
their undermining.

Designs come from Reason; which no Grate can confine: whereas Creatures
governed by sense are by restraint secure. Whence we may gather, that no Art,
nor Experiment, be it never so exquisite, may apply any Cure to this Sore; nor
Cordial to allay this Malady (acting so strongly for disloyalty) saving that
Licinian Cord which prepared a nouze for a Phanatick Neck, to secure that
endangered State from the attempts of a bosom Foe, and fatal issue of a
grounded fear.

In his perusal of those Divine Counsels, which should (if his Brains were
rightly settled) have especial influence over him, there is no one Precept he
relisheth worse, than that of Fearing God, Honoring the King, and from meddling
with seditious Men. It was never his happiness to be versed in these
Principles, and consequently of hard digestion to his crude Stomach. He is
highly discontented, both with our Government of Church and State; yet can his
ravell'd judgment find no just exception to quarrel with either. He has his
constant Emissories, whom, if his Fortunes mount so high, he makes his
Pensioners: but, in very short time they either grow weary of their Master, or
he of them: the honesty of the one, or jealousy of the other procures a
divorse betwixt them. Yet this foreslows not his work: he can Swim, and hold up
his Head in those Waters of Division, without help; unless the Bladder of
vainglory hoise him up; which by a fatal overture unexpectedly, makes him Sink
under his Burden, by intangling himself in the weeds of inextricable ruin.

The only News which take him in the reading of any Diurnall, is the Variance,
and Dissension of States. No Countrey-Cormorant can delight more in the
prediction of a Dearth, than he of a Princes Death: or some dangerous
imbroilment in the mis-management of Public Affairs. He makes himself most
known by three discoveries; Habit, Company, and Discourse. In the first as
fantastic, as his Brain is Phanatick. Some quaint humerous device or other
must help to distinguish him by a special Badge, or Cognizance, from Persons of
other Subsistence. We have had here domineering among us our Titere Tuu's, and
Bugle Blew's. Hectors, and Blades of Metal these pretended to be, and, without
doubt, had proved so, if their Courage had kept Correspondence with their
Countenance. But these two stood at such distance, as Camp Valor, and Carpet
Honor could not in their Scutcheons show more difference. None more generally
daring in tongue, nor more provoking in affronts, nor less performing in
actions of Challenge. That word of reputation appears at first sight a Notion
of high Consequence; Life is but a vapor in Competition with it: yet will they
vapor out, rather than engage their Persons for preserving it. Opinion is as
close to them as their Garment: Both which they usually put off at night: but
the change of the one is at more charge than the other: the one may keep its
place, while the other is at pawn. Where the disposure of his Raiment, in all
Men's esteem, redounds more to his honor, and renders him the sweeter savor:
for his Opinion is distasteful to Common sense, while the Credit of his Habit
lies in Lavender.

For his Company, he makes choice of such, as none would make choice of but
himself. Whether ancient Separists, or fresh Proselites, they are boulted from
the same Bran, and unleavened Lump, whereof himself was molded. Birds of a
Feather flock together. A dangerous Communion (trust me) for a Civil Society to
mix with. These, for want of better employment (for baser Stuff cannot be
vended, nor to the Brokers disadvantage more exposed) pull out their wild, and
illiterate Notes; which upon their unhappy perusal retein the like concurrence,
and concordance, as their harsh, and disharmonious Spirits which Penned them.

These, in the Production of their dis-joynted Annotations (if their Extemporal
Spirits will spare them so much time, as to deliver their giddy Conceptions in
Writing) pretend to infinite humility; yet in their Conventual Assemblies, they
cannot so cunningly palliate their Hypocrisy, but a supercilious immeriting
Conceit of their own Parts (holding themselves incomparably Gifted-Men) makes
their Ambition burst out; and after some frivolous, fruitless disputes, without
the least tincture of Wit, or vigor of Judgment, many times fall from breaking
Priscians head (a most dispensable Error) to break Peace with their own. Each
of them would play the Rabbi; yet, though they be of a Jewish Nature, they
cannot possibly acquire that Honor; seeing neither Civil Carriage, nor
Language will afford any of them the repute of a Scholar.

Thus ends their Convention generally with Contention; their Society with Civil
War, for want of Civility. Their Pharisaical Pride will admit no Shroud; an
eagre pursuit after Preeminence leaves them incapable of shame: undeservingly
high, being of more estimate with them, than deservingly low.

To descend to their Discourse, it is egregiously Course: Circularly
prodigious, having neither head nor foot. Ridiculously impertinent, yet ever
hinting at faction, to discover the malignity of their disposition.

"They have heard how Kings are bound by their Piety, and by no other
Obligation. But they hold this for no Authentic Assertion: they would have the
ways of Princes chalked forth by their Line; and by their Judgment to rise or
fall. They hold their Clandestine Counsels in extent far above all Arbitrary
Power. This scrues them up to that Confidence, as it brings them to knock, with
that saucy Rocheller, at his Princes Gate, and like one of our New-illuminated
Saintlings, rapt with a Phanatick Fury, cry out: Keep not back Counsel when it
may do good. Well, said the Prince, if it be good I will take advice of mine
own heart, and so try the goodness of it; for I have heard, Sir, to answer to
your Scripture; Take Counsel of thine own heart, for there is none more
faithful unto Thee than it. This stilled the Phanatical Separist, leaving him
to his Cabinet Counsel, without any farther unmannerly addresses. Again, some
of these impostur'd Furies have such Worms in their Brains, that though they
have frequently heard, how, He that provokes a King to anger sins against
his own Soul; Yet will not these tumultuary Incendiaries stick to exasperate
his indignation, not only by their Seditious Doctrine, but by their Statizing
Libels; which sufficiently manifests their Qualification, and from what Spirits
such phrensies arise.

But these may be thought to pass under the Notion of Ranters; we will return
to our professed, or rather possessed Phanatick, that Mock-Sun, or New-Light; who,
by his Incredible Illuminations, Inspirations, Revelations, and Enthusiastic
Rapsodies, intranceth his deluded Followers. This Gloworme, with his deceiving
Splendour, and Adulterate Fervor, holds nearer resemblance to none, than the
Pharisaical Gnostick, who pretends to be as perfect as any Apostle. Or like the
Frontless Mount Qank, who takes the Confidence, with a Mimick gesture to
delude simple People with his Sophisticated Druggs. So this Doctrinal quack
cheats his weak Auditory by the Decoy of Specious Spiritual Titles. Copper all
over, though they bear an Orient Color. These Whited Walls are all for Faith;
grounding their Subsistence on other Men's Works. Active Zelots in pursuit of
gain, wherein they prove such useful Saduces, as they get no Proselite without
a gainful Contract. Conscience is their only Impost, which they scrue up to
their highest Interest: wherein they trace the thriving steps of a cunning
Prostitute, who will make sure work to have something in hand before he deal.

Thus makes our Phanatick such use of his angling, without much useful
Doctrine, as his Temporal Purchase far surmounts the value of his Spiritual
Practice. For this over-fed Porket has been so fatned in his Sty, so highly
improved in the grandeur of his State; as he is now resolved to bid his Soul
take her rest. But, sleep she may in her Scism, and slumber without sense of
her Sin; but rest she cannot.

To limn this Phanatick to his full body: and display him in his native
Hypocritical Quality, would require much art, and more expense of time, than a
discreet Pen would willingly bestow on such an ayry Subject; whose Principles
disown the Interest of a Subject.

THE BLACK ROD, A DIALOGUE.
CALANUS. ATREUS. CAlanus. How now Atreus! what is become of your Black Rod? Is
it grown out of request? or is it your Consuls Iubile year, that we must have
no more Whipping?


Atreus. You are in the right on it Calanus; it fares with me as it does with
Schoolmasters at Solemn Times; who are bound by Orders to lay up their Rods for
a season. But my hope is, the House of Correction will not be always shut. We
have great Peccants, if they durst be discovered: and such, as by a Chemical
Application would turn every Sprig of my Sable Rod into pure Ophir Gold. O the
days that I have seen!


Calanus. Golden days, no doubt, Atreus, those were for your Office, and fit
for a Comitial Service; when the Doves went down, and our Kites mounted up.
Your only fishing was in troubled waters. No matter for the Spaun, so the
Lobsters throve.


Atreus. What mean you by those Lobsters, Calanus? we had none such in our Pool.


Calanus. Then had your Pool falln down: and the Good Old Cause utterly ruined
without redemption. Tush Sir, your long Personal employment cannot suffer you
to be ignorant of those many Ebbs and Flows which our brave Capitol, since it
lost his Head, has grapled withal: and in their Civil Domestic Wars, made
their Consul House (to their Honor be it spoken, being what no Record can
sufficiently commemorate) for want of foreign Foes, to quarrel with it self.


Atreus. This is all true; But what did these brawls advantage my Place? What
Fees came by all their bustling to the authority of my Rod? These Corrections
which one gave another did not benefit me an hair. As one Member was ejected,
another came presently elected. Like Hydra's heads, no sooner was one cut off,
than another started up. Or like Iacks in a Virginal, that string which lately
sounded slowest and stillest, rose next turn to that height, as it vapour'd
sharpest and quickest. But, what was all this to my Rod? Not one word of
Commitment all this while. All these being State-Delinquents, and in the
highest qualification: (for two Parliamentary Apprentice Ships at least had
most of those Lobsops sat at their Gamaliel Pims feet, to enable them in
Principles of Dis-allegiance, maintaining Arguments of Treason to the advantage
of the disaffected party) were feathers of one Wing; and would not adventure
to accuse one another: Being all Brethren in iniquity, and equally guilty.
Besides, their Parity pleaded their Impunity; for Equals are not permitted
legally to inflict punishment upon their fellows. Which made their Legion
complete. Uncleaner Spirits could not be caften out than what they had taken in.


Calanus. Howsoever the World went, Atreus, that righteous Synagogue having
Hell so nearly neighboring it; and their associating Forces upon Free quarter
so closely billetted, it could not want fresh supplies to recrute and furnish
their State-Store-house with Accomplices active enough for their purpose: and
highly useful for settlement of their Vtopian Government, or Anarchial Purchase.


Atreus. If you mean of our Hell under Westminster, though that victualling
Fire be hot, it were happy for some of those ravenous Kite's if they had not an
hotter Fire within them. But to fill up those vacancies, which Mortality, or
their mutinous spirits have occasioned, there may be molded Supplies enough to
furnish their Augean Stables with fresh Furies; and in stead of their Secluded
Members; whereof, there be some, I dare positively avouch, have as
conscientious hearts, though not organical ears, as any of that Pharisaical
Leven can really pretend to; unkennel such a Triennial Tribe, as may make up
their late breaches, and repair the defects of their dwindling Rump, to their
infinite advantage. For, though one make no Number; nay, though Unity has been
a long stranger to their Consumptive Assembly; yet there is a Mercury Vein that
bubleth up; and with a surreptitious heat, like another Promethean Fire,
enliveneth those decayed Members; which otherwise would have resembled that
frost-bitten Snake in the Fable; that had utterly perished, had not a timely
warmth unexpectedly (and by the Snake unthankfully) revived it.


Calanus. No more Sir, I can without the help of any Mineralist, dive into your
Vein. A subtle seditious Volpone as ever wrought under ground. Catiline and
Cethegus were but Novices to that Politic Pioner.


Atreus. It seems you know him by his Character.


Calanus. Know him! why, all Albion knows him for a Persidious, Perjured,
Pernicious Mushroom Peer. One who has resolved his Conscience to such a
Wax-like-temper, as it can mold it self to any feature. No shape but it can
assume, to serve his Masters turn. Sinon was a Saint to this Gipsy. This was
he, (and he shall be marked with a Theta to all Posterity) who swore away the
life of the Wisest Statist that ever breathed in Britany. I have many times
wondered upon recollection of his numerous rogueries, what Privilege that
Prodigy of Men could challenge to himself from evading the Censure of your Rod!
His unexemplary Exorbitance, being exposed to all mischief, deserved the
extremest punishment that any National Law could inflict upon him.


Atreus. It is confessed; and that might be conceived the only Cause why he
escaped my Lash. For his imparallel'd impiety might have justly holden my
Black-Rod an Instrument of impunity. Higher and heavier Judgments are reserved
for him; which his Anabaptisticall zeal, were it thrice dipped in his Phanatical
Jordan, might not decline, nor with all his hypocritical elevation of Eyes,
possibly divert. Some of which Wormwood Judgments have lately befaln his
execrable Family. The Top-branch whereof was fearfully lopt off with an Hatchet
of Despair; and his Chaplain near the very same time took a resolution to
confine his Doctrinal Honor to the strait circumference of a Self-twisted
Halter. Thus decayed the Spaun; but the Head of these Cantarides survives,
which either Exile, or a fatal end will no doubt speedily abridge; by staying
his course from poisoning any more this distracted State with his hateful
Principles.


Calanus. What might the cause be of his inveterate Spleen toward the Person
of Strafford; being one so eminent both for Courage and Counsel, as no State
could render it self more happy, than in the enjoyment of so prudent and
resolute a Consul? Surely his absolute demean might rather deserve a pious
emulation, or judicious admiration, than any malignant endeavor of detracting
from such a Complement of Honor. This was such animosity in an Enemy, as it
admits no President.


Atreus. You must know, Calanus, that the Be and Spider are of different
nature. From Flowers of the same influence or operation, the one sucks honey,
the other poison. What in others merited Approbation and Imitation, begot in
him Envy and Detraction; the poisonous fruits of his Serpentine Ambition. It
was his grief, to see Goodness grow great. Neither was this all. He understood
(which was an ementitious conceit, not worth harboring in an honest breast)
that some of those Titles bestowed on him for his incomparable service to his
Prince, and high improvement to the State, had relation by way of Denomination
to one of his usurped Manors: from which groundless occasion, this rankling
heat of that raging Rabby broke forth into that unmanly fury, as he found a way
(a way leading to Death) of dispensing with the ruin of his perjured Soul,
upon condition he might bereave his supposed Enemy of life. And all this was
acted in the Capitol: and yet unrevenged.


Calanus. He was a Person, doubtless, of high accomplishment: nay, such an one
as Nature and Art might seem to have contended whether of them should have more
obliged him to their endeerments: So amply had they contributed in their
several offices to the completing of that Statesman. So, as it was my fortune
one day to hear this positively asserted in a Company of unquestioned
judgments: That if he had survived the various distempers of those times, and
the subtle practices of his professed Enemies, by whom he became treacherously
surprised; and when he least suspected, unawares attached; he had not only
secured his unfortunate Master from all ensuing danger; and preserved the
safety and union of the State to his succeeding honor* but likewise in the
management of State Affairs, as far over-topt OLIVER, for all his juggling
compliance with MAZARENE; as ever Mazarene did the short-Mushroom honor of
hair-brained Mazarella. Never was Headpiece more richly stored, nor more
undeservedly lopped. Which was strongly attested by that Politic Cardinal;
who, upon the report of his Execution, used these words: Had that mad seditious
Isle but one Wise Man in it, and could it render him no better reward, nor find
other employment for his Head, than to put it up in a Bagg, and confine his
Wisdom to so early a Shroud! This States-Mans jeer might have brought those who
were Principal Actors in contriving his death, to a deep resentment of that
irreparable wound they had given to their Country, in their relentless
pursuance of his Tragedy: But, hope of reward, or desire of revenge had so
preoccupated their thoughts, as it had steeled them with that wild Irish
ancient resolution, Never to hold themselves secure from their Foe, till they
might play at football with his head.


Atreus. That was the only way indeed to catch the Old One: But some of those
diving Didappers have since that time no less unfortunatly caught themselves.
It had been much better for them to have falln gently under the lash of my Rod,
than desperately to have twisted nouzes for their own necks, as some of those
Achitophels have lately done.


Calanus. And it was done to their honor, for it saved the Hangman a labor.
But, in earnest tell me Atreus, how will this fagging Rump be made up; how will
it be piec'd and supplied?


Atreus. I must confess, Calanus, our gelded Synodal, or Parliament. Epitome,
maintains Rules contrary to the Principles of all Philosophy; for they have
hitherto most resolutely held a Vacuum; whereof, though Pryn, with other more
Auricular Members, labored strongly to continue them; their opinions, (because
Legal and Loyal) would not be admitted; the doors of that Self-mad-House were
commanded to be shut against them, and those Excepted Members wholly Secluded;
and in part so confined, as they became debarred from challenging their just
and lawful Privilege in the House; which by ancient Prescription, and
successive Concession, they might duly pretend to. But those few scattered
Gleanings that remain shaking and shuddring within, have good cause to be more
feverish than those who are shut out. For they cannot choose but hear a muttring
of a Change: and then woe be to them if the Tide turn. For, then take heed that
the Capitol be not metamorphosed into a Scaffold. Where those peremptory
pragmatical Coxcombs, so much enraged with spleen, or transported with
Disloyalty of spirit, must be brought forth of those Tyring-houses, wherein
they have been so long disguising themselves, to act their last Parts in the
closing Scene of a pittiless Tragedy, to their own surviving Shame, and
Dishonor of their Country.


Calanus. O brave times, when Treason shall hang like a Ball in the Air!


Atreus. Mean time, it is thought we must call up a Francepane Fry of Green
Wits, as a merry Greek termed them, to fill up that shattered Vacancy with a
fresh supply of pitiful Ratlebrains.


Calanus. Howsoever, till that Breach be made up; it remains a Broken Company.
A Consort which runs wholly upon Divisions, without the least Ear-pleasing
accent of harmony.


Atreus. A Bankrupt Factory, trust me; protested against in every Country but
our own: and in our own too, if we had as much Spirit, as we have private
Spleen to discover it.


Calanus. This would prove a brave gainful time for you, Atreus, if the Power
of your Authority were not eclypsed.


Atreus. Not at all Sir; The Multiplicity of Offenders would soon wear out my
Rod. When the Members of a Whole House are to be called to the Bar, who will
be left to censure them? They might be accounted fools in the highest measure,
if they should fall flat under their own Censure; or pronounce Sentence upon
themselves without recognizance of their Speaker.


Calanus. It is true; but have you not had sometimes Persons (and those eminent
Ones) of that Leven under your Lash?


Atreus. Never Sir; my Black Rod observed ever that regular discipline, as it
became a State-Academy for all degrees, Sciences and Professions. We had
Learned Laud; nay, the little Wren could not evade my Gyn; and these were my
Chaplains in Ordinary for Divinity. Bacon for Courtship and Oratory. Eliot and
Seymour for State Policy. Bridgman and Palmer for legal Authority. Thus was my
Economy held an University, while the Capitol held up his head, and exalted
his horns to the distressed Members of this Nation. These knew how to Suffer;
and how to gain honor by their suffering. These knew how to kiss the Rod
meekly, receive their Censure mildly, and pay my Fees freely.


Calanus. That was an Age indeed, Atreus, for Midas to turn all into Gold. But
how came you to be so unhappily Jack out of Office? you became either too high
for your Place; or your Place too hot for you.


Atreus. O Sir, have you not heard a Story; which though it be a fiction, yet
it retains a singular Moral; how Proserpine had her Misset, as well as Pluto
his Cerberus; but it was ever observed that the poor Misset was hushed, and gave
not a yelp, when that Hellish Mastiff begun to roar! So fared it with me and my
Officials. No sooner was the High Court of Justice erected, and with poor
Cavaliers blood imbrued, than my Black Rod became untwisted. It was not for us
inferior Groundlings to mutter, much less to murmur, when that terrible
Minotaur begun to thunder. The Gibbet grew far above the height of my Rod. The
Tower Hill Axe soon cut in pieces those blasted Sprigs of my dis-authorized
Lash.


Calanus. But now the State, like a late-recover'd Bedlam, is rid of both.


Atreus. It Is true; there is no Lunacy so violent, but it has its Lucida
Intervalla; but one foreign drop of Coloquintida strengthened with a Spanish,
French, or Imperial Ingredience may utterly spoil the Concoction of our English
broth. 'Twere good to be merry and wise. But wise we cannot be, so long as we
have Foes within and without us, to exercise their fury, or practice their
designs upon us.


Calanus. But is there any such fear?


Atreus. Such fear, as it is falln into a Quotidian Ague. I am sure there
appear many Banks in Holland, as if they had been gilded over by the yellow
Streams of Tagus, or Pactolus; and all these built up and deposited for fear of
an Inland Breach, in the hands of their confident Trustees, by our rich
Coffemen, those welllin'd Consuls of our Capitol.


Calanus. They suspect a change then.


Atreus. Assure your self, Sir, they sweat for it: and if it proved otherwise,
all our Nation would find cause to sweat; the danger appearing so Epidemical.
For, though we subsist like Monstrous Members without an Relating to the Raging
Reign of our late Protector.
Head; yet the revolution of some few years has so habituated us to misery, as
many of us are become wholly so stupid and senseless, as if we had never
enjoyed an Head, nor we subject to that Head.


Calanus. The Fable of the Frogs and their King will be e're long verified in
us: we have been so jealous of our own; or made our own so contemptible to us;
as we have given way to those who had no property in us, to pretend a Title to
that which most concerned us. The sad consequence whereof has brought us to
that desperate Condition, as no man may safely challenge a propriety in his
own. The only way to live peaceably, is to suffer patiently: and with a
pleasing smile (though there be no cause for it) to entertain the affronts of an
imperious Incroacher with such indifference; as neither the Agent may take
occasion of picking a quarrel at his Murmuring; nor the Patient prejudice his
Cause by his remediless Contesting.


Atreus. We have a gallant Cowed State in the mean time; when just Men must
suffer, because they want power to preserve their right. Surely, those Viceroys
which we have lately had, were Mock-Protectors; for, whereas they should have
protected the Subject from injury, they became so taken up with Self-interest,
as they minded only their own Sovereignty.


Calanus. And to whom might the blame hereof be more properly imputed, than to
our Degenerate Peerage? whose Descent seemed to partake more of Coachman,
Page, or Usher, than the Lineage of a noble Progenitor, -- These deserved your
Rod more than any Delinquent.


Atreus. It is true; but they so innocently Courted their Peace, as my
indulgence granted them ease: and deservingly brought me to the loss of my
Place.


A QUEST of INQUIRY, Without hope of RECOVERY.
Where Is now your Burleygh, Cicil, Walsingham,
Brave Furbisher, Drake, Hawkins, Nottingham?
Their hush't in Clay. These that your Isle affords
Are Silken-Civet-comfet-Curtain-Lords,
Brisk-cringing Senators as Apius was,
Who spent the Morn in courting of his Glass.

THese Dimensions following were Writ in Vindication of the Honor of our
Island, and those Eminent and thrice-Noble Commanders now in Employment: In
Answer to a Foreign Critical Pasquil.

Mean while, our Royal Marine Martialists fear little, but that their Albion
Embarg shall transform their Spungy Satyrs into Sea-Souc't Naiades: and in
short time make them serviceable Negro's, to dive and fish for Pearls.

A REPLY.
HOld Critic, hold; -- We have as gallant men
For Valor and brave Discipline as then.
Take a Survey of our Victorious Fleet,
With which should Neptune with his Convoy meet,
They Would veil their Topsails, shouting, let us give room,
" St. George with his stout Myrmidons are come
"To Scour the Seas; 'twere fitting we gave way
"When Regents of the Ocean bear sway.
How pale does Tethis look, fearing to be
Made Captive to our glorious Sovereignty?
A Navy more magnanimous never came
To slice the surface of the Ocean.
Steered by expert Mariners; the Event
Must needs prove prosperous when High Descent
Co-centre with brave spirits: -- This will take,
And make a greater State than Holland shake.
Eye those renowned Dukes, winged with youth,
With what deep scorn they look on Carpet sloth!
They Are all Elyxir'd in their vernal age,
Hugging no News like to a quick Engage.
These be Mars Sons, and must to Honor rise,
While Others are for catching Butterflyes*
Nor do I fear but I shall one day hear
Their Fames as Large as Guy's or Godfrey's were;
And mount their spreading Wings from Gath to Dan,
And cause the Turk renounce his Alcoran.
Cease Critic then; of Heroes boast no more,
We have as Royal Sparks as e're before.
TO HIS KNOWING FRIEND R. P. A COMMISSIONER For The SVBSIDY.
FRiend (for a more really amicable Title I cannot give you) we hear you are
named a Commissioner for the Subsidies: wherein you may appear by your even and
unbianc'd Carriage, instrumentally Serviceable both to Prince and Subject. For
your better accommodation wherein, take along with you these necessary
Cautions: which conscientiously observed, will bring you off fairly in the
discharge of that Office whereto you are deputed: and return you honest; which
in all Commands, Public or Private, reteins in it that high concernment, as it
is principally to be valued.

Now in the Execution of Offices of this nature, as they are justly and legally
grounded, because from satisfactory Principles derived; there arise many times
sundry grand inconveniences from the inconsiderate Election of our Deputies.
While some ambitiously affected, pursue nothing more eagerly than to have a
Name in the Roll; though they know not what to do in it, either in relation to
their Prince or Country.

To be thought Great, or Wise, is their summary End; though their indiscreet
Carriage merit neither of those attributes.

It was my fortune lately to be present at One of these Sessionary Commissions;
where One of that Knowing Brotherhood desiring nothing more than to be held by
the Commonty an eminent awful Man, suddenly starting up, took a great Oath,
(even by his rich Plume of Feathers) that if the Subsidy Men then and there
assembled did not forthwith pay in their Moneys, He would smook them. Whereto,
one no less Metally than Wittily answered him: Sir, by smooking us, you may
chance to singe your own Feather, and so darnish the color of your Oath; which
were a great pity, being the handsomst thing about you. Which smart Answer
begot such a general laughter in the Court, as Silence could not be procured,
though often commanded, a long time after.

Was not this fair-plum'd Commissioner of a quick dispatch? yes sure, but of a
weak brood; rightly numbered amongst those Hymerian Flies, or Picene Emmets,
hatched before they got shape.

These Rhadamantades, who scatter their brains in the Air, should be used like
that Florentine Fool; who, holding himself the best Man in Florence, was
sentenced to be Whipped out of his humor by two Dwarfs, till wearied with their
lashings, he no less senselesly than pitifully avouched, that Dwarfs were
taller than Giants; and that high Men were the lowest men in Florence: which
absurdity saved him from further Correction. Howsoever, to perfect the Cure in
these Ayry Ranters, whom this Age looks upon as the infinitest Pretenders,
confident'st Undertakers, and Profusest Scatterers in all our Island; it were
not amiss if they were put to School (if capable of such useful Knowledge)
before they be admitted to Public Interests. Assistants in these should not be
of a low level.

It was anciently decreed by the Ephori, in that flourishing State of Athens;
that no Beardless Person, were he of what quality or descent soever, should be
called as Assistant in any Public Service of State; though that was by maturer
deliberation, mainly opposed, alleging, how many might be young in years, who
were old in hours. How incapable then are they who appear neither old in years
nor hours, for management of any Public Affair conducing to the welfare of
the State? Were it not a great madness, said our Sovereign King James, (a
Prince whose constant addresses were beautified with Palms of Peace) for the
Master of a Team of Horses, being furnished with some of a clearer sight, to
set a blind Horse before? We have store of quick-sighted Men; let such be
deputed, leaving these Ayry-Spirited Lapwings, who leave their Nests before
they are taught to fly.

Such flickering Birds, by reason of their untimely flight, have been ever held
incapable of public employments: Persons of prudent and composed tempers are
the properest Engines for such Affairs, and the discreetest Moderators betwixt
Prince and Subject; by rendering to the One what he by his Prerogative may
justly demand; and informing the other what he ought duly to perform.

In your Personal Execution of which Office, you are to imitate the course of
an expert and experient'st Pilot, by avoiding such perilous Shelves as may
probably endanger your Commissionary Passage. These are briefly touched in the
Act it self, by which you are to be directed; and expressly taught, to do naught
either for Fear, Favor, or Hatred. Being the very same which our best Ethnicks
exactly observed in their Course of Justice; commanding, that nothing should be
acted to the dishonor of their Proceedings, either for Amity, Enmity, or
Commodity: Such an even and equal Scale poized the Conduct of their Actions.
And this they did, without any future hope of a fruition of further glory, than
their Poetical fancy of those Elysian Fields, and their imaginary Fame to
Posterity; the sole aims of their Eternity.

That small glimpse, or beamling, which they had received from the Light of
Nature, without any farther influence, produced these rare effects; which might
justly beget a shame in those, who more divinely illumined, though they believe
an Eternity, and the End of their Creation, Supreme Felicity; fall incomparably
short of those Naturalists in the Course of Judicature, nay, even of Civil
Morality. Store of Instances might be returned you in this, deserving no less
your admiration than imitation.

Rake up the Records of former times, wherein true Native Honesty flourished,
and Political Designs (of the Teeming Birth whereof every Nation sadly
labors) appeared Strangers; and you shall find sundry imitable Mirrors of
this kind; whose uprightness in the management of State Affairs needed no other
Annal, nor Monument to Memorize them, than the continued Fame of their
unquestioned deportment; which begot to them a reverence, and an unsought for
advancement in the Commonweal where they were seated.

As in the first place, to insist upon every particular that may obstruct your
Course in the Execution of your Office, whereto you are designed; you shall
find one of those Ethnicks, though a firm Professor, and Preserver of Amity,
neglect the sollicitancy of his Friend in an action of Favor, saying, Dear is
my Friend, but dearer is my Reputation: I may have many Friends, though I lose
thee; but in losing God, I can have no more: there is but one God. He is a
treacherous Friend, who makes his Friend a Foe to himself.

Neither were these less armed against the fury of Revenge. Enmity, though
never so mortal, could not decline them, no more than Amity could over-byas
them in the direct line and path of their proceedings. One of them could say,
like a brave Commander of his own Affections, I shall account it the lowest of
my Scene, to take Revenge of mine Enemy to my own disadvantage. Neither do I
intend to play so much the Fools part, to engage a Public reproach for a
Private revenge. He does himself the greatest wrong, who labors to right
himself, by doing his Enemy wrong. In Public Places, where Offices of Justice
are to be Administered, and what is due to every one justly distributed, not so
much as the least thought of a bosom-injury is to be fomented, much less
discovered. He deserves not the Place where he sits, who sits only to take
revenge of him whom he hates.

That discreet Cleob.
Sage well deserved to be called to the Dignity of one of the Ephori, who knew
(by the attest of the whole Senate) how to bear and digest injuries: and in what
manner to demean himself on the Seat of Justice; neither by eying his Friend
with a countenance of Favor, nor his Foe with an intentional displeasure.
Whence it was, that in Athens were set up in their High Court of Judicature,
Astraeas Scale, and Tidaeus Shield: the one to balance the justness of the
Cause; the other to support it. For Experience, our best Mistress, in the
process of Humane Affairs, may sufficiently inform us; that though Justice
bestow her strength and utmost endeavor, the best Cause may suffer, wanting a
powerful Fortress to support her.

There is another Shelf too, no less dangerous than either of the former; and
this is Commodity; being such an universal Leprosy, as we may worthily account
him a rare Man, that is advanced to a Place of Profit, or Receipt of Custom,
and has got the faculty of holding his mercenary hand from taking. This
self-interest is a perilous Copes-mate; apt to infect where it consorts. Nay,
such an absolute Commandress over this Little World, Man, as it is held the
Wheel; that with its career turns the course of all his actions. O how many
have inconsiderately perished by the poisonous Pills of this familiar and
bosom-nurs'd Impostor!

We shall little need to travel far for Instances of this kind: our own Coast
can furnish us with plentious store, and in high Place, and of eminent quality:
Persons excellently gifted, who, miserably depraved by that infectious malady
of corrupt Gehezi, suffered themselves to engage their honor for shameful
lucre: nay, to aggravate their folly, how many have we known, who, continent
enough in their own desires, through an ambitious humor of maintaining their
riotous followers in a deportment above their rank or quality, have patiently
endured to see themselves with open eyes palpably cousen'd, and abused, by
those Officious Lerchers, and Licentious Lechers, to their irreparable
dishonor, without gain to themselves!

Now for this Office whereto you are deputed, much cannot be expected, because
little will be offered; yet as Petilarceny by our Law is punishable, as well as
Higher Felony, though in a lower quality: so there be sundry petty abuses which
may usually occurr, in the Execution of these Offices, which by a superior
Power, deserve due Censure. And, from what source may these Obliquities arise,
but from your easy connivence toward those Puny Clarks employed under you?

These, though they know little, they can find out the way of exacting Fees,
where none are due. No Discharge nor Acquittance must pass upon Receipt without
advantage: wherein, though it redound to the Clarks Gain, it may be properly
called the Masters Crime. Neither can I be less than jealous of the Officers
themselves, but that some of them, through their indigence of spirit, will not
stick to become Master-Sharers in these imposed Exactions. But, this is
contrived so covertly, that they know how to wipe their Mouths when they have
eaten the sacrifice: resting secure from the confidence they have, that none
sees them.

Thus the Subject not only prays, but pays for the tender of his own;
returning dis-satisfied in all, in that he cannot receive from the penurious
Clark an Acquittance for what he has paid, unless he enlarge the Account above
what the Act injoyns the Subject to pay, or the Officer to receive.

Such as these deserve well to have that punishment inflicted on them, which
that Sicilian Rogue had pronounced on him for abusing the State with his
Forgeries, and counterfeat Declarations: being Sentenced to have his skin
flaid* and made Parchment on; whereon was to be writ in fair Capitals all such
abusive Cheats as he had used: and to have it hung up in the Public Court for
an Annual Record, or Caveat to Posterity* to deterr others from practicing the
like.

Neither is it to be doubted, but if due Examination were taken at this time of
the mis-carriage of our Officials, there might be found more than a good number
guilty in this kind. Nor is there any thing more seriously considerable in
these Public Accounts, than an exact inquisition after these self-interested
men; whose corrupt demeanure too usually foments a disgust betwixt Prince and
Subject. This the Historian well observed, saying, That Vespatians Collectors
of his Urine Money discontented the Romans more, than the Imposition. Wherein
one no less smartly than wittily replied to a Tax-Master, upon his exaction of
Fees: It seems, Friend, by your high demands, that we must pay more than our
Water comes to: We are well contented with paying Caesar for distilling our
Water, but not with you for casting it.

These Casters are such Castawayes, as they ofttimes cast down the Governor
under whom they live, and by whose Command they are deputed to such tempting
Offices. Tempting I may justly term them; for, methinks, I hear them
ingenuously confess with that corrupt Factor, They could be as honest as any
Mortals breathing, if profit did not tempt them.

Which aerie excuse the notorioust Way-man may make, in defense of his taking
Trade, as well as these; for were there no hope of gain, the Thief would take
no pleasure in his peremtory Way-dialect of Stand and Deliver. Neither can I
see why a severer Sentence should be pronounced on an Highway Taker, than a
State-Iugler. Their desires are grounded on equal Principles; the only
difference in their course of Practice is this: the one plays his tricks more
covertly than the other. The one wears his Visard on his Face, the other on his
Breast. But much less Art is required in that Work of the Way, than Designs of
the Pate. This relyes much on an active spirit; that on a subtle brain.

Now I must tell you, Sir, how I have sometimes in my employment in these
Services, usually observed how the indigence of Agents, bestowed on these
Affairs, works strange effects in the current of all Public Proceedings.
Honesty is dangerously incountred, when accosted by Poverty.

Ships Sail safely, and hold their road calmly, when they meet with no surging
waves to combat with, nor contrary winds to play, and apply their fury on their
Topsails.

In these times, where Corruption has crept so subtilely into every Official
Corner, and with a strange kind of confidence rides on its foot-Cloath, as if
it had got a privilege to abuse Justice with impunity; it were a rare sight to
see a Person of that even temper, whom Fortune cannot conquer, nor hope of
preferment alter. The thoughts of a better World become such strangers to Man,
as they un-man him, and make him forgetful of his Primitive honor, or of
rising hopes hereafter.

It were easy to present to your view, with out any artificial Scean at all,
to display them, sundry Persons desertlesly made great, how they have laid a
rust on their gilded Honor; as if they intended by a just fate, through their
abusive Cheats, and dangerous Designs, to throw themselves down to the dust
from whence they were raised.

These might be compared to that unadvised Numidian, who being advanced from a
Flax-man to a Place of Quality; but resting dis-satisfi'd with that Preferment,
by playing the cunning Jugler, he was adjudged to have his new-purchas'd Honor
twich't up in a Flaxen Halter, from whence he had his first Rise and Vocation.

That wise Politician gave us a singular Caution in the Election of Persons fit
to bear Offices. Never to make choice of such as are found either weak in
Estate, Judgment, or suspected Fidelity. And he confirms his Assertion with
impregnable Reasons.

Cursorily and methodically then to dilate on all these, with the
inconveniences that usually befall in the Election of such as are liable to any
of those foresaid prejudices: In the first place, I cannot choose but call to
mind the ingenuous confession of that faulty Pretorian, who being not only
accused, but impeached of sundry corrupt proceedings in the Execution of his
Office, appeared so unwilling to clear himself of those Crimes, whereof he was
accused, as he freely acknowleged; That the Corruption, for which he became
censured, sprung not from any depraved affection, but from the weakness of his
condition, concluding; That he would have been honest enough, if his want had
given him leave.

Those times, no doubt, resembled these we live in: Poverty was too low a step
to raise any one to Preferment. The Court-gate was shut to them who knocked
with an empty hand: which our Camp. In Sylv.
Modern Poet wittily shadowed at, saying: Curia Pauperibus clausa est: Hic
solus honores
Aulicus emeruit qui Satur aere fuit.
He that is poor
Must stand at Door
Though loyal to the King;
While One more base,
Swollen great by's Place,
May boldly enter in.


It is the property of these to make use of those old English Proverbs, By
making Hay while the Sun shines: and Striking while the Iron is hot. Now, would
you know from whence this intentiveness usually proceeds? This arises from a
jealousy they apprehend from their own Carriage: They fear the discovery of
their actions: and consequently deprival of their Places; for depravation can
expect no less than deprivation. This quickneth their endeavors in hope to be
rich: and store their ravenous Nests with others Feathers. These be those
Kings-fishers who prey both by Land and Water. They take all for Fish that
comes to Net: without sticking at small game before they stand out.

And, whereas they are advertised by some of their Confidents (for these must
have their Coys, or they shall play Bankrupts in their Office) that their reign
is not likely to be long, in regard, the Eyes of those Counties, where they
officiate, have taken Notice of their Shuffling: their only way then to
thrive, is, to play at Catch-doult, and to gather up his Crumbs before the Table
be drawn: and so be called to Account, before he has had sufficient time,
either to receive his full share, or discharge the Audit. But in these, as in
Places of higher Command, and richer Employment, Those, who cordially wish
their Security, apply this seasonable counsel to their distempered brains and
occasional fears: presently after the full Receipts of their rackt Fees, or
Commissionary Bribes, to make recourse to their Country House, and play least
in sight; till the Storm be past, and the State-Inquisition run out of breath.

But if they be found egregiously Criminal, they have Presidents in their
Pockets, instrumental enough for rebating the edge of Justice. It is not so
long since but they can well remember (and may those Sanguinary times be ever
ached in Rubric Letters) how those plump Assassinats, who had enlarged their
Babel Buildings many Stories high upon our ruins, had mounted their Banks in
foreign Nations; hoping by that means, if it should chance that times should
change, and Rebellion fall from it self, to support their decays by those
transported, but extorted treasures, which they had there imbursed: So wise was
Treason in providing for its own supportance and security against a time of
Extremity.

But their Crocodile Eggs proved adle; and their Hatchers miserable: may the
like Issue befall these indigent Corrupt Commissioners, who officiate only for
Self-interest, to the dishonor of their Sovereign, and prejudice of his People.

Neither can we less than doubt but that these close Pioneres of our State, by
Plowing deep with our own Heyfers, have been the occasion of sowing the Seed of
Sedition in our late-imbroiled Nation.

So dangerous it is to exasperate a Multitude in raising and levying Assesses
(be they never so legal;) by prolling avaricious Officers, who make it their
Vocation to abuse the Subject, to enrich themselves: and lay a Groundwork, by
their seldom-thriving providence, for their succeeding, but successless
Posterity. So quickly was the flame of their rising fortunes quenched, and to
ashes pittilesly reduced.

What fearful Consequences these Needful Agents have produced, Records in all
times will manifest.

High Taxes are sufficient foments to Division, without such offensive
Instruments, who too often estrange stirring spirits from their Allegiance.

Neither be those to be made choice on for Commissioners, in raising, ordering,
and collecting of these Subsidies, or any dispensatory Act, who are of a weak
or shallow Judgment.

These may be Men of a good meaning, but wanting discretion to manage their
meaning, they suffer themselves to be involved in many inextricable Windings,
and gross Errors; which their easy apprehensions and indulgent humors expose
them to: being so unable to proportion a Charge, as they usually lay the
heaviest load on the weakest back: all which they do without the least
intention of injury, but merely forth of ignorance, or simplicity: which might
have been covertly, and without discovery shrouded, if their ambitious weakness
could have been contented with privacy, and wisely retired from the pursuance
of Public employment. Ambition clothed with Ignorance, falls ever short of
its Expectance.
For, as Preferment is the best Herald in displaying the temper of the enjoyer;
so Public Engagements discover best the abilities of the Undertaker.

Galba was held worthy of an Empire, till he became an Emperor: and Caelius to
be Consul, till he was made a Consul. We know not what men be, nor how they may
prove, until the Places, or Offices, whereto they are deputed, take off their
Visards, and present them naked.

That Divine Cynick, one no less wise than surly, being one day at a Feast
(un-invited, I suppose, for his inbred incivility rendered him unsuitable for
such Meetings) observing a Guest amongst the rest to sit silent, whilst others
appeared more free in their discourse; with a rough brow addressed his speech
unto him in this manner: If Wise, thou art a Fool in holding thy peace; If a
Fool, thou art wise in holding it.

Such Weaklings as these, who are of a Pen-feather'd Judgment, might make good
use of this Observation: ever looking on Harpocrates Sign, with his finger on
his mouth: For more Wisdom is shown in not speaking at all, than in speaking to
no purpose. Of which impertinency we shall hear many of our Commissionary Rank
highly conscious.

This might be instanced in that ignorant Want-brain; who, assuming to himself
the Authority of Examining a Clark of the Market (an Office, doubtlessly, more
abused than any other throughout the Kingdom) made this simple demand in a
Public Assembly, Whether by the virtue of his Office he was to weigh the
Bakers bread by Troys Weight, or Haver de Poy? Whereto the Clark no less
ingeniously answered: Your Worship might as well ask me, why Broad Cloth
should not be measured as well by the Bushel, as by the Yard.

The Choosing of such Empty Casks, which sound lowdest when emptiest, redounds
ever to the dishonor of the Undertaker, the Scandal of the Preferrer, and
Prejudice of all such as stand liable to the ignorance of their Censure. But to
insist no longer on these, I am briefly to give a touch of a more dangerous and
untunable Instrument, for the managery of State Affairs, than either of the
other. For, neither he whose Estate is indigent: Nor he who is of a weak and
defective Judgment, can possibly appear so fatally noxious in the blameless
discharge of their Duties, as he who retains such a Coar in his heart, as it
can afford no room to lodge Fidelity in to his Prince.

For the other two, as the one had more Policy than Honesty; the other more
simple Honesty than prudent Policy: So he, whom we are now to speak of, and
whom we are, like an impartial Herald, to deblazon in his own native colors,
is an Engine of Treachery.

Under a fair and loyal Habit, he ever lodges a Seianus spirit. He is never
found fishing in calm Waters: being the only Incendiary to blow the Coals of
Division in every peaceable State.

Neither is he only treacherously Ambitious, but maliciously Envious.

As one of these Seditious innovating spirits lately used one of his
Fellow-Commissioners, far honester than himself, accusing him to be a
Red-Letter'd Man, (meaning a Roman Catholic) and consequently incapable of any
such Commission. But being brought to their Book by One discreeter than them
both, they were so equally learned, as neither of them could distinguish a Red
Letter from a Black.

Howsoever, though some of these be no Bookmen, they have designing Pates, apt
to Mint and Mould Mischief to their future advantage, be the Groundwork never
so Sandy whereon they build.

I shall not need to strengthen your opinion in this point with variety of
Instances; we have had sufficient store hovering at our own Gates; the sad
shares whereof, even to this day, appear in the ruins of many loyal Subjects.

If we should sound these State-Whiflers to the bottom, (and no Inquisition
more necessary) we might find them under the counterfeit pretense of loyal
Service, from which their disjoynted affections have been long estranged,
seemingly to bemoan the heavy condition of a Subject, and how compassionately
They suffered in that behalf, seeing him crushed with the insupportable burden
of his Pressures.

And whereto tends all this, but to exasperate the Subject against his
Sovereign: and under the color of a gracious Commissioner, act the part of a
graceless Traitor?

All which, to trace the Observation of a judicious and well-studied
Statesman, occasionally arises from the security of a remiss, or libertine
Prince, who indulgeth his affections so much, as they beget in him a Lethargy
to the Affairs of State: which might be instanced in Domitian, Vitellius, and
Decian.

Whereas Divine Providence has returned us such a Prince, who by his vigilant
inspection over his Military and Civil concerns, and timely remove of all such
pernicious Instruments, as never engaged for their Sovereign, yet had so much
impudence, as to expect Honors, with other advantageous helps, the least
whereof they neither merited, nor by derserving Favorites pursued: Has hereby
revived our late depressed Spirits, by shutting his Royal Gates of these
abusive Court-ingles: and by consequence, his Highness, I say, has his loyal
Subjects in their Primitive security, and his Sacred Person in a calm and
peaceful safety.

Such is the assured confidence of all loyal Spirits, whose known fidelity can
abide the touch, and whose integrity never incurred taint. Nor can it be
imagined, much less feared, but that the royal gratitude of so gracious a
Master will amply gratify their gallant Service, who have engaged their Life's,
Freedoms, and Fortunes in defense of his Cause, and Preservation of his Person.
So as those treacherous Assassins could not be more mischievous in plotting his
ruin, than Sacred Providence appeared each where propitious, in preparing an
Hollow Oak for his Shelter, in a time of necessity: but loyal Hearts to succor
in his height of extremity. Which gracious and unexemplary Deliverance, may it
be writ with the Point of a Diamond in the Memories both of Prince and People;
that our Thankfullness may never incurr an Act of Oblivion to Posterity, for
such a signal Evidence of Mercy.

But leaving these dangerous Tetters which we formerly touched, and wherewith
Public Commissions have been usually tainted; holding them the refuse of a
corrupt State, and as we ought, in an incapacity to any Magisterial Service; my
conclusive Cloze shall be an Address to Your self, for whose use, in this Your
Commissionary Charge, I prepared these Advertisements.

Sir, It is well known to your Country, wherein you have shown your self an
eminent and faithful Member, that you are liable to none of those Exceptions
abovementioned.

For, in the First Place, your fullness of Estate has freed you from being
indigent; and consequently no way necessitated to take rewards.

Nor by those excellent helps of your Education and Natural Parts, so weak in
Judgment, as to appear ignorant of what you ought to do.

Nor in the Principles of Loyalty so deficient, as to swerve the least Iota
from your Allegiance.

Being thus furnished, what less can be expected, but that you will go on with
honor: and to your Reputation hold that Dimension, as may suit with a Person
of your Quality, a deserving Branch of your Family, by clearing your self from
jealousy, and rendering content with all indearment to your Country?

Neither is it sufficient to approve your self only blameless in your own
deportment, which ought to be Exemplary: but to rectify others of your
Society, if in any point blameworthy. For that Position will ever hold water:
He, who holds in Competition, or stands jointly empowered by Commission; and in
that parity, or equality of Command, understands his Fellow to be in the
irregular course of his Proceedings an Offender; makes himself guilty of the
Offense, if he act not by his best Endeavor to reform that Error.

In a word, look on your Subsidy Men with an equal eye; the serious survey
whereof will present an Act of Justice and Piety.

Postscript.
WE heard of late that you were grown eminent in the Eye of the Court. Play the
rare Phoenix, an Honest Man.

Abuse not the Princes Favor, to inhance your own honor. The Court is no
place of permanence. This day one story higher; next day so low, as none can
fall lower. The only way to remain long Great, is by a deserving Mean to
attain and retein Grace. To beg a Pardon from Heaven, for preferring, or
begging any unjust Suit in the Court of Earth. Neither can any Clawing Courtier
gain so much by his Compliance on Earth, as he loses by his thoughts
Non-residence in Heaven.

Remember this, and you shall thrive as well, though you Clime not so high, as
the best.

Your Constant PHILOCLES.

A DEFENSIVE LETTER, IN VINDICATION OF HIS FRIENDS HONOR: Occasioned upon our
late ASSESSES.
FAme has been ever held of a more lavish tongue and swift wing, than just in
her Relations: This I hope the World will find verified in you. Your Country
has made choice of you for her Patriot; do not betray her trust. Account it
your highest Preferment, and without boasting, your prime glory, to advance the
Conveniences of your Country. And, to the end your knowing endeavors may
appear more instrumental herein, take an exact survey of the accomodations and
advantages properly conducing to that County, Borough, or Manor, whereof you
stand elected, and deputed an assistant Member.

Neither is it only to fall into your consideration, how, by your discreet
addresses, you may advance the interests of that Place for which you stand
engaged, nay Conscientiously obliged; but, how you may by a prudent and
provident inspection avoid all obstructive ways that shall occasion any
dis-advantage in the improvement of it.

This should be the constant Task of all your fellow Consuls, whose study ought
not to be employed about fishing in troubled waters, as our Factious-fiery
Spirits are usully affected: whose frisking humors hunt only after a Change:
making it the least of their care, or fear, if the State became a Bedlam, so it
were an House of their Foundation; or a Political dis-joynted Body of their own
Constitution. Nor like Court-Fauns, complying with the Current of the time: and
making Self Ends their primary designs. These have their Hooks trimmed with the
pleasantest, but the perilousest Baits. Honors and Places be the attractive
Adamants of these Eminent Favorites. Country relations, with whatsoever is
held most dear to conscientious Men, must fall under the Grand Inquisition; or
what is worse, incurr that Epidemical prejudice to all Royalists, a perpetual
Act of Oblivion. Preferments are personal concerns, and must take place before
Country Debates, or Public Interests, else must these Cabinet Agents, who
officiate for themselves, lose by the bargain.

Dear Friend, our long acquaintance, seconded with such mutual regreets, have
deeply engaged me to the precious tender of your repute. Some will not stick to
say, that your Name is in the Class of those Court-shadows: and the pursuit
after Honor has made you forget the Place from whence you came, or the Errand
for which you were sent. Trust me, I should rather wish you dead to Earth, than
live to such Fame. But, I hope, the World does belly you, otherwise shall the
world make me a stranger to you.

Dead Flies corrupt the precioust Ointments: and vicious Agents are fatally
noxious to the best employments. Therefore was it anciently observed in the
Athenian State, that none were to be Elected one of the Ephori, a Place of
Consular Dignity, unless he were a Person of unquestioned fame, and whose eyes
were shut from rewards, or admiring Greatness. It is not long since (for we
retein yet the scarrs of those Civil wounds and Wars amongst us) your self was
inrowled a Martial Commander in His defense, to whom we owe our Allegiance. In
which service, what clear evidences of your prowess and valor were manifested
to the World, I shall, as one known to your native Modesty, be sparing to
relate; leaving it to the attest of your Country, where your actions purchased
that surviving glory. Only let me put you in mind of that Morning Canto,
which, amidst all your dangers and disasters, you so cheerfully breathed.

The rising Sun shines gracefully on me,
Because a Subject sworn to Loyalty.
Now, upon what grounds could it be imagined, how the gallantry of such an
active spirit should so eagerly nibble at the light bait of fading honor, or
the deceiving hope of Preferment; which generally begets more Foes than
Friends, and in the end leaving the Projector weary of his purchase, renders
him a spectacle of scorn to his slighted Family?

Let us search the Records of all such Men as have taken their rise by indirect
ways in these State-Assemblies! we may, perchance, find them, like Isis Ass,
laden with Honor; so richly has their Compliance with Persons of Place gilded
their New foundations, for moulding, or advancing pernicious Designs. But mark
the issue of these timing Wits, with the usual Catastrophe that attends them!
They fall into such contempt by the purchase of their Mercenary and Immerited
Honor, as they are usually entertained by their abused Country, in stead of
applause and approbation, with scorn and derision.

Hence it was, that the Stoic accounted the Lackquey more happy than his
Master that road on his foot-Cloath. Though the one be fuller of State, the
other rests more secure. For the higher stands ever most exposed to danger. In
public employments (if his abilities engage his attendance in them) his
actions become liable to censure: wherein, if any Proposal, or definite
conclusion appear out of square, the Instrument must be questioned. Admit it be
never so lightly devious, it must undergo the test.

And though formal in most, if defective in one, a severe interpretation will
accompany it. One drop of Coloquintida will spoil a whole Pot of Pottage.
Especially in Public Concerns; where the voice of the People sounds loud.

Every Tax, or Assess, becomes their Phlebotomist; extracting blood from their
veins: and native heat from the vital parts.

One small Chick snatched by the Kite, begets more passion in a Pesant, than the
loss of an herd of Cattle suffered by a Community. This Individual Man, as he
is his own Sharer, so in his sufferings he finds no equal Partner. Of others
wounds nor wrongs he has no resentment, so he enjoy his own welfare and
freedom. But when not only one limb, but the whole Body Politic groans under
a burden of suitable nature, it acts in the sufferers a communicable distemper.
Then, like our quaking Separatists* they find out retiring Places to vent their
discontents in. Then they discover their Conditions, balanced with their
insupportable pressures: but principally their joint practices, how they might
inflict due revenge (so implacable is popular fury) upon the Designers of their
sufferings: who, no doubt, if they should fall into their clutches, would
expect no better usage than Absyrtus received from the remorceless hands of
Medea, to be rent piecemeal. Nor than, that cunning, but cruel Artist, in that
Tyrannick reign of Phalaris, who commanded, that the Inventor should be first
tortured in his own Engine.

Just it is, that those whose only study is Complacency: and whose supreme
ends are self ends, should close their days in misery, weaving up their
Comical Court-Jubile in an Epilogue; breathing nothing but disconsolate ayrs of
an ensuing Tragedy. Such was the fate of Philotas: and may the like Issue
personat the constant office of an Usher to every Court-Sycophant: who, under a
seeming pretense of feeding the Exchequer, starves the State.

It is observed how that insinuating Favorite of Vespasian, having closely
whispered into the Emperors ears, what vast advantage that unbecoming Tax of
Vrin-Money would bring into his Coffers; as one whose mind was naturally
addicted to a pursuit of profit: He hugged his design, promising him an ample
Reward for his ingenious contrivance of so useful a way (atrack never trod
before) for inhancing the Revenues of his Treasury. But, afterward advertised,
how this Claw-Back pursued his own Interest, making it his endeavor to become
Contractor for that Grand Imposition, and consequently not only abuse the
Subject, but cheat the Emperor; his hateful Projections brought him into such
general contempt, as he was not only discarded the Court, where he had such
eminent reception: but in his Country too, where he had forfeited his
Reputation: being not only scorned, but houted at, and Stigmatized with this
Mark of distinction: Ecce quam fastuose and fastidiose Vespasiani lasanum
prodit!
Behold how proudly and hatefully that Piss-pot of Vespasian struts along!

Sundry instances of this ungracious kind might be found, both in our own time,
and Climes, who appeared eminent Ornaments in the Seats of Justice, in their
Country; but, no sooner called up by Public Votes, to do their Prince and
Country Service, than a Surreptitious hope of Preferment made them forgetful
of their just employment; by playing the Crickets, and hatching their Crocodile
Eggs in Chimney Corners; and Moulding Strange Assesses to dis-gust the People,
for their own interest. But, a general contempt abridg'd most of these Men's
days with a languishing discontent. Where I leave them.

Be it your care, as I have justified your carriage in Public Places, to come
off fair in your Deportment and Demeanure, that in this Recourse, you may
return into your Country with Honor.

TO A MALIGNANT, Dissuading HIM from HIS RESOLUTION.
DEar Sir; If any considerate reflection upon your Estate, Repute, the
Affectionatest Wishes of your Intimatest Friends, or a fair compliance with
those, who are nearest to you in blood, or dearest in your esteem, may prevail
with you: timely consider your own hazardous condition. In your Ahderence and
Loyalty to your Prince, it can never repent you: you Walk in a smooth
Conscientious Path: wherein, howsoever some Occurrents may, through a
distempered Surfeit of Peace, interpose themselves; they cannot perplex a Spirit
Loyally affected. Pure and Integrious Minds are compared to sweet Odours: the
more pounded, the more redolent.

Now, if this pretended Cause of Public safety, or State-security,
counterpoize your Friends persuasions: Discuss every Motive, and your
discreeter judgment shall find every Argument that may be Objected by the
Malignant Party, infinitely defective. Their Propositions, like Draco's Maxims,
writ all in blood. Aspersions thrown upon our Politic and Ecclesiastic
Government, without ground: Nothing desired by them, that may conduce to the
Public good; but by his Majesty with much alacrity seconded. So as, unless a
Well-Planted, and long-flourishing Monarchy should be reduced to an
Aristocracy, or which is more to be feared, an absolute Anarchy; What could be
with more facility inclined to, to satisfy the Votes and Voices of a small
remainder: who seem rather to stand upon singularity of Opinion, than
advancement of their Countries honor? What Miseries these woeful Distractions
have brought to our State, there is no eye, unless prejudicate, but apparently
sees, and seeing suffers. This, even many of those who nearliest sided with
them, have lately observed, and so sensibly apprehended; as they have
interceded an Accommodation: wherein, perceiving an averseness in some few
Parliamentaries, (and those who have run so deep an hazard upon his Majesty's
Displeasure, as they find themselves hopeless, by their Disloyal and Malapert
passages, to recover their impeached honor) They have since wholly declined
from adhering to them: and, with a Zealous Loyalty, applied themselves to his
Majesty's Commands: with a resolute desertion of all such, whose Propositions
trenched upon such desperate ends. Besides, the very City, which has been the
Parliaments Exchequer, has of late, upon Maturer Consideration, withdrawn their
Contribution; perceiving clearly, how it neither suited with their Profit nor
Honor; but the utter ruin and extinction of both together.

Now, if you reserve your Eye for Events; excepting these late Relating to
those late Parliamentary Imbroilments.
Lancashire Defeats, you shall see their Yorkshire Forces defeated and
dispersed; Or, if you will look nearer the Sun, you shall collect, by a more
just and credible discovery, than any Diurnal Relation, (which, for the
Stationers Profit, and Parliamentaries Credit, becomes generally a Mint of
untruths, and unjustificable fictions) how his Majesty's Forces daily increase,
and the Parliaments decrease: So, as now, success begins to smile upon the
Justness of his Cause.

Dear Sir, with an unequal and uninteressed eye fix upon these: suffer your
self to be undeceived; and compose the residue of your Resolves to such fair
and noble Presidents, whose timely aversion from pertinacy, and conversion to
Loyalty, have begot them esteem; to their States and Persons safety: those
individual fruits of Allegiance and Fidelity. The least acquiescence whereto,
seconded by your own Pen, shall incomparably cloze with the desires of

Your most Affectionate well-wisher, Upon Retractation of your convinced error,
And Reliction of your Phanatick Humor.

Upon the LATE PLOT.
HOw is it Zimries, that you thus do Plot;
And never content you with the Preys you have got?
Look to your Ravenous Claws exposed to pillage,
On every Loyal State, Grange, Mansion, Village!
Could not your Harpyes-fury be content
With good Men's rapine, ruin, banishment,
Nor all the Miseries that Sea or Land
By the Tyranny of your licentious hand
Could lay upon us, satisfy your thirst,
Nor move remorse for what you did at first;
But Breath fresh veins, and make the festring wound
Larger and deeper than your Agents found
In their Persidious Practice; when no doubt
Their aim was to destroy both Branch and Root?
Yet, what was done against you for all this?
A fair Act of Oblivion Signed is
For your Indemnity: and by it rest
Safe, having richly feathered your Nest
With Spoil of Royallists, who, well-affected;
Came short in Reaping the Harvest they expected.
"Some Honors they might get, but, all the while
" Revenues wanted to support their Style:
And, as the Weakest ever goes to the Wall,
These had been fitter for an Hospital;
And there remain Immured, secure, at ease,
Than receive Honors when they want their Fees
Thrice-happy Knights of Windsor who have go
Both States and Styles for which you ventured not
Nor felt hard Duties, such as we have done,
Yet most of us blink-ey'd are look upon.
Maugre these storms, our thoughts be calm and still
As if we were rewarded to our Will.
So loyal and so faithful tried were we,
We Would fight for the King in spite of poverty.
Our Resolution could not be compared
With theirs, who fought to purchase a reward,
And that unjustly gained: for your delights
Were to make us poor naked Adamites.
Prowess and Prudence chalked forth our way,
Scorning those Craving Spirits fought for Pay,
So long as they would Revenues of their own,
Or self-supportance to rely upon:
They bearded danger, and for honor fought,
Accompting Life a Tribute that they ought.
This was right Gallantry; for it did bring,
Midst all Extremes, some comfort to our King:
For in his service having spent their Store,
They spent their blood, what could a Sovereign more?
How much have you abused his Clemency,
Who, having granted you Impunity
For your mischievous pillage, must be forced
To have your new Conspiracies indor'st
In Sanguine Characters, so deep imbrued
As they display your high ingratitude;
And, make you Prodigies in after times,
Blushing at you who blushed not at your Crimes?
How often have I in my Pastures known
A Rogue Prance on a Horse that was mine own,
And, in a brave insulting frontless sort,
Yet, durst I not call him in question for it?
How often have I seen my Fatlings killed?
My Grounds and Medows by your Heifers tilled?
How often have I by mine own Door gone,
And seen my Pales and Houses trampled down:
The Owner quite estranged from his Nest,
As if he had therein no Interest?
Rebels, what would you have?- I Would have you teacht,
As to us Cavaliers Hugh Peter's Preached.
Would you enjoy our Lands, our Stock, our Store,
Or what is most dear to us: what would you more?
Take it; nay, in your seazure you are so speedy,
As like Bold Men yee'ave taken it already.
Let our Estates your Beggary advance,
Only reserve us our Allegiance
Which you never cared for: our sole task was toil,
Restraint, hard duties, you received the Spoil.
And, after all this, when we were made bare
And lean, as ever Pharaohs Cattle were;
Such large Indulgence your brave Acts receive,
You Are freed from Stigma's, none dare call you Knave,
Roundhead, or Crop-ear, but be entertained
For Friends, when you have our Possessions gained.
Yet, while we must not call you this nor that,
We needs must hold you the Assassins oth' State.
But, this we utter not, for wee'r become
To speak more with our thoughts than with our tongue.
Now, would not such desertless ties as these,
Keep you from acting New Conspiracies?
"By this, you knew to Justice what belonged,
"To leave your States to them whom you had wronged.
Howsoever Heavens Judgments shown, your own hand delves,
What Grace remitted, ruin to your selves.
Those whom Heaven means to shatter, those it mads,
As may appear by these Rebellious Lads.
Upon the FACE of REBELLION: By the Hand of a ROYALLIST, ARTFULLY DEBLAZON'D.
REbellion headed Faction in this sort,
But praised be Heaven, some Heads were set up for it;
May Treason thrive so. -Seldom seen we have
Sedition go gray headed to the Grave.
A Beast of Many Heads; we well may call
That Monsterous, which grows Anarchical:
Who kick at Princely Power, and spurn a Crown,
Yet could brook well to wear one of their own.
These were those Nimrod-Nemeses of wrath,
Who beggared their Friends by Public Faith;
Grinding them to the Bare Bones; much time misspent,
To make their Parliament a Iackalent,
Or a Shrove-Cock, a whirle-gig of State,
For every Wag to throw his Cudgel at.
These could not choose, but they might clearly see,
No Station managed without Sovereignty.
Rivers owe their Allegiance to their Spring,
And, these, who had their Influence from the King
Became his Tyrants. -- But, that Scean is done,
"May never such Acts stain the face of Albion.
"And may our Scutchions still Distinction bear,
"Betwixt a Rebel and a Cavaliere.
A FAREVVELL- CAROL, To All COMMITTEE CARLES.
FArewell Committee Men, if ye be Men,
For, I Would be loath to dedicate my Pen
To Savages; though I must tell you too,
The uncivil Arabs would forbear to do,
As you have done, to any Neighbors State,
To pill him, and confine him to a Grate.
But, of your goodness, I retein a Sense,
By whom I Have purchased such Patience,
As I shall wish, that you may have the grace
To have the like, when you are in like case:
And, in like case you must, or else our State
Must grow Anarchial and desperate.
But, I must startle you, how e're it please,
And cure you of your Lethargies disease.
"It spoils the operation of a Pill,
"For to apply it to the Patients will.
Lend then your Ears, ye zealous Tribe of Gad,
Since you have squeaz'd the substance that I had;
I Am late-resolv'd, by the benefit of art,
To act with Dennis, the Schoolmasters Part.
Of Rod and Custos I Have provision made,
For fit materials, to set up my Trade.
And, with You first I purpose to proceed,
For, some of you can neither write nor read;
To open the door of your intelligence,
At least, to teach you how to conster sense.
I will not School you in Rules of Division,
Christ's Cross was late enacted Superstition.
My Discipline more novell points affords,
As, first, for the due joining of your words:
Wherein, your Censures have so conscious been,
As, those who heard you, knew not what they mean:
Belching forth words of such stupendous wonder,
Who heard you blessed them from you, as from thunder.
For Numbers too, though they be only two,
Yet, in your Summing, you displace them so;
The Private never throve better, Public worse;
For, the Public creeps into the Private purse.
For Gerunds, they are Diurnals, and pretends
All must be Supines that are CHARLES his friends.
For Cases, they are so strangely ordered here,
The Vocative sounds only Cavaliere.
For Articles, their credit's so decayed,
That they are broke so soon as they are made.
For Genders, I must tell you, yee'r such Men,
I Would have you hold that Rule of Origin;
Your Genitals mere Ablatives, Dear Brother,
That none hereafter may beget another.
For Pronouns, Nouns, Verbs, Adverbs, Participles,
They Are all become Apocrypha's Disciples;
The Loyal ranked amongst Adjectives,
Who stand for Parliament Noun-Substantives.
For your Declining, in this madding time,
You teach the well-affected to decline;
Other Declensions ye never seek,
But hold them in your Conclave Heathen Greek.
For Interjections, Blades of pure affections
In their advance meet still with Interjections:
So, as if two Suns shine within one Sphere,
Then in one Realm Roundhead and Cavaliere.
For Persons, there is no respect, save those
Who are the Senats friends, and Scepters foes:
And by these you may guess how the World goes,
For Scepter Friends are ever out at toes.
For Praepositions, those are set before
As Lucky Birds, who the Capitol adore:
For weekly Packets these Relations bring,
That Prae rides for the State, Post for the King.
For Concords, to produce them were a Ridle,
The squeaking Bagpipe suits not with the Fidle:
Yet there is some hope this harmony may take,
Seeing Divisions our best Music make.
For Conjugations, after times may sing,
"The Conjugal Estate has lost her Ring:
With our late Presbyterian Translation,
Changing our Font into a Peuter Basin.
For your Conjunctions, never hope to see
Any use of them while these Factions be:
But, for Disjunctions, they are freely sown
'Twixt Sire and Son in every Country Town.
I shall not trouble you with Moods and Tences,
England has banished them with her five Senses.
Time was, Time is; but so it comes to pass,
The present Tence is not the same it was.
These Principles, and Elements of art
I shall inform you in with all my heart;
But, being Scholars, you must be corrected,
Which you would hardly brook oth' well-affected.
For, it will scarcely be believed of any,
You should be whipped, when you have lasht so many.
But, if to learn, your Roundheads have no will,
In Gods name be mere Ignoramus still.
But, if these Rudiments to you seem dimmer,
Let the Parliament inform you by their Primer.
From my Private School near New- Bridewell.
THE SEQUESTERES SONNET.
COme, come and tell me thou quaint thing,
Late sequestered for the King,
What needst thou care, since thou may share
In freedom of the cheerfull'st air?
Such liberty may give content to Subjects,
When their Princes are enjoined to restraint.
Thou have a Cell, an impaled Croft,
Shady Arbor, downy toft,
And, where is he, Sequesters thee,
Or dare tax thy liberty?
Loves liberty, which gives content to Subjects,
While Princes stand debarred from fancy by restraint.
Can I be poor, or feel annoy,
When I am rich in earthly joy?
Shall I pule, cry, moan, pine or dye,
Or put finger in mine eye,
Because State-sharks collect the rent of Subjects,
Unto their loss, and Sovereigns discontent?
Shall I, fond I, throb Lachrymae,
Or act part of Malevole
With folded arms, surpised with charms,
Or bemoan my forfet Farms?
An estranged Alien to content of Subjects,
Who suffer in their Sovereigns late restraint?
Yes, that I swear may drain a tear,
Else all the World should not hear
Me moan my self, though run on shelf,
For a patch of worldly pelf:
A little portion gives content to Subjects,
Who wish no more of all their store,
Than KINGS Infranchisement.
No Mean, No Man.
WHat is this Pomp, this Port, this flowr of glory,
But a mere pageant, or a naked story,
Presenting Man what his extraction is,
And, what an unblest State is humane bliss?
If rich, he is proud; if poor, he envies them
Who swell with more estate, or more esteem.
If Fool, should he all Ophirs oar possess,
The more he has, he does enjoy the less.
If wise, his own house cannot him contain,
Some foreign projects must surprise his brain;
Where, while he feeds on hopes, and seeks to prey
On others fall, his own falls to decay:
For, how should he retein least hope, to come
To wealth abroad, that cannot thrive at home?
But, if Ambition wing our ayry flight,
Look not how high we fly, but where we light.
Who to his own State can his thoughts confine,
He in his Croft enjoyes an Indian Mine.
TO THE HIGHLY HONORED AND GENEROUSLY ACCOMPLISHED, Sr PHILIP MVSGRAVE;
GOVERNOR OF CARLISLE:

A PERSON, Whose LOYALTY to his SOVEREIGN; CONSTANCY to his COUNTRY; INTIMACY
to his OWN; INTEGRITY to ALL;


Have Rendered Him EMINENT in the Acception of his PRINCE; DEAR in the Estimate
of the STATE;


R. B. HIS most AFFECTIONATE KINSMAN, and SERVANT, PRESENTS the ADDRESS of
these TWO COVNTREY-INTERESTS.

THE INTEREST OF WEST MERLAND.
THis County stands highly engaged to her own Interest: a People frugal and
tenacious: naturally inclined to Industry; which may be an Argument of Her
Frugality; made good by that Italian Maxim, That which we get with our own
hands, we ever forego with heavy hearts. Hence it is, that there is no way
readier to ingratiate their Commonty, than to claw them with an opinion of
moderating their Charge: or declining the face of hostility without cost.

They are infinitely sensible of the emptying of their own pail, be they never
so lightly milkt. For the Public, it is a Star of such a Magnitude above them,
or distance from them, that albeit they derive all their light from that Orb;
yet so individually cemented are these to their own, as they hold the Public
proficience, or deficience, smally concerns them. A little Tax foments such
distaste, as it operates more violently upon the pulse of their spirit, than a
precipice of the whole State. (The Pesants and Plebeians we only hint at) for
the Gentry are generally of that clear and candid nature, and grounded on such
loyal Principles, as might be instanced in those sad-wasting times of our late
distractions, where it was observed, that never any of Quality, within the
whole Barony, was ever known to take up Arms against his Sacred Majesty; or,
for their own security, contract with an Associate County.

This County consists of two sorts; and in these two, dissorted into different
opinions. The Gentry and Commonty. For Nobility, some ancient Structures she
reteins, as Monuments, or Trophies of their owners quality; but either by the
irrevocable decree of fate, or deplorable violation of their faith, they are
divided from their Country; leaving only those main and massy piles for
Landmarks, or aged relics of their pristine Magnificence and Glory. The
Gent. here, are generally well-bred; though in times of distraction, more apt
to Command than to be obeyed. There is nothing that begets more breaches in
their Society, nor discords in their harmony, than that deluding bait of
popularity: Which puts me in mind of that State-axiom, He cannot be justly
regular, that desires to be popular. Self-opinion, drawn from the propriety of
their own worth, or a reflection to their Family or Birth, become inducements
many times to ambitious and elated spirits, to quarrel with Authority: For a
supposed parity, cannot brook priority. This makes Propositions concluded in
the Evening, to lose their vigor and validity in the Morning. While the
distasted precedence of the person, not the inequality of the proposition,
occasions this opposition.

This County holding such gradual distance from the Sun; I mean, the face of
the Court; has been in public Assemblies, where the protection of Counties was
debated, and with great deliberation carefully secured; as an inconsiderable
place, dis-regardfully slighted; nothing in it worthy to be valued: it was
left to support it self, or suffer: The Sun shining then in a clear Zodiac,
would not dart one small beamling on her. Yet, it is admirable to observe, how
this obscure and deserted Angle, in times of greatest distemper; even then,
when men, and all things so miserably jarring, had seemed to change their
nature; stood ever firm, and immutable in her fidelity; and resolute in
contemning those assassinate braves and threats of a confining Enemy. Besides,
never did County, to her succeeding glory, in testimony of her Piety, open her
bosom more freely to return hospitality to such, as were pursued by the Enemy.

Being a Nook, in comparison of other Shires; yet One of the very last Counties
that veiled to their over-powerful Enemy: and upon such Signal Conditions, as,
that Foe to Fidelity could not glory much in the purchase of his Mercenary and
ignominious victory.

And, to give a further addition to their unquestioned valor and renown, it
has been reported, how at that time, when that Handful of Men (being held a
narrow and inconsiderate County) spit defiance in the face of their Enemy;
making this their constant Impreze: INTACTA EST WESTRIA VIRGO; Which, (being
without derogation to their Honor afterward subdued, or rather compounded
with to lay down their Arms) They changed into this: VITIATA EST WESTRIA VIRGO.
Which unexpected, but necessitated Overture, wrought such distempers upon some
of their Commanders; as they could not endure to remain any longer in those
polluted Nests, wherein such Ravenous Fowls pretended an Interest. Mean time,
those loyal-hearted Soldiers left behind, though discomfited, they were not
discouraged; for, though the insulting Enemy was more in number, They never
durst encounter them without great advantage, such was their valor.

It has been reported, that even at such time as those late Malignants, who
bounded near her, and by a daily recruit of their numerous Forces, might
probably perplex her; when their powers increased, and their Victories
vain-gloriously dispersed; yet, the very Colonels, and chief Commanders of
their Enemies Faction seriously interceded their Association; so formidable was
the prowess of this small County to a populous Army, a victorious Enemy. Yet
could neither Promises nor Menaces make a breach upon that impregnable Fortress
of their Loyalty. They disclaimed all concurrence with State-competitors: when
Crowns and Scepters lay at Stake; they neither held it safe, nor honorable, to
admit least acquiescence, much less adherence to such fomenters of debate. This
enforced the Enemy to stand continually upon his Guard, to his great
disadvantage: which, though it enjoined this County to a constant charge, yet
it conduced highly to their safety, and preservation of their honor. Howbeit,
some scattered aspersions have lately spread themselves; which, at the first
blush, may seem to some prejudicate opinions, detractive from the reputation of
this County: but upon more mature and serious discussion of every particular
(though my Person be a stranger to those Parts, which may imply an impartial
Pen) I have heard it amply debated, and unanimously concluded, that no action
was committed, nor design omitted, that might any way derogate from their
Honor: for, by laboring to surprise an Enemy, as was apparently proved, they
might, at that time, have made way for the Enemy to seize upon the Rendevouz
for that County; which would not have been so easily repriz'd, being once
possessed; by reason of the Inhabitants within it, and places adjacent to it;
whose affections were dangerously corrupted.

It was held by an excellent refined judgment, for a gallant action, if they
could decline the fury of a powerful neighboring Enemy, without foreign
Protection: which, by their Commanders care, has been bravely performed:
crowning the issue of their actions with undaunted resolution.

The Soldiers, who are designed to keep Garrison in these Parts, are Men of
proper Personage, and strong Constitutions: and, no doubt, of stout and
resolute Courage, if they were put to it. But, their near adjoining service to
their own doors, makes them more remiss in their attendance. This Opinion has
been generally retained of them: Better Soldiers, if they were well
disciplined, and farther distanc'd from home, never Marched into any Field: but
their thought of home, and a neglected Family, makes them less intentive to
Affairs Military.

This Shire is divided into two parts; but the Baronry is the Beauty and Glory
of the County, for her more civilized Commonty. For the other part of the
County, their Commons are more servile, but less civil: and, to the happiness
of their Commanders, not so ready to argue, as to obey. Whereto, they have been
so inured from their infancy; as Obedience is more acceptable to them than
Sovereignty.

The Shire-Town is Apleby, which merits preeminence only for antiquity: for
Kendall, being the Garrison-Town for the County, has been ever renowned for her
affluence of commerce, and confluence of People: Being a Burgess highly famed
for her Manufactory in Woolwork: which, by their experienced industry, became
infinitely commodious to the Corporation and Parts adjacent: though of late
much decreasing. Which, it were to be wished, that it might be timely supplied,
and cheerfully revived, by the assistance and application of those Members in
the High Court of Parliament, who stand obliged, upon their Election, to
promote the Interests of their Country; by removing all probable occurrencies
that may obstruct the improvement of it. An employment, no doubt, more
corresponsive to their Place, whereto they are, by the Votes and Voices of
their Country, deputed; than any Self-seeking-Interest, wherewith, I hope,
that sharp Northern air will not suffer them to be infected. Neither has it
been the least of her happiness, to have enjoyed such loyal and circumspect
Magistrates; as by their vigilance and fidelity, made it their prime
terrestrial task, to intercept these Enemies of the State. Such Sentinels
deserve cherishing, and high approvement; especially in these times so
anxiously shaking and shuddring. Neither can too much circumspection be used,
in regard of the Dis-affectionates in that Place; their private desertion of
the Public Cause; and their aversion from all accommodation or intention to
Peace. The beauty of Sodoms Aples was only in their color: and, the purity of
these, only in their tinsell-zeal luster. Their seeming compliance in the
Cause, cannot palliat the Core of their heart. Sin ever retains the sting of
shame: Neither can it be such a faithful Secretary to it self, but it must,
when least expected, and less importuned, discover its guilt.

Many private passages present admittance to this Town of Garrison: but, no
In-lets more dangerous than Pretending Zealots, the mainest Fomenters of
Rebellion: relating ever to our late distracted times.
ill-hearts, where the poison of dis-affection has instilled that infusion, as,
no spirit holds more influence over some pretended Zelots of them, than that
viperous fury of Rebellion. Well may the Malignants promise to themselves a
grateful harvest to their Labors, when they plough their accursed Ground with
their Enemies Heifers. But, these Brambles are not so many, but they might be
quickly Weeded, did not Impunity thaw Authority; and leave Delinquents more
presumingly indurate.

Sundry Forts, Rampires, and Barricadoes have been in the most convenient and
incursive places lately erected, by the care of those Governors successively
employed in Garrison: amongst which, One of principal concernment, being an
ancient artificial Mount, and in form resembling one of those Pyrenaean
Mountains, dividing France from Spain; and distinguished by a Device or Model,
like a Cap of Maintenance, upon the top: a Work, certainly, of incomparable
art, ingenuity and consequence. This stands as a Counter-mure, by an equal
level, and opposal to the Castle; which Castle, though ruinous and demolished,
is shortly to be Fortified, if all designs proceed, as are intended. But, now
those hopes of reparation have run themselves quite out of breath: Peace and
Unity being the safest Ports, and securest Forts that Human Policy can erect.

In a word, if this County be at unity within it self, it will prove a grievous
Eyesore to the strongest Assailant: neither can this Sacred Chain of Union be
dissolved but by two means: First, By a surreptitious Envy, fomented in some of
the Gentry, toward the Persons that are in Command: Or, this particular
respect in the Commonty (a too Epidemical Malady) wherein private gain must
overbalance the Public good. To cure these, no Receipt more soverain, than,
in the first place, for the Gentry, without reluctance, or private agency, to
submit their Wills to the fair Commands of those, who derive from their
Superiors a legal precedence: And, in the next place, for the Commonty to
decline their own opinion, and, to adhere wholly to their Commanders; by whose
advice, they may not only be regulated, wherein their own discretion cannot
supply them; But so completely furnished, as timely prevention, the life of
Policy, may hereafter secure them.

THE INTEREST OF CVMBERLAND.
A Cunning cautelous People; Patient of Labor; and pliable to Commands: Which
observance in them, is rather to be imputed to the discreet carriage of their
Gentry, than the innate affection, or disposition of the Commonty. Who, if a
prudent awe did not subdue them, could be easily induced to play the Masters.
Neither was it possible for them to confine so long upon a subtle neighboring
Nation, but they must necessarily receive some tincture from them, and retein
it in them. They are pithy in their discourse, and nimble in their bargaining.
Anciently, this County, as our former was, has been much engaged to The (...)
Foundation of a Tenant-Right.
Border service: in the pursuit whereof, by freedom of booties, it returned
generally more gainer than loser.

The Gentry of this County has been ever much addicted to Recreation; as
Hunting, Hawking, Horse-races, and the like gentile pleasures. Now, by the late
breaking in of these Distractions and uncivil quarrels, to their Honor, they
addressed their employments wholly to the Discipline of Arms. Many of these
have received several Commands; some of Centuries, others of Colonies, and
others of select quality, of Brigades. Certain differences (upon the prevalency
of some disaffected spirits, who itched after nothing more than Innovation)
sprung up dangerously in the beginning: but, the Serpent was nipt in the head:
and the Gockatrice broken in the egg, before it was hatched. Some dangerous
Instruments we have obviously heard of in our travel to those parts; who were,
by their peculiar Places and Offices, highly interessed in the Counties
Affairs; and these, to the great dishonor of their Place and Person, made
Merchandise of their Offices: preferring the receipt of a sordid servile
profit, before the estimation of their Family, conscience or credit. Alexander
Severus would have smoked such mercenary venders of smoke. Xerxes would have
pulled their skin over their ears. But, this official corruption is such a
contagion, as it cannot conceal its poison. The Partridge is said to make her
nest of stolen Eggs, which she has not laid; but, as soon as the Birds are
hatched, the true Mother calls them all away from their theevish step-Dame; the
Story needs no Oedipus.

The prime Seat, or Garrison for this County, is Carlisle; a dainty, free and
fertile soil. Yet, either through sloth of the Inhabitants, or some other
occult cause (notwithstanding the delicacy and fruitfulness of the Seat) the
People are generally poor and necessitous: preferring a sleepy supine life,
before any industrious gain.

Their near adjacency to that disloyal and ungrateful People, the Scots, with
their constant Traffic and commerce with them, has begot in some of them, too
near a congruence, and concurrence in their affections. Hence it is, that
diverse Factious Separatists, who desire nothing more than Division, or rather
a privation in all Government; have familiarly repaired to those parts, and
freely, no doubt, communicated to them their counsels. So dangerous is the
stream of dis-allegeance, when it interveines it self in any descending line of
blood, or to use their own word for it, of Clan. And, as the Snowball gathers
by rolling: so These, by pretending plausive ends, many times find Assistants
and ready Agents to further their Designs.

Religion is a specious pretense; but, for illiterate and undisciplinary
Persons to be reducers and reformers of a long-establish'd Church Government;
and, to find false wards in that Key, which has so freely and fruitfully opened
the door, for so many Ages, to People of all Conditions: it is such an
Anathematized Doctrine, as he that inclines to it, cannot but acknowledge
himself miserably deluded.

To labor a seasonable prevention of these, it was the especial care of the
Gentry of both Counties, to levy their Forces timely, and by applying a present
Remedy, to decline an approaching Malady. In this, they all concurred, and
happily succeeded. For, upon the very first appearance of Force, these
groundless Malignants had the Manners to lay down their Arms, and to embrace
Loyalty. So easily were they to be reclaimed, whom lightness of opinion had so
weakly ensnared: and a precipitate assent to indiscreet counsel, so unadvisedly
persuaded.

Yet, for all this, no Vintage so carefully intended, but some Clusters will be
left ungathered; no Harvest so painfully earned, but some Ears left ungleaned:
though the main Fabric were demolished, there appeared some Refuse, or
Rubbish, arising from those Ruins, which might supply fresh Materials to erect
a new Pile of mischief, if it were not prevented.

The opinion which is held of the Agent, whether his designs aim at Loyalty, or
dis-Allegiance, works wonderful impressions: This might be collected by the
passages of one Gentleman, too deeply interested in these Civil Divisions:
whose moral honesty had so possessed him of a good opinion generally, as his
precipicious actions received the better construction, by means of this
opinion. It is true; that our best Men, being deluded, and employed upon ill
business, do ever the worst Offices. A debaucht Slave, who has sold himself to
all impiety, can never find many Favorites, nor Followers; unless they be such
as are casten in the same Mould: Civil reserved Men, who carry their eyes about
them, will be jealous of the Design, by reason of the Agent. Catiline may find
a Cethegus; but, to see him associated, either by a Cato, or a Brutus, were a
miracle. Let evil Men then be put upon ill actions: for, when good Men are seen
in them, or consort with those that appear for them; they attract many Shadows;
and make those practices, which in their own native Simples, are poisonous,
seem to deluded judgments, who are misled, by their opinion of the Agents,
cordial and commodious. We shall not need here to distinguish Him by any nearer
or clearer Character: the knowledge of his A Gentleman highly valued for his
discreet Government in those times.
Person has aspired to that growth with most men in those Parts; as these may
present him in his full body, without any farther discovery. It were to be
wished, that, as misunderstanding has seduced him, so some clear, solid, and
dis-ingaged judgment may reduce him; which by these calmer times has been
effected: rendering him both morally and conscientiously Loyal. But, we have
retraited too far from the Interess of this County.

Their Shire-Town is strongly fortified; with useful Ordnance furnished: and by
an experienced Governor If a precipicious Passion, or an impropriation to
opinion transport him not; whereto maturity of time, advice, and long
experience, have seasonably made him a stranger.
Commanded: So, as though the continual attendance of Troops of Horse, and
maintenance of a constant Garrison, may appear a burden to the County: yet, in
regard of the vicinity of the Enemy, who is apt to entertain all opportunate
advantages of hostility, this charge becomes their Sanctuary.

Nor is it to be omitted, what Zeal their Magistrate, with other Country
Officers, have expressed to the Public Cause; and in it, how they have
manifested their affections to such, who had deserted their Country, by
bogling at Authority: laboring to reduce them by gratulatory Letters, and
Messages of Amity; but, see the ingratitude of Malignants! So far were they
from being persuaded, as these honest Officers were, by them, uncivilly
answered; twiting them with the vices wherewith they had known them formerly to
be acquainted: Wishing one of them to look to his Wench; another to his Bribe:
and to leave them to their Fortunes.

To conclude this, let us reflect upon their Quality, and Harmony in Commands.
Although they have a Commander in Chief, designed over both the Counties: who,
out of his candor and affability, is pleased, in all freedom and familiarity to
communicate his Counsels to them; yet some resulting spirits there have been,
who varied much from the ancient Israelites disgust: for, their desire pitched
upon this, to have a Stranger Ruler over them; rather than One who was Born and
Bred among them. But, so equally were his thoughts composed, as by none of
these affronts could he suffer himself to be distempered; seeing, it fares
generally with the most Military Agent, or any other active Instrument of
State, as it does with a Prophet, not to be esteemed in his own Country.

It was an excellent observation of a compassionate Roman, touching Scipio
African: O what a gallant General were African, if he were in any Country but
his own! But, brave actions, grounded upon pure intentions, cannot lose their
guerdon. The Sun, after it has wrastled with a Cloud, shows his beauty in more
fullness. For, the affections of the Gentry become more clear than they were,
being wonn by their Commanders affability, his infatigable care for the
Public, his dis-regard to his own profit.

Vertitur Aquilonis auspicium mutando Proverbium:
"Ab Aquilone omne bonum,
"Nobile nobis dedit donum,
"Regi vitam and coronam;
"Aulam nitidam, and Stabilem Thronum,
"Pacis palmam, aureum pomum.
"Mittat per orbem vaga fama sonum;
"Matura pensans mess Colonum:
"Miretur Auster nunc Aquilonem.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE PERUSER.
BE pleased, Candid Reader, to bestow your eye upon the Order of the Characters
methodically digested, and analogically couched; principally intended and
artfully disposed for the benefit and pleasure of any Competent and unbyassed
Reader. The strength of whose appetite commonly becomes allayed by tedious
Tables, Indexes, and intricate Preambles.

FINIS.

