A SERMON, PREACHED IN YORK MINSTER, Before his EXCELLENCE the MARQUIS OF
NEWCASTLE, Being then ready to meet the SCOTCH ARMY, January, 28. 1643. By the
BISHOP of DERRY.

Published by special Command.

Printed at York by Stephen Bulkley, 1643.

AMong the public Prayers of the Church of Scotland, in the time of their
Persecution by the Frenchmen, Printed by Thomas Bassa^dine, 1575. Havin^
acknowledged their Perjury, and breach of faith to England, and that God did
justly punish them by that Nation, for whose cause they offended, and afterward
being delivered from that bondage, by the help of the English, they give thanks
in these words.

Page 62.
O Lord, seeing when we by our own power were altogether unable to have freed
our selves from the tyranny of strangers, and from the bondage of thraledome
pretended against us, thou of thine especial goodness did move the hearts
of our neighbors, (of whom we had deserved no such favor) to take upon them
the common burden with us, and for our deliverance not only to spend the
lives of many, Page 69.
but also to hazard the state and tranquillity of their Realm and
Commonwealth: Grant unto us, O Lord, that with such reverence we may remember
thy benefits received, that after this, in our default, we never enter into
hostility against the Realm and Nation of England: Suffer us never, O Lord, to
fall to that ingratitude and detestable unthankfulness, that we shall seek
the death and destruction of those whom thou have made instruments to deliver
us from the tyranny of merciless strangers.

This solemn Confession is now forgotten without any provocation on our parts,
or the least alteration in Religion, they invade the Children of their
Deliverers, Shall not God see it, and require it?

2 Samuel 10.12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and
for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good.


THis Chapter contains three parts, David's Embassage, Hanun's Discourtesie,
and David's Revenge. Then said David, I will show kindness unto Hanun the son
of Nahash, Verse ^*
as his father showed kindness unto me. It was truly said by Solomon, Love is
strong as death, Cant. 8.6. Gratitude is a branch that springs from this root.
It is not buried in the grave, but descends from the parents upon their
posterity. Non dissecanda sed dissuenda est amicitia, Friendship ought not to
be slashed in sunder, but to be unstitched by degrees. But now what is become
of this forgotten virtue? which like the Phoenix is much talked of, but seldom
seen. Nothing grows aged sooner then a good turn. Now the world has taken
out a new lesson, by cancelling the obligation to avoid the debt, and by
picking some feigned quarrel, to rob good deserts of their due reward. This is
now held the more compendious way for degenerou^ spirits, to dis-ingage
themselves. The King of Ammon did find no such measure from David, but the King
of Albion finds it from too many treacherous Ziba's, to whom both He and His
Father have showed other manner of kindnesses, then Nahash did to David.

Hanun was an Idolater, and more then that, an Ammonite, of whom the Law says,
Deuteronomy. 23.6. Thou shall nor seek their peace, nor their prosperity all thy days
for ever. Differences in Religion disoblige no man from civil duties, Faith is
to be kept with an Heretic, and offices of humanity are due from a Jew to an
Ammonite.

But things well intended are not always rightly construed, Mala men's, malus
animus. The Spider will extract poison out of the sweetest flowers. A sore eye
will be offended with the light of the Sun. Notwithstanding all Hezekiahs
piety, Rabshakeh will not stick to say, That he has pulled down the Altars of
God, Isay 3.6.7. So here, David's courtesy is traduced. The Princes of Ammon
say to their Lord, Think thou that David does honor thy father? Verse 3.
has not David rather sent his servants to search the City, and to spy it
out? They spoke not altogether without reason, Ambassadors are often
honorable spies; but in this case their suspicion was groundless. You see we
are not the first Nation, whom needless Jealousies have undone, or imaginary
Fears have plunged into real dangers. Evil Counselors who infuse malignant
notions into the ears of Princes, are like those who poison a common
Fountain, whereof all the City does drink. On the other side, Blessed is that
Kingdom, where the Kings friends are Alexanders friends, where the favorers
of the Commonwealth, are the favorites of the Prince; Such may be truly
called, the Worse-men and Chariots of Israel, 2 King. 13.14. But such were not
these Princes of Ammon, Evil counsel in the end proves worst for them that
give it. By seeking to prevent David, they invite him to their own ruin. Thus
the will of God is fulfilled, even whilst it is shunned. Yet these evil
Counselors were not in nubibus, in the clouds, the fact was evident. If it
were sufficient to accuse, who should be innocent? The Wolves in the treaty
with the Sheep, desired that the Dogs might be destroyed, as Incendiaries and
e^ill Counselors, (Can you blame them?) that they might range and worry at
their pleasure.

The evil Counselor suffered justly: But Hanun was not innocent to take
David's servants, and shave off half their beards, Verse ^
and cut off their garments in the middle: That is, to strip them of the two
principal outward ornaments of a man, the one natural, Hair, the other
artificial, Clothes. I find four gross errors in this passage. First,
against the light of nature, to punish upon a bare suggestion, without proof
or discussion, whereas in criminal causes the proofs ought to be clearer then
the noonday light. Secondly, against the Law of Nations, To use Ambassadors
in that barbarous manner, whose office is sacred, and ought always to protect
their Person: yet we see how Gods Ambassadors have often met with the same
entertainment. Thirdly, against the rule of policy, First to disgrace and
provoke men of parts and power, and then to dismiss them: which error cost
the Samnites dear, when they had the Roman Consuls and Legions in their mercy,
cooped up at Caudium: They did neither dismiss them honorably, to oblige the
Romans, as they were first advised, nor cut them off every mothers son, to
disable the Romans to revenge, as they were advised in the second place, but
caused them, after they had disarmed them, to pass disgracefully under the
yoke, and so dismissed them with reproach, which they revenged soon after with
the ruin of the Samnites. Fourthly, against piety. By the Law, torn garments
were proper to Lepers, Levit. 13, 45, They were forbidden to round their heads
or to mar the corners of their beards, Lev. 19.27. But the Ammonites thought
to put a jeere upon the Jewish Religion, even as some of late have ludibriously
abused those holy Garments, and Books, and Vessels, which we use in the
service of God. The Ammonites found that it was not good to jest with
edge-tooles: Profane Lucian was torn in pieces with dogs, and the other will
find, that God is a severe avenger of such impious scoffs.

Verse 5.
David's care of his servants, shows, how Governors ought to protect their
Inferior and subordinate Ministers, in the execution of their commands, and to
preserve them from contempt.

Verse 6.
The Ammonites see their error when it was too late, there is no doubt, but
even then upon submission David would have remitted the injury, but their
consciences told them, the abuse was too gross and public to be forgotten.
We see by daily experience, that conscience of guilt, and desperation of
forgiveness, drive men into courses pernicious both to themselves and others.

Verse 6. Verse 8.
Therefore to secure themselves, the Ammonites wage 33000. Syrians, but in the
disposing of their men, this is worthy our observation, that they kept
themselves near the gates for a sure retreite, but the Syrians they placed in
the open field. It was never held to be discretion in any Nation, to bring
Armies of Foreigners, whom they could not regulate into their chief strengths
and holds, witness the Mammertines in Messana, the Saxons in Britain.

But here they met with Joab, an overmatch for them in the art of War, as he
shows by the ordering of his men, verse 9. By his provident forecast, verse
11, Fear the worst, and the best will always save it self. And lastly, by
his gallantry in my Text, Be of good courage, and let us play the men, for our
people, and for the cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him
good.

In which words, I observe four parts. First, A brave exhortation, Be of good
courage. Secondly, A magnanimous resolution, And let us play the men. Thirdly,
A just reason, For our people and for the cities of our God. Fourthly, A pious
submission, And the Lord do that which seems him good.

It has been ever the custom of Generals, before an hazardous Battle, to
cheer up the hearts of their Soldiers in a Patheticall Oration, with
arguments drawn from the approved valor and virtue of themselves or their
ancestors, from the assured hope of rich spoils, from the justice and piety of
their cause. So God commands, Deuteronomy. 20.3. So Joab practices in my Text, Be of
good courage, etc.

I cannot pass in silence by the brotherly love of Joab and Abishai, verse,
11. If the Syrians be too strong for me, thou shall help me, And if the
Ammonites be too strong for thee, I will help thee. As when one foot trippes,
the other is ready presently to sustain it. And here in my Text, By
encouraging one another to play the men, or rather to play the man, As it is
said of the Children of Israel, that they went out as one man, 1 Samuel 11.7.
That is, with one heart, and one soul, animated with the same desire of the
public good. The left hand does not stand more in need of the right, then an
Army does of the concord of its Commanders; where I see this blessed sympathy,
I cannot but echo out that of the Psalmist, Behold, how good and joyful a
thing it is, brethren to dwell together in unity, for there the Lord has
promised his blessing, and life for evermore. Psalm. 133. But where men are
drawn into action as a bear to the stake, by force or fear; where a little
base Plunder is preferred before Honor, and Victory; where there is Faction,
Envy, and Emulation amongst great Officers, it portends Destruction, and
Dissipation; The God of heaven and earth ever bless this Army from it. And if
there be any person within the sound of my voice, who are conscious to
themselves of such sinister respects, or of any other impediment, which may
retard our hopes of an happy Victory, either by offending God, or disabling
them to do the duties of their places, I do here beseech them by that service
which they owe to God, by that allegiance which they owe to His Majesty, by
that love which they owe to their native Country, to sacrifice them this day
to the common Cause, or at least with the Serpent to deposite them so long,
till this Army return again in peace.

And the only way to peace is Courage, which yields to no chances, is terrified
with no dangers, Et ab ipso ducit opes animumque ferro. There cannot be a worse
counselor then Fear in time of danger. Pessimus in du^iis augur tim^^. Fear
caused Moses to stagger at Gods Commandment, Exodus 3.11. Fear caused Elias to
fly from the womanish threatenings of Jesabell, 1 Kin, 19.3. Fear caused Peter
to deny his Master. Fear will metamorphise a field of Thistle into an Army of
men. Fear will cause a man to tremble at the sound of a shaken leaf, Lev.
26.36. As a man standing upon the edge of some lofty turret, or precipitious
cragge, without any to push him forward, even by looking down, is in danger to
tumble down headlong through Fear, So degenerous Fear betraies the succors
of the soul. Therefore when Gideons Army was to give the charge upon the
Enemy, he caused proclamation to be made in the Camp, Whosoever is timorous, let
him depart, Ju^g. 7.3. The reason is given, Deuteronomy. 20.8. least his example make
his fellow soldiers to faint, But nothing is difficult ^o Courage. In the land
of Canaan there were Giants, to whom the Israelites being compared did seem but
Grasshoppers, yet said Caleb and Joshua, Fear them not, they are bread for us,
Number. 14.9. bread which is eaten without any labor or difficulty. When Saul was
to be inaugurated King by Samuel, he set nothing before him but a shoulder, 1 Samuel 9. A mean dish for a Royal entertainment; some have found out a mystery
in it, (they might better call it an allegory,) That as the shoulder does bear
up the beast, so the courage and fortitude of a King, does sustain the body
politic, so to teach Governors how they ought to bear the burden of the
Commonwealth. The ancient law of governing the Romans Army, was reduced to two
heads, First, Non sequi. Secondly, Non fugere. First, not to make a rash hazard
without good ground, he that loves danger shall perish in it. Secondly, not to
decline danger timerously when it offers it self, and cowardly to betray a
good cause. Therefore as one said, that pronounciation was the first, and
second, and third part of a good Orator: So may I say that Courage is the
first, and second, and third part of a good Commander. It is a slander cast
upon Religion, that it makes men cowards. The fear of God is the best armor
against the fear of man. Religion is the root of Courage, Heb. 11.33. By faith
our fathers subdued Kingdoms, etc. Waxed valiant in fight, and turned to
flight the Armies of aliens. Let the Heathens brag of their Decii add Curtii,
that devoted their lives to death for the love of their Country.

Vicit amor patriae, laudumque immensa cupido.
We have our Moses and Paul, that desired to be made Anathemas for their
brethren. Their Socrates drunk his poison cheerfully: Our Cyprian said Amen to
the sentence of his own condemnation. There Scevola burned his hand for
mistaking Porsenna. We are able to name a catalogue of Martyrs, who have
kissed the stake, sung Hymns in the midst of the fire, who have accounted
their sufferings, palms* their punishments, triumphs; their infamy, glory;
their Exile, their country; their bond, their crown; their prison, their
paradise; their death-day, their birthday: So in Courage we equal them, in
the cause we far excel them; this is good Courage indeed. Some think to
express their courage by roaring and blaspheming over their cups, by
unseasonable duells and quarrels, by muttering against their Commanders, by
tyrannising over their inferiors, by trampling under foot all Laws both of
God and man: this is so far from good courage, that it is rather an argument
of cowardice. True courage is fearful to offend God, has a reverend regard of
the Laws, is obedient to superiors, courteous to equals, indulgent to
inferiors, and evermore grounded upon a good cause, and accompanied with
cheerfulness and resolution, that is my next point. And let us play the men.

A strange kind of play, but the terrible face of War is sport to a martial
and experienced mind. As Job says of the Leviathan, That he esteems iron as
straw, accounts darts as stubble, and laugheth at the shaking of the spear. 2.
Sam. 2.14. Let the young men arise and play before us, a fatal skirmish where
not one survived. Virtue is derived a viro from a man, so the phrase is used, 1 Samuel 4.9. O ye Philistines be strong, and quit your selves like men. In the
same dialect, David speaks to Solomon, 1 King. 2.2. Be thou strong, and show
thy self a man, That is, of a masculine virtue and spirit. A men not a child,
Vae terra cujus Rex est puer, Woe is that Province where the Governor is a
child, uncertain, mutable, without resolution. Ephesians. 4.14. That we henceforth
be no more as children tossed too and fre, etc. Fluctuating men without
resolution, are compared to children, who may be drawn any way with a fair
word, or an apple. Or to ship lying at Hull, tossed too and fro, still changing
postures. Secondly, a man, nor a woman without courage and resolution; God
provides strictly, Deuteronomy. 22.5. That a man shall not wear a woman's garment,
much less pu^ on womanish manners. There could be nothing more opprobriously
objected then this, Vos etenim juvenes animos geritis muliebres,
Illaque virgo viri.


Whence was that brag of a Lacedemonian woman, that they only brought forth
men. Let us play the men. But the chief Emphasis lies in this word Us, let Us
play, It was Caesar's honor that his commands to his soldiers were not Ite,
Go ye, but venite, Come let Us go. It was A^imelechs charge to his Army, What
ye see me do, do quickly, Jud. 9.48. Digna Gideonitarum genere sententia, a
saying worthy of the son of Gideon. The example of a leader has a strong
influence upon his followers, Observe the words of Vri^h, 2 Samuel 11.11. The
Arc, and Israel, and Judah, abide in tents, and my Lord Joab is encamped in
the open fields, And shall I go into mine house to eat and drink? My Lord
Joab, there is his pattern. It was debated among the Philosophers, whether an
Army of Lions having an Heart to be their Captain, or an Army of Hearts having a
Lion to be their Captain, were the more considerable Army, and it was
determined, for the Army of Hearts, having a Lion to their Governor. The great
wheel of a Clock sets all the little wheels on going. In Alexanders ^ime all
the Macedonians were soldiers, In Augustus his reign, all the good wits in
Rome were Poets. The example of a leader draws his followers, as the
lodestone draws iron, or the jett draws chafe. In a word, A vigilant and a
resolute Commander, is like a light in a watchtower, to direct his company to
the safe harbor of Victory* But a negligent and cowardly Leader, is like fires
made among the rocks, brings his followers the ready way to ruin and
destruction, Therefore says Ioab, Let us play the men.

But what is resolution without a good cause? Ioab wanted not that, For our
people, and for the cities of our God, For our people, that is, our wives, our
children, our parents, our neighbors, our friends, our native country, and
for the cities of our God, that is, our Churches, our Religion, So for our
people, and for the cities of our God, is pro Aris and focis, for our Altars
and for our fires, for our Church and Commonwealth. The very heathens could
teach us by the light of nature, that we are not borne only for our selves, but
partly for our parents, partly for our Country. Ulysses preferred the smoke
of Ithaca his native soil, before all those pleasant Regions that he had seen.

Nescio qua natale solum dulcedine cunctos
Ducit,
Whether it be by the instinct of nature, as beasts love their dens, birds
their nests, or by civil institution, as having the same Law, the same
Ceremonies, the same Temples, the same Markets, the same Tribunalls. It was the
prayers of the Elders for Boaz, That he might do worthily in Ephratah, and be
famous in Bethlehem, Ruth 4.11. that is, in his native Country, It was Esters
resolution for her Countrymen, If I perish, I perish. And Nehemiah, though for
his own particular he was Cup bearer to a great King, yet his affections are
still the same to his Country, Why should not my countenance be sad, when the
city, the place of my fathers sepulchers lies wast, and the gates thereof are
burned with fire. Nehem. 2.3. Abraham that was so ready to sacrifice his only
son upon a meet command, yet when God requires him to leave his native
Country, he presses it home to him with many reasons and promises, Genesis 12.1.
Brutus commanded his own son to be slain before his eyes, for conspiring
against their Country. When Sampson without any weapon in his hand set upon a
Lion as though it had been a Kid, Jud. 14.6. the reason is intimated in the
Verse precedent, for the safeguard of his father and his mother. There cannot
be a juster War then for defense of our Country. It was Tullies wish, that
every one in Rome had it written upon his forehead how he stood affected to the
Commonwealth, I think it were a good wish for England at this present, that
we might know who are truly zealous for their people.

The other reason is altogether as strong, And for the cities of our God. The
Italians give sundry additions to their chiefest Cities, as Flo^ence, the
Fair, Venice, the Rich, Geneva, the Stately, Millaine, the Great, Rome, the
Holy. This is certain, No City in the Universe can have a more glorious title
then this in my Text, to be one of the cities of our God. But why are the
cities of Israel called the cities of God? For two reasons, First, because the
Lord had a peculiar interest in this land above all other lands, Levit. 25.23.
The land shall not be sold for ever, for the land is mine, ye are strangers and
sojourners with me; So the Lord was the true owner, the Israelites were but the
usufructuaries. Secondly, because they were the Church of God, Juda was his
Sanctuary, Israel his Dominion, in them he had put his name. Solomon knew the
true mother from the feigned, by her love to the child, So a genuine son of
the Church may be distinguished from a counterfeit, by his affection to the
Church. By the rivers of Babylon we sat down and wept, when we remembered thee
O Sion. And Arise, O Lord, and have mercy upon Sion, for why, thy servants
think upon her stones, and it pittieth them to see her in the dust? But the
Church requires not only our affections and supplications, but our best
endeavors, It is recorded of Theodosius that good Emperor to his eternal
honor, that upon his death bed, he was more solicitous for the cities of God,
that is, the Churches, then for himself, or his posterity. And when ordinary
endeavors will not serve* the sword is never more justly drawn then to defend
Religion: As we read of those builders of Jerusalem, who labored with their
trowells in the one hand, and their swords in the other hand, Neh. 4.17. But
these were builders up, not pullers down, whatsoever they did was by the
license, and upon the special warrant of the great King Artax^rxe^, not
rebelliously upon their own heads. What a pitiful complaint did Laban make
for his Images? tulerunt deas, they have taken away my gods; and Mary for the
dead body our Savior, tulerunt Dominum, they have taken away my Lord* Much
more have we cause to be moved, when men go about by force to rob us of our
Religion. A private man may lawfully keep the possession of his house or land
against all acts of violence, much more may a whole Church hold the possession
of their Religion. Three sorts of losses principally concern a man, First, in
his estate, that is but chafe; next in his body, that is but branne; lastly in
his soul, that is the flower, and there is the greatest loss: What shall it
profit a man to win the whole world, and lose his soul? We do not read of
any Wars among the Heathen for Religion, except to punish Sacrilege. The
reason was partly in their Gods, which were sociable to admit fellows. When
Tiberius made a motion in the Senate to have Christ admitted into the number of
their Gods, it was answered, that he was impatiens consortis, not like their
Gods, he would admit no companions: And partly in themselves, many of them were
of opinion, that as variety of instruments makes the sweetest consort, so
variety of Religions makes the best harmony in the ears of God. But now see
how the world is turned, Sacrilege is grown a principal part of Gods service,
(or else some have but a little share of Religion, who yet despise all others
as profane.) Now uva vel faba, a Grape or a Bean is too too much for Gods
service, though David was of a more generous disposition, 2 Samuel 24.24. Nay,
but I will surely buy it of thee at a price, neither will I offer
burnt-offerings unto the Lord my God of that which does cost me nothing. Now
the duties which many men pay to the Deity, are nothing but opinions and
crotchers, and for these they think it lawful for private men to mingle
Heaven and Earth together, for Subjects to invade their Sovereigns Dominions.
They who lately cried for nothing but liberty of conscience, now will obtrude
their own conceits upon strangers by the sword. In this case, he is no good
Christian, no good Commonwealths man, no true English man, that will not say
cheerfully with Joab in my Text, Be of good courage, and let us play the men,
for our People and for the Cities of our God. Deo duce, ferr^ comitante, with a
good sword to attend them, and God Almighty to lead them.

That brings me to my last part, And let the Lord do that which seems him
good. This shows Joabs dependence upon God, and his submission to the will of
the Lord. If he see it be good for us to be Conquerers, we shall be Conquerers,
If not, we shall die gloriously; however Blessed be the name of the Lord. Men
never prosper who deal too magistrally, and will needs be their own carvers
with God. When the husband man has tilled and sown his ground, he may not
challenge a good crop at the hands of God, but expect it of his bounty: Paul
may Plant, and Apollo Water, but still it is God that gives the increase. We
are blind, and know not what is truly good for ourselves. Perieramus nisi
perrissemus, said Themistocles to his children, We had perished, if we had not
perished, that is, in our own opinions. Rachell longs and cries for children,
and she dies in childbed. Therefore the Heathen prayed, O Jupiter, If I beg
of thee those things which will prove hurtful to me, withold them from me.
But that which seems good to God, is always truly good, who disposes all
things sweetly, and out of poison can extract a good cordial, Then let us do
our duties, and submit the success to God, Carking and macerating cares dry up
the bones* plow up deep furrows in the forehead, make the white Almond-tree to
flourish before the time, shorten the life. Our Savior bids, take no thought,
yet Saint Paul tells us, That he that takes no care, is worse then an
Infidel: How are these reconciled? Take care for the means, that is good, Take
no care for the event, that is bad. Toll quod tuum est, Take up thy part, and
leave Gods part to himself, Play thou the man, and let God do that which
seems him good.

But besides the dependence, it shows also Joabs confidence, let not us be
wanting to our selves, and God will not be wanting to his own Cause. The
known justice of the Cause is a great encouragement to a Soldier in the day
of Battle. This was the reason of that Roman policy, before they began any
Wars, the Herald or Feciall went to the confines of the enemies Country, and
made a solemn prayer, Audi Jupiter, etc. Hear, O Jupiter, and thou Juno,
Quirinus thou, and all ye Gods Caelestiall, Terrestrial, and Infernal, I call
you to witness that this people is unjust, etc. And having so said, he threw
his javeline into the enemies Country. But leaving them to their
superstitions, It is an happy conflict which is undertaken for a good cause,
where they neither fear sin from the slaughter of their enemies, nor danger
from their own deaths, where they kill securely, and are killed more securely,
being defended with armor without, and with a good conscience within. Now I
have done with my Text.

The Application is short, The Princes of Ammon conspire against David, they
were kinsmen as descended from Lot, but no Subjects, the less was their crime.
These find themselves too weak, and therefore hire an Army of mercenary
Syrians, strangers to them both, to invade Israel. This forces Joab King
David's General to divide his Army, part against the Syrians, part against the
Ammonites, Church and Commonwealth are both at stake, but by the valor and
providence of Joab, the Syrians are first beaten, and presently thereupon* the
hearts of the Ammonites fail them: they never look into the field again.
Rabba the royal city of Ammon is taken by King David, and upon this occasion
Syria is absolutely subjected to the Crown of Israel. Let the success prove
answerably to all that hate his Majesty, and let the application be to his
Enemies. But let those that love him be as the Sun when he goes forth in his
might. So and never but so shall this Land have rest.

The Exhortation will be somewhat longer. It was wisely said, Externus hostis
unitatis vinculum, A foreign enemy is or ought to be a composer of Domesticke
differences. Nature does teach us to unite our selves for our own
preservation. Cast water into a dusty place, and it will contract it self into
round globes to save it self, An Emblem of association; yet this is contrary
to it is own disposition. Humid bodies are easily contained in other bounds,
difficulty in their own. Vomitio vomitionem sedat, etc. If a vein be broken
within the body, the ready way (say the Physicians) to stay the bleeding, is to
open another without. If a Foreign enemy do not cure our rancorous
dispositions one toward another, I can say no more, but Quos perdere vult
Jupiter hos prios dementat, whom God will have destoyed he first infatuateth.
Simple and prepossest people, may be seduced by Declarations and Protestations,
to believe that their coming is really for the good of this Kingdom, I deny
not but it may so accidentally fall out, But I desire to know when did ever any
Nation that intended War, want such pretenses? Am I now come up without the
Lord against this land? The Lord has said unto me, go up against this Land,
said Senacherib, Isay 36.10. Can the vast charge and the bitter fruits of the
last voyage be so soon forgotten of us? When the Lacedaemonians once made a
reasonable suite to the Athenians, even in their own judgment, yet they
rejected it, in this respect, least they should teach their neighbors of
Lacedem^^ the way in like cases to Athens, or give them an haunt to make such
suits. What I pray you would they have done, if the suite had been unjust and
unlawful, if their neighbors had made such a motion in a chargeable,
commanding, hostile manner?

I have seen their latest and shortest Declaration, sent from Barwicke by the
Commissioners, in a Letter to Sir Thomas Glemham, to satisfy their brethren of
England in these three things, concerning their present Expedition. First, of
the justness of their Cause. Secondly, of the lawfulness of their calling
thereto. Thirdly, of the faithfulness of their carriages therein. If they
fail in any one of these, their Expedition is unjust, and cannot be approved
in the judgment of a brother, for bonum ex singulis circumstantiis, malum ex
quolibet defectu. But if they fail in every one of these (as they do,) what
good shall we expect from such a voyage. Do men gather grapes of thorns or
figs of thistles? Mat 7.16. First for the justness of their cause. Hearing
them so often tell of their clear demonstrations, who would not have expected
some down right authorities, and presidents from the Word of God, or at least
some authenticke proofs from the National Laws of one or both Kingdoms?
These are the standard and measure of Justice to us. Who would not have
expected that they should at least have endeavored to have answered the late
Acts of Pacification, so solemnly passed in both Kingdoms? But for all these
behold a deep silence. If silence be not a plenary consent, yet in this case it
implies strongly, that they know in their own consciences, that the Laws of
God and man are both against them. But in stead of these, they profess before
God and the world, that their hearts are clear from all sinister intentions,
that the love of Christ requires Christians to hear one another burdens,
that he Law of nature does challenge their care and endeavor to prevent their
own danger, which is wrapped up in their neighbors. Alas, what poor
bulrushes are these to bear the weight of so much Christian blood as is like
to be shed in this Cause? That Plea taken from their own danger shows us
plainly, that howsoever they pretend the love of Christ, yet their charity
begins at home. Indeed there is no fence for fear, but what cause have we
given them to fear? Nihil timendum video, sed timeo tamen. Unless it be that
of the wise man, Wisd. 17.11. Wickedness condemned by her own witness is
very timorous, and being pressed with conscience, always forecasteth grievous
things. But let us take their words for once, seeing we can have no other
assurance of their intentions. It is not a good intention, nor a pretended love
of Christ, nor a supposed necessity, nor any one of these, nor all of these
together, that can justify an unlawful action, It is not lawful to do evil
that good may come of it. Charity and Justice go always hand in hand
together, this is for fear of an uncertain danger, to run into a certain
sin. But they tell us that they come to rescue the Kings Person out of the
hands of evil Counselors, who are enemies to Religion. In serious causes it
is dishonorable to trifle with pretenses: Do they think, or can they think,
that the King is kept in durance against his will? or necessitated to do any
Act contrary to the dictate of his own reason? I appeal to their own
consciences. It were greatly to be wished, that they would once speak out and
name the evil Counselors. The History of this Kingdom does show that Treason
has often put it self into this Dress, seeking to hide it is deformity from
the world, under this painted mask of removing evil Counselors; God be
blessed His Majesty has now the flower of both Houses of Parliament about him,
(I hope these are not the evil Counselors,) and daily more and more are
repairing to him, so many for number, so venerable for their condition, that
all your Committees put together, do not deserve to be named upon the same
day. If we look back to former Parliaments, we shall find the most of these,
Great Confessors, and in will Martyrs for this Commonwealth. Some of them
clapped up into the Tower, others into the Fleet, others dis-justiced in the
Country, and disabled to leave all offices, for their love to their Country,
and shall we now be frighted from them with the name of evil Counselors? But
yes perhaps they are enemies to Religion; It may be so, to that Religion which
innovations would introduce by force of Arms, but not to that Religion which
is established by the Laws of this Kingdom, and which God has so long
blessed to us and our fathers with peace and happiness.

In the next place they go about with the same success, to justify the
lawfulness of their calling. An hard task, seeing England is quite without
the Spheere of their activity. Here I expected that they should have cited some
fundamental league of both Nations to this purpose, or something that might
have satisfied conscience. But all they say in defense of their calling,
(except the iterated Pleas of their own necessity, and mischievous Counsels,
which they insert here again,) may be reduced to this brief sum, That this
Expedition is desired by our Parliament, and concluded by the consent of their
Committee: We will for the present suppose that which we know to be otherwise,
and they once never able to prove, that the two Houses were full, and free,
both from force, and fear. Yet there are three maine imperfections in their
calling, First, nothing can give what it has not, but it is clear by our
Laws that the two Houses never had, nor have any power of Arms, but his
Majesty alone. Secondly, if the Parliament had power to call, yet they being
Subjects, have no power to entertain such a motion without the consent of
their Sovereign, notwithstanding all their vows and Covenants; which never
bind a Subject contrary to his Allegiance, nor a child contrary to his filial
duty. Thirdly, it is as clear that the Parliament can give no such conclusive
power to a Committee. They themselves are but Proctors for our Shires, Cities,
and Buroughs, and by the Law, a Deputy cannot make a Deputy. Then let all men
judge what a calling this is like to be, where the Cause is without all
efficacy, the Object without capacity, and the Means without idoneity.

Their last labor is to clear the faithfulness of their carriages herein,
And that is by their promises. A weak tenure, any man may be rich in promises.
The Pipe plays sweetly whilst the Fowler is about his prey. But they go
farther, to give the Public Faith of the Kingdom of Scotland. It seems they
think that English men are to be catched with chafe. What is the Public
Faith of a Kingdom worth without the concurrence of the King? especially being
given by a Committee. There was a time when such a thing called the Public
Faith, would have passed currently, though not with a Scrivener, yet with some
credulous Citizens, but now they will as soon trust a Knight of the post. They
know not how to implead the Public Faith, or to arrest the Public Faith, or
to imprison the Public Faith. The Declarers appeal to their former voyage,
How little damage was occasioned by their means, how little disorder was
committed by them. But to pass by many things that might be justly alleged,
in respect there is an Act of Oblivion, Then they were well paid, with a large
overplus, (I hope it was not for a Come-againe,) now they can expect no payment
in money, and in such a case how is it possible that the soldiers should be
kept from disorder? Lastly, they engage themselves that this Expedition shall
be made no use of to any other ends, then are expressed in the Covenant, and in
the Treaty subscribed by the English Commissioners. What not accidentally by
particular persons? What Committee can undertake that? We have not seen any
Covenant of theirs to invade England, If they have made any such, it binds them
neither more nor less, then Herod's oath did bind him to cut off John Baptists
head, Mat. 14.7. Or that desperate vow, Acts 23.12. did bind the Jews to
murder Paal. But we have seen a Copy of the Treaty, If it be true, it is the
highest burden that ever was imposed upon a Kingdom. The English
Commissioners know how to cut large swatches of other men's Cloth. But who shall
tie the bell about the Cats neck? It gives them all the Lands and Estates of
all Popish Prelaticall persons, and of all Malignants who have assisted or
contributed to the King (That is of all men) between Trent and Tweede, until
all the Arrerages for England and Ireland, and the charge of the War be
satisfied, With Caution, that the Army shall not depart till then out of
England, that is until the Day of judgment. But all the craft is in catching;
this is like one of the Popes Donations, it wants the consent of the right
owners. Men will fight hard before they be stripped of their lively-hoods. Who
ever heard that a conquering sword was capable of any distinction between
persons? Luculenta fortuna, a good estate will be found more dangerous then a
different opinion either in Religion or Policy. All the favors their English
friends can expect, is Poliphemus courtesy to Ulysses, to be last eaten up.

The case being thus, Give me leave for one Word to your Excellence. Be of good
courage, and let us play the men, for our people, and for the cities of our
God. Repel the Syrians, and the Ammonites will soon turn their backs. We
may conjecture safely now, where the strength of this Sampson, this great
Rebellion has laid all this while, If the Lord return you again with
Victory, you shall bring back both a Laurel Garland to deck your own
Temples, and an Olive Branch of Peace in your hand, for our happiness.

I have another Word to the Auditory, Be of good courage, and let us play the
men, for our people, and for the cities of our God. In this case, I wish to
every true Englishman, the spirit and affection of that Soldier, who having
his legs cut off in fight for his Country, yet desired to be cast into the
breach, that he might dull the edge of one sword more. It is better to die,
then survive the honor of our Nation, and to suffer these things which are
worse then death, Schism, Slavery, Beggary, and whatsoever an insulting Enemy
can inflict upon a degenerous people. Dulce and decorum est pro patria mori, It
is a sweet and comely thing for a man to die for his Country, and for his
Religion. Quam gloriosi revertuntur victores de praelio, quam beati meriuntur
martyrs in praelio? How gloriously they return Conquerers from the battle?
Or how blessedly they die Martyrs in the battle? If they overcome, they are
crowned with a Laurel Garland, If they die, with a crown of Martyrdom, says
Saint Bernard.

If we compare our present condition, though heavy through Assessements, and
some disorder* of a necessitous unpaid Army, with what it was within the
circumvolution of the last Year, or little more, when we were blocked up almost
on every side, and this City now a pattern of loyalty to the whole Kingdom,
was even ready to have been made a nest of Rebellion, we shall find that we
have cause to bless God and the Instruments of our safety. Indeed the burdens
of the Country have been great, but how collected, how distributed, how
ordered, all men are not satisfied. This is evident, that those who have born
the greatest heat and burden of the day, those that have jeoparded their lives
unto death in the high places of the Field for our protection, have had the
least share. I say no more, nor would have this construed to the disrepute of
any well deserving Patriot.

Qui monet ut facias quod jam sacis, ipse monendo
Laudat,
A noble Frenchman in his Description of the several interests of these
European Kingdoms, says of England, that it is Magnum animal, A great
creature that cannot be destroyed, but by it is own strength. Let us yet hold
together, and every one in his own element contribute his uttermost endeavors
to the advancement of the public welfare, without all sinister respects: And
then I doubt not but we shall both survive this storm, and see Sunshine and
Halcionian days again in England. Therefore, Be of good courage, and let us
play the men, for our people, and for the Cities of our God, and the Lord do
that which seems him good.

FINIS.

