IMPRIMATVR,

Tho. Tomkym R. R. in Christo Patri ac Domino Domino Gilberto Divina
Providentia Archi-Episcopo Cantuariensi a Sacris Domesticis.

A SERMON PREACHED IN MADRID, JVLY 4. 1666. S. N. OCCASIONED By the Sad and much
Lamented Death of his late Excellency Sir RICHARD FANSHAW, Knight and Baronet,
of his Majesty's Most Honorable Privy Council, and his Ambassador in Ordinary
to that COURT. Where falling Sick of a Violent Fever, June 14th -- 66. He
ended his Life the 26th day of that Month; in the Third Year of his
Negotiation in that place, and the 59th Year of his AGE. By HENRY BAGSHAW, M.
A. Student of Christ-Church Oxon, and his late Excellencies Chaplain in that
EMBASSY.

London, Printed for G. Beadle and T. Collins, and are to be sold at their Shop
at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1667.

To the Honorable my Lady FANSHAW, the Widow of his late Excellency my Lord
Ambassador FANSHAW.
Madam,
HOw ready I am to receive your Commands, but withal how unfortunate in
obeying them, may be easily judged by the coming forth of this Treatise; where
I find I have only made my weakness public, when I intended service, and being
so much divided betwixt my duty to the Dead, and my obligations to the living,
yet I am in neither able to pay. However I may presume to venture the Worlds
trial in subjects of this nature, where I have ample Merit and great virtue to
describe: for so men can charge me with poverty of words, but not with
falsehood: and though my Labors be mean, yet I know such a Fate attends Worth,
that it not only secures its own Fame, but protects others that speak of it. To
tell your Ladyship whom I design by this, is to injure my Lords Memory, and
your goodness; since both of you require from me a particular acknowledgement,
though both be above my testimony. I should not here be willing to waken your
griefs, nor recall to your remembrance past accidents, were I not sufficiently
convinced of your Faith in an affliction. This is a School, wherein you have
been long with my Lord bred up; but whereas it might be imputed to the strength
of your love, that you could with him govern all other misfortunes, it must be
now merely ascribed to the strength of Religion, that you can without him
conquer the last. A severe Blow! sensibly felt by lookers on, but much more by
your self, that placed all your glory in his life: and yet to be able to kiss
the Rod, in all that tenderness of passion, which both your Sex and affection
had raised, this argues a high temper of a Christian; and makes me: doubt which
is greater, the loss, or your constancy in bearing it. Yet that courage you
show in suffering, is not more eminent, than the Nobleness of your cares;
which as they signally appeared in my Lords life time, so afterward in your
performance of all rights to his body; when you bore along through strange
Lands that Image of Sorrow, as if you would have an exercise of your love and
your patience together. This was a Travel taught Friends Grief, and Enemies
Reverence; when they reflected upon the Greatness of the Person there
represented, and the Piety of the Conveyer; that the Wisdom of a State should
be shut up in a Hearse, and the Joys of your Ladyship there enclosed. But
there are other particulars I could mention, wherein you are as nearly
concerned: for whatever praise is due to a Devout Life, to an Exemplary
Discipline, to a Loyal Love, or a Resolute Faith, that your Ladyship may justly
challenge: of all which I could give the world pregnant proofs, but that I
know, as it is the comfort of your grief to read my Lords Character, so it is
the affliction of your Virtue to read your own. Therefore laying aside this
Theme in compliance to your will, yet in what relates to my self I shall heg
leave to publish to the World the great sense I have of those many favors I
have received both from my Lord, and your Ladyship: who have always lived with
an equal love as to your selves, and with as equal a concern to oblige others;
amongst whom none more reckons himself a Debtor than

Madam Your Ladyships most Obliged, Faithful Servant, Henry Bagshaw.

A Funeral SERMON Preached in MADRID, July 4. 1666. At the Interment of Sir
Richard Fanshawe, his Majesty's Ambassador there.
HEB. 12.11. Now no Chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but
grievous; nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of
righteousness to them which are exercised thereby.


THe Discipline of breeding up Christians under a Scourge, and the way of
planting a Church by laying its Foundation in Tears, are Methods so little
tempting in themselves, that they have no virtue to raise Followers: no more
than Fire and Sword sent by an Enemy can people Towns, which are properly
designed to destroy the Inhabitants. But if you look up to the Sovereign Master
of that Discipline, and the Glorious Blessing annexed to that way of planting,
all the seeming horrors in Religion are removed: The Whip Christ now uses,
drives Man into the Temple, that would not enter it before; the Death he
denounces, prepares man's way for a Crown, that would not otherwise receive it;
so that we may joyfully walk in a weeping Track, that leads us to a Grave, and
a Grave opened by our Savior for a Triumph. It Is this Discipline the Apostle
commends throughout this Epistle to the Christian Jews scattered in the world;
who needed an extraordinary light to discover the privilege of Sons in such a
Dispensation, as being acquainted before with no other inheritance in this
life, but that of Temporal Promises, and therefore thought it Bastardy to
suffer. Which Opinion of theirs, he confutes in the sixth, seventh, and eighth
verses of this Chapter, and clearing to them the Doctrine of the Cross,
confirms them in a new Principle of Gospel-Government: as in the words of my
Text -- Now no chastening for the present seems to be joyous, but grievous;
nevertheless, afterward it yields the peaceable fruit of righteousness to
them which are exercised thereby.

The words contain in them these parts:

1. The unpleasant Nature of Chastisement to man's apprehension: Now no
Chastening seems to be joyous, but grievous.

2. The time this unpleasantness lasts, (...) for the present; which indeed is
no time, but an instant, that dies with naming it.

3. The end and reward of Chastisement; It yields afterward the peaceable
fruit of righteousness.

4. The Qualification of the persons that receive it; they are said to be
(...); we render it exercised; but it signifies such that are approved and
tried in all the Combats of affliction: Men, that have got art and strength by
their frequent meetings of that Adversary, to repel its force, and foil all its
designs. I shall not prosecute these parts as they lie thus severally, but form
out of them all, these two Propositions which shall be the subject of my
ensuing discourse.

Prop. 1. That Gods correcting hand, while it inflicts the blow, seems rather
to carry (...) in it, than Mercy.

Prop 2. That the end of that blow to the patient sufferer, is a high reward of
Eternal Peace and repose.

1. That Gods correcting hand, while it inflicts the blow, seems rather to
carry Weight in it, than Mercy. Sense (which is man's nearest Neighbor while he
lives in this world) is likewise the highest Favorite he loves to consult
with: It Is Sense reports to him all accidents without, and according to the
affections of Sense is he wrought upon. Those two Passions that are in us, Joy
and Grief, have hence commonly the Original of their motion: Joy proceeds from
a soft, Grief from a hard impression, objects make upon our senses; whence we
conclude this thing to be joyous, the other thing to be grievous, from the
different manner of its stroke; without taking farther information from Reason,
whose Verdict were it heard, both those strokes would be counted indifferent to
the soul. 'Twas this life of Sense Job led, Job Cap. 3.
when he complained of his wounds; this life of Sense Haman led, Esther 5.9.
when he rejoiced in his prosperity; but the judgment of them both was
fallacious; for neither was Job miserable in his Smart, nor Haman happy in his
Revels; to the one God showed no Enmity, to the other no Friendship; nay, had
they both reflected on the ends and consequences of those two States, Job's
chastening had been joyous to him, as the sores were to Lazarus in Abraham's
bosom: Hamans height mournful, as such Prospects are, where only Execution is
seen. But Sense bearing sway in the best of Gods people, affliction is
thereupon ill painted to their view, and temporal losses strangely represented;
and that upon three accounts.

1. Because of the seeming violence and breach they make upon Nature. Nature,
that inclines us to Self-preservation, spurs us on to a desire of all good, in
which that Interest is secured; whence Friends, Riches, Honors, and the like,
have a value set on them, as Props that contribute to the strength of our
being. If therefore any of these goods should be lost, man is presently apt to
cry out, as if some limb of his happiness were cut off, and his very being
weakened by that change. And this Opinion, how imperfect our state is in the
want of these, the best are liable to entertain; being ready to fancy, life is
not that which is maintained by inward spirits, but by goods without us; and
that to the perfection of our form, is necessarily requisite the assistance of
another. Thus Man, that has a Power given of moving himself, and an infinite
good proposed to him for to sill and direct all his Faculties, yet yields to be
governed by low outward principles: and (such is his corruption) he takes up
Maxims concerning the sufficiency of temporal things; which beget love in him,
and adherence of mind: and so resting upon those Reeds, no wonder they pierce
him with breaking. Hence the Soul can Naturally relish no trouble; for it
appears destructive to its bliss; till Grace comes, and gives a new appetite;
instilling into our minds a different Notion of happiness; namely, such that
consists not in present delights, but in a future Vision; not in perishing
comforts, but in an Eternal Good; not in scattered Rays, but in a full Sun:
then Trouble (which was so harsh Physic to the old man) becomes agreeable to
our desires, 1 Timothy 2.12. Romans 8.17.
because the same Grace tells us, it is a means of purchasing that perfection.
But before we have this enlightening, man can only tend an inferior good, and
therefore must necessarily loathe an affliction as the disturber of it.

In this juncture it is Satan's custom treacherously to invade us, as Simeon and
Levi did the Sichemites, Genesis 34.25.
when they were in their pain, and lay under the greatest smart of their
wounds: And with the like ease he prevails over the Soul, as these Brethren did
over the Bodies of that people, by timing his assault, and guiding all the edge
of his force against the weakness of the party. Now nothing so much disables
the Soul, nor exposes it more to a surprise, than this violent passion of
Sorrow: Lust (though powerful) yet leaves Reason still such a Command, so as to
check and control it: Fear (though weak) yet leaves us so much spirit as to
make us avoid danger; Despair (though ghastly) yet gives boldness to encounter
it; but Grief devoures the understanding, closes up the heart, and so
dis-spirits the whole man, that he prostrates himself to his calamity. 'Twas
the height of this passion, so dulled Christ's Disciples, that it laid all their
courage and devotion asleep, at such a time, when they should have watched
their Master; Mat. 26.43.
'Twas the height of this passion corrupted Martha's Faith, John 11.39.
when the imagined smell of a Grave (where her Brother had lain for four days)
worked more with her to believe his utter loss, than the Divinity of a Savior
to hope the mercy of a recovery. With that apprehension all her faculties were
overpowred, and Christ's Presence with all his Miracles forgotten; as if the Arm
of his Omnipotence could not reach the dead, and Corruption were an Inheritance
so Entailed, that the Prince of Life could not alter it. But when once the
Stone was removed, the Word given out, and that Word answered by her Brothers
rising, then her Faith with him revives: Which Figure of a future Resurrection
proving actually her cure, we ought all to contemplate, and apply to our
selves, that we may be Masters of the like trouble.

2. Because of the Cloud they seemingly cast upon Providence; and this is a
violence offered to Religion. The evil of sin (which man brought into the world
by the abuse of his Freewill) has not so much occasioned a Dispute concerning
Providence, as the evil of suffering, where man only is passive, and God
properly the Inflicter. As to the first, Man bears the blame of that
Dispensation, by reason of the guilt he has contracted in misimploying his
faculties, which he had freedom to govern: As to the second (since God is the
cause of it) the merit of man's actions is enquired into, that thence a Reason
might be alleged, why the Party suffers. This Merit of actions, when man is
not satisfied in, he is thereupon apt to question the order of a Supreme, and
impute to Chance the building of the Universe, because its Government appears
confused. Hence the Chastisements of good men have been the old Arguments
Atheism has used to fix its seat in the world; and the Rod they were smitten
with, has proved a Weapon in its hand to wound the Divinity of the Corrector.
And indeed the Notions we have of Justice (an Attribute so Essential to the
Godhead) seem much to suffer in their affliction; since it implies an unequal
distribution of things, where Virtue is not distinguished by a Reward; and
consequently Justice it self is doubted of in the Creator, as we question the
true resemblance of that Piece, where the proportions are not discerned. Were
there eyes in those Wheels above, that turn about this world, and order joined
with their noise to sweeten the Motion, why then should Vice get soonest the
Top, and Piety lie under? But if it chance to ascend, why should its ascent be
with greater toil, and its downfall more sudden, before the midst of its course
be finished? Can Gods care be seen in the advancement of sinners, or his
goodness in breaking his own Image? If he be careful of the world, let him
wash off the spots; if good, let him preserve its Beauty; but to govern Affairs
otherwise then his Attributes seem to promise, to let Darkness overcome Light,
and Guilt triumph in the ruins of Innocence, this affords the Atheist a
plausible Theme, when he declaims against Providence, and gives his Wit a fresh
Sting to persecute Christianity. Neither does the Atheist only take glad notice
of this strange Administration, Eccles. 8.14. Psalm. 10
but the Devil farther improves it, to make his Votaries more sure; for he
builds them a Fabric of visible good, plants the temptations of his Kingdom
to the eye, Mat. 4.8.
that Christianity only sets before the Faith of its Followers. And as the
present crosses of Gods people have much furthered the impiety of the looker
on, so they beget immediately a quick sense in the sufferer, who reflects upon
his own integrity, and therefore is prone to question the hand that afflicts
him. What does God act the part of a Judge, or a Sovereign in correcting me? If
it be Sovereignty I must submitto, alas there is no loveliness in that
Attribute; for Power considered without its Rule, can only be looked upon as
Tyrannical and Oppressive; like a great Sea let loose upon Land, that never
divides its stream with respect to the Soil, but covers every part with an
equal Deluge; if it be the Sentence of a Judge I must submit to, where are its
measures to show the Equity of his Tribunal? In what Balance are my actions
weighed, that such a portion of ill should be laid in the Scales, which many a
heinous Malefactor never knows? Thus the good man disputes upon the present
touch of the Rod, and almost argues himself into Infidelity; stumbling foully
over those stones the world throws at him, and making them at first causes of
his fall, which he turns afterward to be Instruments of his Martyrdom. For
Faith being once shaken, cannot in an instant recover its strength; by degrees
it must fasten in the soul, and be able to stand the Tempest; but when once
it is prepared by time, and settled by deliberate Acts, it stops all farther
complaint, and puts an end to the Objection.

3. Because of the remoteness of the Promise that should support the Soul
under that adversity. In worldly Races men (that strive for Mastery) have a
double advantage above the Christian, in that they all know the fixed limits of
their course, and see the Garland they run for; by knowing their course they
are quickened in their flight; by seeing their Crown, they breathe nothing but
Victory. But we (that have rough ways to travel in, and know not how far they
tend; that have a Garland to contend for, but are not able to make a discovery)
may easily faint and be discouraged under the weight of some pressures. How
uncertain to us our Race is, will appear, because our times are taken from us
into Gods hand, and our ends reserved to his own knowledge; how dark our neward
is, will appear, both from considering the Nature of this Reward, (which is
spiritual) and the manner of its conveyance (which only Death helps us to) so
that we must march through a gloomy walk to invisible glory. It Is true, our
state under the Gospel is much different from that of the Jews, to whom life
and immortality were not so clearly brought to light, neither by the plain
Letter of the Text, nor by examples; both which we enjoy in the fullness of
Evidence, to confirm and settle us in that Article: however the unhappiness of
that life is still unknown; and though in general we may be better grounded to
believe, yet the Nature of those joys we as little discern. But suppose we had
eyes so piercing as to see our Bliss, yet the vast separation of its Seat
cools many times the zeal of a Christian; especially when he labors under a
present pain, which requires a near object of succor. Now Heaven and Glory are
two Lights set afar off; whose influence is not so strong, as to remove the
Cloud that hangs over us; nay, by reason of their distance the present evil so
prevails, that it wholly hides the riches of their Treasure. When S. Paul was
more than ordinarily persecuted, he needed the help of a Trance to bear his
persecution: the Promises alone could not raise him out of his weakness;
whence an extraordinary Vision was added to them for his assurance. This
privilege Saints cannot now expect, to whom is left the gift of suffering, but
not the gift of an Immediate Revelation to find it one: We have no Mount Nebo
to view our Canaan from, Deuteronomy. 34.1.
and thereby recompense our stay in the Wilderness; but lie in a Valley
exposed to floods, that overwhelm, and breathing our Vapors, that darken our
Prospect. Therefore the Soul of an Afflicted Christian is for the present
disconsolate, and lies under the temptations of Despair; requiring hastily a
Mathematical Evidence of Bliss to overcome his sorrows, that would otherwise
rest upon a Moral certainty; but missing a Demonstration of Faith, he is
carried away with the sense of ill, and neglects the use of his Charter, as of
a Deed dark and unsealed. But when once the pain is removed, and the dregs of
Passion boiled off, that so he may freely contemplate the reason of his hope;
his old love to his Master breaks out, and in considence of a future possession
he can trample on all those Thorns that before hindered his passage. These are
in short the grounds, why no Chastening for the present seems to be joyous,
but grievous; the Foundation of which Opinion you hear is Sense; which begets
in the Soul false apprehensions of good and ill, mistakes of Providence, and a
forgetfulness of Divine Glory.

By Sense (hitherto spoken of, as destructive to our Faith) I chiefly mean
Sense, that is tonder, and unacquainted with Trials; for this proves but an ill
Pilot; and to set it up for our Guide in a Time of Calamity, it is like the
putting a fresh Mariner to the Holm at the rising of a Storm, that he may make
there Essays of his Folly in all that roughness of danger. But Sense
exercised with suffering grows valiant many times, and prepares the Soul
against all accidents: and though it may turn into a sinful hardness, (as it
did in Pharaoh) yet it often settles in judgment; whereby we come to consider
the Nature and end of an affliction, the result of which is Patience and
tranquillity of temper: Therefore you read of the Saints rejoicing in
Persecution; the bitterness of that stream being lost by a customary tasting
it. That Sense should work thus, it is not by any Virtue of its own, but by
Grace that sanctifies it; the Dictates of this Law of Flesh are soft, as its
make is; pleasure and ease are the two desirable goods it propounds to its
subjects; but when once the Spirit rules, it so exercises this Flesh, that all
the softness is worn off, whereby it can receive rougher impressions. So then
Sense of it self is always quick to mind us of pain; but the good Angel (that
walks in the Furnace) keeps Christians from scorching. 5
Hence it is that the grievance of suffering is not felt; but should we once
rely upon Natural strength, or Phylosophical Principles, the flame would
quickly devour us, and show by our Ashes the frailty of our Composition. Who
can resist God in that terrible Shape of a Consuming Fire? Who can meet him
when he is armed, or wrestle with him in the strength of his Power? Old
Experiences and new Arguings will of themselves little avail to the curing of
our wound, if God once hides his face in afflicting us; as he hides it
sometimes from the best of his people, to discover to them the falsenesse of
their own hearts, and the terror of his Arm. David had long thrived in
troubles, and sharpened his Sword at the Forge of his Enemies, when he cut his
way courageously through the hatred of Saul, the Wars of Israel, and the
Invasions of Philistims; but at last (lest he should forget whence that courage
came, and loose the memory of his own weakness) God sends him a Joabs Arrow, 2 Samuel 18.14
which pierces his heart with the same point, wherewith Absalom was slain. Here
he weakly complains under Gods hand; 33.
and the death of one Son (though a perverse and rebellious Child) blots out
of his mind all the Idea's of former Conquests. If such an accident were for
the present so powerful over a David's Spirit; what trouble would this Spectacle
have caused in him, had he beheld Wisdoms Tragedy, and Virtues sudden fall? A
loss every one is concerned in! and therefore they may find excuse for their
sorrow.

Let us take care the affliction of this place produce not worse effects; Grief
indeed we are not denied, for though it be a passion first caused by sin, yet
it is now purged by Christ's weeping, and made a Handmaid to Charity; but if we
would preserve it pure, as he left it, then the stream of our grief, like his,
must be mild, and have Banks to direct it in its Flow; that so we may Piously
lament our loss of a Person, whose Life Envy (blind and dumb as it is) yet
might learn to admire; his Death Malice (hard and cruel as it is) yet might be
taught to deplore.

Shall I here represent before you his Birth, his Learning, his Travels, the
Reverence of his Age, and the like? these were all Ornaments that belonged to
him, and yet the least of his Praise.

The Nobleness of his Birth was a good he little valued; nay, he strove to
hide it with Dignity acquired; as desiring to be begotten anew by Virtue, and
thence receive his Honor, which the Fortune of Birth lazily bestows.

His Learning, as it was great and choice, so he used it only as a Servant to
higher ends; bare knowledge he never doated on; nor Wit his Knowledge was set
off with, but as they both conduced to practice; the one as the Weight, the
other as the Edge of his Actings.

His Travels considered in themselves were common to him with others; but the
mannagement of those Travels was peculiar to him, and therefore may give him a
Property in Fame. For they were so many Victories over the times, and the Vices
of those Kingdoms he lived in: the knowledge he had of the worlds frauds,
never biased his Soul, nor could his sight of Sin in its several Shapes bend
him from Noble Designs; Who was such a follower of Virtue, that he learnt from
bad Customs a stricter practice of it; such a Lover of Truth, that he (who was
Master of Foreign Languages) yet taught those Languages to speak it? A strange
Current this! that has passed through several Lands, and yet received no Taint
from the Soil, nor ever traveled from his own Nature.

Lastly, The Reverence of his Age, and the Dignity of Gray Heirs, these were a
Grace indeed to his Person, but a Grace of it self not to be prized; for it is
an effect of Time, Folly as well as Wisdom may partake of; but in him Age
created Respect, because it showed a Head that Crowned it: 'Twas like an old
Monument, that has NOble Acts written upon it, and so becomes Honorable for
that History. Therefore passing by these Qualities, give me leave to go higher,
and consider him in a threefold Capacity.

As a Subject. As a Public Minister. As a Christian.
1. As a Subject. Still times may prove happy to a State, but not glorious to
the Liver: they are dead calmes, wherein the courage and fidelity of the
Subject cannot move; but Heaven had ordered a Trial of his Loyalty in such an
Age, wherein Loyalty seemed a Crime; when Rebellion looked gay with success,
and Sacrilege had Providence to gild it; yet ran he then constantly the
hazards of his Prince, and Triumphed in an afflicted cause; as seeing Heavens
Justice through the blackness of its course, Earths sin through its prosperous
Usurpation. Such services (without worldly hope to allure) could have only pure
Conscience for their Principle; and it was the bare Right of his Master, joined
with a love to the Owner, made him digest all the misfortune. This is a
Quality, for which many then Listed in as Subjects were not known, that
generally framed their Maxims, as Seamen do their course, according to the
vantage of Wind, and so ordered their Sails: But to oppose the wildness of a
Torrent, to steer against popular Gusts, and dare good actions (as he did)
though ill countenanced; this was looked upon as monstrous in the State, whose
great Rule was compliance with Power; whence they ordinarily proved dangerous,
because their Faith could not be proved. Who will commend Shimei for making one
in the throng to bring back his King, 2 Samuel 19.26.
whom a little before in his flight he blasphemed? 'Twas the striving of the
people for David made him forget his Curses, and come with words of Allegiance
in his mouth; that were as little to be trusted, 2 Samuel 16 6.
as the stones in his hand; the one being but Treasons closer work, the other
an open Defiance. But flattering Arts and cunning Practices were far from the
temper of this Person, who had a Breast large and open, made indeed to hide his
Masters Secrets, but not to dissemble his own Principles; whence he manifested
them in the lowest Extremes, sticking to the Crown, when it lay in dust, and
following the Sun in its Eclipse, which the Multitude adores for its Beams.
When he had thus recommended his Duty, none could justly envy him in his
Princes height, he should partake of that Influence.

2. As a Public Minister. Which Office he began betimes, and rose by steps to
the highest Honors of Employment; yet he never altered his course in his
manage of Affairs: Justice and Integrity were Notions fixed and rooted in his
Soul; no Bribe could enter that Room; for it was before richlier filled, and
Honesty kept the Key; so that with the same truth he tied himself to the
business of his Prince, as he did to his Fortune. What Trust he had in the
World three Courts can witness; how well he managed it, they may equally
proclaim; for the general good was his aim, and thither he directed all his
Endeavors. I need not mention the care he had of his Charge; for that was a
work of his Nature, nor the exactness of his performance, for that was an
ordinary effect of his Wisdom; but give me leave to declare to you the
clearness of his designs in all his Undertakings, who never studied Self to
enrich, but only Self to Command: His whole Treaty of Commerce had nothing of
Private Traffic; for his Soul was above Wealth, and he Nobly showed it, when
he threw it away to preserve Kingdoms. To the Peace of Crowns he made his
flight in this Embassy, and not to Merchandise, Peace the great gift of
Heaven, and the Noblest Copy man has left him for imitation; It was this
endeared his labors abroad; and with this he thought to magnify his Master at
home, when the World should see (by that Mediation betwixt States) the
goodness of our King, as in War they had felt the greatness of his Power. And
what could be more Honor to a Prince, than the glory of saving with one hand,
when the other Conquered; of settling Dominion in Princes, when he had broke it
in States? The first work this one Minister endeavored; the latter a whole
Fleet served in: but though that good design of his for uniting Kingdoms
(which he so lately ventured to procure with his own danger) be now frustrated
by the prejudices of obstinate men, In his Voyage this Year to Portugal.
yet the fruit is not to himself: God looks on him as a Peacemaker, and has
accordingly bestowed his Reward.

3. As a Christian. What the Graces of Christianity are, the Apostle describes,
Gal. 5.22, 23. The fruit of the Spirit (says he) is love, joy, peace,
long-suffering, gentleness, goodness, meekness, faith, temperance; against such
there is no Law: And it were easy for me to make out, how in all these he
excelled. Love ruled in him as the moving Principle, and joy as the attendant
of his good actions; Peace was his end; Long-suffering, gentleness, goodness,
meekness, were his Constitution; Temperance his Habit; and Faith in his God a
Grace that Sanctified all. In his last sickness (that came upon him with a
severe Face, like Deaths Herald, and therefore required as severe a Welcome)
that Faith and Patience he had long before exercised, did then eminently shine.
No groan, no complaint was heard to come from him; though he had a fire raging
within, and Physicians, as Executioners, without him, Executioners I mean in
their Tortures, though not in design: And when the Fatality of his Fever was
told him, with what composedness of Spirit did he resign himself up to the
Almighty! With what indifferency of eye did he look on, nay part with his
dearest Friends! for his thoughts were carried upward to higher Relations: and
drawing near his last (for I was an Eyewitness of all passages to his End)
how readily did he make a good Confession; professing openly, he died in the
English Faith, which no Son of our Church has more cordially Espoused; in the
assurance of Everlasting Life which no Martyr has more fully received; and then
giving himself up wholly to prayers, he breathed away the whole time in such
calmnesse of Devotion, that you would think he was never versed in business of
State, but only practiced how to Dye.

God knows, I have not studied to devise him a Character; and you well know he
needs none. Indeed the time, and the place, as well as the Subject, will not
allow a Fiction: the Time is a time of seriousness, and not of acting: the
place is that of a Minister before God, and therefore a place for truth, and
not for flattery: The Subject is a Subject of Worth, and not of Title; so that
neither I can make, nor ought he to wear the vain Dress of a Counterfeit Fame.

One thing I have omitted in this poor Description; which is the considering
him in his Domestic Government; in the constant chastnesse of a Conjugal Love;
(which was mutually answered to a height, and resembled the shine of two
Tapers, lighted but with one flame) in the goodness of a Fathers care, in the
sweetness of a Masters Rule: but I have purposely omitted it; as knowing, it is
too tender a Theme both for you to hear, and me to enlarge upon; and it would
only serve to widen the Wound, which the intention of this Sermon is to close.
I shall therefore proceed to a brief handling of the second Proposition, which
is this.

Prop. 2. That the End of Gods Blow to the Patient Sufferer, is a high reward
of Eternal Peace, and Repose.

Hitherto we have looked upon the Rod in the Serpents shape; Exodus 7.10.
namely, in its Plague, and in its Sting: Let us now consider it in its own; as
bearing blossoms to invite, and fruits to reward the Sufferer; that having
before paid Tribute to Nature in Tears, we may now pay Tribuce to Religion in
Joy. This is that blessed Hope supported Christians of Old in their fiery
Trials; whence they willingly quitted wealth, friends, any their own lives: by
reason of this Hope they counted the spoiling of their goods but a putting out
of their Treasure, that so they might gain by a removal of that Stock, which
would lie dead in their hands; the fall of Friends they looked upon, but as the
fall of Corn to Husbandmen, that expect thence a better rising. Lastly, their
own Martyrdom, but as a quicker and more violent Entry into Heaven, a taking
of it by force; which adds new luster to that Glory, because it is Happiness
with Conquest. Thus they fortified themselves with the expectation of a Crown;
nay some would not accept Deliverance, that they might obtain a better
Resurrection; Heb. 11.35.
wherein they showed their apprehensions of Temporal Misery, were far different
from those of their Old Parent Adam: for he took the Briars of the Earth for a
Curse, but they a Blessing; He thought the Flaming Sword a Terror to keep him
from Paradise; they a Light, to guide them thither. Indeed were not Afflictions
rewarded with such an End, Christianity would appear an Unsupportable Yoke, its
Law a Bloody Edict; and God the giver of it, a severer and less liberal Master
to his People, than Joshuah was to the Gibeonites; nay, then Satan is to his
Subjects: for the Gibeonites obtained from Joshuah a Covenant of Life, though
not of Liberty; Joshuah 9.5.
but these must serve under Sawes and Axes, (as ready to be slain) without
hopes of Reprieve: Satan's Subjects receive from him their Portion in this life,
though they can expect no other; Luke 15.25.
but these must be tormented in their life time, and at last enjoy no other
shadow of contentment, but that common cooling-place a Grave. Who could upon
such a score endure the lightest Chastening, so as not to cry out with Cain, My
punishment is greater than I can bear? Much less can we imagine, he will be able
to endure the Cross for his Profession; the shame of which, the Son of God
himself (with all his Divinity to support the Manhood) did not despise, but
with an eye to his Glory, Heb. 12.2. If therefore we will allow God the equity,
and wisdom of a Lawgiver, and the Religion he prescribes man, as fit to be
owned; we must necessarily conclude there is a certain reward reserved to its
followers, as a reason of their obedience. But here two things may call for our
enquiry.

1. In what sense Chastening may be said to yield the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness?

2. Why those that are exercised by Chastening, are the great Proprietors that
enjoy it?

1. In what sense Chastening may be said to yield the peaceable fruit of
Righteousness? Lanswer, not because of any Natural Virtue in affliction to
produce it: for that has only this proper quality to kill, as being a Sword
edged with Justice, that never returns empty. Who will be so mad, as to expect
Winds should proclaim Peace, or Tempests hurl him Treasures, when the Nature of
Wind is to breathe War, of Tempests to bring Ruin? As little fruit can be
looked for from one of Gods severe Dispensations, which of it self threatens
destruction. Yet though it has so ill a Countenance as to bode Death, it cannot
actually hurt Christians, because all the rigor of its Nature is restrained by
the power of a Mediator. So the Lion (that was hungry and devouring, and
naturally made no distinction in its prey) yet had its mouth shut up at Daniels
descending, but let loose all its wildness upon his Adversaries; whereby was
manifested, the fury of that Beast was not lost, but only in the exercise
over-powred. All Chastening, without relation to those stripes Christ suffered,
is but a sad Argument of Gods anger that consumes, and man's sin that condemns:
Such Lectures were Pharaohs Plagues both to him and his People, wherein were
read those uncomfortable Miracles of Power, and no Mercy; all their Waters were
Waters of Blood, that brought ruin in their taste, and revealed to them their
End; as destructive would those waters prove, that surround Christians, were
not other blood mingled there, to make them sound. But now since a Savior has
suffered, all the Debts of his people are cleared; the Judge reconciled, and
consequently Acts of Punishing laid aside; whence their suffering is accepted
of, as the suffering of Martyrs, which would otherwise be no better than the
Passion of Thieves.

2. Why those that are exercised by Chastening, are the great Proprietor s that
enjoy it? To which I may reply, because these tread best and truest in the
steps of their Master; who being desirous to be followed by man in his sharpest
Enterprises, is pleased to tie promises to the example; and like the Captain of
our Salvation lead us on, that we might be made perfect with himself through
suffering. The advantage of this State, Julian the Apostate so well knew, that
he took another course of persecuting Christians, by permitting them a life of
ease and pleasure, and an undisturbed enjoyment of the world; which in effect
proved their worst overthrow: for the Persecutions of other Emperors rifled
only their outward goods, but this took away the Marks and Evidences of their
Profession. It is part of our service to Christ, and the greatest too to suffer
for his Name; who though he wrought the work of our Salvation upon the Cross,
when Man was but looker on, yet will not apply the benefit of that Salvation,
without man becomes a Party by suffering. For can we imagine (when our
Redemption cost him so bloody a Sweat to procure) that he would thereby
altogether dry our faces, and save us the least expense of Sweat to apply it?
Would he buy Heaven to bestow it upon man, without our owning the Purchase?
What is this, but to make Glory vile, and the blood shed for it cheap; whose
price is best valued by the afflictions we endure? Therefore, when our Savior
took the way of the Cross to triumph over Death, we find he left that Cross
standing for his Disciples; to show the Victory was finished, but not the
imitation; and so requiring man's patience to Crown his work, he signified it
was regarded by him, not as Merit of Claim, but as Homage of Duty; not as a
Pleader for life, but as a witness of Subjection. It Is this Patience under
Trials seals the truth of our belief, which cannot be otherwise known. A
Peaceful Piety is the sleep, and not the exercise of a Christian: Voluntary
Chastenings, as VVhippings, Sackcloth, Watchings, and the like; are slight
Essays of Devotions, no real proofs; for where our fears are not assaulted,
and the strivings against sin are secure, there is rather the show of a fight,
then a true Encounter. But to combat our most ruling and tender passions in
those losses we bear, and dangers we undergo, to meet malice in all its forms,
and Sacrifice every Interest to our cause, this is a service declares the
height of our Zeal, and the sincerity of our Faith; which being our utmost
payment (though but two Mites in comparison) Christ wills no more for Heavens
Purchase, exalting their value from hence, Mark 12.43, 44.
that we have no more to cast into the Treasury. I shall not farther enlarge my
self on this point; but beg leave to conclude with a word of Application to our
selves.

We have here presented a tender Object of Patience: the fall of a Head, which
Passion tells us, reflects on this Family; but Reason extends it wider to
Kingdoms, as the fall of a Head, wherein their Interest was contained. Yet
such persons Deaths (like their lives) are of public use, and Trials sent us
for a general improvement; that we might all acknowledge the hand correcting
us, and learn submission to the blow. This will draw out all the Vinegar from
our Tears, and separate the Gall, which imbitters the affliction. What? shall
we receive good from God (which is our undeserved portion) and refuse such an
evil, which is but another Method of doing it? Shall we prescribe Rules to that
Sovereign Wisdom how to act, that are unable to prescribe our own remedy? But
a sober considerer will be far from taxing the Orders of Divine Providence;
which he knows should he oppose, it is a fruitless work, because they are
unconquerable; should he judge, it is an absurd action, because their end is
not known. Let us first understand our own disease, before we scruple at the
Physic given us; let us first find out the evil of Death, before we quarrel at
the Dispensation. Otherwise we do but bruitishly repine; and besides affront
God at our own peril; like a foolish people I have read of, Saavedra Hisp. De
Gothis.
that shot their Arrows at Heaven when it Thundered; but those Arrows, instead
of appeasing the noise, turned Instruments of Heavens Justice, by coming down
upon their heads to punish their presumption. Whoever he be that complains,
let me ask him (if Grief can allow Reason a hearing) what evil is there in this
accident, that should breed any murmuring in his soul. Can the chastening be
thought grievous, to the person departed, or to us left behind? To him? Then
Rest must be Torment, and Immortality a Penance: But alas! we consider not, how
a good man's sighs go away with his breath, and his tears are sealed up with his
eyes; whose soul (now freed from the dregs and contagion of body) can have no
trouble, without you will call pity one; which may be raised in Saints above,
should they behold the mistakes of us Mortals below. Lies then the burden of
this affliction upon us? So Interest pleads in our Grief, and not Love: But
wherein are we properly losers, when God sends this and the like Trials, merely
to exercise us for Glory? The Storm that frighted S. Peter in the Ship, had not
its blackness from the grossnesse of Air without, but from a dark Cloud
within; because his Master was asleep there: Now his and our Master is
incapable of sleep; for when he arose, he threw off all the weakness of
Humanity: He is now watchful and vigilant over every accident that befalls us;
whence we may look upon the bitterest storm of an affliction, (since Mercy
governs it) with as pleasant a regard, as we look upon Dew or seasonable
showers that refresh the Earth with their fall. I need not I hope fetch Reasons
from Philosophy to cure the distemper of our passions, which Scripture can with
more truth and fullness supply us with, out of the abundance of its store. The
old Heathens derived their cure of Death both from the necessity of that blow;
as likewise from the period it put to Sense: and lastly, from a wandering
Immortality the Soul by it enjoyed. Necessity they thought would give Reason
such a Law, so as to cause its submission: A destroying of Sense would remove
their fears, and a wandering Immortality be a sufficient object of desire. The
first of these is indeed so convincing, as may silence our complaints; but the
two last (that annihilate one part of our being, and leave the other imperfect)
are but poor reliefs, to support us either at our own or our friends departure.
Christianity affords us better Medicines to heal our wound, by setting before
us no Airy Phantome or Apparition of good, but a substantial happiness;
wherein the body shall share with the soul in a Beatifick vision; and sensetaste
of those divine joys, that shall fill the understanding; so that it makes a
perfect object received by a complete subject, when God shall be the reward,
and the whole man enjoy him. But we are apt to make melancholy reflections
upon that scene of mortality Death presents us, in a pale look, sunk eyes,
breathless body, and a dark vault to which it must be carried: All these are
but Artificial figures of its loss to delude our Sense; no real tokens of it;
and therefore a right Faith is not moved with that spectacle, which dwells upon
another scene of lasting colors; for therein is shown the endless spring, and
Vigor of a Resurrection. This is the great stay of a Christians Hope; and the
cornerstone of our building; which were it wanting, all our Preaching would be
vain, and all your Mourning desperate: But being grounded in the truth of it,
We hence learn to persuade, as you should learn to rejoice with that
expectation. This is that state will truly instruct us in the knowledge of our
Natures, whereas the Life we have here, and the Death that follows it, are but
ill Schools to teach it us: Life (that swells us with an opinion of good) is
but a false Dress to hide its Imperfections: Death (that breaks man's Frame, and
disorders his dust) is a false Dress too, to hide the Glory of his rising: but
a Resurrection (that instates us in a full fruition of Bliss, that takes away
all our corruption; and a proness of falling into it again) this breaks forth
upon a devout Soul, in such beauty and luster, that it makes all the
Apprehensions of good in this Life, all the Fears of Evil in Death, to vanish
before it. What is there then here (in comparison of this state) can be worth a
minutes desire? when the Life (we prize so much) begins in Tears, continues
with Cares, and ends with Torments? What is there in Death (if we reflect on
this glory) can claim a minutes discomfort? when death (we lament so much) has
but a sick stomach, in swallowing its prize, and will ere long throw it up upon
a Land of Immortality. Go then and be discontented, that thou have left here
deposited, thy Friend, thy Husband, thy Father, thy Master: Is it not madness?
like his Grief, that is troubled, he has put his Money to the Exchangers, to
receive his own again with Usury. For it is but a little while we stay here;
and while we stay, God tries how we use, and how we surrender our Talents;
which if we can give a good account of at the day of Death (that great day of
collecting Gods rents) We shall then be taken up into the Clouds, that now seem
to us so dark; and there behold the brightness of those Saints, we have here
mournfully lamented: There we shall jointly with them sing Praises, making
this no small part of our Song, that God would use so severe a method to bring
us together. One Word in the close.

We are now leaving this Land and our Offices together; Suffer me at the end of
my Preaching to make a plain, but true profession, before a Great Judge (to
whom we must all give an account of our Actions) that I have endeavored
(according to my poor ability) a faithful discharge of my Function, throughout
the whole course of this Service: To God I leave the judgment of my heart: To
you I leave the trial of my Passions, the errors of my Nature, the weakness
of my performance; but if God uses to accept the heart, these other
Infirmities, I hope, Man will pardon.

Now to God the Father, to God the Son, and to God the Holy Ghost, be
ascribed, all Honor, Praise, Might, Majesty, and Dominion, both now and for
evermore. Amen.

FINIS.

