AN APPENDIX TO THE DISCOURSE Upon the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant:
BEING A METHOD OF FAMILY-RELIGION.

By THOMAS BRAY, D.D.

LONDON, Printed for Will. Hawes, at the Rose in Ludgate Street, 1699.

The PREFACE.
THE Design of the foregoing Discourse, being to Principle the Minds of our
Youth with a true Notion of Christianity, by a course of Reading upon the
Nature of their Baptismal Covenant; And few of our Youth being serious enough
to Relish such Employment to that degree, as to betake themselves to Reading,
if not encouraged and obliged thereunto by their Parents and Masters; so that
it is very rare to find where there is no performance of Family Religion, that
the Children and Servants belonging to it are not notoriously Ignorant and
Immoral, for these Reasons I have been much solicited to annex the following
Method of Family Religion; as that without which the precding Discourse will
not have its End in the Edification of our Youth; who if they neither read it
themselves, nor hear it read by others, cannot be supposed to receive benefit
by it.

Nor will it, I hope, be thought strange, that in the following Method of
Family Religion, the first thing I propose is the Singing of Psalms. I believe
indeed it will be found, if we should look back into the Causes of the Decay of
Christian Piety in Families, that the neglect of Family Religion has its date
from the disuse of Singing Psalms therein. This is a part of Devotion not more
noble in it self, than it is pleasant and inviting to others; and therefore it
will be the likeliest means to draw the whole Family together, to begin with a
Psalm. And that it may be the more taking, I have not only set the following
Psalms to the choicest Tunes, but given them out of the New Version of Mr.
Brady and Mr. Tate, being persuaded that the Contempt into which Singing of
Psalms is grown amongst us, is owing to the very ill and ridiculous Meter of
Hopkins and Sternhold, and the equally bad Singing of them in our Country
Churches. And now, all that I shall add upon this point is this, that the best
way to have them sung in Families, is to have the Youth practice it at their
Catechetical Conferences; and the likeliest Method to bring 'em into Common Use
in Churches, is first to have Families accustomed to the singing of them.

The next thing to be accounted for, is the Course of Reading I propose in the
following Method. And as it is a Course of Reading upon the several Subjects of
our Church-Catechism, so I hope it will be thought the best I could pitch upon.
This best of Catechisms does administer Instructions in the most accurate
Method possible. It teaches us nothing superfluous and unnecessary to be known,
but gives us to understand the whole Doctrine of the Covenant of Grace; and
that in an excellent Method; treating first of the General Nature thereof in
the Preliminary Questions and Answers; and descending afterward particularly
to instruct its Disciples in the several Articles; and ends with those Means of
performing our Covenant, Prayer, and the Sacraments: And therefore, according
to this Method, I would have the Reading ordered in Families, according to
which if it should be managed, I cannot doubt but that Christian Knowledge
would grow upon us a-pace; and Heresy and Error would more difficultly find
Entertainment than it does.

And now as to the Morning and Evening Prayer I propose; in the Families of
Persons of Quality, where there is more leisure for longer Devotions, it is
incomparably the best way to use the Common Prayer: But in meaner Families,
where so much time cannot be allowed, next to the Common Prayer, I thought a
better could not be composed for that Purpose, than a Prayer formed out of our
Catechism, wherein all the Mercies of God's Part in the Covenant, are recounted
with Thanksgiving, and all the Conditions on ours are enumerated, together with
Petitions for God's Grace to assist us in the Performance of them.

And now I have only this to add to you, who are Parents and Masters of
Families, that you would unanimously, and universally set up a Course of Family
Religion in your respective Houses.

There seems to be a general Apostasy from Christianity now growing upon the
Nation: And one great Reason that Atheism and Irreligion has so prevailed, is,
that the present Generation of Men have seen no more of Religion, than what
they hear in our Churches; the Instructions from whence cannot be sufficient to
reform the World, if the Application be not made by Parents, and Masters at
home; much less, if they take not care so much as to send their Youth to Church
to be Catechis'd and Instructed. And indeed it does infinitely deserve your
most serious Consideration, how far you will be answerable for the Souls of
those who are within your Houses, and under your Paternal Care. The Fate of old
Ely, and his Family, for not honoring God, by taking Care to the Piety of his
Children, would be very awakening to those who consider it. And the
extraordinary Regard God bore to Abraham, merely because he knew he would
command his Children, and his Household after him, that they should keep the way
of the Lord, is equally encouraging to you to take care of Religion in your
Families. Wherefore let that Resolution of Joshua be the Resolution of every
one of you: As for me, and my House, we will serve the Lord.

And that no Assistance may be wanting to you for your Childrens Devotion, as
well as Instruction, I have added the following Office for Youth. It was for
the most part compiled by Dr. Alexander Noel, once Dean of St. Paul's, for the
Use of Schools; and to make it more generally Useful thereunto, I have not only
translated it, but added some few Prayers more for the Youth, and Servants of a
Family: And if due Care shall be taken both in Schools and Families, that all
the Youth belonging to each, shall to Knowledge add Piety and Devotion, it will
turn no doubt to a comfortable Account one Day, as to those Pastors who shall
thus faithfully inspect their tender Flock, so to those Masters of Schools and
Families, who shall take Care thus to train up the Youth belonging to their
Charges respectively in the Knowledge and Fear of God.

A Method of FAMILY-DEVOTION.
THE foregoing short discourse upon the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant, is
designed to lay the Foundation of Christian Knowledge in Youth. And this short
Method of Family-Devotion is formed in order to revive the most principal part
of Christian Practice in Families: And for want of both which, the Youth that
happen therein are undone throughout the Nation.

Now there were never greater variety of better Helps to Families in this kind,
than have been given us of late Years, by several pious Divines of our own
Church. And to bring them more into use, I shall venture to propose this
following Method.

In the first place, the whole Family being called together, I would propose
there might be a Psalm sung; for there is a most inviting, and popular, as well
as a most Heavenly Part of Divine Worship. And because there is now so good a
Version of the Psalms given us by Brady and Tate, and these revised by several
Bishops, and allowed by Public Authority to be sung in Churches, I would
propose the Use of them in Families at leastwise, and could wish they were
introduced into our Public Assemblies.

The Disadvantage that Psalmody does at this day lie under, by reason of the
intolerable badness of our Meter, and the ill singing of our Psalms in
Country-Churches, makes the better sort of People indeed nauseate it, and all
to despise it: Not to say that the Beauty of our Service suffers extremely by
it. But Psalms, and Hymns, to the Great Creator, Redeemer, and Sanctifier of
Mankind, as they were the most signal part of the Primitive Liturgies, and as
they will continue to all Eternity the constant Employment of the Blessed
Angels and Saints above; so now that there is an Emendation both of the Psalms
and Singing, the Prejudices conceived against them, may soon, I hope, be turned
into the highest Love and Esteem of both: So that this I think would be an
Alteration made to the well-liking of all the Members of our Communion.

I know there are those who think the Common People so fond of the Old Psalms,
that they would not endure an Innovation therein: But in all the Experience I
have had in this Matter, in a Ministry amongst them for Fifteen Years, I never
found that Person which spoke the least liking to Hopkins, and Sternhold's
Psalms; nor any one of the Country People who had that Value for them as to get
one of them by Heart: But as to a new Version of our Singing Psalms done with a
Spirit, and Life, that comes up in some measure to the Original; now that such
an one is made, all People, I am persuaded, would be apt of themselves to learn
them, and the Clergy can now with a good Countenance strike in, and encourage
them thereunto; not only that every Person might be able to bear a part in that
Service, but as an Excellent Furniture for Devotion, both in Solitude, and on
many other Occasions.

And this indeed deserves a particular Consideration, that whereas through the
Difficulty of learning Prose, it is a very hard Matter to make the meaner sort
of People to get any Prayers by heart; yet through the Facility of getting
Verse, and the great liking they have to it, they may be easily wrought upon to
get many of the Singing Psalms without Book; so that they might hereby be
provided (if the Choice were well made) of apt and proper Devotions, sufficient
in some measure to supply their want of other Prayers. However they would have
wherewithal to lift up their hearts to Heaven upon Contemplation of God's
Works, when they walk in the Fields, and view the Wonders of his Works; of
which sort of Devotions David's Psalms are so noble a Storehouse, and to which
he does so often call upon all Men: Not to say that the getting of much of this
Sacred Poesy by heart may work in them a disrelish for obscene, and profane
Songs, and Ballads, whereby the Minds of all sorts of People are so infinitely
corrupted at this day.

In short, since there is no part of Devotion more pleasing than Psalmody, and
the Neglect of Family Worship amongst the Common People; at least, may be dated
from the time it has grown into neglect, I cannot therefore but propose it as
fit to be revived: And because it does so wonderfully compose the Spirits, and
prepare the Mind for Divine Heat, I cannot but think it proper to begin with it
in the Daily Returns of Family Worship.

PSALMS.
PSALM C. Proper to be Sung at Home, or at Church, before the beginning of
Divine Service.
Psalm 100. Proper Tune.
^ With one consent let all the Earth, to God their cheerful voices raise;
^ Glad homage pay with awful mirth, and sing before him Songs of Praise.
Convinced that he is God alone,
From whom both we and all proceed;
We whom he chooses for his own,
The Flock that he vouchsafes to seed.
O enter then his Temple-Gate,
Thence to his Courts devoutly press,
And still your grateful Hymns repeat,
And still his Name with Praises bless.
For he is the Lord supremely good,
His Mercy is for ever sure,
His Truth which always firmly stood,
To endless Ages shall endure.
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost;
The God whom Earth and Heaven adore,
Be Glory, as it was of Old,
Is now, and shall be evermore.
PSALM XCV. To be Sung as the 100 Psalm.
Proper to be Sung as the former.
O Come, loud Anthems let us sing,
Loud Thanks to our Almighty King:
For we our Voices high should raise,
When our Salvation's Rock we praise.
Into his Presence let us haste,
To thank him for his Favors past;
To him Address in joyful Songs,
The praise that to his Name belongs.
For God the Lord enthroned in State,
Is with unrivaled Glory Great.
A King superior far to all,
Whom by his Title, God we call.
O let us to his Courts repair,
And bow with Adoration there,
Down on our Knees devoutly all,
Before the Lord our Maker fall.
To Father, etc.
PSALM II. Proper to be Sung in a Family, or at Church after the Second Lesson.
Psalm 2. Rochel Tune.
^ WIth restless and ungoverned Rage, why do the Heathen storm?
^ Why in such rash Attempts engage as they can never perform?
^ The Great in Council and in Might, their various Forces bring;
^ Against the Lord they all unite, and his anointed King.
Must we submit to their Commands,
Presumptuously they say?
No, let us break their slavish Bands,
And cast their Chains away.
But God who sits enthroned on high,
And sees how they combine;
Does their conspiring Strength defy,
And mocks their vain Design.
PSALM XI. To be ^ung between the First and Second Service.
Psalm 11. St. David's Tune.
^ THe Lord has both a Temple here, and Righteous Throne above;
^ Whence he surveys the Sons of Men, and how their Counsels move.
If God the Righteous, whom he loves,
for trial does correct;
What must the Sons of Violence,
Whom he abhors, expect?
Snares, Fire, and Brimstone on their Heads
Shall in one Tempest shower,
This dreadful mixture his Revenge
Into their Cup shall power.
The Righteous Lord, will Righteous deeds
With signal Favor grace;
And to the upright Man disclose
The Brightness of his Face.
PSALM CXIX. To be Sung before the Sermon.
Psalm 119. St. Mary's Tune.
^ INstruct me in thy Statutes, Lord, thy righteous Paths display;
^ And I from them through all my Life will never go astray.
If thou true Wisdom from above
Wilt graciously impart,
To keep thy perfect Laws, I will
Devote my zealous Heart.
In Truth, substantial Peace have they
Who truly love thy Law,
No smiling Mischief them can tempt,
Nor frowning Danger aw.
Directed therefore by thy Word
Let all my Footsteps be;
Nor Wickedness of any kind
Dominion have over me.
On me devoted to thy Fear,
Lord make thy Face to shine,
Thy Statutes both to know, and keep,
My Heart with Zeal incline.
PSALM CXIX. To be Sung after Sermon.
Psalm 119. London New Tune.
^ SAfe in my Heart, and closely hid thy Word, my Treasure lies,
^ To succor me with timely Aid when sinful Thoughts arise.
Secured by that my grateful Soul
Shall ever bless thy Name;
O teach me then by thy just Laws
My future Life to frame.
My Lips, unlocked with pious Zeal,
To others have declared,
How well the Judgments of thy Mouth
Deserve our best regard.
Whilst in the way of thy Commands
More solid Joy is found,
Than had I been with vast increase,
Of envied Riches crowned.
Therefore thy Just and Righteous Laws,
Shall always fill my Mind;
And those sound Rules which thou prescrib'st
all due Respect shall find.
To keep thy Statutes undefac'd,
Shall be my constant joy,
The strict remembrance of thy Word
Shall all my Thoughts employ.
PSALM XXIV. To be Sung before Evening Service begins.
Psalm 24. St. James's Tune.
^ THis spacious Earth is all the Lord's, the Earth her fullness is;
^ The World, and they that dwell therein by sovereign right are his.
He framed, and fixed it on the Seas,
And his Almighty Hand,
Upon inconstant Floods has made
The stable Fabric stand.
But for himself this Lord of all,
One chosen Seat designed;
O who shall to the Sacred Hill,
Desired Admittance find?
The Man whose Hands and Heart are pure,
Whose Thoughts from Pride are free;
Who honest Poverty prefers,
To gainful Perjury.
This, this is he, on whom the Lord,
Shall shower his Blessings down;
Whom God his Savior shall vouchsafe
With Righteousness to crown.
Such is the Race of Saints, by whom
The Sacred Courts are trod;
And such the Proselytes that seek
The Face of Jacob's God.
PSALM XXIV. To be Sung after the Second Lesson, Evening Service. To be Sung as
the foregoing part.
ERect your Heads, Eternal Gates,
Unfold to entertain
The King of Glory; see he comes
with his Celestial Train.
Who is this King of Glory? Who?
The Lord for Strength renowned:
In Battle mighty, over his Foes,
Eternal Victor crowned.
Erect your Heads, ye Gates, unfold
In State to entertain
The King of Glory; for he comes
With all his shining Train.
Who is this King of Glory? Who?
The Lord of Hosts renowned:
Of Glory he alone is King,
Who is with Glory crowned.
To Father, etc.
PSALM LXXXIV. Proper to be Sung in a Family on a Sunday Evening, or in Church
after Evening Service is over.
Psalm 84. Manchester Tune.
^ O Lord of Hosts my King, O God, how highly blessed are they:
^ Who in thy Temple always dwell, and there thy Praise display.
For in thy Courts one single Day,
It Is better to attend,
Than, Lord, in any place besides,
A Thousand Days to spend.
For God who is our Sun, and Shield,
Will Grace and Glory give:
And no good thing will he withold,
From them that justly live.
O thou whom Heavenly Hosts obey,
How highly blessed is he,
Whose Hope and Trust securely placed,
Are still reposed on thee!
To Father, Son, and Holy Ghost,
The God whom we adore,
Be Glory, as it was, is now,
And shall be evermore.
PSALM CXVII. Proper to be Sung in a Family before Morning Prayer.
Psalm 117. Exeter Tune.
^ WIth cheerful Notes let all the Earth, to Heaven their Voices raise,
^ Let all inspired with godly Mirth, sing solemn Hymns of Praise.
God's tender Mercy knows no bound,
His Truth shall never decay;
Then let the willing Nations round,
This grateful Tribute pay.
To Father, Son, etc.
PSALM CXXXIX. To be Sung as the 100 Psalm. Proper also to be Sung in a Family
at Morning Prayer.
THou Lord by strictest search have known,
My rising up, and lying down;
My secret Thoughts are known to thee,
Known long before conceived by me.
Thine Eye my Bed, and Paths surveys;
My public Haunts, and private Ways.
Thou know what it is my Lips would vent,
My yet unutter'd words intent.
The veil of Night is no disguise,
No screen from thine All-seeing Eyes.
Through midnight shades thou find'st thy way,
As in the blazing Noon of Day.
Thou know the Secrets of my Heart;
If mischief lurk in any part,
Correct me where I go astray,
And guide me in thy perfect way.
To Father, Son, etc.
PSALM VIII. Proper to be Sung in a Family at Evening Prayer.
Psalm 8. Winchester Tune.
^ O Thou to whom all Creatures bow, within this earthly Frame;
^ Through all the World how great art Thou; how glorious is thy Name.
When Heaven the Beauteous Work on high,
Employs my wandering sight,
The Moon that nightly guilds the Sky,
With Stars of feebler Light.
What Is Man, said I, that Lord thou love
To keep him in thy Mind!
Or what his Offspring that thou prov'st,
To them so wondrous kind!
Him next in Power thou did create,
To thy Celestial Train.
Ordained with Dignity and State,
Over all thy Works to Reign.
They jointly own his potent sway,
The Beasts that Prey or Graze,
The Birds that wing their Airy way,
The Fish that cuts the Seas.
O thou to whom all Creatures bow,
Within this Earthly Frame,
Through all the World how great art thou,
How Glorious is thy Name!
To Father, etc.
PSALM CXLVIII.
Psalm 148. Proper Tune.

^ YE boundless Realms of Joy, ex -- alt your Maker's Fame;
^ his praise your song employ, above the starry frame; your voices raise,
^ ye Che -- ru -- bims, and Se -- ra -- phims, to sing his Praise.
Let all of Royal Birth,
With those of humbler Frame,
And Judges of the Earth,
His matchless Praise proclaim.
In this Design
Let Youths and Maids,
And Hoary Heads
With Children join.
United Zeal be shown,
His wondrous Fame to raise,
Whose Glorious Name alone,
Deserves our endless praise.
Earths utmost ends
His Power obey:
His Glorious sway
The Sky transcends.
His chosen Saints to Grace,
He raises them on high;
And favors Israel's Race,
Who still to him are nigh:
O therefore raise
Your grateful Voice,
And still rejoice,
The Lord to praise.
PSALM CIII. To be Sung as the 100 Psalm.
THe Lord, the Universal King,
In Heaven has fixed his lofty Throne:
To him the Angels, Praises sing,
In whose great Strength his Power is shown.
Ye that his just Commands obey,
And hear, and do his Sacred Will;
The Hosts of his, this Tribute pay,
Who still what he ordains, fulfill.
Let every Creature jointly bless
The mighty Lord: And thou, my Heart,
With grateful Joy thy Thanks express;
And in this Consort bear thy part.
Yea Lord to celebrate thy Fame,
My grateful Voice to Heaven I Will raise;
And Nations, strangers to thy Name,
Shall thus be taught to sing thy Praise.
For God abounds with tender Love,
And unexampl'd Acts of Grace,
His wakened Wrath does slowly move,
His willing Mercy flows apace.
God will not always harshly chide,
But with his anger quickly part;
And loves his Punishments to guide
More by his Love than our Desert.
Secondly, Next after the Psalm, may succeed a Course of Reading, And this both
Ordinary, and Extraordinary; Ordinarily, and at every time the Family are
called together to Prayers, it were well if a Chapter were read, either
according to the order of our Calendar, by which means the most material parts
of Holy Scripture might be read over, the Old Testament once, the New thrice
a year. Or if time will not serve to have four Chapters read every day, then
the New Testament may be read over in order. And it would tend singularly to
the improvement of the Youth of the Family, both Children and Servants, to have
them read the Chapters by turns.

Extraordinarily, I would recommend it to all Families, that on
Sunday-Evenings, the Master or Mistress having called together their whole
Family, would besides the Chapter, cause to be read some Discourse out of some
Practical Treatise: And I shall here recommend what Books they may read with
profit, and in what order.

And in the first ^^ace, since in the Doctrine of our Baptismal Covenant is
contained all that is essentially necessary to Salvation, and nothing is to be
accounted such, which is no part, nor Article of the Covenant of Grace; and
since according as we have performed, or not performed our part of this
Covenant, we shall be justified, or condemned at the last day; I am therefore
persuaded that the Knowledge of the Nature, Terms, and Conditions of this
Covenant, by whose Mediation we obtained such Gracious Terms of Salvation, and
what vast Obligations do lie upon us to discharge the same; I am therefore I
say, persuaded, that a through understanding of this Covenant, is fundamentally
necessary. And since the general Doctrine thereof gives a view of the whole
Scheme of the Christian Religion, I humbly conceive it ought to be the first
thing taught, and understood in Christianity; to which end give me leave to
recommend every Sunday the reading of a Lecture in the foregoing Short
Discourse till it be gone through.

And then, after that, for a more particular Information in the several
conditions of this Covenant, I would be glad if some Treatise upon the Articles
of our Christian Faith, such as Kettlewel's Practical Believer; and next to
that, some Discourse upon the several Christian Duties, such as the Whole Duty
of Man, were by degrees read over. And then if next after this, a Discourse
upon the Sacrament, such as Kettlewell's Help and Exhortation to worthy
Communicating, were also read, there, would be nothing wanting to give all the
Mem^^rs of a Family, both a general and particular Knowledge in the whole
Christian Religion, and to guide them to Heaven. These three last mentioned
Books are what I would wish were in every Family, for the complete Instruction
of the Members of it. But in regard they may be thought too dear a Purchase,
and too tedious for some; instead thereof, the Guide of a Christian, and the
Christian Monitor may serve excellently for the purpose of Family Instructions.
And if with the latter of these be bound up Wake upon Death, between these
three there will be an admirable Rule provided for Holy Living and dying. And
both together will make up an Excellent poor Man's Family-Book.

The purchase of the two latter will not arise to above one Shilling and six
Pence, and of all together, to not above eight Shillings. And it were happy for
this Church, and the Souls of Men, if so many of our Common People did not lay
out much more, as they generally do, to the loading of their Shelves, in Books
of an Antinomian Spirit, such as Bunyan's Books, to the Poisoning of many
thousand Persons both in their Faith and Practice.

Thirdly, And now after the Psalm and Chapter, and the other reading on
Sundays; In the Close it is proper that Prayer should succeed, for which by
this time we may suppose all the Members of the Family to be very well
prepared, and to be put in a good frame of Spirit. And there are indeed great
variety of excellent Devotions in the foregoing Books, especially if to them
there shall be added Patrick's Devout Christian. However to render this as
generally useful as may be, for all the purposes of Family-Religion, I shall
add a Prayer for the Morning and Evening, made for the most part out of the
words of our Liturgy, the best Treasury of Devotions doubtless in the World, of
any Humane Composure; and particularly out of the words of our Catechism; the
Praying over of which will have these advantages in my Opinion, of all other
Forms, that first the things thereby prayed for, will be the same we have
Covenanted with God to perform: And secondly, every single Expression being
pregnant of abundance of Matter, so as to be the Subject of Expositions; in
every Petition, the Mind will be taken up with great variety of things, whereas
in most other Composures, in much variety of Expression there is but little
Matter included. And by the by, this being the Nature of our Forms in the
Liturgy, especially of those Supplications following the several Commandments,
the Injury which is done to our Church Service is intolerarable, when it is
hurried over, and read precipitately, so as the Worshipper cannot have due
space to reflect upon the copious Matter he prays for under those comprehensive
Expressions.

PRAYERS.
O Most blessed Lord God, whose glorious Name is exalted above all Blessing and
Praises, yet it is our Duty, and our Happiness, to Glorify thee: And, to this
end, we a small handful of thy depending Creatures are here met, to join our
Hearts and Voices, in the Celebration of thy Praises. And therefore with Angels
and Archangels, and all the glorious Company of Heaven, we laud and magnify thy
holy Name, for all thy Mercies vouchsafed unto us, and to all Mankind. Our
Creation was an admirable Instance of thy Goodness, communicating Life and
Being, and a competent measure of Happiness to all thy Creatures. And as the
Morning-Stars, or Angels, did thereupon sing for Joy; so do we this Day
celebrate the Glorious Power then appearing. But the Redemption of us by the
Mediation of thy Son Jesus Christ, reconciling us to thee, when we had basely
revolted from thee, and took part with thine Enemy, was an astonishing Work of
Mercy, which the Angels themselves cannot fathom, but desire to look into. O
how did Mercy and Truth here meet together! How did Righteousness and Peace
here kiss each other! We are in some measure sensible of it, and we do most
devoutly adore thy Goodness, that thou have called us into the Family of thy
Church, to partake of the Benefits of such Redemption.

And now, O God, as at our Admission into this holy Society, we did List our
selves under Christ's Banner, manfully to Fight against the World, the Flesh,
and the Devil; so do thou enable us to Renounce the Devil, and all his Works,
the Pomps and Vanity of this wicked World, and all the sinful Lusts of the
Flesh.

As we have been Baptized into the Belief and Profession of thee the only true
God, Father, Son, and Holy Ghost; we beseech thee that thou would keep us
steadfast in this Faith, and that we may ever continue to Believe in God the
Father, who has made us, and all the World; in God the Son, who has Redeemed
us, and all Mankind; and in God the Holy Ghost, who has Sanctified us, and all
the Elect People of God.

And enable us, as to Believe in thee, so to Obey thy holy Will and
Commandments, and to walk in the same all the Days of our Life. Particularly,
enable us to Love thee with all our Heart, with all our Mind, with all our
Soul, and with all our Strength; to Worship thee, to give thee Thanks, to put
our whole Trust in thee, to Call upon thee, to Honor thy holy Name, and thy
Word, and to Serve thee truly all the Days of our Life. Enable us also
Conscientiously to discharge our Duties toward our Neighbor, to love him as
our selves; and to do unto all Men, as we would they should do unto us: To
Love, Honor, and Succor our Relations; to Honor and Obey the King, and all
that are put in Authority under Him; to Submit our selves to all our Governors,
Teachers, Spiritual Pastors, and Masters: To order our selves Lowly and
Reverently to all our Betters; to hurt no Body by Word or Deed; to be true and
just in all our Dealings; to bear no Malice nor Hatred in our Hearts; to keep
our Hands from Picking and Stealing, and our Tongues from Evil-speaking, Lying,
and Slandering; to keep our Bodies in Temperance, Soberness, and Chastity; not
to covet nor desire other Men's Goods, but to learn and labor truly to get our
own Living; and to do our Duty in that state of Life, unto which it shall
please our God at any time to dispose of us.

We know, O God, that we are not able to do these Things of our selves, nor to
walk in thy Commandments, and to serve thee, without thy special Grace: And
therefore we desire of thee, O Lord God, our heavenly Father, who art the Giver
of all Goodness, to send thy Grace unto us, and to all People; that we may
Worship thee, Serve thee, and Obey thee, as we ought to do. And we pray unto
thee, that thou will send us all Things that be needful, both for our Souls and
Bodies; and that thou will be merciful unto us, and forgive us our Sins; und
that it will please thee to save and defend us in all Dangers, Ghostly and
Bodily; and that thou will keep us from all Sin and Wickedness, and from our
Ghostly Enemy, and from everlasting Death. And this we trust thou will do of
thy Mercy and Goodness, through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Neither pray we for our selves alone, but for all States and Conditions of Men
amongst us. And, O merciful God, who has made all Men, and hate nothing that
thou have made, nor would the Death of a Sinner, but rather that he should be
Converted and Live, have Mercy upon all Jews, Turks, Infidels, and Heretics;
and take from them all Ignorance, and Hardness of Heart, and Contempt of thy
Word and Commandments: And so fetch them home, blessed Lord, to thy Flock, that
they may be saved amongst the Remnant of the true Israelites; and he made one
Fold under one Shepherd, Jesus Christ our Lord. More especially, we beseech
thee, to receive our Supplications and Prayers, which we offer before thee, for
all Estates of Men in thy Holy Church; that every Member of the same, in his
Vocation and Ministry, may Truly and Godly serve thee. Amongst whom,
principally we beseech thee, to save and defend all Christian Kings, Princes,
and Governors, and especially thy Servant William our King; that under Him we
may be godly and quietly Governed. And grant unto his whole Council, and to all
that are put in Authority under Him, that they may truly and indifferently
minister Justice, to the Punishment of Wickedness and Vice, and the Maintenance
of thy true Religion and Virtue. And we most humbly beseech thee, of thy
Goodness, O Lord, to comfort and succor them, who in this transitory Life, are
in Trouble, Sorrow, Need, Sickness, or any other Adversity. More especially we
beseech thee Graciously to behold us of this F^mily.

And as thou have safely brought us to the beginning of this Day, This to be
added in the Morning.
so defend us in the same by thy mighty Power, and grant that this Day we fall
into no Sin, neither run into any kind of Dangers; but that all our Doings may
be ordered by thy Governance, to do always that is righteous in thy thy Sight,
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

And enlighten our Darkness, we beseech thee, O Lord, This to close up Evening
Prayer.
and by thy great Mercy defend us from all Perils and Dangers of this Night,
for the Love of thy only Son Jesus Christ our Lord. In whose most blessed Name
and Words, we conclude our imperfect Prayers, saying, Our Father, etc.

A Morning Prayer for a Family.
O Blessed God be thou acknowledged, Praised, and Loved by us, and all the
Child^en of Men; on whom thou pourest continually thy Benefits. They are great
and many; we know not the Sum, nor understand the Value of 'em. The Angels
themselves admired thy Love to us in Christ Jesus; and are become Ministering
Spirits to them who are Heirs of Salvation. We enjoy the continual Fruits of
thy watchful Providence, by which we have been kept in Peace and Safety the
last Night, and are raised this Morning in Health and Strength, both in Body
and Mind, beholding all things belonging to us, just as we left 'em with thee
when we went to sleep.

Accept, we most humbly beseech thee, of this poor Tribute of Praise and
Thanks; together with the hearty Oblation of our Souls and Bodies, which we
here dedicate again to thy Service. Vouchsafe us the continual Assistance of
the Grace of thy Holy Spirit, to enable us to make good those Vows that are
upon us, of Obediently keeping thy Holy Will and Commandments, and walking in
the same all the days of our Life. Pardon, O Lord, all our Breaches of this
Sacred Covenant. Deal not with us according to our Sins, neither reward us
after our Iniquities; but in the multitude of thy Tender Mercies pity our
Errors and Wanderings, and he^p us against our Infirmities.

Give us leave this Day to put our selves into thy powerful Protection, and to
depend on thee for thy merciful Guidance and Assistance, that we may be more
faithful to Thee in the discharge of our Duties, and never swerve from the
Rules of Sobriety and Righteousness, Charity and Goodness. So shall we return
with joyful Hearts to praise thee in the Evening; and teach those who shall
come after us to continue thy Praises in the next Generation. Amen. For thy
Mercies sake in Christ Jesus, in whose words we present the earnest desires of
our Souls and Hearts, both for our selves and our Brethren, saying,

Our Father, etc.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
IN an humble and thankful Sense, O Lord of Heaven and Earth, of our entire
dependence on Thee, and of the Duty we owe Thee, and the many Promises and Vows
wherein we stand engaged to Thee, we fall down before Thee this Evening, and
with all Reverence worship thy Divine Majesty: Giving Thee the Glory that is
due to thy Name, and acknowledging thy multiplied Mercies to us, particularly
those of this Day; to the Conclusion of which thou have now safely brought us,
with new Resolutions in our Hearts to continue forever in thy Faith, and Fear,
and Love, and Obedience.

It is but just, and reasonable, and we feel likewise by daily Experience, that
it is our Happiness to keep thy Commandments, and to maintain cheerful Thoughts
of Thee, and an hearty Friendship with Thee, by complying in all things with
thy Holy Will: O pardon our Folly, most Gracious God, in forsaking at any time
that Perfect Rule, to follow our own unruly Desires. Pardon us, we beseech
Thee; for we know not how to pardon our selves such Ingratitude to Thee, and
Cruelty to our selves. It is the Grief of our Hearts, that we have in the least
offended Thee, and our most earnest, unfeigned Desires to to be preserved
hereafter in an exact Conformity to the Rule in every thing: Yea, we would
delight to do thy Will, O God, and take such a Pleasure in all the Acts of
Righteousness, Mercy, Meekness, and Gentleness to our Neighbors; and in
praising, and acknowledging Thee the God of all Grace, and in living in an
humble sense of thy Bounty, and our own Vndeservings, and in a temperate, and
thankful Use of all thy Blessings, that we may have the continual Feast of a
good Conscience, and the constant Comfort and Satisfaction of having Thee
always for our Friend, and our Gracious Father in Christ Jesus.

O thou who art the Inspirer of such holy Counsels, Desires, and Purposes, keep
them for ever in our Hearts, encourage, strengthen, and increase them, that
after the Refreshment of a quiet Sleep this Night, we may feel them lively, and
powerful in the Morning; and with renewed Joy, we may still devote our selves
to thy faithful Service. O that our Friends, and all thy People in every Place,
may partake of the same Mercies we desire for our selves: And however we are
severed one from another in this World, grant us an happy Meeting at the Day of
our Lord: In whose Words we pray Thee to hear us.

Our Father, etc.

AN Office for YOUTH.
Texts of Scripture proper for a Mornning Meditation.
Ephesians. 5.14. AWake thou that sleep, and arise from the Dead, and Christ shall
give thee Light. Romans 13. Ver. 11. Knowing the time, that now it is high time
to awake out of sleep; for now is our salvation nearer than when we believed.
Ver. 12. The Night is far spent, the Day is at hand; let us therefore cast off
the Works of Darkness, and let us put on the Armor of Light. Ver. 13. Let us
walk honestly as in the Day, and put on the Lord Jesus Christ. Matthew. 5.16. Let
your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your good Works, and glorify
your Father which is in Heaven. Eccles. 2.13. Wisdom excels Folly, as far as
Light excels Darkness. I. Psalm. 3.5. I laid me down and slept, I awaked, for
the Lord sustained me. II. Psalm. 90.14. O satisfy me early with thy Mercy, that
I may rejoice and be glad all my Days. III. Psalm 59.16, 17. I will sing of thy
Power, yea, I will sing aloud of thy Mercy in the Morning; for thou have been
my Defense and Refuge in the day of my Trouble. IV. Ver. 17. Unto thee, O my
Strength, will I sing; for God is my Defense, and the God of my Mercy. V. Psalm.
71.5. Thou art my Hope, O Lord God; thou art my Trust from my Youth. VI. Ver.
6. By thee have I been holden up from the Womb; thou art he that took me out of
my Mothers Bowels; my Praises shall be continually of thee. VII. Psalm. 148.12.
Young Men and Maidens, Old Men and Children; VIII. Ver. 13. Let them praise the
Name of the Lord; for his Name alone is excellent, his Glory is above the Earth
and Heaven. IX. Psalm. 113.1. Praise ye the Lord, praise him, O ye Servants of
the Lord. X. Ver. 2. Blessed be the Name of the Lord, from this time forth and
for evermore. XI. Ver. 3. From the rising up of the Sun, unto the going down of
the same, the Lord's Name is to be praised. XII. Psalm. 119.124. Deal with thy
Servant according to thy Mercies, O teach me thy Statutes. XIII. Ver. 125. I am
thy Servant, give me Understanding, that I may know thy Testimonies. XIV. Psalm.
143.8. Cause me to learn thy loving kindness, for in thee do I trust; cause me
to know the way wherein I should walk, for I lift up my Soul unto thee. A
Morning Prayer.
O God the Father of Heaven, I render unto Thee all possible Praise and
Thanksgiving, who have preserved me safe from the Danger of the Night past. I
do humbly beseech thee, that thou would take me under the Protection of thy
Good Providence this Day and for evermore. And as thou have dispelled the
Darkness of the Night, and filled the World with the Light of the Sun, and have
awakened me from Sleep; so do thou vouchsafe, O Lord, to expel the Darkness of
Ignorance from my Mind, enlightening it with the Beams of thy most Holy Spirit,
and with the Knowledge of thy beloved Son Jesus Christ, our Savior, that true
Light which lights every Man that comes into the World; that so declining
from the Works of Darkness, and directing my Steps according to the Truth of
thy most Holy Word, I may always walk as in open day, Soberly, Righteously, and
Godly; subduing all Youthful Lusts, and avoiding all Evil Company; and at
length may arrive to the Habitations of Light under the Conduct of the same thy
Son; to whom with thee, and the Holy Spirit, one God of most Adorable Majesty,
be all Honor and Glory, both now, and evermore. Amen.

Scripture Texts for Evening Meditation.
John 11.9. ARE there not twelve Hours in the Day? If any Man walk in the Day
he stumbleth not, because he sees Light of of this World. Ver. 10. But if a
Man walk in the Night he stumbleth, because there is no Light in him. John
3.19. And this is the Condemnation that Light is come into the World, and Men
love Darkness rather than Light, because their Deeds were Evil. John 1.9. Now
Jesus Christ is that true Light which lights every Man that comes into the
World. John 12.35. Let us therefore walk whilst we have Light, lest Darkness
come upon us; for he that walks in Darkness knows not whither he goes. 1
John 2.9. He that says he is in the Light, and hates his Brother, is in
Darkness, even until now. Ver. 10. He that loves his Brother abides in the
Light, and there is no occasion of stumbling in him. Psa. 58.10. If thou draw
out thy Soul to the hungry, and satisfy the afflicted Soul; then shall thy
Light rise in obscurity, and thy Darkness shall be as the Noonday. Psalm 92.1.
IT is a good thing to give thanks unto thee, O Lord; and to sing Praises unto
thy Name, O most High. Ver. 2. To show forth thy Loving Kindness in the
Morning, and thy Faithfulness every Night. Psalm. 43.3. O send out thy Light and
thy Trut^, let them lead me, let them bring me unto thy holy Hill, and to thy
Tabernacle. Psalm. 119.105. Thy Word is a Lamp unto my Feet, and a Light unto my
Paths. Psalm. 119 133. Order my Steps in thy Word; and let not any Iniquity have
dominion over me. Psalm 36.9. With thee is the Fountain of Life; in thy Light
shall we see Light. Psalm. 13.3. Consider and hear me, O Lord, my God, lighten
mine Eyes that I sleep not in Death. Psalm. 4.8. I will lay me down in Peace,
and Sleep, for it is thou, Lord, only that make me dwell in safety. An
Evening Prayer.
O Lord God, the Father of Mer^ies, and the God of all Comfort, how infinitely
am I abashed to appear before thee, who cannot pass one Day without offending
thee, both by Sins of Omission and Commission, both by leaving undone those
things which I ought to have done, and by doing those things which I ought not
to have done. And in both these kinds have I offended thee this Day, and that
both in Thought, Word, and in Deed; particularly, [Here mention any Sin of
either of the foregoing kinds you have been guilty of.] But I fly into the Arms
of thy Fatherly Compassion; Lord for thy Mercies sake forgive me, cleanse me
from my Wickedness, and strengthen my Weakness, that I may overcome all the
Temptatioas which daily surround me, and may henceforward continue steadfast in
my Covenant with thee.

Accept of my humblest Praise and Thanksgiving, O Lord, for all the Goodness
thou have this Day showed me; for all the helps of preventing or restraining
Grace thou have vouchsafed me; for whatever I have done this Day, which is in
any measure acceptable to thee, for whatever progress I have made in my Study
[or Success thou have given to my honest Labours] as also for thy Preservation
of me from all the Miseries and Dangers which frail Mortality is every Moment
exposed to; This if a Servant.
particularly for [H^re name any particular Blessing or Deliverance God has
sent you.]

And now, O Lord God, in whose Protection consists the safety of Man, and of
all Creatures, I commit my self wholly to thy Protection thi^ Night, beseeching
thee that thou would graciously preserve me from the Power of the Prince of
Darkness, who to deceive Mankind, can transform himself into an Angel of Light;
and that thou would likewise preserve me from all Dangers both of Soul and
Body. And let me not be so overwhelmed with slumber as wholly to forget thee;
but when my Body is overtaken with sleep, let my Mind continually watch, and be
intent upon thee both Day and Night. And when Rest shall have refreshed both
Body and Mind, as much as shall suffice Nature, let the Morning find me more
apt and propense to serve thee, to the Salvation of my own Soul, the Good of my
Neighbor, and the Glory of thy most Holy Name. And all this I beg for Jesus
Christ his sake, to whom with thee, and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor
and Glory, by me, and by all Mankind, throughout all Ages, World without end.
Amen.

[The three following Prayers are to be added to the foregoing Morning and
Evening Prayer, by the Persons respectively concerned in them.

A Prayer for a Youth at School.
O God the Father of Lights, and the Giver of every good and perfect Gift, I do
render thee all possible Praise and Thansgiving, that thou have put it into the
Hearts of my Parents [Guardians] to deliver me up to be instructed in good
Literature, at an Age which is most flexible, and apt to learn. I do humbly
entreat thee, that I may not th ough sloth, or negligence, fail their
expectations of me. And because no Vigilance, Industry, nor Study will avail
any thing without thy aid, vouchsafe, I beseech thee, to enlighten my Mind with
a Ray from above, and inspire me with that desire and love of Learning, Wisdom,
and Virtue; with such a Readiness to apprehend, and Memory to retain that which
is good, that I may become Learned and Pious, and thereby serviceable to Church
and State, and to the Honor of thy most Holy Name. These things, O God, I do
most earnestly beg of thee for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord, to whom with
the Father and the Holy Spirit, be ascribed all Honor and Praise, both now and
for evermore. Amen.

A Prayer to be used by Children under the Government of their Parents.
O Eternal God and Heavenly Father, thou that art the kind Author of my Being,
be thou the Gracious Guide of my Life. My Age is simple and unexperienced, and
be thou pleased to inspire me with truth from above. I am come into a World of
Snares and Temptations; O do thou fill me with the Knowledge and Love of thy
Truth, that it may keep me from the Path of the Destroyer. O possess my Heart
with the fear of thee, and dependence upon thee, that I may walk before thee
the Almighty God, and be perfect; that I knowing that thou art my exceeding
great Reward, may neither be discontented in my present State, nor distrustful
of a Provision for the future. Possess also my Heart, O my God, with that
natural tenderness for my Parents, and with that Christian sense of my Duty
toward 'em, that my Language may be respectful, my Actions dutiful, and my
whole Behavior such that I may not increase the Burden, and Care of their
Life, but prove a Comfort and Support to 'em. O my God, possess me lastly with
a Spirit of Meekness, Justice, Truth and Industry, that by Reverence to my
Betters, by Courteousness, Truth, and Faithfulness toward all, and by
Diligence in whatsoever I am employed, I may grow like a Tree planted by the
Rivers of Water, my Leaf may not wither, whatsoever I do may prosper, and I may
bring forth my Fruit in due season, increasing daily in Wisdom and Stature, and
in favor with God and Man: Hear, O hear the Voice of my Petition, for in thee
only is my trust, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Prayer for a Servant.
O Holy and Just God, I know that without Holiness it is impossible for me to
please thee here, or to enjoy thee hereafter; I beseech thee therefore, that my
Understanding may be so enlightened, my Conscience convinced, and my whole
Heart enflamed with the love of Holiness, that I may be Holy in all manner of
Conversation. Beget in me a most tender and lively Sense of the great Duties of
Obedience, Justice and Charity, which I owe to my Master; that I governing my
self by these in all my Actions, I may in my Station advance the Honor of God,
the Contentment and Interest of my Master, the Peace and Virtue of the Family,
and my own both Temporal and Eternal Happiness. I know, O Lord, that no Acts of
Injustice, or Unfaithfulness between Man and Man, shall go unpunished; I know
that for these things sake the Wrath of God is revealed from Heaven; O what
then must be my Punishment, if I heap upon the guilt of Injustice and
Incharitableness, many others, namely, the Guilt of Ingratitude,
Unfaithfulness, Lying, Perjury. O preserve me therefore, O my God, from all
falsehood and wrong; suffer me not to forfeit thy Favor, and destroy my Soul,
for the sake of those things which perish O let me be fully convinced, that the
ways of Righteousness are ways of Pleasantness, and that all her Paths are
Prosperity and Peace, that so I may delight my self in the Law of my God, and
may find Comfort and a Blessing in the discharge of my Duty: Teach me, O Lord,
Humility and Obedience, Faith and Truth, Care and Industry, Charity and
Meekness, that I may adorn the Doctrine of God my Savior, win others over to a
Love of Virtue; and after an humble and contented, though laborious Life here,
may enter into Rest and Glory hereafter, through Jesus Christ our Savior. Amen.

Our Father, etc.

A Grace before Meat.
BLess, O Lord, these thy Creatures to our Use, and us unto thy Service,
through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

A Grace after Meat.
WE give thee Thanks, O Lord, for these, and all other thy Benefits. Good God
preserve the Church, and save the King, and all the Royal Family: And bless us
with Unity, Truth, and Peace, through Jesus Christ our Lord. Amen.

FINIS.

