God Magnified, MAN DETHRONED: Presented to the PARLIAMENT, And SYNOD of
England: Who sit as if Judges for Saints, as if Leaders, and Guides unto the
Generation of Jesus Christ, the Body of the Communion of God.

By W. BRAY.

ISA. 9.15, 16. The ancient and honorable he is the Head: the Prophet that
teaches lies, he is the Tail. For the Leaders of this people cause them to
err, and they that are led of them are destroyed.

MAT. 21.13, 14, 15, 16. JOB 20.26. A Fire not blown shall consume him, it
shall go ill with him that is left in his Tabernacle. The heaven shall reveal
his iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against him.

JOB 36.22. Behold God exalts by his power, who teaches like him?

JOB 21.22, 34. Shall any teach God knowledge, seeing he judges those that are
on high? How then comfort ye me in vain, seeing in your answers there remains
falsehood?

LONDON, Printed, Anno Domini. 1647.

TO The High Court OF PARLIAMENT.
Right Honorable,
HAving by experience beheld God, and in seeing God have seen man also, I
desire to speak a word or two unto you, as not loosing my life unto the death,
for I desire more and more to be translated and transformed into the Image of
Jesus manifested in the flesh, and to live by the Faith of the Son of God in
the Spirit. I have now seen man, the perfection of the earths Creation to be
vanity, and his ways to be as mutable as the wind, which is sometimes East,
and sometimes West, sometimes North, and sometimes South: and now I desire to
lie low before the God of the whole earth, and to lay aside all voluntary
humility, and worshipping of Angels or men: I have seen many writings, and I
have heard many tongues which have endeavored to hinder the pure flamings of
the Eternal God; even the God, the King, and Judge. The pure Scepter is in the
hand of Immortality and Immutability, that can make the light to shine in the
darkness; so that darkness shall not withstand or comprehend the power of its
infiniteness. There is much contending for victory over one another
censcience in the world, and the root of such endeavor for a present Conformity
proceed from your Synod which you have chosen, who would (if they could) fain
be riding on others, and making the Image of God in others a slave, a servant
to their fallible and fallibly interpreted results, whereas the walkings of the
visible man should alone proceed from the pure power and teachings of the
invisible God, both as to God and to man, (if we walked as he also walked.) The
Gods of the Nations they are all Idols, vanity, a lie, and a shadow, though I
remember I have read it was an opinion of old.

Quicquid Humus, Pelagus, Coelum, miserabile gignit,
Id dixere deos, etc.
What ever Heavens Sea, and Land begat,
Hills, Sea, and Rivers, God was this and that.
Me thinks I see sensibly and experimentally (praised be the Father of mercies)
that the Saints sit by the River of Babylon, and weep when they have the
remembrance of Sion, and may yet still do, if the Lord give power any longer to
the enemy and oppressor: then they that carry us away captive, will require of
us a song, and they that made exile or banishment our portion (as a Synodean
Minister (so called) told me there was no other way for Sectaries) will revile
us exceedingly, and say, race, race them even to the ground; and they that
waste us, will require of us mirth, saying, sing us one of the song of Zion.
But if we have not the Lord with us, God with us, How shall we sing the Lords
song in a strange Land? Psalm. 137.1, 2, 3, 4. verses.

Me thinks it should be a business of high concernment to you to offend one of
the littele ones of the Father, (which you may do, seeing neither you, nor
your teachers are infallible) lest you be found fighters against God (as God is
in Jesus) and crucifiers of the body of love, and complacency. But if you are,
and if you are to me, Crucifiers, I desire to embrace the Cross, as my Fathers
Crown to me, I desire to see the Cross, and Crown, from one supreme cause,
power, and will, I shall be glad if the Father will account me worthy (when I
have no ground to account my self so) to suffer for his sake: if you shall
have the Crown any longer, yet know this, that your crown, your dominion, is
not an everlasting dominion, the people of the most high God shall appear more
palpably, as God, with them in the inmost man, and then God shall be palpably
exalted, and man dethroned.

The invisible God, and substance, has carried me out to write these things,
and has answered all objections (though many) of flesh, hell, and death, so
that to me, to will and to do, is God, so that all, or any thing shall be to me
gain and immortal advantage. In fine, is not particular, fleshly interest,
the God of the world: is there, not a general acting, judging, censuring and
condemning, without infallible judgment, and Testimonys and have not men thrown
down Episcopacy, to set up tyrannical dominering Presbytery, mutato nomine
tantum. And is not formal Philosophy, vain deceit, traditions of men, and
rudiments of the world, the great Argument that swayes, witness many men who
write many elaborate Volumes, and the continual man-teachings of priests to
Counsels: do not the Priests of the nation endeavor to blow the bellows of
contention; and to divide dear friends, because of difference in judgment, so
that as one Augustine, one of they Fathers, Tempestate contentionis serenitas
charitatis obnubilatur. In the tempest of contention the serenity of charity is
over-clouded: may not Episcopalls, Presbyterians, and Independents sit all
under their own Vines, and Fig Trees, and yet live lovingly one with another,
one to another be contraries, and yet be contraries in the spirit of love, and
mekeness forbearing and forgiving one another; may not every one walk in the
light of his God, according to the prophecy; And the Saints walk in the light
of the Lord their God: surely if all that talk of Christ, of that anoinment,
were really possessed in the glory of it, man would not be any thing, but God
would be all in all: I cannot hold my peace, I am Idem calamo quod in mente, I
desire you to excuse me (if you can) that I have been so bold (according to the
common denomination of boldness) God has condescended to speak to me, and I
have spoken to God, and his Testmony is sure; why should not you condescend,
peradventure God may give you an invisible dart, to think on temperance, and
judgment to come: So I rest,

Your Honors humble Servant if you walk according to the pure light of
nature, and if you shall stand for justice and mercy in the Land. W. Bray.

National Assembly.
YOU that endeavor to make your selves renowned, and to exalt God with your
selves alone, you that consult and endeavor to make the places of Saints too
straight, and to bind up the spirit of God to your formality, darkness, and
bounds. You that hear the children that you have lost say in your ears, the
place is too straight for us, give place to us that we may dwell, Isa. 49.20,
21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. You that say in your hearts, who has begotten me
these? seeing you have lost your children, and you are and will become
desolate; and who has brought up these? these, where have they been? will you
make the broad places straight? will you comprehend God in a narrow compass of
a man, of a Synod? will you compass the incompassable? will you compare with
the incomparable? Oh you cannot! Do you think that God has no other Ornament
then a Directorie, to adorn a Nation which he means to reform? If he has such
a mind, surely he has. Do you think that he who has rivers of all sorts, and
waters of glory, and of variety to change his Creation by Jesus Christ, and
according to Jesus Christ, has but your stream? But that one current of yours
which you intend to make to run in the veins of the heavens, and of the earth
if you can? Surely you are deceived, God will, I am confident dry up your
River, and make your fish to stink, and die for thirst. If you have a Jasper,
do you think all must have Jaspers; may not another have a Saphir? Yes truly,
whether you have, or have not a Jasper, if you have a Saphir, may not another
have a Chalcedony? If you have an Emerauld, may not another have a Sardonyx? If
you have a Sarduis, may not another enjoy a Chrysolite? if you have a Topar,
may not another enjoy a Chrysophrasus? If you have a Jacynth, may not another
have an Amethyst? Rev. 21.19. If you have, or be any of these, surely it would
be satisfaction enough to you. If you have the light of the Sun freely given
you, will you endeavor to destroy him that has but the light of the Moon?
will you despise the day of small things? Have you freely received, and will
you force another to walk as you walk when he has not received? You that were
overcome your selves, (if you have truly overcome evil and Heresy) will you
have another Conqueror then the brightness of the Fathers glory? Is it not
your darkness and inconsiderateness, to say in your heart, who has begotten
these? Do you think you must be perpetual Fathers? shall Saints be always
taught of fallible, mutable, vain man? would you not have God to beget how he
pleases, and when he pleases? Oh vain man! why contendest thou with thy
maker, the holy one of Israel? Thou can not prevail, thou never made a hair
of thine own head, thou never addest a Cubit to thine own stature: He that
walks in the circuit of heaven laughs thee to scorn, and has thee in derision
daily. Do thou think God can bring none forth, but such as thou willest? can
teach no other way, but such as thou teach? can have no other Terms but such
as thou understandest, comprehendest, studiest, and contrivest? If that
invisible God, and eternal substance does begin to set up his Standard to the
people, and to lift up his hand to the Gentiles, and to make Kings nursing
Fathers, and Queens nursing mothers; Will thou instigate the Magistracy, the
Kings, the powers of the world in the high places, to bind the people of God
(though under another notion) in chains of death and darkness? Do thou think
that Kings, Queens, and Magistrates must be only nursing fathers and mothers
unto you, must honor the God of Heaven and earth only in you, and lick up the
dust of your feet? In the consideration of these things, I am cast into
admiration of infinity. Oh boundless God and binding man! Oh boundless God!
that measurest all things, comprehendest all things, who have infiniteness in
all thy true variety; let not thy Saints be ashamed to wait for thee. Oh
Supersuperlative binding God! who art able to bind Synods, Counsels, Powers of
the world, in chains and fetters of Iron; that have bound the people, and
deceived the Nations a great space, manifest thy self, that thou bindest and
loosest, and art able to restrain the bindings of man, as well as to unloose
after thou have given him power to bind. And if thou have an intent that this
Synod shall be a scourge, or means of a scourge to thy people, as well as other
Synods (formerly called Convocations, or other names) do thou say to thy Saints
in the spirit of understanding; Where is the fury of former oppressors? and am
not I the Lord thy God? and is not my name the Lord of Hosts, who have divided
the Sea, whose waves roared? Isa. 51.15. Say thou to thy people, as thou said
of old, Isa. 52.3, 4, 5, 6. Ye have sold your selves for naught, and ye shall
be redeemed without money, though they that rule over you make you to howl,
and cause the ignorant of God to blaspheme the Lord every day. But let thy
people know, it is thou that speak, even thou. I am confident Synod, the
thoughts of God are not your thoughts, neither are your ways, the ways of the
Lord, for as the heavens are higher then the earth, so are the ways of the
triumphant God, and the thoughts of the triumphant God higher then yours, and
you may miss of your aim in your generation: but I rejoice you keep your
Crown, Power, Kingdom, and Glory so long as the Father will: Synod read,
perhaps you may know and understand, 56 Isa. 11. and 57 Isa. Whose Chapter may
appertain to thee in thy own understanding, and the 13 Ezekiel and 14 Ezekiel
9, 10. and 41 Isa. and 10 Jeremiah, and 23 Jeremiah, and the 26 Jeremiah, and
29 Jeremiah, 8 and 12 verses etc. And also the 34 of Jeremiah 14, 15, 16, 17,
18, 19, 20, 21, 22, etc. I can (I thank the most High, the invisible substance)
make parallels, and the parallels aequipolent. Therefore though you shall
endeavor to scourge me and afflict me, yet I shall see the love of the
absolute Lord, in scourgings and whippings. Though you shall say as others
before you have said, Come let us scourge him and afflict him, for he has
sinned against the Lord; yet my glory is in the absolute God, washer, cleanser,
purger, discerner, informer, reformer, and acquitter, and from him I have my
Quietus est. What though you make me an offender for a word? What though you
shall have the Nobles, the Powers of the world, the Parliament (whom you
instigate,) the People, to say, Come let us devise devices against him, because
he speaks of the things of God (he being not Ordained.) The Law shall not
perish from the Priest, nor Counsel from the Wise, nor the Word from the
Prophet. Come let us smite him with the tongue, and let us not give heed to any
of his words. Yet the absolute Lord, non-respecter of persons can give a word
to the poor, as well as to the rich; to the Carpenter, to the Fisher, as well
as to the Prophet, the Priest, and the Levite.

I rejoice in your instigation of Magistracy, because of the Fathers will, and
because it causes this operation in me, it makes me, and has made me to see,
if I might attain it, how I am (as really) in the beauty of the Son of
righteousness, who is more beautiful then the Sun, the Moon, and the Stars.
And truly I am told of God (as I am persuaded) that I should not as yet one my
self with you, nor acknowldge you as friends, to the wisdom and glory of God in
Jesus Christ. If I should not hold forth my contrariety, as the Father has
made me contrary to you, in love for God, in love from God, and to God; I
should have burning fire in my own breast. Would you have me know any thing of
God and not speak it? if I should forget the Lord my maker and trust on you,
and upon you; surely my Lord when he looks upon me and I see him, would make me
to lie down in sorrow, and to weep bitterly: therefore I had rather have your
frowns (who call your selves Teachers and Fathers) then my real, absolute, and
immutable Fathers. Will you scourge me, or afflict me, or instigate Magistracy,
if at any time I shall declare the sweetness of God? Shall I be in the garden
of variety, and not speak of it? would you have none be in the garden but your
selves? would you have none other but your selves (though others are in the
garden) to speak of the things they see and hear? Do you know the root and the
ground of Gods wisdom? Do you know all the branches of Eternity? Do you know
the God of Dominion? Will you not let him save whom he will, and condemn whom
he pleases? Will you assume to make a man know, before he must truly know; and
understand, before he must truly understand? Are not the times and the seasons
in the heavens and the earth, for the fathers accomplishments? Must not the
heavens and the earth hear his voice when he speaks with an intention that it
shall hear, know, and understand.

I was lately cast into a consideration of the incomprehensible od, even of God
(who is acknowledged by you generally to be Causa Causarum) and also of vain,
weak, inconsiderable, Logical, Sophistical formal, in fine, sensual man. I was
thinking how small a particular creature of God I was, and how little of the
visible world I could comprehend in the hollow of my hand, and then I
considered, and said, surely it would be an admired thing, if a Synod, if a
man, if men, if a few men should make a Law, or procure a Law, Ordinance, or
Declaration to be made, that a man that could not comprehend the heavens and
the earth, or the glorious visible things of God in the hollow of his hand,
should be accounted an Heretic. All rational men in the world, and those that
are only rational would think it a foolish Ordinance, an inconsiderate Law.
Would you have a Law made then, that he that cannot comprehend (or comprehend
as you would have him comprehend) the invisible things of that invisible,
indivisible God, shall be accounted an Heretic. O surely if you had faith, you
would be glad to have it to your selves, and you would manifest it, with the
glory of its pure self, and undefiled being: surely if you had faith to remove
mountains, you would have more love to Heretics (as you call them) and less
bitterness. But it satisfies me that God can roll the heavens and the earth
together like a scrowl, and bring it into the narrow compass of a man's hand, if
he will, and manifest himself to whom he will, and when he pleases, and you
are not masters of him. He always comprehends, and he can so be seen to man's
capacity if he will; and he can and does comprehend not to be seen if he will;
he is not like to man, one little particular of Gods varieties; he can feel us,
and we shall not be sensible of it; and see us, and we shall not see him;
though he be within, and without; upon the right, and upon the left; before,
and behind. Suppose you have seen Lillies, but another has seen Roses, and
another has seen flowers of other natures and kinds: will you make a Law, or
endeavor to have a Law made, that all must say they have seen Lillies, and
nothing but Lillies; when they have not seen Lillies at all, but Roses, or
other of Gods diversities? Again, suppose you have been in the garden of God,
did you get in by the sword, by violence, by power, by sleight of hand, by wit
and policy, by Logic and Phylosophie? what must others do that have not your
Logic and Phylosophie? but truly I think the flaming sword of the
incomprehensible God will keep you out with your Logic, and prevail with you,
and over your Philosophy, and truly, immutably, and substantially cry,
Victoria Again, suppose you have been in the garden of God, and seen the
fragrant flowers, the sweet beams of Divine Light; your names written in
heaven: suppose you have the witness of Jesus in your consciences, will you
endeavor to have a Law made, that all that will not believe you, may be burnt
with fire, may be imprisoned, may be banished, may be sawen asunder, may not
trade and traffic in the kingdoms of the world, which are the Lords? Surely
if you were truly taken up with those beauties in your selves, you would not
desire that fire should come down from heaven to destroy others much less make
a fire your selves to consume them.

Again, suppose that a multitude, or many now in these days should see Jesus
Christ, should enjoy the invisible teachings of God in the inward man, should
speak of it, or preach it: would it not be a Pharisaicall envious trick to
endeavor to rebuke such Disciples: if they should cry Hosanna, Hosanna,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord in the inward man? May not
Christ say, if these should hold their peace, the stones would immediately cry
out Luke 19.37, 38, 39. When the incomprehensible pleasantness of the spirit is
manifested, from enjoyment, it would be never the worse if it were by all the
people, if in the streets, if upon the house tops. But I know that Scribes and
Pharisees and high Priests will murmur at this, and pray, and fast, that Christ
may rebuke this, but Christ will not; and therefore Assembly, though I have
been held in chains of darkness a great while, and though held in the grave as
it were; yet when the eternal God to my understanding, and with his flame
inflames, and zeal makes me zealous, and in his time makes me to serve him, I
desire it in that time when he wills, and alone in that time when he wills and
until that time I may say, from my self, to my self, and to you, Ne suitor
ultra crepidam. But when he will inflame me to speak in the understanding, I
desire not to value the powers of the world; whether within me, with me, or
without me: For I desire to be a servant to the most high God, though bonds and
afflictions shall wait for me. And so with my respects to you, as to men, men
subject to infirmities, and passions, fallible men: And also desiring the
father alone (if it be the fathers pleasure) that I may whilst I live (under
the appointed power and Authority of the World) be more and more drawn up into
the life Supereminent in a way of peaceableness, (though I live in unpeaceable,
unquiet, unholy, ungodly Authority, and Power) and quietness, in all godliness
and honesty, I rest:

Hoping I am, and so shall be A Servant to the absolute Lord, though I shall be
persecuted for the same, W. Bray.

To the Impartial and Partial READERS.
Reader,
WHosoever thou art, under what name soever thou would be accounted, and
esteemed amongst men, if thou art free to read, let it be as if there were no
distinction of names by man which tend to division and fleshly contention; but
if thou and I are distinguished in the true nature of distinction, (as of, and
in two bodies in opposition, designed, and brought forth by the eternal God) I
know we shall be contraries, though in some measure, I can say, I have the
spirit of testimony, the spirit of understanding, yet, I can say, I am nothing
at all, neither do I desire to be any thing, but what God will, and whatsoever
I am, or am made to be, that God may be all in all. Perhaps I shall lead thee
through variety of objects, which thou will like, and dislike, but whosoever
thou art, I hope I shall not be offended with thee (being in it kept through
the power of God) if thou dislikest, nor the more affected, if thou likest, for
thy liking, or disliking, commends me not, neither discommends me unto God. But
his Testimony unto me, with me, for me, in me, is free, and true, even higher
if possible, then perfection can style it, Non ab homine testimonium accipio, I
receive not man's record, I care not for man's testimony. I have directed this
ensuing treatise to the national Ministers (so called) perhaps you will expect
they should confirm the words they have spoken, and preached unto you: If that
ministerial Assembly, and those godly divines, (so called and esteemed) will
not vouchsafe or condescend to give me an answer, I should be unwilling to be a
Proselite to such men. But my comfort is, that he that inhabits eternity will
discourse with me in the inner man, within my own vail, when I shall not be
admitted, or accounted worthy to come within a thousand foot of a Synod. I have
read, that Mahomet when he had published his Alcaron, no man must comment, dare
to dispute, or call in question any part of it, be it never so absurd,
incredible, fabulous, and ridiculous, it must be believed, implicit, no man
must contradict it upon pain of death, threats, terrors, affrights, tyranny,
are their means to keep men in obedience, Priests and polititions do delude the
whole world now at this day: Such men as have, and do read Machiavell and
Tacitus are the men that act to the been esse of a Commonwealth, and must also
(as they suppose) act in dominion and authority over the Church of God The
Priests talk much of the spirit in their prayings, and preachings, yet none
other must upon pain of damnation, or heresy, at least; others if they preach
it, or declare it, must be termed by them, Enthusiasts, and what not. Can we
exclaim thus O Festus dies hominis! If that the light of reason only were not
stifled, and choked in the world by the national Priests and their Proselites
pretended divinity men would not be so much deceived. Do not take notice of
names, as Episcopal, Presbiter, and Independent, for a man may use either of
them, without wrath or malice, a man may say unto you all, do as you would be
done by. Let God alone (if you can) to destroy all unrighteousness, and to add
Cubits to our statures; whosoever thou art, if thou art righteous, thou can
not hinder another wickedness, and falls, until God wills it; so if thou art
wicked, thou can not hinder another righteousness unless God wills it, God
has brought forth variety in the world, and one thing shall not hinder
another till the Supreme cause of all will hinder as to man, and further as to
man. Methinks it would be more suitable to the Scriptures of an Apostle, if in
any thing any one be otherwise minded, God shall even reveal it unto him, and
that would be the cessation of contention in Episcopalls, Presbiters, and
Independents so called. I desire only to manifest a striking at the root of
any evil, as I am stricken lovingly of God, the supreme cause, I desire him
alone to perfect the work in righteousness, and to bring forth judgment and
truth unto victory when he will, both to thee, and me. I write this unto man,
not for liberty, but to declare what grounds I have in my own conscience for
the same of him, and from him, who gives and continues liberty, and holy
complacency in a divine will, in prison and out; I have been under an
extraordinary temptation (of and from the Devil and Satan, that for the
present has Crowns in the world) that I might not manifest my self in this
particular way but God has answered all Arguments that I can, and paradventure
also that thou can make. If I shall be again stricken friendly of the Saints,
I desire I may see it as a precious balm, and embrace it, and in some of all
see the active God in it. If I am stricken of others, I desire to see only
power, will, and authority, from the Father of consolation: So accept this from
him who is

Thine in the service of the everlasting God, as in the generation of Jesus
Christ. W. Bray.

Temporary Potentates, (that now are) you must go to the great Grave of your
Fathers, even you Mutable, living, and dying Potentates, you must be enclosed
in the Concave of the earth. You Principle Counsels the best of you not much
better then your fathers: nay, if some of your fathers were extant in the
Visible life, you would hardly counterpoise them in a balance: if you would
suffer your selves to be weighed, you would be found too light. Oh! you
spiritual Sensitive Synods or other Assemblies in the whole World: What
though you break out without an absolute holy zeal of the eternal God, (but
yet with zeal) with a zeal to set up your selves, or to honor eternity with
the thoughts of your selves, with the directories of your own hearts.
Interrogemus Prophetas, Interrogemus Apostolos, Interrogemus Scripturas,
Interrogemus Christum: Have not many of your National fathers erred, not
knowing the true and real mind of the minifestations of that incomprehensible
God? Have not many of your forefathers, even you your selves varied from
Apostolical knowings and livings in the Spirit? If I did think Antichrist
would not lie, or if you were competent Judges of your own hearts (in this
great time of your contention for Masteries, for power and authority, for the
sitting in the uppermost Rooms of feasts, for Judging according to your selves)
you would tell me that you have all gone out of the way, and that you are
altogether become abominable, even in the eyes of the divine invisible
presence, as it is in the Son of the Fathers love; and also in your own eyes:
Have not many of you endeavored to find out the profound, unsearchable riches
of the incomprehensible God, who is every where, in all the natures of things;
and yet can hide himself in relation to any thing beside himself, so that they
shall not perceive him? May not God work upon the Left hand, and upon the Right
hand, and you see him not? surely it is recorded that Job was in such a
condition Job 23.9. Have you not endeavored to find out that one indivisible
mind, that one unalterable God, as if you contained him in the hollow of your
hands, in one associated, assembled company? Oh! then truly those that you are
pleased to call Sectaries, of all men are most miserable. Have not you thought
you might find truth's glory by the knowledge of the Etymology of words, by
your artificial learning and parts, by finding out the fallible derivations
and national changings of Terms? Have not your Sermons been cunningly and
artificially composed, like Menander his two Comoedies Andria and Perinthia,
which were very unlike in composition? And has not this deceived the hearts of
the people, though your subject matter, (as you will say) differ little? Do not
you in your great contentions endeavor to make a Uniformity in worship, (which
you are pleased to call circumstantials, or to give some other slight name to
it,) and also an Uniformity in your substantialls; so that the Magistrates have
been as the Priests, or the Priests as the Magistrates; and so Priests,
Magistrates, and people have been almost all one? But you must likewise go to
the Sepulcher of your fathers, to be intoombed, or hidden mystically in the
containing Bowels of the earth, the grave of the eternal God for all.
Yesterday it was to a persecuting Papist, afterward to a persecuting
Protestant power, and to day is to a domineering Presbyter, Hinc illae
Lachrymae, here is unstedfastness in all our ways, here is persecution under
3. adulterated forms: though I mention only these forms, I complicate other
forms whatsoever they are in the world, that are not of God even the Father,
as considered in the body of the Lord Jesus Christ. Give me leave to reason
with you, and take all in good part; for I freely give in a loving
consideration: but let me tell you in this little Tract, that which I
apprehend, will in the time of the invisible, omnipotent Father pierce you to
the very heart; even some of you in this Generation before it passes away, by
that word which endures for ever. Oh thou Papist! have thou Jesus, Jesus, so
much in thy mouth? Oh thou Protestant! have thou Christ as much in thine? and
thou Presbyter have thou the Lord Jesus as much in thy mouth as either of the
former, to throw both down; and others also that are in a form of contrariety
to thee, and to make thy self an absolute Lord, an absolute lover of thy self,
an absolute pleaser of thy self, an absolute liver to thy self: I only give
these names, because you are capable of those names you own your selves by, and
distinguish your selves; and indeed are distinguished in the world; therefore
be not offended at it.

You speak much of Christ, and your own ordinary and frequent expressions to
maintain your own Jus Divinum are frequently in your mouths (nay, I think in
your hearts.) You say indeed Interrogemus Christum, but you do take council
with your selves, and if you, or any of you, shall be subject to the sweet
teachings of God, of the most holy, true, and absolute, you will tell me
hereafter, or others, if not me, or your selves, if not others; or be told of
God that you did proclaim a Fast, but you intended to cut of Naboaths head
before hand, to stone poor Naboath and all because he will live in the
inheritance of his Father. You will say that you had self-contrivings, and
Law-makings, to destroy those that would walk, and live, and speak, as being
the inheritance, and in the inheritance of the Father, of freeness, love, and
excellency: You will say that you with the will of your selves, and the mind
of your selves, (though unseeingly to you, the mind of the incomprehensible)
did make way for Stigmatizing, and Stigmatizing Informers; if you fasted from
your selves, if you did not ask council of your selves in the forms of truth;
make interrogatories to your selves, and answer your own questions; it would be
a great question whether you obeyed the voice of God, or walked after your own
premeditated Ordinances, Laws, and Designs. What though your Counsels, (as it
is recorded of Herod in the peoples apprehensions) do speak as the Oracles of
God? what though you make your selves strong by arguments drawn from your vast
Humane Intellects, (according to the formal denomination of wisdom and
understanding in the world) it is all but your selves, it is but the high glory
of an exterior and mystical Antichrist; it is but ad res inanes studia
convertere; It is that, that has deceived all the Nations of the world, and
does deceive the people and multitudes of the earth, and make them to wonder at
you: and indeed it has not only drawn the earthly, and beguiled the simple,
ignorant of God through deceit, but also the heavenly, the Saints of the most
high, those that are in the fathers bosom, and glorious teachings, even to
make a Disciple for a season to deny his Master; till the substance, the
invisible, incomprehensible God has given them to see himself more, and also
themselves and others, and to see and live to themselves and others less, and
to see him inmost of all, within every vail, within whom nothing is, and
without whom nothing is, or is not: is it not evident in the world, that Synods
and Assemblies have more looked upon, and judged truth to be according to men's
various argumentative varieties, according to the seeing of the eye, and the
hearing of the ear, rather then the true and real discendings of God in their
own understandings, by the absolute spirit, witness, Testimony, or
manifestation of the sole supreme?

How many thousands of adulterous voices have the world heard and worshipped
with, even with the Supereminentest names of Glory? how many false and
uncertain sounds have the Plebeians (so called by many in scorn) affected from
a Causidick, or a Terrestrial Politician, or an affected and self-affecting
Priest, when the sound have been given by those that have the power of the
Air, that are the princes, Lords, Counselors, and Synods of the World, has
not error been affected from them, if under glorious names, and curious
expressions? let the Generation that is now, be Judge, Oh you Lords! you
Consellors of the earth: Oh! you Cedars in the world your Kingdom, you have
interwoven your selves into the language of the Almighty, and mixed your dross
with the precious, and scarce-known truths in the World; But your mixture
destroys not the substance, but the substance in the fullness of time shall
destroy your mixture: but how many, or whether all you shall be saved in that
day, I determine not; he alone knows, before whom, all things are naked, and
not veiled.

Truly Potentates I see (when I behold him, or when I am rather made to behold
him, who is the cause of all, and of me, that am in particular, and of what I
am, whom I desire to live unto) man's highness to be lowness; man's strength, to
be weakness; man's promises to be perfideousness; man's liberty to be bondage;
man's Communion to be far different from the Communion with the Father and the
Son in the active, substantial, immutable, eternal spirit: I see man's truths
to be vanity and a lie; man's love to be wrath, man's goodness and constancy to
be all to himself, and man with God in his heart, as by his understandings
contraction, and man with God in his mouth to carry on the design of his
worldly Kingdom and glory.

Truly earthly scourgers and Tormentors in your own Kingdoms and glories, your
intentions to scourge and afflict, do make me to look to the interiorest, and
to see if possible I can by that measure of glory ministered to me, how I am as
to the great Jehovah; and how I must be to him, and for him and not to you, for
you, nor to him for you, but that I might be all for him, and all from him if
possibly to you, to him, that so I might see what I have been and am unto my
self, But in the consummation of my thoughts I considered this with my self,
I shall not be truly able to endure the brunt of violence, if my contrariety
be to you only with the flesh, it is but Satan's Kingdom divided against it
self, whose Kingdom and glory must cease, and must be demonstrated to be vile
and contemptible, for these two (which are but one) contraries in this seeming
division, shall at length find and feel the absolute contrary, the supreme,
and the supereminent, the head, the Judge. In my alone seriousness I considered
that I had been a professor (of and out of the Church of England so called) but
my profession made me no Saint: for it is the alone absolute and real
sanctification in the Spirit that must make me a Saint and a professor, I did
find according to the substance of examination and scrutiny, that my
profession now must surely be more then formerly; that it must have an absolute
life or else a fire would quench it, and the looks of Lords would abash it, a
prison would imprison it when I should be in and out, if I shall be out after I
am in, it would cause a cessation, and honor and credit and preferment amongst
men would ensnare me, and with it is smiles would entrap me: But Lord let not
the Lords excellencies, mutabilities, glories, in fine Vanities, entrap me, let
not my profession be merely a profession of the eternal and everlasting being
and name according to things without me in the similitude of the profession of
the world, generally, cofusedly, and from an exterior extrajudiciall affection,
that eternity would comprehend me as knowingly to me (as well as knowingly to
himself, who comprehends all things knowingly) in the true serious and real
nature of sanctification; and that my profession may be the true and real
effluxs of such a glorious comprehension.

But Princes, Nobles, and Counsels, not worthy to be named so, in relation to
the absolute supreme; I desire to behold a distance; when I am truly acted in
contemplation of the Prince, the absolute, the true, the infallible,
unspeakable; though I speak of the false, though I speak of the fallible and
mutable, I desire not to center there; I desire only to speak of the fading,
and dying glories, as being United to him who comprehends the mutables, the
exteriors, and the interiors, and speaks of them, and to them, and give them
their names and places.

But Satan that Devil tempted me, and endeavored to have Dominion over me and
it presented it self to my exterior, and approached violently with curious
attire, fine expressions, the language of the most High to have admittance; but
the interior (I thank the Lord) had present recourse to the Interiorest, to the
comprehending the mystical God, the comprehending incomprehensible. Me thought
I had these things presented me, if you will not walk according to the Law of
Nobles, Lords, and Potentates, you will be crushed, they will bind you in
chains, will not let you live in the world, Imprison your poor body, make you
to be despised of all men, if thy profession or the things thou live in, and
know, were more general; then thou might have honor, credit, and
reputation in the profession thereof, thou would have friends in the
unrighteous Mammon; the Highpriests, the Scribes and Pharisees, and the
Doctors of the Law are thy Antagonists; but then was the time for the absolute
Lord to appear, and his appearance caused contrariety to the Lords Agent or
Agents: then I (despised, contemned, inconsiderable person) did desire that I
might behold the absolute Lord, and might now contend in the spirit, and speak
by the power of the highest, the cause of all causes, the God of all natures,
the father of all spirits, and might now be made unwilling to stand before him,
as being any thing; and that I might be what he willed, and might not be what
he nil'd, Absolute supreme, one Absolute Counselor, (yet more wise then
Counselors) let me be abased, so as in my abasement thou aboundest, in me, to
me, though thou art incapable of abounding in thy self: thou who comprehendest
the heavens and the earth the constellations, glories, and powers of both; let
the particular, producted, visible form and shape; even me in particular, see
thee who art alone praiseworthy If the world have a prison for me, tell me
that the prison is thine, both before and when I am there; and let me know that
nothing divides thee and me; for thou art indivisible, and may, when thou will, be seen in all the natures of things. Oh thou eternal triumphant God!
let me live in the wondering and admiring of thy holy, unsported fullness: let
me not look upon spots any more, upon emptinesses any more, but with the
communication of thy fullness incommunicable, that is, let me not look upon
things by the wisdom of self, by the sensual wisdom, the wisdom of the
flesh; let me not look upon a lie any more to be deceived by it, to live upon
it, to live to it, to be delighted in it: thou that have habitation and
habitations, and yet have no habitation at all to enclose thee, comprehend
thee, inviron thee, and do good unto thee; if thou have eternally willed it,
let me be the habitation of thy wisdom, though a prison shall be a habitation
for me: Oh sweet God! how sweet will it be, that I should be a habitation for
thy invisible, indivisible self, in the spirit of understanding: conquer that
Devil for me whom thou have made and given power to deceive, and yet have
power to conquer him; and if thou have a mind that I shall speak of thee, and
acknowledge thee, manifest it, and then let me not fear the face of a man whose
breath is in his nostrils; but yet Lord let me have that courage that belongs
to thy immutable life, and to those that live unto God, and not themselves.

When I shall, or if I shall be brought before Magistrates, Kings,
Counselors, or Judges of the earth, let not that move me; let me not be
tossed to and fro by them, so as to give up or make recantation of those thngs
thou manifestest by thy eternal impress, let me be before the Magistrate and
judge as knowingly in the presence of the judge of Magistrates and Judges; and
let me speak as in thy presence: Lord I have spoken in private of thee and to
thee, and thou vouchsafest to reason with with me, and discourse with me, but
man is vain, man is sensual, man is proud, and the lofty ones would be more
lofty, then the lofty one that inhabits eternity. Will thou invisible God draw
me to speak to thee, and furnish me with arguments: and shall I be afraid to
speak of thee, to thee, in the face and hearing of a dying man? But Lords of
the earth, Lords in time, I may truly say as in the presence of the Lord of
times and seasons; Oh Lord my God! other Lords besides thee have had Dominion
over me, (have been in me the head of a design) but by thee will I only make
mention of thy name.

Temporary Lords, Counselors, Synods, if he that sees would make you see,
that say you see; if he that apprehends, would make you apprehend, you would
see your selves, neither Lords to your selves, nor Lords to others in things
concerning the invisible life; you would be glad to have your selves dethroned,
and the absolute supreme in all your titular, momentary glories alone
dignified, and exalted.

But Mutable Dominion, what will it avail in the day of the Triumph of the
absolute perpetual Triumphant; when sorrow and mourning shall fly away from
your abjects, the off-scum, and offscouring of your worldly glory: when fears,
death and Hell, when worse then the Plagues of Egypt shall fall upon you, and
possess you, even you that have had the pleasures of Egypt, and power given not
only to your selves, but pleasure in your selves to scourge the Nations,
especially the refining Jewels of the great God of heaven and earth.

Me thinks I see and hear, that the Lords of the earth, the Potentates of the
world; the praying, the preaching, the fasting, the fleshly glories, and the
spirits of Antichrist (but I must confess with some comfort, it is only during
their time of dominion and whilst their place is to be found) endeavor to
destroy the prayers of Saints by praying, the declarations of Saints by
Preaching; to destroy the glory of true, real, and absolute fasting, by
fasting.

This National Interrogatory may be indeed asked; What Religion do you
profess? May there not be a general cry by those that see? May there not be a
Trumpet sounded in the Nations of the World (but more especially in the
commonly called house of Jacob, or England,) that seemingly there is a daily
delight to know the ways of the most high; as if a Nation that did
righteously, and did not forsake the ordinances of the great God; as if they
walked according to the dictamen of the absolute sole supreme, and lived
according to the absolute spirit of the eternal God in the truth of
understanding: do they not seem to ask of God he Ordinances of Justice, when
their own praemeditated, praeordinated, fleshly, Antichristian Ordinances,
Laws, and Statutes, are maintained by their fleshly, carnal, accomplishing
power? But these delight in their approaching to, and by the name of the
eternal God.

Have we not the Monarchs, the powers of the world, of Nations, the spirits of
darkness, death, hell, and the Grave that challenge the holy one of Israel to
his face, that insultingly, and domineeringly, and as much as in them lie,
blaspheme the absolute supreme wisdom: and would be in the place of the
supreme Cause; or would have the supreme Cause to be their servant? and they to
be Master to that eternal, absolute, undefiled, immutable glory; as if they
should say, we have fasted and thou see not; have we observed days and
months and years, and observest thou not? We love the Nation with our hearts,
and we will preserve the Nation with our prayers: Shall we observe a day, and
will thou not observe both the day and us? We have not only afflicted our
bodies, but our very souls: if bodily whippings; scourgings, and lashings of
our selves, (as many of us are persuaded in our understandings) will not move
thee: yet our afflicting our souls, and piercing our selves through with many
sorrows, or reducing our selves in body and soul into a super-superlative way
of sadness and affliction, will, must move thee: Will thou take no knowledge of
this excellent days work of ours? We came with an intent to have thee know
what we would have thee know, and do, what we would have thee do against
Heretics and Sectaries, disturbers of the Peace; we would have thee our
servant, our slave, but we will not say so, for that will too much undeceive the
world; if out of our own mouth we should judge our selves, we should no more
bind the world in temporary chains, and in fetters of our own devising. But
Oh Lords! Oh you Monarchs in a Nation and Nations! you have here in this little
Tract, but an earnest of your charge drawn up; but when the interiorest of all,
when that knowing, seeing, and judging God, that lofty one shall come and judge
you according to that you are within, (for you are not always the same without
that you are within) What are ye? What difference shall you see? Shall you not
see a change, and a vast disproportion betweeen a Lord, and a Lazarus that was
captivated to the light and knowledge of the absolute Lord: But Lords, or powers
of the World, by what name or title soever distinguished, what though in the
day of your fasting you found pleasure and delight yet it was but an exaction
of your own labors; ye fasted for strife and prayed for debate, and to smite
with the fist of wickedness, as a Nation that did righteousness, justice and
mercy; as if you lived to the highest forms of truth, in relation to
humanity, and likewise to infallible and absolute Divinity; but in the 58 of
Isa. you may see your Image even by your National fathers before you, when the
absolute alone supreme judge shall enter into judgment, and give grinding to
the grinders, in giving eternal burdens to those that have temporarily
burdened, bound and oppressed. O then let the mountains and Rocks fall on us
and the Hills cover us from the presence of the judge: Oh then! Ministers,
Divines, Teachers, Instigators, Instructers (as you said of your selves) in
righteousness, what hiding place shall we have? But you say or think, it may
be, that there is no such thing to be expected, therefore you will take another
man's word, I wish I could truly say (if it were the will of eternity) much good
may it do ye.

When the absolute supreme shall fasten this to your Consciences, which as yet
passes away as a tale that is told unto you, 59. Isai. Your hands are defiled
with blood, and your fingers with iniquity; your lips have spoken lies, you
conceive mischief, and you bring forth iniquity; you hatch Cockatrice eggs, and
weave the Spiders webb: but your eggs, if they are eaten, they that eat them
die; and if any with the power of life, manifestation, and understanding of the
Absolute, crush your eggs, they break forth presently into a viper; but when
eternity will enter into judgment; when the Islands shall fly away, and the
Mountains not be found, when the hearing of this voice shall be manifested,
Rev. 6.10. etc.

Oh Lord, (not Lords) holy and true, do thou not judge and avenge our blood
on them that dwell on the earth, shall the glory of the heavens afford you any
comfort? they shall be rolled together like a scrowl: shall the Kings of the
earth, and the great men, the richmen, and the chief Captains (your servants)
the mighty men, the bond men, the freemen, the Dens, Rocks and Mountains afford
you comfort and succor? Shall multitudes? shall kindreds, Nations, Tongues?
shall power and authority? shall a Lady? shall a Queen? shall a woman arrayed
in purple, and scarlet color, decked with Gold and precious stones, with a
Golden cup in her hand? Rev. 17. Shall the Merchants of the earth, with their
Merchandise of Gold, Silver, and Precious stones? shall the fruits that your
soul lusted after? shall the Shipmasters? Rev. 18. shall the Parliaments? shall
the Synods? shall the Committees? No surely Lords: Oh then! happy is he whose
God is the Lord.

But Counselors, but earthly Politicians, when you shall be arraigned in the
interior man by the interiorest, the all-seeing Jehovah, the infinite
everlasting, the absolute Lord: What are many Lords, and what are many
idolized false Gods? when you shall be called Gods, and Lords, and come to be
judged, arraigned, condemned by the absolute non-respecter of persons, as men
in the inwardest cogitations, mind, and understanding with those aggravations
that lie in the wisdom of eternity, to make and manifest, your Webs shall not
become garments, neither shall ye cover your selves with your works; for your
works are works of iniquity, and the Act of violence is in your hands.

But in the midst of all my thoughts I was sore oppressed in my own spirit, and
I was willing to give up my self, even the exterior and the interior life to
the supreme absolute. To live in the world I was unwilling, yet willing; for
live I must, and in this consideration live I would, so long as the giver or
the taker pleases; let him do with me what seems him good in his own eyes:
But I saw man, or the temporary Lords in the world contending to amend; and me
thought I saw that which was mended by man, was but amended with a fancy; and
that which was amended with a fancy, was lacerated and torn with another: one
man's amending another in the world, in relation to the supereminent divine
changer, amender, translater, is like a simple Cobbler his amending a pair of
shoes, that may be for a fortnights or less (not much more) walking, will
wear them out, so that it may be said, as you were, or rather worse then you
were, for these amendings perish with the using; therefore I may say, Ne suitor
ultra crepidam.

But that which I beheld in the world, I desired the supreme to destroy in me,
for I thought with my self, it may be I may contein all the innormities of the
whole Orb, therefore I was in fine, made to reflect upon the supreme, and the
absolute Lord and Lawgiver; and when I by reflection considered the foundation
of all Generations, and I had no satisfaction in the apprehension of the life
of the Generations past, or the life of the Generation that now is: I was
reduced into the foundation, and that gave me some sweet solacing, and some
pleasant refreshing.

But in seeing I beheld, and in my view I saw the Lords of the earth had
enlarged, and were ever enlarging their beds of pleasure, to take pleasure in
their excess, and their temporary glories: Methought I saw them resolved so far
as mutable Lords could resolve, to keep to their own Laws, Statutes,
Ordinances, and to make them unto themselves, and demonstrate it unto others,
as if it were the absolute, true and infallible Sabbath of rest, and
commendable by the most high. And when I did upon the Lords casting me into
serious consideration; behold the Lord by the glimmerings of the supereminent
and everlasting glory opening the Seals: I saw beasts in the shape of men going
forth conquering, and to conquer, with bows in their hands, Rev 6. And I saw
and expected an Arrow to pierce all those who held the Testimony of Jesus, I
saw the Lords and the Potentates of the Air, those that had the power of
Nations and Kingdoms (so long as they had the Crown) go forth conquering, and
to conquer. But Lord if it be thy will, make me also to will to receive (if
thou willest to give) an Arrow from that Bow. The life supereminent was no
sooner held out, the Seals were no sooner opened by the eternal supereminent
judging word; but presently another beast represented it self (so long as it
had the Crown) to take peace from the earth, and to kill with the sword. But Oh
Lord Absolute and Eternal! I cannot say that thou will not reveal thy self to
any one, because thou do: not reveal thy truth to many a one; but if thou will reveal what thou have hid, and hide what thou have revealed, thy will be
done: the generations of the world, are servants to thy Mystical glory, and to
thy incomprehensible Majesty; draw me up unto that supereminent life in the
truth of apprehension and understanding, that so I may live in that life though
I am killed with the sword.

Also I see a further accomplishment, and in the accomplishing I behold even in
the temporary world, a horrible persecution and affliction upon the exterior
forms, and natures of things: methought I saw violence on every side,
persecution and affliction under all forms, to stifle the Testimony: methought
I saw the beast, the powers of the world, the Air, the Kings of the earth, the
great men, the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, (that had
the temporary Crown given them) endeavor by all ways and means possibly to
destroy the Testifyers, and the Testifyers Testimony. Methought I saw the
temporany and yet infernal Nobles of the earth, that wear the momentany and
yet perpetual Crown of Hell and death in themselves according to the power
that is committed unto them, acting persecution in one form upon the Neck of
another, which is the manifestation of the variety, and yet unity of that
state, that body of Antichrist, Hell and death, sword, hunger, and beasts of
the earth, even Ephesian beasts after the manner of men: and then I saw the
doom of those that have the Testimony of the Lord Jesus: and I brake out into
Admiration in my self, Oh eternity! how do the Nations of the world, the
National powers of the world, hear, and see, and read, and seem, and would be
supposed to understand, yet they see not nor understand, and yet they suspect
not themselves, but teach and declare of themselves, and say that they are
christians and walk in the life supereminent. But Nobles of the earth take this
only if you can lovingly, til I am more lovingly inflamed, or until the father
will manifest himself more unto you, or me, even in the interiorest in the
dividing assu^der, rending, and tearing in pieces of all your fleshly
deceitful glories, whereby you have for many hundred years past, deceived the
people of the earth: I am no disputer of the world, I desire to be Tomteltra
and not Oedipus. I desire not to insinuate with you but to live to my God: the
God and Lord absolute, merciful, holy, undefiled and eternal, I desire only
of the father that I unworthiness and weakness, may live to him and with him in
the interiorest, sublimest, and truest; and that thou worthiness, gloriousness,
would understandingly as to me, comprehend my particular, and do what thou will with me in my exterior, or in this visible world: if thou worthiness and
truly eternal Lord, wilt surrender me up into the hands of the Lords and
powers of the earth, that act in a constitution of persecution: Let me in the
interior say Amen.

But yet Satan that Devil tempts me; but yet me thinks I am surrounded and
environed in this my pilgrimage, and methinks the exteriors of the world
operate, insinuate, dispute, and reason with me and tempts my exterior to
conform me to its self, and confound me in its self: I heard a voice in the
world the other day saying, (very Schismatically, erroneously, and according to
the witness of men) and denying the absolute witness of the great Jehovah,
denying that Jesus Christ is come in the flesh denying that power is given to
the Son, loving, to have the pre-eminence, the uppermost Rooms at feasts, and
in Synagogues, setting themselves in the place of God: attributing that to
their fallible, deceiptfull, devilish understandings, actings and contrivings,
that is, to be attributed to the alone supreme; not waiting when God the
absolute changer will give repentance to those that believe not the truth but
have pleasure in unrighteousness; earnestly contending (as they say) for the
faith that was once delivered to the Saints, in such ways of carnallity, by
such carnal weapons which were not used in the times of that excellent,
glorious, Apostolical ministrations of God, and consequently denying the
glorious and supreme power of the spirit; giving themselves to fornication, and
going after strange flesh to deceive the Nations, desiling the flesh by their
filthy dreaming, by imposing such things for an exterior worship (as if
Commanders) as are not consistent, with the life and glory of the Spirit in us.
Whereas the flesh of Christ that visible manifestation of God at Jerusalem 1600
years ago, was lead according to teachings of the Divine God, despising the
true and absolute Dominion and dignities of the most High, speaking evil of
those things they know not, and what they do know, as brute beasts in those
things corrupt themselves, running in the way of Cain, killing their brethren
in the flesh, because they are not of the same judgment and understanding in
the spirit, envying them in the offering of their sacrifices, because they
offer not their sacrifices as they do: pulling and halling them before
Magistrates, Counsels, Powers, and Authorities, Imprisoning them, Banishing
them, confining them, depriving them of their liberties, accounting the world
not worthy of them, acou^ting them the off scouring of all things, running
greedily after the error of Baalam for reward, setting obstacles in the way of
true, real and unblameable liberty of Saints, in their true and glorious
feastings of spiritual Charity and Love in the dispensation of the various
gifts of the most High God, feeding themselves without fear, when others are
living, walking, talking, lovingly conversing, eating and drinking in fear;
Clouds without water, Clouds covering the clear Heavens and Firmaments as if
they were full of water, and as if showers would presently fall, great
Mountains traveling in birth, Clouds carried about of winds: from Popery or
Popish Episcopacy to Prelacy in another form, and from that to Presbytery, and
those that would have the same wind of Doctrine; the same teachings of fallible
men to blow others, whethersoever it blows them, whose fruits have often
already withered from one age to another, and more then twice dead, and plucked
up by the Roots, raging waves of the sea, foming out their own shame, having
not the spirit of meeknes, gentleness, tender mercy and compassion though Stars,
yet wandering Stars, to whom is reserved blacknes of darkness for ever; and
therefore they would draw all men unto them, Murmerers, Complainers, Informers,
Reformers according to their own lusts, speaking swelling words, having men's
persons in admiration because of advantage (not knowing the glorious mind,
infallible will of the eternal God, as the Apostles of Jesus Christ) Mockers
walking after their own ungodly lusts, seperating themselves by the power,
will, mind, fallibility of fallible sensual men, having not the spirit,
denying any one but themselves, (and those whom themselves approve of) to build
up any in the holy faith or to Minister the gifts they have had of the
supereminent God: Teaching by necessary unavoidable consequences that their
love, sensual, carnal, mutable affections are to be looked after before the
love of God; or as well as the love of God (though God the absolute satisfyer,
informer, and reformer satisfies not.) having no compassion but on themselves
and those that they think they can by flattery draw to themselves, making no
difference but from themselves, making no difference according to the true
nature of difference, but only making a difference according to their Carnal
Laws, ordinances, Statutes, decrees, not endeavoring to save others according
to the true absolute, infallible, holy, just, warrantable way of salvation,
Endeavoring to pull men that are (as they say erroneous) out of the fire with
violence instead of fear, malice, hatred, imprisonments, bonds, Endeavoring
to pull others out of the fire, and save others with a love, respect, affection
to their fallible mutable garments spotted with the flesh. But oh, immutable,
unspotted, undefiled God! thou who art able to present me faultless before the
presence of thy glory with joy, let me not be separated from any, or joined to
any when thou shall separate, till thou seperatest and joynest; that so
separation may be of thee, and uniting may be of thee, and that I may hold
forth the interior teachings, the hidden unspeakeable mystery of calling and
enjoying. Let me not walk according to the mind and will, of the men of the
world, that are something and nothing, that live and command according to the
will of the flesh, let me not walk according to the way of the wandering stars,
the wonders of the world, of mountains, of Thrones, of Principalities and
powers of the air, of the Gods of nations preistly Counsels, and Magistrates
of the earth chosen by men of the earth. But oh Lord! let my Exterior be what
the Lord, and not what the Lords will.

But methought I saw the priests of the nation in Pomp and glory, in kings,
Monarchs and potentates Courts: and methought I saw them instigating the
Civil Magistrates of the world, and I saw the persons, and their ways to be
the Preistly Lineage and the successors of the Lord Jesus, his and his
Apostles and Saints enemies, who crucified the Lord Jesus, did kill and slay
the Apostles, and Saints of the most high God, and being convinced of the
glory, power, and truth of God, manifested in those Apostles and Saints, did
endeavor to extripate and root them out from off the face of the earth, and
made them to wander up and down destitute, afflicted, and tormented: And when
they thought they had extinguished them, and rooted them out of the world, they
styled themselves the Apostles successors, Ministers of the Lord Jesus, and
Priests of the high God, like certain of the Jews, Acts 19.13. yea Vagabond
Jews, Exorcists, who took upon them to call over them that had evil spirits,
the name of the Lord Jesus, whom Paul Preached. But here I was cast into
admiration why the world should ever the more admire the Priests of nations and
their adherent (that are the scourgers of Saints, the incensers of Magistrates)
because they pretend to the Lord Jesus whom Paul did enjoy, and whom Paul did
preach: But priests, but Ministers of the Gospel as you call your selves)
though I can say in some measure Jesus Christ! know and somewhat by the power
of that eternal spirit I know, which Paul know; But who are ye?

But though you are in my apprehension, the great enemies of the Lord Jesus,
and though I shall be accounted an evil spirit by you, a Devil, or what not;
I would not insult over you though I had power over you. But it is I can only
say, that many of you may be saved; it is the eternal, absolute, and only wise
can say, you shall. But yet I think you shall suffer the loss of your craft;
for many persecutors, both before and in the Marian persecution became
persecuted ones; the Father called some of them from queenly, fleshly carnal,
Antichristian glory, to the fire: I desire, that you would not be offended with
words; for I profess seriously I speak not out of hatred, but out of pity to
you that are in contrariety to the Lord Jesus. You often say, you acknowledge
a God, therefore expect not that I should call you gods that have hands, nor
your works gods that are made with hands, nor any or all your minds or
understandings Gods, even a whole Synod or Counsel, But the absolute supreme
God shall be, when you are not to be seen; Time may be when your Craft, as well
as your predecessors craft may be set at naught, and your gods and goddesses
despised and all your magnificence destroyed, though there were as many more,
eager and violent persecutors and worshippers: are not you the cause, whilst
you have the power in your hands, whilst you have the Kings, Lords, and
Potentates of the earth to act for you, that there is so great a stir about
that way which you partial, fallible Judges call Heresy: What though you cry
out great is Diana of the Ephesians? what though you are full of wrath and
bitterness, so that fire proceeds out of your mouth, and as much malice, envy,
and divellish contrariety to all (except your selves) as can be supposed to be
in the most barbarous and cruel; yet your Kingdom is not an everlasting
Kingdom, nor your Dominion an everlasting dominion, but the supreme infallible
Judge will come gloriously, and will not tarry: It is but a Marian Trick to
persecute a poor man, and to hale him, or endeavor to bring him before you
Commanders in chief; your Magistracy and Counsels for Preaching, (as you call
it) I will acquaint you with one thing, I providentially saw not long since in
the Book of Martyrs of one Rawlins White a Fisher man of Cardiff, who was burnt
for an Heretic: a little before the fire flasht up to his body, many of his
friends came to him and took him by the hand, and one held held him till the
flame arose and separated friends: but a Priest said it was not lawful to take
him by the hand, for he was an Heretic, and condemned by the Church; I wonder
Mr. Pryn does not insert this as of divine Authority, to prove the lawfulness
of persecution and violence to be used to Heretics.

But National Ministers you are the Children, or the Childrens Children of
those that were so constituted, and did Act according to an unjust papal way,
and as one says of them, Cujus faetor usque ad nubes fumum teterrimum
exhalabat, whose filthy stinck did fume even to the Clouds of Heaven, but
indeed you did still endeavor to cloth your selves finer and finer to make the
world wonder at you, and think you were really for Reformation, but be not
deceived so as to think that God can be mocked and deluded, though you find
men (almost the whole world) very facile and easy to be deluded with a lie,
with a fancy. It was formerly wont to be said, Agnus dei qui tollis peccata
mundi miserere nobis, but must we take it in this acceptance, Synodus Dei qui
tollis peccata mundi, miserere nobis? Oh the intolerable pride of Lucifer! O
the Vanity of the high Priests! who are made by the power of the great God, to
confess they are not infallible, yet act as if they were.

But methinks I see and behold (I thank my eternal life and only wise God) my
Lord to laugh at the Lords, my God at the Gods, the and my absolute, immutable,
perfect, infallible informer, and Reformer to laugh at the mutable,
non-absolute, imperfect, fallible Informers, and Reformers; but it may be these
men may be sealed up to the judgment of the great Day: but the alone absolute
Judge knows, and I am alone satisfied that he knows, and that he manifests,
and mysteriously contains in his invisible self what he pleases.

In my Soliloquies, in my withdrawings in secret before my God (of whom I
desire not to be ashamed, and unto whom all things are naked and bare) the
contrariety of the powers of the world, made me more now then ever in all my
life to look up to God the incomprehensible glory, to see if possible I might
attain, or had attained to it, as apprehended of him; how I was as to him,
which would be the greatest comfort to me that could be: if the Lord should
lay some heavy affliction upon me, if I should be brought before the powers of
the world, for I saw in the world, and methinks I see and hear the Crowned
Beasts (as well as the Saints of the most High, the fellowship of the body of
the son of God that are round about the Throne) cry Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was and is, and is to come, I saw the whole World in confusion,
and yet walking in their place; the beasts in their place of adoration,
acknowledge the most high God under the same forms of expression or
Ministration of holiness and glory, that the Saints of the most High did. But I
see and understand a variety of manifestation of the great God of Heaven and
earth in distinction.

But I seeing and beholding the Beasts of the earth to have a Crown, power, and
authority given them to kill with the sword, under the name of the worship,
service, glory, and excellency of the most High God, and it made me that have
lived (in the time of my ignorance of God, or life to God with God) after the
flesh, deceit, formal man, teachings, and fallible apprehensions to look and
see, if I could behold, or attain to see the eternal, absolute and infallible
to comprehend me in the body of the Lord Jesus and to see if I lived to the
life superemine^t, to the life sustaining, feeding, even to the absolute, true,
and not fading principle of glory, and to see if I lived to the true beams,
life and Communion of true understanding. But Lords, Counsels, Synods, or
Honorable men, of good, and admired literature, you that desire to be
reformers of men for the salvation of souls, you that conceive your selves to
be the men absolutely infallible in your selves, and undeniable to others
called of God more then the generation of priests, or Synods before you, you
that so well conceive of your selves that you act not from Preistly Marian
principles, as the Priests, your predecessors did, you also that hold forth
your doctrine, as they did theirs, from your own or your Fathers
interpretation of Scriptures, you that endeavor to limit and bind in Chains
of darkness and self, you that would have none teach but your selves, or
rather to minister what they apprehend of God, but your selves as your Fathers
before you. I desire you and earnestly entreat you, as you tender the
Scriptures of God which you (as if convincedly, truly, and knowingly maintain
and preach from) And because it may not be said if you, (if it be not true of
you) according to that Rule of imperiousness earthliness, sensuality, and
Devilishness, wisdom (and yet folly) Sic volo sic jubeo, stat pro ratione
Voluntas; And furthermore because it is said in the 5 James 20. let him know
that he which converteth a sinner from the error of his way, shall save a
soul from death, and shall hide a multitude of sins, (if you infallibly
know, as many of you seem constantly to averr, that this Scripture belongs
unto you, to make use of) Consider you are men, and not God. You are many men,
and you have many minds, See and behold (if you can) whether you may not be
condemned by the Eternal God, though you condemn not your selves, or judge
your selves; if you are now of one mind in your Assembly, you are not to be
considered eternaly so; for yesterday you were of one mind, to day, you are of
another, and before many days or years come to be consummated by that
eternal God, (who is incapable of change) you may be of another mind,
contrary to them both; you have hissed at the generations; that have been past,
and at the generation that is, but the generations that are to come may hiss at
you, and may be ashamed of their fathers pretended infallibilities; you or your
fathers have Clipped the wings, whipped, scourged, imprisoned the bodies, in fine
abused those that have been contrary to you; what did you do as you would be
done by? Did not many of you that pretend to have a holy respect to the
Sabbath, read (your selves, or countenance the reading in others) the book of
sports. And will you now make it your sport to persecute? Did you not live far
below the heavenly glory of knowing, and understanding? How will it be with
you, when God shall say to your Consciences, you that thought you knew so much
of me, did not know your selves; you that were ready, and violently ready to
scourge, had need be scourged, even at the same time, of God. It is true, I
gave you understanding, power, and Crowns on your heads, and I will judge you
according to what you are, and with what you have, as I have your fathers
before you. Time was, when you would take notice of none crowned but your
selves, none honored of God but your selves, as if you comprehended all the
incommunicable and communicable varieties of my self, as if you had the
infallible discerning of spirits, but now I will show thee those whom thou
persecutedst, those whom thou esteemedst the offscouring of all things, the
filth of the whole world, to wear Crowns of gold, and white Raiment, though
you had Crowns, though powers, kingdoms, and glories, though you are
disputing, intellectual persons, and have rational capacities, though
governors of multitudes, Nations, Kindreds, and tongues, yet you have not
white Garments before the All-seeing, Supereminent, eternal Jehovah.

When you Lords of earth shall see one that you Lorded over, crowned with
transparent gold, Crowned with the transparent power, life, wisdom, and love
of the eternal, invisible God, and in the body of Jesus Christ, if you shall
behold it in time, Oh then my Lords, Tempora mutantur; if when time shall be no
more, what shall my Lords be, I shall expatiate my self according to the
Scriptures of God. 10 Luke. Christ gave power to (and manifested the fathers
glory in) a few poor disciples, a few tormented, hated, persecuted Saints; to
cast out Devils, to tread upon Scorpions, and all the power of the Enemy; But
surely they became not a Magistraticall power, to accomplish such a Victory;
and though he gave them such power, he told them, there was no cause of triumph
in this, or joy in this, that the spirits were subject unto them, but rather
that their names were written in heaven, what though their are many spirits
gone abroad in the world, Sectaries, the divills of the world, (as you call
them) your rejoicing would be rather (if you had such a glorious Apostolical
Commission power and glory) that your names were written in heaven, that you
your selves are comprehended in the bosom of the Father: But yet if you did so
your selves, and know your selves, it would be questionable whether you have
this Apostolical power and glory, if not the one, surely not the other. But
you may have a Crown, power, and authority continued to you, to scourge and
crucify.

It it is said in the 21. and 22 verses, The eternal supereminent, the Lord of
Heaven and earth, had hid wisdom from the wise and prudent, and revealed it to
babes: Lords tell the people plainly and distinctly, whether you can say that
it seemed good in the sight of the Lord to alter his visible dispensations, and
to reveal his truth to Lords, Potentates, Counselours, wise men, prudent men,
Satin men, Purple and Diamond men (that is to say) those that go in gay
clothing, and would sway the whole world, those that have respect of persons,
those that must sit here, and sit there, because they are thus, and thus:
Christ told his disciples that many prophets and Kings, did desire to see the
things that they saw and did not see them, and to hear the things that they had
heard, and did not hear them. But admit there have been prophets, Kings, and
Lords, since that, which have seen the things of God, you may not be such men,
that are now in this Generation, Christ said all the glories of the Father were
delivered unto him, and that no man did know who the Son is, but the father;
and who the father is, but the son, and he to whom the son will reveal him,
even that son who has power over all flesh to give eternal life to as many
as the father pleases. But Lords, Synods, Counsels, can you say all things
are delivered unto you of the father? though you have Crowns, though you have
power, yet have a power of mutability your power is not that power of all: that
power of love, of life, of perfection, of infalliblity: do you know the son
as well as the Father, and the father as well as the son? Do you know how
many? and who, if how many, the father will give eternal life unto, by Jesus
Christ? do you persecute (you being fallible according to your own confession)
because you would bring into the fold those that are not yet brought in, but
must be, or would you be certain, infallible, powerful assistants with Jesus
Christ, the absolute Lord, or do you intend to persecute those that are not
intended according to an eternal intendment, to be of the body of Jesus
Christ? if so, are you as certain, as Christ is certain, that this is the
Harvest? and are you as certain that you are the reapers? that you your selves
are not the tares? are you the Thousands, yea the ten Thousands of Saints by
which he will come to judge the world? Has the Father altered his mind in
relation to manifestation, and told you that you must pluck up the tares before
the Harvest? Or was not that his mind, when he declared that the tares should
grow together till the Harvest? Has the Father or has the Son revealed these
things unto you in this generation? if so tell us; and when it was; and how:
and it will be a greater glory unto you, then to sit a great while and bring
out a few fallible contrivances, and Scholastic inventions. But it is far more
glorious, and a greater matter of rejoicing to you to be lead (if lead) then
to lead, for the all-sufficient immutable Lord to lead the lords, the people
and Nations, then for blind lords and Priests to lead poor blind people.

How would the supereminent be exalted here? Admit that the Sectaries of the
times, those that are called Devils incarnat (by you Potentates of the world)
should in their journey to or from Jerusalem fall amongst thieves, and should
be stripped of their raiment and be wounded; should yield to the temptations of
that raging devil in the world, in and since the Apostasy, or since that
Satan's Minestery and Magistracy has had and continued their power in the
world. Is it commendable in the Priests and Levites to see them so, and to pass
by on the other side? or is it commendable for these Priests to add, or cause
others to add afflictions to their bonds: But these Priests and Levites God
will not honor so much. The Samaritan must come and see also, and have
compassion. Oh Good Samaritan! for the poor, wounded, stripped, and torn man;
this is an excellent similitude, the supereminentness, and gloriousness
consists in the subsistence.

But Oh! unmercifull High Priests and Levites, when God has sent a messenger
of Satan, to buffet a man and to have power over the body, and may be the
understanding in temptation will you buffett and imprison much more: look to
your commission, may not God say to a Synod in this case as Christ said to
Peter, in another Get thee behind me Satan, Are you better then Peter was? if
you are, or if you think you are, dare not Christ say so as well to a Synod as
to a Peter? But this is your pity, if we were wounded and naked, and if you
were (as you are not) the true, loving, compassionate, judging, discerning
persons, I think you had need to have the most glorious, infallible Commission
for your security that may be, so to persecute and prosecute, if it were
lawful so to do. What cruelty is it in you who made not your selves, to
destroy your selves? you that are not able to make a man to destroy a man,
starve a man for that which is in the conscience, even for that which a man
himself is not Lord of, when you nor he are truly able to add one Cubit to his
stature, unless that you go to a Shoemaker for a pair of Heels. Indeed what
ye make you may mar, but 11 Luke 40. Ye fools, did not he that made that
which is without, make that which is within also, Profecto testificamini quod
consentitis, operibus patrum Vestorum; For ought you know, God has sent a few
mechanical illiterate fellows (as you call them,) that the blood and cruelty
of all Generations may be set on the score of the continued successiue
persecutors as well as upon those who slew and dealt injuriously with the
Prophets and Apostles. But this will not excuse you, to say you had power to
bind heavy burdens on others shoulders, and not to touch them your selves
with one of your fingers; This will not exuse you before the Supereminent life
glory, Lord absolute, discern judge to say; what tongue, or Lord shall
control us? Surely I think if Christ Jesus the head, the anointed, of God in
peculiarity, were in the world now, as he was, in so despicable manner to his
enemies, you would scarce afford him to write, or seem to write upon the
ground, If he did we should have a gangraena made presently to condemn this
Heretic, this Beelzebub, this friend to publicans and sinners.

But Lords, But Counsels but Synods, in fine but men, when the absolute Lord,
and supereminent God shall tell you (though a poor man) it may be that is
judged and condemned before you may not neither does that you who were, or are,
called Lords in the sublunary, Visible Kingdom and glory did endeavor to cast
a moate out of another eye, and you had a beam in your own, and that you
having a beam are no competent judges of a mote.

But it may be you will say that you are infallible in this, and also say, that
that saying of Christ does not appertain to you; Let him that is without sin
cast the first stone, when God shall discover himself and manifest you what you
are, even that you that judge other, are Cast-awaies your selves, are Heretics
your selves, you would not be very willing to find a stone for another. When
the Lord shall say though you cried Templum Domini, Templum Domini, yet the
everlasting was not in your esteem, even he that can when he will both cast out
Beam and Mote. But thus it is, when the Lord is not or will not be
understandingly and supereminently in the Lords thoughts, though he be near and
sees, yet he will not be seen; but they say, how does God know? can he judge
through the dark Cloud, thick Clouds are a covering to him that he sees not,
and he walks in the circuit of heaven, Job 22, 23, 24. But Oh Immortality!
thy righteousness, thy seeing, and thy seeing to be seen, thy knowing to be
known, and thy understanding to be understood shines not upon all. Thou have O
Lord set the world in my heart, so that no man can find out the work that thou
have made from the beginning to the end. Ecclesiastes 3.11. Therefore Lord if
thou will give a Crown, Power, and Authority to Temporary Lords to exercise
their Dominion and power even upon me, if thou shall manifest me and make me a
little flame of thy self, thy will be done. It is only in thy self to
comprehend the works that thou have made from the beginning to the end, if man
endeavors to comprehend, endeavors to inthrone himself in a state of
comprehending others, and persecuting others from an apprehension that he
comprehends, when he does not in deed and in truth: and though I shall (if thou
comprehending incomprehensib e, willest) be afflicted, scorrned, and contemned
by that generation; yet let me in particular lie down and be satisfied, that I
am apprehended and comprehended of thee, and that I know, see, and speak,
according to the true and real nature of knowing, seeing, and speaking, and
living, and enjoying, as comprehended: let me see, before I say I see, know,
before I say I know, and be spoken to, before I speak: Oh! thou immutable
knower, see'r, and absolute speaker, as to the things that thou have made
capable of seeing, knowing, and speaking, let thy loving spirit of
righteousness and wisdom uphold me; and though thou deliverest me to the
ungodly, and turnest me over into the hands of the wicked, let me say truly,
knowingly, and understandingly; my witness is in heaven, and my record is on
high, in love, Job 26.19.

But Counselors of the Earth, Weak Contenders of the Earth with the absolute
Lord: I see and consider oppressions (though I see not all oppressions) under
the Sun. But a comfort it is that the absolute Lord sees, Eccles 4.1, 2. But it
may be Lords, you will say when you persecute, there is no remedy in the death
of a man, it is suitable to convenience, and the constitution of a Kingdom to
destroy a man: so as it was indeed to crucify the Son of God, who was known,
and is known to some, not to be held of the grave: But you it may be, will say
you have not known any man to return; it may be you will say men are born at
an adventure, and shall be hereafter as though they had never bin; and that the
breath of your nostrils is as smoke, a little spark in the moving of your
Breast; which being extinguished, your body shall be turned into ashes, and
your spirit shall vanish as the soft Air, therefore you will lie in wait for
the righteous, because he is not for your turn, he is clean contrary to your
doings, because he professes to have the knowledge of God, and he calls
himself the child of the Lord, he is made to reprove your doings, therefore he
is grievous to behold, because his life is not like other men's, his ways are
of another fashion, because you are esteemed of him as counterfeits, and he
abstaineth from your filthiness, and because he makes his boast that God is
his Father. And therefore you will examine him with despightfulness and
torture, to know his meekness, and prove his Patience. But Potentates, I shall
present a few things to your consideration, paradventure you may see with your
eyes and hear with your ears, and when you are converted (if ever you shall)
you may set to your seals that these things are true; to the praise and glory
of the absolute,, infallible God, Judge, power, wisdom, and true glory.

1. God is the alone supreme, King of kings, Lord of lords, and God may, as
well as he has already, give the Nations, (or those to whom he intends, to
show and manifest himself unto) a light and glorious understanding, to see that
Lords (by special authority and power formerly constituted) are but types and
shadows of the absolute supreme, immortal God and Judge: but this is true,
though the Lords and Kings see it not themselves, for I know they will say, you
Prophecy not good unto them in these things.

2. Christ the perfect pattern of the Fathers, manifested perfection to men;
never gave any such power or kingly authority to any that then were in the
world, either Magistrates or Apostles; he never gave the Apostles power to
exercise themselves with scourgings, whippings, imprisonments, banishments, or
oppositions of such a kind, therefore there is no such successive Magistracy, 2
Cor. 11.3, 4. verses If he that comes, Preaches another Jesus whom we have
not Preached, and if ye receive another Spirit whom ye have not received, or
another Gospel which ye have not accepted, ye might well bear with him.
Likewise there was power given, or the manifestation of the most High in a way
supereminent, that the Saints should do great things by the power of the
Spirit, and in the name of the Lord Jesus, that supereminent name, that name
above every name. In whose name the seventy returned with joy, and said, the
Devils were subject unto them by it. Luke 10.17. I know no other authority,
power, or glory given to any that should profess that name according to the
spirit.

3. Christ's commanding the Apostles to give Caesar his due, and God his due, is
a plain demonstration, that somewhat might be due to the one that was not due
to the other: and if the Magistrate would demand Lordship over the body and
conscience, what would they leave for God, the eternal, infallible Ruler? Or
does the soul, the understanding alone belong to God, and the body belong to
man, in relation to the commands of the Divine God?

4 External contrariety to Magistracy is apparent by Jesus Christ and his
Apostles in their Preachings of the truth, and way of the most High God; so
that as the visible does do what he is commanded by Caesar, If that invisible
God command another thing in the conscience or understanding; for Christ was
not contrary in the invisibility, but also contrary in the visibility to the
Magistracy, Governors, Highpriests, Scribes and Pharisees. Christ never
inslaved himself, nor the mind of his Apostles to the Magistrates and powers
of the earth. And there can be no more Conformity demanded from any, to any
Magistracy, but only what he obeyed, and taught others to obey, even in the
paying of Tribute to Caesar. Or unless a man be taught (by that Ministering
spirit which was promised to direct into truth) to be obedient to a Magistracy
in some other things which Christ was not obedient in; or was to be subject
unto: no power of conscience to Magistracy. Again, the children will not be
free in the Magistrates jurisdiction from paying of Tribute, so long as they
have that benefit to live in the world amongst them, in buying and selling. God
will not have his Saints to appear more glued to the world then other men; to
get by the world, and not to let the world have a benefit from them as well as
strangers or other Cohabiters: and indeed it is good for the maintayning of
love and Unity in the world, and that which does comprehend in it a possibility
to live peaceably with all men. And a Magistrate (if he be one that walks and
judges according to the pure light of nature and right reason) is to see that
there be no injury offered to peaceable men amongst them: and for this cause,
the Saints or those of contrary judgments pay Tribute also, because they are
or should be the Ministers of God attending upon this thing. Romans 13.6. And
therefore very conscionable that they should have Tribute, whether they are
appointed of God in an immediate manner, or of men in a mediate; if they are
(as they are not) appointed of God in an immediate, in a more especial (if God
shall send such, or constitute such a Magistracy) then reason to pay Tribute,
if appointed of men in a mediate, good reason also because the people,
multitudes or Nations, have made choice of some to do their business, to be
their servants, and so long as the children of the Kingdom of God, have their
just, lawful, and natural liberties, and freedoms, to act in their several
trades and occupations in the world, in godliness and honesty, they will yield
to Caesar in those things which a Law of nature or of convenience obliges them
to, if they were not commanded: for if they live quietly under a Magistracy in
godliness, or according to the teaching and way of the most High God in a way
of peculiarity; then they also exercise themselves in honesty, in relation to
civils or to Magistracy. No power of conscience given to Magistracy.

But if they are deprived of the supreme and absolute Glory of manifestation of
themselves, as to God, even in godliness (viz) by imprisonment, banishment, or
by confiscation of goods, or their conversing with men because they will not
receive the mark of the beast, then the Magistracy weaken their own, and the
Kingdoms strength. But yet they fulfill their own wills on them, but indeed
have no dominion over the Saints at all.

But if it be the Fathers pleasure, the Saints may live under a Caesar, a
Caligula, a Nero, a Domitian, or another successive civil Magistracy in these
considerations, peaceably and quietly in all godliness and honesty (not
affording a power of conscience at all) though they are persecuted and
afflicted, despised, scorned and oppressed, and so not live quietly, and
peaceably, yet they may live godlily, and honestly amongst them, or in the
Nation under the power of a Magistracy and the Apostle might pray for it to the
Father, and yet magistracy have no power of conscience; again though they are
persecuted and afflicted under a Civil Magistracy, and so not live quietly and
peaceably as before, yet they themselves may live quietly, and peaceably in
Godliness, and honesty (viz) they may not be disturbers, though they are
disturbed; afflictors and scourgers, though scourged; Tormentors, though
Tormented; buffetters, though buffetted: in fine, may not walk contrary to the
pure light of nature, and right reason, though others do so to them, and so
they may live quietly, peaceably, godlily, and honestly in the midst of a
perverse, irrational, self-ish generation; and so they may pray the Father to
live, though they give no power of conscience to magistracy. And therefore a
poor despised Apostle being ready to be devoured by every one, to be spitt on
by every one, in his abundant labors, in his stripes above measure, in prisons
frequent, being beaten with rods, being stoned, being in perils of waters, in
perils of robbers, in perils by his own countrymen, in perils by the
heathen, in perils by the City, in perils in the wilderness, in perils
amongst false brethren, might very well break out and pray to the eternal God
to alter and change the powers of the world, if that eternal God would that he
or the poor Saints might live a quiet and peaceable life in all godliness and
honesty: shall an Apostle speak of the things of his Father, and for it be
ready to be devoured, and shall a Magistrate countenance it? shall he have
stripes by authority, and without authority, be beaten with Rods, be
imprisoned, be in peril of robbers, in the City, in the Wilderness? What is a
Magistrate for then?

The Apostle being under so great pressures, in relation to the walking of
Magistracy contrary to the pure light of nature and right reason, might well
become a suitor to the Father, for a benefit of quietness and peace under
Magistracy. But yet Oh Lord absolute and undefiled, though thou give a crown
to defiled Magistracy to take peace from the earth, thy alone eternal will be
accomplished and performed, and let thy Saints live to thee, the supreme
Magististrate power, and authority, if thou will not suffer them to live
quietly and peaceably in the jurisdiction of the powers of the world.

5. Though the Magistrates may command the body, yet they are only to command
as I said before, that which a Saint would willingly do for peace and quietness
sake, if he were only entreated, or neither commanded or entreated; so that he
will act being commanded, and act being entreated, and also though neither
commanded nor entreated. But when the body was to be with Jesus Christ, who was
manifested in the flesh, or when the body is exercised according to the life,
power, and will of the supreme Lord, in Communion with those that have the
same spirit of the most high, in knowing and understanding, then the Saints
must not fear them that can kill the body, (viz) magistracy, but they must
walk as the divine, supereminent Savior, Lord, King Judge will have them.
Suppose that a Magistrate commands my body to do one thing, but the invisible
God in the understanding, he that is God of body and soul commands another
thing; whether is it lawful to obey God or man? Judge ye.

6. Suppose there is such a Magistrate in the world that does truly and really
conceive that there is one eternal God, the judge, the absolute God, the
Lawgiver in the conscience, and he according to rationality does endeavor to
demonstrate it, can he make another believe it? and if any conform to what he
says, not knowing it, is not he, an ignorant doer of what he would have him
to do, or a dissembling person? But Aug. one of Gangraena's Fathers says,
Simulata sanctitas est duplex iniquitas. But the Magistrates, and Priests of
the earth, have led the world in a string, and they are at the sensual beck,
and will of every base lust, and that rule is verified amongst them qui nescit
dissimulare nescit vivere, But Oh! how excellent will it be when Saints shall
more and more live to the supreme absolute God!

7. Whether a man may not have a word of God to deliver to a Magistrate, as
well as a Magistrate to another man? Formerly I know God called some to speak
to Kings, and Potentates of the earth. But we are better then our Fathers. Is
not the spirit of forbearance as good in a Magistrate as it is in another man?
if the Magistrate has had experience that no man can make him believe the
truths of God, and that he can not make any one; likewise why should he use
violence, bitterness, and wrath? But we call it not wrath, we call it Justice.

But the absolute distinguisher sees what it is, and he will call that wrath
and anger in you, which you call justice. But we will contrive a great many
fine words to wave it. But there is nothing has power, but what is given to
it, nothing enjoyes it longer, then he that gave it, pleases; neither shall
any thing be waved, but what he will wave, even that absolute, I am: But oh!
Lord supereminent, if thou call me, causest me to speak of thee, to manifest
thee, though magistracy heap up words against me, and strengthen their
mouths, according to the judgment of Causidicks and Synods of the earth,
though they hale me, and tear me in their ire, and sharpen their eyes at me,
yet let it be sufficient that thou love, and when soever I see man, let me be
drawn to God, and let me say with Job in the spirit of understanding without
respect of persons. Job 20.4, 5, 6, 7. Know thou not this of old since man
was placed upon the earth, that the triumph of the wicked is short, and the joy
of the wicked is but for a moment? Though his Excellency mount up to the
heavens, and his head reach to the clouds, yet he shall perish for ever like
his own dung, they which have seen him shall say where is he?

8. Those that the Magistrates endeavor to compel to the Laws, wills,
Ordinances, interpretations of Scriptures (the Magistrates being and confessing
themselves fallible) may, for ought the Magistrates know, have an obligation
and an absolute understanding, engagement upon their spirits as to God, to live
to Gods own interpretation, Law, will, and ordinance; which may be contrary to
the Magistrate. For God is the absolute original of all things that are, and
that are to be interpreted.

9. The People shall not suffer for the Magistrates sins, but their own, nor
the Magistrates, for the peoples sins, but their own. But the soul that
sins shall die: But yet in a common calamity the one may suffer as well as
the other, though not for the sins of another, 18 Eezekiel, 1, 2, 3, 4. etc.
There is a declaration as from the Lord. And the word of the Lord came to me
saying, What mean ye that ye Use this Proverb, concerning the Land of Israel,
saying, the Fathers have eaten sower Grapes, and the childrens Teeth are set on
edge? As I live says the Lord, ye shall not have occasion any more to use this
Proverb in Israel. Behold all souls are mine, as the soul of the Father, so
also the soul of the son is mine; The soul that sins, it shall die: you
may read the whole Chapter. This was a glorious Prophecy, of the time that
should be, when God should peculiarly manifest himself, when God would be no
more vayled by a man, when God would manifest himself to be the absolute Lord,
me thinks a Magistrate (confessing himself fallible) should fear to desire,
much more to command another, to that which that other is not satisfied of God.
For the soul of the person that the Magistrate commands, is Gods. It was no
argument, for a poor soul, when the absolute supreme entered into judgment,
to say that the Magistrate gave me and I did eat, nor an argument for the
Magistrate to say, that a company of people invested me with this, and that
authority, (as I thought) or desired this, or that thing, and I did eat: I had
received a Petition from the people, or from the Major part to release one
Barabbas, and crucify Jesus Christ, I received a Petition to deprive such and
such People of their liberties, (being such as they, when they did petition,
confessed God had honored in doing them good) estates, privileges, and
benefits of living in the world, unless they indeed, were not persuaded of in
their own consciences. If it was an Argument inexcusable that Adam and Eve used
to God, this may also hardly be. They had an infallible Ministration, what
should be death and life: But the Magistracy of the world, and Synods of the
times (confess themselves fallible) It was an Argument in that most certain
case for Satan to use, to suggest to poor weak Eve, as it was presented to
deceive: God does know that in the day ye eat thereof, your eyes shall be
opened, and ye shall be as gods, knowing good and evil. But oh Lord I let me
seek unto thee, with thee, and from thee, though that Devil tempts me to unite,
and manifest my self to that, and in that way of darkness, and man-sinning in
the world, whatsoever specious, and fallacious pretenses, I shall receive from
the men of the world, and from my own soul, as considered in its way of
operations contrary to the body of Jesus Christ: Let me, though I hear men in
the world pretend to the glorious mysteries of the Eternal God, and the honor
and glory of him, try things with thy self alone; and therefore, be thou
pleased to condescend to be my Companion, and teach me the way of thy
Commandments in the Spirit.

Though honor, pleasure, and preferment is presented to me, if I submit to
that way that I am, or am not persuaded is the way of God, as considered in
distinction in thy production in Jesus Christ: Let me hate (O strength) all
objects that are presented with pleasantness to my eyes, and with affection to
my understanding, though it be presented unto me, to be desired, and to make me
wise: If thou do contradict all those exterior presentations in the
Interiorest, And let me not value the favor, credit, respect, and reputation
of men of the world but be thou my God, and then I shall have rejoicing, though
I shall be cast out of the Paradise of men, and kept out every way with a
flaming sword: But in this my affliction let me have communion and power with
thy self, or else I shall prove a Devil to my self, and present the glories of
the world to my understanding, and shall be deceived.

Tenthly, Admit that the Laws, Ordinances of man, or the interpretations of
Scriptures by man were plain; must not God, the absolute, and infallible, and
Supreme power, accomplish in the hearts and spirits of all men, a believing of
plain things as well as mysterious things (that have more palpable necessity to
have the truth, and pure mind of them declared.) The Spirit was promised to
show the Saints plainly of the Father: If the Father intended we should have
Lords of the earth to show us plainly of the Father, and to make us believe the
plainness of the Supereminent teachings, surely he would have told us that the
Fathers shall teach us; The LORDS shall instruct us: The variable, mutable,
fallible, windy spirits shall teach us.

But if we are subject to such teachings: The fallible, mutable, spiritual men,
or spirits of the world, may cast out Devils in the name of Jesus Christ, and
sweep, and garnish the house, that seven other Devils far worse then the former
may enter in.

Eleaventh, Admit magistrates, and natural high Priests were the servants of
the most high God, the beloved of the Father, those that knew the mysteries of
the Lord Jesus, were infallible in all knowledge, or if they were true and
real Fasters, and praying persons; have they any other way prescribed to cast
out Devils out of those that are in their eyes damnable Heretics, such as are
really possessed with the spirit of blasphemy, then by Fasting and Prayer? Have
they any such rule as this, by scourgings, by whippings, by imprisonments, by
banishments? Howbeit, says Christ, this kind comes not out but by fasting
and Prayer, and no more. There is no other way spoken of by Christ, but by
fasting from self, from strife, and from debate, and from striking with the
fist of wickedness, living to, and seeing the will of the Supereminent in
fasting, in willing, in desiring, according to the effluxes, and descendings of
it to capacity: so that then fasting is good, and praying is exceeding good,
when the will of the Supereminent and everlasting is become man's will, or man's
will become the will of the supereminent, substantial, eternal, undefiled God,
which shall certainly be accomplished. But if even their very Fasting and
praying (according to the true, and real nature of Fasting and praying) be
questionable, whither will they fly for their actions of Persecution and
Tyranny?

Twelfth, Admit the generallity, or major part of Civil magistracy were truly
godly, and heavenly-minded (though I must confess I know no such matter, it is
well for themselves, if they truly know themselves so) and did walk in the
Spirit; would they not say as Paul did, concerning his brethren after the
flesh, who was so taken up with love to them, that he would be accursed from
Christ Jesus for his brethren after the flesh (who no doubt had errors, yet
not persecuted by him) would they not say, surely these are men as well as our
selves, and we cannot choose but confess our selves fallible; we have not the
Supereminent light, and perfection of infallibility discovered to us, as we
confess the Apostles had; we have not the infallible mind of God discovered to
us without the Scriptures; we have not the infallibility of interpretation of
the mind of God in the Scriptures; these men that we now Persecute, though as
now after the flesh to us, may be in relation to God the seed of Abraham,
according to Faith; unto these may belong the Promises, the adoption, the
giving of the Law of the most high God and LORD in Tables of the heart, as well
within as without, as well within in love, as within in terror. We have had
experience in this particular already; that those that have been extreme
vicious, are become Religious; we our selves have been debauched, most
desperate swearers and blasphemers of that Eternal being, (and are so still)
and we saw (or many of us) that nothing did us good truly, but the light and
love of the absolute, Divine, Supereminent: Truly all are dry-vines, there is
but one Supereminent power: Why should any the Dry-vines of the world urge such
a thing on us, as to lift us up, and instigate us to Persecute a company of
poor, may be, afflicted, tormented, tempted creatures of God, as well as our
selves, if they have received the Spirit of the Lord? So said their fathers
before them, and yet Persecuted the members of Christ; they may boast beyond
their line, as well as others have: If they have the Spirit, they have received
it, why should they boast? Why should they insult, domineer, and Tyrannize over
others?

Suppose Lords of the Earth, that some of you should give a gift to some one
man, and not to another, or a better gift to one man then to another, as a
badge of your mutable honor and love, should another now that meets with one
that has not this badge, rend him and tear him for it? if that he did also
meet one that had not so excellent a badge of honor as another should he also
imprison him, and wound him, or strip him naked? Surely I should think its
because he is so covetous, as to desire the garment: The Priest and the Levite
that came by the poor Samaritane, might be the Thieves: Apply it Potentates.

Besides, admit you should give a man an excellent badge, or cognizance of love
in your families, you should array him in glorious apparel, and set a crown of
gold on his head, would you take it well, that he should beat his fellow
servants, and wound them? Reflect my Lords, that he should kill all other poor
creatures, that came in his way, because they had not the like garb; truly,
you would say this with your self; I may give my own to whom I will; so long as
I have, I may give what I have; he has abused my love and favor toward him.
It may be you may judge your selves for your liberality; but Gods ways are past
finding out; and God may give forth some way or other to discover the thoughts
of all hearts. Oh Lord Supereminent! Thou have made all men almost to differ
one from another, and thou have set the world in their hearts: to some thou
did give the gift of prophecy (it may be) in some measure, to some Tongues,
to some discerning of spirits, to some working of miracles, to some wisdom, to
some knowledge, to some Faith; if thou give me but the glimmerings of love in
the least of these, or in any one, let me not despise him that has more, or
judge him that has more, nor yet despise him that has less, or judge him that
has less (if any have less then my self) in relation to capacity, or
understanding, for thou art the same; let me not pretend to know above what I
really know, though the powers of the world would have me do that I am not
convinced of; or leave undone, that which I cannot, because I am thine, not
their servant: Oh then the absolute Lord, overruled the lords in me, and let me
see thee, and walk before thee in the understanding: yet if thou will have a
Nero, a Domitian, a Caligula, or any power of the visible world to scourge me:
Give my back to the smiters, and let me know and see thou give it, and then
let me take pleasure in it. For oh Lord, me thinks I see that a man may have a
vision of God, and may see a star to arise out of Jacob, and may be convinced
in his conscience, that the earth is the Lords, and the fullness thereof, and
that God is the alone Lawgiver, Judge, and absolute supreme (as many, or most
of the National Priests and Lords confess) yet at the request of a base
sensitive lust, and divilish desire, will endeavor to have Altars built; yea,
Altar, upon Altar, to see whether they can curse the Israel of God. Let us
proclaim a Fast, that so God may hear our Prayers, and grant our desires, the
longing of our souls. But Lord, how far is this from the true life of
Saintship, and love in the World? But O Lord refine me, and then let me walk as
refined.

Thirteenth, The mandates of the Scripture (even the Scriptures from which the
Potentates, and powers of the earth have, and do maintain persecution and
violence to others) do all of them extend to the Magistrate, and if he were in
a Christian constitution (as he pretends) he ought not in that relation to use
carnal weapons, neither will he, unless he supposes himself wiser then ever
Christ, or an Apostle was, or has received the Spirit more then an Apostle
had, or has received the Spirit to maintain and defend such a practice, as the
Apostle could not, neither did, 2 Cor. 10.4. Christ says, when they were
persecuted, should pray, when cursed, bless; Christ could have had twelve
Legions of Angels to defend him in this visible world, but he would not take
any invisible glory, or visible excellency of God to defend him: And if the
Magistrates will tell us plainly, that they have that power given them (as
considered in a constitution of holiness and truth) which the Father would not
give Jesus the Son, or which he would not assume or exercise, nor give his
Apostles power to assume or exercise: Let them prove, that they, or this, or
that particular Magistrate had, or have, that which neither of them had,
neither Jesus Christ, nor Apostles: And let those whom they are pleased to call
Heretics, and to banish, imprison, and afflict; see their Arguments, that they
have in themselves, as in the presence (though they think it not, nor perceive
it, or know it, or though knowing it, will not acknowledge it) of the Eternal
incomprehensible Judge, non-respecter of persons, the interiorest, discerner,
that can describe that which man describes with a fuller description, and judge
with a fuller judgment then man, or any visible glory, or rational intellect
in the world; who is without the exteriorest, and within the interiorest, and
indivisible in himself, who judges with a more absolute judgment, then all the
Councels, Potentates, Lords, Synods or Parliaments of the earth. And when he
enters into judgment, the flesh of a Lord is no more then the flesh of another
man, nor shall more be justified by him, or be able to justify it self. But I
believe, if things were demonstrated in the world, according to the spirit of
truth, reallity, and non-confusion, the Lords, Potentates, and Counsels of the
earth would appear to be the greatest Anti-scripturists, though in words they
would not have it so expressed, or so express it themselves.

Fourteenth, Is it not a case of conscience, or is there not necessity, that
every particular man should be persuaded in his own mind for what he does or
for what he is commanded to do, least he call good evil, and evil good, least
he call oppressing, persecuting, Lords, Magistrates, Counsels, Synods,
followers of the God of heaven in love, light and truth; Citizens of the New
Jerusalem, Saints of the most high God, livers in the Spirit, those that walk
with God? when indeed they are not so, but grinders of the faces of the poor;
Idolaters, carnal, sensual and divilish, having not the spirit, having men's
persons in admiration because of advantage, making a prey of the poor and
needy; having wisdom, yet are not wise unto God, but to themselves; oppressors
(though not of their friends, or themselves) of the Saints of the most High, or
those that are not persuaded in their consciences by the Divine Supreme God: It
is not strange to say, know, and think, that magistrates (and ministers so
called) have been so, are, and may be so: The Scriptures of the most High God
testify it; the saints have witnessed it, and still do witness it with their
blood and bodies: Are there not men, magistrates, and ministers of such minds
as Caesar Caligula was of, that wished that all the people of Rome had but one
neck, that he might destroy many at once: Many can apply this: But Hell must
enlarge her self; Gods design must be accomplished in Hell, as well as in
Heaven; Saints give your backs to the smiters.

In this my last Demonstration and apprehension, I was in the conclusion,
desiring in my own spirit of that eternal Jehovah and everlasting God, that I
might be so swallowed up into that eternal glory, wisdom, power, will, that I
might not manifest my self with my self; but that my self, or rather himself
might be manifested in me, by me, and from me: then though the mutable Lords of
the Air oppose me, yet my alone substantial, ever-remaining, supereminent
Lord remains: If I live he is, if I die, those that live after me shall not
truly say he is not, but he is the same. I also desired that I might be so
swallowed up to the life of the Lord, that in seeing of that Lord, in the
things of that Lord, I might not respect persons and that it might be all one
to me to be hated, and to be loved, to be honored, and to be dishonored, to
have evil report, and to have good report to be buffetted, scorned, contemned,
despised, and to be counted the offscouring of the world, and to be courteously
entertained, affected, delighted in, to be out of prison when I am in, and to
be in when I am out; to have all things when I have nothing, and to see only
that all, that eternal wise God alone when I have any thing: if he shall call
me to speak of himself, that I may not live to any thing under the Sun, for I
see vanity in all things; I desired that I might see and live in the eternal
life, in the life supereminent: and if I shall be called amongst the called
Gods and Lords, that I might speak, as seeing truly but one eternal God and
Lord: For all the Gods and Lords of the earth shall wax old lik a garment, and
shall be folded up like a vesture: this I know and see by experience. Thou Lord
make the lords of the earth their name to rot, and their memory to perish,
and what shall be to them in their several particulars everlastingly, thou
LORD know.

In company I desire to see thee, and to look up to thee in the understanding,
as if I had none, that so I might see and not see, behold and not behold, be
thou my alone companion. Here in the world men love one another, because they
are as to one another according to sense, but let me not be to any but to thee
alone; let my life as the Apostle said, be in the flesh by the faith of the Son
of God in the Spirit.

In this world none must speak of the God, but that those the gods will approve
of; none must speak of the eternal, immutable, incondemnable, but those whom
the mutable, condemnable, dying Lords please, none must declare the eternal God
to the world, but those whom the Ministers, or Synods of Nations, or the Gods
of the Nation pleases. But if thou absolute, infallible minister, ministrests
to me, if thou committest a word unto me, inflame me, and let me be thy flame
in the spirit, though the world endeavor to drown, to quench thy glory in me.
But if I am not manifested by thee, let my hiding place be in thee, and of
thee, so that let manifestation, and cessation; (to be, and not to be; and
again to be) be all of thee, who have times and seasons comprehended in thy
self.

But Lord, if the lords of the earth imprison me, visit me in the understanding
and lay not, if it be thy will, that sin to their charge; for I desire not to
have pleasure in their horror, when hell and death seizes upon them, I desire
not to be taken up with them, nor to live unto them, nor to rejoice in their
pains; for I desire not to live unto my own pleasure in me, nor any pleasure to
me, but be affected with pain to me from them, if thou wilst it. But let me
wholly live to thee but Lord thy will be done, for all things are of thee, all
things are for thee, all things are to thee, though particulars see it not.

15. If it be supposed (as there is great probability to suppose) or if it has
been, and be known as by experience, that Magistrates, Lords, Potentates,
Counselors, Priests, yea high Priests, are swearers, drunkards, oppressors,
walkers after their own lusts, blasphemous, fallible men, will-worshippers,
(having none, as they say, to rule them) contemners, and despisers of that
which is good (unless it be from a Priest) from a Carpenters son, from a
fisherman; then Lords are you competent Judges? May not a man say to you when
you would punish such a one as you call a Heretic (though a man does not
countenance Heresy no more then Christ did countenance adultery in the woman,
when they would have had her stoned) Let him that is without sin cast the first
stone at her; so you that are without Heresy, or without the same Heresy (for
many times expressions of formality do make a difference) cast the first stone,
imprison, destroy, banish, or take away the lives of those you call Heretics
whose life perhaps may be better then ten thousand of yours. But precious in
the sight of the Lord, though not of the Lords, is the death of his Saints; but
you may do such a thing in your days, that you may never blot out of your
consciences, at such a time, when you shall not be able to redeem your selves
or others with ten Thousands of Gold or Silver, or ten Thousand Rams, or ten
Thousand Rivers of Oil, or the first fruit of your body, for the sin of your
soul. But the Will supereminent, indescribable, is, that there must be
persecutors and persecuted, crucifiers and crucified. Lords and high Priests
look to your selves if you can: God has chosen the poor of the world rich in
faith: not many mighty, not many rich, not many Noble, etc. I exclude not all:
What eternity has done, that it self knows.

16. A man for what he does, especially in a business of high concernment, had
need be infallible, be absolutely resolved it is the mind of God as in Jesus
Christ, for if you live not to the supreme Original according to the of
knowledge God, you judge the things so God with your own minds, you judge the
supreme; so that it may be said as well that the lords Judge the Lord as that
the Lord judges the lords: But ye will not say so, will ye? neither will you say
you think so: but whether you say, or think so, you do so.

17. If you are infallible, your infallibility must proceed from the most high,
immediately, truly, and understandingly; if you will declare things without the
Scriptures (as you say you will not) if you will be absolute Judges, if you
will have Heretics depart out of your coasts, if you will have them banished,
(according to the mind of a Synodean Minister, who declared himself so to me)
if you your selves are your own teachers, you will not say you are infallible;
if the pretended Ministers of the Lord Jesus are your teachers, they will not
always be so audacious (thanks be to the most High) to say that they are
infallible, so that you shall find great cause to confess you are at a loss.

18. If your infallibility depends upon the understanding of the Scriptures,
and so you (as you say) will walk according to the Scriptures, you must have
the infallible Teacher to teach according to them, what is mysterious, and what
not, to distinguish between the mystical and the plain: if you acknowledge
that there is a plain and a mystical, and so to be more infallible
distinguishers then others. Suppose a Noble man should send a Letter to one
that has been an intimate friend of his in the Kings Army, and they having had
precedent intimacy, know the mind one of another by this Letter, but when this
Letter is intercepted, and comes to the hands of others, every man interprets
this Letter as he pleases; would you not esteem it an indignity: when the
supreme Judge shall come to judge the world, as the Apostle says according to
his Gospel, when the supreme God shall averr in the interiorest, and say, that
indeed he sent his Son, and anointed him with the Oil of gladness above his
fellows, and gave him the spirit not by measure, so that unmeasurableness, and
mysticalness, was manifested in him, and by him, and he spoke to a few Saints,
and gathered by the power of the Spirit a few poor men to teach the mysteries
of Christ: but there was one William Pryn Esquire, a Lawyer, (I will not say
Saint Pryn) and the Lords of the earth, and the Synods of the world proved
interpreters with their own lusts, according to their formal, artificial
terms of distinction, and so they said, this must be the meaning to day, and
this must be the meaning to morrow, Procul dubio; Lords, is this not indignity?
But Christ will not be for ever crucified in his body the Church, crucifying
will be over may be in time; but surely will, when time shall be no more.

19. If the Scriptures were so plain, that he that runs may read, and he that
barely reads may understand, to what purpose is the spirit promised to lead
into all truth since the Ascension? If I may absolutely, knowingly,
understandingly, infallibly, Aopstolically, Christ like know and understand all
that I see and hear concerning my self and others. But truly Lords and mutable
Potentates, though you read, and hear, and see (as you say you do) you may say
as the Eunuch, how shall I understand without a guide? But remember this, the
guides say and confess they are not infallible.

20. If you do confess the spirit was promised to be given after the Ascension,
if it be given to ye, it is a greater glory for you to tell us of it, then
laugh at it; to tell of it how it came to you, and when, then to tell us what
you have done for us (if any thing) in relation to civils, Paul was not ashamed
of it.

21. If you confess that the spirit was promised to be given after the
Ascension, you had need to averr, justify, and prove, that it was promised to
be given to Magistrates, Lords, and Synods, not poor men, not Fishermen, that
the spirit went from the poor, to the rich, from those that the honorable
count base, to the honorable. And though it were so, it is no good Argument to
convince a man, even to strike him, to imprison him, and defame him, as the
false prophet did the true, when he said, when went the spirit of the Lord,
from me to thee.

22. If you prove that the spirit was to be given to Magistracy, Lords,
National priests, both you and the people had need know, whether you in this
age, that now is more then any other, are the Magistrates, and the Priests. For
it was not promised to Magistracy in all Ages, if it had, it would have been
performed, for he promises nothing, but what he performs. And that precedent
Magistracy, have been enemies, and persecutors of the Saints of God under the
notion of Heretics or those that have been contrary minded, it is plainly
apparent, History declare it, and you your selves confess it, and are
convinced of it in your own hearts, as you say; therefore let that Magistracy
as well as other men, let that Synod that thinks he stands take heed least he
falls, or is already fallen, or that he takes falling for standing in himself,
and standing for falling in others, and so judges, condemns and persecutes.

23. Me thinks I hear in my ears, a urge, saying, and a voice to my
understanding, declaring that there was a Nation or multitude of people met
together (as Episcopalls, Presbyters, and Independents, so called) and did
convene from remote parts, the East, West, North, and South, and these chose
some to consult and debate what should be for the good of that Nation, and
kingdom, and gave them power, and honor, and external glory, (so much as
they could, or was in their power) but the prevayling party took upon them the
things of God, and the place of God, as much as in them lay, and beat and
wounded those that were contrary minded in their minds, as to God, though they
still continued loving and affectionate to them, Is this good? Oh! sad
requital, may not you say, woe to your own soul, for you have rewarded evil
to your selves? Isa. 3.12. Oh! my people, they which lead thee, cause thee to
err, and destroy the way of thy paths.

24. Suppose that a multitude of fair complexioned men, of strait deportment
should choose and elect a company, and place them in honor, and dignity,
above themselves, but these poor creatures, or some of them (may be Job in the
parallel) should have an affliction upon them, their faces should be changed,
their bodies should grow crooked, and this should be inflicted by the God of
all natures, mutable glories, and excellencies; or suppose God should send
Satan to tempt them, or some of them, that they may consent to the temptation,
and whereas Job had boyles, and sores, even from the Crown of the head to the
sole of the feet, would it not be sad now, that one should come and lay Jobs
affliction more heavy on him, whipp the man, sting him with scorpions? But
would it not be as sad also, to see two that were full of boyles, and sores,
wounds of Satan, temptations of the Devil, that contrary, that roaring Lion,
in the shape of man, to whip one another, and lash one another, for I have
heard many of the national priests confess themselves publicly, that they
have been full of wounds, and sores, and putrifactions even from the crown of
the head, to the sole of the foot: Oh! Priest, it is better for thee to tell
who healed thee, then to wound another that is in thy former condition, if thou
art out of it, and truly translated.

But would not this make a man to break out after this manner, and say (O
inhumanitie) had I known this, should I have been so inhumane to my self; I
am scourged, because I am sore wounded, because I have boyles, because I am in
temptation, because I am in errors, because Satan that politic Devil, that
contrary, has deceived me, and I am deceived, though I have boyles, and
sores, from the sole of the foot to the crown of the head, sent me of the God
of Gods, and Lord of Lords, the Ruler of Princes, yet after the manner of men;
I might have spared the rending, and tearing my own bowels. I cannot
comprehend the heavens, and the earth, much less him that is greater then both,
I cannot change my self, nor make him change me, till he will.

But the will of eternity be done, why should I contend with the God of all
changes? when I did choose them, I was weakness it self: I was the weaker
vessel, and I am despised for being so, yet I made not my self so, neither
can I add one Cubit to my stature, read 1. Isa. 29.30.31.

25. Admit that those that are generally called (and do call themselves)
Ministers of the Gospel, and prophets of the most high God, in an eminent, and
a supereminent manner, have communion with God, and should be told of God, as
the Prophet was, what they should do, 13 Kings read the whole Chapter, must we
go forward, and backward, because the Prophets do so. But surely I hope there
is the Lion of the Tribe of Judah in the way: I who am weakness, desire of
thee, O Immortal strength, that I may more and more walk as comprehended of
thy divine will, that I may neither go backward, and forward, and forward, and
backward, to the right hand, and to the left hand, because the National
priests, and Prophets do so, but that I may walk as became a child to thee the
Father of spirits, and the God of all consolation, and therefore let me live to
the willing life, and living will of thee, O supersupereminent God.

26. Magistrates and ministers of God (so called) you are but men subject to
like passions that other men are, as well as an Apostle was (as he confesses)
if not much more; and you were not long since under Episcopacy, and owned it as
of God, many of you, if not all did: did you satisfy your selves, or were you
satisfied of God? if you were, can you, or we that are contrary minded draw God
to us to satisfy us when you or we will our selves, your selves?

27. You Magistrates and ministers (so called) are but at the most, or the most
you can say of your selves in your own applause, is, that you are but wise and
prudent men. But says Christ, Father I thank thee, thou have hid these things
from the wise, and prudent, Scribes, Pharisees, Lawyers, chief Priests, and
revealed them to babes; but may be you will say now as Lloyden said, the case
is altered; but many Scriptures will prove this.

28. Magistrates and ministers (so called) you shall die as well as other men:
the King and the Beggar, the Fool, and the Achitophel, the master, and the
servant, ye shall go to one Tomb that contains all generations mystically in it
self: But I will not say you think you shall have a Pardon, or a Purgatory, or
both.

29. Magistrates and minsters (so called) the Kings, the Priests, and the
people; the beggar, and the rich; the wise, and the foolish; the abased, and
the abounding person; the Lawyer, with his terms, fallacies, and
term-pleadings; and the Divines, (so called) with their formal, Sophistical
Criticisms shall appear (if there be any judgment, as indubitably there is,
and shall) before the absolute perfect Tribunal, all the restitution of all
things, when all things shall be brought forth, according to the will,
powerful Excellency, and mind of the supreme Cause, when the things that are
mystically, unsearchably brought forth, and are again mystically hid in its
proper center, in a way of mutability, shall be brought forth in
everlastingness; but this is a mystery of eternity, at which time, and in which
appearance, you Lords of the earth shall be judged in those things that ye
judge; questioned in those things that ye question others, and be your selves
examined, whether you are in the faith, in a supersuperlaive manner. And so
farewell mutable, dying, vain, unholy, unnatural, temporary, judging,
inconsiderable man.

FJNJS.

