SIGNS OF THE TIMES: OR PROGNOSTICS OF Future Judgments, WITH The way how to
prevent them.

BY Edward Bagshaw, Student of Chapter Church.

LONDON: Printed for Simon Miller at the Star in St. Paul's Churchyard. 1662.

The Preface.
AMong the names whereby the public Ministers of the word are expressed in
Scripture, there is none either more useful unto others, or if neglected, more
dreadful to themselves, than the style of Watchmen, which is so often given
them, whose business it is to foresee the first Approach of Danger, and to
give timely Notice, that so all who through sleep and ease would not rouse up
themselves, and take the Alarm, might be inexcusably guilty of their own
Destruction. But, says God to Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 33.6.
whom he had deputed for the discharge of that forlorn employment, if the
Watchman see the Sword come, (which may be understood proportionably of any
other impending Calamity) and blow not the Trumpet, and the people be not
warned, if the sword come and take any person from among them, he is take away
in his iniquity, but his blood will I require at thy hand. It was, I believe,
for fear of this terrible account (which the common sort of merely self-called,
and humanely appointed Prophets consider not) that Habakkuk, who was by God
himself commissioned for this Task, to declare his diligence, cries out, I
will stand upon my watch, Hab 2.1.
and set me upon the tower, and will watch to see what he will say to me; And
to show, that what he received in this kind, was not to be concealed or
reserved only for his own use, Verse 2.
God presently bids him, Write the vision and make it plain upon Tables, that
he who runs may read it, i. e. Whatever you find upon your most strict and
severe enquiry, let it not be imprisoned in secret, but unfolded to all in the
most perspicuous and apparent manner; since such visions like light, are lost
as to the use of them, if they be not communicated.

If this was the duty of Prophets heretofore, it must needs follow, that it
does equally belong to Preacher now; whose burden is not at all lessend, but as
their Ministry is more glorious, so there is a double weight of care incumbent
upon them; For they, Heb. 13.17.
says the Apostle speaking of Gospel Ministers, do watch for men's souls, as
those who must give an account. And when the Apostle Paul would testify how
carefully he had discharged his Ministry, he tells the Ephesian Elders, Acts
20.26.
that he was clear from their blood: Thereby implying, that had he not with so
much sollicitous industry and watchfullnesse performed his office, in
denouncing their danger as well as in declaring their duty, he should have been
accountable for their miscarriage.

This Consideration alone, without any circumstantiall inducements, will
sufficiently justify me in venturing to Publish, what I have now, not without
great anxiety, for a long time observed; That so, if these indeed are Signs of
the Times, or, Forerunners of Future Judgments, which I have impartially
Collected for such out of the Scriptures of Truth; then others, together with
my self, might take notice of, and be warned by them. For though I shall
always pray, that I may prove herein a false Prophet; yet so long as our
National sins are so great and crying, I should not have been faithful in my
Ministry, (which I do not take to be confined within the circuit of any one
Parish) should I not have thus Blown the Trumpet, and endeavored to awaken
all, into whose hands this Treatise may come, that, while the Cloud is
gathering, they might look up, and labor to avoid their danger.

Edward Bagshaw.
Drury Lane, Jan. 28. 1661.
Signs of the Times.
Matthew. 16.3. Ye Hypocrites, ye can discern the face of the Sky, and can ye not
discern the signs of the Times?


THese words contain our Saviors answer, to an impious command of the
unbelieving Pharisees, who, notwithstanding the many Miracles he had wrought,
yet now come to require a visible sign from him; a sign from Heaven; and this
they did, not out of any desire to be convinced by him, but willing some way or
other to entrap and ensnare him; The Text says, (...), playing the tempters
with him; For, Matthew
that we may know by what spirit they were acted, we shall find that the very
first temptation, whereby the Devil did set upon our Savior, was to desire
such a sign of his Divinity from him, If thou be the Son of God, command that
these stones be made bread, so these, show us a sign from Heaven.

Our Saviors absolute refusal, both then and here, to satisfy this bold and
unwarrantable curiosity, leaves us this Observation, That where ordinary means
for the attaining of faith may be had, there it is nothing else but a tempting
of God to request a Miracle. Miracles are the rarities and reserves of Heaven,
which God will not suffer to be squandred away to no purpose; but Gods visible
storehouse and treasure of good things must be first searched and ransacked,
before that other way may be, so much as in a wish, attempted. Had the
Pharisees done that part of their duty, which was to search the Scriptures, and
to enquire thence, what kind of person the Messiah was to be, and what he was
to do and suffer; they might thence have arrived to a better satisfaction of
their doubts, than any miracle could have procured them.

Our Savior therefore remits them to these ordinary and safe, because
sanctified, ways of trial: and by a familiar instance, convinces them of their
great folly and indiligence, in this so serious and important business. You
are, says he, very careful to observe the Heaven, and from the various
aspects of it, are able to collect what kind of Weather the following day will
produce; which industry of yours in that which is of so small concernment,
argues you to be but Hypocrites, in that you neglect to take notice of the
times, the signs of which are as visible and as easy to be known, as the
prognostics and indications of the Weather.

By times here, I take it our Savior means, those calamities and miseries,
which were then hanging over, and, because of their rejecting of Christ, would
certainly come upon the Jews. So is the word (...) here rendered times, to be
understood in other places; as where the Apostle Paul says, 1 These. 5.1, 3.
But of the times and seasons, ye have no need that I write unto you, for that
your selves know, that the day of the Lord (i. the destruction he has
threatened) so comes as a thief in the night; For when they shall say, peace
and safety (e. i. there is nothing at all to be feared) then sudden destruction
comes upon them, as travail upon a woman with child, and they shall not
escape. So when our Savior wept over Jerusalem, in contemplation of those
miserable slaughters and devastations which were then coming upon them, he used
these words, Oh! that thou have known in this thy day, (i. Luke 19.41, 44.
in which I warn thee of thy approaching danger) the things that belong to thy
peace: But because they regarded them not, but went on secure and carlesse,
therefore he acquaints them, that their enemies, the Romans, should very
shortly demolish their City, because, says he, thou know not, (...) the
time or season of thy visitation, i. that time, wherein mercy is offered, the
refusal of which will inevitably bring a sudden and irreparable judgment. And
this place I take to be a full Comment upon the (...) or times, here mentioned
by our Savior.

The words thus explained observe two Observations.

Doct. 1. God never intends to bring a public and eminent judgment upon a
people that profess his name, but he always creates and sends some signs
which do infallibly foretell and forerun it.

Doct. 2. That it is every holy and truly religious man's duty, to study and to
examine those sions.

God never intends to bring a public and eminent judgment upon a people that
profess his name, but he always creates and sends some signs, which do
infallibly foretell and forerun it. And the truth of this is evident, not only
from matter of fact and story, (for we read not in the whole Scripture, of any
judgment that God ever sent upon the Israelites, (who had the sole privilege
of being his people) but he always sent some previous warnings and admonitions
of it, which were his signs) but likewise it appears from these two Reasons.

Sun was darkened, the Rocks were rent, the Earth shook by a kind of natural
sympathy and compassionate horror at so dreadful and amazing a spectacle; so
when Jerusalem was to be destroyed, Luke 21.11.
our Savior himself foretells, that there should be Earth quakes, and Famines,
and Pestilences, and fearful sights, and great signs, as the van-carriers and
outguard to that more terrible desolation which was to follow them. What the
Apostle therefore says elegantly concerning future Glory, that the whole
Creation, which was made subject to vanity and misery for man's sin, Romans
8.19, 22.
does groan, and as it were travail in pain, until it be delivered from the
bondage of corruption; and manumitted or set free to partake of the glorious
liberty of the Children of God: so while it is in this state of vanity, God
has put into it such a quick sense, that not one part can grieve, but it will
all, after a sort, grieve together; and discover by its tremblings, shakings,
eclypses and extraordinary changes, that there is some great judgment a coming.

Secondly, stir up all his anger, and therefore warns often before he strikes.
When once God is in Covenant with a people, it is not a little matter that will
provoke him to use extremities against them: according as the Psalmist observes
concerning the people of Israel, whose hearts, though they were not right with
him, nor steadfast in his Covenant, Yet, says he, God being full of compassion,
Psalm. 78.37.
forgave their iniquity, and destroyed them not; yea, many a time turned he his
anger away, and did not stir up all his wrath; For he remembered that they were
but flesh, a wind that passes away, and comes not again. What forbearance
here is imputed unto Gods considering his peoples frailty, in another place is
ascribed unto Gods being mindful of his Covenant. As we have it, Psalm. 106.43,
45.
Many times did he deliver them, but they provoked him by their Council, and
were brought low for their iniquity: nevertheless he regarded their affliction
when he heard their cry; and he remembered for them his Covenant; and repented
according to the multitude of his mercies. It is by virtue of this Covenant,
into which every Nation professing his Name do enter, that God is so unwilling
to smite, and will never surprise his people; and therefore he lets his anger
smoke long, before the fire of it breaks out. In the Covenant God made with
David, are expressed the terms wherein all Gods Covenants do run, either to
the Jews or any other people who stand under that relation; Psalm 88 26, 34.
He shall, says God, cry unto me, thou art my Father, my God, and the rock of
my salvation. And then God promises, My mercy will I keep for him for evermore,
and my Covenant shall stand fast with him. Whereupon he says, that if his
Children should rebel against him, Then I will visit their transgression with
a Rod, and their iniquity with stripes, i. I will gently correct them; for
which he gives this reason, My Covenant will I not break, Verse 31.
nor alter the thing which is gone out of my lips. God therefore having obliged
himself to deal as a Father, he will not come to cast a people utterly off,
and to rescind all engagements and ties between them, till all his other
remedies have failed. As a Father will often frown upon his son, then chide,
then warn and admonish him, before he proceeds to cut off the Entaile, and
utterly to disinherit him: So deals God with a professing people, he shows some
apparent signs of his anger, before he goes on to pour out, and to execute
the fierceness of it: He makes the characters and tokens of his indignation
legible, and unless they blind their eyes, and harden their hearts, he will
not let it fall with its whole weight and surcharge upon them. And so much for
the first Observation.

The second Observation is this, It is every holy and truly religious man's
duty, to study and to examine those singes. And this is clear in that our
Savior calls the Pharisees, Hypocrites, for neglecting it; and by his Prophet
Jeremy, God complains, Jer. 8.7.
The stork in the heaven knows her appointed times, and the turtle, and the
crane, and the swallow, observe the time of their coming, ( i. e. these brute
creatures understand their proper seasons, and what in each of them is most for
their good,) but my people know not the judgment of the Lord, ( i. e. they
heed not that judgment, which by all marks and tokens, they might easily
perceive God is bringing upon them) The Church therefore, when she would
declare and manifest her integrity, she says, Yea, Isai. 26.8.
in the way of thy judgments, O Lord, have we waited for thee, i. e. We have
traced the footsteps of thy judgments, we have discovered the print and
appearance of them, and accordingly we have composed our selves to wait upon
thee. And that this is every holy man's duty, will appear from these Reasons;

First, Rainbow to be a token of the Covenant between himself and Noah, he
says, Genesis 9.14.
My how shall be seen in the cloud, i. e. it shall not be placed idely there,
but as it were, summon the eye of every beholder to observe it: so when God
sets some lightnings and overtures of a tempest to precede his thunder, he
loses his design, if such as profess to fear his name do not regard them.
Therefore the Psalmist threatens the wicked, Psalm. 28.5.
Because they regard not the works of the Lord, nor the operation of his hands,
he shall destroy them, and not build them up. Intimating, that to be incurious
and indiligent heeders of any of Gods works, especially of his works of mercy,
would only add wings and weight unto his judgments, to make them more speedy
and withal more intolerable.

Secondly, slumber and sleep, Matthew. 25.6.
(as even the wise Virgins in the Parable did, and herein kept company with the
foolish.) But when we perceive that God is angry, and by some evident symptoms
of his wrath, we can read, that he is preparing his thunderbolts, and aiming
them at the wicked, this will awaken us to look to our standing, and to provide
some shelter against the impending storm: When the judgments are actually
come, then the Prophet tells us, Isai. 26.9.
that even the wicked will learn righteousness. How much more should the godly
do it, while these judgments are coming? for then is their time, to run into
their hiding place. According to the advice of the same Prophet, Verse 20, 21.
Come my people, enter thou into thy Chambers, and shut thy doors about thee:
Hide thy self as it were for a little moment, until the indignation be
overpast. For behold the Lord comes out of his place, to punish the
inhabitants of the earth for their iniquity. Wherein there is declared, not
only that the people of God may discern the first approaches of wrath, but
likewise that then they ought to act and quicken their faith on Christ, who is
their rock and refuge.

Lastly, Deuteronomy, Thou art a glutton and a drunkard, Deuteronomy. 21.18, 20.
and likewise stubborn and rebellious, and wilt not obey my voice; and when I
have chastened thee, thou would not hearken to me. Then if he proceeds to
take a legal remedy, none can blame him for it. So when the godly, by observing
the signs of the times, shall say, God is now angry, and unless you repent,
will assuredly bring a sudden judgment upon you; if at last the overflowing
scourge does come, they must needs applaud Gods justice, and be comforted
concerning his doings; as the expression is, Ezekiel. 14.22, 23.
Ye shall be comforted, concerning the evil that I have brought upon Jerusalem:
And they shall comfort you, when ye see their ways and their doings: and ye
shall know that I have not done without cause, all that I have done in it. One
of which causes is, their not attending to those preparatory strokes and items
of future vengeance, whereby God showed himself willing to be prevented, and
therefore was most just in punishing.

signs be upon us; and that we may do so, the best way will be to examine
first what are those signs, which fatally and inevitably forerun some great
and signal calamity.

To find out this, our only way is, not to depend upon our own guesses, or to
follow the spirit and conceits of other men; but to search the Scriptures,
especially the Prophesies of the Old Testament; For we must not think, that
those Predictions were only made against the Jews, but they equally concern
any Nation, which succeeds into their privilege and relation; so that we may
call them The Rolls of Heaven, or, The Books of Divine Providence; wherein we
may read and assuredly learn, how near the ruin and extirpation is of each
professing State and Kingdom. The Signs which are there Registered, are such
as these,

First, While the earth remains, Genesis 8.22.
seed-time and harvest, and cold and heat, and Summer and Winter shall not
cease, i. e. These seasons shall not vary, but follow each other in their
proper turns. Not as if God had indispensably tied himself always to observe
this Rule, but that he would ordinarily do this without alteration, unless the
sins of a people did provoke him, for then, as he speaks to the Israelites,
Numb. 14.34.
They should know his breach of promise, i. e. that he would change and vary
his determination. When therefore the seasons are altered, when we have our
Summer in Winter, and our Winter in Summer, it is a sign God is angry; and is
now whetting his sword, and preparing his arrows against the transgressors.
Therefore when Moses threatens the Israelites for their disobedience, amongst
other judgments, he reckons this for one, Deuteronomy. 28.23, 24.
Thy Heaven that is over thy head shall be brass, and thy earth iron, and thy
rain powder and dust, and then concludes; and they shall be unto thee for a
sign and for a wonder. Verse 46.
Accordingly when Samuel would declare how angry God was with the People, for
their wantonness in desiring a change of their Government, he tells them that
he would call for thunder and rain, 1 Samuel 12.17.
which at that time of the year in those parts, was altogether strange; That,
says he, ye may perceive and see, that your wickedness is great, which ye
have done in the sight of the Lord, in asking you a King. And when upon this
the Lord sent thunder and rain, the people were so apprehensive of their
danger, that immediately they cry out to Samuel, Pray for thy servants, unto
the Lord thy God, that we dye not: as conceiving, that God would not stop or
rest satisfied with a bare denunciation of his anger, but go on to the
extremity of it. Joel 1.15, 17.
So the Prophet Joel makes an unseasonable seeds-time, and an unfruitful
harvest forerunners of some greater vengance. Alas, says he, for the day, for
the day of the Lord is at hand, and as a destruction from the Almighty shall it
come. And this he gathers, because The seed is rotten under their clods, the
garners are laid desolate, the barns are broken down; for the Corn is withered.
As when the pillars and supports of an house are removed and taken away, we may
learn infallibly, that the house it self will not long stand: So when
Bread-corn, which is called in Scripture, the stay and staff, begins to fail,
we need not doubt but some worse judgment is at the door, and just entering
in. Under this head of extraordinary mutations, I may rank Eclypses, Comets,
unusual Apparitions and strange Accidents in any of the Elements, which our
Savior says should and (as we read in Josephus,) did actually precede the
destruction of Jerusalem. But of these I spoke before.

Secondly, Zedekiahs sins, this is reckoned as one, 2 Chronicles. 36.12.
That he humbled not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet, speaking from the
mouth of the Lord. And likewise of Herod's, who, though he were an incestuous
and voluptuous wretch, yet says the Text, He added this above all, Luke. 3.20.
that he put John Baptist (a sharp and severe Preacher) in prison. As if his
other sins were small in comparison of this. It is therefore recorded as the
cause which did both hasten and complete the ruin of Jerusalem, 2 Chronicles.
36.15, 16.
That, The Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his messengers, rising up
betimes, and sending; because he had compassion on his people, and on his
dwelling place. And therefore sent his Heralds, before he would wage open War:
But, says the Text, they mocked the messengers of God, and despised his words,
and misused his Prophets, and what followed, Until the wrath of the Lord arose
against his people, and there was no remedy. For when a people refuses to hear
the voice of God, which speaks always in these Prophets that he Commissions,
then he has no way to vindicate his honor, but to make bare his arm, in
their destruction. As David avenged the outrage offered unto his Ambassadors,
in the utter slaughter and devastation of the Ammonites. When the Jews had
arrived to that degree of complacency in sin, as to say unto the Prophets, Amos
2.12, 13.
prophecy not; then God presently threatens, I will press your place, as a
Cart presses that is full of sheaves, i. e. I will so load and pursue you with
my judgments, that they shall dash and break you to pieces, as a loaded Cart
does crush the Waggoner or whatever else it falls upon. And therefore it is
observable, that none ever imprisoned Gods Prophets, but they met with sudden
and unexpected deaths. When Ahab had commanded to put Micaiah in Prison, the
next news we hear of is, 1 Reg. 22.
that he went down to Battle and perished there. Amos 7.10, 12
And when Amaziah the High Priest of Bethel had accused Amos of sedition and
treason; and forbad him to prophecy any longer at Bethel, for it was the Kings
Chapel, and the Kings Court. Amos denounces against them this heavy doom,
that his Wife should be a strumpet, his children should fall by the sword; and
notwithstanding his endeavor to prevent his prophesying by Prison and Pillory,
yet God would certainly fulfill it. It is so unpleasant a task, so contrary to
flesh and blood, and so full of apparent hazard, to reprove sin in the world,
that wherever God stirs up the spirit of any to do it, with those Cautions and
in that manner which the Word of God warrants, such an one will have Gods power
to stand by and to defend him; and to suppress this duty in any, only hastens
the judgment: as when in a rage men put out the Candle, it presently involves
them in an helpless and irrecoverable darkness.

Lastly, Amorites so long, because says he, Genesis 15.16.
The iniquity of the Amorites is not yet full. And when God descends to visit
Sodom, he alleges this as the occasion of it; Genesis 18.20.
The cry of Sodom and Gomorrah is very great, and their sin is very grievous;
wherefore, says he, I will see whether they have done according to the cry of
it: implying that their sin was grown so clamorous, loud and importunate,
that it had attained its full growth, and therefore he could no longer defer
his vengeance. This is expressed in Scripture under the similitudes of an
Harvest and a Vintage; Jer. 51.33.
as in Jeremy, God says of Babylon, The daughter of Babylon is like a
threshing-floore, it is time to thresh her; yet a little while and the time of
her harvest shall come: i. I will mow her down with my judgments, because she
begins to be as it were mellowed in sin, and thereby ripe for ruin. So in
Joel, Joel 3.13.
Put ye in the sickle, for the harvest is ripe; come get you down, for the
press is full, the fats overflow, for their wickedness is great, or according
to the Greek, (...) is multiplied. i. e. There is not one sin wanting to
complete the number, which when it is made up, judgment always follows it; as
the breaking of the Ordnance does its being overcharged with Powder. It is for
this reason mainly that our Savior so long delays his coming, because then he
intends to put an end to, and to take vengeance of the wickedness of men, and
therefore he waits till they have filled up their measure, Revel. 15.15.
Till the harvest of the earth be ripe, and sin like a common contagion has
once more overspread the face of all Lands, he will not command his Angel to
thrust in his sickle. And therefore it will be dreadful to live at the end of
the world; for as a stone that descends to its center, the nearer it
approaches, the more speed and swiftness, and withal the more weight it
contracts: or as the people of Israel, Acts 7.17.
The nearer the time grew of Gods promise to them, the more they multiplied; as
Stephen observes. So the nearer the world hastens to its end, the more will
iniquity abound, and by its enormous redundancy, provoke and accelerate an
utter desolation.

Quest. But some may ask, How shall we know when the iniquities of a Nation are
arrived unto that measure and proportion, against which judgment is decreed.

Answ. I answer, By comparing the event of the Prophets predictions against
Jerusalem, in these two fatal Epocha's, when their City and Temple was burnt
up, first by the Chaldeans, and after that by the Romans; it will appear that a
Nation which professes to serve God, in the truth and purity of Religion, has
then filled up its measure of sin, and consequently lies under the immediate
arrest of some great and irreparable judgment, when there are committed by
them these three great abominations.

First, When a people newly come out of great affliction, relapse into the very
same sins for which they were afflicted. The end of all affliction on Gods
part is to purge out sin, and to get himself glory by our repentance, as he
speaks by the Prophet, By this shall the iniquity of Jacob be purged, Isai.
27.9.
and this is all the fruit to take away his sin: When God misseth of this
end, then one judgment slighted and contemned, only makes way for another.
As he threatens by Moses, Lev. 26.23, 24.
If ye will not be reformed by me, by these things, but will walk contrary to
me; Then (he does not say I will leave off striking, and give you over; but)
will I also walk contrary unto you, and will punish you yet seven times for
your sins. As a Judge does seldom spare an incorrigible Felon, but after he
has been once burnt in the hand, if he comes again before him, he gives
immediate order for his Execution: So when Gods lighter strokes have been
beaten back without making impression, we must then expect to feel the weight
of his hand. This is that which the Prophets by joint consent take notice and
sadly complain of in the people of Israel. Isai. 9.12, 13.
Esaias having recounted the sad estate of the Jews, by reason of the many
enemies which did surround them, Yet, says he, for all this, his, i. Gods
anger is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still: For which he
assigns this reason, For the people turns not unto him that smites them,
neither do they seek the Lord of Hosts. So Jeremy, Jer. 5.^.
They have refused to receive correction; they have made their faces harder
than a rock, they have refused to return. Therefore I said, they are foolish;
for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God, i. e.
They understand not what is Gods design and end in bringing judgment, which
was to bow and incline the heart unto himself. Whereupon it follows, Verse 7.
How shall I pardon thee for this? As if he had said, this is a sin which I
cannot pardon, but must go on to punish. Amos 4.11.
So Amos repeating several judgments, as famine, drought, barrenness, the
plague, and the like, which God had brought upon them, yea, says he, I have
overthrew some of you, as God overthrew Sodom and Gomorrah, and ye were as a
firebrand plucked out of the burning; yet ye have not returned unto me says
the Lord: Then presently he threatens, Verse 2.
Therefore thus will I do unto thee, i. e. I will execute what I formerly
denounced, to take away them and their posterity with fish books: i.e. to make
clean riddance. And because I will do this unto thee, therefore prepare to meet
thy God, O Israel. i. e. Look upon God as thine enemy, and sit thy self for the
encounter. For as it is in Ezekiels words, Ezekiel. 24.13.
Because I have purged thee, and thou wast not purged, thou shall not be purged
from thy filthiness any more, till I have caused my fury to rest upon thee, i.
e. I will so satiate mine anger, that I shall not need to renew it; as the
Prophet Nabum speaks, Nahum 1.9.
Affliction shall not rise, up a second time. I will once for all ease me of my
adversaries, by breaking them to pieces, with one stroke of my fury. When men
run greedily to enjoy their unlawful pleasures, and are so much the fiercer and
more eager upon them, the longer they have been restrained; Isai. 5.12.
there is a Woe pronounced against them: The harp and the viol, the tabret and
the pipe, and Wine are in their feasts; but they regard not the work of the
Lord, neither consider the operation of his hands. i. e. They never consider
that when God sends a public jugdment, he is then like a Judge upon the Bench,
and expects that his clemency in releasing and taking it off, should not be
affronted with a new miscarriage.

Secondly, The sins of a Nation then seem to have attained their full measure,
when there is a general and an allowed corruption in the public Preachers of
the Word: when they either Preach vainly, or live viciously. Vain Preachers are
such in the Prophet Ezekiels words, Ezekiel. 13.2, 3.
Who prophecy out of their own hearts; Foolish Prophets, who follow their own
spirit, and have seen nothing. Who have never felt the power of the Word
themselves, and therefore speak not to the heart, 2 Cor. 2. ult.
but only to the ears of others. Such in the Apostle Paul's phrase, as do (...),
we render it, corrupt the Word, but properly it is, to deal with the Word as
bankrupt Merchants do with their Wine, i.e. dash and allay it by mingling water
with it; So these, by trickments of humane eloquence and fantastic curiosity
dress up the Word of God, and by robbing it of its plainness, do as far as
they can, take away likewise its power. 2 Pet. 2.3.
Such as Peter speaks of, who (...), by counterfeit and cunning words, make
merchandise of men, i. e. make Preaching which God appointed as a means to save
souls, merely a trade to get money by: whom he there severely threatens, Whose
judgment now of a long time, i. e. which long since was decreed against them,
lingreth not, or is not idle. And their damnation, or punishment slumbreth not.
And it were well for Nations, if such Drones who eat the honey, and make a
noise, and yet have no sting; no piercing quickness in their Ministry to rouse
and stir up a secure and sleepy sinner, were to perish alone in their iniquity;
but they are a general plague, a fretting leprosy that infect and consume all
round about them. For, says Jeremy, Jer. 5.30, 31.
a wonderful and horrible thing is committed in the Land. The Prophets, i. the
Preachers, prophecy falsely, and the Priests, i. the superior Order of the
Jewish Clergy, bear rule by their means, and my people love to have it so.
Which complaint he ushers in with this menace, Shall I not visit for these
things? says the Lord; shall not my soul be avenged on such a Nation as this?
When those who are styled Lights, do either not shine at all, or else cast a
false and deceitful luster, which merely misleads the unwary Travelers; God
then thinks it high time for him to come with his Candle, and to search out
their iniquity, till he finds none. And if vain-Preaching does thus provoke
God, much more does vicious living: For if the salt becomes unsavory, it is
not only to be thrown away it self, but it defiles a Land, and makes it but a
noisome dunghill, fit only for the rain of vengeance, to purify and wash it.
Isa. 56.10, 12.
The Watchmen of Israel in Esays time, were ignorant and blind, and as a
consequent of that, they were dumb Dogs which could not bark; and likewise
great voluptuaries, sleeping, lying down and loving to slumber. Such Shepherds
which though they did not understand, i. e. what belonged unto their proper
dtuy, yet they could look to their profit well enough, They all look to their
own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter: And with their Gains, they
procured Wine and strong drink, and eat and drank like Epicures. Whereupon God
sends a summons, All ye beasts of the field come to devour. Verse 9.
As if such brutish and swinish Teachers were only fit to be a prey unto their
fellow beasts. Ier. 23.14.
So in Jeremy God complains, I have seen in the Prophets of Jerusalem an
horrible thing. They strengthen the hands of evil doers, that none does return
from his wickedness. Therefore I will feed them with wormwood, and make them
drink the water of gall; For from the Priests is profannesse gone out into the
Land. For according to Hose as words, which may be Proverbially used, Hosea 4.9.
Like Priest, like People. When sin gets credit by the Preachers example, it
spreads presently. It is no wonder then if God works, i. sends some sudden
judgment, for men will be sure to make void his Law, when such as should be the
reprovers of sin, are the principal and most noted committers of it.

3. Lastly, The sins of a Nation are then full and ripe for vengeance, when
those commands of God are most commonly broken, which God has most
particularly pressed upon our observance; which he seems as it were to have an
especial care of; and therefore has hedged in, and fenced about with his
Prohibitions.

Of this sort I might mention many, As 1. Oppression of the poor: Prove. 14.21.
which who so practices, reproacheth his Maker: and therefore ought to expect,
that God will vindicate his quarrel. 2. Adultery and uncleanness; which is said
greatly to defile a Land: Ier. 3.1.
And when a Land is filthy, God says he will sweep it with the beesome of
destruction. 3. Entrapping and injurious Laws. When the Law instead of being a
protection, becomes a snare; when men are made offenders for a word, Isai.
29.21.
and wait is laid for such as reprove in the gate; and the just are turned
aside for a thing of naught, i. e. for small and trivial causes, good and
upright men are condemned and sentenced. But to pass by these, I shall insist
only upon three Commands, all which are contained in the Decalogue, and God
seems by his manner of enforcing them (which he does in more words than he
spends upon all the rest) to have a principal esteem and concernment for them.

1. That against Idolatry, Com. 2.

2. That against Swearing, Com. 3.

3. That against Sabbath-breaking, Com. 4.

1. The Command against Idolatry is fenced with a severe Commination, that God
is a jealous God, and that he will punish not the persons only, but also the
posterity of such as hate him: for so he counts all them to do, who set up
their commands and worships, in competition with his; for did they indeed love
God, they would reverence his Wisdom, and not presume to serve him any other
way than he has appointed. This Precept therefore is broken, not only when
Images are erected, and divine honor given to them, which is but a gross and
dull part of Idelatry, (and yet as stupid and senseless as it is, it is at this
day, in these very terms, practiced and enjoined among the Papists) but also
when we have inventions and devises of our own, to adorn as we think, but
indeed to adulterate the worship of God: which is then best, when it is most
simple, and savouring of its divine original. This was the sin of which the
Scribes and Pharisees were guilty in our Saviors, Matthew. 15.
who worshipped God after the commandments and traditions of men, for which he
threatens, that they should be rooted up: Every plant, says he, which my
Father has not planted shall be rooted up. God does so much disdain to have
his worship squared by men's model, that he will root up all such impious
pretenders, who by giving way to their own imaginations, do secretly tax the
goodness of God, as if he were not holy and wise enough in his own
appointments. For let men say and use what fine distinctions they please, it
will at last be found, that all such self-devised forms, though they are not so
gross and palpable, yet have every whit as much of the nature and spirit of
Idolatry in them, as the open adoration of Images. And the reason is clear, for
when God rebukes this sin by the Prophets, he charge them most with this,
that they did what he never commanded. Jer. 7.32, 31.
As in Jeremy, They have set their abominations in the house which is called by
my name to pollute it. And they have built the high places of Tophet, to burn
their sons and daughters in the fire. Which, says God, I commanded them not,
neither came it into my heart. Jer. 18.15.
And in another place, My people has forgotten me, they have burnt incense to
vanity, and they have caused them to stumble in their ways, from the ancient
paths, to walk in paths, in a way not cast up, i. in a way, which God never
chalked out for them. Hosea 13.2.
So in Hosea, God complaints, That they made themselves Images of silver and
gold, according to their own understanding. Whereupon it is recorded as a great
aggravation of Jeroboams sin, that he offered to God in the fifteenth day of
the eigth month, 1 King. 15.32.
even in the month which he had devised of his own heart. From all which
places it appears, that the Idol did not so much provoke God, as the ill temper
of heart in the idolater, which occasioned it; and that was a proud conceit of
mending the Law of God, and of adding something to make it more specious. And
this corrupt principle is the true spring of all invented, uncommanded, and
therefore unwarrantable forms of Worship. In defense of which, whoever pleads
custom and antiquity, does only use Names, for which we ought so much the more
to detest it. Since the older an error is, the worse it is; and calls for the
sorer rain of judgment, to wash those inveterate stains of it away. As God
threatens by Amos, Amos 2.4.
For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will not turn away the
punishment, because they have despised the Law of the Lord, and have not kept
his Commandments, and their lies caused them to err, after the which their
fathers walked: They it seems pleaded custom too, and tradition from Fathers,
but this very thing did so little abate, that it is mentioned as a cause of
their punishment. And it is very observable, that when the people of Israel
were flat Idolaters, God did content himself with punishing them only by
seventy years captivity. But in our Saviors time, when in great zeal, not for
Gods Law, but for their own false glosses and Comments upon it, (by which they
sought to uphold their superstitious usages,) they rejected Christ, and would
not endure the simplicity of his Gospel (At which time they were so far from
idolatry, that they would not brook so much as the Emperors Statue to be set
upon the Temple;) yet God did look upon that refined and more subtle Idolatry,
that will worship of theirs, to be so great and so incurable a sin, that he
soon after fulfilled all those wees, which our Savior had denounced against
them, and left them neither place nor Nation: and they are at this day a
terrible Instance, both how ill managers of holy things, humane fancy is; and
likewise how severely God will avenge such bold and unlicensed intermedling.

2. The second Command which God has fenced with a commination, is that
against taking Gods name in vain, concerning which, he affirms that he will not
hold the doers of it guiltless, i. e. he will certainly and unavoidably punish
them. By taking Gods name in vain, may be meant either false, or vain swearing;
and either of them is a grievous God-provoking sin. For the first, viz. that of
perjury or forswearing, the Instances are so notorious, that I need not insist
on them. The cases of Joshua and the Gibeonites, which was an Oath got by
fraud; Ezekiel. 17.13, 19.
of Zedekiah and Nebuchadnezzar, which was an Oath extorted by force, might
seem to have something pleadable in their excuse: but Gods indispensable
punishing the violatours of those solemn Vows, sufficiently shows us, that
those persons who have been in the same case, must needs expect the same
punishment, if they shall venture to commit the same sin. I shall therefore
omit the prosecution of the guilt of perjury, against which so many curses are
denounced in Scripture, that as certain as God is true, so certain is it, that
that sin will never long escape unpunished. And only mention the inevitable
danger of vain-swearing, which because it is more common, men are apt to think
is more excusable. This swearing in ordinary discourse is that which our
Savior in his explication of the Law, Mat. 5.33, 37.
says was originally intended should be forbidden, and therefore it is
expressly prohibited by him, because it proceeds (...) From that evil one who
delights in all manner of superfluity of naughtiness, James 1.21.
(as the Apostle James calls sin) and therefore needless and unnecessary
Oaths must needs take their first rise from his instigation. And when this sin
did abound among the Pharisees in our Saviors time, who made as little scruple
to make, as to break their Oath (for which we read they had found out many
subtle distinctions; as that an Oath by the Altar did not bind, Mat. 23.16, 22.
though an Oath, by the gold upon the Altar did, and the like) Our Savior
first tells them, that every Oath they swear, by any thing how light and
trivial soever, was sacred and obligatory; since it had an immediate aspect
upon the Creator; whose name, though it was not interposed, yet, was understood
in all those solemn asseverations. And then denounces a Woe against them for
such rash and inconsiderate swearing; Deuteronomy. 28.58.
since it betrays a great want of reverence toward God so lightly to mention
his name, which ought to be feared and dreaded by us. And if they would plead,
that they did not mention the name of God, but only swear by the creature, as
by their head, etc. the crime is so much the worse, since it puts the creature
into the place of God, who only hears our vows, and can take notice to punish
the breach of them. So James, where he bids us not swear at all, gives this
reason, (...), least ye fall under judgment, i. e. Incur some signal
punishment and judgment from God, for God will not have his Name tossed about
irreverently in our mouths; An Oath is a religious tie, and therefore ought to
be solemn as well as sacred. When therefore a Nation abounds with oaths and
cursing; when swearing, and banning, and blaspheming becomes our ordinary
language; it is a sign that the tongues of men are set on fire of hell, James
3.6.
and that calls for the fire of divine wrath to purify them.

Lastly, The third command which is especially recommended to us, and therefore
the breach of it cannot but be very dangerous, is that about keeping the
Sabbath, which begins with a Memento, to show, that it is very remarkable; and
concludes with urging Gods example, who is to be our pattern, in all holy
performances: And its this, which gives that command its obligation; for since
the reason there alleged is universally equal, viz. That we ought to rest
because God the Creator did rest upon the seventh day; it must needs follow
from hence, that the command is universally binding. Whereupon we find that it
was enjoined unto Adam in Paradise; Genesis 2.
when the nature of man was in its highest and most elevated degree of
perfection: and therefore neither pretenses of piety with some, nor commands
from Authority with others, nor examples of antiquity with the most; either can
absolve any, or ought to prevail with us to quit and to leave off this duty.
Hence we find that in all predictions, the breach of the Sabbath is always
reckoned for one of the greatest, and most highly provoking sins. Isai. 58.13,
14.
If thou turn away thy foot from the Sabbath, says God, from doing thy
pleasure upon my holy day, and call the Sabbath a delight, the holy of the
Lord, and honorable. It follows, Then shall thou delight thy self in the Lord,
and I will cause thee to ride upon the high places of the earth, i. e. I will
signally bless and prosper thee: Now we must take notice, that wherever there
is promise of a blessing for our obedience; Ier. 17.21.
there is always threatened a curse for disobedience. Therefore when Jeremy had
commanded in the name of the Lord, that they should carry no burden upon the
Sabbath day, but hallow it, i. e. by forbearing such kind of employments,
according as God had commanded. He concludes, that if they would not hearken,
then says God, Verse 28.
I will kindle a fire in the gates thereof, and it shall devour the palaces of
Jerusalem, and it shall not be quenched. From whence I infer, that if to bear a
burden, which otherwise was lawful and necessary, be so severely prohibited
upon that day; How much more are sports and recreations, which are always
needless, and for the most part suspicious, to be avoided then. Ezekiel
therefore having told the people of the Jews, Ezekiel. 20.12.
that God had given them his Sabbaths, to be a sign between him and them, that
they might know, says he, that I am the Lord which do sanctify them. But they
by their profanation having polluted these Sabbaths, Wherefore, says God, I
gave them statutes that were not good, and judgments whereby they should not
live, i. e. I brought my judgments upon them to destroy and to overthrow them.
And since the parity of reason does obliege us to the same observance of a
seventh day, or of one day in seven, with the Jews; we cannot doubt, but our
breach and violation of it, will bind us over to the same punishment.

Having thus found out in general what are the certain and infallible signs of
an approaching judgment; the next part of our duty is, to enquire how far these
signs do concern us, and whether we of this place have any just reason to be
afraid of them. And here I shall advise you not so much to cast your eyes
abroad, in beholding the state of others (though that likewise is to be done)
as to turn your eyes inward, and to consider with you selves, whether any of
these tokens of death be upon you. Survey your past actions, and discern, what
measure your sins in particular have contributed to fill up the Nations Cup.
For as when the Sea roars and swells, the parts of water which lie next the
bank, though they seem to be still and quiet, yet do, because of their
contiguousness, as much contribute to the noise and tumult of the Ocean, as any
of those which are more remote; so your sins and mine, though perhaps they make
not that stir in the world, nor fly up and down so much upon the tongues of
men; yet do indeed as much make up and complete the Nations sins, as any of
those that are more discoursed of. Therefore run over these provoking
transgressions, mentioned a little before, and see what is your part in them.
And when you have found them out, then

1. Confess your guilt, and give God the glory of his mercy in that he has so
long delayed to punish. When Job would testify his integrity, and thereby use
an argument, why God should ease him a little of his heavy load, Job 31.33.
he says, I did not cover my transgressions, as Adam, by hiding my iniquity in
my bosom. And David praying likewise for respite, uses this motive, Psalm.
38.18.
For I will declare mine iniquity, I will be sorry for my sin. As when God has
brought his judgments, confession of sin is the best way to redress and remedy
them; as he tells the Israelites, that when he had driven them out into foreign
Lands, yet says he, Levit. 26.40.
If then they shall confess their iniquity, with their trespass which they have
trespassed against me: and if then their uncircumcised hearts be humbled, and
they accept of the punishment of their iniquity, i. e. If they acknowledge that
they did deserve whatever I laid upon them: Ier. 3.13.
then says God, I will remember my Covenant, and restore them unto their Land:
So before a judgment comes, confession is the best way to arrest and stop it.
As God himself prescribes the method, return, says he to me, and I will not
let my anger to fall upon thee, Only acknowledge thine iniquity, that thou have
transgressed against the Lord thy God. Till we confess we have sinned, Ier.
2.35.
the same Prophet tells us, that God will continue to plead with us. David no
sonner confessed, but he obtained pardon, which when it is once gained, no
judgment either is, or ought to be terrible; Because then it loses its name,
and instead of a punishment, as from a Judge, is only the Rod of a tender and
compassionate Father.

2. Prevent the growth of future judgments, by a particular and serious
repentance. Confession and repentance must be joined together, like the purge
and the plaster; the one does cleanse the wound, the other cures it.
Confession is the sick and sinful souls Vomit; Repentance is its Diet: the one
does stir the humors and discover the distemper, the other begets new blood
and spirits, and brings us to a more healthful habit.

To encourage you to this, consider

First, By this means you may be isntrumental in retarding Gods judgments as
to the whole Nation. Had there been but ten righteous men in Sodom, Genesis 18.
God would not have meddled with it: And when he came to punish Jerusalem, he
descends to a lower proportion, and declares, that if there had been but one,
but a man that executed judgment, Ier. 5.1.
and that sought the truth, and he would pardon it. And he often complains,
that he sought for a man amongst them, that should make up the hedge, Ezekiel.
22.30.
and stand in the gap before him, for the land, that he might not destroy it,
but he found none. Thou sinner, whoever thou art, that now lie surfeiting in
thy wickedness, thou know not, but thou may be the man, for whose sake, if
thou repentest, God will save the Nation: Thou may be raised out of the mire,
wherein thou now wallowest, and become a pillar to uphold a tottering state. Or
at least, if Gods decree be gone forth, and there be no reversing it, yet

Secondly, Thou will be sure to save thy self; though the sentence of
destruction should be gone out of Gods mouth, and we were a people utterly
devoted to ruin; nay though God was just now aiming his thunder, and levelling
his arrows; yet could you suppose in that very instant, that a sinner would
repent, the threatened and intended evil would not come near him. Ier. 18.7, 8.
Thus God himself expressly, At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation,
and concerning a Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down, and to destroy it; If
that Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will
repent of the evil that I thought to do unto them. And the reason is clear,
because repentance changes the person; God is angry only with sinners, but he
that has once repented, is no longer accounted a sinner: Repentance evens all
accounts, and sin once truly sorrowed for, is not only forgiven, but remembered
no more. When we have once attained to such peace with God, the tumults and
stirs in the world may allarm, but they ought not to affright us. Therefore to
conclude in the Prophet Zephanies words, Before the decree bring forth, Zeph.
2.12.
before the day pass as the chaff, before the fierce anger of the Lord come
upon you, seek ye the Lord all ye meek of the earth, which have wrought his
judgment; seek righteousness, seek meekness, it may be ye shall be hid in the
day of the Lords Anger.

FINIS.
ERRATA. Page 1. line 2. for command read demand, page 2^ line 28. for observe
read afford.


