Seasonable Truths IN EVIL-TIMES: IN Several Sermons, lately preached, in and
about London: viz.

I. Of Grace growing and increasing. II. The first and last in Suffering-work.
III. The way to obtain a sure and great Reward. IV. The Two Witnesses their
Testimony. V. The uncertainty of the World. VI. Man's Wrath against Gods people,
shall turn to Gods praise. VII. Comfort to Mourners for the loss of the Solemn
Assemblies. VIII. The evil of Unbelief in departing from God. IX. A warning to
Apostates.
By William Bridge, late Preacher of the Word of God at Yarmouth.

LONDON: Printed for Nath. Crouch, at the Cross-Keys in Bishops-gate-street,
near Leaden Hall. 1668.

Of Grace growing and increasing. SERMON. 1.
1 Thessalonians. 4. 1. That as ye have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to
please God; so ye would abound more and more.
THe Apostle having exhorted the Thessalonians in the former part of this
Epistle to perseverance in grace, as you read in the former Chapter, verse. 8.
For now we live, if ye stand fast in the Lord; and at verse. 13. of the same
Chapter, To the end he may stablish your hearts unblameable in holiness before
God even our Father: he does here in this Chapter exhort them to Christian
Progression, growing and increasing in Grace. So in this first Verse of this
fourth Chapter.

In this Exhortation three things are considerable:

1. The Matter which he exhorts them unto, in the later end of the verse,
That they would abound more and more in the work of the Lord.

2. The Manner of his Exhortation, and that is with much earnestness: We
beseech you brethren, and exhort you; and, We exhort you by the Lord Jesus.

3. The Reason or Motive that he uses to press this Exhortation: That as ye
have received of us how ye ought to walk, and to please God. Ye cannot say that
ye have not been taught: for both I and others have taught you, and ye have
received of us how ye ought to walk, and to please God. Now therefore seeing
that ye have received this of us, see that ye abound more and more.

That ye abound more and more. Beza and others, they have the words read thus:
So that ye excel more and more. I will not dispute the Translation. There is
one great Truth which the words at first view do hold forth unto you; and that
is this:

It is the earnest desire of those that are faithful in the work of the
Ministry, and ought to be the care of all the Saints themselves, to abound in
the work of the Lord yet more and more.

We are not only to have grace, but to abound and grow. So he exhorts them in
verse. 10. of the same Chapter: But we beseech you brethren that ye increase
more and more. The Apostle is express in this Exhortation: But grow in grace,
and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. And in 2 Cor. 7. 1. Having
therefore these promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the
flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

In the Text it is called ABOVNDING more and more; in verse. 10. it is called
INCREASING more and more: by the Apostle Peter it is called GROWING in grace: by
the Apostle Paul it is called PERFECTING of holiness. Now this you will find,
if you look into Ephesians. 4. the end of Christ's ascension, and the end of all our
Ministry; of all our preaching, and your bearing, that ye may abound in the
work of the Lord more and more, and that ye may be made perfect. He that
descended, in the same als^ that ascended up far above all heavens: and he gave
some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and
Teachers; for the perfecting of the Saints; till we all come in the unity of
the faith, and of the knowledge of the Son of God, unto a perfect man, unto the
measure of the stature of the fullness of Christ. Then in verse. 15. But speaking
the truth in love, may gr^w up into him in all things which is the head, even
Christ. So that you see this to be our great care that do preach the Word, and
the endeavor of all those that hear it, that ye may abound in the work of the
Lord yet more and more; that you may increase, that ye may grow in grace. And
this you will find to be Paul's ONE thing, Phil. 3. 13. Brethren, I count not
my self to have apprehended; but this one thing I do, (so you read it)
forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth to those things
which are before, I press toward the mark, etc. This one thing I do, so you
read it: but the words [I do] are not in the Greek, but thus: This one thing.
Brethren, I count not my self to have apprehended; but this is the one thing,
forgetting those things that are behind, and reaching forth to those things
that are before. Our Lord and Savior Christ he had his one thing necessary;
and David had his one thing too; One thing have I desired: and here now Paul he
has his one thing, one thing for the Saints, and that is this, We forget what
is past, and press on to that which is before, laboring to increase and to
grow in grace, and perfecting holiness in the fear of God.

And this you shall find to be the end of all those afflictions which we meet
withal from God the Father. God the Father is unwilling to afflict his
children, he would not do it unless it were necessary; why the end of his
affliction we find to be this, in Joh. 15. 2. Every branch in me that bears
not fruit, he takes away; and every branch that bears fruit, he purges it,
that it may bring forth more fruit.

And this you shall find to be the end of Christ's coming, as you read in Joh.
10. 10. I am come, that they might have life, and that they might have it more
abundantly. There lies a poor soul, says Christ, dead in trespasses and sins;
I am not only come to give life unto that soul, (spiritual life) but that he
may have it in more abundance. So that it is not only our duty to have grace,
but we must abound therein more and more; we must grow therein. And, my Beloved,

It is not only the duty of the Saints to do so, but they will, and they do do
this. So says David, I will praise thee yet more. And if you look Revel. 2.
you shall find that this was the commendation of the Church of Thyatira, at
verse 19. that her works were more at the last then at the first. Pray mind it;
it is a great and a glorious commendation: O that it were the commendation of
all the Churches now being! With some it is contrary, their works are more at
the first then at the last; but, says he concerning the Church of Thyatira, I
know thy works, and thy charity, and the last to be more then the first. Where
there is a truth of grace, there will be a growth. Read I pray what is said in
Prove. 4 18. But the path of the just is as the shining light, that shines more
and more unto the perfect day. That shines more and more. Look how it is with
the light of the day, so with the grace of God in the hearts of his people; the
light is small and little at the beginning of the day, but it shines more and
more, it grows brighter and brighter unto perfect day: and so though grace in
Gods people be but little at first dawning, yet that light and grace that is in
them, it grows every day brighter and brighter unto perfect day.

I but there is a great deal of danger, through the great opposition that the
Saints meet withal, that their light should be quite put out: they are in great
danger to loose all, for they meet with much opposition, yea and the rather,
because that they do grow. Bu^ as the Torch by being beaten burns the better:
so the Saints do by their opposition, they grow stronger and stronger; as in
J^b 17. Upright men shall be asto^ied at this, etc. the righteous also shall
hold on his way, and he that has clean hands shall be strong^r and stronger.
His opposition should make him grow more and more: when he is chidden from
following Christ, and the Ordinances and the ways of Christ, he will cry so
much the more, Jesus thou son of David have mercy upon me. And if you look into
Acts 9. you shall find that Paul did increase by the opposition he met withal:
when he was much opposed by the Jews, it is said, verse. 22. But Saul increased
the more in strength, and confirmed the Jews. He increased the more.

God has a hand upon all the hands of opposition against his children; and it
is so far from putting out their light, that it makes their light to grow
brighter and brighter.

In the next place, the Saints do not only increase and abound more and more,
but they can do ^o other, they cannot but grow in grace; for so the promise is,
To him that has shall be given, and he shall have it in more abundance. Now
the Godly they have grace, an^ therefore upon that account of the promise, they
shall have it in more abundance. And so in that place of Isaiah, He that
waits upon the Lord shall renew his strength, he shall mount up as with
eagles wings: there shall be an addition of strength unto him, he shall
increase and abound yet more and more. In Scripture Phrase, grace it is called
life: indeed it is our spiritual life. Now you find that all your sublunary
lives, where they are there is growth: the plant or the tree it grows, because
it has life; and the beast grows, because he has life. The Sun, Moon and
Stars, though they move apace, they do not grow; why? because they have no
life: they have light, but no life, and so they grow not: but all the people of
God they have a spiritual life, and so they will, and do, and must, and cannot
but grow. They make God himself their uttermost and their last end. What a man
makes his last and his uttermost end, that he labors to grow up unto more and
more; he never has enough of it. Some men make riches their last and their
uttermost end; and they never have enough. Some make God their end, and riches
a means to serve God; they can have enough: but when a man makes riches his
last and his uttermost end, and never stints himself, he never thinks he has
enough. Now the children of God they make God himself their last and their
uttermost end, his service and grace; and therefore they never have enough:
they cannot have enough, but must labor to grow and increase, and abound more
and more.

And besides, they look upon grace, and growth and increase in grace, as their
greatest excellencies. What a man looks upon as his excellency, that he does
much desire. Some place an excellency in fine Gardens; and if they see a
dainty flower in another Garden, they will never be at quiet till they have
the like in their own Garden, because therein they place an excellency. Now
there are many increases in the world, wherein men place great excellency, and
therein they labor to abound more and more. And now says a godly creature, A
rich man looks upon riches as his excellency, and therefore would yet have
more: an honorable man looks upon cred^t as his excellency, and therefore he
would have more: So do I look upon grace as my excellency, and therefore I
must yet have more. A godly man having once tasted of the sweetness that is in
the ways of God, Oh, says he, it is so sweet, I must yet have more: give me
more of this; though I die for it, yet give me more of this. He does grow, and
he cannot but grow and abound yet more and more.

Object. I but you will say to me, Then am I afraid that I never had any truth
of grace, because I do not find that I do grow in grace: where there is truth,
there will be growth, and there will be increasing: but as for me, I do not
find any such growth and increase, and therefore I fear that I never had grace
at all.

Answ. For answer: As a man may have grace and not know it, so he may have
grace and not perceive it: his earnest desire of having more and more still,
makes him forget what he has.

The more grace one has, the more he does see sin; and the more a man sees his
sin, the more his own grace will be hidden from his own eyes. Godly men do
oftentimes measure themselves by Metaphors; as sometimes we that are Preachers
of the Word, we fall upon a Scripture-metaphor, as where Christ is called a
sun, a shield, or bread; and we run the Metaphor off its legs, further then the
Holy Ghost did intend: so sometimes we do. So it is with Christians too; they
fall upon a Scripture-metaphor, and they run it and themselves off their legs,
beyond what the Holy Ghost does intend. For example, increase of grace in
Scripture Phrase is called a growth: now because a Christian cannot find his
own spiritual increase answerable to all outward growth, therefore he thinks
that he does not increase in grace: whereas there is a great deal of difference
between a spiritual increase, and an outward growth, in many things: As now, a
man's body grows, but all the parts of his body do not grow out of his head; but
now in our spiritual growth it is so, as you read in Col. 2. 19. And not
holding the head, from which all the body by joints and bands having
nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases with the increase of God.
Why here our spiritual increase in all the members comes from the head: it is
not so in our outward growth; all the members of our body do not grow out of
our head; but in our spiritual growth it is so. And so many other differences
might be given. But now because that Christians do not find their spiritual
increase every way answerable to an outward growth, therefore they call all
into question many times, and say, Oh I do not grow in grace, and so I have no
grace at all. Celestial bodies, as the Sun, Moon and Stars, they move apace,
and may run hundreds of miles in an hour; yet when you look upon them, they
seem to be fixed, and you see no motion: but look now upon your terrestrial
bodies, men or beasts, moving before you, you see them move. So now, when a man
looks upon his increase in riches, he may perceive that; but when you cast your
eyes upon those celestial bodies, Saints, you will think they are fixed, and
they move not at all: and so you will think sometimes concerning your selves,
that you do not move at all, and yet move, and stir, and increase, and abound
more and more. So that I say, first, As a man may have grace, and not know it;
so it is possible for a man to increase in grace, and not perceive it.

Object. Oh but I fear that I do not increase and abound more and more; for I
do nothing now more for God then what I have done before, will some say. I pray
now, and I did pray before; I hear the Word, and I did hear before; I read the
Scripture in private, and I did read before; I examine mine own heart, and I
did so before: I find no addition at all made to my spiritual condition; what I
did before, that I do now; and therefore I fear that I am not grown in grace,
and therefore that I never had any grace at all: for where there is truth,
there will be growth.

Answ. First, for answer to this, you must know that growth in grace does not
always consist in doing of other works for the kind, but in doing the same
works over and over again better then before: As now, when one learns to write,
when a man has attained to a great perfection in Writing, he does not make
other letters then he made at first; he makes the same letters that he did,
only he makes them better, and sets them closer. So now, in your growth and
increase in grace, you must not think that you shall make other letters, or do
other duties, but shall do the same duties now, and exercise the same grace
now, as before; only you will set your duties and graces closer together, and
you will do the work better then you did before.

But secondly, It may argue more grace, to do the same work afterward. Pray
con^ider this: I say, it may sometimes argue more grace to do the same work
afterward. As for example: suppose a man be an old man, or an old woman, when
this person was young he prayed it may be an hour or two hours in a day; now he
is grown old, and his body is infirm and weak, to do the same thing now, argues
more grace now then before: and therefore if you look into Psalm. 92. you shall
find that this is made the growing of those that are old, that they shall
bring forth fruit still: The righteous shall flourish like the palm tree; he
shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon; he shall grow. Those that be planted in the
house of the Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God. Well, and what
shall he do when he is old? At verse. 14. They shall bring forth fruit in old
age. He does not say that they shall grow; but this bringing forth fruit still
in oldage is his growth: so that sometimes it may argue more grace to do the
same work afterward then before.

Object. Oh but yet some will say, I am afraid that I do not grow in grace, and
so indeed that I never had any truth of grace; for now I am much declined: at
the first my heart it was mightily enlarged for God, and now it is straightened. O
what freedom once I had! I remember a time when I went to prayer, and wept, and
mourned, and my heart broke and melted; but now my heart is exceeding cold, and
very dead, and therefore I am even afraid that I am declined, and that I do not
grow in grace, and so that I never had grace at all.

Answ. Give me leave to fix here a little, and to answer this Objection, that I
may speak a word of stay to those that are weary and troubled. And now as your
Objection arises, so shall my Answer rise. Before, I said a man may grow in
grace and not perceive it; now I speak further, a man may grow and increase in
^^^ce, and yet think he is much declined; a m^n may increase, and yet think
that he is much decreased. For, my Beloved, sometimes, yea often, good people
do measure themselves by that first affection which they had at their first
turning to God; and then the change was specifical, and afterward the change
is gradual. When a man is first converte and turned to God, then he is turned
from in to God, from sin to grace, from the world to Christ: afterward he does
not change from the world to Christ, but he changes from grace to grace, from
glory to glory: it is but a gradual change afterward; and therefore the change
at the first being a specifical thing, his affections were high then. At our
first conversion and turning to God, all things are span-new; and we are apt to
be much affected with new things, and therefore the affections must needs be
very much up and raised at the first, and when a man does first convert and
turn to God, and leave the world: God the Father does as it were take the poor
soul into his arms when it is a babe, and he does bestow many desires upon it;
and he gives out many encouragements, to weigh down those discouragements that
the soul shall meet withal in parting with the world. But now afterward, when
a man is more able to go alone, possibly he does not meet with these; now shall
a man think therefore that all is naught, and that he has no grace at all,
because he does not feel what he had then? Yet how often is this!

But besides, good people do mistake because of their ignorance, whereby they
call that sin which is grace, and that grace which is sin. Thus I mean: it is a
great sin (...) a man to doubt of Gods love, and to lie down upon his face, and
to be discouraged, as if there were no hope for him in God: why many that are
weak now, they look upon this as a great virtue, to doubt of their condition,
and to call all into question: afterward they are freed from these doubtings,
and so they do grow in grace: but because they do look upon these doubtings as
marks of virtue, they think because they have lost these, that now they are
quite declined, whereas indeed they are grown in grace.

But secondly, in answer to this, you must know that our Christian growth is
fourfold.

1. There is a growth of affection. 2. Growth in extention. 3. Growth in regard
of firmness and rootedness. 4. And g^^^th in regard of spiritualness.
A man grows these four ways spiritually.

Sometimes his affection grows more intense hot then it was before: sometimes a
man's growth is in regard of extention, his affections of love or joy extending
to other objects then before. So in Hosea our growth is described to be a
spreading of the branches. And sometimes a man grows when he is more firm and
rooted in the way of God; and so our spiritual growth in that place of Hosea is
described by our taking root downward. And sometimes a man is said to grow when
he is more spiritual. Beloved, weak Christians look altogether at the
intensness of their affectictions; and if they do not find their affections so
intense as they were before, then they break forth and say, Oh now I am
declined, and now I am decayed, and I have lost my first love; whereas there is
a growth in regard of extension; as a man or beast he may attain to his full
talness, and after that he may batten and spread more: so in grace, a man's
gracc may spread more afterward, and yet possibly not so intense in regard of
some affections, as it was at the first. Now a Fountain or Spring that has but
one stream, and afterward that one stream be divided in many streams; if an
unskilful man look upon it, he says, How comes this to pass, that this
Fountain is dried up? here was a full stream before, and now there is not. But
now says a skilful man that stands by him, Now there are many streams, and so
there is rather the more water, now it is divided into more streams. And so it
is in regard of grace; at the first a man's grace does run out much in one
chanel, afterward it is divided into more streams, and it spread^ more; yet
notwithstanding, those that are w^^k, because they do not find so full a
stream in the same chanel as before, though there be many streams now that
there were not before, they question all, and they say they are abated, and
they are declined, and they have lost their first love.

But again, whereas thou say it is not now with thee as it was before; I say
to thee, poor doubting heart, wherever thou art or stand, I say unto thee
from the Lord, Thou have more now then thou had before; as thus: for suppose
a child that heretofore served his father for wages, and does now serve out of
love, and not for wages, it may be he does not do so much work as he did
before, yet I say to you, If he does but hal^ so much out of love, he does more
then he did before when he wrought for wages; now the work is more out of love
to God: heretofore you were much grieved and troubled for sin committed, and
you were therefore grieved, that your sin might be pardoned; I but now you
grieve for your sin because it is pardoned: I tell you, One tear from you of
these Gospel-tears, are more then a bottle-full of all those legal tears that
you had before, man or woman, and therefore there is no reason why thou
should be dejected, and say thus, I am declined, and I have lost my first
love, and I do not grow in grace, and therefore I never had any truth of grace
at all.

Quest. But you will say unto me then, If a man may grow and increase in grace,
and yet think that he is decreased; what certain Signs are there, whereby a
man may know that he does grow in grace, and that he does abound yet more and
more?

Beloved, I shall not give you any negative signs, but I shall make mention of
some things, which if you have, and can find, you may certainly say, you are
grown in Grace. But mistake not, I do not say, that if you do not find these,
that therefore you should conclude that you are not grown. I come rather to
comfort and to lift up the weary Soul, then to trouble it: but, I say, If you
do find these, you are certainly grown in Grace.

Answ. 1. First, The great work of the Gospel it is to believe; and if you can
rely more upon Christ in the time of your temptations then heretofore, surely
you are grown in Grace.

If you do find again a greater sweetness in the ways of God, then you have
found heretofore, certainly you are grown: when we come and look upon a flower,
we look at the color of the flower, and the smell of the flower; but the Be
does not regard the color of the flower, or the smell of the flower, but the
Be regards the sweetness of the flower: so at our first coming into the ways
of God, then we look at the color, and how they appear; but afterward, the
more Grace you have, the more sweetness you find; and if you find more
sweetness, certainly you are grown more.

Again, If that you are more able to turn from the exercise of one Grace to
another, and of one Duty unto another, then you were, this argues you are
grown, if you be able to mingle Graces together: a weak Christian is all for
one work, humiliation for sin committed, and it is true, we ought to be much
humbled: I say, a weak Christian is all for one work, but the stronger you
grow, the more you will be able to mingle Graces together, and to turn from one
to another. As now, if one learn to sing, when one has but little skill,
possibly a man may sing one tune; but the more a man grows in skill, the more
he will be able readily to turn from one tune to another. So in Grace, a man
may be able to mingle Graces more; and therefore our growth is so described, as
you shall hear by and by in that of Peter, Add unto your Faith virtue, and to
virtue knowledge, etc.

Again, If you be able to go on in the ways of God more, without whip, or rod,
or without spur, it argues you are grown more; give me leave to express it
thus: A Horse at the first, till he be acquainted with the Rode and way, he is
ridden with a whip and with a spur; but afterward when he is well used to the
way, you may lay the Bridle upon his head, and he need none of the spur and
whip; why? because he is now used to the way: and so when Christians come on at
the first, then they are whipped on with more fear; but now when the reins seem
to be laid upon the neck, they go the better and the faster: when they can go
without that whipping and the rod, it argues that they are used more to the way
of God, then they were used before.

But further, the more a man is able to go out unto others for counsel,
spiritual admonition, consolation, or reprehension, the more he is grown, and
he will grow in Grace.

I Will propound you a Parable: suppose three men that are sick and weak; one is
extreme ill, and the Physician comes to his bedside, and he spits in his
Physicians face, and will take nothing.

Another man he does not deal so by the Physician, he lies upon his bed, but he
cannot stir off his bed; he lies upon his bed, and he hears the counsel of the
Physician, and he takes his advice.

A third man he is weak indeed, but he is able to go abroad, and he goes to the
Physicians house for his counsel and direction. I pray, which of all these
three men are the most healthy? surely, you will say, the latter is more
healthy then the second, and the second more then the third. Beloved, there are
these three sorts of people, one that when spiritual Physic is brought to
them, they spit in the Physicians face, and they will have none. Others they
are not so bad, but yet notwithstanding they keep their beds, as it were, and
do not go forth for counsel.

But there is a third sort of sinners, that finding their souls ill at ease,
they can go forth for counsel, and go out for admonition, and go out for
reprehension. It may be that all these three conditions have past over some of
you: you can remember the time when you did kick and fling, and spit in the
Physicians face, as it were, and you would none at all; afterward you lay more
still, but yet sat, and did not stir out: I but now you are able God be
thanked to go out to the Physician, or to such and such Saints, and to open
your condition before them; Oh thus it is with me, Oh thus it is with me! come,
lay on some Admonition, or lay on some healing Plaster, some Reprehension,
some Consolation; good Sir pity me; and the like. Now this argues more health
then before.

Again, the more you are able to do the work of the Lord without noise, the
more does it argue that you are grown in grace. Beloved, Jesus Christ was a
perfect workman, and did the work of the Lord perfectly, and he made no noise;
it is said of him, that he did not lift up his voice in the streets. Young
Christians make a great noise in the work of God: one he cries out, Oh I am
damned, I am damned! and another cries out after the same kind, Oh I am damned,
I am damned! and wring their hands in the family, and make a great noise when
there is a work of God upon their hearts; like to your young Scholars, when
first of all they learn their books, they read with a great noise: afterward,
when they are grown men, and read better, they read silent, and make no noise.
So now I say, Thou man or woman, art thou able to do the work of the Lord in a
more silent and sweet Gospel-way then heretofore thou did? this argues that
thou art more grown then thou were heretofore.

And further, if you know Christ more, you are grown more; the Apostle puts
them both together: Grow in grace, and in the knowledge of Jesus Christ.

But take one more. If that you do as much as before, and deny your doing more
then you did before, then you are grown in grace. One man does much, and denies
himself little; another does much, and denies himself much: who has most grace
of these two? The husbandman will tell you, that when the ear of corn is not
so ripe, it stands bolt-upright; but when it is more ripe, then it hangs down
its head, and looks to the earth: and so heretofore it may be you were much in
prayer, and in duty, you wept much; and it was well that you were much in duty
and humiliation for sin; but it may be then you rested upon your duties, and
denied your self little. I but now you are as much, but you have seen more of
the free grace of God, and the love of God in Christ, and now you deny your
duties more, and rest less upon them then you did; this is a growth now; and
where these things are, you may conclude that you are grown. And I say to every
soul here, Is there any one that does find these things? thou art the man or
woman that does grow in grace, and does increase; therefore be of good comfort,
thou art not declined, thou art not abated, thou have truth of grace, thou have
growth of grace.

Quest. I but whether I have or I have not, you will say, surely it is my duty
to have; and what shall I do that I may grow in grace? I hope the Lord has
begun savingly upon my heart; but what shall I do that I may abound yet more
and more, and increase in grace?

I must not be large here; give me leave to say some things to you.

Answ. First of all, observe what those ways of God are, unto which he has
promised increase; and Oh let your feet be found standing there: he has
promised to those that exercise; To him that has shall be given. It is opposed
to laying up the talent in a napkin.

He has promised increase to those that wait upon him: Those that wait upon
the Lord shall renew their strength.

He has promised increase to those whose feet stand in the courts of the house
of the Lord, in Psalm. 92. 12. The righteous shall flourish like a palmtree, and
shall grow like a cedar in Lebanon: those that be planted in the house of the
Lord, shall flourish in the courts of our God. And so in Psalm. 84. 4. Blessed
are they that dwell in thine house, they will be still praising thee. They that
dwell in thine house they will be still praising thee.

Quest. But suppose that a man's feet do not stand in the court of the Lords
house, suppose a man be not planted in the house of the Lord, can he not grow
in grace?

Answ. Yes: mark what follows in verse. 5, 6, 7. all growth of grace is not
instal'd upon one condition: Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee. He
had said before, Blessed are those that dwell in thy house: but suppose a man
be driven out, and cannot dwell in Gods house, shall he not be blessed, and
shall he not grow? Blessed is the man whose strength is in thee, and in whose
heart are the ways of them, who passing through the valley of Baca, make it a
well; the rain also fills the pools: they go from strength to strength, every
one of them in Zion appears before God. They may grow too; but then it is upon
these three Conditions.

1. The ways of God must be in their hearts: In whose heart are the ways of
them.

2. They must look upon that condition as a valley of Baca, a mourning valley,
verse. 6.

3. Thirdly, they must be abundant in private duty and exercise, digging up of
pits; and then the rain falls, and fills those pits; and thus they shall go
from strength to strength. But the great increase is promised to those whose
feet do stand in the court of the house of the Lord.

Again, would you know how you may grow in grace? Beloved, let your eye be
steadfast upon the greater and higher matters and objects of the Gospel. The
Apostle for this end does lay the great things of the Gospel before the people,
and prays for them, that they may be filled with all the fullness of God. But I
pray see what an expression he has in 2 Cor. 9. 8. And God (says he) is able
to make all grace abound toward you, that ye always having all sufficiency in
all things. All Sufficiency is a great attribute of God: they have it in a
kind; That ye always having all sufficiency in all things, may abound to every
good work. Mark what great things he lays here before them. And if you look
into chap. 6. of the Epistle to the Hebrews, verse. 6. you shall find that the
Apostle gives this plain direction that now I am upon for our growing in grace,
and perfecting holiness in the fear of God: Therefore (says he) leaving the
principles of the doctrine of Christ, let us go, on unto perfection, not laying
again the foundation of repentance from dead works, etc. Good people, mark: Let
us go on to perfection: how? not laying again the foundation of repentance from
dead works. Some there are that are always laying the foundation, and all their
life they are questioning whether their work were right at the first or no: Oh
I am afraid I was never truly humbled at the first: their whole life is nothing
but a laying of the foundation-work: why says the Apostle, Let us go on to
perfection, etc. Be not always in this work of laying the foundation, if you
would go on to perfection. And as for my self, says he, I go this way to work,
as you may read in chap. 3. of this Epistle to the Philippians: Brethren, I
count not my self to have apprehended, but this one thing: forgetting those
things which are behind, and reaching forth to those things which are before,
I press towa^ds the mark. Mark, it is a similitude taken from those that run in
a Race: says he, I do as those that run in a Race; they stretch out their
bodies toward the Price, so do I: and, says he, as it is with those that run
in a Race, they do not go backward for to measure the ground that they have
gone over, but they forget what is past, and press on to that which is before:
so now do I, I forget that which is past, not only so as not to rest upon it,
but I forget what is past, I am not always laying the foundation of the
doctrine of repentance from dead works, but I press on to that which is before.
And so, would you be perfect, and would you grow, let your eyes be upon those
things that are before.

Again, if you would grow in grace, cut off all those superfluities that grow
out of your heart, and give up your selves wholly to the Word of the Lord in
this world. If you would have a tree grow, you slip off the lesser sprigs that
grow out of the sides; they will hinder the growth, you will say: so says the
Apostle; Wherefore laying aside all filthiness, and superfluity of naughtiness,
receive with weekness the ingrafted word, which is able to save your souls.
James 1. 21.

But again, if you would grow in grace, and abound yet more and more; observe
what gifts or graces God has given you, and labor to improve them. Beloved,
God does give some gift or special grace to every Christian, and that gift or
grace is as a Spade or Shovel to dig out more out of the Mines of Christ. Every
bird has its bill, and by the bill it does take in its meat, whereby it grows;
and every Christian has one gift or another whereby he does excel: and with
that gift or grace you should now go unto Jesus Christ, who is the great
Ordinance, and fetch out more. Observe, I say, what that gift and grace is, and
labor to improve it more and more.

I will say no more in this; but if you would grow in grace, study much of the
love of Jesus Christ: and you shall find that these two are put together by
the Apostle, in Ephesians. 3. For this cause (says he) I bow my knees unto the
Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. that he would grant you, according to the
riches of his glory, to be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the inner
man, that Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith; that ye being rooted and
grounded in love, may be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and hight, and to know the love of Christ which passes
knowledge, that ye might be filled with all the fullness of God. Mark how these
go together: the more you see the love of Christ, the more you will love God;
and the more you love him, the more you will obey him, and the more abundant
you will be in the work of the Lord. Therefore as ye desire to grow, study the
free love of God in Jesus Christ, and hereby you will be able to grow and to
abound yet more and more. And that you may do it, give me leave to speak here a
little by way of encouragement hereunto, and so I will wind up all.

Beloved in the Lord, when you hear of Gods blessing any in Scripture, he
says, Increase and multiply. So then, the more you do increase in grace, the
more your gifts and graces multiply, the more you do carry up and down with you
a testimony of the Lords blessing upon you.

Besides, herein you glorify God the Father: Herein is my Father glorified,
(says Christ) in that ye bring forth much fruit. It Is the glory of the
husbandman, that the tree bring forth much; it is the glory of God the Father
that ye bring forth much, that ye abound more and more.

And the more and greater our opportunities are, and means of growth, the more
are we all encouraged for to grow in grace. Let me appeal to you a little; have
not your opportunities and means for growth been great here?

Communion of Saints it is a great means for to grow in grace. Here you have
time, here many Saints meet together; and in poor Country-towns, possibly a
poor Christian may travel three or four miles before he can meet with one that
may refresh his thoughts: here you have the opportunities which you have not in
other places. Communion of Saints, standing in the courts of the house of the
Lord, is a great means for to grow in grace.

Preaching of the Gospel, and the Word of Gods grace, is a special and great
means of growth: it is called the rain of plenty, or the plentiful rain. It is a
true speech, It is the year, and not the soil, that does make the fruit: if the
rain falls seasonably, and the sun shines seasonably, then you have fruit. Now
Beloved, I appeal to you; have you not had a fine time of it here? have you not
had a sweet season of Gospel-preaching amongst you? The Lord knows what
plentiful rain has fallen upon you: Oh, great engagements are upon you all for
to grow in grace; and if you, this people, shall not after all your engagements
this way, and opportunities to grow; if you shall not grow in grace, Oh how
will you appear before God your Father at the great day! how, how will you give
an account of those talents that you have had? We read of him that had but one
talent, he wrapped it up in a napkin; but the Parable speaks there were five
left, and two left; but it is not said that he that had the five, or the two,
wrapped them up in a napkin; but he that had but the one talent, he wrapped it up,
and you know what became of him; but now when those that have five talents
shall wrap them up in a napkin, Oh what will become of them! Beloved, you have
not had the one talent, you have not had the two talents: you have had the five
talents: and if there was such a miserable end of him that wrapped up his one
talent, O what will become of us that have five talents, and wrap them up, and
do not improve them! You know what the Lord Christ said to the Church of
Ephesus, how he threatened that Church: I have somewhat against thee, because
thou have lost thy first love: remember therefore from whence thou art fallen,
and repent, and do the first works, or else I will come unto thee quickly, and
will remove thy candlestick out of his place. God knows whether your first love
be not left, or no; I am sure the Lord has taken away a burning and a shining
light from among you; and certainly, if you do not grow and thrive under all
those opportunities of grace, and growth in grace that you have had, and still
have; how soon the Lord may quite remove his Candlestick from you, and leave
you quite in the dark, he only knows. Wherefore, Beloved in the Lord, you have
received much, Oh much is expected from you, much is expected from you. And let
me tell you for your encouragement, If you do grow in grace, and abound in the
work of the Lord, then shall there be an abundant entrance given unto you into
the everlasting inheritance.

And so I come to that place of Peter, which I shall but open before you, and
so have done for this time; and I pray consider it diligently. 2 Pet. 1. 5. And
besides this, giving all diligence, add to your faith virtue, and to virtue
knowledge. But mark how he prefaces before he comes to the words: Whereby
(says he) are given unto us exceeding great and precious promises, that by
these you might be partakers of the divine nature, having escaped the
corruption that is in the world through lusts. Now besides this, there is
something else to be done: well, what is that? it is such a matter, as all
diligence is to be given to it: Besides this, giving all diligence, add to
your faith virtue. It Is not, it is not enough that you believe, but you must
have moral virtue also: Add unto your faith virtue. I but suppose we have
moral virtue, is not that enough? No* and to your virtue knowledge. You must
not only have moral virtues, but you must know Jesus Christ. But suppose he
has knowledge, is not that yet enough? No; and to your knowledge add
temperance, whereby you may be kept from the immoderate use of the things of
this world. But suppose we have that, is not that enough? No; add to your
temperance patience: you shall meet with many afflictions and crosses, and
therefore you must have patience. But suppose we have patience, is not that yet
enough? No; and to your patience add godliness: there must be a right
worshipping of God in his Service. Well, but suppose we have godliness, and do
worship God after a right manner, is not that enough? No; add to your
godliness brotherly kindness: you that are Saints are brethren, and therefore
it is not enough that ye have the worshipping of God in a right way, but ye
must agree together as brethren; add to your right worship and godliness
brotherly kindness. But suppose we have that, is not that enough? no; add
charity: brotherly kindness may be toward you that are brethren, but there
must be charity toward all, to those that are not of the body. Well, but
suppose we do these things, what then? Read verse 8. For if these things be in
you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in
the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ. You complain that your hearts are
barren, and that you lie as barren ground in the Family: why if you would not
be barren and unfruitful, you must grow, and add one grace unto another; And
if these things be in you and abound, they make you that ye shall neither be
barren nor unfruitful. Well, but suppose a man lack these things; read verse 9.
But he that lacks these things is blind, and cannot see afar off: he may see
some things in Religion that are near, but those things that are afar off he is
blind in them, and has forgotten that he was purged from his old sins, that
is, by Baptism. But suppose we do all this, what then? Pray see what
encouragement there is to this in verse. 10. Wherefore the rather brethren give
diligence to make your calling and election sure: this will be a sign to you
of your election. And if you do these things, you shall never fall. Whereas
those that are weak, and do not grow in grace, they stumble at all occasions;
but if you do these things, ye shall never fall, and not stumble as those that
are weak do. And yet further, at verse. 11. you shall not only have this
benefit for the present, but for the future: for so an entrance shall be
ministered unto you abundantly into the everlasting kingdom of our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ. Do you abound in grace, and grow in grace, and are rich
in grace? Why look as you abound, so there shall be an abundant entrance
ministered to you into the everlasting kingdom. Wherefore (he says) I will not
be negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things. It may be you
will tell me you knew these things before; but mark verse. 12. I will not be
negligent to put you always in remembrance of these things, though ye know
them, and be established in the present truth. Yea, at verse. 13. I think it
meet, as long as I am in this tabernacle, to stir you up, by putting you in
remembrance. And that you may see that it is a matter of great concernment, he
does not only say that he would put them in remembrance as long as he lived,
but he would take some course when he was dead that this exhortation should be
pressed upon them, at verse. 15. Moreover, I will endeavor that you may be able
after my decease to have these things always in remembrance. Oh therefore what
a necessity is there that we should grow in grace! Wherefore Brethren and
Beloved in the Lord, as you have been exhorted not only by me at this time,
but by others of Gods servants: so now labor to abound in all well pleasing,
to abound yet more and more. And for me, I shall say to you, and concerning
you, as the Apostle in Philip. 1. This I pray, that your love may abound yet
more and more in knowledge and in all judgment, that ye may approve things
that are excellent; that ye may be sincere and without offense till the day of
Christ, being filled with the fruits of righteousness which are by Jesus
Christ, to the glory and praise of God.

The first and last in Suffering-work. SERMON. II.
Matthew. 29. ult. But many that are first shall be last, and the last shall be
first.
AT verse. 27. Peter does propound a question unto Christ, saying, Behold, we
have forsaken all, and followed thee: what shall we have therefore?

Jesus answered him in the following verse; and his answer is partly
comfortable, and partly cautional.

In the comfortable part, he does declare what great reward his disciples or
any other should have, that did suffer, or leave any worldly interest for his
Namesake.

The first part concerns the disciples only, in verse. 28. I say unto you, that
ye which have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit on
the throne of his glory, ye also shall fit upon twelve thrones, judging the
twelve tribes of Israel. This shall be your reward.

And as for others, though you make the question, I Will give my answer so (says
he) as shall concern more then you: my prom^se shall be extended unto others
also; at verse. 29. And EVERY ONE that has forsaken houses, or bre^hren, or
sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my Names
sake, shall receive an hundredfold: Here Is their reward, an hundredfold. It is
a very great improvement. We account Ten in the Hundred a great matter; and if
Merchants can venture to Sea, and gain Twelve or Ten in the Hundred, and be
Insured of so great a gain, they account it a great matter: but here is an
hundredfold: not Ten or Twelve, but an hundred for one; and this insur'd too:
Verily I say unto you (says Christ) every one that has forsaken, etc. shall
receive an hundredfold.

And as for the cautional part, that follows at verse. 30. But many that are
first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

Wherein he does give a Caveat, not only unto his disciples, but unto all
those that should suffer, and forsake any worldly interest upon his account. As
if he should say thus: It Is true, you have indeed left all to follow me;
thereupon you ask me what you shall have; and I lay before you very great
rewards: but I would have you for to walk warily, and to take heed how you walk
in the matter of your sufferings: for though you suffer for my Namesake, and
though those that do so in truth shall have very great rewards, an hundredfold
in this life; yet many that are very forward, shall appear to be backward; and
many that are backward, shall appear to be forward; and many that stand
behind, they shall stand before; and many that stand before, they shall be set
behind: The first shall be last, and the last shall be first. Which being
spoken in reference unto suffering, and forsaking of our worldly interest for
the Name of Christ; the Doctrine then is this:

That many that are first shall be last, and many that are last shall be first,
in suffering-work.

For the clearing whereof, there were four things propounded.

1. First, what it is for a man to be first that is last, and to be last that
is first.

2. Secondly, how it may appear that many that are first shall be last, and
many that are last shall be first in suffering-work.

3. Thirdly, how and in what respect that is true.

5. Fourthly, what are the Reasons on it.

And then the Application.

First, what is it for one that is first to be last, and one that is last to be
first? what is this?

Some think this is to be understood in regard of the sameness of reward; as if
Christ had said thus: The first shall be as the last, and the last shall be as
the first, in matter of reward. And for this, they have the next Parable to
show, where this same speech is brought in: A certain householder went out early
in the morning to hire laborers into his vineyard, and agreed with the
laborers for a penny a day: and be hired some at the first hour, and some at
the last; and those that came in at the last, received a penny as the first did.
Whereupon the first they grumbled. The Master answered, verse. 15. Is it not
lawful for me to do what I will with mine own? is thine eye evil, because I am
good? So the last shall be first, and the first last. Why? because the last had
the same penny. As if the meaning of this therefore should be thus much, That
there should be the same reward given to the one as to the other. But this
cannot be the meaning on it: for it is not true; for there shall not be the same
reward given to all; some shall have more then others, some shall have greater
degrees of glory then others.

If there be degrees of torments in hell, then there are degrees of glory in
heaven. There are degrees of torment in hell; for Christ has said, He that
knows his Masters will, and does it not, shall be beaten with MANY stripes,
with more stripes then those that are ignorant, and know it not. Now if there
be degrees of torment in hell, there are degrees of glory in heaven: and
therefore the thing is not true, That there shall be the same reward.

And here in chap. 19. we see, that the Apostles are set higher in their
reward: When the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, YE also shall
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.

And our Savior Christ here, he does not speak universally, nor indefinitely:
he does not say that ALL that are first shall be last, and ALL that are last
shall be first; neither does he speak definitely, The first shall be last, and
the last first: but he speaks thus, That MANY that are first; he does not say
ALL that are first shall be last; neither does he say indefinitely, The first
shall be last, but, MANY that are first shall be last, and the last shall be
first. That Is the meaning then.

Others think therefore the meaning is this, and the words are to be understood
in reference to men's conceit and opinion: as if he should say, Be not
conceited; for though ye suffer much, and forsake a great deal for me, and for
my Namesake, yet many that are first in their own conceit, shall be last; and
many that are last in their own opinion and conceit, shall be first. This is
true; but this is not all the meaning.

Therefore we must know, that a person or thing is said to be first or last, in
regard of time, or in regard of dignity or chiefdom.

In regard of time: so we say the last day is the first day of the week; first,
in regard of time.

2. Secondly, in regard of chiefdom; and so Paul says, Whereof I am chief. In
the Original it is, This is a true saying, that Christ came into the world to
save sinners, whereof I am the FIRST; but we read it chief, because the chief
is the first. First is put for chief in Scripture Language: and so it is true,
many, many that are first in religion, ancient professors, shall be last at
suffering for the Name of Christ, when it comes to 't; and many that are last
in religion, novices in religion, lately brought in, shall be the first in
suffering for the Cause, and for the Name of Jesus Christ. And so, many that
are chief, and of great esteem in the world, that are first in esteem, shall be
last at suffering-work; and many that are last in esteem, and of no account,
shall be first to suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, a thing is said to be in Scripture, when it is declared to be, when
it appears to be. So in Acts 13. speaking concerning the resurrection of
Christ, According as it is written, This day have I begotten thee. Why this day
have I begotten thee? why was Christ begotten that day, the day of his
resurrection? Christ was the eternal Son of God: how is this, This day have I
bogotten thee, to prove the resurrection? The Apostle explains it in Romans 1. 4.
by the resurrection he was mightily DECLARED to be the Son of God. So that in
Scripture Phrase, a thing is said to be, when it is declared to be, and appears
to be. And accordingly now, many that are first, that appear to be first, shall
in due time appear to be last in suffering-work; and many that appear to be
last, shall in due time appear to be first in sufferingwork for the Cause of
Christ, and for the Name of Christ.

Thus now in the general we hear what this means: more particularly afterward.

But secondly, how may it appear that many that are first shall be last, and
many that are last shall be first in suffering-work, suffering for the Name of
Christ? (For I am not now speaking of the thing at large, that many that are
first shall be last, and many that are last shall be first, in the general, but
in reference only to suffering.) How may that appear? Thus:

It Is in the suffering part of Religion, as in the doing part. In the doing
part of Religion, many that are first shall be last: many that are great men in
duty, and of great abilities and gifts, shall be last; and many that are last,
and weak and low in grace, that you would think had no grace at all, shall be
first. It Is said so in the next Chapter, in the Parable: there it is spoken in
regard of doing; here in this Scripture it is spoken in regard of suffering. Now
in regard of doing, so it is (I say).

Is it not a great matter for a man to frequent the Ordinances with delight; to
believe, and to repent, and to preach, and to prophecy, and do many wonderful
works, casting out devils in the Name of Christ? All these things in some sense
a man may do, and yet may fall short of heaven.

Possibly a man may attend upon the Ordinances with delight. In Isai. 58. Ye
delight in approaching to me, ye unsound, hypocrites.

Possibly a man may in some measure believe, and yet be unsound. It Is said of
Simon Magus, that he himself also believed, in the Acts.

Possibly a man may repent in some sense, and yet be unsound. It Is said of
Judas, in Mat. 27. when he saw what became of Christ, he repented himself, and
carried the money again.

And in Matthew. 7. they say, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy Name, and
cast out devils in thy Name, and done many wonderful works in thy Name? And yet
Christ shall say at last, Depart, I never knew you. So that many men go very
far in the doing part of Religion, and yet fall short of heaven. If then, the
first may be last in the doing part of Religion, why should it be a thing
incredible to us, that the first may be last in the suffering part?

The second demonstration of it, to clear it, is this:

If a man may spoil and lose all his former sufferings by his after-sins; and
if a man may recover, repair, recompense his former backwardness to suffer, by
his after-faith and grace; then presently the last may be first, and the first
may be last in point of suffering. So it is.

Possibly a man may lose all his former-sufferings by his after-sins: Foolish
Galatians! (says the Apostle) have ye suffered so many things in vain, if yet
in vain? They fell from the doctrine of grace, to justification by works; and
they lost all their sufferings by their after-sins.

On the other side, Nicodemus was very backward to come to Christ; he came by
n^ght; he was afraid to suffer: yet afterward, when Christ died, he owned
Christ openly: and the Holy Ghost sets a mark upon it, in Joh. 18. This is that
Nicodemus which came to Jesus by night. He did recompense his former
backwardness to suffer, by his after-faith. So that a man may lose his former
sufferings by his after-sins; and a man may recover and recompense his former
backwardness to sufferings, by his after-faith and grace.

Thirdly, If a man may be a famous Preacher of the Gospel, and lose much upon
that account, and yet prove an Apostate, a persecutor of the Gospel; and if a
man may be a notorious persecutor of the Gospel, and yet afterward prove a
famous Preacher of the Gospel, and suffer much upon that account: Then possibly
the first may be last, and the last may be first in point of suffering So it
is, that a man may be a famous Preacher of the Gospel, and lose much upon that
account; and yet afterward prove an Apostate, a persecutor. So it was with
Judas. When Christ sent forth his disciples, saying, Take no purse, nor scrip,
etc. Judas was among them, and left his purse, etc. and was no doubt a famous
Minister; yet after, he became a most notorious persecutor, and headed the
party that came to take Jesus.

And always (as you may observe) the persecutors are headed with some Apostate;
they have some Apostate in the head of them.

And on the other side, who does not know what a notorious persecutor Paul was!
insomuch as he says upon that score, that he was the least of all the
Apostles, because he persecuted the Church of God: and yet who does not know
what a famous Preacher of the Gospel he was, and suffered much upon that score!
So then, the thing lies clear and plain, That possibly the last may be first,
and the first may be last, in point of suffering.

Thirdly, How and in what respect is this true?

First, it is true in regard of privileges and enjoyments: many that are first
in regard of privileges and enjoyments, shall be last at the work of suffering
for Christ; and many that are last in privileges and enjoyments, shall be
first in the work of suffering for Christ.

Many that are first in privileges and enjoyments, shall be last in suffering.
Here Is a young man comes to Christ, and Christ loved him; and he says unto
Christ, What shall I do 10 inherit eternal life? Keep the commandments, says
Christ. I have done it, says he. I but says Christ, One thing thou lackest;
go sell what thou have, and give to the poor, and come and follow me, and thou
shall have treasure in heaven. And says the text, He went away sorrowful, for
he had a great estate; he was rich, he was a privileged man, and he had great
enjoyments, for he was a rich man; and yet notwithstanding he was the most
backward for to leave all for Christ.

On the other side, the poor receive the Gospel: and as the poor do receive the
Gospel, so they hold it, and keep it, and suffer for it. So that it is true then
in regard of privileges and enjoyments.

Secondly, this is true in regard of abilities: many that are first in regard
of ability, shall be last in suffering for Christ; and many that are last in
abilities, shall be first in suffering for the Name of Jesus Christ.

Many that are first in Abilities: so the disciples, when Christ said to them,
Are ye able to drink of the cup that I am to drink of? and are ye able to be
baptized with the baptism that I am to be baptized with? Yea Lord (say they) we
are able. But when Christ came to suffer, it is said, They all forsook him and
fled. First, in point of abilities; and last, in point of suffering. But Mary,
and a company of weak women, cleaved unto Christ, and followed him to the very
last: the first were last, and the last were first. And look into the Book of
Martyrs: where do you find the Martyrs growing? do you find them growing upon
Universities? Few were Scholars and Doctors that were Martyrs, but growing in
Country-towns and Villages. So it is said of Origin, that when he was a young
man, about sixteen or seventeen years old, his mother was forced to hide his
very Shift from him, so that he was ashamed to go into the streets; for
otherwise he would have gone to have suffered Martyrdom. But afterward, when
he came to be a great Doctor, then he offered to the Idols; insomuch as they
cried out, Origin has sacrificed! While he was weak and young, very forward to
suffer: when he was grown strong, and had abilities, then backward. The last
shall be first, and the first shall be last.

Thirdly, this is true also in regard of action, professional action. Many that
are first in profession, and of great performance, shall be last in suffering
for the Name of Christ. And many that have not been of so great profession, and
such high performance, shall suffer when it comes to it; they shall suffer for
the Name of Christ. You have an instance in the Parable of the stony ground; it
receives the Word with joy: yet notwithstanding, when tribulation and
persecution arise because of the Word, by and by they are offended. So they
were high, and first in profession, yea action too, and yet the last in
suffering.

So on the other side, you know the stories there that go together: a certain
man comes to Christ, and says, Lord, I will follow thee whithersoever thou
go. Says Christ, The foxes have holes, and the birds of the air have nests,
but the Son of man has not whereon to lay his head. Then Christ comes to
another, and says to him, Follow me. Lord, says he, I must go bury my father.
Why let the dead bury their dead. What Is the meaning of this, but to show thus
much, That the first shall be last, and the last shall be first, in forsaking
their worldly interests for Christ, and for the Name of Christ?

Fourthly, this is true also in point of Resolution: many that are first in
resolving to suffer, shall be last to suffer when it comes to; and many that
are last in resolving, shall be first in suffering. Lord (says Peter) though
all men forsake thee, yet will not I. Bravely resolved! but though he was first
in the resolve, yet he was first in forsaking Christ. The cock shall not crow
before thou deny me. And you know how it was with those Pendleton and Sanders.
two in the Book of Martyrs: the one was a very fat man, and he would burn, his
grease should fry in the fire for the Name of Christ: the other was a lean man,
and he cries out, Oh I am afraid I shall never hold out! But when it came to,
the lean man was the Martyr, and the fat man would not burn. So that that is
true in the point of Resolution.

And true it is also in the point of Indurance and pain in the work of
suffering. And in that, many that are first in the work of suffering, shall be
last in the reward; and many that are last in the work of suffering, shall be
first in the reward. 1 Cor. 13. 3. Though I give all my goods to feed the poor,
and though I give my body to be burnt, and have not charity, it profits me
nothing. Possibly a man may give his goods to the poor, part with his worldly
interest to the poor, and give his body to be burnt, and yet want love. So
then, the first in the very work of suffering, may be last in the reward: it is
true in that respect. And so I have done with that.

But then in the fourth place, what is the reason of this, and how comes this to
pass, that many that ^re first shall be last, and many that are last shall be
first in suffering-work? There are two Reasons for it.

The first is drawn from God and his grace.

The second is drawn from our selves and sufferings.

The first is drawn from God and his grace, thus: It Is Gods ordinary way in his
dealings with his creatures, to set those things and persons before, that do
stand behind; and those behind, that do stand before. As in Printing, you
don't take the letters and place that first that is first in the Alphabet, but
that which is first in the Word; as in zeal, z is the first, but it is the last
in the Alphabet. And so God in writing down the names of men in the Book of
life, he writes down them that stand behind; the last letter first, and the
first letter last. See it for instance.

When the Lord had to deal with Men and Angels, which was the first in the
Creation? The Angels they were the elder brother to Man, they stood first: but
when Men and Angels had fallen, God ^e redeems Man, and sets him before, that
stood behind; and takes the fallen Angels, and sets them behind, that were
first in the Creation; sets them behind, and Man that was behind, he is
brought before. So when God would take a people to himself, what people did God
take to be his people? A poor, forlorn, despised people, The people of the
Jews; and past over all the glorious Nations of the world.

And when God would take a family out of that people, what family did he take?
The family of J^sse. And when he would take a particular person, what person
was it? David the younger brother, that stood behind, and was among the sheep:
he that stood behind was brought before, and he that stood before was set
behind. That for the time of the Old Testament.

So in the time of the N^w Testament; the Jew stands first, he had the hansel
of the Market, he had the hansel of the Gospel; Christ was born of them after
the flesh; they had the Oracles of God; they stood first: the Gentiles stood
behind; they called them dogs: It Is not meet to take the childrens bread and
cast it to dogs. Well, these Gentiles that stood behind, they are brought
before; and the Jews that stood before, they are set behind.

And what Nation did God take out of the Gentiles? did he take any great
continent in America, where the Gold and the Silver is? No, but the Isles shall
wait for thy law: and, the inhabitants of Kedar shall rejoice, and the
inhabitants of the rocks shall sing.

And when God would convert these, whom did he make use of to do it? He makes
use of Paul, Paul the last of all the Apostles: the twelve Apostles they stood
first: but he that stood behind, that was brought in last, that was born out of
time, he is taken to do the work.

And who are they that are converted to him? They are babes and sucklings: not
many wise, not many noble, but habes and sucklings. Even so, Father, because
thou art so pleased. This is the ordinary way of God: he takes those things
that stand behind, and brings them before; and takes those things that stand
before, and sets them behind. And why does he do so? Why

Because he will show mercy to whom he will show mercy: whom he will, he shows
mercy unto; and whom he will he hardens: and he orders things in such a way,
that no flesh may glory. 1 Cor. 1. But God has chosen the foolish things of
the world, to confound the wise; and God has chosen the weak things of the
world, to confound the things which are mighty; and base things of the world,
and things which are despised, has God chosen; yea and things which are not,
to bring to naught things that are. Why? That no flesh should glory in his
presence, v. 29. God will carry things in such a way, as no flesh may glory,
either in their doings, or in their sufferings. And how will he order it then?
Therefore the first shall be last, and the last shall be first, both in doing,
and in suffering; that no flesh may glory, but that grace may be all in all.
Whom he will he shows mercy to, and whom he will he hardens. This is the first
Reason, drawn from God himself, and from his grace.

The second Reason is drawn from our selves, and from our sufferings; and it
lies thus:

If there be a great deal of suffering that will come to little; and if there
be a little suffering that will amount to much, and come to much: then many
that are last shall be first, and the first shall be last, in point of
suffering.

Now so it is, that there is a great deal of suffering which will come to
little, come to little account. Judas left all; and it came to little.
Alexander drawn out of the crowd in suffering for Christ, and it came to
little: Alexander the coppersmith did me much evil; the Lord reward him
according to his works. His sufferings came to little. The poor Christians that
are taken slaves by the Turks, they lie in slavery ten years together, rather
then they will renounce the Christian Religion: yet when they come out, O what
drunkards, and swearers, and enemies to God, and such as have nothing of Christ
in them! O they suffer much, but it comes to little; they shall not be saved.
So that I say there is a great deal of suffering that will come to little.

On the other side, there is a little suffering that will amount to much. A cup
of cold water shall have its reward; the mite that the poor woman gave, more
then all the rest, says our Savior. 'Twas no great matter that Onesiphorus
suffered for Paul: says Paul, On^siphorus was not ashamed of my chains; he
sought me out diligently, and often refreshed my bowels. The Lord show mercy to
the household of Onesiphorus. It was no great matter that he suffered, but it
did amount to much.

But you will say, How can this be, that there should be a great deal of
suffering that will amount to little, and a little suffering that will amount
to much?

Both ways I answer.

First, if you ask how it can be that a great deal of sufferings should come to
little;

I answer first, it is possible that a man may lose, that he may gain. I am a
Minister, and have a Living; and I may lose my Living possibly, that I may get
a livelihood another way. I may suffer, and go to prison, that I may be
maintained. I do not reflect upon any particular, but only to show the
deceitfulness of our hearts in such a case.

And who does not know, that a man may suffer from a natural boldness and
courage? and that he may suffer by crouding in among good people that are in a
suffering way?

And who does not know, that a man may suffer upon the strength of education?
As a Turk, a Jew, a Papist, a Protestant, may suffer in the Religion that they
are educated and brought up in.

And who knows not that a man may suffer very much in a way of merit? It Is
recorded of one, that he invited a friend of his to dinner, that so he might
show unto him his Hounds. And when he came, he showed unto him a company of
poor people, and said unto him, These are my Hounds with which I do hunt for
heaven. In a way of merit he speaks. And we see how it is with a Horse or a Cow
in pasture that is eaten down; if there be herbs or pleasant flowers growing in
the ditch that is full of water, the Horsa or Cow will reach, and reach many
times so far, that it falls into the ditch. Truly there are many fine flowers
grow in the suffering ditch, and many an unsound heart may reach so far, till
it falls into the ditch. As it is possible that a man may tread a great deal of
ground, and never come to his journeys end: so it is possible a man may tread a
great deal of suffering ground, and never come to heaven; for there is a great
deal of dross cleaving to our best sufferings.

In a suffering time, then we are apt to be very froward, and to be impatient,
and to dwell more upon our own pleasures then upon Gods dishonor.

Secondly, in suffering times, then we are very apt to forget our former
experiences, and to be unthankful for our present mercies.

Thirdly, in suffering times we are very apt to boggle at the dispensation, to
fall foul upon instrumen^^ ^^ to complain of Gods dealings with us, and not of
our own unworthy dealings with God.

Fourthly, in suffering times we are very apt to look to the smart of our
sufferings, and not to the cause; or else to pitch upon the wrong cause.

Fifthly, in suffering times we are very apt to wish that we had never begun in
the work of God; As Joshua and the Elders, when they smarted before the men of
Ai: Would to God we had stayed on the other side Jordan, (say they.) So when
men meet with the sm^rt of afflictions in the way and work of God, O then,
would to God we had never meddled with the work of Reformation; would to God we
had been content with our leeks and onions which we had before.

Sixthly, in suffering times we are very apt to comply and correspond with our
enemies, and with Gods enemies; and to use unworthy shifts to get out of
trouble: as Abraham did; Say, thou art my sister. It Is true, she was his
sister; but she was his wife: and it was an unworthy shift for such a man as
Abraham was.

Seventhly, in suffering times we are very apt to tempt the Lord, and to limit
the holy One of Israel; and to say, Can God provide a table now? Can God
provide a table for me in this wilderness? Thus there is a great deal of dross
cleaves to all our sufferings, and therefore no wonder that a great deal of
suffering comes to little.

And on the other side, that a little suffering may amount to much. I can give
no other reason of it but this; God has a very gracious allowance for his
people. As we use to say; We bear with children when it is their weaning time.
Truly our suffering-time is our weaning-time: And God says, Bear with such a
one, it is his weaning-time. You have beard of the patience of Job. Why I have
heard of Jobs impatience. True; but God did not measure Job in hi^ wallops, but
when he was cold. As we do not measure milk when it wallops and seethes, but
when it is cold: so God does not measure Job in his passion, but when he was off
the fire, when he was cool. You say, the best Gold must have its allowance; if
it want a Grain or two, it must have its allowance. So all the suffering people
of God must have their allowance: and God has a very great allowance for his
suffering people; and therefore this is all the reason that I can give, why a
little suffering shall go a great way. So then, put all together, and you have
the Doctrine cleared in all the particulars of it.

If many that are first shall be last in point of suffering, why then should we
not all take heed how we suffer, look to the manner of our sufferings, look to
our hearts in suffering? He Is a virtuous man, that does what he should, as he
should. So he is not a true sufferer, that suffers what he should, but that
suffers what he should, as he should. When we hear how far a man may go in
Religion, and yet be unsound, and go to hell; then we should say, Good Lord, I
will then look to my heart in prayer, and look to my heart in duty. So in point
of suffering, if many that are first shall be last, and the last first; then I
will look to my heart in suffering, if ever I be called to suffer.

Secondly, if that many that are first shall be last in suffering-work, why
then should we not walk humbly under all our sufferings? The first shall be
last, and the last shall be first. A man who has prayed a prayer, or performed
a duty, he should do as one that has written a Letter; why he will read over
the Letter, and then he mends it, and then he looks over the letter, and throws
dust, dust, dust upon the Letter. And so a man when he has performed any duty,
he should look over his duty, and throw dust, I mean humility, and self-denial,
upon his duties. So should we do in regard of our sufferings; if ever we be
called to suffer, read over our sufferings, and throw dust upon our sufferings,
walk humbly under them: for many that are first shall be last in point of
suffering.

Thirdly, why should we rest in what we suffer, and not press on to that which
lies before? The life of a Christian is like the life of a man in a Cooks shop,
from one work to another. Like the life of a Husbandman; he plows and he
harrows, and he sowes and reaps, and threshes; and he never stands still. So
the life of a Christian, always at work. You know what our Savior says, If
any man will be my disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his cross. What
then? take a stool and sit down? No, let him take up his cross and follow me.
Follow me after sufferings, not sit down and rest there. When we have done all,
still press on to that which is before.

Fourthly, if many that are first shall be last in point of suffering, why
should we not take heed that we don't give in if ever we be called to
suffering? As it is said of the French, They are fire at the first onset, but
smoke in the issue.

So there are many that are rare men at a Charge, and they overcome in a
Skirmish; but they give in at the Battle. But is this true, that many that are
first in suffering, shall be last? Oh then why should we not take heed that we
don't give in if we be called to suffering?

Fifthly, if this be true also, that many that are last, shall be first in the
work of suffering; why should we censure or despise some that are weak, that do
drag, that do come behind, that are backward (as we think) unto the work of
suffering? We will not blame an Apple Tree or a Pear Tree that is winter-fruit,
because it does not come so soon as other trees that are summer-fruit? So there
are some men that are sooner ripe for sufferings, and they are summer-fruit;
others that are backward, and they are winter-fruit, they ^on't come so soon.
The Lord has many gusts of suff^rings, and such a one may be reserved for the
second, or for the third part. Now as we do not blame the tree for bringing
forth so late, because it is a winter-fruit: so why should we despise some that
are backward in our eyes, that h^ng and flag as to the business of suffering?
why the first shall be last, and the last shall be first.

Sixthly, why should any be afraid, or be discouraged, because they are weak,
and unfit to suffer? As many that are first shall be last, so, many that are
last shall be first. As there is a great deal of suff^ring that will come to a
little, so there is a little suffering that will amount to much. Therefore
though you be unfit (as you think) for this suffering work, yet be not
discouraged.

But you will say, I am not afraid of suffering upon this account, but I am
afraid of my suffering because of my sin: for now suffering times are come, and
we suffer for our sins; and can any suffering that comes by sin, turn to a good
account? If I did know that my suffering should turn to a good account, I would
never be afraid to suffer: but I fear my suffering will not turn to a good
account, because my sufferings come by sin. Can any sufferings that come by sin
turn to a good account?

I answer, Yea, through the grace of God. When the Ark was taken, were not the
people in a sad condition? Yes; they lamented after the Ark twenty years. And
did not that condition come by their sin? Yes. Did that turn to any good
account? Ye^: for Dagon falls down before the Ark: the Philistims own hands
brought it home again; and they give glory to God. So that it turned to a good
account.

But especially that instance of David. There was a Pestilence, and many
thousands died: and did it come by sin? Yes; David numbers the people. I, but
did it turn to any good account? Yes: for then the Lord told David where his
Temple should be built, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. David had a great desire to know where
Gods house should be built; but never was it told till now. So that thus this
suffering turned to a good account, although it came by sin. Possibly a
suffering may come by sin, and yet (through grace) it may turn to a good
account.

But then the great Question of all is, suppose thus: Suppose there be such a
great reward laid out for those that suffer for the Name of Christ: suppose
there is a great deal of suffering will turn to a little account; suppose there
is a little suffering will turn to a great account: How shall I so order and
manage my sufferings, as that my sufferings may turn to a good account? Indeed
this is a great Question, and worthy of all our consideration.

For answer unto this:

First, if you would order and manage all your sufferings so as they may turn
to a good account, be sure of this, That all your sufferings be underlaid with
Godliness; Personal Godliness, and actual Godliness.

With personal godliness: for if your person be not accepted, your suffering
will not: if you be not in Christ, your suffering will come to little. As the
tree is, so is the fruit that grows upon the tree: if the tree be a Crab, all
the fruit is but Crabs. And if you be a Crab, and not implanted into Jesus
Christ, your suffering will not be accepted.

And not only personal godliness, but actual godliness; so as not to lie in
any sin, either of omission or commission. For any sin is a hole in the bag of
our sufferings: if there be a hole in the bag, all your money will run out.
Surely if a man lies in any sin, that sin is a hole in the bottom of the bag,
and all the profits of his sufferings will run out, though he suffers never so
much for Christ, and for Religion. Therefore that is the first thing; be sure
that all your sufferings be underlaid with godliness, personal and actual
godliness.

Secondly, if you would so order and manage your sufferings, as that they may
turn to a good account; then labor to get your understanding clear, and your
will free, in the matter and business of sufferings. For though the thing that
you suffer for be never so right, yet if you have not a clear understanding in
what you suffer, your suffering will turn to little. And though you have never
so clear an understanding, yet if your will be not free, it will turn to
little. You know how it was with Moses; it 's said, He refused to be called the
son of Pharaohs daughter, and chose rather to suffer affliction with the people
of God. Why when was this? when he came of years. Why when he came of years?
Because then he had discretion and understanding; and the Holy Ghost would
show, that he did what he did understandingly in the point of his suffering:
and he did it freely in the point of his will; for he chose rather: choosing is
an act of the will. So that if you would have your sufferings turn to a good
account, labor to get a clear understanding in the matter of your sufferings,
and be very free in your will.

You will say to me, How can I be freely willing to part with my house, or
land, or liberty?

Yes, you may be very free, and freely willing to part with all in reference to
the will of God your Father. Christ himself said, Father, if it be possible,
let this cup pass from me. He was unwilling, in regard of the thing it self he
suffered: but he was very willing, in regard of the Fathers will; and therefore
he says, Not my will, but thy will be done. This is the second thing: let your
understanding be clear, and your will be free in the matter of your sufferings.

Thirdly, take heed you run not into any suffering without a Call, nor rush out
of that suffering without the same Call from God. Noah was in the Ark; and when
the waters were abated from off the earth, Noah would not stir out of the Ark.
Why would not Noah go out when the waters were abated? Why as Noah had a Call
to go in, so he would have the same Call to go out. A man must not run into a
suffering without a Call, and he must not rush out of it without a Call. And
therefore you shall find Christ and the Apostles, and all the Martyrs, that
thus they acted: they would hide, and go aside, and avoid their sufferings: but
when they were in hold, they would not go out, though the doors were open. So
that that is the third thing; be sure of this, that you do not run into
sufferings without a Call, nor rush out of sufferings without the same Call
from God.

Fourthly, if you would order and manage all your sufferings so as they may
turn to a good account, then set all your losses upon Christ's head, and upon
Christ's score: which you may do, if you do suffer for Christ's cause; which you
may do, if you do suffer according to Christ's example; which you may do, if you
suffer with the same spirit and disposition that Christ did, and suffer in the
strength of Christ, set all upon the head and score of Christ.

Fifthly, if you would so order and manage all your sufferings as that they may
turn to a good account, then take heed that there be no contradiction found in
the way of your suffering. A man may be very stiff, and stand out here, and yet
he may yield there. Says the Apostle, If I build again what I have destroyed,
I make my self a transgressor. And, Blessed is the man that condemns not
himself in the thing that he allows. It Is possible I may build that with one
hand, that I may pull down with another. Possibly a man may be very stiff, and
stand out at such a thing, and yet he may yield there. There may be
contradictions found in the way of our suffering. And let me tell you this, if
it be thus, your sufferings will come to little. Take heed that there be not
contradictions therefore found in the way of your sufferings.

Sixthly, if you would manage your sufferings so as they may turn to a good
account, then let your eye be more upon the Public good, then upon your own
private loss; more upon Gods design, then your own detriment; more upon Gods
dishonor, then your own grievance, or your own pressure. It Is good for a man
to be spiritual and savoury in his suffering: our Savior says, Such
worshippers the Father seeks, etc. and truly I say, Such sufferers does the
Father seek, that suffer in spirit and truth, whose spirits are savoury in
their sufferings. And when is that? when that your eye is more upon the public
good, then your own private loss; more upon Gods design, then your own
detriment; more upon Gods dishonor, then your own grievance, and your own
pressure.

Sevently, if you would so order and manage all your sufferings, as that they
may turn to a good account, then let your eye be upon that, and observe what
that is that you have most delighted in, and that your heart is most upon in
this world; and give that up to God the first thing you do: for truly nothing
is done till that be done. It Is said of Abraham, that God tempted Abraham.
Divines observe, that Abraham met with ten temprations; but it is never said
before, that God tempted him, till he spoke to him to offer up his son Isaac.
Why there was his heart, and his love, and his delight. And where does a man's
temptation grow, but where his Isaac is? he shall be sure to be tried there.
Here was Abraham's heart, here lay his temptation. And so, it may be, my heart
is upon my house, or upon my land, or upon my trade; and I cannot part with
this: I can part with any thing else, but when it comes to this, I am ready to
say, The good Lord pardon me in this. Many say, I will not adventure to suffer
any further for the Name of Christ, then I can secure my trade, or my land, or
relations: but when it comes to this, I cannot part with these; I must have my
trade, etc. Here Is a but comes in. Anamas and Sapphira they parted with a great
deal, but it came to little, because they had a reserve. And so if we have our
reserves with the Lord, our sufferings will come to little. So that observe,
that you give that up first to God that your hearts are most upon: for nothing
is done in suffering till that be done.

Eighthly, if you would so order and manage your sufferings, as they may turn
to a good account, then let the load, and let the weight and the burden of all
your sufferings be drawn upon the wheels of faith and love: those two wheels of
faith toward God, and love toward man. Says the Apostle, By faith Moses
chose rather to suffer afflictions with the people of God. How so? why by faith
he saw him that is invisible; and so trampled upon visible things. And by faith
he had an eye to the recompense of reward; and so overlooked these things. And
by faith he saw greater wealth in the reproach of Christ, then in all the
treasures of Egypt. And so the three children, they suffered by faith, and it
turned to a good account.

And as for love, you know what the Apostle says, If I give my body to be
burnt, and want love, it profits me nothing. So then, as ever you desire your
sufferings may turn to a good account, let your faith toward God, and your
love toward man be exercised. And let these be the two great wheels that all
your sufferings shall be drawn upon.

Ninthly, if you would order your sufferings so as they may turn to a good
account, then labor to be serviceable in and by your sufferings. If ever God
call you to a prison, labor to be as serviceable in and by your suffering, as
ever you can. Peter was in prison; what came on it? was there any converted? No.
Why so? Peter slept. I but Paul and Silas they sang in the stocks, and they
preach in the prison, and there is the Jailer converted. They were serviceable
in and by their sufferings, and it turned to a good account. And therefore if
you would desire that your sufferings may turn to a good account, labor to be
serviceable in and by your sufferings as God calls you into.

Tenthly, when you have done all, and suffered all, then say, and think in
truth, that you are unprofitable servants; and let your eye be wholly to the
sufferings of Christ: offer your own sufferings upon the sufferings of Christ,
in reference to your acceptance. For though you may have an eye to the
recompense of reward, to encourage you to suffer; yet you are wholly to look to
the sufferings of Christ in reference to your acceptance. And therefore when
you have done all, think and say, you are unprofitable. Two men went up to
pray, and the one he was a Pharisee, and the other a Publican. The Pharisee he
comes and praises God he was not as the Publican: I thank God I am not as this
Publican. I fast, and pray, and I am not as this Publican. Well, there comes
the Publican, and he smites himself upon the breast, and says, I am a poor
sinner: Oh! the Lord be merciful unto me a poor sinner. So say I, Two men go up
to suffer, and there is one stands and vaunts, and says, I thank the Lord I am
not so cowardly and dastardly as these poor-spirited men that dare do nothing;
my flesh shall fry in the fire. But the other stands at a distance, and says,
Oh, I am a poor creature, I am afraid to suffer, and I am afraid I shall betray
the Cause of Christ. Now I tell you, this poor trembling soul that is last,
shall be first, and he goes away rather justified.

Eleventhly, and lastly, if you would so order and manage your sufferings; as
they may turn to a good account, praise God over your suffering, and pray to
God under your suffering. I put these two together, praise and pray. This is a
certain thing; those sufferings shall turn to a good account, that Christ
blesses. How shall I know whether Christ will bless my sufferings? Why if I can
bless God over my suff^rings, God will bless my sufferings to me. And then, are
you called at any time to suffer? go away rejoicing that you a^e counted worthy
to suffer for the Name of Christ.

Yet notwithstanding, not only bless and praise God over your sufferings, but
pray unto God under you^ suffering^. And what should you pray for? Pray unto
the Lord, that he would turn your sufferings unto a good account. There is an
old promise wrapped up in the Apostles prayer, 1 P^t. 5 10. The God of all grace,
who has called us un^o his eternal glory by Christ Jesus, after that ye have
s^ffered a while, make you perfect, stablish, strengthen, s^ttle you. So then,
have you suffered a while? you may go then to God, as to the God of all grace,
and say, Lord, through thy providence I have now suffered a while: thou art the
God of all grace; make me perfect, confirm me, stablish, strengthen, and
comfort me; and let all these sufferings turn to a good account. Thus praise
God under your sufferings, and pray over your sufferings, and so shall you
manage and order all your sufferings, as that they shall turn to a good account.

The way to obtain a sure and great Reward. SERMON. III.
Matthew. 19. 28. And Jesus said unto them, Verily I say unto you, that ye which
have followed me in the regeneration, when the Son of man shall sit in the
throne of his glory, ye also shall sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve
tribes of Israel.

And every one that has forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father,
or mother, or wife, or children, or lands, for my Name sake, shall receive an
hundredfold, and shall inherit everlasting life.


IN this Scripture we have our Saviors answer unto Peter's question propounded
at ver. 27. Behold Lord (says Peter) we have forsaken all, and followed thee:
what shall we have therefore? Our Savior answers in the following verses; and
his answer is partly Comfortable, and partly Cautional. The Cautional part I
have spoken to among some of you, from verse. 30. But many that are first shall
be last, and the last shall be first. The Comfortable part I spoke unto the
last Lords day in another Meeting. And being now desired to speak the same
things unto you, considering that they are of present and universal
concernment, I shall do it as briefly and plainly as I can.

The Comfortable part of Christ's answer you have in v. 28, 29. wherein our
Savior Christ does show what great reward those shall have that do suffer, or
leave any worldly interest for him, and for his Namesake. Which reward does
either relate unto the Apostles, or unto others.

It relates unto the Apostles, in verse. 28. Verily I say unto you, that ye
which have followed me in the regeneration, that is, in the preaching of the
Gospel. Preaching of the Gospel is a regenerating work. The preaching of the
Law is convincing work; the preaching of the Gospel is regenerating work. Ye
which have followed me in the regeneration, in the great work of preaching the
Gospel; when the Son of man shall sit in the throne of his glory, ye also shall
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. That Is their
reward, peculiar and proper unto them.

The reward which is more large, extending unto all, v. 29. And every one: not
one of you shall be rewarded that are mine Apostles; but EVERY ONE that has
forsaken houses, or brethren, or sisters, or father, or mother, or wife, or
children, or land, for my Namesake, shall receive an hundredfold, and shall
inherit everlasting life. From whence then I took up this Observation; and you
may observe from the whole thus much:

That whosoever shall leave any worldly interest for Christ, and for his Name
sake, shall be sure to be well rewarded.

He shall be well rewarded: for he shall have an hundredfold in this life, and
everlasting life in the world to come. And he shall be sure to be well
rewarded; for he has put a verily upon it: Verily I say unto you, and every
one that has forsaken houses, etc. So then, the Doctrine is clear, That
whosoever shall leave or forsake any worldly interest for Christ, and for his
Namesake, shall be sure to be well rewarded.

For the clearing of this, first, we must enquire what it is to leave any
worldly interest for Christ, and for his Namesake.

Secondly, what the reward is that such shall have that do so, and wherein it
consists. And

Thirdly, what assurance we may have of such a reward.

And first of all, if you do enquire what it is to leave any thing for Christ,
forsake any worldly interest for Christ:

I answer, that a man may leave and forsake a worldly interest for Christ two
ways:

Either by his own will, or the wills of others.

We do leave and forsake a worldly interest by our own wills, when we do
voluntarily and freely deprive our selves of our commodity or satisfaction for
Christ; as the Apostles left their ships and nets to follow Christ.

We (secondly) do leave or forsake a worldly interest by the wills of others,
when through their oppression or persecution, we are deprived of our own
commodity and satisfaction for Christ; and that is called suffering.

Our Savior Christ here, has respect to both: and in both these respects it is
true, That whosoever does leave any worldly interest for Christ, and his
Namesake, shall be sure to be well rewarded.

But then still to clear it:

Quest. What is it to leave any worldly interest for the Name of Christ?

Answ. The Name of Christ is that whereby Christ is made known unto us; as the
name of a man, is that whereby a man is made known unto us. A man is made known
unto us by his name; so Christ is made known unto us by his Name. That whereby
Christ is made known unto us, that is his Name.

Now Christ is made known unto us by his Spirit, and by the Gospel.

By his Spirit he is made known unto us: for as God the Father is made known
unto us by Christ his Son: so Christ is made known unto us by the Spirit: He
shall take of mine, and show it unto you, such Christ. And upon this account
therefore, when a man does suffer any thing for the Spirit, or for any working
of the Holy Ghost upon his heart or soul, then he is said to suffer for the
Name of Christ. And upon this score it was that John the Baptist was accounted
a Martyr of Christ, and enrolled among the Martyrs of Christ: John the Baptist,
if you look into the story, did not suffer for any Gospel Truth: John the
Baptist suffered for this, that he reprehended Herod's adulterous courses: true;
but the Spirit of Christ put him upon it; and therefore being stirred up
thereunto by the Spirit of Christ, he is said to suffer upon the account of
Christ. So that, I say, the Spirit of Christ is that whereby Christ is made
known unto us; and when a man does therefore suffer for any work of the Spirit
of Christ, then he is said to suffer for the Name of Christ.

But secondly, Christ also is made known unto us by the Gospel, as by an
outward means. The Gospel is the Name of Christ, whereby Christ is made known
unto us. Every truth, is not a Gospel Truth: it is possible that a man may
suffer for a truth, and yet not suffer for a Gospel Truth. But look when a man
does suffer for a truth, which is properly the truth of the Gospel, then he is
said indeed to suffer for the Name of Christ, whereby Christ is made known.
Would you therefore know when a man may be said to suffer for the Name of
Christ? Take all together, thus: When a man does suffer for that whereby Christ
is made known unto us, then he suffers for the Name of Christ. Christ is made
known unto us by the Spirit; he is made known unto us by the Gospel. Look
therefore when a man does suffer for the work of the Spirit, which is properly
the work of the Spirit; or suffer for the Truth, which is properly the Truth of
the Gospel: then plainly he is said to suffer for the Name of Christ: and
whosoever does so, shall be well rewarded. And that is the first thing.

Quest. 2. And then secondly, What is this reward that those shall have, that
do leave any worldly interest for Christ, or for the Name of Christ; and
wherein does that consist?

Answ. The reward is great; and it will appear to be very great, if you look
into and consider this text and Scripture well. For this reward, it does relate
unto the Apostles, or it relates unto us; to all others that ^o leave any
wordly interest upon the account of Christ.

Now as for the Apostles, their reward is here set down, That they shall sit
with Christ on his throne. When Christ sits on his throne, the Apostles shall
sit on twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel. For the clearing of
this, only these two things.

1. What it is for the Apostles to sit on twelve thrones with Christ, judging
the twelve tribes.

And 2. Whether are there any degrees of glory, seeing that the Apostles here
seem to have a degree of glory given them above other men.

And as for the first, briefly thus.

When Christ shall sit upon the throne, they are said to sit on twelve thrones,
judging the twelve tribes; to note their communion and fellowship with Christ
in his Judicial kingdom.

But whereas the Saints shall judge the world; it is true, the Saints shall
judge the world, and shall have communion and fellowship with Christ in that
great work of judging the world. The Apostles they shall sit as assessors on
that day: at the great Assizes, the Apostles shall sit on the bench as
assessors, or as Justices of the Peace, by the Judge; and so shall have
communion with him. It Is true, that all the Saints shall judge the world by
their lives, and by their conversations: but the twelve Apostles shall judge
the world by their Doctrine: not only by consenting to the judgment of Christ,
as all the Saints shall do; but in Romans 2. 16. it is said, In the day when God
shall judge the secrets of men by Jesus Christ, according to my Gospel. So that
this is all that is here meant, That in the grand and great Assize, that
kingdom and glory of Christ, the twelve Apostles they shall have a special
fellowship and communion with him above others.

Quest. But then, are there any degrees of glory? for it would seem here, that
the Apostles have some degree of glory above other men. Are there any degrees
of glory?

Answ. Yes surely, there are degrees of glory. For as one star differs from
another star in glory, so shall the resurrection be, says the Apostle.

But though there be degrees of glory, all that glory that the Saints shall
have in heaven, shall be of one piece; for there is no envy there. Envy! there
is none in heaven. And whence comes Envy? We may see that among our children,
or among men. If you have four or five cchildren, and make them clothes, if
they be clothes made all of a piece, they do not envy though ones clothes be
bigger then another. But if they be not made all of a piece, or my Brothers
clothes are better then mine, or my Sisters clothes are better then mine; but
when they are all of a piece, they do not envy. So if you invite twenty men to
dinner, and they all eat of the same dish, there is no envy: but if you have a
meaner dish for those that sit at the lower end of the Table, say they, Indeed
we sat at such a Table but we had a meaner dish: and so they envy. But if one
man eat more then another, yet if they eat of the same dish, there is no envy.
Now in heaven there is no Envy: for though there be degrees of glory, yet it
shall be all of a piece, and all of a dish. But now though this glory in heaven
shall be all of a piece, and though there be degrees of glory in heaven, yet I
don't think this Scripture to be understood of the degrees of glory in heaven;
for there is no judging of the twelve tribes in heaven: Christ shall then at
last give up his kingdom unto the Father. This is spoken therefore of a
glorious Judgment on this side heaven; and it is here promised unto the
Apostles above all others, as a reward suitable to them: for they were twelve,
preached to the twelve tribes; some received the Gospel, some did not: and
therefore here is a reward propounded suitable unto them. But thus much for the
reward that concerns the Apostles, (by the way).

But then it will be said, What is the reward that does concern all those that
leave any worldly interest for Christ, or suffer for the Name of Christ?

Why that does either relate unto this life, or unto the life that is to come.

It relates unto this life; and then says our Savior, There is an
hundredfold. Look whatsoever that is that you do lay out for Christ here in
this life, you shall receive an hundredfold for it, even in this life. Here Is
a great matter, and it is well worth our considering. Look whatsoever you do
lay out for Christ, wha^so^ver worldly in^^^est you do part withal for Christ,
or lay out for Christ, that you shall receive in an hundredfold, even in this
life.

And to make this out unto you: I confess it is a great matter.

But first of all, (to clear it) is it not a great matter for us to be enriched
with divine promise^? one promise is worth a world: he is rich indeed, that is
rich in promises. We say a man may be a rich man, though he have never a penny
of money in his purse: he may have a great many Bonds, and we say he is a rich
man. I am sure that Christian is rich indeed, that is rich in promises. Well,
when comes the promise? Look when a man does forsake any worldly interest for
the Lord, then comes the promise. For that, look into Genesis 12 and you shall s^e
what a great promise God makes to Abra^am, verse. 2. I will m^ke of thee a great
nation, and I will bless thee, and make thy name great, and thou shall be
blessed. Well, but when comes this promise? The first verse tells you: Now the
Lord said unto Abraham, Get thee out of thy country, and from thy kindred, and
from thy fathers house, unto the land that I will show thee.

Quest. I but suppose that Abraham do so, what will ^he Lord then bestow upon
Abraham?

Answ. Why I will make of thee a great nation.

Object. But if I go out of my country, (Abraham might say) I shall be
scattered, and come to nothing, I and my posterity.

Answ. Nay, but I will make of thee a great nation, and I will bless thee.

Object. I, but every body will say, I am a fool to leave my country, and go I
know not whither.

Answ. Nay, but I will make thy name great, and thou shall be a blessing.

Object. I but I shall meet with diverse enemies abroad, and they will fall upon
me, and ruin me.

Answ. Nay, (says the Lord) And I will bless them that bless thee, and I will
curse him that curses thee. See what a great promise here is made: When did
this promise come? So Abraham departed, as the Lord had spoken to him. Look
when we do forsake any worldly interest for the Lord, then comes the promise.
Now is not one promise better then any worldly interest, an hundred times
better?

But secondly, is it not a gre^^ matter to have the favor of God the Father,
the heart of God drawn out unto us, to be amiable and beautiful in the eyes of
God the Father? Now look when a man does forsake any worldly interest for God,
then he is beautiful in the eyes of God; never so amiable or beautiful in the
eyes of God, as then. Take it thus:

Beauty raises Persecution, and Persecution raises Beauty: they are matual
causes.

First, I say, Beauty raises Persecution. Persecution you shall find does
always fall upon the beautiful piece of Religion, upon those that are the most
beautiful pieces of Religion. So long as Christ our Savior lived, persecution
lay upon him, and not upon the Apostles: when Christ was dead, then the
Apostles were the most beautiful piece, and then the persecution lay upon them
especially. When the Apostles were gone off the stage, in the Primitive times,
the Persecution always fell upon the most eminent Saints. Persecution always
falls upon the beauty of Religion. In Matthew. 13 we find that persecution is
compared to the scorching of the Sun: And when the sun was up, they were
scorched; speaking of the stony ground: which is expounded in verse. 21. by
persecution: For when tribulation or persecution arises because of the word.
The scorching sun here, is interpreted to be persecution. And you shall find
that the scorching Sun falls with most prejudice upon the greatest beauty: the
greatest beauty suffers most by the scorching sun. Truly so persecution falls
upon the beauty of Religion: you may see it in Cant. 1. there the Spouse is
described in her beauty: If thou know not, O thou fairest among women, etc. I
have compared thee, O my love, to a company of horses in Pharaohs chariots. Thy
cheeks are comely with rows of jewels, thy neck with chains of gold. But says
she, at verse. 5. I am black but comely, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, as the
tents of Kedar, as the curtains of Solomon. Here Is her beauty: what then? Look
not upon me because I am black, because the sun has looked upon me. The sun
has looked upon me: what is that? Persecution: My mothers children were angry
with me. The scorching sun of Persecution has fallen upon my beauty. That Is
the thing I speak of, namely, that Persecution always falls upon the beautiful
piece of Religion.

And so on the other side, as Beauty raises Persecution, so Persecution raises
Beauty. A man's never more beautiful in the eyes of God, then when he is
persecuted for the Name of Christ, and when he does leave and forsake a worldly
interest upon the account of Christ. You may see it in Psalm. 45. verse. 10.
Hearken O daughter, consider, and incline thine ear; forget also thine own
people, and thy fathers house: so shall the King greatly desire thy beauty. See
where the beauty lies, in forgetting of the fathers house: in leaving and
forsaking a worldly interest upon the account of Christ, here is beauty. Now is
it not an hundred times better to be beautiful in the eyes of God the Father,
and of Christ, then to have a worldly interest? Certainly it is.

But then thirdly, Is it not a great matter for a man to have communion and
fellowship with Jesus Christ in his sufferings? If ye suffer with him, ye shall
reign with him, says the Apostle. Now we have communion and fellowship with
Christ in his sufferings, either at the Lords Supper, or in our suff^rings for
Christ: but with this diff^rence: we have communion and fellowship with Christ
in our sufferings for Christ, by fi^ing up the suff^r^ngs of Christ: we have
communion and fellowship with Christ in the Lords Supper; but then we don't
fill up the sufferings of Christ: but in our sufferings for Christ we have
communion and fellowship with Christ, by filling up the sufferings of Christ.
So that here is a specialty of communion with Christ, by suffering for the Lord
Jesus. Now is it not an hundred times better to have communion and fellowship
with Christ in his sufferings, then to have a worldly interest?

Fourthly, is it not a great mat^er to have the Spirit of God and of glory rest
upon us? You know what the Apostle Peter says concerning those that suffer for
the Name of Christ, The Spirit of God and of glory shall rest upon you, as the
dove rested upon the Ark; it h^vered upon the waters, but at last she rested
upon the A^k; so the Spirit of the Lord hov^rs over men, but it rests upon the
suff^ring Saints. Now is it not an hundred times better to have the Spirit of
God and of glory resting upon us, then to have any worldly i^terest? Certainly
it is.

Fifthly, is it not a great deal better to be filled and abound with divine and
spiritual consolations? Look when a man does leave any worldly interest for
Christ, or does suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ, then shall his heart be
filled with consolations. You see what is said for that, in 2 Cor. 1. says the
Apostle, verse. 5. For as the sufferings of Christ abound in us, so our
consolation also abounds by Christ. Why now is it not an hundred times better
to be filled with inward consolations, then to have a worldly interest by one?
certain^y it is.

Six^hly, is it no^ a great matter for us to have an assu^ance of our
salvation, and of our election, to be sealed to us? Surely it is a great matter.
Now look when a man does suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ, then comes the
assurance, th^n is the sealing time. When we do bear our testimony unto Christ,
then Christ bears his testimony un^o u^, that we are his children: when we bear
test^mony to the truth of Christ, Christ bears testimony to the truth of grace
in us. See what is said Phil. 1 28 And in nothing terrified by your
adversaries, which is to them an ^vid^nt token of perdition, but to you of
salvation, and that of God. A token, and of God; it is Gods token. But look
into Acts 9. and you shall see what the Lord says unto Anan^as concerning
Paul. The Lord said unto him, Go thy way Ananias; for he is a chosen v^ssel
unto me, to carry my Name before the Gentiles, and kings, and the Children of
Israel. Why? For I will show him how great things he must suffer for my Name
sake. So that suffering for the Name of Christ, seals up our assurance, the
assurance of our salvation, the assurance of our election. Now is it not an
hundred times better to have the assurance of our election, and of our
salvation seale^, then to have some particular worldly interest lying by us?
certainly it is.

But seventhly, is it not a great matter for us to reign with Christ a thousand
years? Such a thing there is promised in Revel. 20. I will not now debate how
and in what manner it shall be made good: but this is certain, there is such a
thing promised, as reigning with Christ a thousand years. Who is that promised
to? verse. 4. such as those that suffer for the Name of Christ: And I saw
thrones, and they sat upon them, and judgment was given unto them. And I saw
the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus, and for the Word
of God, and which had not worshipped the beast, neither his image, neither had
received his mark upon their foreheads, or in their hands* and they lived and
reigned with Christ a thousand years. Now is it not an hundred times better to
live and reign with Christ a thousand years in the day of glory, then to have
some particular worldly interest together for the present? Sure it is.

Now put all these seven things together: why every ^ne of them is a great
matter, but put them all together, and you cannot but say we shall have a
thousand-fold in this life.

I but mark, the Apostle tells us we shall have an hundredfold in the fame
kind, in this life: how can that be?

Why if you look into Mark 10. you shall find that Mark does not say in so
many words, that we shall have an hundredfold in this life, in the same kind;
but says thus: Jesus answered and said, Verily I say unto you, that there is
no man that has left house, or brethren, or sister, or father, or mother, or
wife, or children, or lands, for my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive
an hundredfold now in this time, houses, and brethren, and sisters, and
mothers, and children, and lands, with PERSECVTIONS. But he do'nt say he shall
have it in ^^e same kind, An hundredfold in this life, and an hundredfold in
the same kind. When Peter left his nets and his fishing for Christ, Christ
made him a fisher of men: now that was an ^^ndred-fold in this life, but not in
the same kind. But to clear up this, take these four or five considerations.

First, consider this: whatsoever God does for us immediately, that is an
hundred times better, then what he does for us by means. Now look when a man
does forsake a worldly interest for Christ, and puts himself upon Christ,
Christ will provide immediately for him. You may see it in Matthew. 15. there
were a company that had followed Christ, and had followed him so long, that
they were faint: Christ would not send them away fainting, verse. 32. Jesus
called his disciples unto him, and said, I have compassion on the multitude,
because they have continued with me now three days, and have nothing to eat.
They have nothing to eat: they had left their houses, they had left their own
victuals, and their own provisions, and they had nothing to eat; and (says he)
I will not send them away fasting, lest they faint in the way. Well, what shall
be done? here Christ works a miracle; And they took up of the broken meat that
was left seven bask^ts full. Do you think now that ever these men made a better
meal in all their lives? I am persuaded it was an hundredfold better to them,
then the best meal they had in all their lives. And to show that Christ will
rather work a miracle, then that those shall want which leave ought for him.
What Christ does for us imme^^^^ely, that he does fully, and sweetly, and is ^^
hundred times better then that he does by ^eans.

Secondly, look what the Lord does for our children, and our posterity, that
the Lord does for us, in Scripture Language. In experience, what God does do
for our children, and for our posterity, that God does for us Now look
whatsoever that is that you tha^ a^e Parents shall leave for the Name of Jesus
Christ, Christ will give it in an hundred-^o^d; it may be to your posterity.
What shall we say to the second Commandment? The second Commandment you know is
this: Thou shall not make to thy self any graven image: ^ha^ i^, ^hou shall not
worship God by any means but that which God himself has appointed. Here all
the inventions of men are forbidden; here all the institutions of God are
commanded Well, what does G^d promise upon the keeping of this? I will show
m^rcy to a thousand generations. Stay a little: before, he says he will punish
them that break this Commandment, to the third and fou^th generation: I will
punish them that hate me, to the third and fourth generation. Them that hate
me: pray why, why are those that break the second Commandment said to hate God?
it is not said upon the breaking of any other Commandment, that it is a h^ting
of God, but upon the breach of the second Commandment.

I conceive the reason essentially is this, because Persecution grows upon the
second Commandment. Those that hate the people of God, hat^ God. N^w where does
the hatred and persecution grow? Upon the keeping the second Commandment; not
conforming to men's inventions, keeping close to the institutions of God; here is
Persecution grows upon this Commandment: well, says God, I will visit the
iniquities of the fathers upon the children unto the third and fourth
generation of them that hate me. But as for those that keep this Commandment:
And sh^wing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and keep my
Commandments. Why does he say Commandments, and not, this Commandment?

The reason is this, because in the second Commandment all institutions are
commanded; all the inventions of men are forbidden. All the institutions of
Christ come within the second Commandment; and therefore, says he, I will show
mercy to a thousand generations of those that l^ve me, and ke^p my
commandments. Now here is an hundredfold, in that mercy is sh^wn to a thousand
generations. Well, what God gives to our children, and to our posterity, that
he gives unto us.

A third consideration is this. Look what that is which we have in effect, that
we have in truth, though we have it not in the formality. Now look whatsoever
you do lay out for Christ, whatsoever worldly interest you do part withal, and
forsake for Christ, that you shall have in effect. Why? because the same
affection does still remain. I will express it thus: Suppose you have a
Crab-stock, and there you plant a Harvie, or a Pearmain, or a Pippin; why the
Pippin is an hundred times better then the Crab would have been. Why it is the
same stock still, under the Harvie, or Pippin, or Pearmain; only there is an
Apple planted that is an hundred times better then the Crab was. So now, you
have a delight in the things of the world: well, you leave this delight for
Christ; you leave not the affection, but there is a better object planted upon
the affection; and there being a better object planted upon the same delight,
thus you have the same thing you part withal for the Name of Christ in an
hundredfold.

Fourthly, look what that is that we have in a way of substitution, that we
have in truth, and in effect, though we have it not in formality. Now look what
that is that you do leave for the Name of Christ, that you shall have an
hundredfold in a way of substitution. The Apostles they left their houses;
Peter left a house, it may be, or a fisher-boat, for Christ: why he had an
hundred houses in a way of substitution, he had an hundred men's houses open to
receive him; and happy was that Lydia that could receive the Apostle. And this
is that which you have Psalm. 45. verse. 10. Hearken, O daughter, and consider;
incline thine ear: forget also thine own people, and thy fathers house. What
then? Why then at verse. 16. In stead of thy fathers shall be thy children, whom
thou may make Princes in all the earth. Here now is the same, in a way of
substitution. It Is true, it is not the same in formality, but in a way of
substitution; here is that which is an hundredfold.

Fifthly, look what that is which we have in a way of satisfaction, that we
have in truth and in effect, though not in formality. Look what that is that
you do leave or forsake for Christ, that you shall have in satisfaction an
hundredfold more then you had before. If you leave any thing for Christ, you
shall have an hundredfold more satisfaction in what you have given for Christ,
then what you keep for your selves. So that an hundredfold in a way of
substitution, and an hundredfold in a way of satisfaction. And thus you see
how we receive an hundredfold in this life: That whatsoever you do lay out for
Christ here, you shall be paid an hundredfold; and how, and in what manner.

But then secondly, what is that reward that we shall have in ^he life to come?
Suppose a man do leave a worldly interest for the Name of Christ, or that he do
suffer for the Name of Christ; what is that reward that he shall have in the
world to come?

Truly that reward is great, and I am not able to speak it; it requires the
unwearied hand and arm of Eternity, to tell over all the wealth of glory that
the suffering people of God shall have in the world to come. Only thus much
I Will say, and briefly.

First of all, That reward that you that are suffering Saints shall have in the
world to come, it shall be an open reward: for, says Christ, he that
confesses me before men, him will I confess also before my Father, etc.

Secondly, it shall be a comfortable reward: for, says the book of the
Revelations, Then all tears shall be wiped out of your eyes. He does not say,
From your eyes, or from your cheeks; no, but they shall be wiped out of your
eyes. So that the eyes shall be then such a womb as shall never breed a tear
again. All tears shall be wiped not from your eyes, but out of your eyes. So in
Rev. 7.

Thirdly, as it shall be a comfortable reward, so an honorable reward: for,
says our Savior Christ, Be faithful unto the death, and I will give thee the
crown of life. And

Fourthly, as it shall be an honorable reward, so a proportionable reward, a
reward proportionable to all your sufferings. You know what the Apostle says,
These light affl^ctions which are but for a moment, work for us a far more
exceeding and eternal weight of glory.

Will you say, I but our afflictions are exceeding heavy. Nay, says the
Apostle, they are light.

But grant they be; to balance the account, you shall have a weight of glory.

Will you say, They are long and tedious.

Nay, says the Apostle, they are but light.

But grant they be long and tedious.

To balance the account, you shall have an exceeding and an eternal weight of
glory.

And then fifthly, as it shall be a reward proportionable, so it shall be a
reward transcending; over and beyond proportion, over and beyond all
expression, beyond all our apprehensions or thoughts. Who is able to think or
apprehend what the inheritance of the Saints in light is; that inheritance that
is incorruptible, and undefiled, and that fades not away? Look into Romans 8. If
ye be children, then are ye heirs, heirs of God, and joynt-heirs with Christ;
if so be that we suffer with him. See, it hangs upon suffering; If so be that
we suffer with him, that we may be also glorified together. Now, if children,
then heirs. All our children are not heirs: well, but all the children of God
shall be heirs, heirs of God. What Is that? Some think that is to be understood
objectively, that they shall inherit God: and indeed, they have all things,
that have him that has all things. Heirs of God. But take it efficiently,
shall be Gods heirs, and joynt-heirs with Christ. He does not say,
Joyntpurchasers with Christ, but joynt-heirs, joynt-heirs with Christ. What
shall Christ inherit? Why Christ is God the Fathers heir; and he never
d^spleased his Father; he will not disinherit him therefore. Look what God the
Father is worth, that Christ shall be worth: and look what Christ is worth,
that the suffering Saints shall be worth: for they be joynt-heirs with Christ.

Lo here, here is an inheritance now, and here is the reward that the suffering
Saints shall have. What a large inheritance is here! This is that they shall
have in the life to come. And so you see what their reward is that lose or
forsake any thing upon the account of Christ, or suffer for the Name of Christ.

But then thirdly, what assurance is there of this reward?

I Will go no further then the text: our Savior Christ here puts a Verily upon
it: Verily: you have the word of Christ for this reward. If an honest man make
you a promise, you will believe him, especially if he says, I protest unto
you. Why Jesus Christ has protested this promise: Verily, says he, you shall
have an hundredfold in this life, and in the world to come, life everlasting.

Well then, the question is, Why should those that suffer for the Name of
Christ have such a great reward as this? Why should those that leave or forsake
any worldly interest upon the account of Christ, why should those above all
other people be so well rewarded?

I answer: These above all other people, that suffer for the Name of Christ,
these are those that do honor Jesus Christ. What is honor? Honor, it is the
testimony of another excellency. When I testify of another man's excellency,
then I honor him. Now look when a man does forsake a worldly interest for the
truth of Christ, then he testify there is an excellency in Christ: and the
greater the worldly interest is I do forsake, and the less the truth is I
forsake it for; the more do I testify an excellency in Christ: Christ
therefore will be sure to honor them, they shall be well rewarded.

Secondly, these people of all other people, are the people that do trust in
the Lord before the sons of men: O how great is thy loving kindness, which thou
have laid up for them that fear thee; which thou have wrought for them that
trust in thee, before the sons of men! Some trust in God, and believe in the
heart (as they say): But they do not trust in God before the Sons of men. But
now, when a man forsakes a worldly interest, and does suffer for the Name of
Christ, then he trusts in the Lord before the sons of men: And therefore, O how
great is the loving kindness of God that is laid up for them!

But then thirdly, these above all other people that suffer for the Name of
Christ: these are those people that are firm and fast unto God. God loves a
fixed Spirit. God does not love to see a man unsettled in points of Religion.
Now when a man will leave a worldly interest for the Cause of Christ, and the
Name of Christ, there is a fixation in such a man. And therefore he of all other
people shall be well rewarded.

Fourthly, these people of all other people, are the most opposed by the Grand
Enemy of Christ: Well, who is the Grand Enemy of Christ in these days?
Antichrist: Antichrist is the Grand Enemy of Jesus Christ. Now these that
suffer for the Name of Christ, are most opposed by the Grand Enemy of Christ:
And Christ will be sure to love them that are most opposed by his Grand Enemy.

Fifthly and lastly, these of all other people, they are the people that are
overcomers: How many promises are made to those that overcome, in the second
and third of the Revelations? To him that overcomes, to him that overcomes, a
promise still is made to him that overccometh.

But how do we overcome?

In the 12 of the Revelat. v. 11. And they overcame him, that is, the Devil, By
the blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, and they loved not
their lives unto the death. These of all other people, are the overcoming
people. As Christ overcame the Devil, by being overcome; so men overcome, by
being overcome. Those that suffer upon the account of Jesus Christ, when they
are overcome by the world in the view of the world, then they overcome. Now
Christ will be sure to reward them well that overcome. And thus you see why
these of all other people shall be so well rewarded. And thus you have the
Doctrine cleared.

Applicat. Now then by way of Application.

If this be true, that whosoever does leave or forsake any worldly interest for
Christ, and the Name of Christ, shall be sure to be well rewarded: why should
not we be willing to loose and to be lost for Christ?

Good Friends, the time's a coming when you may be called to leave your Trades,
to leave your Shops, to leave any worldly interest you have for the Name of the
Lord Jesus Christ. But is this true, that such shall be well rewarded? Why
should we not be willing then to loose and be lost, to suffer for the Name of
Christ? Can you have a greater improvement of your Money? A man would think he
improves his Money well that has ten in the hundred, six in the hundred now:
But here is an hundred for one; not ten in the hundred, but an hundred for one.
If a Merchant ventures to Sea, if he could be sure to gain twelve in the
hundred, he would think he came to a good Market. Why behold here, here is an
hundred fold in this life, and all this insured by Christ; Verily, verily I say
unto you. It Is insured by the word of Jesus Christ; not ten, but an hundred;
not twelve in the hundred, but an hundred for one, even in this life. Who would
not be willing to suffer for the Name of Christ? It Is recorded of Queen
Elizabeth, That when she was in the Tower, she looked out of a Window, and saw a
milk-maid go by singing; and seeing her, O, said she, that I were a Milk-maid,
then I should go singing! But when she came to the Throne, she reigned forty
four years. Now had she known that she should have been delivered from her
imprisonment, and brought to the Throne, and there have reigned forty four
years; would she have wished her self a Milk-maid? Beloved, we are assured of a
great reward in Heaven, an hundred fold in this life, and a great and glorious
reward in the life to come; and therefore when we come to suffer, shall I
peevishly say, Would I had been a Milk-maid? would I had been born in a mean
condition? O no! how willing should we be to suffer for the Name of Jesus
Christ?

But some will say, I am not unwilling to suffer for the Name of Christ, so it
be for the Name of Christ, but there are many false glosses put upon our
sufferings.

Says the Adversary, Man, friend, you don't suffer for the Name of Christ, and
the truth of Christ; but for Sedition and Rebellion, and because you will not
be obedient to Authority; and these and the like glosses are put upon the
people of God. And how can I be willing to suffer now?

No Indeed, if these things be true: for the Apostle says, That we are not to
suffer as evil doers.

But I pray tell me, When did any of the people of God suffer for the Cause of
God; but there were such glosses as these? says Haman, These are a rebellious
people, and it is not for the Kings profit to suffer them. And so when Christ
himself suffered, He is not a friend to Caesar, but an enemy. Well, then came
the Apostles, and when the Apostles came, what a guise was put upon their
sufferings? These are seditious, and th^se that turn the world upside-down are
come hither. And do not you find in Scripture and experience, that it is no
new thing for men to persecute Religion upon the account of Religion? Says
Christ, For which of my good works go ye about to kill me? No, no, thou art
mistaken, we go not about to kill thee for thy good works, but because thou
breakest the Sabbath, etc. So that it is no new thing to persecute Religion,
even upon the account of Religion.

But then you will say, If it be so, how shall I be able to know that I do
truly suffer for the Name of Christ? How shall I be able in the midst of all
these blinds and disguises? How shall I see through them all, that I may be
able to say, Nay, but in truth, I do suffer for the Name of Christ.

Why, you have heard it in the general already; only a little more
particularly to open it.

If you do suffer for the Work of the Spirit of God upon your heart, the Work
that the Holy Ghost has wrought upon your heart: If you do suffer for the
Truth, which is properly the Truth of the Gospel; whatsoever disguises men put
upon your sufferings, plainly you suffer for Name of Jesus Christ.

Again, if you suffer for the Cause of Christ, for the Ways of Christ, for the
Ordinances of Christ, for the Children of Christ, for the Liberty which Christ
has purchased for you; then you do suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ.

But thirdly, if you do suffer for the worship of Christ, as it is distinguished
from Jewish worship, from Antichristian worship, from Worldly worship; then you
suffer for the Name of Christ. for the Worship of Christ, is the Name of
Christ: And all Nations go forth in the Name of their God. Now if you do suffer
for the worship of Christ, as it is distinguished from the Jewish worship, from
Antichristian worship, from Worldly worship; then you do plainly suffer for the
Name of Christ.

The worship of the Jews, and the way of the Jews was National; but the worship
of Christ and the Gospel is Congregational.

The worship of Christ is distinguished from Antichristian worship: For that is
humane, and by humane inventions; but the worship of Jesus Christ is Divine,
and from Heaven.

The worship of Christ is distinguished from the worship of the world, for
that is Pompous, that is Ceremonious; a carnal worship like unto the world it
self; but the worship Jesus Christ is plain and simple. Such worshippers does
the Father seek, as worship him in spirit and in truth. Now if you do suffer
for the worship of Christ, as it is distinguished from the worship of the Jews;
Antichrist, and of the World; then you do certainly suffer for the Name of
Christ.

Fourthly, if you do suffer for the not-doing of that, which Jesus Christ has
justified his own Disciples for the not doing of, then do you suffer for the
Gospel, and so for the Name of Jesus Christ. Now look into the 15 of Matthew. and
you shall see what Christ did justify his Disciples in. And the Scribes and
the Pharisees came to Christ, and they say unto him, Why do thy Disciples
transgress the tradition of the Elders? What Is that? for they wash not their
hands when they eat bread. Why that is an indifferent thing; surely the
Disciples would not stand off for an indifferent thing. Yes that they did, I
and Christ justified them in it.

But this was hatched with the tradition of the Elders of the Church, and surely
they would not stand off now. Yes, that they did, and Christ justifies them in
it, for Christ said, Why do you also transgress the commandments of God by your
traditions? So that if you do suffer for not doing that, which Jesus Christ
has justified his Disciples for the not doing of; then you suffer for the
Gospel, and for the Name of Christ.

Fifthly, If two things be laid before you, and there is sin on the one hand,
and on the other hand there is suffering for Christ: Sin on the one hand, and
suffering on the other: If now you choose rather to take up the suffering, the^
to commit the sin; you do plainly suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ. And
therefore look whatsoever the reward is, that great reward is which they shall
have that suffer for the Name of Christ; all that reward is yours. Be of good
comfort, all that reward is yours: O, and if ever you be called to suffer for
the Name of Christ, go away rejoicing that you are accounted worthy to suffer
shame, or any thing for the Name of Jesus Christ. O what great encouragement is
here from this great Rewarder! Who would not be willing now to suffer for the
Name of Jesus Christ?

But you will say to me, What shall we do that we may be willing to suffer for
the Name of Christ? for I confess I am very backward and unwilling to suffer
for the Name of Christ.

Do you say so?

But it may be you are not convinced that it is for the Name of Christ.

But are you sensible of your unwillingness? Why, I use to say this, He is not
far from a grace that is sensible of a contrary evil: And it is a true speech,
He is not far from humility that is sensible of pride; he is not far from
faith, that is sensible of unbelief. So he is not far from being willing to
suffer for the Name of Christ that is sensible of his own unwillingness.

But now suppose that for the present you be very unwilling to suffer for the
Name of Christ.

You may know this, That willingness to suffer for the Name of Christ, is part
of our suffering Grace; and suffering Grace is given upon suffering ground:
Unto you it is given not only to believe, but to suffer. The opportunity to
suffer is the gift of God. The will and heart to suffer is the gift of God. And
the strength to suffer is the gift of God. These are three gifts in one gift.

But when is this suffering grace given?

It Is given upon suffering ground: In that hour there shall be wisdom given
you: well, to be willing to suffer for the Name of Christ, is part of our
suffering grace; and therefore when you come upon the suffering ground, then
you shall have the suffering grace.

I but you will say, Indeed I find my heart extremely backward to suffer for
the Name of Christ. What shall I do, that I may be willing now for the present
to suffer for the Cause or the Name of Christ? Here are diverse Directions.

Directions to suffer for the Name of Christ.
First, Whenever you do receive any thing from God, when you do receive it,
then engage your hearts to offer it up unto God, when God calls for it again,
to lay it out for God. And if at any time you find your hearts willing, then
pray to God, and say, The Lord continue this in the thoughts of my poor heart
for ever: whenever you receive, then engage, and keep this engagement fresh
upon your hearts.

Secondly, Train up your selves in leaving and forsaking a worldly interest for
the Name of Christ; the Gospel calls for this work daily: for you know the
Parable: A certain man made a great feast, and invited many; and sent his
servant at Supper-time to say to them that were bidden, Come, for all things
are now ready. And they all with one consent began to make excuse. One said, I
have bought a piece of ground, and I must go see it: Another said, I have
bought five yoke of Oxen, and I must go prove them: Another said, I have
married a wife, and therefore cannot come. All these were excuses. But we
should daily be parting with a worldly interest for the Gospel and Name of God.
It was a true speech of Mr. Greenham, He will never be able to suffer by a
Papist, that cannot suffer from a Protestant. Train up your selves every day;
daily you must meet with one Temptation or another, therefore be daily training
your selves up in this work of leaving and forsaking your worldly interest for
the Lord Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, Use the World as if you used it not, for the fashion of this world
passes away. He that is glewed to the world, will never leave and forsake much
of the worldly interest for the name of Jesus Christ: the more a man's heart is
glewed to the world and the things thereof, the more unwilling he will be to
part with a worldly interest for Jesus Christ. Therefore let him that uses the
world, be as if he used it not; he that marries, as if he married not; and they
that weep, as if they wept not; and they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced
not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not; and they that use this
world, as not abusing it; for the fashion of this world passes away. Witness
the Revolutions of these latter times.

Fourthly, Study Christ crucified much: Let me say this to you, and to my self
(and I pray consider of it) the more frequently and seriously we do think on
Christ crucified, and what Christ did leave and forsake for us, the more
willing shall we be to leave and forsake any worldly interest for Jesus Christ.
I should think thus: What, shall Christ leave his Heaven for me, and shall not
I leave my Earth for him? What, shall Jesus Christ leave the bosom of his
Father, and that sweet Relation for me, and shall not I leave the bosom of my
Relation for him! What, shall Jesus Christ suffer for me a cursed death, and
shall not I be willing to suffer a blessed death for him? The Death of Christ
has blessed our death: Christ has suffered a cursed death for us, and our
death is made blessed by the death of Christ. And shall Christ suffer a cursed
death for me, and shall not I be willing to suffer a blessed death for him?
Think much of what Christ left for you, and then you will be willing to forsake
any worldly interest for him.

Fifthly, Get your hearts filled with the divine sweetnesses of the Ordinances.
O Lord, says Austin, when once thy sweetness came into my Soul, how sweet was
it to me to want my own sweetnesses! Oh! when the sweetnesses of God shall come
into our Souls, this begets Love; and much water cannot quench Love. Go
therefore and labor to get your hearts filled with Divine sweetnesses.

Sixthly, Whatsoever you do now in a way of service, do it because your Father
wills it. If you do therefore serve God now because your Father wills it; then
when you come to suffer, you will willingly suffer, because your Father wills
it. So that now, use your selves to this, to serve all your service upon this
score, because my Father wills it.

Seventhly, Take heed that you do not stand lessning of a sin, or of an error,
and greatning of a suffering. What Is the reason that many are so unwilling to
suffer? The reason on it is this: they lessen the error and the sin in the
yiedling; and they aggravate and greaten the suffering. O says one, Is this a
great matter, to yield in such a thing as this! it is an indifferent thing; but
if I don't yield, I am undone for ever. But take heed of this, that you do not
lessen the sin, and aggravate your suffering: for you will never be willing to
suffer for the name of Christ, if this be your way.

Eighthly, If you would be willing to suffer for the Name of Christ, then go
unto God in prayer, and pray unto God for boldness; and go to your friends, and
beg of them to pray for you. I remember when Latimer was to suffer, he called
upon his friends, Pray friends, pray for me; for sometimes, though I am as bold
as a Lion, yet at another time I am so afraid, as I could run into a
Mouse-hole. Therefore say, Come, O my friends, I have a cowardly heart of my
own, and am unwilling to suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ: O friends, pray
for me, and go to God and pray for boldness: for you see how it was in the 4th
of the Acts, they told their own Company what the Priests said to them, And
now, Lord, say they, Behold their threatenings: and what did they pray for?
Grant that with all boldness we may speak thy word: And what was ^he issue? in
the next verse: The room was shaken, and they were filled with the Holy Ghost,
and they spoke the word of God with boldness. God answered their prayer
presently. Therefore if the Enemies threaten, and you are afraid to suffer for
the Name of Christ, get together, and in the midst of all your Petitions, put
up this to the Throne of Grace, O Lord, give us boldness.

Ninthly, If you would be willing to suffer for the name of Christ, O then read
over the sufferings of others, and how others have offered up their worldly
interests to the name of Christ; and by reading their sufferings, you will be
made willing to suffer as they were: Having such a cloud of witnesses, says
the Apostle; he speaks of suffering-Saints.

Tenthly, Improve all your afflictions to the mortification of your mind, and
of your will: Take this for certain; truly, the more your own mind and will is
alive, the more you will be unwilling to suffer for the Name of Christ. Well,
how shall I mortify my own will? Afflictions will help you do it. Affliction!
What Is affliction? Affliction is all that that is contrary to ones will; thereby
God eats out the core of our wills. Whenever therefore you meet with any
affliction, pray over it, and beg that God would eat out the core of your wills
thereby: and the more the core of your wills is eaten out, the more willing
will you be to suffer for the name of Jesus Christ.

Eleventhly, And then to draw to a conclusion, that you may be willing to
suffer for the Name of the Lord Jesus Christ, lay these things and this great
reward wishly upon your hearts, and thereby you will be made more willing. You
see how it is with a man that is going to Court, he rides through this plash,
and the other plash; I am going to Court, and there I shall be made a man, if I
get but thither. Why, truly we are going to the Court of the King of Kings, and
these sufferings that we meet withal, are the plashes by the way. But
Christians, there is enough in heaven to pay for all. Luther said, Let him be
miserable, that can be miserable. So you that suffer for the Name of Christ,
you cannot be miserable, Christ has pronounced you blessed, and you shall be
blessed: and you see what a reward here is in the Text; An hundred fold in this
life, and in the world to come life everlasting.

I shall only say, this is the parting Speech: There is no loss in loosing for
Jesus Christ; whatsoever you do loose for Christ, you shall find it infinitely
in Christ: Christ and a little, is a great deal. The only way to have a mercy,
is to be content to go without it: And the only way to prevent a misery, is to
be willing to endure it. Now therefore, if you would prevent suffering, be
willing to suffer for the Name of Jesus Christ.

And thus you see what the means are to be made willing. And so I have done
with this Answer of Christ. In this part of the Answer you see how we may be
made willing to suffer for Christ; and in the cautional part, some of you heard
how we should so order our sufferings, as that they might turn to a good
account.

Now, He that has ears to hear, let him hear.

SERMON. IV. The two VVitnesses, their Testimony.
Rev. 11. ver. 3, etc. And I will give Power unto my two Witnesses, etc.
AND I will give Power unto my two Witnesses; That is, unto the inner Court,
and those that Worship there, spoken of before -- The whole Church of God under
the name of the Temple, speaking in the Jewish Language.

The whole Church of God under the name of a Temple, is divided into the outer,
and the inner Court. The Inner Court is measured, and the Altar, and those that
Worship there, in ver. 1.

The outward Court is left out, and given unto the Gentiles, and they tread
down the Holy City forty and two Months, ver. 2. But says Christ, I will
give power unto my two Witnesses: that is, unto the inner Court, and those that
were measured, of which he had spoken before.

Called Witnesses. No sooner is the Holy City trodden underfoot by the Gentiles,
but Christ's Witnesses do begin to bear their testimony to Christ.

The Witnessing time is divided into three parts: -- A Prophesying time. The
time of their Prophecy, from the third verse unto the seventh.

The Slaying time, from the third verse unto the 11th.

The rising time, and restoring time, from the 11. verse unto the 14. So that
in this Scripture that I have now read, you have the state of the Church
Prophesying, or Witnessing in the days of Antichrist, called Witnesses: who
are here described,

First by their number Two. I will give power unto my two Witnesses.

Secondly by their Work and Office, And they shall Prophecy.

Thirdly, By their mournful and sad habit and condition, and the time thereof,
They shall Prophecy 1260 days clothed in Sackcloth.

Fourthly, By their quality. These are the two Olive Trees, and the two
Candlesticks standing before the G^d of the Earth, ver. 4.

Fifthly, By their Guard, and by their Defense, And if any man will hurt them,
Fire proceeds out of their mouth, and devoureth their Enemies, ver. 5.

Sixthly, By the great things that they shall do, in the latter end of their
Prophecy, These have power to shut Heaven, that it rain not in the days of
their Prophecy, and have power over waters to turn them into Blood, etc. So
that now from all this, I take up this one Observation.

Observe. Though the Saints and Faithful Witnesses of Jesus Christ must lie in
Sackcloth 1260 days, or years, yet in that time they shall be very fruitful,
and Prophecy, and do great things in the end of those day^s.

For the clearing whereof, five or six things will fall under our consideration.

First, Why the Saints and People of God are called Witnesses.

Secondly, What these Witnesses are: more especially in respect of their
number, and quality.

Thirdly, How and in what respect they are clothed in Sackcloth, and how long.

Fourthly, What this Prophecy is, and how it comes to pass that they Prophecy
in the time of their Sackcloth.

Fifthly, What is their Defense and Guard wherewith they are Guarded and
Defended in the days of their Prophecy.

Sixthly, What are the great things that they shall do in the latter end of
their Prophecy. (I shall run through these particulars as briefly as I may),
And

First, If you ask why the Saints and people of God are here called Witnesses.

I answer, Because it is their work and business to bear Witness to the truths
and ways of Christ, in opposition to the ways of Antichrist. If you look
into this Book of the Revelations, you will find they are so described, by
bearing witness unto the ways and the truths of Christ, in opposition to the
ways of Antichrist. For look but a little into this Book, and you shall find
that there are two sorts of people that are marked: The followers of the Beast
are marked, and the followers of the Lamb are marked in their Foreheads.

The followers of the Beast are marked, in Rev. 13. 16. And he causes all,
both small and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a Mark in their
right hand, or in their Foreheads.

The Followers of the Lamb are marked in their Foreheads too, chap. 14. ver. 1.
And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with him 144000 having
his Fathers Name written in their Foreheads. But now though the followers of
the Lamb are thus marked with their Fathers Name written in their Foreheads,
yet their mark does not only consist in some thing that is positive, but in
Refusing the mark of the Beast, Rev. 20. -- why, but to show thus much, That
they are witnesses upon this account, because they do bear witness unto Christ,
the truth and ways of Christ, in opposition to the ways of Antichrist. Thus
they are conformed unto Jesus Christ, who is the True and the Faithful witness,
Rev. 3. write, These things says the Amen, the true and Faithful witness. That
is, Christ: Christ is the true and the faithful witness, and therefore those
that are his, they must be witnesses too, that they may be conformed to him.

Thereby they also overcome, as you have it in Rev. 12. And they overcame him
by the Blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony. They overcome by
the Blood of the Lamb, and by the word of their testimony, by witness-bearing.
So then, the Saints and people of God, they are Christ's witnesses. In
Antichristian times, they are Christ's witnesses: and if they be thus
described, why then should not we look unto this work especially, Bearing of
witness to the truths and ways of Christ.

This is the work that we are born for: For this cause, says Christ, was I
born, and for this cause came I into the World, that I might bear witness unto
the truth.

This is the work of our Generation, witness-bearing to the truths of Christ in
opposition to the ways of Antichrist, in Antichristian times. This is the
work of our Generation.

This is the work which there is a thousand years of glory and comfort promised
unto above other things, as you read in Rev. 20.

This is the work, Witness-bearing to the truths of Christ, in opposition to
the ways of Antichrist. This is the work that has the Crown and Name of
Martyrdom. A Martyr, what is that but a Witness. Every witness more or less, is a
Martyr: We take the word only for them that dye, But every witness is a Martyr.

This is that work which sometimes is necessary to Salvation, Romans 10. 10. For
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth confession
is made unto Salvation. This is the work I say therefore that sometimes is
necessary unto Salvation.

And this is that work which Jesus Christ will own, and acknowledge before all
the world. He that confesses me before men, him will I confess before my
Father and all the Angels in Heaven.

And if this be the great work, why should we not all of us look to this work
especially, this witness-bearing?

You will say, what shall I do that I may be found faithful in this
witness-bearing? what shall I do that I may witness a good confession in these
days of ours?

Something by way of Rule -- Something by way of means; and yet not long,
because I must pass on to other things.

Rule 1. Something by way of Rule. Be sure that your testimonies do agree.
Though there be 100 Witnesses about a business, if their witness don't agree,
'twill be of little worth. And now so it is, Christ's Witnesses this day are
divided into many Opinions and Persuasions, but they may agree in the main for
Christ, they may all agree in opposition unto Antichrist. If that you wou^^
^ave your witness valid and good, labor you tha^ are the witnesses, for unity
in your testimony. T^^re are three, says the Apostle John, that bear witness
in Heaven, speaking of Gods testifying of the truth of Grace. There are three
that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the Holy Ghost: these
bear witness of Christ, and their witness is good, -- why -- For these three
are One, 1 John 5. 7. And says he at the 8. v. There are three that bear
witness on earth, the Spirit, and the Water, and the Blood. The Spirit: I come
to know that I am the child of God by the testimony of the Spirit, bearing
witness with my Spirit that I am the child of God. -- And I come to know that I
am the child of God by the witness of water, by the testimony of
Sanctification. -- And I come to know that I am the child of God by the
testimony of Blood, by the testimony of my Faith, relying upon the Blood of
Christ. And these three agree: and these three agree in One. The testimony is
good, because they agree in one. So in our testifying of Christ, If our
testimonies do agree, our testimony is good: that's the first thing. We have bin
too much divided, God knows we have, and he has punished our Divisions with
Divisions; it is time to unite our testimony: If you would bear witness, unite
your testimony.

2. If you would witness a good confession in these days of ours, then you
must be willing to own the truth of Christ, to own it whenever you are called
thereunto: it is said, our Savior Christ he witnessed a good Confession before
Pontius Pilate. -- Pray what kind of witness was it -- was it any long
confession, or large, -- n^, ^ut the manner on it was this, when they called him
before them to give an account of any fact, he left them to prove it. When they
called him to give an account of the Doctrine that he held, Art thou the King
of the Jews? then he owned it. He left them to prove the fact, and he owned the
truth; so should we do. And indeed, if that we be not willing for to own the
truth when we are called thereunto, why how can it be that the mark of the
Father should be written upon our Foreheads only. We read of the followers of
the Beast, that they received a mark in their right hands, and in their
Foreheads both: -- why in the Forehead, and why in the hand? In the Forehead,
sometimes to wear it openly -- And in their right hands, to put it into their
pockets, and to hide it. They can own it sometimes, and sometimes they can hide
it: but the followers of the Lamb, they have the mark of their Father only in
their Forehead. Therefore I say, If we would witness a good Confession, we must
be willing to own the truth whenever we are called thereunto.

3. If you would witness a good confession in these days of ours, then you
must be willing also for to suffer for the truth of Christ. Those that cannot
suffer for the truth of Christ, and run the hazard of a suffering, they cannot
bear their witness fully. See how they go together, in Rev. 13. 10. Here is the
patience and Faith of the Saints. The Faith of the Saints, and their Patience,
do go together. So in chap. 14. ver. 12. Here is the Patience of the Saints,
here are they that keep the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus.
Patience, and keeping the Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, they go
together: And therefore that's a third thing.

4. If you would witness a good Confession, then take heed that when you have
born your testimony, you do nothing that may revoke the same, either directly
or by consequence. Some bear a good testimony to the truths of Christ, but then
they revoke their testimony by something that they do afterward, either
directly or by consequence. Mark what is said of John in Joh. 1. 20. it is said
of him, He confessed and denied not, but confessed, I am not the Christ. He
confessed, and did not revoke his testimony. He confessed, and denied not, but
confessed. I know there is an Hebraism in it, but there is more than so. -- And he
confessed and denied not: He bare his testimony, and did nothing that might
revoke that testimony, either directly or by consequence. And therefore if you
would bear your testimony for the truth of Christ, take heed that when you have
given in your testimony, you do nothing that may revoke it, either directly or
by consequence. Thus by way of Rule.

And secondly by way of Means. If you would be Faithful in bearing your
testimony, in bearing witness to the truths of Christ, in opposition to the
ways of Antichrist: Observe what the root is that a good confession grows
upon, and labor for to strengthen that.

Now what is the root that a good confession grows upon, but Faith working by
Love.

As for Faith, I believed, and therefore have I spoken.

And as for Love, Much Water cannot quench Love. Faith working by Love, is the
root that a good Confession grows upon, and therefore strengthen that.

Secondly, Labor in the work of Self-denial, and use your self now to deny
your self. There are two denyals that you read of in the Gospel -- one
commanded, and the other forbidden, directly contrary one to another.

Self-denial -- and denial of Christ.

Self-denial is commanded, If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself.

Denying of Christ is forbidden: He that denies me before men, him will I deny
before my Father which is in Heaven. The more you deny your selves, the less
you will deny Christ: And the more you deny Christ, the less you deny your
selves. Will you not deny Christ, but witness fully to Christ, and the truths
and ways of Christ; labor now to be found in the ways of self-denial, that
you may be kept from Christ-denyal.

Thirdly, In the next place, Take heed that you be not feared or scared too
much with the scare-crowes of the times, but go to God for boldness, that you
may be emboldned with the boldness of the Holy Ghost. A timorous fearful Spirit
will shrink in witness-bearing, if God come not in with boldness. You may see
how they would have made Nehemiah to have ceased from the work of God, even by
scaring and fearing of him, in Neh. 6. Tobiah and Sanball^t, they send unto him
that they might make him cease from the work of God that was in his hand; and
they say unto him, It Is reported that thou have appointed to Preach at
Jerusalem, saying, There is a King in Jerusalem, and now shall it be reported
to the King according to these words, ver. 7. here they cry out, A Plot, a
Plot: But while they cry out a Plot upon Nehemiah, the truth is, it was their
own Plot. Then I sent unto them (at ver. 8.) saying, There are no such things
done as thou say, but thou feignest them of thine own heart. They cry A
Plot, and they made a Plot.

Well, what was their Plot? -- It was to make him cease from the work of the
Lord. -- And how did they lay the Plot, say they at ver. 9. For they all made
us afraid, saying, Their hands shall be weakened from the work. They all made us
afraid, v. 13. (speaking of false Prophets) Therefore was he hired, that I
should be afraid, and do so, and sin. And says he, ver. 14. My God, think thou
upon Tobiah and Sanballat, according to these their works, and on the
Prophetess Noadiah, and the rest of the Prophets that would have put me in
fear. This was the way to make Nehemiah cease from the work of God that was in
his hand, to put him in fear, to scare him. And therefore take heed of the
scares of the time, but go to God for boldness, that you may be emboldned with
the boldness of the Holy Ghost. And therefore do but read the fourth of the
Acts, where you find, that when the Apostles were threatened, they returned unto
their own company, and fell to Prayer, at ver. 23. And being let go, they went
to their own company, and there they fall to Prayer, And they lift up their
voice, -- And what did they pray for? the great thing that they prayed for in
their Prayer, was, That God would give them boldness. And now Lord, say they,
ver. 29. Behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy Servants, that with all
boldness they may speak thy Word. And what was the Answer, ver. 3^. And when
they had prayed, the place was shaken where they were assembled together, and
they were all f^lled with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with
boldness. This was the Petition put up, Behold Lord their threatenings, now give
boldness to thy Servants. Presently God answered, and they were filled with the
boldness of the Holy Ghost, and so they bare their testimony. And so I say, If
you would bear your testimony in these days of ours, Take heed of being scared
and feared with the scare-Crowes of the times: But rather go to God, and beg
boldness of him, that you may be emboldned with the boldness of the Holy Ghost;
and thus shall you do this great work, which is the work that we have to do in
this day of ours. And so I have done with the first thing, why the Saints and
people of God are called witnesses, Namely, because it is their work in
Antichristian times to bear witness to the truths and ways of Christ, in
opposition to the ways of Antichrist.

But then secondly, What are these Witnesses more expressly in regard of their
number, and in regard of their quality?

First in regard of their number, They are two, And I will give power unto my
TWO Witnesses.

Two is but a Few, and yet it is enough to bear witness, For out of the mouths
of two or three Witnesses shall every word be established.

Two, a Few, and yet enough. The Note is this.

Observe. Christ will always have enough to bea^ witness to his Truth in the
darkest times. When the Gentiles tread underfeet the Holy City; yet here are
two, it is but a few; and indeed Christ's Witnesses they are not very many, they
are but few.

In the Old Testament, unless the Lord had left us a Remnant, a very little
Remnant.

And in the New Testament, Nevertheless there are a ^ E W Name^ in Sardis.
Christ's Witnesses are not very many, they are but few, Two:

And yet they are enough, Two are enough to bear witness unto a thing, they are
enough. Christ, though he have but few to bear witness to his truth, he will
always have enough to bear witness to his truth in the darkest times: in the
darkest times of Antichrist.

What then? though many fall off, and go over unto Anti-christ's Colors,
Christ will have enough to bear witness: In the 24. of Matthew. it is said, Many
shall be offended; And Many shall be deceived; And the Love of Many shall grow
cold. But [he] that endures to the end: he does not say, but They that endure
to the end, but He. There is an He upon that. Many shall be deceived, and Many
shall be offended, and the love of Many shall grow cold. But He that shall
endure to the end; But yet an He;

Why should we be afraid and discouraged in reference to the Cause of God, and
the Affairs of the Church: It may be we think few or none will stand in this
dark and gloomy day, few or none will stand.

But I pray now, have you cast up the account, how many are wanting upon the
Muster? In the 14. Rev. In the 7th. chap. The Saints are mustered before they
go into the times of Antichrist ver. 4. And I heard the number of them which
were sealed, and there were sealed 144000. And then in the 8, 9, 10, 11, 12.
chapters comes in the times of Antichrist, and bloody times. Now in the 14.
chap. verse. 1. They are accounted over after the times of Antichrist; and how
many are wanting: And I looked, and lo a Lamb stood on the Mount Sion, and with
him 144000. having his Fathers Name written in their foreheads, here is not one
wanting: Christ will lose not one; not o^e lost. By all the persecution of
Antichrist, the Church shall not lose one: In the letter end, here is just as
many to a One, as was in the beginning. We think few or none will stand in
these days: So Eliah thought And I only am left alone, but he was deceived:
There Is 7000. men that will not bow the knee to Baal. And so we may think, few
or none will stand, but we may be deceived, God has his seven thousands that
we know not off. Though but few, yet enough, Christ will always have enough to
bear witness to his Truth in the darkest times, Two Witnesses. This for their
Number.

But then Secondly, As for their qualification.

For their quality: These are the two Olive trees, at the 4. verse (I shall
speak to all these things, within the compass of my Doctrine) And the two
Candle-sticks standing before the God of the Earth.

Wat's that? These are the Olive Trees: Why if you look into Zech. from whence
this is taken, you shall find the two Olive Trees are the godly Magistrates and
Ministers, by whose assistance the golden Oil is emptied into the
Candle-sticks, and Lamps. Having spoken of the Candlestick of gold, at the 2d.
verse. of that 4. of Zech. And of two Olive Trees by it; at the 3d. verse. At the
11. verse: Then answered I, and said unto him, what are these two Olive Trees
upon the right side of the Candlestick, and upon the left side thereof? And I
answered again, and said unto him, what be these two Olive-branches which
through the two golden pipes, empty the golden Oil out of themselves? And he
answered me, and said, know thou not what these be? And I said, No my Lord:
Then said he, These are the two anointed ones, that stand by the Lord of the
whole Earth -- The two anointed ones -- What Is that?-Why the Magistrates were
anointed, and the Highpriests were anointed. Zerubbabel and Joshua were the
two anointed ones --

That stand by the Lord of the whole Earth. What Is that? that are public
Ministers. So then, these two Olive Trees are the godly Magistrate, and the
godly Minister.

But what are the two Candlesticks? These are the two Olive Trees, and the two
Candlesticks.

Our Savior tells you that the seven Golden Candlesticks, are the seven
Churches. They were seven: Now in Antichristian times reduced to a lesser
company, two Candlesticks: Though as I said before, Christ will lose none in
the latter times, yet in Antichristian times reduced unto two.

These are the two Candlesticks: Christ tells you the Candlesticks are the
Churches: So then put this together: Would you know what these two Olive trees
are and the two Candlesticks? They are the godly Magistrate and godly Minister
in conjunction with the Saints of God and Churches of Christ. The two
Olive Trees are the godly Magistrate and the Ministry: The Candlesticks are the
Churches and Saints of God. The godly Magistrate and Minister, in conjunction
with the Churches and Saints of God. The godly Magistrate alone, is not it: Nor
the Ministry alone, is not it: Nor good people and Saints alone, is not it;
Here are two Olive Trees, and two Candlesticks: So that would you know what
these are? They are the godly Magistrate, and Minister, in conjunction with the
Saints of God, and Churches of Jesus Christ.

And then if so, That these be the Witnesses.

Here we may see who those are that are fit to bear witness of Christ in
Antichristian times, to bear their Testimony. -- They are to be a fruitful,
profitable people, And a lightsom people, that can hold forth light unto others
in some measure: -- What more fruitful and profitable than the Olive Tree?
There Is nothing unprofitable; The Bark, Oil; the Leaf, Oil; the Body, Oil; the
Fruit, Oil; nothing unprofitable: So the Saints of God, they are the Sons and
Daughters of Oil, nothing but profit. The wicked indeed are compared to the
green Bay Tree; barren, unprofitable: But the Godly are compared in Scripture
to the Olive Tree, nothing not profitable: The Wicked are compared to Goats,
the Saints are compared to Sheep: Sheep, nothing not profitable: Their wool
profitable, their flesh profitable; their very dung profitable: Nothing not
profitable: And here, the Witnesses of Christ, they are the Olive Tree;
fruitful, and a profitable people; and a people in some measure fit to give
light to others, as the Candlestick, to hold forth light unto others.

Beloved, Truly every one is not fit to bear witness to the Cause, and the
Truths, and the Ways of Jesus Christ: A man may be a Protestant, in opposition
to the Papists, and yet an ignorant man; A man may be a Professor, in
opposition unto others, and yet barren in his life. No, no, none are fit to
bear testimony to the Truths of Christ, and the Ways of Christ, in opposition
to the ways of Antichrist, but the Olive and the Candlestick; The profitable
man and the lightsom man: and therefore in evil times that you may be fit to
bear witness to the Ways of Jesus Christ in opposition to the Ways of
Antichrist, labor to be Sons and Daughters of Oil; labor to be more fruitful
and profitable in your life; And let your light so shine before men, that they
may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. And so now I have done with the
second thing, What these Witnesses are, More particularly in respect of their
number, Two; In respect of their q^ality, They are two Olive Trees, and two
Candlesticks.

3. But then Thirdly, It it here said that they shall Prophecy 1260. days,
clothed in Sackcloth; that they shall lie in Sackcloth, and lie in Sackcloth
1260 days.

In Sackcloth, -- What Is that -- And how 1260 days?

If you ask what this Sackcloth means: It represents the sad, and afflicted,
and mournful condition that the Saints and people of God shall be in, in
Antichristian times. When the Jews of old mourned, and were afflicted, they put
on Sackcloth: The Princes put on Sackcloth, and the Priests put on Sackcloth,
and the people put on Sackcloth: So here, the Witnesses clothed in Sackcloth;
-- What does this mean, but their sad, and afflicted, and mournful condition?
Such it is, and must be in Antichristian times.

For is it not a sad thing, and mournful, for the holy City to be trodden
underfoot by the Gentiles? so it shall be in Antichristi^n times.

Is it not a sad and mournful thing for the Church of God to be hidden, the
inner Court to be hidden? Indeed a hidden Church is a true Church; a scattered
Flock is a true Flock, and a scattered Church is a true Church: But is it not a
sad thing for Churches to be hidden; the Church of God to be hidden? Why so it
must be in Antichristian times. I remember Mr. Brightman says, when the Woman
is in the Wilderness, she must not think that there will be Congregations so
visible; but in a Wilderness here and there, or in a Forest, here and there is
a house; and here and there you meet with a man; But you meet not with great
Towns, and Corporations in a Wilderness, or in a Forest: So when the Church is
in the Wilderness, here and there a knot of Saints, and here and there a knot
of meeting: But Corporations and Churches then are hidden: Is it not a sad
thing now I say? Yet thus it must be.

Is it not a sad thing for the Vessels of the Temple to be defiled? So it must
be in Antichristian times.

Is it not a sad thing for the solemn Assemblies to lie under reproach? So it
is and must be in Antichristian times.

Is it not a sad thing for the Saints and People of God, and the Daughters and
Sons of Sion to be persecuted to the very Gates of Sion, yea into the very
Gates of their Trade? So it is and must be in Antichristian times: and
therefore no wonder that the Witnesses lie in Sackcloth.

But then they lie in Sackcloth 1260 days, -- what is that? That is 1260 years,
a day being put for a year, as it is ordinary in Scripture.

And if you ask, When does this time begin, or end, that we may know where we
are?

I answer: If you can find the beginning from whence this time does commence,
you will soon find the end: -- now these 1260 days or years, are all one with
the 42 Months (spoken of before) that the Gentiles shall tread down the holy
City: They are all one with the 42 months of the Beast. Take a day for a year,
and 42 months come to 1260 years; take a day for a month, and then 1260 days
comes to 42 months.

These 42 months of the Beast then, and the 1260 days or years that the
Witnesses are clothed in Sackcloth are all one.

Now, when did the 42 months of the Beast begin?

In likelihood about the year 400 or 406 or 10 or thereabouts, for to speak to
a year or so, is not safe, Chronologers have been deceived: I say in the year
of our Lord 400, or thereabouts.

For look when that that hinders was taken away, then the man of sin was
discovered: The mystery of iniquity did work in the Apostles time: In 2 These.
2. The mystery of iniquity does already work verse 7. Only he who now lets,
will let until he be taken out of the way, and then shall that wicked one be
revealed: -- When is that? As Jerome and all agree, the Roman Empire was the
thing that let, and about those times was the Roman Empire taken out of the
way; In 410. the Goths and Vandals broke in upon Rome it self, about that time
was that that let taken away.

And Secondly, (I do but touch upon this, and touch I must upon it) look when
the Roman Empire did fall asunder into ten Kingdoms, then did the Beast begin
his forty two months, Rev. 17. 12. And the ten horns which thou saw are ten
Kings, which have received no Kingdom as yet, But receive power as Kings one
hour with the Beast.

But when did the Roman Empire fall asunder into ten Kingdoms? About the year
400. It Is observed by good Historians, and diverse, that in the year 406.
Brittany and these Nations fell off from the Roman Empire, to be a Kingdom
standing by it self. -- Now then, if the time did begin about 400. surely the
end of the time we must needs be about. I confess indeed: It is a sad thing for
Christ's Witnesses to lie in Sackcloth; and to lie in Sackcloth 1260. years,
but so it must be, not a day abated, but to a year, to a day. Why should you be
offended friends then, at the Sackcloth and mourning condition of the Church,
and Saints, and People of God? -- Why, is not this the habit of the Witnesses,
Sackcloth: and will not you be content to be habited as they are habited, as
Christ's Witnesses are habited, to wear the same clothes that Christ's
Witnesses do? And if Christ's Witnesses shall lie in Sackcloth 1260. years,
will not you be contented to be in Sackcloth three or four years? Christians,
will not you be contented to be in Sackcloth three or four years? Me thinks we
should rather look to the duty of a Sackcloth condition; there should our
hearts and our thoughts be: But we are very apt evermore, (and consider what I
say, not only in reference to this point, but to others) we are very apt to
mind Gods work, and neglect our own: It Is Gods work to ful^^l the Promise, it is
our work to apply the Promise; but we mind the fulfilling on it, and neglect the
applying on it; mind Gods work, and neglect our own work!

It Is Gods work to deliver his people, it is their work to be humbled under the
mighty hand of God: But we mind deliverance, which is Gods work, and neglect
our own work, humiliation under the mighty hand of God.

It Is Gods work (says the Martyr) to take care, it is our work to cast care:
Cast all your care upon God; there is your work: for he cares for you, that is
Gods work. To take care is Gods work, to cast care is our work, but we mind
Gods work, and are taking care, and neglect our own work, which is to cast all
our care upon God.

It Is Gods work to take off our Sackcloth, it is our work to wear it; but we
mind Gods work, the taking of it off: When shall this Sackcloth be off? and
neglect our own work, to wear it handsomely. -- Why should we not I say, mind
our business? what is the duty of a Sackcloth condition more?

Why then, when we are in Sackcloth, surely then it is our duty for to lay by
our Ornaments: Let the Bridegroom go out of his Chamber, in the day of
Sackcloth; if any body may rejoice, the Bridegroom may; But let the Bridegroom
go forth of his chamber in a Sackcloth day: Lay aside your Ornaments friends,
lay aside your Ornaments: In the time of Sackcloth, it is our duty then for to
fast and pray, and cry mightily unto the Lord.

Then it is our duty to put our mouths in the dust, if so be there may be hope.

Then it is our duty for to bear our Testimony.

Then it is our duty for to wait on God; though the Witnesses wear Sackcloth
for a time, yet there are white Robes provided for them, and they come out with
Palms in their hands.

And the nearer the time of Deliverance grows, the less time for waiting, the
more we are engaged to wait: Why now according to the calculation, there is not
much of the time to come; there is but a little of the Sackcloth time to come,
shall we not watch with him one hour, and wear Sackcloth with him one hour?
wait a while, he that shall come, will come, and will not tarry. And so I have
done with the third thing; namely, what this Sackcloth is, and their lying in
Sackcloth for 1260. years.

4. But then in the fourth place, It is said here, that these Witnesses did
Prophecy: I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall Pr^phesie --
Prophecy -- What Is that? and how did it come to pass, that they shall
Prophecy in the time of their Sackcloth.

Prophecy, -- What Is that?

Why Prophesying is sometimes taken in Scripture for the Revelation of the mind
of God, whereby a man does foretell things to come, and so Daniel and Ezekiel,
and others were called Prophets.

Sometimes Prophesying is taken more largely in Scripture, for Preaching the
Word of God in a way of Office; Preaching the Word by Office: And so the
Ministers and Preachers of the Word of God in Office, they are called Prophets
in Scripture.

But Thirdly, yet more largely: Prophecy is took for a declaring and making
known of the Mind and Will of God, and so all those that do declare and make
known the Mind and Will of Jesus Christ, they are said to be Prophets, and so I
take it here: For I pray do but mark, This their Prophesying and
Witness-bearing seems to be all one: I will give power unto my two Witnesses,
and they shall Prophecy: -- And when they shall have finished their Testimony,
their witness bearing; He should have said, when they have finished their
Prophecy: True, But he would show that their Witness-bearing and Prophecy is
all one; And so compare chap. 19. and chap. 22. of the Revelations together,
and you will find the same, I fell at his feet and worshipped him, and he said
unto me, see thou do it not, I am thy fellow servant, and of thy Brethren, that
have the testimony of Jesus: and chap. 22. I fell at his feet, and he said unto
me see thou do it not, for I am thy fellow servant, and of thy Brethren the
Prophets; Of thy Brethren the Prophets, here in chap. 22. is all one, with thy
Brethren that have the Testimony of Jesus, In the 19th. and says he there,
Worship God, for the Testimony of Jesus, is the Spirit of Prophecy: It Is the
same word that is used, when they had finished their Testimony, or
Witness-bearing: The witness of Jesus, is the Spirit of Prophecy: This bearing
witness to the truths of Jesus, this is Prophecy: And thus now the Witnesses,
they are said to Prophecy.

Well, but how come they to Prophecy in the times of their Sackcloth.

Behold, I will give power unto my two Witnesses, and they shall Prophecy
1260. days clothed in Sackcloth: How comes it to pass that they shall
Prophecy in Sackcloth?

It Is clearly answered, I will give power (says Christ) I will give power unto
my two Witnesses, and they shall Prophecy in Sackcloth. I will give power to
them; they shall have their Orders to Preach from my self; They shall have
power from Me to Preach and to Prophecy, and to bear their Testimony: Some
have their Orders and their Power to Prophecy from Men; from Prelates, from
the Beast; but (says he) I will give power unto my two Witnesses to Prophecy:
It Is said of the Beast, That Power was given him: It Is said of the Witnesses, I
will give Power unto my two Witnesses: They shall have their Orders, they shall
have their Power of Prophecy and Witness-bearing from my self: I will give
Power unto my two Witnesses. Plainly then thus much.

Obs. There Is none can bear witness to the Truths of Jesus Christ, but those
that are empowered by Christ, and if that Jesus Christ will give power unto his
two Witnesses for to Prophecy, and to bear their Testimony, then why should we
not depend on God? why should we not go unto Christ, and depend on Christ, for
our very Power to bear Witness to the Truths of Christ.

It may be you are afraid, and you will say thus: I am a poor weak Creature,
man or woman, and I shall never be able for to bear a Testimony in these
witness-bearing times?

I but you know what the Martyr said, I Will set my foot against the Alce Driver.
foot of the proudest Prelate of them all in the cause of Christ: But who gave
power unto her; -- Jesus Christ that says, I will give power unto my two
Witnesses; and he has said so concerning all his Witnesses: I will give power
unto my two Witnesses, that they shall Prophecy, and bear witness; and he is
faithful: and therefore why should you not go to Christ, and lay your selves
flat upon this Promise, and say to him: O Lord, I am a poor weak Creature; I
fear I shall never be able for to bear my Testimony, but thou have said, I will
give power unto my two Witnesses; I am one of thy Witnesses: Now then O Lord,
give power to me, for I am poor; O remember this Promise, here is a gracious and
a blessed Promise: Christ says himself, I will give power unto my two
Witnesses, and he is faithful, and will make it good. And so I have done with
the fourth thing, namely, what Prophesying is, and how the Witnesses come to
Prophecy in the times of their Sackcloth; Christ gives them power.

5. But then Fifthly, what is the defense and guard that these Witnesses have,
whereby they are guarded and defended in their Prophecy.

The Text says, If any man will hurt them, fire Proceeds out of their mouth,
and devoureth their enemies: -- What Is that? Fire proceeds out of their
mouth; It may relate unto Moses; but especially it relates unto Elijah, a
Prophet, a Minister, that when the Captain and his fifty came to do him hurt,
he called for fire from Heaven, and destroyed the Captain and his fifty; fire
came out of his mouth by his prayers: and when another Captain came, and his
fifty, Elijah prayed, and fire came down and destroyed him and his fifty: Fire
came out of his mouth; plainly it relates to this of Elijah.

What then is this fire that proceeds out of the month of the Witnesses, but
the scorching and devouring Judgments of God, whereby the Enemies of Gods
people are blasted and destroyed by the prayers and threatenings of the people
of God, that come out of their mouth.

But if any man will hurt them, mind a little.

It seems then first, That there will always be some in readiness to hurt the
witnessing people of Christ, though they be empowered to witness from Christ
himself. Though the Saints and People of God be empowered by Christ himself for
to bear their Testimony: There will always be some or other to hurt the
witnessing people of God. If any man will hurt them, Them that are Witnesses.

But Secondly, though men do hurt the witnessing people of God, they shall not
go unpunished: If any man will hurt them, fire proceeds out of their mouths,
and devoureth their enemies: Though the enemies may hurt the witnessing people
of Christ, the enemies shall be hurt themselves, they shall not go unpunished.

But Thirdly, They shall not only be punished that hurt the witnessing people
of God: But they shall be punished with a So; He must in this manner, or So, he
must So be punished: -- So -- how so? So, look in what way he thought to have
hurt the witnessing people of God: So shall he be hurt, look by what men's he
sought to hurt the people of God, by the same hand and means shall he be hurt
himself.

But So, so by fire coming out of their mouth; by the prayers of the people of
God, they shall be blasted and consumed; not by sword, not by might, nor by
strength, but by fire coming out of their mouth, So, So, he shall not only be
punished, but be punished with a so, that hurts the witnessing people of God.

Oh my beloved friends, why do you shut your mouths? why should you not be much
in prayer? what does fire come out of the mouth of the witnessing people of God
to devour their enemies, and will you shut your mouth, and not pray?

Oh! where will Opposers appear; what will become of those that hurt the
witnessing people of God, O woe to them?

Oh! what a dangerous thing is it to oppose the prayers of the people of God?
This is the fire that comes out of their mouth, whereby those that hurt them
are scorched: And therefore let men take heed how they hurt any of the
witnessing people of Christ; and let all those that are witnesses pray; You
that are witnesses now open your mouths, for fire proceeds out of your
mouths, to devour the enemies that hurt the witnessing people of God; Open your
mouths wide. And so I have done with the fifth thing; The Guard whereby the
Witnesses are guarded in the days of their Prophecy.

6. The sixth thing remains, and that is, what are the great things that these
Witnesses will do, in the end of the days of their Prophecy, and of their
Sackcloth.

Why briefly thus: In the general it is said: These have power to smite the
Earth with all plagues, as often as they will: That is, as I humbly conceive,
pouring out the seven Vials, in Rev. 16. the seven Vials are poured out upon
the earth: and why is it spoken of here, That they have power to smite the
earth with all Plagues? But to show that at least some of the Vials shall be
poured out, before the Witnesses are slain: But not to fix there, more
particularly.

First, These have a power to shut Heaven, that it rain not, in the days of
their Prophecy: What Is that? Certainly, it must relate unto Elijah: That
Elijah prayed, and by his prayer he shut the Heavens that it rained not for
three years and an half: Plainly it relates unto Elijah as can be: Elijah
prayed, and by his prayer he shut the Heavens that it rained not for three
years and a half.

Well, but what are the Heavens here?

Those cannot be understood literally, but spiritually: As it is said in the
8th verse, Their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
Spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt: The Heavens here cannot be understood
literally, but spiritually; what then? what are the Heavens then, and what is
the shutting of the Heavens that it rain not.

The Heavens are the highest power, so that look when the Witnesses have power
to restrain the highest power in Church and State from their wonted influence;
then is this word fulfilled, that they have power to shut Heaven that it rain
not in the days of their Prophecy: I say the Heavens are the highest powers:
look when the Witnesses do restrain the highest power in Church and State from
their wonted influence, Then is this word fulfilled.

Secondly, They have power also to turn water into blood. What Is that? plainly
it must relate to Moses, who turned Rivers, and turned waters into blood:
What Is that? It cannot be understood literally, but spiritually still: What Is
that then? Why thus: These waters are to be understood spiritually, and so you
read in Revel. 16. The Sea, and Rivers were turned into blood: Look therefore
when the Witnesses shall have power to turn the still waters of a State or
Nation into War and Blood; Then is this Word fulfilled.

But how came the Witnesses to have power to do this?

It may be, not legally, for it is not said here, And I will give power unto
them to shut the Heavens: but these have power to shut the Heavens, and these
have power to turn waters into blood; it is not said here, I will give them
power, as it is said before: it may be this may be done, and not legally.

But when shall this be done?

It must be done immediately before their slaying. I pray mark the coherence
here: They shall have power to shut the Heavens immediately before they are
slain, and to turn water into blood immediately before they are slain, just
before the three years and a half, that they lie dead upon the earth: For when
did Elijah shut the Heavens but immediately before the three years and a half
of drought: When did Moses turn the waters into blood, but immediately before
the coming out of the Children of Israel out of Egypt: So here, immediately
before the Witnesses are slain, and they lie three years and a half as dead,
immediately before, they have power to shut the Heavens that it rain not, and
to turn waters into blood.

Now therefore to draw to a Conclusion; whenever you see all these things
come to pass. I will not apply them to times or places, this or that time or
place: But when you shall see all these things come to pass, one treading upon
the heel of another: when you shall see that the Witnesses have power to shut
the Heavens that it rain not: to restrain the highest powers both in Church and
State from their wonted influence. And that they have power to turn water into
blood, and still Nations into War; and then immediately upon it they shall be
slain, and so lie dead, deprived of their functions and vital operations, as if
they lay dead. Then lift up your heads, and comfortably say, hopefully say,
Now, now comes the three years and half, which is the last time: Now is our
Salvation near, for God will bring near his righteousness, and his Salvation
shall not tarry. And he will place Salvation in Sion, for Israel his glory.

Only for the present, let me conclude and leave an Exhortation with you, which
I will draw up from all which has bin said.

The first part on it is this: The Saints and people of God in Antichristian
times, they are Witnesses.

First therefore, be sure that you bear your testimony faithfully. Be faithful
now in your Witness-bearing, Christians. Christ will pay all the charge that
you are at in Witness-bearing. If a man have a Suit at Law, and have five or
six Witnesses, and carry them a hundred Miles, he bears all the charge of their
Witness-bearing. Says Christ, I will give power to My Witnesses, they are My
Witnesses. Ye are Christ's Witnesses, and look whatsoever charge you are at, he
will bear the charge, he will bear all the charge of your Witness-bearing: And
if your Faith come not home enough, as it should be, yet Christ is Faithful
though we believe not, and therefore be faithful in your Witness-bearing.

Secondly, Though you be but few, be not afraid, be not discouraged, for Christ
will always have enough to bear Witness to his truth in the darkest
times.-Comfort ye one another with those words.

Thirdly, Be fruitful as the Olive tree; And be lightsome as the Candlestick. O
that God would roll away the reproach of a barren heart from every one of you,
and of a barren life. It Is time now to be fruitful that you may be as the
Olive Tree, and as the Candlestick, to hold forth your light to others.

Fourthly, Pray now have a care that you wear your Sackcloth handsomely. Truly
these Meetings that now we do enjoy, they have a Sackcloth on them: there is a
Sackcloth upon the loins of every such meeting as this. Christians, you have
your Sackcloth on, pray wear your Sackcloth handsomely, for in due time you
shall have Robes, you shall come forth in white Robes, having your Palms in
your hands, only for the present wear your Sackcloth handsomely. I mean, carry
your sad and mournful condition as you ought.

Fifthly, If you find that you be not able for to bear your testimony as you
would, and as you should: Go then to Christ, and remember this promise, I will
give power unto my Two VVitn^sses. O plead this promise Christians, it is a
great promise: I will give power unto my two VVitnesses. Though men take away
power from you for Prophesy; They will not let you Pray, nor Prophecy, yet I
will give power.] I will give power in opposition to your own weakness. And I
will give power in opposition to men's Malice. Therefore go to Christ and press
this promise, Lord, I am one of thy poor Witnesses, therefore give power
according to thy Word, for thou have said I will give power, and they shall
Prophecy.

Sixthly, Let not your mouth be shut, but open in Prayer: For it is said here,
If any man will hurt them, Fire proceeds out of his mouth. That was the
Prayer of Elijah, It brought down fire, scorching and blasting Judgments.
Christians, is there a Fire, a Fire in your mouth? O you that have any credit
in Heaven, pray now. If there were any here that I could speak to, I would say
thus, You that never prayed, pray now: but I hope there is none such; but if
there should be any such, I would say, you that never prayed, pray now; and you
that have any credit in Heaven, improve it in this day of trial for the poor
Witnesses.

And to conclude all: If that you should see that the Witnesses shall have done
such great things, that they have shut Heaven that it rain not; that they have
turned water into blood, and yet immediately upon it they have bin slain, and
lie dead: If you see all these things come to pass one after another, then lift
up your heads oh ye Saints, and wait, and wait; for he that does come, will
come, and will not tarry. And when he comes, he will not only pay you your
principle-money, but he will pay you all your forbearance money too: And
therefore what I say to one, I say unto you all, and to my own soul, Let us
wait upon the Lord and keep his way. And thus now I have done with the first
time of the Witnesses, their Prophesying time, their slaying time follows: But
that you will conjecture at something by what has bin said.

SERMON. V. The uncertainty of the world, should take off our Hearts from the
Love of it.
1 Cor. 7. 30, 31. But this I say Brethren, the time is short. It remains,
that both they that have Wives, be as though they had none And they that weep
as though they wept not: And they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not:
And they that buy, as though they possessed not: And they that use this world,
as not abusing it; for the fashion of this world passes away.
BUt this I say Brethren, the time is short, etc.]

In this Scripture we have a great Exhortation to use this World as if we used
it not, which the Apostle opens by diverse instances, and strengthens by
diverse Arguments. The general Exhortation brings up the Rear, They that use
this world as if they used it not, or as not abusing it. The instances march in
the body and middle of the words; They that have Wives, as though they had
none; and they that weep, as though they wept not; and they that rejoice, as
though they rejoiced not; and they that buy, as though they possessed not.
Which are enclosed with two Reasons:

One in the Front, The time is short; This I say Brethren, the time is short,
It remains, etc.

The other reason in the close or rear of the words, F^r the fashion of this
World passes away. From all which then I take up this Doctrine or Observation,
Doctr. That the consideration of the shortness of our time here, and that the
fashion of this World passes away, should move us to use the World in all our
particular concernments, as if we used it not. For the opening whereof, these
several things will fall under our consideration:

First, That a good man may make use of the world.

Secondly, Though he may make use of the World, yet he must use the World as if
he used it not.

Thirdly, What are those particular concernments wherein we are to use the
World as if we used it not.

Fourthly what there is in these Reasons of the Apostle, The shortness of the
time, and the passing fashion of the world, that should move us so to use the
World, as if we used it not.

Fifthly, When a man may be said so to use the World as if he used it not.

Sixthly, What is the issue and the consequence thereof, in case he do or do
not.

Seventhly, What a man should do that he may get his heart into this holy
frame, So to use the World as if he used it not.

First therefore, We must grant that a good man may make use of the World; he
may make use of the world in reference to the persons of the world, in
reference to the things of the world.

In regard of the persons of the world: So Abraham and Isaac did make use of
Abimelech; so Jacob did make use of Laban; so the Israelites did make use of
the Egyptians; so the Jews did make use of the Heathen Cyrus, Darius,
Artaxerxes, for the building of the House of God. Plainly then, a good man may
make use of the world, the persons of the world.

And as he may make use of the persons of the world, so he may make use of the
things of the world, for they are his own: All things are yours, whether Paul,
or Apollo, things present, and things to come; life and death, all things are
yours. And who may not make use of his own? If a friend should send a man a
gift, it would be accounted an incivility and unthankfulness not to make use
thereof. Why truly, as for the things of this world, they are Gods gift; The
Lord gives, and the Lord takes: They are Gods gift: And will it not be
accounted an incivility toward God, and an unthankfulness toward God, not to
make use of this his gift that he has given us: May not a Traveller make use
of those things in his journey, that are meet and necessary for him in his
journey? he may. We are all Travelers to another Country, we are upon our
journey, so far therefore as things are necessary for our journey, we may make
use thereof: The Lord would have Adam himself to be employed in the state of
Innocence, in the things of the world, Six days shall thou labor, and do all
that thou have to do: And the Apostle in his second Epistle to the
Thessalonians, Chap. 3. v. 11. shows, that those are busybodies, whose bodies
are not busy: We hear that there are some which walk among you disorderly,
working not at all, but are busy bodies; working not at all, but work in
another ground: busy bodies, because their bodies are not busy: See how they
go here together, working not at all, but are at work where they should not
work: those whose bodies are not busy, will be busy bodies: And is it not an
evil thing to be a busy body? it is so; therefore we must work: How can we work
if we do not make use of the world, and the things thereof? So that plainly
then we see the first thing cleared: A good man may make use of the world, both
in reference to the persons of the world, and in reference to the things of the
world: A good man may make use of the world.

2. But secondly, though we may make use of the world, we must use the world as
though we used it not, not regarding it too much, not setting our affections
upon it too much, not spending too much time upon the world, and the things
thereof.

For look as wicked men do use the things of God, and of the other world, so a
good man should use the things of this world: Why now a wicked man does use the
things of God, as if he used them not, pray, as if he prayed not, and hear, as
if he heard not; why, because his mind is upon other things: Why truly so the
minds of the Saints are, or should be, upon other things. Set your affections
on things that are above: It Is a good speech that an Ancient has, says he, As
good men are, where they yet are not, namely in heaven; so they are not where
they now are, namely on earth, for your conversation is in heaven: Though your
communication be here on earth, yet your conversation is in heaven; and if
heaven be our object, earth will be our abject: Few I confess that live at this
rate, to use the world as if they used it not: But is there not reason, good
reason for it? let us see the reasons: Is there not good reason for it? yes. For

First, If the world, and the things thereof be so our own, as if they were not
our own; then why should we not use the world, and the things thereof, as if we
used them not? why now, though the things of the world are our own in regard of
propriety, yet if you look into the sixteenth of Luke, you will find that they
are called not our own, ver. 11. If therefore ye have not been faithful in the
unrighteous Mammon, who will commit to your trust the true riches? and if ye
have not been faithful in that which is another man's, who will give you that
which is your own: That which is another man's, that is the same with the
unrighteous Mammon; who shall give unto you that which is your own? spiritual
things are our own; the things of God are here called our own; properly that is
our own which we can carry up and down with us, omnia mea mecum porto, that is
our own which we can carry away with us, out of the world with us, that is truly
our own: But now, as for the things of this world, they have wings, yea Solomon
says, they make themselves wings: If you clip their wings they will grow
again; they make themselves wings, and fly away; and they have the wing of an
Eagle, strong wings for to fly away. Now if that the things of this world be so
our own, as if they were not our own, why should we not use the world, as if we
used it not?

Secondly, If the things of this world be, and are as if they were not, why
should we not use them as if we used them not? In the 23 of the Proverbs,
Solomon says, that they are not, why should thou let thine eyes fly upon
that which is not. They are not, and if that they be as if they were not, why
should we not use them as if we used them no?

Thirdly, If it be not in the power of any creature in this world for to help
us, or to hurt us, to do either good or evil to us, why then should we not use
the world as if we used it not? you know, Psa. 62. 10. If riches increase, set
not your hearts upon them; why, God has spoken once, twice, and I heard it,
that power belongs to God: It Is not in the power of riches, or any creature in
the world, to do us either hurt or help. In Isa. 41. its made Gods Prerogative;
Show the things that are to come hereafter, v. 23. That we may know that ye are
Gods, do good, or do evil; do good, or do evil: if ye will show your selves O
ye Idols to be Gods, then do good, or do evil; this is Gods great Prerogative,
to help, or to hurt, its Gods prerogative, it is not in the power of any
creature for to help, or hurt; now if it be not in the power of any creature
for to help, or hurt, why should we not use the world, and the things thereof,
as if we used them not?

Fourthly, We are so to use the world, and the things thereof, as they are; why
now truly there is nothing in this world that is either good or evil morally,
but as it is used; prosperity in it self is not good, not morally good;
adversity in it self is not evil, it is not morally evil; all the things of this
world are but indifferent, neither good nor evil in themselves, but as they are
used: Thus then, if all the things of this world are but in their own nature
indifferent, neither good nor evil, why should not our hearts be carried out
indifferently toward them, and so to use them, as if we used them not?

All the things of this world, they are but to serve a turn, they are not to be
enjoyed for themselves, only for to serve a turn; there is nothing that you
have to deal withal, but is merely for to serve a turn; Clothes are but to
serve a turn, to cover nakedness; good meat and drink is but to serve a turn,
to serve our hunger, and our thirst; money, and houses, and lands, are all but
to serve a turn, only God is to be enjoyed; God is not for to serve a turn, but
all the things of this world, they are only for to serve a particular turn: The
Schoolmen therefore have a handsome speech of a worldly man, they deforibe him,
He does enjoy what he should use, and he does use what he should enjoy: God is
to be enjoyed, and he uses him; the world is to be used, and he enjoys that:
but it is God alone that is to be enjoyed for himself; all things here are but
to serve a turn, and therefore why should we not use the world as if we used it
not.

Fifthly, If the world do use us, as if it used us not, and if the world do
care for us, as if it cared not for us, why should not we use the world as if
we used it not? Paul reasons after this manner, in Gal. 6. 14. God forbid that
I should glory, save in the Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom (or
whereby) the world is crucified unto me; and I unto the world. The world looks
upon me as a man hanged, crucified, hanged out of the way, why truly I look
upon the world so too, says he; the world looks upon me as a dry leaf, and I
look upon the world as a dry leaf. Thus now it is, the world cares for us, as
if it cared not for us, and the world uses us, as if it used us not; and
therefore why should not we use the world as if we used it not.

Obj. I but Solomon says, Whatsoever thou find in thine hand to do, do it
with all thy might.

Ans. True, and it is in our band to use the world, as if we used it not; and
therefore this we are to do with all our might, even to use the world as if we
used it not: And so I have done with the second thing; though a good man may
make use of the world, and the things thereof, yet he is to use the world, as
if he used it not.

3. I but then thirdly, what are those particular concernments wherein we are
to use the world as if we used it not? why, the Apostle here does instance in
four.

In the matter of our Relations; it remains that they that have wives, be as
though they had none.

In the matter of our grief; And they that weep, as though they wept not.

In the matter of our joy; And they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not.

And in the matter of our p^ssessions; And they that buy, as though they
possessed not. I shall run through them briefly, that we may have the clear
understanding of the case, and the matter before us.

First, As for the matter of our Relations, says the Apostle, It remains,
that both they that have wives, be as though they had none: A man may use his
Relations, as if he had none; His Relations:

Why, but is not a man to provide for his wife, and children, and family?

Yes, he is worse than an Infidel that provideth not for his Wife, and for his
Family, for his Relations. But when a man has Relations, he is very apt to be
lost therein; a man may be drunk with his own Bear or Wine: I have married a
Wife, and I cannot come; therefore he is to use his Relations as ^f he had
none, in regard of his care to please God; as diligent in frequenting the means
of grace, as if he had no Relations: For, says he, v. 32. But I would have you
without carefulness, he that is unmarried, cares for the things that belong to
the Lord, how he may please the Lord: He that is married, cares for the things
that are of the world, how he may please his wife. In reference therefore unto
the pleasing of God, frequenting of the means of grace, let him that has
Relations be as if he had none, hindered no more by them, than if he had none.

Let him be as zealous for the truth, as if he had none.

Let him be as apt, and ready to suffer for the Cause of Christ, as if he had
none: We are apt to boggle at sufferings, because of our Relations; What shall
become of my wise and children? What shall become of my Family? It was a Speech
therefore of Origin, when he was young, unto his Father, when his Father was to
go and suffer Martyrdom for the Cause of Christ; O my Father, says he, O my
Father, Take heed that you do not bauk this suffering for my sake, that you may
provide for me. We are very apt to bauk s^fferings for the Cause of Christ,
upon the account of our Family, and upon the account of our Relations; but now,
let him that has Relations be as if he had none, frequenting and using of the
means of grace, praying, reading, hearing, as if he had none; as zealous for
the truth, as if he had none; as apt and ready to suffer for the Cause of
Christ, as if he had none. Thus we are to use the world as if we used it not,
in reference to this concernment: (I must but touch upon things.)

Secondly, As for the matter of grief, says the Apostle, And they that weep,
as though they wept not. It Is lawful to grieve and weep, not only for our sins,
but for the misery of the times: O that my head were waters, and that mine eyes
were a fountain of tears, that I could weep day and night for the slaughters.
Mine eyes run down with rivers of tears, says David, because they keep not thy
Law. God has a bottle to keep all these Pearls in; the tears of his people,
they are precious, and too precious to be lost: As God has a bag for all the
sins of the wicked to keep them in, so he has a bottle for all the tears of
the Saints; but yet we must not weep too much, but grieve as if we grieved not.

Or otherwise it will argue that we have too much love to the world: Love is
the cause of grief; the more passionately you grieve for any outward thing, the
more abundantly you show your love thereunto, and it will in some measure
reflect upon your God: It Is a considerable speech that of a child, when the
mother of the child had used to say upon al her losses, Yet my God lives; when
she had lost a child, she would say, yet my God's alive; when she had lost a
friend, yet my God's alive: At last, loosing a child she loved much, she wept
very much, and another of her children came unto her and said, Mother, is your
God dead? Mother, is not your God alive? She used to say still, yet my God's
alive, and now weeping much, and not saying so, the child said, Mother, is not
your God alive? Truly this grieving much, it has such a reflection as this, Is
not your God alive? Christians, is not your God alive? you know what the
Apostle says, Rejoice in the Lord evermore, and again I say rejoice.

If that we are to rejoice in the Lord evermore, then surely we are to weep as
if we wept not, and to grieve as if we grieved not: And thus we are to use the
world as if we used it not, in reference to this concernment, the matter of our
grief.

Thirdly, As for the matter of our joy, the Apostle says, And let them that
rejoice, be as though they rejoiced not: it is lawful to rejoice, even in the
things of the world, Rejoice in the wife of thy youth. God has provided
several delightful objects for every sense; there is Music for hearing, and
there are smells, and sweet smells for smelling, sweet things for the taste:
God has so ordered things, that every Sense has its delightful object; surely
therefore it is lawful to take pleasure, and to rejoice in the things of this
world.

But still, though we do rejoice in the things of this world, we must rejoice
as if we rejoiced not.

For why should I joy much in that which I cannot enjoy? why now the things of
this world I may use, but I cannot enjoy them, God only is to be enjoyed.

Who will rejoice with all his might in the blaze of a Wisp? a Wisp of Straw
set on fire makes a great blaze, but it ends in black ashes: who rejoices much
in the blaze of the Wisp? why truly the best outward thing, it is but the blaze
of a Wisp, and if we don't take heed, it ends in black ashes.

Who would rejoice much in that which is but a Tanquam, a quasi of good, which
he cannot satisfy his soul in? there is a crack in the finest Crystal Glass
in this world, a crevice: what outward thing is there in all the world, but
has some crevice in it? what beauty, but has some Wart grows upon the face
on it? Our Savior Christ was at a Wedding, and when he was there the Wine was
spent; why? for to show that in the midst of all our fullness and joy, there is
a deficiency, and there is a want, bottles will be empty.

And if it be the great work of a Christian for to moderate his affections,
then should we not grieve as if we grieved not, and rejoice as if we rejoiced
not.

The great work of a Christian, what is it? why, the great work of a Christian
is not for to know much; the great work of a Christian is not to have much; he
is a Christian indeed that grieves as if he grieved not, and rejoices as if he
rejoiced not, that moderates his affections, that has the command and the true
moderation of his affections, I, he is a Christian indeed. So that thus then we
see, that we are to use the world as if we used it not, in reference to this
concernment, the matter of our joy.

Fourthly, As for the matter of our possessions, the Apostle says, And let
them that buy, be as though they possessed not: it is lawful, and very lawful to
buy and sell, and to possess.

For else there would be no propriety, but there is a propriety in nature, the
last Commandment, Thou shall not covet thy Neighbors Ox, nor his Ass, nor any
thing that is his: nor any thing that is his: The Moral Law, the Law of Nature
tells us, that there is an his, that is, a propriety; and the Gospel tells us,
and the Law of the Gospel tells us, that there must be liberality, surely then
its lawful to buy, and sell, and to possess: it is lawful.

But though we may buy, and sell, and possess, yet we must possess as if we
possessed not, buy as if we bought not, and possess as if we possessed not: For
else,

How can we be strangers here: it is said of Abraham, by Faith, he was a
stranger in the Land of Promise: A stranger in the Land of Promise, certainly
if a man would let out his heart upon any Land, a good man would let out his
heart to the utmost upon the Land of Promise. What, the Land of Promise, and
yet a stranger to it: Yes, though it were the Land of Promise, yet a stranger
to it.

How can a man be patient in the loss of things; If he be not weaned from them
while he has them. Surely Job was weaned from what he had, by being so patient
under his loss.

And if that good men have other greater things and possessions for to mind,
and they cannot intensively mind both: why then a man must surely so possess,
as if he possessed not. Why now a good man has higher and greater possessions
to mind, and inheritance Incorruptible, undefiled, that fades not away,
reserved in the Heavens: And both he cannot mind together, but he must love the
one and hate the other. The intention about the one, must be remisness about
the other. Then surely it is our duty to use the World as if we used it not, in
reference unto this concernment; namely, this concernment of our possessions.
And so you see the thing now cleared by these four instances: We are to use the
World as if we used it not; In the matter of our Relations; In the matter of
our griefs; In the matter of our Joys; And in the matter of our possessions.

Well, but then fourthly. In the fourth place: What is there in these Reasons
of the Apostle, The shortness of the time, And the Fashion of the world passing
away. What is there in these Reasons that may enforce this Exhortation, To use
the World as if we used it not.

Much every way (still I must but touch at things).

The time is short. Use the World as if we used it not: For the time is short.

The time of our life is short, it is but short. A great business we have to do
in reference to our eternity, and our time to do it in is but short. Time
roul'd, and trust up as it were into a little bundle; and therefore why should
we not use the World as if we used it not? If a Country man comes to London
upon some business that does concern him nearly in his life, why will he run up
and down the City for to see things? Go and see the Lions, and the Bears, and
not mind and dispatch his business. Or if a Citizen go into the Country about
some business that concerns his life, will he run up and down the Closes for to
catch Butter-flyes, and to gather Cowslips, when all his time is but little
enough for to do his business in? Surely no, we are upon our life, and we are
upon our Eternity, and upon this little spot and moment of time hangs our
Eternity: what shall we ^un up and down catching Butterflyes, gathering
Cowslips, running up and down to see the Lions, and the Bears, and our business
undone, and our time but little? All the time that we have is little enough to
make our Calling and Election sure.

All the time we have is little enough for the preparing for our great change.
The Devil does improve his time upon this score. We read in the Revelations,
that the Devil is come down with great wrath, for his time is short. Shall the
Devil improve his time because it is but short, in a way of mischief: And shall
not we improve our time seeing it is but short? Our time is short, therefore
let us use the World as though we used it not.

But then secondly, as for the second Reason, Use the World as if we used it
not, we must, For the fashion of this world passes away. The fashion of this
World, it is but a Scheme, it is but a piece of Pageantry, it is but a Stage,
one goes off and another comes on. Take the World in the bravest dress, and it
is but a Fashion: And as that's a Fashion to day which was not yesterday, that's
a Fashion to day which is none to morrow; Fashions pass away: So the Fashion of
the World passes away. Joseph was in favor greatly with his Father, and that
favor past away. His Brethren sold him; then he was in an afflicted condition,
being sold down to Egypt: That fashion past away, he came into Potiphars house,
and there he had favor. Well, there he had favor a little time, and that
fashion past away; then thrown into the Prison, and there he was in a sad
condition again: and that Fashion past away, he had favor with the Jailer: And
then he came to the Throne, to be the great Councellor of the Nation; and that
lasted ^ot long, but that past away. What piece of the world is there, but the
fashion thereof passes away.

Will you instance in the strongest natural piece of the World, or the civil
moral piece of the World, or the sinful fashion of the World, or the Religious
fashion of the World, or the comfortable fashion of the World?

First, for the natural piece, the Fashion of the World: what stronger piece of
the World than the Heavens and Earth. Now Read what is said in the first of the
Hebrews v. 10, 11. Thou Lord in the beginning have laid the Foundation of the
Earth, and the Heavens are the works of thine hands. They shall perish, but
thou remainest, and they all shall wax old as does a Garment, and as a vesture
shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed, but thou art the same, as
the Heb. in the Psalms, But thou art he. But thou art the same, and thy years
shall not fail; but as for them, though these things be brusht over a little,
as a vesture shall thou fold them up, and they shall be changed. The nap of all
these things, the fashion of all these things, it will pass away.

Or will you instance in the civil moral part of the world, that fashion
thereof? What more desirable thing is there in all the world than friendship, a
true friend to an ingenuous heart, there is nothing in this world more
desirable than friendship? Will you see how that passes away? In Psa. 88. v.
8. Thou have put mine acquaintance far from me, thou have made me an
abomination unto them. It passes away indeed; an abomination to friends; thou
have put mine acquaintance far from me, thou have made me an abomination to
them. See how it sticks upon his heart; he comes over again in v. 18. Lover and
friend have thou put far from me, and mine acquaintance into darkness. See how
the fashion of thi^ piece of the world passes away.

Will you instance in the sinful fashions of the world? why, it may be, the
poor people of God they are in a mourning habit, in a mournful fashion, and the
enemies of the people of God, they are in a very brave and a gallant fashion:
you shall see how this fashion passes away, in Isa. 51. 7. Hearken unto me ye
that know righteousness, the people in whose heart is my Law; fear ye not the
reproach of men, neither be ye afraid of their revilings, for the Moth shall
eat them like a garment: They are brave fellows, and they are in a very brave
and a gallant fashion, but the moth shall eat them up like a garment, and the
worm shall eat them like wool, but my righteousness shall be for ever. and my
salvation from generation to generation. As for the redeemed of the Lord, at v.
11. But the redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come with singing unto Sion,
and everlasting joy shall be upon their head: They shall obtain gladness and
joy, and sorrow and mourning shall flee away. That fashion, that their mourning
habit shall off, and that fashion shall pass away.

Or will you instance in the Religion piece and part of the world, and the
fashion thereof? You know what is said in Heb. 12. v. 26. Once more I shake not
the earth only, but also heaven; speaking of the Jewish Worship, the Religious
part, and this word, yet once more, signifies the removing of those things that
are shaken, as of things that are made, that those things that cannot be shaken
may remain. Indeed, says he, we have received a Kingdom, wherefore we
receiving a Kingdom which cannot be moved. Indeed the Kingdom of the Gospel it
cannot be moved, and the gates of hell shall never prevail against the Church
of God in the general, but the fashion of particular Churches may pass away,
and be broken. What a famous Church was Coloss in the days of the Apostle; but
O thou Coloss, where art thou now? What a famous Church was the Church of the
Thessalonians? where is the Church of the Thessalonians now? this Tabernacle is
pulled down, particular Churches, though the Kingdom of Christ shall go on, and
shall prevail, particular Churches may be scattered, and the fashion thereof
may pass away.

Or will you instance in that which you call the comfortable part of the world?
What Is that of all things you take the most comfort in? your Relations, the
Husband in the Wife, and Parent in the Child; the fashion of these passes
away: Children pass away, Husbands pass away, and Wives pass away, Friends pass
away, Relations pass away: Thus the fashion of the world passes away; and
therefore why should we not use the world as if we used it not? Pray now, when
a Traveller comes to his Inn, why does he set his heart upon his bed, or his
stools, or any thing that he has in his Chamber? No, for, says he, I pass
away, and these things they pass from me: If you have a fine silver stream of
water run by your door, you don't set your heart upon it; for, say you, th^s
fine silver stream that glides by my door, it passes away, why should I set my
heart upon it? Thus it is with all the things here below; the things of this
world they pass away, the strongest natural piece of the world, and the civil
piece of the world, and the sinful piece of the world, and the Religious piece
of the world, and the comfortable piece of the world, all pass away; why then
should we not use the world as if we used it not? And thus you may see what
there is in these reasons of the Apostle to it force this same, and that is the
fourth thing.

Fifthly, But when may a man be said then, so to use the world as if he used it
not?

Why look, when a man does so use the world; and the things thereof, as he does
walk with God in the use thereof, then he uses the world as if he used it not;
when one man walks with another, he turns as he turns: So when a man walks with
God in the world, he turns as God turns: When God calls to joy, he joys; when
God calls to grief, he grieves; he walks with God, for he turns as God turns: I
say, look when a man does so use the world, as he does walk with God in the use
of the world, turning as God turns, then he does use the world as if he used it
not.

Secondly, Look when a man does use the world, and the things thereof, in
subordination to the things of God, then he does use the world as if he used it
not, in subordination to the things of God.

And thirdly, Look when a man does make it his business for to serve the Lord,
and does the things of the world by his by, then he does use the world as if he
used it not: As if a man does make it his business to get the world, and prays
by the by, and reads the Scriptures by the by, and does good by the by: Now
when a man does make it his business to get the World, and uses the things of
God by the by, then he does use the things of God as if he used them not. So on
the other side.

Fourthly, Look when a man is dead, and estranged from all the world, and the
things thereof, through the communion and fellowship that he has with Christ,
then he does use the World as if he used it not; for we die to the World, by
living in God; I say, we die to the world, by living in God: Why now consider
it, it is one thing for a man to be dead unto the world, and another thing to
abstain from this or that particular comfort of the World, this or that
particular way of the World: Possibly I may abstain from this or that
particular way, or course of the World, because my inclination don't like out;
some men's inclinations don't like of drunkenness, some men's inclinations don't
like this way, or that way; possibly a man may abstain from this or that
particular thing of the world, and yet not be dead to the whole world; possibly
a man may be very negligent of the world, and slubber over the things of the
World, and yet not be dead to the World: A prodigal man is not dead to the
World; its one thing for a man to be negligent of the World, and slubber over
the things of the World, and another thing to be dead to the world, says
Calvin; this Philosophy is in every man's mouth, He is dead to the World, but
few there are that are dead to the World, and estranged from the World, through
their communion and fellowship with God: But I say, look when a man is dead,
and estranged from the world, through communion and fellowship with God, then
he uses the World as if he used it not.

Fifthly, Look when a man can leave and forsake his worldly interest, his own
interest in the world, that he may please others, and be at peace with others,
truly it argues, that a man does use the World as if he used it not: Thus it
was with Abraham, Abraham gave Lot the choice; Abraham was the Elder, and the
choice did belong to Abraham, but he gave Lot the choice, and he parted with
his own interest for peace and quietness: Why Abraham lived by Faith, and he
used the World as if he used it not: Thus should we do, for says the Apostle
in Romans 15. We then that are strong, ought to be^^ the infirmities of the weak,
and not to please our selves: Let every one of us please his Neighbor for his
good to edification, for even Christ pleased not himself. See how the Apostle
presses it; what more ordinary than this? every man seeks for to please
himself, especially in the matters of the World: every man seeks for to please
himself, Christ pleased not himself; would you therefore know when a man does
so use the World as if he used it not, if that you do so use the World, as you
do walk with God in the midst of it: The things of the World in subordination
to the things of God, make it your business to serve the Lord, and other things
by the by; estranged from the World, through communion and fellowship with God:
You can part with your own interest for to please others, that are weak ones;
this does argue then, that you do use the World as if you used it not.

Sixthly, Why, but suppose I do or do not, what is the consequence? Suppose I do
not use the World as if I used it not, What then?

I will tell you what then.

Then you do want this Character of a good man.

Then you are not dead to the World, and if not dead to the World, then not
dead with Christ; and if not communion with Christ in his Death, not communion
with him in his Resurrection.

Then you are defiled by the World, and the things thereof; use the world as if
you used it not, and you are not defiled thereby; but if otherwise, you are
defiled, by all the things that you meddle with, you are but defiled.

And then your hearts will reproach you when you come to die; O when you come
to die, and you lie upon your Deathbed; I had the World, and the things of the
World, but I did not use the World as if I used it not: As the Mother said,
Where Is the Child in the Cradle, when the house was on fire, and they had been
getting out the goods, and pulling things out of the Fire: But at last, Where Is
the Child in the Cradle? So at last, when we come to die, O where is my Soul all
this while? Your heart will reproach you when you come to die; and blessed is
that man or woman whose heart shall not reproach him when he comes to die.

Yea, let me say this farther, you cannot more prejudice the thing you love,
nor wrong your selves more, than by loving it too much, and not using of it as
if you used it not: A man leans upon a stick, and if it be too weak it breaks,
he breaks the stick, and it runs into his hand; the stick suffers, and his hand
suffers: So when we come to lean upon a thing, and don't use it as if we used it
not, it breaks, and it runs into our hands: Look into the 23 of Ezekiel. and you
shall see there how the Jews lovers, and what they rested on, run into their
hands, v. 5. And Aholah played the Harlot when she was mine, and she doted on
her Lovers, on the Assyrians her Neighbors, v. 7. Thus she committed her
whoredoms with them, with all them that were the chosen men of Assyria, and
with all on whom she doted, with all their Idols she defiled her self: What
becomes of her? Read v. 9. Wherefore I have delivered her into the hand of her
lovers, into the hand of the Assyrians upon whom she d^ted: Wherefore? Why she
doted upon the Assyrians her lovers, and I have given her into the hand of the
Assyrians her lovers, upon whom she doted: Why, when a people shall dote upon
this and that, God will give them into the hand of their lovers, and make them
to run into their hands: it is a most prejudicial thing to dote upon any thing
in this World.

And indeed, (to say no more in it but this) how will you be able to suffer?
Suffering times are come Christians; not coming, but come: How will you be able
to suffer in these suffering times, if you don't use the World as if you used it
not? What makes the difficulty in suffering, but because we cannot part with
this or that Relation, or this or that comfort? Oh this makes the difficulty in
our sufferings; do but use the World now as if you used it not, you will be the
more able to suffer; but if you don't use the world as if you used it not, how
will you be able to suffer in this suffering day? Wherefore as you do desire
that you may be able to suffer in this suffering day: As you do desire that you
may not be whipped by your own lovers: that you may ^ot be given into the hand of
your own lovers: that that which you rest upon should not run into your hand:
As you do desire that your own hearts may not reproach you when you come to
dye: As you do desire that you may not be defiled by the things of the world:
As you do desire that you may have communion with Christ in his death, and in
his Resurrection: And as you do desire that you may have this mark and
character of a good man, labor so to use this world as if you used it not.

But Seventhly you will say, What shall we do that we may get our hearts into
this gracious and holy frame, which indeed will fit us for every condition,
under grace? what shall we do that we may use the world as if we used it not.

First, I shall a little farther speak to this, and show you what that man does
that does use the world as if he used it not. And secondly, give you some means.

First of all for that, what that man does, that does use the world as if he
used it not?

1. He will be sure to use Grace in the use of the world, and in all his
dealings in the world, and the things thereof. He is never satisfied unless he
does see that he does use Grace in the use of the world, and the things thereof.

2. He is always ready to give up that part of the world unto God wherein his
affections are most engaged, His Isaac; for says he, God does use to try his
people in the things wherein they do most delight: And therefore still he is
upon that, ready to give up that unto God wherein his affections are the most
engaged.

3. He will be sure to stand at a distance from the World and the things
thereof, in the getting, as well as in the keeping; and in the keeping as well
as in the getting. There are some that are very worldly in the getting part,
and are very free and prodigal as to the keeping. Some are not so worldly in
the getting, but they are worldly in the keeping. A man that does use the world
as if he used it not, he does stand at a distance from the things of the world
in the getting as well as in the keeping, and in the keeping as well as in the
getting.

4. He does not place his Religion in a morning and in an evening duty, but in
his walking with God in his place. Every man has so much grace as he uses in
his place. Consider what I say, He does not place his Religion (he that uses
the world as if he used it not) in a morning and in an evening Prayer, but in
his walking with God. Adams trial did not lie in the Morning and in the Evening
Prayer; but Adams trial lay among the Trees. So the trial of a man don't lie in
the morning and in the evening duty, but in the Trees, and in his Calling, and
in his place. And he does not place his Religion merely in a morning Prayer, or
in an evening Prayer, and all the day after muddling up and down in the earth.
No, he that uses the world as if he used it not, he does not place his Religion
in an Evening, or in a Morning duty, but in walking with God in the use of the
world.

5. A man that uses the world as if he used it not, he is sometimes more afraid
of prosperity than of adversity. All men are afraid of adversity, but a man
that uses the world as if he used it not, he is sometimes more afraid of
prosperity: I am sure of this, he will fear God in prosperity, and love God in
Adversity. Now therefore, would you use the world as if you used it not,
remember these five things.

But secondly by way of Means. If you would use the world and the things
thereof, as if you used it not; then labor to possess your hearts much with
Gods Allsufficiency. In Psalm. 62. If riches increase, set not your hearts upon
them, once and twice have I heard it, that power belongs unto God. And mercy
also unto the Lord: God's All-sufficient, there is enough in God alone, Come O
my Soul, possess your heart with this, Ah, there is enough in God alone. Still
be pressing this upon your own souls, There Is enough in God alone, Gods
All-sufficient.

Secondly, Look upon the things of the World, with the prospective of the
Scripture; not with one of the worlds glasses: Not with the worlds
Multiplying-glass. The world, and the glass of the world; If you look upon the
world with the glass of the world, there you shall find that the things of the
world are called Goods, and they are called Substance, An Estate and Substance.
But look upon the world with the Prospective of the Scriptures, there they are
called Shadows, there they are called Vanities, there they are called Things
that are not. What Is the reason that people are so much in love with the things
of the world, but because they look upon them with the multiplying glass of the
world, and not with the glass, and prospective of the Scripture?

Thirdly, Never fall in love with any condition for it self, but for the good
of the condition. Love not your condition for the condition it self, but for
the God of your condition. I do but name things.

Fourthly, Take all Gods Allarums of death, and mingle those with the
consideration of the death of Christ, Christ crucified. There is never a death
that does pass before us, but its Gods Alarm, and it calls off from the world
and the things thereof. Truly this I must say, It is not all the deaths in the
world will make us dye to the world, only the death of Christ: take Christ
Crucified, and then you will dye to the world. And therefore I say, take Gods
Alla^ums of death, but be sure that you mingle those Alarums with the
consideration of the death of Jesus Christ.

And then fifthly, Afford the world, and the things thereof, so much of your
love, as better things do leave: For Christians, that which is too cold for
God, is hot enough for the world; I say it again, That which is too cold for
God, is hot enough for the world; and therefore afford the things of the world
so much of your love, as better things do leave; for that which is too cold for
God, is hot enough for the world, and the things thereof.

Sixthly, Let the name of the Lord be very precious in your hearts, and in your
eyes; and then you will use the things of the world as if you used them not.
Abraham had a very great regard unto the Name of God, and he would not have it
said, that the King of Sodom made him rich; not a shoe-latchet will he take
from him; it shall never be said, that the King of Sodom made Abraham rich: He
had a very high esteem of the Name of God; O God alone shall have the honor
(says Abraham) of making Abraham rich; it shall never be said the King of
Sodom made Abraham rich: He had a great care of the Name of God: So if men
would carry the sense of Gods Name with them into the World, and the things
thereof, they would use the World as if they used it not: It shall never be
said that a base unworthy way made me rich; no, God shall have the honor of
it, and Faith shall have the honor of it, and Prayer shall have the honor
on it.

Seventhly, Go to the Lord, and beg of the Lord to fulfill his promises: Now
Gods promises are very many this way; but I shall only turn you unto that in
the last of Zech. 20. a promise spoken concerning the latter times: In that day
shall there be upon the bells of the horses, holiness unto the Lord. The bells
of the horses; upon the bells of the Temple? no, upon the bells of the horses,
your Carriers horses: In that day shall there be holiness upon the bells of the
horses, holiness unto the Lord: And the pots in the Lords house shall be like
the bowls before the Altar; yea, every pot in Jerusalem and in Judah, shall be
holiness unto the Lord of Hosts: Every pot in Jerusalem, every pot in your
house, shall be holiness unto the Lord: go to God to fulfill this promise; O
^here is such a promise lies for the l^tter times, let us go to God to fulfill
this promise, that holiness may be written upon all our pots, and then shall we
use this world as if we used it not.

Eighthly and lastly, Consider what a good thing it is to use this world as if
we used it not.

Thereby you shall be able for to want, and to part with the world with ease: I
know how to want, says Paul, and I know how to abound. Truly give me but this
grace, and I will speak with Paul; give me but this grace, to use the world as
if I used it not, and I will say with him, Now I know how to want, and how to
abound: If you use your Relation as if you used it not, you will part with your
Relation more easily; if you use your Land as if you used it not, you will part
with it more easily: Christians, parting times are coming, the Lord knows how
soon we may be parted from the bosom of our dearest Relations, and from all our
enjoyments that we have here; would you part easily when the parting blow shall
come? Now use the world as if you used it not: now use the world as if you used
it not.

Thereby also you shall have more of the world, have it in more abundance, by
using the world as if you used it not, you shall be no loser: I have sometimes
stood and wondered at Abraham; for we say, that the rouling stone gathers no
Moss. Abraham went out of his own Country; God commands him in Genesis 12. to
forsake his Kindred, and his Fathers house: So Abraham departed, v. 4. and
Abraham came, and they went out to go into the Land of Canaan, and into the
Land of Canaan they came, v. 5. And at v. 10. There was a famine in the Land,
and Abraham went down into Egypt. A famine in the Land! why, but did not God
call him thither? yes, Go unto a Land that I shall show thee, v. 1. God showed
him thither, yet there he met with a famine.

Obs. So one may have a clear call from God, and yet meet with a great deal of
afflictions in the way that God calls them to; he goes down to Egypt to sojourn
there: When he came into Egypt, the Lord plagued Pharaoh and his house with
great plagues, because of Sarah Abraham's Wife. At v. 18. And Pharaoh called
Abraham, and said, what is this? now therefore behold thy Wife, take her, and
go thy way: And they sent him away, and his Wife, and all that he had, ver. 10.
Well, away they go; And Abraham went out of Egypt, he, and his Wife, and all
that he had, and Lot with him, into the South, v. 2. And Abraham was very rich
in Cattle, in silver, and in gold: A strange thing, to grow rich in Cattle: How
could he drive his Cattle up and down from Egypt to Canaan, and up and down the
Country? Yes, thus removing at the Command of the Lord, living in Tents, and
using the world as if he used it not; thereby, I say, you shall have the world,
and have it in more abundance.

Yea, thereby you shall have it in a better edition, in a better impression,
the world, and the things thereof, sanctified unto you; use the world as if you
used it not, and the things thereof, as if you used them not, you shall have
them in a better edition sanctified to you.

Yea, thereby you shall have that which is better than all, you shall have the
mind of Christ; And we hope we have the mind of Christ, says the Apostle; we
believe we have the mind of Christ: who have the mind of Christ? says David,
in Psa. 119. Lord, says he, I am a stranger in this earth, hide not thy
Commandments from me: Here Is his argument, in Isa. 28. Whom shall he teach
knowledge? v. 9. And whom shall he make to understand Doctrine? them that are
weaned from the milk, and drawn from the breasts, them shall he teach
knowledge, and them shall he make to understand doctrine.

I Will say no more but this, thereby you shall be happy indeed; use the world as
if you used it not, and thereby you shall be happy: Who is the happy man in the
world? He Is an happy man that can contemn, and be contemned, says the Heathen
Seneca. He Is the happy man in the world, that can use the world as if he used
it not.

And yet again i will repeat that, Thereby you shall be fit to suffer in suffering
times. Suffering times are upon us, and by using the world as if we used it
not, you shall be fit to suffer: And therefore again I say, As you do desire
that you may be fit to suffer in suffering times. That you may be happy. That
you may have the mind of Christ. That you may have the things of the world in a
better Edition. That you may have them in more abundance. That you may know how
to want and part wi^^ all things easily. Now use the world as if you used it
not.

And if nothing else will do, I beseech you take these two Arguments that the
Apostle here uses, and lay them with all their weight upon your Souls, lay them
with your experience. Beloved, this I must say to you, The Holy Ghost does
never spend reasons in vain, the Holy Ghost has no wast of reasons in
Scripture. Here are two Reasons, The time is short. Use the world as if you
used it not, For the time is short. Use the world, for the Fashion of the world
passes away. It Is Scripture reason, and there is no waste in it, and therefore
lay it unto your own experience: And if you desire now to get this holy frame
of Spirit, and to use the world as if you used it not: go and say unto your own
Souls, Come O my Soul, why should I not use the world as if I used it not?
indeed the time is short, Ah the time of our opportunity is short; The time of
our Spiritual enjoyment is short; The time of this life is short. The time is
short O my Soul, and therefore why should I not use the world as if I used it
not!

And come O my Soul, the Fashion of this world passes away: And this I have
experience of, witness all the Revolutions of these later times, how the
Fashion of all things has past away: We have seen in these late Revolutions
the Fashion of this world passes away, and therefore come O my Soul, why
should you not use the world as if you used it not: You have now Riches, it
passes away! Relations pass away: And Friends pass away; And
Creature Comforts, they pass away: The Fashion of this world it passes away,
and therefore O my soul, now use the world as if you used it not. Thus the
Apostle speaks, this is his Argument, and these are his Arguments; And so say
I, Brethren and Beloved, The time is short, It remains therefore, that both
they that have Wives, be as though they had none; And they that weep, as though
they wept not; And they that rejoice, as though they rejoiced not; And they
that buy as though they possessed not; And they that use this world as not
abusing it; For the Fashion of this world passes away.

SERMON. VI. Men's Wrath against God's People, shall turn to Gods Praise.
Psalm. 76. 10. Surely the Wrath of man shall praise thee, the remainder of
wrath shall thou restrain.
IN this Psalm we have a Declaration of the Majesty and glorious appearance of
God, in and for his Church and people. In Judah is God known, his Name is great
in Israel, in Salem also is his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place in Sion,
ver. 1, 2. Where God appears as a Captain and General unto his people, and as a
Judge.

As a Captain and General; therefore in ver. 3. There (In Syon) brake he the
Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle. Thou art more
glorious and excellent then the Mountains of prey. At thy rebuke O God of
Jacob, both the Chariot and Horse are cast into a dead sleep.

As a Judge, at ver. 8. Thou did cause Judgment to be heard from Heaven, the
Earth feared and was still: When God arose to Judgment, to save all the meek of
the earth.

But if God do thus appear, to, and for, and with his people, why does he
suffer the wrath and anger of men to be so much against his people?

Why he answers it in ver. 10. Surely the wrath of man shall praise thee, the
remainder of wrath thou shall restrain. Though God do suffer the Enemies of his
people to be very angry and wrathful with his people, yet that wrath of theirs
shall turn unto the praise of God, and the remainder of their wrath God will
restrain. From whence then I take up this Observation.

Observe. Though there be a great deal of anger or wrath in the hearts of men
against the people of God: Yet God will either turn their wrath unto his own
praise, or restrain their wrath.

For the clearing and prosecuting whereof, two things will fall under our
consideration.

First, That there is a great deal of wrath and anger in the hearts of men
against the people of God.

Secondly, That this wrath God will either turn to his praise, or restrain the
same.

First of all, There is a great deal of wrath and anger in the hearts of men
against the people of God. A great deal of anger; so much anger as does amount
to wrath, for wrath is the height of anger: Now the men of the world, they are
wrath with the people of God, not only angry, but wrathfully displeased, Psalm.
124. Had not the Lord bin on our side when men rose up against us, then they
had swallowed us up quick, when their wrath was kindled against us.

There is not only Wrath in their hearts against the people of God, but such
wrath as does amount to Rage. For as wrath is the height of Anger, so Rage is
the height of Wrath. Now there is Rage also in the hearts of men against the
people of God. Why do the Heathen Rage? Psalm. 2. They Rage.

And there is not only Rage in the hearts of the wicked against the people of
God; but such Rage as does amount to Fury. For as Rage is the height of Wrath,
so Fury is the height of Rage. Now there is Fury in the hearts of men against
the people of God. In Dan. 3. 13. Then Nebuchadnezzar in his Rage and Fury
commanded to bring Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, and they brought these men
before the King, v. 19. Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of Fury.

Yea, there is not only a Fury in the hearts of men against the people of God,
but there is a Hatred in their hearts against the Saints and people of God. For
as Fury is the height of Rage, so Rage settled, is Hatred. Hatred is the worst
of all, it is settled anger, Wrath, and Rage, and Fury. Now wicked men they do
hate the Saints. In Psalm. 24. 21. Evil shall slay the wicked, and they that
hate the righteous shall be desolate. Yea, says David, Psalm. 25. Consider mine
Enemies, for they are many, and they hate me with cruel hatred, v. 19. So that
thus then we see in the general, that there is a great deal of Anger and wrath
in the hearts of men against the people of God.

Well, but for the opening of this a little further: 'Twill be said, what kind
of Anger and Hatred is there in the hearts of men against the people of God?

And how comes it to pass that they should so hate and be so wrathfully
displeased with the Saints and people of God, that do them no hurt?

To give you some account of this: First of all, If you ask what kind of Anger
and Hatred, or Wrath there is in the hearts of men against the people of God.

I answer, 1. It is a violent wrath and anger: proud and violent men are risen
up against me.

2. As it is a proud and violent wrath or anger, so it is a fraudulent and
deceitful wrath: Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half their days;
speaking of the Enemies of the People of God. Their wrath is not only violent,
but there is a fraudulency that is joined therewithal.

3. As it is a deceitful and a fraudulent wrath and anger: So it is a Mortal
wrath and Anger that is in their hearts toward the people of God. A devouring,
consuming, and destroying wrath. They eat up my people as they eat bread, Psalm.
14. If the Lord had not bin with us, they had swallowed us up quick, Psalm. 124.
And they shall kill you, says our Savior Christ. So that this wrath and anger
that is in the hearts of wicked men, It is a mortal, deadly, destroying,
consumeing and devouring wrath.

4. As it is a mortal, deadly, destroying and consuming wrath: So it is a
Blaspheming wrath. How long shall foolish men Blaspheme thy Name? Rabshekah was
angry, and he did not only Blaspheme the people of God, but God himself. Where
is now your God?

5. As their wrath is a Blaspheming wrath, so it is an unreasonable wrath. Why
do the Heathen rage? Why? Why they have no reason for it. Why do the Heathen
rage, and the People imagine a vain thing? It Is a vain thing, they have no
reason for it. The wrath that wicked men have against the people of God, and
their Anger, it is most unreasonable.

6. As it is an unreasonable wrath and anger; so it is an insulting wrath and
anger, whereby they do insult over the poor people of God, Psalm. 137. By the
Rivers of Babylon we sat down, yea, we wept when we remembered Sion. We hanged
our Harps upon the Willows, For there they that carried us away Captive,
required of us a Song: And they that wasted us, required of us mirth, saying,
Sing us one of the Songs of Sion; insulting over them. And so in Rev. 11. They
will make merry, and send gifts one to another, rejoicing over the dead
Witnesses. It Is an insulting wrath and anger that they are filled withal.

7. And then further, As it is an Insulting wrath and anger; so the wrath and
anger that is in the hearts of wicked men toward the Saints, it is an
universal wrath and anger. For though they be angry with one person, their
anger does not stay there, but it rises unto all the party of the Saints.
Hamans wrath began with Mordecai, in Hest. 3. 5. And when Haman saw that
Mordecai bowed not, nor did him reverence, then was Haman full of wrath. What
then: And he thought scorn to lay hands on Mordecai alone, For they had showed
him the people of Mordecai: wherefore Haman sought to destroy all the Jews. So
wicked men, they begin (it may be) to be angry with one Saint; but from that
one, their wrath and anger does arise to them all. It Is an universal wrath
against all the Seed of the Godly: They take occasion from one, and fall upon
all.

8. And then lastly, As it is an universal wrath and anger, so it is an
implacable, an unappeaseable, never-dying, and everlasting wrath, Amos 1. 11.
Thus says the Lord, For three transgressions of Edom, and for four, I will not
turn away the punishment thereof; because he did pursue his Brother with the
Sword, and did cast off all pity, and his anger did tear perpetually, and kept
his wrath for ever. It is an everlasting wrath, wicked men will not be appeased.

This is a certain Rule, The more there is of Religious end that any evil work
has, the more lasting, holding, and continuing is that evil work. Now in Joh.
16. 2. Our Savior says, They shall put you out of the Synagogue; yea, the
time comes, that whosoever kills you, will think that he does God Service.
The Syriack reads it so, That whosoever kills you, will think that he does
bring a Sacrifice unto God. In Exodus 8. 20. says the Lord by Moses, unto
Pharaoh, Let my people go that they may serve me. Now this is the errand that
Moses has: Pharaoh answers it thus, ver. 25. And Pharaoh called for Moses, and
for Aaron, and said, go ye, Sacrifice to your God in the Land. Moses says in
the Name of the Lord, Let my people go that they may serve me: Pharaoh
understands it concerning Sacrifice, and therefore says he, go and offer
Sacrifice unto your God. And indeed the thing Sacrifice has the same word. The
word that is used here in this 16th of John, Whosoever kills you, will think
that he does (...). Now in Ephesians. 5. the Sacrifice that Christ offered, has
the same word, Walk in love, as Christ has also loved us, and has given
himself (...), An Offering and a Sacrifice. So that as good Authors do observe,
What Christ says here, They shall think that they do God good Service: it is as
much as if he should say, They shall think when they kill you, they shall offer
a great Sacrifice unto God. But this is the thing I bring it for, The more
Religious end any evil action has, the more holding and continuing is that
evil action. Now wicked men for their malice, they shall have a Religious end;
they shall think they do God good service: their malice therefore, and their
wrath against the people of God, is never dying, and an everlasting wrath. Thus
you see what kind of wrath it is.

It is a violent anger: It is a fraudulent anger: It is a Mortal anger: It is a
blasphemous anger: It is an unreasonable anger: It is an insulting anger: It is
an universal anger against all the people of God, upon one man's occasion: And
it is an everlasting and a never dying anger.

But then secondly, How comes it to pass that there should be such a deal of
anger and wrath in the hearts of men against the people of God; for the people
of God are a quiet and a peaceable people.

It Is true, so they are: But who more quiet, and peaceable, and meek, than our
Lord and Savior Christ; he lift not up his voice in the streets, and yet who
ever bare more anger and wrath from men than He.

Yea, the Saints are not only quiet, meek and peaceable, but beneficial to the
men where they live. The innocent delivers the Land: Yet notwithstanding, says
Solomon in Eccles. 9. I have seen a sore evil under the Sun, there was a little
City, and few men within it: And there came a great King against it, and
besieged it and built great Bulwarks against it: Now there was found in it a
poor wise man, and he by his wisdom delivered the City, yet no man remembered
that same poor man. Then said I, Wisdom is better than strength, nevertheless
the poor man's Wisdom is despised, and his words are not heard. So though the
Saints and people of God do deliver a Nation, and are exceeding beneficial to
the people where they live, and where they are, yet they shall be despised, yet
there shall be wrath and malice in the hearts of men against the Saints of God.

But you will say, how does this come to pass, that there should be such a deal
of wrath and malice in the hearts of men against the people of God?

First of all, the Saints and people of God, and the men of the world, they are
directly contrary one unto another: they are contrary in their Birth, and in
their Original. For the men of the world, they are of their Father the Devil,
who was a Murderer: But the Saints and people of God, God is their Father.

They are not only contrary in their original, but they are contrary in their
principles. For the one are the Seed of the Woman, and the other the Seed of
the Serpent, whose Principles are contrary. The Seed of the Bondwoman at the
best, and the Seed of the Freewoman.

Yea, they are not only contrary in their Principles, but they are contrary in
their Worship: For the Worship of the World is a pompous and a carnal Worship,
but the Worship of the Saints is Spiritual, Such worshippers does the Father
seek, that Worship him in Spirit and truth.

And as their Worship is contrary one unto another, so their deeds and their
practices are contrary. For why (says the Apostle) did Cain kill his Brother
Abel, but because his deeds were evil, and his Brothers good? Now one contrary
seeks to destroy another. Why these are contrary; They are contrary one to
another, contrary in their Original; Contrary in their Principles; Contrary in
their Worship; Contrary in their lives and Practices: And therefore no wonder
that there is such a deal of wrath and anger in the hearts of the men of the
World against the Saints and people of God.

But secondly, The Saints and people of God, they do not regard the men of the
World, and the men of the World they think so. Now for high and lofty men to be
slighted, and not regarded, this makes them angry. In Dan. 3. when the three
children would not bow down unto the Image, There are certain Jews (say they to
the King) that thou have set over the Affairs of Babylon, Shadrach, Meshach,
and Abednego; These men O King have not regarded thee. Why they think now, that
if the people of God don't bow down to their Commandments, and to their Idols,
that they don't regard the Magistrate, These men have not regarded thee: And
the truth is, Godly men that are the Saints and people of God, they cannot
regard them, For blessed is the man (says the Holy Ghost) that regards not
the proud, nor such as turn aside to lies. God has given a blessing to those
that regard not the proud. Now wicked men cannot bear this, that they should
not be regarded; high and great men of the world, that they should not be
regarded: and therefore no wonder that there is such a deal of wrath and anger
in their hearts against the people of God.

3. The Saints and people of God, they do withdraw from the men of the world,
and do separate from them; Come out from among them, and be ye separate, touch
no unclean thing. Now when we withdraw from men, and from their Worship: We do
condemn their Worship; and the men of the world don't love to be condemned.
Noah condemned the world; And by the separation of the Saints from them, they
do condemn them, and they don't love (I say) to be condemned. To separate from
them, and from their Worship, this they cannot bear. The Saints do separate
from them, and therefore there is such a deal of anger and wrath in their
hearts against them.

4. As the Saints and people of God do separate and withdraw from them, upon
which they are much provoked: So the Saints and people of God do hinder them in
their proceedings. A man does not love to be hindered in his proceedings: the
Saints and people of God, they do hold wicked men's hands that they cannot
proceed, hold their hands by their Prayers. I remember a story of Mr. Tyndal,
that blessed first Translater of the Bible into English, that dyed a Martyr in
Flanders, being then at Antwerp, and much respected by the Merchants there.
There was a great report of a certain juggler that could bring a dish of meat
from any Princes Table, and so set the Table that they were at with several
Dishes, from several Princes Tables: Pray, says Tyndal to the Merchants, will
you let me be at your Supper; Yes, and so they carried him: And when he was
there, the Juggler tried his skill, and sweat, and took a great deal of pains;
but says he, I cannot do it, there is some man here that does hold my hands.
And Tyndal only set himself to this, to believe that he should not do it. I
speak it only to this, that the people of God, they hold their hands. And in
this 76. Psalm, The men of might, they find ^^t their hands. There brake he the
Arrows of the Bow, the Shield, and the Sword, and the Battle: The stout-hearted
are spoiled, They have slept their sleep, and none of the men of might have
found their hands. Why? Why there brake he the Bow and the Arrow. There. Where?
In Salem. In the Assembly of the Saints, by their Prayers. Now men cannot
endure to be hindered in their proceedings. The Saints do it, and therefore
there is such a great deal of anger and wrath in the hearts of them against the
people of God.

5. But then further, As the Saints and people of God do hinder them in their
proceedings, which does anger them; So they do destroy their Gods, destroy
their Idols. Men of all things cannot endure to have their Gods destroyed; how
angry were they when Paul came and Preached down the Gods of Diana? then they
were in a Rage, Oh great is Diana, Paul Preaches down our Gods, and destroys
our Gods. The people of God do destroy the Gods of the wicked, no wonder
therefore that they are so provoked against the Saints and people of God.

6. As the people of God do destroy their Gods, and their Worship, so they do
destroy their sins and lusts. The Saints are enemies unto all their lusts.
Wicked men cannot endure to be kept from their lusts: but if they be hindered
from their lusts, kept in and restrained from their lusts, what say they then?
In Psalm. 2. Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their Cords from
us. These Puritans, they will not let us play upon the Sabbath day, they will
not let us have leave to dance about a May Pole, they put Cords upon us, and
bring us into bonds, and take away our liberty. Why do the Heathen rage, etc.
The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take counsel together
against the Lord, and against his Anointed. Why, wherein is it expressed? Why
they say, Let us break their bands asunder, and cast away their cords from us.
The people of God are great enemies to their wickedness, and therefore they are
so angry; full and furious against the people of God.

7. As the people of God are enemies unto all their lusts, so the men of the
World they are enemies unto the Saints, unto all their ways, and duties, and
graces. The Saints are a praying people: The men of the World are Enemies to
Prayer: Forms of Prayer they can endure, but the power of Prayer they cannot
bear.

8. The Saints and people of God are righteous in their Generation: The men of
the World cannot endure the truth of the Generation, the Grace of the
Generation, the righteousness of the Generation, they cannot endure it.

9. The Saints and people of God, they have, and they are stamped with the Image
of God: the Image of Christ is stamped upon them; and the more that any man is
stamped with the Image of God, the more the men of the world hate him. Why there
are the footsteps of God in the Creatures; man at the Creation was made after
the Image of God, now being raised again by Christ, the very image of God is
stamped upon the Saints, and wicked men cannot endure to see the Image of God;
the more they see the Image of God shining forth in any man, the more angry
they are. But now the Saints, they have the Image of God stamped upon them, and
therefore no wonder that they are thus angry. And thus you see what kind of
wrath it is that is in the hearts of the men of the world against the people of
God: and how it comes to pass that there is such a deal of wrath in the hearts
of wicked men against the people of God.

But then secondly, Will God let wicked men alone in this their wrath and anger
against the people of God.

No, but says the second part of the Doctrine, the Lord he will either turn
their wrath and anger unto his own praise, or he will restrain it. You have
both he^e in the Text; thou will turn their anger unto thy praise O Lord, and
the remnant of their wrath, thou will restrain. Either God will turn their
wrath unto his own praise, or he will restrain it. I use to express it thus, by
the Miller that lets the water run: So much water as will serve his turn to
grind the Corn, he lets it run, the rest he does restrain, and don't let it
run. So the Lord does let the wrath of man run so much as may grind his corn,
so much as may serve his turn, so much as may work to his praise: The remnant
he does restrain, either he will work the wrath and anger of men to his own
praise, or he will restrain the same.

Sometim^s he will restrain it: In Isa. 27. v. 8. speaking of the afflictions
of the people of God: In measure when it shoots forth will thou debate with
it; he stays his rough wind, in the day of the East Wind: Consider that
expression, He stays his rough wind, in the day of the East Wind. The
East Wind is an obnoxious wind, a hurtful wind, a piercing wind, and a wasting
wind. Why now this East Wind may blow but mildly, and it may blow roughly: Why,
says the Lord, when wicked men that are rough, and when they are very rough,
God will stay his rough wind in the day of his East Wind: Though it be a day of
Gods East Wind, and wicked men are very rough, God will stay his rough wind:
The wrath and anger of wicked men is his rough wind, but God will stay his
rough wind in the day of his East Wind: Some times he will restrain it.

Some times again he will turn their wrath and anger unto his own praise; and
for that, I Will only turn to the third of Dan. you see how angry the King was
when the three children would not bow down unto his Image, v. 13. Then
Nebuchadnezzar in his rage and fury commanded to bring Shadrach, etc. at the
19th ver. Then was Nebuchadnezzar full of fury, and the form of his visage was
changed against Shadrach, etc. and he commanded the most mighty men that were
in his Army, to bind Shadrach, etc. and to cast them into the burning fiery
Furnace: what was the issue? God let this wrath go on; but in the end, see how
it turned to Gods praise; when Nebuchadnezzar saw what he had done, Therefore,
says he, I make a Decree, that every People, Nation and Language, which speak
anything amiss against the God of Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, shall be cut
in pieces, and their houses shall be made a dunghill, but there is no other God
that can deliver after this sort. Thus the rage and wrath of the King turned to
the praise of God.

But you will say then, how will the Lord turn the wrath of men unto his
praise? it is a day of much wrath, and of great anger in the hearts of men:
Wicked men are full of wrath and anger at this day against the people of God;
it is good news, that God will either restrain it, or turn it to his praise: But
how will God turn the rage and wrath of wicked men unto the praise of God? and
what assurance may we have of this? and what is our duty that flows from hence?

First of all, If you ask what way God will turn the wrath of men against his
people to his own praise: I answer, many ways; I shall but name them.

First, Thereby the holiness of God shall be the more exalted by the wrath of
men: God spoke in his holiness, I will divide Shechem, and measure out the
valley of Succoth: The holiness of God, wicked men they are but dishclouts for
to make clean the Vessels of the Sanctuary; but their wrath, and by their anger
and rage, they shall make clean the Saints: These dishclouts shall make clean
the Saints: Thus Gods holiness shall be thereby exalted, so many Enemies, so
many Schoolmasters.

2. Thereby also the power of the Lord shall be declared and manifested, by the
wrath and anger of wicked men against the people of God: Is it not a great deal
of Gods power to preserve the poor Saints in the midst of all their rage; when
wicked men have power, yet that the poor Saints should be preserved, hereby the
power of the Lord is the more declared.

3. By the wrath and anger of wicked men, thereby the anger and Justice of God
is justified: Who will not justify the anger of God against wicked men? when
wicked men are so angry with his children; O this justifies the anger of God
against them: why, you are angry with my children, and just therefore it is
that I should be angry with you.

4. Thereby the patience of the Lord is magnified. If one should stand by, and
see a man smite his child; be very angry and wrathful, and smite his child, and
not meddle, would not you say, This man were very patient. So, that God should
see so much anger against his own Children: O the patience of God is magnified,
that can bear with wicked men in this manner!

5. Hereby also the Mercy, Grace, and goodness of the Lord is exalted. The free
Grace and Mercy of God does discover it self, and is exalted both toward
wicked men, and toward the Saints.

The free Grace of God toward wicked men. God does sometimes convert wicked
men in the midst of their rage, wrath and malice against the Saints, witness
Paul.

Sometimes men are convinced by their very injurious dealings with the people of
God. I remember in the Book of Martyrs, there is a story of James Abbes, that
was cruelly handled by his enemies: and when he was dead, the enemy was
troubled in Conscience, and cried out, I am damned, I am damned; James Abbes is
saved, and I am damned; James Abbes is saved and I am damned. Men sometimes
snore so loud in their sleep, that they wake themselves; sometimes men are
converted, Jaylors converted, and Jaylors Relations converted by their
unreasonable dealings with the Saints and people of God.

And hereby the grace and mercy of God is magnified toward his children: O
that they should be preserved in the midst of all the Rage and Malice of wicked
and unreasonable men; here is the grace and mercy of God toward them. Thus the
goodness, mercy and grace of God is exalted, both toward wicked men, and
toward good men.

Again, From the wrath and anger of wicked men against the people of God,
thereby the providence of God is very much magnified. Haman was very angry with
Mordecai, and then Mordecai should have bin cut off; And that night the King
could not sleep. Here Is one providence.

Well then, when he could not sleep, he calls for the Records, (here is another
Providence) and there he hits upon the place where there was mention made of
the good deeds of Mordecai; and so Mordecai was spared. But thus the wrath and
anger of men does draw out the providence of God, and it is magnified thereby.

Thereby also the Faithfulness of God is declared, and magnified, and
manifested. The Faithfulness of God: for God has threatened to destroy the
enemies of his people, and has promised to preserve his people. When the
enemies rage and are destroyed, God is faithful in fulfilling his threatenings:
When the people of God are preserved, God is faithful in his promise. Thus by
letting out the rage and anger of wicked men against the People of God, the
faithfulness of God is magnified. And now is the threatening fulfilled, God is
faithful. Now is the promise fulfilled, God is faithful. And thus you see how
the Lord does turn the rage, and anger, and wrath of wicked men, and the men of
the World unto his own praise.

But then secondly, What assurance have we of this? It Is a very comfortable
thing, in the day of men's wrath and anger, that all this anger and wrath should
turn to Gods praise, or be restrained. But what assurance have we of this, that
it shall be so?

Assurance you have in the Text. Surely the wrath of man shall turn to his
praise. That same word Surely. I but what assurance have we of it?

It Is very certain that God will be fearful in praises. It Is certain, and very
certain, that God will be above wicked men in the thing wherein they behave
themselves proudly. But besides this,

First of all, You have the assurance of Christ's Death and Merit. If you look
upon the death of Christ, and the issues thereof, you may see it, and be
assured of it. Was there ever more anger and malice let out upon any man, than
upon Christ in his death? They were angry to the utmost: And did ever anger or
malice turn more to the praise of God? What one thing was there that ever
turned more to the praise of God than the death of Christ, and the anger and
malice of those that brought him to death? Why now Christ by his sufferings
has merited this, That if we be conformable unto him in sufferings; As his
sufferings, and as the wrath that brought him to suffer did turn to the praise
of God; So that wrath that brings us to sufferings, shall turn to the praise of
God. This is a great matter, and here is much in it, and we may be assured
on it, when we see and feel the wrath and anger of men, if we be conformable in
our sufferings unto Christ's sufferings: Then as the wrath of men in bringing
Christ to suffer, did turn to the praise of God; so the wrath of men, in
bringing the Saints now to suffering, shall turn to the praise of God, you have
the assurance of the death of Christ for it.

2. As you have the assurance of Christ's death and merit for it, so you have
the assurance of the Fathers design. God would not suffer men to be so wrathful
and malicious against his people, if he did not intend to turn it unto his
praise; God has a design upon all their anger: God has bid them to be angry
(if I may so speak) and why? if he had not a design to turn it to his praise?
The Lord bid Shimei curse David: Who was it that bid Shimei curse David? God:
And who was it that sent Joseph into Egypt? God sent him: The wrath, and anger
and envy of his Brethren indeed were instruments, but God sent him. God had a
design upon their anger, and upon their envy and wrath, in Rev. 16. you find
that three unclean Spirits that came out of the mouth of the false Prophet, and
Dragon, and the Beast, they stir up the Kings of the Earth to battle; and they
are the Spirits of Devils, working miracles, which go forth unto the Kings of
the earth, and of the whole world, to gather them to the battle of that great
day of God Almighty. They go forth to stir up men to battle, but in verse 16.
it is God that gathers them: Behold I come as a Thief, blessed is he that
watches, and keeps his garments, etc. and he gathered them together into a
place called in the Hebrew tongue Armageddon: God had a hand upon their hand;
God gathered them, in Mich. 4. 11. Now also many Nations are gathered against
thee, that say: Let her be defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion. Let her be
defiled, here is anger enough, but says he, verse 12. They know not the thoughts
of the Lord, neither understand they his counsel; For he shall gather them as
the sheaves into the floor. He shall gather them, in the 11th. verse, it is
said: Now also many Nations are gathered against thee, that say, let her be
defiled, and let our eye look upon Zion; But they know not the thoughts of the
Lord: They are gathering together against the people of God; and God is
gathering to thresh them: They gather together, God has a design upon their
gathering; God gathers them: So in Ezekiel. 38. you have there the story of Gog
and Magog, that came up against the people of the Lord in a great multitude;
and they came up to spoil: Therefore verse 14. Son of man prophecy, and say
unto Gog, Thus says the Lord God, in that day, when my people Israel dwells
safely, shall thou not know it? and thou shall come from thy place, out of the
North parts, Thou and many people with thee, all of them riding upon Horses, a
great company, and a mighty Army, and thou shall come against my people Israel
as a cloud, to cover the Land, it shall be in the latter days: And I will
bring thee against my Land; Why? That the Heathen may know me, when I shall be
sanctified in thee O Gog before their eyes, verse 11. Thou shall say, I will go
up to the Land of unwalled Villages, I will go to them that are at rest, that
dwell safely, etc. to take a spoil, and to take a prey; But see, the Lord has
another design, Thou shall come up against my people Israel, as a cloud to
cover the Land, it shall be in the latter days, and I will bring thee against
my Land: Why? That the Heathen may know me, when I shall be sanctified in thee,
O Gog, before their eyes: And in verse 23. Thus will I magnify my self, and
sanctify my self, and I will be known in the eyes of many Nations, and they
shall know that I am the Lord. Here Is Gods design, God does let out the wrath
and anger of wicked men against his people, and he has this design, that his
Name may be sanctified: So that you have this assurance also, the great design
of God.

3. You have the assurance of Gods Zeal: The zeal of the Lord of Hosts shall do
this: The God whom we serve is a zealous God. Zeal is angered Love. Now there
are three things that God does love especially. He loves his Truth; he loves
his Worship; and he loves his People. When wicked men do prevail against the
People of God, They scorn the Truth, they defile his Worship, they persecute
his People: I say, these three things God loves in the World. But now God will
not suffer these things that he loves thus, to be always trampled on: for he
is a zealous God, and therefore you may build upon it, you may be assured of
it: That either he will restrain the rage of men, or he will turn their Wrath
and Anger unto his own Praise.

But then, Thirdly, Suppose all this: What is our Duty that does flow from
hence?

First of all, if that there be such a deal of anger and wrath in the hearts of
men against the Saints and people of God; wonder not at it, be not offended
when you see it: it was always so from the beginning: God has put enmity, and
the enmity that God has put between the seeds, shall stand; Cain began betime,
and as Luther says Cain will be killing his Brother Abel to the worlds end: It
has always been so, and do you think there shall be less anger in the hearts
of the men of the world against the people of God now in the latter days: No,
rather more; in Rev. 12. it is said, The D^vil is come down, having great wrath,
because he knows that he has but a short time. The shorter the Devils time
is, the more his wrath will be in his Instruments: Why now we are fallen in the
latter times, and therefore his anger must be greate^ now. Anstin thinks that
the anger, and wrath, and persecution of the wicked, will be greatest at the
last: says he, The persecution of the Primitive times was very sharp: But
afterward there followed the persecution of the Arrians, and that was sharp:
But the last persecution, is the Persecution of Antichrist, and that shall be
the sharpest: And we find in the 11th of the Revelations, speaking of the
latter days, That the Nations are angry, verse 18. And the Nations were angry,
and thy wrath is come. That Is well, Gods wrath goes with their anger: But the
Nations were angry, speaking of the latter days. There are three or four
things that will raise the anger and wrath of Antichrist in the latter days.

There is the Prophesying of the Witnesses: The Witnesses Prophecy, and when
they have finished their Prophecy, the Beast shall kill them; and being slain,
they shall make merry over the Witnesses that Prophesied, verse 10. and rejoice
over them, and shall send gifts one to another: Why, because these two Prophets
tormented them that dwell on the earth; the Protestants and reformed Churches
do torment by t^e^r prophecy. So that there is one thing that does image them.

Another thing that does raise the anger of the Antichristian party ^^ the
world in the latter days, is the separation: For there shall be the greatest
separation that ever was, Come out of her my people, that ye be not partakers
of her sins, and that ye receive not of her plagues. There shall be the
grea^est separation, and that provokes them.

3. Another thing that shall provoke the Antichristian party in the latter
days is this: That they shall power forth the vials: The Angels that come out
of the Temple, they shall have an hand in pouring out the vials: And what then?
Why then, the men of the world, they shall be tormented, and gnash their teeth,
and bite their tongues for pain. The pouring out of the vials is another thing
were-in they shall be instrumental for the angering of the Bestial party. But
then the

Fourth thing is, The setting up the Kingdom of Christ: So you have it in
Revel. 11. The seventh Angel sounded, and there were great voices in Heaven,
saying: The Kingdoms of this world are become the Kingdoms of our Lord, and of
his Christ, and he shall reign for ever and ever, etc. What then? And the
Nations were angry. When Christ's Kingdom comes to be set up, then the Nations
are angry: It Is the setting up the Kingdom of Christ that angers the Nations:
and therefore in the second Psalm, W^y do the Heathen rage, and the Kings and
Princes take counsel together? It follows, I will set my King upon his holy
Hill, I will set up my Kingdom, and the Kingdom of Christ shall be setup, for
all they are so angry at it; I will do it: But this is another thing that shall
raise the anger of the men of the world in the latter days. I but is this so,
that there is such a deal of anger and wrath in the hearts of the wicked
against the people of God? Be not offended at it, it always was so, and it
must be so in the latter days.

But Secondly, If there be so much wrath and anger in the hearts of wicked men
against the Saints, Why should we not all make sure of the love of Christ? O
the Love of God in Christ will weigh down men's anger! What need I care though
men be angry, if God love me; though men frown, so God smile: If God be angry,
and wicked men angry too, how shall we bear that? how shall we stand under
that? Wicked men are angry, and full of anger, and it is a persecuting time, and
wicked men are very angry against the Saints, if God be angry too, how shall we
bear it? Therefore labor to make sure of the Love of God in Jesus Christ.

Thirdly, If that the wrath and anger of wicked men shall turn to the praise of
God, Why should we fear when wicked men are angry? why should we be afraid?
When men are angry, we are apt to fear, but in Isa. 51. Who art thou that art
afraid of a man that shall dye, and of the Son of man that shall be made as
grass: and forgettest the Lord thy Maker, that has stretched forth the
heavens, and laid the foundations of the earth? etc. Who art thou that art
afraid of a man that shall dye? Is that all the Argument? There Is another
Argument before, verse 7. Hearken unto me ye that know Righteousness, the
people in whose heart is my Law, fear ye not the reproach of men, neither be ye
afraid of their revilings: why? for the Moth shall eat them up like a garment:
They shall eat out themselves, as the Moth eats out her self: For the Moth
shall eat them up like a Garment, and the Worm shall eat them like Wool; But my
Righteousness, the Gospel of my Righteousness, and the Righteousness of
Christ, that is my Righteousness, shall be for ever, and my salvation, from
Generation to Generation. Fear not, why God will turn all their wrath and anger
unto his praise. And therefore why should we fear.

But fourthly, If God will turn the wrath and anger of wicked men unto his own
praise, why should we not be contented, satisfied, and comforted under all the
rage and malice of unreasonable men in such a day as this?

Will you say, O but they are not only angry, but they are furious. Why their
fury shall turn to the Lords praise.

You will say, O but they are not only furious, but they hate, and they are
enraged, and their rage ascends up to Heaven. All this shall turn to Gods
praise.

Their great design is to damp the Spirits of the People of God. But they waxed
bold by my bonds, says Paul, speaking of the Saints.

Their great design is to scatter the people of God: But by the scattering of
Gods People shall his truth be scattered. They scatter Gods people, and Gods
people scatter Gods truth; it shall turn to his praise.

Their great design is to destroy the Gospel, to suppress the Gospel: But says
Paul, my bonds turned to the furtherance of the Gospel. Thus God will work it
to his praise. And therefore when you see the wrath, anger, and malice of
wicked men, breaking out to such Persecution; be quiet, be contented, be
satisfied, be comforted; all this shall God turn to his praise, or he will
restrain it.

But then fifthly, If these things be so, why should we not now stand still and
behold the Salvation of God? See what God will do, expect the fulfilling of all
this, it is a day of anger, it is a day of great wrath, there is abundance of
anger and wrath, and hatred and malice in the hearts of men against the people
of God at this day, who does not see it? Well then Friends, stand still; you
know how angry Pharaoh was when he followed after the Israelites; and says
Moses, stand still and see the Salvation of God. So say I, you shall see all
this turn to Gods praise: You shall see the restraining of prayer, turn to the
enlarging of Prayer: You shall see the seeking to suppress the Gospel, turn to
the furtherance of the Gospel.

Now in such a day as this, be righteous in your places, For says the Lord,
say to the Righteous, It shall go well with him. Say! Who should say it? Why,
Ministers say it, Christians say it one to another. Let every man say to
himself. Say to the Righteous, It shall go well with him; therefore be
righteous in such a day as this.

And then secondly, Fear before the Lord: In such a day of Anger be sure that
you fear, and fear before the Lord. Look what is said in Eccles. 8. Though a
sinner do evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know
that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear before him. That fear
before him: What Is that? That is, a man that fears the Lord, walking up and down
in the presence of God.

But what Case does he speak to?

Look into the 9th verse, There is a time (says he) wherein one man rules
over another to his own hurt: and (says he) because they rule thus, and
sentence against wicked men is not executed speedily, but they go on and
prosper in their rule and Government; therefore the heart of the Sons of men is
fully set in them to do evil: But says he, Though a sinner do evil an hundred
times, and his days be prolonged, yet surely I know that it shall be well with
them that fear God, which fear before him. Be sure therefore that you fear the
Lord, and that you fear before him; and the more you fear God, and fear before
him, the less will you fear men.

But then thirdly (and so I end). Now in such a time, give your self much to
prayer. In Psalm. 109. 4. For my Love they are mine Adversaries, but I give my
self unto Prayer. So you read it, But I Prayer. I give my self unto, is not in
the Hebrew, but, I Prayer; the sense is good enough. For my love they are my
Adversaries, but I give my self to Prayer. Now in such a time as this, when
they are angry, and their rage ascends up to Heaven; now do I go to prayer, now
do I give my self to prayer. Now then, if it be an angry day with the enemies,
now go to Prayer. And in all your Prayers in reference to men's anger and
malice, when you go and spread their anger and malice before the great God, aim
more at your duty, than at your safety. Look into that fourth of the Acts,
there you find that they were angry; Why do the Heathen Rage, v. 25. (They
bring the second Psalm to their purpose) And the people imagine a vain thing,
The Kings of the Earth stood up; being at Prayer, at v. 29. And now Lord behold
their threatenings. They spread their threatenings before the Lord: And now Lord
behold their threatenings, and grant unto thy servants. What, gran^ safety? No,
Grant unto thy servants, that with all boldness they may speak thy Word: Its
matter of Duty that they pray for. What then? And when they had prayed, the
place was shaken where they were Assembled together; and they were all filled
with the Holy Ghost, and they spoke the Word of God with boldness. Here was
Prayer answered presently; they Prayed, and in their prayer, their mind was
more upon their duty than upon their safety. They go to God, and spread the
threatenings of the enemies before the Lord. And now Lord behold their
threatenings. And what then? Now grant that with all boldness: Lets beg Grace to
do our Duty. They begged not for safety, but their great request was, That they
might have grace to do their duty. So I say, when men are angry: Now let us go
to God in Prayer, and in all our Prayers, spreading their anger and threatenings
before the Lord. Yet let our mind be more upon our duty, than upon our safety.

SERMON. VII. Comfort to Mourners for the loss of Solemn Assemblies.
Zeph. 3. 18. I will gather them that are sorrowful for the Solemn Assembly,
who are of thee, to whom the Reproach of it was a burden.
THIS Prophet Zephany who lived, not long before the captivity of Babylon:
having Threatened the People of God (the Jews) with that calamity, and exhorted
them to repent, to return unto God, that they might prevent that eminent evil;
does at the last conclude all, with a comfortable and gracious promise unto the
people of God.

First, he threatens, and then promises: Gods threatenings usually do end in
promises; sharpest threatenings, in the sweetest promises.

This Promise here is sweet, and full, and large; wherein you have the mercies
promised, and the several branches thereof.

The cause, fountain, and original of these mecies promised.

The persons upon whom these promised Merces are intailed.

The Mercies promised are very many:

First, the Lord promises to return unto his people, verse 9. For then will I
turn to the people a pure language, that they may call upon the Name of the
Lord, to serve him with one consent.

Then he promises to free them from their Judgments: To bring them out of
their captivity, v. 10. from beyond the Rivers of Ethiopia, my suppliants, even
the daughter of my dispersed shall bring mine offering: And at the 15th. verse,
The Lord has taken away thy judgments, he has cast out thine enemy.

He promises Pardon, Sanctification, verse 11, 12, 13.

He promises to gather the poor exiles; I will gather them that are sorrowful.

He promises to destroy all their enemies, verse 19. Behold! at that time I
will undo all that afflict thee: Thus you have the Mercies promised.

The Cause, and Fountain, and Original of all these Mercies: The mighty
Presence of the Lord, and his Love unto his People, verse 15. The King of
Israel, even the Lord, is in the midst of thee, Thou shall not see evil any
more, verse 17. The Lord thy God in the midst of thee, is mighty, he will save,
he will rejoice over thee with joy, he will rest in his Love, he will joy over
thee with singing.

As for the persons that these promised Mercies are intailed upon, they are
poor afflicted people that trust in the Name of the Lord: The people of a pure
language, verse 9. and v. 12. and here in this verse such as are sorrowful for
the Solemn Assembly, unto whom the reproach of it was a burden. I will gather
them that are sorrowful for the Solemn Assembly, who are of thee; To whom the
reproach of it was a burden.

From whence then I take up this Observation.

Obs. Though God does sometimes suffer the Solemn Assembly to lie under
reproach, yet if his people are fully sensible of that reproach, God will turn
their former miseries into after mercies; And he will cause their future
comforts to run parallel unto their former troubles. For the clearing whereof
three things fall under consideration.

First, That God does sometimes suffer the Solemn Assembly to lie under
reproach.

Secondly, That then those that are true members of the Solemn Assembly, those
be very sensible of it, carry it as their burden.

3. That being so, God will turn their former miseries into after mercies, etc.

First, God does sometimes suffer the Solemn Assembly to lie under reproach:
For the clearing whereof.

First, We must enquire, when the Solemn Assembly may be said to lie under
reproach? And

Secondly, Why God does suffer the Solemn Assembly to lie under reproach at any
time?

Quest. First of all, If you ask, when the Solemn Assembly may be said to lie
under reproach?

Answ. I answer: Look when the Presence of God is departed from the public
Ordinances, or Solemn Assembly, then the Solemn Assembly does lie under
reproach. The Presence of God in the public Ordinances or Solemn Assembly, is
the glory of the Assembly, and when that glory is departed, the Solemn Assembly
lies under reproach: though the Word of God be preached in an Assembly, if the
Converting, Sanctifying Comforting Presence of God be gone out of the
Ordinance, and be not there, it lies under reproach: And though there be
Government in a Church, yet if Gods Presence be not in that Government, it lies
under reproach, and the Church lies under reproach: That Is the first: Look when
the Presence of God is departed from the Solemn Assembly, then it lies under
Reproach.

2 Look when a Reformation has been intended, and cannot be accomplished, but
is staid and hindered, then the Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach.
Disappointment is Reproach, The Children are come to the birth, Isa. 37. and
there is no strength to bring forth. What then? it is a day of Rebuke, and
Blasphemy, and Reproach. Look therefore when a Church or People have been
traveling with a Reformation, and that Reformation proves abortive, stopped and
hindered, then that Church and People, or Solemn Assembly lie under Reproach. But

3. And especially: Look when the ways of Zion mourn, and are unfrequented,
then does the Solemn Assembly lie under Reproach, when the ways of Sion mourn
and are not frequented: It was the case that this Prophet speaks of: he speaks
of the Captivity of Babylon, the time of the Captivity, what then? why says
the Church in the Lamentations, the ways of Zion mourn, and are not
frequented: When the ways of Zion mourn and are not frequented, the people of
God are kept from coming together according unto Gods appointment; Then the
Solemn Assembly lies under reproach: You read in the 5th. of Joshua, that when
they were come into Canaan, the first step Joshua circumcised the people, verse
9. The Lord said unto Joshua, this day have I rolled away the Reproach of Egypt
from off you; wherefore the name of the place is called Gilgal unto this day:
The Reproach of Egypt; What were they not circumcised in Egypt? Yes, the
Children of Israel were circumcised in Egypt, verse 5. Now all the people that
came out were circumcised, But all the people that were born in the Wilderness
by the way as they came forth out of Egypt, Them they had not circumcised. They
were circumcised in Egypt: Why then is this circumcision called the reproach of
Egypt? Though they were circumcised in Egypt, it was at the pleasure of the
enemy, they were under bondage, they were not free to the worship of God; But
now when they came here into Canaan, the first step into Canaan, and were
circumcised; now they were a free people, and had liberty not only for
circumcision, but for all the Ordinances, as they had not in the Land of Egypt;
they could not sacrifice there, but now they had liberty for all; and now the
reproach of Egypt was rolled away. So that look when the ways of Zion mourn,
and ^re not frequented, and the People of God are kept from the public
Ordinances according to Gods appointment, then the Solemn Assembly lies under
Reproach.

4. Again, look when the Saints and people of God, the members of the Solemn
Assembly; Look when they are scattered and driven one from another that they
cannot meet together, then the Solemn Assembly lies under reproach: Therefore
says the Prophet here; I will gather them that are sorrowful for the Solemn
Assembly; I will gather them to whom the Reproach of it was a burden; as if
the Reproach lay in the scattering; and at the 20th. verse I will bring you
again even in the time that I gather you, and will make you a Name and a
Praise, in all the places where ye have been put to shame: So that the
scattering of the members of the Solemn Assembly is a Reproach; and then the
Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach.

5. And lastly, Look when the state and condition of the Solemn Assembly is
such, as that no man cares for it, nor seeks for it, then it lies under
Reproach: Such a state sometimes the Solemn Assembly falls into: This is Zion
whom no man seeks after; This is Zion whom no man cares for: The Magistrate
does not care for it to countenance it: It has no friends for to help it: if
you see a poor man in the streets, neglected, none cares for him, none
countenances him, none looks after him to care for him, and to help him: You
say he lies under Reproach. So when the Solemn Assembly is in such a case and
condition, that none cares for it, nor seeks for the welfare of it: Those that
are in place, especially, then the Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach.

2. But then Secondly, Why does God suffer the Solemn Assembly to lie under
Reproach at any time?

1. He will sometimes suffer the Solemn Assembly to lie under Reproach, that he
may roll away the Reproach from off the Assembly. There is a twofold Reproach
of the Solemn Assembly. There is a sinful Reproach, and there is a penal
Reproach of the Solemn Assembly.

Sometimes the Members of the Solemn Assembly are accessory to the Reproach of
the Solemn Assembly: As sometimes they walk and live so, as that they are a
scandal to the very Ordinances: So it is said of the Sons of Ely, sining at the
door of the Tabernacle, they made the Sacrifice of God to stink. Possibly
Professors may so walk as to make the Sacrifice of God to stink, and are so
accessory unto the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly.

Sometimes again they are exceeding barren, and unfruitful under the enjoyment
of the Solemn Assembly. The Hebrews call the Winter (...) which signifies
Reproach, for (say they) the Winter is the Reproach of the Earth, because there
is no fruit, nothing but barrenness, and unfruitfulness: and therefore they
call the Winter by such a name as signifies Reproach. What a Reproach was it to
Hanna to be barren: barren women accounted it a Reproach, so Reproachful is a
barren life among Professors.

Sometimes again, The Members of the Solemn Assembly, they do bear themselves
out in their sins upon their enjoyment of the Solemn Assembly; crying out the
Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord, and are we not delivered to do all
these abominations. There is a twofold bearing of our selves upon the Solemn
Assembly. There is a bearing of our selves upon the Solemn Assembly, and upon
the public Ordinances in opposition unto false worshipers; So in 2 Chronicles. 13.
Abijah bears himself upon the Solemn Assembly, in opposition unto Jeroboams
false worship: But as for us, the Lord is our God, and we have not forsaken
him, and the Priests which minister unto the Lord, are the Sons of Aaron, and
the Levites wait upon their business: And they burn unto the Lord every
morning, and every evening, burnt Sacrifices and sweet Incense; The Shewbread
also set they in order upon the pure Table, and the Candlestick of Gold with
the Lamps thereof, to burn every evening; for we kept the charge of the Lord
our God, but ye have forsaken him. Thus they did bear themselves, and this was
not their Reproach, but their Faith, in verse 18. Thus the Children of Israel
were brought under at that time, and the Children of Judah prevailed, because
they relied upon the Lord God of their Fathers. They did bear themselves upon
the Solemn Assembly, and their pure enjoyments therein, in opopsit on to false
worship; this was no Reproach. But then there is a bearing of our selves upon
the Solemn Assembly, so as to bear us out in our sin, to cry, The Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord; Sin and live wickedly, and bear our selves out
upon a Solemn Assembly, that we are Members of a Church etc. This is a
Reproach: This bearing ones self, upon the Solemn Assembly is a Reproach: And
says Chrys^st^m, who would not be moved to hear the Blasphemings and Revilings
of the Jews against Christ? But O Christian (says he) take heed thou be not
guilty of the same fault; for he that defiles the Kings Garment, and he that
tears the Kings Garment offends alike. The Jews tear it, scandalous Christians
they defile the Garment of Christ, the Sins are diverse, but the Reproach the
same (says he.) Now then, you see that sometimes the Members of the Solemn
Assembly do bring a Reproach; They are accessory: God knows how to roll away a
Reproach by a Reproach: and God will sometimes roll away sinful Reproach by a
penal Reproach: And therefore he does suffer the Solemn Assembly sometimes to
lie under a Reproach.

2. What if God have some great design and work to bring to pass, which in an
ordinary way he cannot bring to pass, but through the Reproach of the Solemn
Assembly? Suppose that the Lord be intended for to scatter and disperse the
Truth, and the Gospel; how will he do this but by scattering his people that
are of the Solemn Assembly? The Church was scattered in the 8th. of the Acts:
What then? they went up and down preaching every where, they came to Antioch,
and a great number believed, and turned to the Lord, and Paul and Barnabas
stayed there a whole year preaching, and there those that believed were first
called Christians: By their scattering, Truth and the Gospel scattered.

But then, Thirdly, what if God will try his enemies and his friends, both at
once? Sometimes he will try his enemies, whether they will dare to break open
his House, to trample his holy City under foot: Whether they will behave
themselves proudly: Sometimes he will try them. Sometimes he will try his own
Children, how they will ca^ry it in such a day, whether they will lament after
God, how they will be affected for the want of the public Assembly; God will
try sometimes his own Children, and where does God try his Children but in that
thing, wherein they are much delighted? what is that? One thing have I desired
of the Lord, which I will for ever desire, that I may dwell in the house of the
Lord: here is their delight, here is their desire, here God will try them.

But Fourthly, What if the Lord will make the Solemn Assembly more glorious
than ever it was? he has promised to do it, To make the Place of his feet more
glorious; that the light of the Moon shall be as the light of the Sun, and the
light of one day as of seven days: He will make the Solemn Assembly more
glorious: How so? but by bri^ging one contrary out of another: when did God
ever put any great life into any business, but at first he put the sentence of
death upon it? When did God ever give any great repute or honor to Joseph, to
David, to Mordecai, but first they were brought under Reproach: says our
Savior Christ, unless the seed dies, it abides alone, but if it die it brings
forth much fruit, So with Christ, so with the Saints; in the 26th. of Isaiah,
as with himself it was, so it shall be with his, Thy dead men shall live,
together with my dead body shall they arise. Bodies once dead and raised again,
are the most glorious. Now God does intend to make the Solemn Assembly more
glorious than ever: No wonder therefore that he does sometimes, (being this is
his way and method) suffer the Solemn Assembly to lie under Reproach. So then,
you have the first thing cleared in two particulars.

But then Secondly: Suppose the Solemn Assembly do lie under Reproach: How will
the members of the Solemn Assembly take it, or be affected with it?

Why the Members of the Solemn Assembly are of two sorts: There are false
Members, and there are true Members.

Some are true Members of the Church, If ye continue in my Word, then are ye my
Disciples indeed.

Some are false Members of the Church: They went out from us, because they were
not of us. 1 John 2. 19. these latter when the Solemn Assembly lies under
Reproach, they will not be much grieved, but rather say, down with it, down
with it even to the ground, (with the Children of Edom.

But the former, that are the true Members of the Solemn Assembly, The Saints
and people of God, They will be much affected, says the Text, therefore I will
gather them that are sorrowful for the Solemn Assembly, who are of thee, To
whom the reproach of it is a burden: These will be much affected, and very
sensible of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly, in Numb. 9. We read of some
certain men that were defiled by a dead body, and they were mightily troubled
that they were kept from the Passover from one Ordinance, verse 6, 7. Yet the
Solemn Assembly stood: how would they have been affected if the Solemn Assembly
it self had lain under Reproach, in Psalm 42. You see David is much affected
when he was kept from the house of God: yet the Solemn Assembly stood. How
would he have been affected if the Solemn Assembly it self had lain under
Reproach. When the Solemn Assembly does lie under Reproach, those that are the
true Members of the Church and Solemn Assembly, the Saints and people of God in
truth, they will be much affected and sensible thereof, and carry the Reproach
up and down with them as their burden.

You will say How, and Why?

Quest. How will the Saints and People of God be affected when the Solemn
Assembly lies under Reproach?

Answ. I Answer Negatively First, They will not be so affected with the
Reproach of the Solemn Assembly as to be incapable of the Teachings of God.
It Is said of Israel, that they did not hear Moses for anguish: so the Saints
and People of God will not be affected when the Solemn Assembly lies under
Reproach, for they will learn thereby.

Neither will they be affected with the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly, as to
be unthankful for what they have, it is thy Mercy that we are not consumed:
True, The Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach, but it is a Mercy of Mercies we
have that liberty we have.

Nor will they be so affected with the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly as if it
were barely their own concernment: Not barely as their own concernment: It Is
true, they are much more concerned in the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly than
others, but they are not affected upon this account, merely because it is their
own concernment.

Q^est. How then? How are the Saints and people of God ^ff^cted with the
Reproach of the Solemn Assembly?

Answ. First, They are affected more with this evil, than with any evil in the
world: And they look upon this as their great affliction, and are afflicted
more at this than at any evil; than any other evil of their own that does
befall them. You know how it was with the Daughter of Ely, Ickabod, Ickabod,
The Ark of the Lord is taken; Her Husband was k^lled, and she falls in Travel,
1 Samuel 4. 21. and being delivered, she names the Child Ickabod, saying* the
glory is departed from Israel, because the Ark ^^ God was taken, and because of
her Father in Law, a^^ her Husband: and she said, the glory is departed from
Israel, for the Ark of God is taken, she names her Husbands death but once, and
her Fathers death but once; but the Ark was taken, twice, for that she was most
affected. Is there any sorrow like unto my sorrow, says the Church? why? the
ways to Zion mourn and are unfrequented. Thus then the Saints and people of
God will be affected when the Solemn Assembly does lie under Reproach.

2. This affection of theirs will continue with them, and abide upon them: they
will not hang down their heads for a day, and frolic it afterward; hang down
their heads for a day in a Fast, but as it is said of Ahab, he walked heavily,
So they will walk* Says David in Psalm 42. My tears have been my meat day and
night, while they continually say unto me, where is thy God? When I remember
these things I pour out my soul in me, so you read it; but it should be, upon
me: I pour out my soul upon me, as waters poured upon the ground: For I had
gone with the multitude, I went with them to the house of God, with the voice
of joy and praise, with a multitude that kept holy day: My tears have been my
meat day and night, it is not for a day, and there is an end, but day and night:
This affection does continue with them, and abide upon them, where ever they go
they carry it as their burden.

3. Then also they will lay aside their Ornaments that they cannot rejoice in
their former comforts as they did before: And the Lord said unto the Children
of Israel, that he would not go up with them; I will send an Angel before you,
Exodus 33. and drive out the Cananite, and the Amorite, but (says he) I will
not go in the midst of thee: then the children of Israel stripped themselves of
their Ornaments; When the people heard these evil tidings, they mourned, and no
man did put on his Ornaments; For the Lord said unto Moses, say unto the
Children of Israel, ye are a stiff necked people, I will come up into the
midst of thee in a moment, and consume thee; Therefore now put off thine
Ornaments from thee, that I may know what to do unto thee. And the Children of
Israel stripped themselves of their Ornaments, by the Mount Horeb: And Moses took
the Tabernacle, and pitched it without the Camp, afar ^ff from the Camp, and
called it the Tabernacle of the Congregation; And it came to pass that every
one which sought the Lord, went out unto the Tabernacle of the Congregation,
which was without the Camp. The presence of the Lord was removed: They were
fain to go out unto the Tabernacle: The presence of God was departed, and God
said, he would not go with them; and though he had promised them an Angel, yet
they fall a crying and weeping: O the Presence of the Lord with us, else we
have no comfort; and then they laid by their Ornaments: So that look when the
Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach, then the Presence of the Lord is gone from
the Solemn Assembly; and therefore the Saints and Servants of God, will and
must lay by their Ornaments.

4. The Saints and People of God will search into their own ways, and turn
from the evil of those ways that have had a hand in bringing in this reproach
upon the Solemn Assembly: They will search and turn. In vain is the sense, when
there is no emendation. Is it such a day as I have chosen, for a man to hang
down his head? No, To relieve the oppressed, to take off the yokes and
burdens: Reformation: But what is it a dull Reformation? No, but it is a
Reformation lead on by prayer, and fasting, and it is such a prayer as is
backed with Reformation: And thus the people of God are affected under the
Reproach of the Solemn Assembly.

3. But then secondly, you will say: What is there in this Reproach of the
Solemn Assembly, that the Saints and people of God should be so much affected
with it?

What, what not?

Only First, The Lord himself is well pleased with, and the Saints are well
pleased in this sense, in t^^ Reproach of the Solemn Assembly.

God himself is well pleased with it: The Sacrifices of G^d are a broken and a
contrite heart; An hard heart is Gods curse, Lamentations 3. you read it thus:
Give them sorrow of heart, thy curse unto them. It Is not sorrow of heart, for
that is a blessing, but obstinacy of heart, an hard heart, so the Margent; but
in the Hebrew, give them a heart with a Shield upon it, that may fense off the
blow: That when any thing is spoken, they may fence it off; give them a fending
heart, a hard heart; a hard heart is Gods curse: A tender and a soft heart
bleeding over the miseries of the Church, it is Gods Sacrifice; God is well
pleased.

And the Saints and people of God, they are well pleased in this sense. It is
Recorded of Nazianzen, that knowing there would be freedom from sin in Heaven,
he desired to dye: But then remembering that there would be no mourning for sin
in Heaven, nor for the miseries of the Church, he desired to live: Choosing
rather to mourn for sin, and the miseries of the Church, than to be freed from
sin: here was a Spirit. It Is said of the true Griever, he grieves, and he does
rejoice in his grief; A man that does truly grieve, he does grieve, and he
does rejoice in his grief: So that in this sense of the Reproach of the Solemn
Assembly, God himself is well pleased therewith, and the Saints are well
pleased therein.

2. But Secondly, Do you ask what there is in the Reproach of this Solemn
Assembly, that the Saints and People of God should be so much affected with it?

I Answer, There is a darkness falls upon the greatest Organ of Light: The
greatest Organ of light is ecclipsed; all ecclipsed, and the greater Vessel or
Organ of light is ecclipsed, the more dreadful is the Eclipse: The Sun
ecclipsed, that great Organ of light, it is more dreadful. The great Organ of
light for the world, it is the Solemn Assembly: Now when a Reproach falls upon
the Solemn Assembly, the greatest Vessel, and Organ of light is darkened, and
this is dreadful to those that look upwards.

But Thirdly, Then the Name of the Lord is dishonored: The Reproaches of them
that Reproached thee have fallen upon me: And so the other way; The Reproaches
of them that Reproach us, and the Solemn Assemblies, are fallen upon thee O
Lord, and upon thy Name. There are three or four things that God does much
delight in, in the world; his Truth, his Worship, his People, Things God
delights in.
his Name. When the Solemn Assembly is under Reproach, his Truth is derided,
his Worship defiled, his Children persecuted, and his Name dishonored: Who can
behold all these things and not bleed; and not be affected there withal?
That Is a third.

4. Look when the Solemn Assembly does lie under Reproach, then all the People
of God, the whole Generation of the Righteous are afflicted, distressed, and as
a Lamp despised before him, that is at ease: Who would not grieve to see the
necks of all the people of God lie upon the block together, ready to be cut
off? Pray do but mind that place in Esther, It Is said there, that when the
Decree came out upon the Jews, that their necks lay all upon the block, in the
third of Esther, The Decree was given in Shushan the Palace, and the King and
Haman sat down to drink, but the City Shushan was perplexed: The City Shushan,
Why the City Shushan? It Is not said the Jews: What was the City Shushan, Jews?
No, there were a hundred to one in the City, that were no Jews, I, but the
Neighbors of the people of God were perplexed. O then, is the City Sushan
perplexed in such a day? and shall not the Jews themselves be perplexed? shall
they not be affected much with it? Then all the Saints, their necks lie upon
the block. Look but into the Psalms, and you shall see that when the Temple of
God is defiled, The reproach of the house of God, and the persecution of the
Saints go together, Psalm. 79. 1, 2. O God, the Heathen are come into thine
Inheritance, thy Holy Temple have they defiled, they have laid Jerusalem on
heaps; the dead bodies of thy Servants have they given to be meat unto the
fowls of the Heaven, the flesh of thy Saints unto the beasts of the earth,
their blood have they shed like water round about Jerusalem, and there was none
to bury them, we are become a reproach to our Neighbors. I, these two go
together, the defilement of the house of God, the reproach of the Solemn
Assembly, and the persecution of the Saints likewise. Now who can see these
things and not be affected?

5. The Schoolmen say, That power which cannot be resisted, is a cause of
grief. If evil be coming, and I be able to resist it, I am not much affected:
but if evil comes like an armed man, and I cannot resist it, this causes
grief. Now when the Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach, evil comes upon the
People of God like an armed man: They cannot resist it, hear's grief then.

6. The Schoolmen say, All grief does arise from the want of the thing loved,
and the loss of good: Now when the Solemn Assembly does lie under Reproach,
there good things are lost; the Saints good things: There Is the presence of God
in the Solemn Assembly: There Is the Chariot whereby Christ rides into the souls
of sinners: There Is the food of Faith: There Is all good things gone, and
therefore no wonder they are so affected: But

7. Look when the Solemn Assembly does lie un-under Reproach, then the world is
scandalized, and the world's offended. Woe to the world because of ^ffences,
it is an evil thing that the world should be offended. When is the world
offended? when the Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach? aha, so would we have
it: Then they laugh, says Paul, who is offended, and I burn not. We say, when
the sick man laughs, the Physician cries, he is distracted says he. Why now the
Saints and People of God, they are the worlds Physicians to cure them, and heal
them, by their lives, and prayers, and instructions. What do they laugh? what
do they say? Aha, so would we have it. But when the Solemn Assembly lies under
Reproach, then is the world offended: Then therefore is the time for the Saints
and people of God to be much affected.

8. Look when the Solemn Assembly does lie under Reproach, then the Devil gets
up again: The Devil falls by the powerful preaching of the Gospel, says our
Savior Christ. Rejoice not that the Devils fall down like lightning before
you. What fall? what does our Savior Christ speak of the Devils first fall? no
surely, but of his fall by the preaching of the Gospel. When the Gospel is
powerfully preached, then the Devil falls: But when the Solemn Assembly lies
under Reproach, he gets up again: And what good man would not grieve, when he
sees how the Devil gets up again? especially if he have seen the falling of the
Devil before?

9. Look when the Solemn Assembly does lie under Reproach, then you have a
certain presage of a Famine of the hearing of the word. If one could assure
you, that for certain there would be a Famine of Bread, you would be much
affected. Why the reproach of the Solemn Assembly is a certain presage of a
Famine of the word, and the hearing of the word, a certain presage of it.

10. The more that any good man has any hand in any great evil that is come,
the more he is affected there withal. It Is fabled of the Eagle, that when the
Eagle was shot, looking upon her wound, she was troubled: But when she looked
upon the Arrow, and saw the feathers of the Arrow; nay then says she, I am
killed, and am destroyed by some of my own kind, in regard of the feathers; and
this wounded her again, and troubled her more, that she was destroyed by some
of her own kind. And truly, when a good man looks upon the reproach of the
Solemn Assembly, may he not see his own feathers? Yes, This reproach of the
Solemn Assembly have I had a hand in. No wonder therefore that it does grieve
him, and that he is much affected.

11. When the Solemn Assembly does lie under reproach, God is departed. Take
away God, and I am no body says one. A good heart will always say so: Take
away God, and I am no body. Now when the reproach lies upon the Solemn
Assembly, then God is gone. God is so much departed, and so much gone, as the
Solemn Assembly lies under reproach; so much we do bear the badges of Gods
departure.

Do you then ask me, what there is in this reproach of the Solemn Assembly,
that the Saints should be so much affected there withal? There are these two
things, and judge you whether there be not cause, that all the Saints and
people of God should be much affected, and carry it as a burden upon their
souls, when the Solemn Assembly lies under reproach? And thus I have done with
the second thing, that those that are of them: Those that are the true Members
of the Solemn Assembly, they will be very sensible of it: And you see the
reasons of it.

But Thirdly, Suppose the Solemn Assembly do lie under reproach; and we have
been, and are very sensible thereof, and carry it as a burden: What then?

Then will the Lord turn your former sorrow into future comforts: Then will the
Lord return unto you with joy: Then shall you certainly be comforted, and God
will make your after-comforts, to run Parallel with your former troubles.
Blessed are those that mourn, for they shall be comforted: Those that sow in
tears, they shall reap in joy. As surely as now you go forth, carrying precious
seed; the sense of this condition upon your hearts, you shall return again with
your sheaves of joy with you.

But wherein lies this Parallel? and how shall our after-comforts run Parallel
with our former troubles, in case we be thus sensible?

The Scripture tells you; First of all, in case that you have been scattered in
the day of the reproach of the Solemn Assembly: In case you have been
scattered, then the Lord will gather you, your gathering shall answer to your
scattering. I will gather them that are sorrowful, gather, he will gather you
under his wings, as a Hen gathers her Chickens. O Jerusalem, etc. How often
would I have gathered thy Children together, as a Hen gathers her Chickens
under her wings: Gather you, as a shepherd gathers his sheep into his fold, and
he will gather you into his bosom; and therefore says our Savior Christ, I
was a stranger, and ye took me in. The word is, you gathered me. I was a
stranger, and ye gathered me not. Why? because when the Lord gathers, then he
takes us in, and receives us into his bosom: So that in case you have been
scattered, then will the Lord gather you.

2. In case that you have halted in the day of the Solemn Assembly, then will
the Lord heal you. Behold, says he, I will save her that halteth, and gather
her that was driven out. Mark, there is a great matter in it, if that you be
sensible of the reproach of the Solemn Assembly: I will save her that halteth,
halthing notes weakness. I will strengthen you in opposition to all your
weakness. Halting notes an uneven course: A man that halts inclines this way,
and inclines that way; sometimes he bends to the right side, and sometimes to
the left: So when men halt in matters of Religion, how long will ye halt
between two Opinions, sometimes he bends this way to the truth, and sometimes
that way against truth: Now in opposition to all this uneven course of yours,
says the Lord, I will heal her that halteth: Though thou have halted in the
day of the reproach of the Solemn Assembly, yet I will heal thee, and I will
save thee, says the Lord.

3. In case that you have suffered reproach in the reproach of the Solemn
Assembly, says the Lord, in the 19 ver. I will get them praise and fame in
every land, where they have been put to shame. Have you suffered reproach in
the day of the reproach of the Solemn Assembly, have you suffered reproach? I
will get you fame and praise; yea I will get you fame and praise in the very
place where you have suffered reproach, ye in all the places where you have
suffered reproach.

And says he in the last verse, When I turn back your Captivity before your
eyes. Sometimes a man's name is vindicated when he is dead; God vindicates him
from reproach when he is dead: But says he, I will get you fame and praise,
even before your eyes; In the very places where you have been put to shame,
there will I get you fame and name, and your eyes shall see this: So that thus
then you see the Parallel; If that the Saints and people of God be sensible of
the reproach of the Solemn Assembly, God will turn their former Miseries, into
after Mercies, and he will cause their after Comforts to run parallel with
their former trouble.

By way of Application then:

If these things be so. First, rejoice not over us O our enemies; for though we
be fallen, yet we shall rise again. Speak no more arrogantly O ye Children of
man, though the righteous fall seven times, he shall rise again.

2. If this Doctrine be true, what a mighty difference is here between a godly
man, and a wicked man, in reference to his dealings with God, and God's dealing
with him? In reference to his dealings with God, a wicked man looks upon a
Solemn Assembly with an evil eye, and it is his burden, he cries, The burden
of the Lord, the burden of the Lord: A good man looks upon the reproach of the
Solemn Assembly as his burden. The Solemn Assembly it self is a burden to a
wicked man, the reproach of it is a burden to a good man. Well now, as for the
wicked, his laughter shall be turned into mourning; as for the godly, his
mourning shall be turned into comfort.

But thirdly, If this Doctrine be true, what abundance of comfort is here, for
all you that have been sensible of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly? It
cannot be denied, but this day the Solemn Assembly lies under Reproach; then
you that have carried this Reproach up and down with you as your burden, and
have been sensible of this Reproach of the Solemn Assembly, be of good comfort,
the Lord will turn your present Miseries into future Mercies; the Lord will
cause your after comforts, to run parallel with your present troubles.

You will say, this comfort does relate to the future, but I have none for the
present.

Yes, you know it is said, the Lord comfort in all our tribulations; it is not
said after our tribulations, but in them: There is comfort in our tribulations;
Blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the Kingdom of God: Blessed are
those that mourn, they shall be comforted: and blessed are the pure in heart,
for they shall see God: But blessed are the poor in Spirit, for theirs is the
Kingdom of God: So that here is comfort for the present.

But you will say, All this comfort hangs upon a condition, This Promise does
run conditionally. Here Is a great Promise of comfort indeed, but it is upon
condition, being sensible of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly, and I have
not been sensible, and I am not sensible.

No, pray stay a little: Not sensible! It may be you are not sensible of your
sense: As a man may be sensible of his unsensibleness, so a man may be
unsensible of his sense: As a man may not believe that he does believe; So a
man may not be s^nsible of the sense that he has of the cause and misery of
the people of God. When a poor man comes first into the Prison, he is sensible
of the smell of the Prison, afterward he is not sensible of his sense, but he
has a sense still: So now it may be, you have been so used to be sensible of
the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly; that it may be you are not sensible of
your sense.

But I pray tell me, If that you have born the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly
upon your hearts before God in private? Have you not been sensible? If you have
fasted and prayed in reference to the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly: Have you
not been sensible? Our Savior Christ expounds the one by the other. There came
to Christ the Disciples of John, saying: Why do we and the Pharisees fast often,
but thy Disciples fast not? Jesus said unto them: Can the Children of the
Bride-chamber mourn, etc? he expounds fasting by mourning: and if you have been
more afflicted with the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly, than of any other
thing, and have walked heavily under the burden of it: Certainly you have been
sensible.

But whereas you say, This Promise does run conditionally, and this Condition
you have not attained: Give me leave to say to you; Do you rightly understand a
Condition? A Condition properly is that upon the account whereof a thing is
done, and without which thing it cannot be done.

As for example, I sell my Commodity for Money, now upon the account you pay so
much Money, I give you the commodity, and without that I do not give it: Now I
pray, will you say, that your own sense at the highest, is that upon the
account whereof God will show mercy? or will you say that God will not show
mercy unless you have sense? We find that God does return unto his people
first, and afterward he says, then shall ye be ashamed, and then shall ye
loath your selves: it is very true, that he will show mercy to those that have
sense of the Solemn Assembly. But where does he say that he will show no mercy
to those that have no sense? No where; For his love and grace is free: But if
any man be sensible of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly lo this comfort is
laid up for you: Are you scattered? the Lord will gather you: have you halted
in this day of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly? God will heal your halting:
Have you suffered Reproach? In the very place where you have suffered Reproach,
God will give you a Name, and Fame, and Glory. I must say it, lift up your
heads O ye Saints, you that hang down and are sensible of the Reproach of the
Solemn Assembly.

You will say now: But what should we do that we may be more sensible then of
the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly? It Is clear, the Solemn Assembly does lie
under Reproach, and God has promised all this comfort to those that are
sensible of it: I hope I have some sense, What shall I do that I may be more
sensible of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly, that this comfort, and this
promise may come upon my soul?

First of all, get spiritual life, you must be living; A dead man is not
sensible: A living man is sensible of the scratch of a Pin, a dead man is not
sensible of the gash of a Sword: It Is life that makes one sensible: Never think
to be sensible, and to be dead: Therefore go to God for Spiritual life.

2. Then strengthen your love unto God, and his Ways, and Children, and
Ordinances; Dol^r amoris filia, grief is the Daughter of love: I grieve for the
loss of what I love, and no further than I love. If I would grieve and be
sensible of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly, strengthen your love: Love to
the Ordinances, love to the Solemn Assembly, love to God. And

3. Then take advantage from all those occasions that you meet withal, to
enlarge your mourning, and your sense. When a man would leap far, he takes his
rise upon a Molehill, that he may leap the farther. Friends, you have many
rises this day, for your mourning, and for your sense, improve all those rises,
as you meet with any occasion, look upon them as so many Mole-hills, look upon
them as so many rises for to go the farther in your sense of the Reproach of
the Solemn Assembly.

4. then observe what those evils are, those sins are, that have had a hand in
bringing this Reproach upon the Solemn Assembly, and do not meddle therewithal:
Take heed you do not add any of them to the heap. If a man have a burdenupon
his shoulder, that he cannot stand under, and you go to lay any more upon him;
(says he) I pray take heed, I have as much on me, as my back will bear: And if
there be company in a Boat, that the Boat be full, and another offer to come
in; O no by no means, the Boat is ready to sink already: Truly thus it is, the
Boat is ready to sink already it is so full. And do you look upon the Reproach
of the Solemn Assembly as your burden; O then, take notice what it was that
brought the Reproach, and take heed of that.

5. Take heed of the immoderate use of any creature comfort. Friends, let me
say this to you; the more your hearts do soak into the comfort of the
creatures, the less cause you will have of the Reproach of the Solemn
Assemblies: The more your hearts soak into the comforts of your own house, the
less sensible you will be of the Reproach of Gods House: So that take heed of
the immoderate use of any creature comfort that is before you.

To end all,

Above all things strengthen your Faith: for although Sense be an enemy to
Faith, Faith is a friend to Sense; especially sense of sin, and sense of the
Churches miseries. The more you look upon the fullness, and the freeness, and
the certainty of the Promise of deliverance, the more your Faith will be
strengthened. Now this promise of deliverance here, is full, is free, it is
large, it is repeated again, and again; In the fourth of Micah you have the same
promise, and its there repeated again and again.

Why then should you not say thus? Well through the grace of God, though I be
sensible of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly; yet I will believe for
deliverance, and though I do believe for deliverance, yet I will be sensible
through grace, of the Reproach of the Solemn Assembly. Do so; only let your
Faith be the Mother unto this sense; therefore take this Promise, read it over,
work it, chafe it upon your hearts much when you are alone. I conclude reading
it: Says the Lord hare, I will gather them that are sorrowful for the Solemn
Assembly, who are of thee, to whom the Reproach of it was a burden: Behold, at
that time, I will undo all that afflict thee, and I will save her that halteth,
and gather her that was driven out: And I will get them Praise and Fame in
every Land where they have been put to shame: At that time will I bring you
again, even in the time that I gather you, for I will make you a Name, and a
Praise among all people of the Earth, when I turn back your Captivity before
your eyes, says the Lord.

SERMON. VIII. The evil of Unbelief, in departing from God.
Heb. 3. 12. Take heed Brethren, least there be in any of you an evil heart of
Unbelief, in departing from the Living God.
IN these words three things are the most considerable.

A great Disease that Christians are subject to, to depart from God.

The cause of that Disease, an evil heart of unbelief.

The cure of that Disease, or the remedy against it; and that is, watchfulness,
or taking heed. Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of
unbelief, in departing from the living God.

The Disease is great indeed, a disease common unto the Children of men to
depart from God.

And the Disease is very dangerous; for else, why should we take heed thereof?
I shall speak something to all these, and not so much as to single out any
Doctrine: But thus from the first.

It is a very dangerous thing to depart from God.

Q. When may a man be said to depart from God, or a people said to depart from
God: And what is the danger of it?

A. For answer, There is a total departing from God, and a partial departing
from God; every sin that we do commit is a departing from God. For what is sin,
but an Avertency from the Creator, and a Convertency to the Creature?

A total departure, there is, and that is twofold, either total in regard of
the object, or total in regard of the subject.

A man does totally depart from God Objective, when he does depart from all the
truths and ways of God, and turns Heathen.

But Subjective, a man does totally depart from God, when he does with his
whole heart and soul depart from the Lord, though he may keep many truths; as a
man that breaks in his outward estate, he may keep some thing, and yet be
broken: So spiritually, a man may break and depart from God, and yet may keep
many truths. Now it is this totally departing that is here aimed at; and it is
a dangerous thing, either totally or partially: But especially a dangerous
thing to depart from the Lord totally.

Now that is the Question: When may a man be said to depart from God?

Look when a man does depart from the Service and the Worship of God, then he
departs from God. In Isa. 65. 11. But ye are they that forsake the Lord, that
forget my holy mountain: When men do forget the Holy Mountain, the Worship and
Service of God, and depart from that, then they depart from, and forsake the
Lord: And

2. Look when a man does depart from an holy Conversation wherein he has walked
before, then he is said to depart from God, Job 6. 14. But he forsakes the
fear of the Almighty: To him that is afflicted, pity should be showed from his
Friend, but he forsakes the fear of the Almighty: It Is not said, he forsakes
the Almighty, but he forsakes the fear of the Almighty, which is all one: When
a man does forsake the fear of the Almighty; the good ways of God, a holy and a
good Conversation wherein he has walked before, then he is said to depart from
God: And

3. Look when a man and in time of danger and trouble, not so much trust unto
the Lord, as unto an arm of flesh for safety and deliverance, then he is said
to depart from God, Jer. 17. 5. Thus says the Lord, Cursed be the man that
trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm, and whose heart departs from the
Lord: For a man in time of trouble to rest upon an arm of flesh, and not upon
the Lord himself. Why, this is to depart from God in Scripture Language.

Now it is a dangerous thing so to do.

For thereby a man does depart from his life, in departing from The danger of
departing from God.
God, he does depart from his own life: For God is a Living God, says the Text
here: Take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of Unbelief, in
departing from the Living God: Departing from God, then a man does depart from
his life: Take away God and I am no body says one: A true speech, take away
the Living God, and where is our life?

2. Thereby also a man does depart from his own Prosperity, 2 Chronicles. 26. 5.
It Is said of Uzziah, As long as he sought the Lord, God made him to prosper:
Departing then from the Lord, is a departing from a man's own prosperity.

3. Thereby also in departing from God, a man does depart from his Refuge and
shelter in the time of Adversity: As he does depart from his own prosperity, so
by departing form God, A man does depart from his shelter, and Covert, and
Sanctuary in the time of adversity. You know what God has said, I will be a
little Sanctuary unto you: In the want of a Sanctuary, God will be a Sanctuary
to his people, Fear not their fear, nor be afraid, sanctify the Lord of Hosts
himself, and let him be your fear, and let him be your dread, and he shall be
for a Sanctuary unto you: A hiding place, a shelter in the time of a storm:
When a man departs from God, then he departs from his Sanctuary, from his
relief and shelter in the day of his adversity.

4. Thereby also a man does depart from his own Comfort, from all his Comforts:
Take away the Sun, and it is not all the Torches in the Land can make a day, or
can give day light: God is the Father of Mercy, and the God of all Consolation;
depart therefore from the Lord, and we depart from all our Consolation, we
depart from all our Comfort.

5. Thereby also in departing from the Lord, a man does depart from his own
Being, and his own Mercy: Forsakes his own Mercies, and cleaves unto lying
vanities. The name of God you know is I am, I am that I am: Who is
Allsufficient? I am says God: Who is gracious? I am says God. The name of God
is, I am, the name of the Creature is, I am not: In departing therefore from
the Lord, a man does depart from his own being: In him we live, and move, and
have our being, departing from the Lord, we depart from all: Surely it is a very
dangerous thing then to depart from God.

2. Now in the second place, The cause of this disease is Unbelief: Unbelief is
the Root of Apostasy, Infidelity is the ground of Apostasy, an unbelieving
heart is the cause of this departing this God.

Here are two things:

1. That an unbelieving heart, is an evil heart.

Secondly, That unbelief is the cause and root of this Apostasy, or departing
from God.

As for the first, I shall clear it by several particulars; and but name them.

An unbelieving heart is an evil heart, for it is an hard heart; and therefore
you have it in the following words, Least any of you be hardened through the
deceitfulness of sin: What is an hard heart? we are generally mistaken about an
hard heart; we think ordinarily that when a man's heart is straightened in duty,
then his heart is hard: No, a man may be straightened in duty, and yet his heart
may be soft: But a thing is said to be hard when it don't yield: Soft when it
does yield. Touch hard wax and it yields not, touch soft wax and it yields, and
takes the impression: A soft heart yields unto Gods impressions; a hard heart
yields not, but resists and contradicts: So does an unbelieving heart: An
unbelieving heart is a contradicting, resisting, an unyielding heart; and
therefore properly an unbelieving heart is a hard heart.

2. As an unbelieving heart is an hard heart, so so an unblieving heart is an
unclean heart: For faith purifies the heart, and therefore where the heart is
unbelieving, the heart is unpurified, and so is unclean: An unbelieving heart
is an unclean heart.

3. As an unbelieving heart is an unclean heart, so it is a proud heart. You
know what the Prophet Hab. says, in his second Chapter, Behold, his soul which
is lifted up is not upright in him, but the just shall live by Faith: So then,
an unbelieving heart also is a proud heart.

4. As an unbelieving heart is a proud heart, so it is a froward, peevish,
fretful heart: Faith and fretting are opposed, in Psalm. 37. Fret not thy self
because of evil doers, trust in the Lord, and do good: Commit thy way unto him,
and trust in him, verse 5. Rest in the Lord, and wait patiently for him, fret
not thy self because of him who prospers in his way, ver. 7. Faith and
fretting are opposed. How did the people of Israel murmur in the Wilderness?
and why? but because of their unbelief? Froward, and fretful, and murmuring. An
unbelieving heart is a fretting froward heart.

5. As it is a fretting and froward heart, so an unbelieving heart is a rash
foolish heart, and will put one upon doing foolish things. It Is rash, faith
makes not haste, but unbelief makes haste, I said in my haste I am c^st out of
thy sight: That Is unbelief, I said in my haste, all men are Liars, that is
unbelief: What a foolish thing it was for David to scrabble on the door, and
let fall his spittle, and fain himself mad? It was his unbelief that did it: An
unbelieving heart, is a rash, sudden, and a foolish heart.

6. As it is a rash and a foolish heart, so it is a doubting, wavering,
staggering heart: It Is said of Abraham, that he staggered not through unbelief:
It seems then, that as Drunkenness will make a man stagger and reel too and
fro, so unbelief will make a man stagger and reel too and fro: A doubting,
wavering, unsettel'd, staggering heart, is an unbelieving heart.

7. As it is a doubting, staggering heart, so it is an undutiful, and an
unserviceable heart: For it is Faith that is the great performer of Duties.
What is duty, but faith Incarnate? what are works, but faith Incarnate? Faith
is a friend to prayer, and prayer is a friend to faith. You may see how they
are twisted together, and one walks by another. In the third Psalm, David being
in very great distress, he believes, ver. 3. But thou O Lord art a shield for
me, my glory, and the lifter up of mine head: Why then he prays, ver. 4. I
cried unto the Lord with my voice: Then he believes, ver. 5. I laid me down and
slept, ver. 6. I will not be afraid of ten thousands of people that have set
themselves against me round about: Then he prays at the 7 ver. Arise O Lord,
save me O my God: He prays, and he believes, and he believes, and he prays.
Prayer is a friend to says, and faith is a friend to prayer: But an
unbelieving heart, is an undutiful heart, an unserviceable heart, it is an
unpraying heart.

8. As an unbelieving heart is an undutiful heart, and an u^serviceable heart:
So it is a sad, and a discouraged heart. Why art thou cast down O my soul? and
why art thou so disquieted within me? Hope, wait, trust in the Lord; And that is
the way to take off discouragements: But a heart full of unbelief, is a heart
full of discouragement.

9. As it is a sad and disconsolate heart, so an unbelieving heart is a
dishonouring heart: By Faith we honor the power of God, the grace of God, the
All Sufficiency of God: He that believes not, makes God a Liar, says the
Apostle, That God is not faithful: Faith honors the faithfulness of God, but
he that believes not makes God a Liar: It Is a God dishonouring sin.

10. And to say no more in it but this: As it is a God dishonouring sin, so an
unbelieving heart is the heart that God will punish with the most severity: We
may see how the Lord punished it in his own people, when they were in the
Wilderness, and they sinned through unbelief, God kept them out of the Land of
Promise; and why? Heb. 3. 19. So we see that they could not enter in, because
of unbelief: This was in their first time; but now in their last time, they
were broken off. And how came they to be broken off in Christ's time, Romans 11.
20. Well, because of unbelief they were broken off, and thou stand by faith:
Because of unbelief they were kept out of Canaan, because of unbelief they were
broken off in Christ's time: So that an unbelieving heart, and an unbelieving
soul, is such an heart, and such a soul, as God will punish with the most
severity; He that believes not is condemned already: An unbelieving heart is
an evil heart.

But now in the second place, This unbelieving heart or infidelity, is the
ground of Apostasy, for thereby we depart from God: Infidelity is the root of
Apostasy; for as by faith we are united to God, do draw near to God, and are
united to him: So by our unbelief we depart from God. Faith (you know) is the
uniting grace; and so on the contrary, by unbelief we depart from God: But this
will appear if you consider what those things are that make men depart from God.

They are the good things, and the evil things of this life.

The good things of this life do flatter men from God.

The evil things of this life, scare men from God. Now Faith will preserve from
both.

If a man be tempted with the good things of this life: Yet if he have Faith,
he will not depart from God, for by Faith we live upon God in the use of the
good things.

And if a man be tempted to depart from God by the evil things of this life,
yet if he have but Faith, he will not depart from God; for by Faith we live
upon God, and live above losses, and above crosses; so that Faith does preserve
us from both: and therefore unbelief is the root and ground of all our
Apostasy, or declining from God: And we know how it was with the three
Children, what it was that kept them in that evil day; there was the Music on
the one hand, and the fiery Furnace on the other; but between both, they were
kept and preserved, for they believed: It was their Faith kept them from
departing.

But further, If that Unbelief be a Mother Sin, a Parent Sin, a breeding Sin,
the root and cause of other sins: Why then Unbelief must needs be the root, and
ground, and cause of Apostasy. Why now, what is the cause of all our sins but
our unbelief? People do not think so: What Is the reason that men are so
covetous and worldly, but because of their unbelief? What Is the reason when
people are in trouble that they use indirect means to get out of trouble, but
because of their unbelief? What Is the Reason that a Servant or a Child will
tell lies? Because of Unbelief. Unbelief is the Mother sin, the Parent sin, the
Breeding sin; and therefore Unbelief is the cause of departing and going off
from God.

And if so, why should we not all then take heed of an evil heart of unbelief?
That Is the Remedy that is here prescribed for the cure of this disease: Take
heed Brethren, take heed least there be in any of you an evil heart of Unbelief.

Take heed:

What should we take heed of?

Take heed of departing from God, and take heed of unbelief, and of an evil
heart of unbelief, whereby we depart from God.

Take heed of departing from God; For as we have heard already, it is a very
dangerous thing to depart from God. Let me add this:

If we depart from God, who will receive us? If a Proclamation be out against a
man as a Traitor, who durst receive him? And if a man do depart from the Lord,
what creature dare receive him? In 2 John speaking of some that departed from
the Lord; Whosoever transgresses, and abides not in the Doctrine of Christ;
if there come any into you, and bring not this Doctrine, receive him not into
your house, neither bid him God speed: The Kings Proclamation is out against
him, take heed how you receive him; Here Is a command sent from the Lord to take
heed how you receive such an one; I say, if we depart from God, who will
receive us?

And if you depart from God, you will hardly ever return unto him again: you
know the place, it is impossible we should be renewed by Repentance; Faith is
but once delivered to the Saints: If the leaves be off in the Winter, the tree
will grow again; but if it be plucked up by the roots, it will grow no more:
Twice dead says the Apostle: dead by the Law; but if a man depart from God
under the Gospel, he is twice dead: now a man that is twice dead, certainly he
will never recover; twice dead, How twice dead? Not that a man was twice alive.
A man is hanged, and so is dead; after he is hanged he is quartered, here is a
second death; he is twice dead, not that he had a life between these two
deaths, between his hanging and his quartering, but he is twice dead: So a man
that departs from God under the Gospel, he is twice dead: He was alive once in
the state of Innocence, but he lost it, and now he is dead by the Gospel, and
out asunder by the Gospel, he is twice dead, and will hardly ever return to God
again: A man that lives under the Gospel, and departs from God, a thousand to
one, if ever he return to God again.

And if we do depart from God, God will depart from us: God is with us while we
are with him, but if we forsake the Lord, he will forsake us; if we depart from
God, God will depart from us: God comes first to us, but we go first from him;
God does not leave any, but those that leave him first; He comes to us before
we come to him, but if we depart from him, he will depart from us: and if God
go, the Devil comes; the Lord rejected Saul, and an evil Spirit came presently
upon him: therefore who would not take heed of departing from God? But

Secondly, As we are to take heed of departing from God, so we are to take heed
of Unbelief, and of an unbelieving heart, whereby we depart from God; for the
sin of unbelief, and an unbelieving heart is very cunning and makes a deceitful
heart: Therefore says the Apostle in the words following: least ye be hardened,
through the deceitfulness of sin. It has very many pretenses and fair colors.
When they were invited by the Gospel, what excuses had they, all from unbelief?
I have married a Wife, and I cannot come; and I have bought a piece of ground,
and I must needs go see it, I pray thee, have me excused; And I have bought
five yoke of Oxen, and I go to prove them; I pray thee have me excused. No, no,
I have unbelief in my heart, and I cannot come; Unbelief made all these
Excuses, it is cunning heart, a deceiving sin, the sin of unbelief.

And indeed it is such a sin, as hardens insensibly, that we cannot perceive:
You can see the tree, the body of the tree, and the bark of the tree, and the
boughs of the tree, and the leaves of the tree, but you cannot see the root of
the tree. Unbelief is a root sin, and that is least perceived: Now when one has
to deal with a deceitful enemy, that is least perceived, had be not need take
heed? Take heed of departing from God, through an evil heart of unbelief.

Quest. The question then is, What shall we do? These are declining and
departing times, wherein many do and will depart from God, (make account on it)
what shall we do that we may not depart from God through unbelief? What shall
we do, that we may take heed of an unbelieving heart, that we may take heed of
departing from God? (I put them together into one question) Now I shall give
several directions here, and so wind up.

1. If you would not depart from God through unbelief, in declining and
departing times, be sure that you keep close unto the word of God, unto his
appointments; and take heed how you meddle with any appointments that are like
to his: For the more you depart from the word, the more you depart from God;
and the more you meddle with appointments that are like to Gods, the more you
depart from the word. Look into Exodus 30. and see what a Commandment there is,
not to meddle with any thing that is like to Gods appointments, at the 23 ver.
There Is direction concerning the holy ointment, Take thou also unto thee
principal spices, of pure myrrh five hundred shekels, and of sweet Cinnamon half
so much, even two hundred and fifty shekels, and of sweet Calamus two hundred
and fifty shekels, and of Cassia five hundred shekels, after the shekel of the
Sanctuary, and of Oil Olive an hin: Then at the 25 ver. Thou shall make it an
oil of holy ointment, an ointment compound after the art of the Apothecary: it
shall be an holy anointing oil: Well at the 33 ver. Whosoever compoundeth any
like it, or whosoever puts any of it upon a stranger, shall even be cut off
from his people: You shall make none like it. At the 34 ver. You have
directions for the making of an holy perfume, The Lord said unto Moses, Take
unto thee sweet spices, Stacle, and Onycha, and Galbanum: these sweet spices
with pure frankincense, of each shall there be a like weight: And thou shall
make it a Perfume, a Confection after the Art of the Apothecary, tempered
together pure and holy: But then at the 38 ver. Whosoever shall make like unto
that, to smell thereto, shall even be cut off from his people: A dangerous
thing it is to meddle with the appointments in the Worship and Service of God,
that are like to Gods appointments: for any man (like an Apothecary and a
Confectioner) in the Worship and Service of God; To make appointments in Gods
Worship like unto the appointments of God; it is a dangerous thing, he shall be
cut off from his people: Therefore if you would not depart from God through
unbelief, keep close to the word, and the appointments thereof; and take heed
of meddleing with any appointments that are like thereto.

2. If you would not depart from God through unbelief, take heed that you do
not suffer any thing to come between your heart and Gods Commandment or
Promise: We all fell in Adam through unbelief: How came that about? Why, the
Devil got between Adams heart and the Commandment: Adam did not keep the
Commandment close, there was something (a Devils promise) that got between his
heart and Gods Commandment; and so departed from God. Take heed therefore, and
be sure that nothing come between your heart and Gods Commandment.

3. If you would not depart from God, the Living God through unbelief: Take
heed of venturing upon any sin because it is small, yielding to any Error
because it is little, leaving any truth because it is but little or small. There
are some passage truths (as I may call them) in time of War when one Army is
against another, you shall see how earnestly they will contend for a little
passage, a little spot of ground; ask them the reason, O that is a passage: So
there are some truths that are but small in themselves, and they are passage
truths: and if you would not depart from God, and the great truths; look to
passage truths, look to keep your passages.

4. If you would not depart from God, the Living God through unbelief, Be sure
that you lay all your work in sincerity; for the ground that had not Root in it
self, falls away. Take this for a certain Rule. He that begins in Hypocrisy,
will end in Apostasy. Here are some it may be (though but few of us) that are
beginning, and laying the foundation: Look to your foundation, that it be laid
well in sincerity; for if your foundation be laid in hypocrisy, you will end
in Apostasy.

5. If you would not depart from the Lord through an unbelieving heart, take
heed of strangeness with God, want of Communion in private: Enmity begins in
strangeness among men; First, people grow strange, and then they come to hate
one another, and to be enemies to one another: Enmity begins with strangeness,
and truly so it is with God; First strangeness, and then Enemies: If you would
not depart from God, the Living God; O take heed of strangeness with God,
maintain your private Communion.

6. Take heed of taking offense, and of being offended at any of the good ways
of God, or any of the people of God: 'Twas Dr. Prestons usual saying, I never
knew any one decline, or fall away; But first he took offense at some good man,
and then he took offense at more good men, and then he took offense at the
ways of God themselves: And you know it is said of the Disciples, they were
offended and went back: And of the false ground, By and by he is offended; he
does not say, By and by they fall away: Why? Because usually falling away and
departing begins at being offended: Therefore would you not depart from the
Living God, then take heed you take no offense at the good ways of God, or the
people of God.

7. Take heed of walking alone: For you see what follows in the Text, says he,
Take heed Brethren, least there be in any of you an evil heart of unbelief in
departing from the Living God, But exhort one another daily: So that the only
way to be kept from departing from the Living God, is to be exhorting one
another. Then they that feared the Lord spoke often one to another: In evil
days exhort one another daily, in declining times take heed of walking alone.

8. Take heed of Remisseness in duty: Remisseness in duty, will cause omission
of duty; omission of duty, will cause Commission of evil; and Commission of
evil will cause a departing from God: I use to say, the slumber of grace, is a
preparation to sin; and those that slumber in times of enjoyments, they will
fall in suffering times (it is likely) you know how it was with the Disciples
that slumbred and slept at the Mount of Transfiguration, afterward they slept
also in suffering time: Well therefore, if you would not depart from God, the
Living God through unbelief; Take heed of the slumbers of grace, take heed of
remisness in any duty, least remisness cause omission, omission commission, and
commission departing from God.

9. Take heed that you do not stand poring upon your Temptations, whatsoever
your Temptations be: When the Children of Israel were stung by the Serpents in
the Wilderness, they did not stand poring upon the Arm that was stung, and
crying out, O my Arm, O how it is swelled! but they looked up upon the Brazen
Serpent: If they had looked upon their Arm, and stood poring upon that, they had
never been Cured: So now, if in case we be tempted, the way is, not to stand
poring upon the temptation, but to look off unto Christ: If therefore you would
not depart from God in the time of Temptation, take heed of poring upon the
Temptation, look off from that upon the brazen Serpent. And

10. Set the Lord always before your eyes, his All Sufficiency, his Fullness,
his Grace, his Goodness: I have set the Lord always before me, at my
right hand (says David) and therefore I shall not fall: So do you.

11. Possess your hearts much with the fear of God: Fear is the preserver of
innocence: I Will put my fear into your hearts says God, That you shall not
depart from me: If then you would not depart from God, labor to possess your
souls with the fear of God.

12. Take heed how you consult with Flesh and Blood in the things of God. If
Paul had consulted with Flesh and Blood, he had never believed: And if in the
things of God we consult with Flesh and Blood, we are sure to depart from God,
the living God.

13. Put your selves often unto this disjunction. Come O my soul, either there
is enough in God alone, or there is not: If there be not enough in God alone,
how do they live in Heaven? They have no meat, no drink, no clothes, no gold
nor silver: As the Martyr said, I am going to that Country where your gold and
silver will not go, (when they offered him gold and silver) Alas, our gold and
silver does not go there; As leather mon^y will not go here where gold and
silver goes: So our gold and silver will not go there: if there be not enough
in God alone, how do you think they live in Heaven? Surely they live upon God.
Therefore there is enough in God: Well, if there be enough in God alone, O my
Soul, Why should I depart from God? All departure does signify an
insufficiency. I leave this house, and go to another, because this house is not
sufficient. When I am sick I send to my neighbor for Beer, why? because my
Beer don't like me. The Be leaves one flower, and goes to another, because it
does not find enough in that flower: all departing notes an insufficiency. If I
depart from God, it notes an insufficiency in God: Is it not because there is
no God in Israel, that ye are gone down to Baal-zephon? Well, either there is
enough in God alone, O my soul, or there is not: If there be not enough in God
alone, then how do they live in Heaven? If there be enough in God alone, then
why should I depart from God through unbelief? Thus put your selves upon this
Dilemma, and it will be a means to keep you from departing from God through
your unbelief.

14. If you would not depart from God, the living God through unbelief, Then
take heed of worldliness: Take heed of covetousness, and of worldliness: We
cannot serve two Masters, God, and Mammon, you must cleave to the one, and
forsake the other: Demas has forsaken me, and embraced this present world. A
worldly covetous heart will depart from God, and therefore take heed of
covetousness, worldliness: Seek not great things for your selves: Seek ye great
things in these times? Seek them not; It Is a great matter to have ones life for
a prey in evil times.

15. If you would not depart from God, the living God through unbelief, then
take heed of mis-belief; all unbelief is grounded upon a misbelief: We don't
believe because we mis-believe; we see it in Adam, he was guilty of unbelief,
how? Why he believed the Devil, You shall be like God, says he, and by his
mis-believing he came into unbelief; His unbelief was grounded upon a
misbelief. God draws by Promises, and the Devil tempts by Promises. Why when
the Devil tempts by Promises, if we believe his Promises, we shall soon be
guilty of unbelief, in regard of Gods Promises; and therefore if we would not
depart from God, the living God, through unbelief, take heed of misbelieving.

16. If you would not depart from God through unbelief, then look to your
Judgment in reference to your Conversation, and look to your Conversation in
reference to your Judgment: Look to your Life in reference to your Opinion,
look to your Opinion in reference to your Life. Faith and a good Opinion, does
preserve a good Life, and a good Life does preserve Faith and a good Opinion:
Faith lys in the bosom of a good Conversation; Faith is best preserved by a
good Conversation, and a good Conversation is best preserved by Faith: Sometime
men do depart from God, and their departure begins above in the Judgment, and
like Rheum it falls down upon the Lungs, it falls down upon the Conversation;
Sometimes the departing begins below in the Conversation, and steams up into the
Judgment: as some things that are unsavory in the stomach, they steam up into
the head. Sometimes the depart^re from God begins above, and works downward
into the Conversation; Sometimes it begins below in the Conversation, and works
upwards into the Judgment: Therefore look to your Judgments in reference to
your Conversation, and look to your Conversation in reference to your Judgment:
Look to your Faith in reference to your Life, and look to your Life, in
reference to your Faith.

17. If you would not depart from God, the living God, through unbelief, Then
take heed how you run with the times: Good friends, there is the truth of the
times, and there is the error of the times: There is the grace of the times,
and there is the sin of the times, seldom that the generality of people hit it,
they seldom hit the truth of the times, seldom hit the grace of the times; I
say, the generality of people seldom hit it, they are like the dead Fish that
swims down the water, the living Fish swims against the Tide; and so the living
Christian swims against the tide of the Times: Take heed, if you would not
depart from the living God through unbelief; take heed how you fall with the
times; for I say, seldom do the generality of people hit the truth, or the
grace of the times.

18. Know that it is the greatest honor (possess your souls on it) that may be,
to wait upon the Lord, and the greatest dishonor to depart from God through
unbelief; Thereby a man proclaims his own folly; thereby he does put himself
out of Gods protection; thereby he casts dirt and reproach in the very face of
God: Is it not because there is no God in Israel, that ye go down to Baal-zebub
the God of Ekron? God will cast dirt and reproach in their faces, that cast
dirt and reproach in his face: It Is the greatest honor to wait upon the Lord;
It Is the greatest dishonor to depart from God.

19. Be very sensible of your own unbelieving heart, and of all your former
departings from God: The best way to keep from new sins, is to be very sensible
of old sins; he that is very sensible of his former sins, shall through the
grace of God be kept from new sins: Have you departed from the Lord, be
sensible of your departings from God, be sensible of your own unbelieving
heart: There is many that go up and down, and are never sensible of their own
unbelieving hearts, twenty, thirty, forty years they have lived, and yet not
sensible of their unbelieving heart, though it is the greatest Evil: Well, if
you be sensible of your unbelief, and former departings from God, then you
shall be kept from departing from the Lord through unbelief.

20. Lastly, If you would not depart from God, the Living God, through an evil
heart of unbelief: Be not too confident of your own strength in standing, but
commit your self, and your cause, and your way, and your heart unto the Lord:
The best Swimmers are the soonest drowned: Why? because they are the most
confident, and the most confident people do the soonest fall and depart from
the Lord. But our strength is to commit our selves unto God, Commit thy way
unto the Lord, says he; and the Apostle in evil times, suffering times, calls
upon us to do this, to commit our selves into the hand of God, as into the
hands of a faithful Creator: Are the times declining; and do many depart from
the Lord? take heed, be not to confident, he that stands, stands by Faith;
be not to confident of your own standing, but commit your way, your souls, and
your all unto God. He is best kept that the eternal God keeps; and if you
commit your selves unto him, and his keeping, he will certainly keep you. And
thus have I given you these twenty directions, that so you may not through an
evil heart of unbelief be drawn to depart from the Living God.

SERMON. IX. Seasonable Truths for these Evil Times.
Luke 17. 32. Remember Lots Wife.
IN this Chapter our Lord and Savior Christ tells us, how it shall be in the
latter day, immediately before his second, or his last coming: which he
declares by two Similitudes or Comparisons.

The first comparison is drawn from the days of Noah: wherein he observes their
security, and their punishment.

Security: As it was in the days of Noah, so shall it be also in the days of
the son of man. They did eat, they drank, they married Wives, they were given
in Marriage, ver. 26. 27.

The Punishment: And the sloud came and destroyed them all.

The second Comparison is drawn from the days and times of Lot, where you have
their Security, and their Punishment, ver. 18. Likewise also, as it was in the
days of Lot: They did eat, they drank, they bought, they sold, they planted,
they builded.

The punishment, ver. 29. But the same day that Lot went out of Sodom, it
Rained fire and brimstone from heaven, and destroyed them all.

The Rendition at the 30 ver. Even thus shall it be in the day when the son of
man is revealed.

Whereupon he dehorts them from the world, and the care thereof, ver. 31. In
that day, he which shall be upon the house top, and his stuff in the house, let
him not come down to take it away; and he that is in the field, let him
likewise not return back.

Which he presses by diverse Arguments.

The first is drawn from the example of Lot's Wife, who for her looking back,
was turned into a Pillar of Salt.

The second Argument is drawn from the contrary good, Whosoever (says he)
shall lose his life, shall preserve it, v. 33.

The third is drawn from the separation that Christ has made between the
nearest Interest and Relations at that day, ver. 34. In that night there shall
be two men in one bed, the one shall be taken, and the other left; two women
shall be grinding together, the one shall be taken and the other left; two men
shall be in the field, the one shall be taken and the other left.

I am now to deal with this first Argument, drawn from the example of Lot's
Wife, who for her looking back to a worldly interest, was turned into a Pillar
of Salt.

Remember Lot's Wife, and remember her at such a time, and remember her upon
such an account: Christ would have us remember Lot's Wife.

There is a special time when Lot's Wife is to be remembered by us.

We are not only to read the Story of Lot's Wife, we may forget that; but we
are frequently to consider, and call it unto mind: A time there is and a
special time, when Lot's Wife is to be remembered by us?

For the clearing and prosecuting hereof:

First, We will inquire, what of Lot's Wife is to be remembered by us?

Secondly, Why Lot's Wife is to be remembered by us?

Thirdly, How Lot's Wife is to be remembered us?

Fourthly, What is the special time wherein Lot's Wife is to be remembered by
us? And

Fifthly, How we should so remember Lot's Wife, as we may gain thereby?

Sixthly, And what we should do, that we may so profitably remember Lot's Wife?

1. As for the first, If it be said, what of Lot's Wife is to be remembered by
us.

I answer, her Sin, and her Punishment.

She was turned into a Pillar of Salt, she was stricken with a sore Judgment: A
mortal deadly stroke: she was not stricken as Miriam, with a Leprosy; but with
a mortal deadly stroke, she was stricken with Death.

2. As she was stricken with a mortal deadly stroke, so with a sudden stroke:
She had no time given her to repent. It is a great mercy to die standing, to
die exercising of grace: but to be stricken with death in the very height of
ones sin, in the very act of ones sin, and to have no time given one to repent:
This is a great judgment, and this befell her.

3. As it was a sudden stroke, so it was an immediate stroke: From the hand of
God immediately. Immediate mercies are the sweetest mercies, and immediate
judgments are the sowerest judgments. Thus she was stricken by the hand of God
immediately.

4. As she was stricken with an immediate stroke, an immediate hand of God: So
this stroke, it was an exemplary stroke: for by it she was hanged up in chains
as it were, and Gibbited for all ages to take heed of: To take heed of looking
back, declining, and backsliding.

And she was stricken into a Pillar of Salt.

And if you ask, why into a Pillar of Salt?

Why Salt? says one, that by her example she might season others; that by her
example all of us might be warned to take heed of looking back to any worldly
interest.

But I think also by her looking back, she in some measure complied, and
comported with the men of Sodom, as they were smitten with brimstone, fire, and
Salt, Deuteronomy. 29. 23. And the whole Land thereof became Brimstone and Salt: So
she complying with them, and returning in her heart and affections to them,
partaking with them in their sin, does partake with them also in their
judgment, and so was turned into Salt.

And into a Pillar of Salt, that is durable, and of continuance: As the
everlasting Covenant is called a Pillar of Salt, so her body (for I speak not
of her soul, neither does the Scripture speak any thing concerning that) being
turned into a material Pillar of Salt for the longer continuance, that she
might be an everlasting Monument and warning to all Generations to take heed of
looking back, declining, and backsliding: And thus she was turned into a Pillar
of Salt: That Is her Punishment.

As for her sin that did bring her into this condition, it was exceeding great
and heinous, for there was much disobedience in it, being directly contrary
unto the express Commandment of God by the Angel. In Genesis 19. The Angels said
when they had brought them forth abroad, Escape for thy life, look not behind
thee, neither stay thou in all the Plain; escape to the Mountain lest thou be
consumed. Here was an express Commandment that they should not look back. It
seemed to be no great matter for Adam to eat an Apple, a forbidden Apple; but
being directly contrary to Gods express Commandment, there was much
disobedience in it: And so though it seemed no great matter to look back, yet
being directly contrary to Gods express Commandment There was much
disobedience in it.

Again, There might be much incredulity and unbelief in this thing, for she
might doubt whether God would fulfill his word in destroying Sodom (as God had
said) and so might look back to see whether the Word of the Lord were
fulfilled, or no.

But besides, There might be, and there was a great deal of carnal affection in
looking back unto a worldly interest there, upon which account our Savior
Christ brings it in, in this chapter, and cautions men upon that.

Yea there was in effect an Apostasy, a Typical Apostasy, upon which account
our Savior Christ speaks on it, and says he, he that puts his hand to the
Plow, and looks back: an Apostasy there was in it. Now this Apostasy of hers
was aggravated by many circumstances.

First, by the goodness of her Relation: The more gracious a man's Relations
are, if he do decline, the greater is his sin, if he do decline: Now she was
the Wife of a gracious holy man, and therefore for her to decline from such a
Relation, it was exceeding wicked.

2. And besides, As she did look back under such a Relation, so she was not
tempted thereunto: The less temptation to any sin, the greater the sin: Those
that are tempted to sin, excuse themselves; The woman thou gave me, she gave
me to eat: But now Lot's Wife could not say thus; I was tempted by Lot, or by
any other; No, she was not overborn by any temptation from without, and
therefore her sin was the greater.

3. She sinned in good company: It Is an evil thing to sin in any company; but
the better the company is that I sin in, the worse is my sin: She had the
company of her husband; she had the conduct of Angels: now upon this ground she
sinned.

4. She sinned in the face of Justice: It Is an evil thing for a Thief to sin at
any time, but to cut a man's purse before the Judge, while he is upon the Bench
doing Justice, this is worse. God was now doing Justice upon Sodom, and for
Lot's Wife to sin in the face of Justice doing, it made her sin exceeding great.

5. And yet farther, To say no more in it, But that she sinned also in the face
of great deliverance; God had now brought her out, Husband, Children, and self,
and delivered them with an high hand: To sin in the face of a deliverance
wrought with an high hand, is to sin with an high hand: Such was her
deliverance, wrought with an high hand, and therefore for her to sin thus, was
exceeding evil, and very sinful. And thus you see what that is of Lot's Wife
that is to be remembered by us, namely, her sin and her punishment.

2. But then Secondly, Why is Lot's Wife to be remembered by us.

She is to be remembered by us, because that she is Recorded, and her Example is
recorded for that end and purpose: She is hung up, and Gibbeted (as it were)
for all that go by and read the Scripture to Remember.

Again, If that whatsoever is written in the Old Testament, is written for our
instruction for our admonition, and Judgments there recorded for our Caution
and Warning: Then good Reason that she and her Example should be remembered,
Romans 15. 4. For whatsoever things were written aforetime, were written for our
learning, and in 1 Cor. 10. 5. speaking of the sins of the Israelites, With
many of them God was not well pleased, for they were overthrown in the
Wilderness. Now these things were our Examples, to the intent we should not
lust after evil things, as they also lusted. Neither be ye Idolaters as were
some of them, as it is written, the people sat down to eat and drink, and rose
up to play: Neither let us commit Fornication as some of them committed, and
fell in one day, three and twenty thousand: Neither let us tempt Christ, as
some of them also tempted, and were destroyed of Serpents: Neither murmur ye,
as some of them also murmured, and were destroyed of the Destroyer. Now at the
11th. verse, All these things hap^ed unto them, for our ensamples, and they are
written for our admonition, upon whom the ends of the world are come.

Further, We are to remember Lot's Wife, and she is to be remembered by us, that
we fall not into the same condemnation: Read the History, least thou thy self
be made the Judgment of God: The only way to be kept from afflictions our
selves, is to gain by other men's afflictions: How should we gain by such
afflictions as these, if we should not remember them?

Again, If you look into Scripture, you shall find, that of all the Judgments
that are Recorded in Scripture, there is none so frequently mentioned and
repeated, as the Judgment of Sodom and Gomorrah, in the 19 Genesis once in the 20
Jer. again, and 49th. again, the 11 of Hos. again, the 4 Amos again, the 17
Luke again, the Epistle of Jude again: So then look into Scripture, and you
shall find there is no Judgment so often repeated as this Judgment upon Sodom
and Gomorrah: And why? That it may be observed in all the circumstances thereof.

And to say no more in it but thus: There is a Sodom that is still to be
destroyed, in the 11 Rev. You find that Rome in the Latitude thereof is called
Sodom: Their dead bodies shall lie in the street of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt: This Sodom is to be destroyed with fire,
in the 18 Rev. She shall be utterly burnt with fire. ver. 8. And as Lot was
commanded to come out of Sodom, so the people of God are commanded, Come out of
her my people.

And as Lot's Wife by looking back did partake with them in their sin, and so
partake in their Plagues: So says the Lord, Come out of her my people, that
you be not partaker of her sin, and that ye receive not of her Plagues: So
then, there is a Sodom still which is to be destroyed, which we are to come out
of; spiritual Sodom; and therefore even this of Lot's Wife coming out is
diligently to be considered, and to be remembered by us, that we may know how to
come out well: And thus we see the Reasons why Lot's Wife is to be remembered by
us.

But Thirdly, How is Lot's Wife to be remembered by us?

1. She is to be remembered by us in a way of reflection, again and again to
mind the story and example of Lot's Wife: You may oftentimes read the story,
and may have forgot the same, but as the clean beast was to chew the Cud, which
in the Hebrew is a bringing of the Meat into the mouth again: So you may have
oftentimes eaten up this story of Lot's Wife, but you are to chew the Cud, and
bring it into your Memory again, to remember it in a way of reflection.

2. In a way of meditation, I remember all thy mavelous works, and meditate
thereon says David: Remembrance without meditation will do little good, it
must be remembrance with meditation: And

3. As it must be with Meditation, so with an holy Fear, and Reverence, and
Adoration. I have read of a Heathen, that when he came by the Gallows, he would
always put off his Hat and bow, and say, God save Justice: And so now, when we
come by this Gibbit, we should not come by, but bow with Fear, and Reverence,
and Adoration, adoring the Justice and the Sovereignty of God in his
proceedings. We are to remember Lot's Wife in a way of Fear, and Reverence, and
Adoration.

4. We are to remember Lot's Wife in a way of Caution, so as to take heed by
her: Remember how she looked back, and take heed that we do not look back: And
thus we are to remember Lot's Wife.

But then Fourthly, What and when is the special time that Lot's Wife is to be
remembered by us?

It is good to remember her frequently: But we are in a special manner to
remember Lot's Wife in the time of declining, in declining times remember her
that you do not decline. Thus our Savior Christ brings her in for to be
remembered by us, that we do not look back, as she looked back.

2. We are to remember her in times of security, of great security: As in the
days of Noah, says Christ, they were in great security: They ate, and drank,
etc. And as in the Days of Lot, they ate, and drank, they married, they were
in great security: Now says our Savior, So shall it be, but remember Lot's
Wife: So that in times of great security, Lot's Wife is to be remembered by us.

3. She is to be remembered by us also, In time when God does call upon his
people by his dispensa^ions to go out of Sodom, and make no delay: For so our
Savior also presses it to you, Let not him that is on the house top go down,
etc. But remember Lot 's Wife, God would have no delay then: So when God calls
upon a people to come out of Sodom, make no delay, but remember Lot's Wife:
Thus we see what the time is.

But fifthly and lastly, What good shall we get by remembering Lot's Wife? Is
there any good to be gotten by remembering Lot's Wife?

Yes, much every way: Something in a way of Instruction, something in a way of
Caution.

First, By way of instruction: I shall lay before you ten or eleven
instructions that we may gain hereby.

First, If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and do live in our Memory, then
why should not we stand and admire, and say, Lord, how unsearchable are thy
J^dgments, and thy way's past finding out. Here are four, and but four that
came out of Sodom, and yet one of the fo^r were destroyed: God may deliver our
Family in the time of common Calamity, and yet some of our house may suffer.
God in the midst of Judgment does remember mercy: In the midst of Mercy he
Remembers Judgment. In the midst of Judgment upon Sodom, he remembered mercy for
Lot, and for his Family: In the midst of mercy upon Lot, and upon his Family,
he remembered Judgment upon Lot's Wife. The same thing may be done by one in a
way of Faith, and he may live, and done by another in a way of unbelief, and he
may die. Abraham looked upon Sodom when Sodom was a burning, Abraham got up
early in the morning, at the 27 ver. to the place where he stood before the
Lord, and he looked toward Sodom and Gomorrah, and toward all the Land of the
Plain, and beheld, and lo, the smoke of the Country went up, as the smoke of a
Furnace: Abraham beheld, and looked upon it in a way of believing and lived:
Lot's Wife looks back in a way of unbelief, and she dies. The same thing may be
done by one in a way of Faith, and live, and by another in a way of unbelief
and die. But literally here, two shall be in one bed, the one shall be taken,
and the other shall be left; two shall be in the field, the one shall be taken,
and the other left: Two in a bed, Lot and his Wife, one taken, and the other
left: Two in a field, they were going both out of Sodom, one taken, and the
other left; Lord how unsearchable are thy Judgments, and thy ways past finding
out.

2. If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and do live in our Memory, then here
we may learn by way of Instruction, and see how far a Man or Woman may go in
Religion, and yet come short at the last: Lot's Wife went far, she was a
professor of the first and the highest form, she had lived a long while in
Abraham's Family, she had walked with her Husband Lot, and enjoyed his prayers
many years; she stood out against the wickedness of Sodom while she was there;
she was in some me^sure obedient unto the voice of the Angel in going out of
Sodom: and (as some observe) she was a Professor of seventy years growth, and
yet she miscarried: How far may Men and Women go in Religion, and yet miscarry
at the last?

3. If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and do live in our memory; Then you
may learn, and see by way of Instruction; That the best Relations will not
secure from the hand of God if we continue evil: She was the nearest Relation
to a Holy Righteous man, Lot, yet sinned; Her Relation would not save her, and
would not excuse her: Why should any say, I am the Child of such a godly
Parent; I am the Servant of such a godly Master; I am a member of such a
Church: It Is not the nearest and the best Relations will save us from the hand
of God, if we sin against him: Here was the nearest Relation, and yet not
exempted from the severest punishment.

4. If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and do indeed live in our memory, Then
here you may see what an evil thing it is to look back from that which God has
delivered us from. It is an evil thing to sin against that Deliverance that
has a Such written on it: In the 9th. of Ezra, see how he argues, After all
that is come upon us for our evil deeds, and for our great trespasses; seeing
that thou our God have punished us less than our iniquities deserve, and have
given us Such deliverance as this (A deliverance with a Such written on it)
should we again break thy Commandments, and join in affinity with the people
of these abominations? Would not thou be angry with us, till thou had
consumed us, so that there should be no remnant, nor escaping? See, it is a very
evil thing for to sin after a Deliverance that has Such written upon it; but
to turn back, or to look back unto that which God has delivered us from, that
is yet worse: For the Lord to have delivered us from Superstition, from
Idolatry, and to look back to that which God has delivered us from, What Is
this, but after the manner of Lot's Wife? But you see how it fared with her.
Well then you see, it is an evil thing to look back to that which God has
delivered us from.

5. If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and live in our memory; Here we may
learn by way of Instruction, That former Deliverance will not secure us from
future Destruction: She was delivered with a great Deliverance, and yet
destroyed with a great Destruction: The like is said of the Israelites in the
Epistle of Jude: I will put you in remembrance, though ye once knew this, How
that the Lord having saved the people out of the Land of Egypt, afterward
destroyed them that believed not: Delivered, and yet destroyed. We are apt to
think, O we have been delivered thus, and thus, and therefore we shall not be
destroyed: God delivered them with an high hand, and they were destroyed with
an high hand: Lot's Wife delivered with an high hand, and destroyed with an
high hand. Former Deliverance will not secure us from future Destruction.

6. If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and live in our memory, then here we
may learn by way of Instruction; It Is ill sinning when God is punishing: It Is
good begging while God is giving; but O it is ill sinning while God is
punishing: If he be angry, yea but a little, blessed are all those that trust
in him: Be wise now therefore O ye Kings; be instructed ye Judges of the Earth,
serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with trembling: Kiss the Son, lest he be
angry, and ye perish from the way. The way, What way? Why, in the way of his
judgments; When God is fetching his stroke at a people, stand out of the way
then of Gods stroke: God was striking at Sodom, and Lot's Wife came in the way
of his stroke, and she dyed for it; It Is ill sinning, when God is punishing.

7. If that this story be true, and live in your memory, then here you may
learn, That those that are exemplary in sinning, shall be exemplary in
punishing: She was the first that sinned this kind of sin, and the first that
fell under such a Judgment. The Lord marked Jeroboam, Jeroboam the Son of
Nebat, that made Israel to sin; Why he was the first, and God set a mark upon
him. This is that wicked Ahaz, that in the time of his affliction sinned yet
more: What a mark did God set upon Judas, in his life, in his death? Why he was
the first that made a treacherous retreat from the Gospel; He was the head of
those Halbertiers that came to attatch Christ: So an Apostate, usually does
head the persecuting party, but God set a mark upon him. Those that are first
in sin, and those that are exemplary in sinning, God will make exemplary in
punishment.

8. If this story of Lot's Wise be true, and do live in our memory: Then here
we may see what an evil thing it is to mis-chuse in our choosing time. Lot had
two choises once, he had a choice before, when there was a difference between
Abram's Servants and his, Abraham condescends, and gives him his choice: Lot
thou art my younger, but I Will yield for peace sake (as we should all do for
peace sake) but Lot take thy choice; all the Country was before him, and he
chose Sodom, but God fired him out of that choice: Now he was to go out of
Sodom, he and his Wife and Children were to go out of Sodom, and Let (says
God) fly to the Mountain: Not so my Lord, there is little Zoar, let me go
thither, and God let him have his choice, and yielded to him, but it cost him
dear: What an evil thing is it to mis-chuse in choosing times?

9. If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and do live in our memory, Then here
we may see by way of Instruction: That though God will lay out an hiding place
for his people, in times of public Calamity: Yet if they sin in the way, they
may perish or miscarry in the very face of their hiding place. It appears that
Let had lost his Wife before he came at Zoar, Genesis 19. 30. And Lot went up out
of Zoar, and dwelt in the Mountain, and his two Daughters with him. We don't
read, he lost her in Zo^r, but in the way to Zo^r; he would not go to the
Mountain that God chose for him, but to Zoar: Now here in the way he sinned,
and in the way to this hiding ^lace he lost his Wife: So that though God in
time of public Calamity, may indulge, or find out a hiding place for us, yet
if we sin, we may perish even in the very way to our hiding place.

10. If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and do live in our memory, Then here
we may learn by way of Instruction, That it is possible that a Religious Family
may have a black mark of Gods Indignation: Lot's Family was a Religious Family.
Never bear upon it that you are a Religious Family, It Is possible that a
Religious Family may have a black mark of Gods Indignation, and possibly the
death of one Relation may be a snare to the other: We know the sin that Lot
committed afterward with his Daughters. The death of this Relation, a snare to
the other, and God does know how to strike at one through the sides of another:
God strikes at Lot through the sides of his Wife; God knows how to strike at
one through the sides of another.

11. And the main of all is this: If the story of Lot's Wife be true, and do
live in our memory, O what an evil thing is it to look back, and to decline in
declining times? How quick was God with Lot's Wife for looking back? She never
sinned this sin before, 'twas the first sin that ever in this kind she
committed; and she might have said: Why Lord, It Is the first time that ever I
committed it, and indeed I was taken before I was aware thus to look back, I
did not consider well of What I did: But God turned her presently into a Pillar
of Salt: God was quick with her: Why? For to show thus much, God will be quick
with Apostates: God will turn the Turners; She turned to look back, and God
turned her into a Pillar of Salt. And so for those that turn, God will turn;
God will turn Turners: God will be quick with Turners; God will turn Turners
into a Pillar of Salt. God is quick with Apostates, and such as do decline. And
thus I have given you these eleven things by way of Instruction.

As many I might give you in a way of Caution, but the Instance only in one.

If this story of Lot's Wife be true, and do live in our Remembrance; By way of
Caution: Why should we not all take heed how we look back to worldly Interests,
in the day when the Son of man shall be Revealed, or in this day of the Gospel,
when the Son of man is Revealed? You see what became of Lot's Wife for her
looking back: and therefore why should we not all of us take heed, how we look
back or decline in this day that the Son of man is Revealed?

You will say, what shall we do that we may not decline? What shall we do that
we may so remember Lot's Wife, that we may not decline or look back in
declining times?

I shall not speak at large unto the Argument: Only thus.

If you would not look back in declining times, shut your eyes and your ears
against all the allurements and threatenings of the World: For the Devil he
tempts much now in these days to false Worship, as he tempted our Savior
Christ, when he said: All this will I give thee, if thou will fall down and
worship me: That was false Worship: So now the Devil says, All this living and
preferment will I give thee, if thou will worship me so: This Cupboard with
Plate will I give thee; this Chamber hung with Tapestry will I give thee, if
thou will worship so; This great living and preferment will I give thee, if
thou will worship so: If thou will not worship, all this will I take from thee:
Would you therefore be kept, that you may never look back? Shut your eyes, and
shut your ears, go blindfold into Gods Commandments, as Abraham your Father
did.

2. If you would not look back in declining times: Take heed of leaving any
Nest-egg in the day of Reformation; if there be an Egg left in the Nest, sure
enough the Hen will return to the Nest to lay yet. So in the time of
Reformation, If a Nest-Egg be left, as God knows what Nest-eggs were left among
us: But I say, If in a time of public Reformation Nest-eggs be left, there
will be a return of the Hen to the Nest-egg there. Will you know what that good
man said, Mr. Dearing before Queen Elizabeth: The house is swept, and the Dirt
is behind the Door, there comes a Hen and scrapes it all out again: But I put
it into this, If a Nest-egg be left, be it a public Reformation, or a private
Reformation; yet if a Nest-egg be left, there will be a returning back again.

3. If you would not look back in declining times, Then be sure that you never
part friends with any sin: Some will part with their sin, but they will part
friends with it. Says one, By the grace of God I will never commit this sin
again, and I Will go but this time into this company, but after this time I will
never go to them again: and so they part friends with their sin: Why, if a man
be to part with his friend, he goes part of the way with him, and having parted
friends, they look after one another; And so when a man parts friends with his
sin, he will certainly look back again: But if a man would never look back to
his sin in declining times, let him part as an enemy to it. He that will part
friends with his sin, will certainly return to his sin again.

4. If you would not look back in declining times, be sure of this: That you do
not run a share, or a part in the Vessel that God is about to destroy: Where my
grief is, there is my finger; where my love is, there is my eye; If I have a
share and a part in the Vessel that God is about to destroy, I shall look after
the Vessel, what becomes thereof. Why now Babylon that art to be destroyed,
Babylon is not to repent; Babylon that art to be destroyed: Babylon is not to
be reformed: Wash dirt an hundred times, and you cannot make clean the dirt;
Babylon is not to be reformed, but to be destroyed; Take heed therefore of
running a part or a share in the Boat or Vessel that God has laid out for
destruction, for if you have a part and a share there, you will look back. But

5. If you would not look back in declining times, let us consider in the fear
of the Lord, what an evil thing it is to look back: Briefly thus.

1. Thereby you lose all you have wrought; Thereby you will lose all your
losses; There is much gain in losing for Jesus Christ; There is gain in our
losses, by looking back you will lose all your losses, and the gain thereby.

2. Thereby you will lose the Testimony of your own Integrity; Yet says God,
Job held fast his Integrity: And if we don't look back in declining times, then
our hearts will tell us, we were upright before him, but if we look back in
declining times, our consciences will tell us we were never right before him.

3. Thereby also you will lose the comfort of those glorious times that are to
come: Friends and Beloved, glorious times there are a coming, that are at the
back side of this hedge, that are but a little way off; that are on the
backside of this affliction; glorious times that are a coming, and when they
come, if ye stand and hold out, you will have the comfort of those glorious
times: But if now you look back in the interim, you will lose the comfort of
all those glorious times when they come, and come they will, and come they
shall.

4. Thereby also you will, and shall be satisfied with your own ways, for the
back-slider in heart shall be satisfied with his own ways, you will look back,
and you shall have enough on it (says God.)

5. And thereby also you will be made unmeet for the Kingdom of Heaven; For he
that puts his hand to the Plow, and looks back, is unfit for the Kingdom of
Heaven.

6. And thereby also you may be made a Pillar of Salt, and an example unto
after Ages; for God is quick with Apostates, and with them that do look back:
You have heard how quick the Lord was with Lot's Wife, and she was but a Type.
Now therefore, as ever you do desire (Friends and Beloved) as ever you do
desire, that you may not lose what you have wrought for so many years; as you
do desire that you may hold fast, and not lose the gain of your former losses;
as you do desire that you may hold fast your Integrity; as you do desire that
you may have the comfort of those glorious times that are a coming; as you do
desire you may not be satisfied with your own ways, and as you do desire you
may not be unfit for the Kingdom of Heaven; and as you do desire that you may
not be made examples for after Ages: I beseech you in the Name of the Lord, and
I desire this Exhortation may take upon my own heart as well as yours; Let us
remember Lot's Wife. It was the Lady Times speech to Harding that Apostate,
Harding, Harding, Remember Judas; Harding, remember Francis Spira: And let us
remember Lot's Wife.

And if you will ask, How should we so remember Lot's Wife, that we may not
decline in declineing times? Work these things upon your hearts; This story and
example upon your hearts: Take this for a constant Rule, that Passion is the
best doorkeeper of Memory: The more I am affected with a thing for the
present, the more I shall remember it for the future; and therefore if you
would remember Lot's Wife, go and work this story now upon your own hearts; and
as the times are declining, the more declining the times are, the more do you
rub your Memory with this Example of Lot's Wife, and call upon your selves:
Come O my soul remember Lot's Wife: Brethren, Friends, Beloved, our Savior
Christ has left you this Example, he has commanded you and me to remember
Lot's Wife; It Is an Example that he has sanctified, that we may take heed
hereby, and therefore at all times call upon your selves, and your own souls;
come O my soul, have thou forgotten Lot's Wife? Thou beginnest to grow cold,
and dead, and dull, have thou forgotten Lot's Wife? Come O my Soul, remember
Lot's Wife: Thus shall you be able to stand, and not to look back, and I pray
think upon it, that we may not be of the number of those that draw back unto
perdition, but of those that do believe to the saving of your souls: Think
therefore of these things, and remember Lot's Wife.

FINIS.
THere is lately Printed an Excellent Treatise called the World Conquered: Or a
Believers Victory over the World, laid open in several Sermons on 1 John 5. 4.
By R. A. The Author of Vindiciae Pietatis.

Sold by Nath. Crouch at the Cross-Keys in Bishops-gate-street, near
Leaden Hall.


