TWO INTERCEPTED LETTERS From Sr WILLIAM BRERETON to the Earl of ESSEX, and M.
PYM; concerning the Rebels affairs in the NORTH.

The Originalls whereof were sent by an Express to the Earl of ESSEX,
according to His MAJESTY'S direction, this 8. of July, 1643.

Printed Verbatim according to the Originalls, BY LEONARD LICHFIELD, Printer to
the University. 1643.

May it please your Excellence.
Halifax is deserted by Our men, and the Earls Forces possessed thereof.
I received this day a Letter from Captain Duckenfield, and another from Captain
Booth, importing that my Lord Fairfax and the Lancashire Forces (being joined
and encountering with the Lord Newcastle) were routed and pursued to Bradford,
which Town also was taken by the Earl of Newcastles Forces, and Leedes
besieged, whereby the Earl of Newcastle is possessed of all Yorkshire, except
Hull and Leedes.

The Lancashire Forces being also defeated (as I am informed) there remains
very few, except those small forces We have, (which are more then sufficiently
matched with the Lord Capell) to make opposition and resistance, unless your
Excellence in your Wisdom think fit some ways to provide for the prevention of
so great a danger, as may ensue upon gathering and increasing of his Forces, by
subduing and spoiling the Country.

I hope your Excellence will excuse and pardon what was intended for the
assistance of my Lord Gray, being necessarily employed for the defense of these
parts. But if your Lordship Command otherwise, I shall account it a part of my
duty to obey your Excellency, to whom I will always profess to remain.

Stafford, July. 4. 1643. Your Excellences most humble servant WILL: BRERETON.
My Lord Fairfax and his Son it is said are in Leedes, where I hear they are
distressed.

Superscribed, For his Excellence the Earl of Essex, these humbly present
Speed.



Sir,
I Can do no less then account it a part of my duty to Communicate unto you
what I received yesternight from Captain Duckenfield, and others, touching the
bad success of the Lord Fairfax, and the Lancashire men in their encounter
with the Earl of Newcastles Forces, being routed and pursued to Bradford,
which Town was by the Enemies Grenades set on fire and taken: the report
whereof struck such a Terror into the Hallifax men, as that thereupon they
deserted the Town, whereby the Earl of Newcastles Forces are become possessed
of all that great County of Yorkshire, except Hull and Leedes, whither the Lord
Fairfax, and Sir Thomas Fairfax are escaped, and wherein it is said they are
besieged and distressed. It is not to be expected that there can be prevention
given to the progress, advance, and increase of this Army, unless some
considerable force can be sent down to join with the Country, and to assist
and make head, there being no more in these parts to resist, but only those
small forces we have, which are sufficiently tasked with my Lord Capells Forces.

Me thinks therefore it were high time that you should have sent before this
to have entreated the assistance of the Scots, whereby prevention might have
been given to the loss of many 1000 men's lives, and many 1000 pounds worth of
Treasure and Goods, whereof the Enemy is become possessed, and will be
exceedingly strengthened, if you do not hasten to call them in to our
Assistance. And if this be not done it is feared that the whole Kingdom may be
endangered, and certainly all the Northern parts Ruined and spoiled.

I beseech the Lord direct you herein to such Resolution as may be most for his
own glory, and the rescuing of his people out of the hands of their oppressors,
so prays*

Your most faithful friend and Servant
STAFFORD, July 5. 1643. Superscribed, For the much honored M. PYM these Speed
Speed.




