BABYLONS Downfall.

A SERMON LATELY PREACHED AT WESTMINSTER BEFORE sundry of the Honorable house
of Commons.

By William Bridge, sometimes fellow of Emanuell College in Cambridge, and
since, Minister of Gods word in NORWICH. And now in KOTERDAM.

Published by order of the said House.

LONDON: Printed by I. N. for John Rothwell, and are to be sold at his Shop at
the sign of the Sun in Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

Good Reader,
THou have (I doubt not) heard with what difficulty and pains this small work
is brought forth, and delivered into the world; let the difficulty of Printing
quicken thine affection in reading. As the fall of Babylon is much expected, so
the rising of the Churches is much desired. Thy prayers, and our pains, may
help forward both. Wherefore that I might not be wanting to this great service,
I am willing that these notes should walk abroad, which I thought should never
see more light than what crept in at my study windows. This Sermon may prove
all the Legacy which your dying friend shall be able to bequeath unto you; For
I am now returning to that Church and people of God, which Jesus Christ has
committed to me, and others. And if in this voyage the Lord shall put the
winds, and seas in Commission for my death, my desire is,

First, That God would forgive our adversaries (if it be his will) that have
put us to these extremities.

Secondly, That it may be ever said of this Island, as once it was said of
Israel, Happy art thou O Israel: who is like unto thee, O people saved by the
Lord, the shield of thine help, and the sword of thine excellency? Deuteronomy. 33. 29.

Thirdly, That falling Babylon may be fallen Babylon. And that all the
distressed Churches may be restored Churches. Vivat Christus moriatur Barrabas,
moriatur Antichristus.

For the first we have great cause to forgive, seeing all their injuries, are
turned unto our blessings. And therefore as Joseph said to his brethren that
sold him into a strange Country, As for you, ye thought evil against me, but
God meant it unto good, Now therefore fear not, etc. Yet we know that public
Administration of Justice is not contrary to personal forgiveness. We must
confess, that the leaving of our own dear Country was, and is most
afflictive to us; A trouble to leave our good friends, Convenient houses,
Precious liberties, and so many souls under the hazard of your eternities. But
Luthers Counsel is good. Si nolint ves far inditione sua non frangatur
animus ad cessandum ad deserendum verbum and officium, sed perseverandum and
docendum, si non in hoc loco saltem in alio. Ab iterum dices quid sinullo loco
liceat, sed ubique ejiciamur in toto mundo, respondet Christu nolite solliciti
esse, Antequam id even^^et ut nullus locus amplius sit verbo, ego adero meo
adventu, evit igitur semper locus ubi doceatis donec ego veniam, tantum vos
perdurate and salvi eritis, non expedietis omnes civitates Israel quin f^ius
haminis veniet, Luther. loc. com. de piis exulibus.
If they will not suffer you where they have to do, let not your mind be
troubled to cease from your work, or disert your office, but teach and
persevere, if it be not lawful in one place, it may be in another. But thou will say, What if it be lawful in no place, and that we be every where cast
out in the whole world? Christ answers, Be not solicitous, before it come to
pass that no place be left for the word, I will be present by my coming,
there shall always be a place where you may teach till I shall come, only do
you hold on, and you shall be saved; you shall not have gone over all the
Cities of Israel, till the Son of man shall come.

So that according to Luther, and the Truth, though the persecutions of the
Churches be never so great, yet there shall always be some place free, and
open at a City of Refuge for Gods people to fly unto, and hide themselves in,
till Christ shall come by public deliverance for the Churches.

For the second. You have seen what great things the Lord has done for you.
Beleevest thou because of these, thou shall see greater, only let us follow
the star of heavenly, and divine guidance which has led us along all this
while, and not go in to consult with the Scribes; and Pharisees of the times,
with those that say they are Jeues, and are not; so shall our star the
Scripture lead us more clearly to the place, and house where Christ is.
Neither be thou ashamed to receive, and own the truth, and way of Christ,
though it be despised. The wise men did worship Christ in a manger.

And for the third, I shall not prophecy if I say, The sword is now drawn,
whose anger shall not be pacified till Babylon be down, and Sion raised. Yet
if thou shall meet with another suffering Bout, In Patience possess thy soul,
In Faith thy God, In Love thy neighbor. And know that it is Gods usual way to
bring his best servants to his choice blessings by tedious Bouts, Exodus 13. 18.
In the interim observe diligently what God is now doing, and help forward the
work of God what you can. Quod Deus facit pro nobis facit in nobis. And as you
would read, and study some choice book to get learning, so read, attend, and
study every page, line, and letter of this great volume of the Lords works
which is now extant, be in commons with the Lords people. The works of the Lord
are sought out of all those that have pleasure in them, says the Psalmist.

Finally, good Reader, pray for us, that we may stand complete in all the will
of God; and though the malice of some men has been so great, that we may not
live together in one Land, yet the mercy of God is so rich, that we may live
together in one heaven.

Now, the God of peace that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus, and
great Shepherd of the Sheep, thorough the blood of the everlasting covenant,
make you perfect in every good work to do his will, working in you that which
is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ, to whom be glory for ever,
and ever. Amen.

Thine in Christ, WILLIAM BRIDGE.

Babylons Downfall.
REVELATION. 14. 8. Babylon is fallen, is fallen, the great City, etc.
THis Text has connection with the present times, and the preceding words; for
the Holy Ghost having made a description of the state and condition of the
Church of Christ, in the first, second, third, fourth, and fifth verses, comes
in the sixth verse to make mention of another vision which Saint John saw, and
that is of an Angel flying in the midst of heaven with the everlasting
Gospel; which is said to be everlasting in opposition to those Innovations and
Traditions of men, under which the Churches of Christ had labored a long time.
This vision being past, as a right consequent of the former vision, he sees
another Angel crying, Babylon is fallen, is fallen, ver. 8. And no wonder, for
where the everlasting Gospel is preached in the midst of heaven, that is
openly, there Babylon falls, and falls immediately.

The words themselves are a short, and sweet prophecy of Romes ruin and
destruction. Wherein we have:

Rome it self.



She is described two ways.

1. From her Greatness, called the great City. Indeed she has been great
in large possessions, and great revenues, so she is fallen already in a great
measure, yet she is too great. Great in her opinion with Kings and Princes,
and thus she is fallen already in a great measure, yet still too great. Great
in her authority, and power over the Saints, and Churches of Christ, and from
this greatness she is much fallen already, and yet too great.

2. From her sins that she is guilty of, under that word Babylon. For if we
consult with this book of the Revelation, we shall find that the Church of Rome,
and that party is called Egypt, Sodom, and Babylon, as if the wickednesses of
them all were concentred in her.

Egypt was exceeding harsh, and cruel to the Church, and Israel of God: so are
they.

Sodom was exceeding base, and filthy in corporal uncleanness; and so are
they.

Babylon full of Sorceries and Idolatry, so are they. She is called Babylon.



1. From the fullness, and greatness thereof, therefore she is said to fall,
and not once, but again fallen, fallen. As it is Gods way to reward those that
are good with the good which they most desire; so it is his way to punish the
wicked with that punishment which is most contrariant to their dispositions,
and their own humors. Babylon, and the Babylonish company most affect rising,
and great preferment; contrary their punishment shall be that it may be most
vexations to them, they shall fall, their destruction is called a fall.

2. From the certainty thereof. 1. It is put in the present tense, as if it
were already done. 2. The words are repeated. It is fallen, It is fallen.

Hardly a word but it affords it is several observation. Yet because I would
not cut out more bread then we shall eat at one meal, I will fall, and close
with these especially.

Antichristian, Doct. 1.
and Romish Babylon is truly Babylon.

Though this Babylon be never so great, yet it shall fall.

It is the duty of the Saints, and people of God to speak

For the first. Antichristian Romish Babylon, is truly Babylon. Herein I shall
1. parallel the old, and our late Babylon. 2. I shall prove that by this
Babylon is meant Rome. In the old Testament we read of a Babylon wherein
Israel was once captived, that was heathenish Babylon. In the new Testament we
read here, and in diverse other places of another in Babylon, Antichristian
Babylon. Give me leave to parallel them a little.

Heathenish Babylon was the Metropolitan, or the who sat upon many waters, Jer.
51. 13. So it is with our late Babylon, who calls her self the Queen sitting
upon many waters, which is also interpreted by Saint John, to be peoples
multitudes, and nations. Revel. 17. 15.

Babylon of old was a proud people, and very confident, exceeding delicate, and
very wanton, calling her self a Lady for ever. Is. 47. 7. 8. Thus
Antichristian Babylon sits also. Revel. 18. 7. She has glorified her self,
and lived deliciously: for she says in her heart, I^s(...) a Queen, and am
no Widow, and shall see no sorrow.

Stand now with thine enchantments, and with the multitude of thy Sorceries,
wherein thou have labored from thy youth, etc. Therefore we read that in
Daniels time they came before the King to tell him the meaning of his dream,
but could not. So it is with our late Babylon, wherein are many Sorceries and
Sorcerers. Revel. 9. 21. Revel. 18. 23.

Babylon was exceeding full of Idols, and vile Idolaters, the mother of them,
and therefore we read, that the three children were commanded to worship the
Kings Idol. Dan. 3. Answerably it is said of our late Babylon, that she does
make all nations drunk with the wine of her fornication. Revel. 17. 2.

Babylon was full of Idols, and gross Idolaters, so also it was exceeding
cruel to the Church, and people of God. Psalm. 137. 1. By the rivers of Babylon
there we sat down, yea we wept, when we remembered Syon, etc. Who has not
read of the Babylonish captivity, the fiery furnace, and their den of Lions.
Answerably in this late Babylon is found the blood of Prophets, and of Saints,
and of all that were slain upon the earth. Revel. 18. 24.

The destruction of ancient Babylon was great,

1. It was universal. Is. 47. 14. There shall not be a a coal to warm at,
nor fire to sit before. And Is. 14. 22. For I will rise up against them, says
the Lord of hosts, and cut off from Babylon the name, and remnant, and son,
and nephew, says the Lord.

2. It was very sudden. Is. 47. 9. In a moment, in one day: the loss of
children, and widdowhood: they shall come upon thee in perfection.

3. It was irrevocable. Jer. 51. 63, 64. And it shall be when thou have made an
end of reading this book, that thou shall bind a stone to it, and cast it
into the midst of Euphrates. And thou shall say, Thus shall Babylon sink, and
shall not rise from the evil that I will bring upon her.

Answerably the destruction of our late Babylon is very dreadful. For,

It shall be universal. Revel. 18. 23. The light of a candle shall shine no
more at all in thee.

It shall be sudden. Revel. 18. 8. Therefore shall her plagues come in one
day, in one hour.

It shall be irrevocable. Revel. 18. 21. And a mighty Angel took up a stone
like a great millstone, and cast it into the sea, saying, Thus with violence
shall that great City Babylon be thrown down, and shall be found no more at
all.

Because of all these things, great sins, and great destructions, Babylon. Je^.
51. 6. Flee out of the midst of Babylon, and deliver every man his soul. And
ver. 45. My people go ye out of the midst of her, and deliver ye every man his
soul, etc. In like manner, we find that the Holy ghost having given warning to
the world concerning the fall of this late Babylon, he exhorts his people to
go out from the midst of her. Revel. 18. 4. Come out of her my people, etc.

Thus are these two Babylons paralleld, certainly they are, and shall be
exceeding like one to another in these particulars. But the question now is,
who is here meant in the Revelation by this late Babylon; Indeed this is a
question of much concernment, because she is to fall, the Princes of the earth
are to be provoked to eat her flesh, and drink her blood, and we are all to
depart from her, lest we partake with her in her plagues.

By this late Babylon therefore, we understand the Church of Rome; not as
confined within her walls, but as by her Merchants she tradeth with, and
puts off her commodities to other Kingdoms. Rome in her latitude, with all
her Merchants, and those that symbolize with her, is here to be understood. And
that Rome, and no other is here meant, I prove by these reasons.

1. Babylon is here in my text called, the great City, and in S. John's time,
what was the great City but Rome it self: for suppose a man were in France,
and should hear another say, that such and such a work were to be done in the
great City, who would not know that he meant Paris? or suppose a man in
England should hear another say, that some great work were to be done in the
great City, who would not know, that he meant London? In S. John's time the
Roman Empire prevailing, the great City was Rome it self; and therefore the
Holy Ghost saying, that Babylon was the great City, says expressly, that by
Babylon is meant Rome.

2. This City, and Whore of Babylon, is said to sit upon a beast, Revel. 17.
7. Now if we look into the book of Daniel, whereby much of the Revelation is
to be interpreted, we shall find mention made of four beasts to succeed one
another, which is there interpreted to be four Kingdoms or Monarchies. The
first of the Chaldees. The second of the Medes and Persians. The third of the
Grecians. And the fourth of the Romans. Now before John's time, the three first
beasts were dead, and gone; the fourth and last, only remained, the Roman
Empire. And what City or people has so ridden the Roman Empire, as Rome has
done?

3. S. John tells us, that this beast that carried the woman, this City was to
have seven heads, and ten horns, Revel. 17. 7. which the Holy Ghost
interprets in the same Chapter, saying. These seven heads are seven
mountains, ver. 9. or seven Kings, that is, several sorts of government, ver.
10. And the ten horns are ten Kings or Kingdoms, ver. 12. which this Empire
did break into. Now though some think, whilst they look through false
perspectives, that they see some other City sitting upon seven hills, yet let
any man show us these three met together in any other City. Who knows any
other City whose building has been laid on seven hills, so famous that the
City it self is called Septires, and whose government has been of seven
sorts, and whose Empire has been broken asunder in to ten Kingdoms, or
there-abouts? This we know is agreeable to Rome it self, and therefore Rome
and no other people is here meant by Babylon.

4. The Scripture is most express, telling us, totidem verbis, that that City
which in S. John's time reigned over the Kings of the earth, was Babylon. Revel.
17. 18. And the woman which thou saw, is that great City which reigns
over the Kings of the earth. But in S. John's time no other City then Rome
reigned over the Kings of the earth, and therefore that, and that alone is
truly Babylon, that is, our late Babylon. Whereupon Cornelius a lapide,
considering also how Irenaeus, Lactantius, Jerome, and other Ancients, speak
fully to our purpose, professes that he will not tergiver^^ri, but grants,
that by Babylon is meant Rome.

If so, Use 1.
what ill office have they done to the Churches, and people of God, that
obtrude this position upon us. That the Church of Rome is a true Church. But
was Babylon a true Church? was Sodom a true Church? was Egypt a true Church?
Rome is Sodom, Egypt, and truly Babylon. Oh what abundance of hurt, and
mischief has this dangerous position done, that the Church of Rome is a true
Church! I my self have known some that had relinquisht the Church of Rome,
and written against her, who again staggered in their faith, I wish (I might
not say they were revolted) when they saw this opinion countenanced, and
published by great authority. And what say the Papists? Your own men, say
they, hold that the Church of Rome is a true Church, and that salvation is to
be had in her, as for the Church of England it is a Schismatic, heretical
Church, wherein no salvation is to be had. The safest way therefore is to join
with us, where, according to all men, both ours and yours you may be sure of
your salvation. And indeed the argument were very strong, and home, if the
premises were true. But when it shall appear by Scripture, that Sion is called
Babylon, and Babylon called Sion, then, and not till then will I believe that
Rome is a true Church. I know what some urge, namely, that Antichrist, that man
of sin, is to sit in the house of God, and therefore that the Church of Rome
is the house, and Church of God. But if we consult with the original, we
shall find that the words are not (...), in the house, but (...), upon, or
against the house of God; so Austen, and others turn it. Upon; noting his
tyranny and usurped government, so the coherent words also give it, He shall
sit exalting himself above all that is called God. The whole words being
nothing else, but a description of his proud government and vile tyranny.

If Antichristian and Romish Babylon be truly Babylon, Use 2.
then set your selves in array against her round about. I mean not in way of
warlike hostility, (O that all your swords were turned into plow-shares) my
exhortation is no other then that of the Prophet Jeremie, concerning old
Babylon, Chap. 50. 14. Put your selves in array against Babylon, round about
all ye that bend the bow, shoot at her, spare no arrows, for she has
sinned against the Lord. It is the wisdom of every man, to observe what
design God has upon the world, a Kingdom, or place, and to be in our
callings serviceable, and helpful to Gods designs. God will help us, if we
help him. We love to be on the strongest side, and God is strongest. Now is
the time that God is bearing down the walls of proud Babylon, that are raised
up in every Kingdom. Magistrates; Ministers, people, help. Help, O you that
love the Lord, help the Lord, down with them, down with them even to the
ground.

But what shall we do to help forward the fall of Babylon? Quest.


Either you are of public place, Answ.
or private station. If you be of a private station, yet you ought to be of a
public spirit. If you be of public place, give me leave to tell you out of
Gods word what to do, and yet I will not so much direct you to what you are
not doing, as encourage you from Scripture in what you are doing.

First, therefore ye Worthies of our Israel, it lies you upon to search out,
and enquire after this Babylonish company, and to repay them according to their
demerits. An eye for an eye, a tooth for a tooth, burning for burning, ear for
ear, liberty for liberty, and blood for blood. We find in the old
Testament, that if there were a noise, and report of Idolatry in the land, the
Magistrate was not barely to take information, but to make diligent search.
Deuteronomy. 13. ver. 12. to 15. If thou shall hear say in one of thy Cities which
the Lord thy God has given thee to dwell there saying. Certain men of the
children of Belial are gone out from among you, and have withdrawn the
inhabitants of their City, saying, Let us go and serve other gods which you
have not known. Then shall thou enquire, and make search, and ask diligently,
etc. And in the verses before, you may see their punishment, ver. 6. 8, 9, 10.
And who knows not that of the Psalmist Psa. 137. 8, 9. O daughter of Babylon,
who art to be destroyed: happy shall he be that rewards thee, as thou have
served us! Happy shall he be that takes, and dasheth thy little ones against
the stones. Though as little ones they call for pity, yet as Babylonish little
ones they call for Justice, even to blood. You may think it cruel, but there
is nothing cruel which God commands. Indeed father Latimer in his Sermon
before King Edward the sixth, is exceeding earnest, that Popish Prelates might
be made Quondams, as (says he) Abiathar the high Priest was, because he
labored to keep King Solomon from his throne. And behold, a greater then
Solomon, Christ Jesus in the government of his Church is here. And there is a
notable Scripture for this. Ezekiel. 44. from ver. 10. to 15. And the Levites that
are gone away far from me when Israel went astray from me after their Idols,
they shall even bear their iniquity. ver. 13. They shall not come near unto
me to do the office of a Priest unto me, nor to come near to any of my holy
things in the most holy place, etc. Whence it appears, that those which were
unfaithful, superstitions, following Innovations when Israel went astray, and
followed Idols, were to be thrust from their places, and to be made Quondams
for ever. This now the Magistrate may see into, I prescribe not, I leave with
you this General. It is your duty to search, and enquire after these persons,
and to punish them according to their deservings.

England has born the name, and worn the crown for the life, and power of
godliness; yet give me leave with grief of heart, and sadness of spirit, to
make a challenge. What reformed Church is there in all the world, that ever knew
so many suspended Ministers as England? Speak (O Sun) whether in all thy
travels from one end of the heaven to the other, thou did ever see so many
silenced Ministers as thou have done here. And is there not then need of more
humiliation, more fasting, and prayer, more selfeafflictions, and more tears?
I will lead you but to one Scripture, and leave it with you. Ezekiel. 43. 10, 11.
Thou Son of man, show the house to the house of Israel, that they may be
ashamed of their iniquities, and let them measure the pattern. And if they be
ashamed, of all that they have done; show them the form of the house, and the
fashion thereof, the goings out thereof, and the commings in thereof, and all
the ordinances thereof, and all the forms thereof, and all the laws thereof,
etc. I know not such another text in all the Bible, as this is for this
purpose. One man says, the government of the Church of England is the best;
another, that the Scottish government is the best; a third, that a third is
best; another, O that I knew what were the government and form of Gods house,
prescribed by God himself. Well. Would thou know? If you be ashamed of your
own iniquities, God will show you the form of his house.

Thirdly, It is with you also (right worthy and beloved) to see that all the
ordinances of Jesus Christ, be rendered to the Churches in their native beauty,
and that all the relics, and remains of Babylon be quite removed. Opus
marmoreum albario non indiget. True marble needs no painting. And Gods
ordinance is all marble, no chalk. True beauty needs no coloring; and the most
deformed of Gods ordinances to a gracious eye, is truly beautiful. Great is
the pomp of Gods ordinances, when freed from pomp, great is their glory when
freed from ours. Every ordinance is then best administered, when it is most
effectual, and a thing is most full of efficacy, when it is plenum sui,
immixtum alieni. As wine, or water which does most cool, or cleanse when freed
from mixtures.

In the primitive times when the heathen would put the Christians to a cruel
death, they tied a living man to a dead man, that so by the filthy savor, and
stench of the dead carcass, they might poison the living man to death; this
they counted the worst of death; the death of deaths. So when the dead
ordinances of man's Inventions, shall be tied to the living ordinances of Gods
appointment. What is this, but as much as in us lies to poison the living with
the dead? But I pray tell me, what unkindnesse has the good ordinance of
Christ done to us, that we should put it to so sad a death. And as Christ said
to the Jews, I have done many good works amongst you, for which of all these
do you take up stones against me? so may the ordinances of Christ say, O ye
people of England, I have done many good works among you; I have converted many
of you by preaching to you; I have healed many of you, that were sore bruised;
I have comforted many of you that were sore troubled, for which of all these
do you use me thus unkindly; for which of all these do you thus tie, and
link me to that, which never entered into the heart of God to match me with.
What Luther saves concerning preaching, that may, I say, concerning all the
ordinances of God. We that are Ministers (says he) think to take our people
with our expressions, and if we light upon an expression that pleases us well,
we think that it should convert every one that hears it from us; but then the
Auditor comes and hominem olet, he smells man in the expression, turns his
back upon it, and the whole vanishes, and comes to nothing. The explication is
plain, and easy.

Wherefore, I beseech you, in Christ's stead, that are the heads of our Tribes,
that nothing be obtruded upon the Churches of Christ; but what may clearly,
and plainly have Jus divinum written and engraven upon it. Your wisdoms
cannot but observe the several distractions that are both in Church, and
Commonwealth. If you Analize the distractions of the Commonwealth, you may
find thereby what is the head of our distractions in the Church also. And in
the Commonwealth this is that which troubles, that proceedings are so
illegal; O says one, though it cost me never so much, yet if it were
according to law, I would yield unto it. This is that which cuts so deep,
says another, there is no law for these, and these courses: so in the Church,
I cannot yield to this, and that custom, this and that Innovation, for there
is no law for it.

But if a thing be indifferent, and authority command it, Object.
then Jus divinum is written upon it.

It is the wisdom of authority to preserve the Churches in that liberty,
Answ. I.
wherein Christ has left them, for Authority is Tabularum custos, non Anthor.

Jus divinum upon it; for to offend a weak brother, is to destroy him, 1 Cor.
8. 11. And the destruction of a weak brother; is the breach of the moral law.
Now we all know, that authority cannot write Jus divinum upon the breach of the
moral law.

Sal^mon says, Ecclesiast. 12. 13. Fear God, and keep his commandments, for
this is the whole duty of man. As God is an all-sufficient being for a man to
live upon, so Gods word is an all-sufficient rule for a man to live by. And if
we look into Is. 30. 22. We shall find that God does not only command,
that the Images themselves should be destroyed, but that their coverings should
be desiled. I remember what Master Dering said in a Sermon before Queen
Elizabeth. There has bin much dust in the house, and though for the present
the house be swept, yet the dust is but laid behind the door, and a Hen will
come that will spread it all abroad again. Wherefore, I beseech you take heed,
that there be no dust left in the house of God in any corner. Give us the
ordinances of Christ in their naked, and own colors, so shall they be blessed
to us, we under them, and you by them.

Babylon, for ye heard from the context, that no sooner did there an Angel fly
through the midst of heaven with the everlasting Gospel, that is, preaching
openly; but another Angel followed presently, crying, Babylon is fallen. You
know, that contraries have contrary consequences. Babylon was built by
Ignorance, therefore the Papists say, Ignorance is the mother of devotion, and
they say truly; for indeed ignorance is the mother of their devotion; therefore
they use their friends, that the people may be put off with Mattins, and
Even-song, that so our ignorance might be an inlet to their devotion.
Wherefore then let there be an Angel sent, that is a ministry flying in the
midst of heaven, that is openly, and not by stealth; preaching the everlasting
Gospel to every place, and congregation, then will Babylon fall, and fall
immediately.

These be your duties.

But it is exceeding hard, and very difficult to do these: Object.
a perfect and full reformation is very good, and necessary, but exceeding
hard, and difficult.

True. But did not Abraham's Sacrifice hang in the briars and bushes? Answ.
Ye read, that when Isaac should have been sacrificed, God provided a
Sacrifice, but that Sacrifice did first hang in the briars. Ye are the children
of Abraham, and if you would offer a sacrifice of Gods own a sacrifice that
should be pleasing to him, make account that it must hang in the briars,
bushes, and many difficulties.

The heathen could say, Virtue groves upon the rocks, and if the extirpation of
Babylon, with the reformation of true Religion, were not a hard work, it were
not fit for a Parliament to do. They are met to unty such knots as none else
can unty. The heathen King said to a poor man, Though this gift be too great
for you to receive, yet it is not too great for me to give. Either it is of
God that you are assembled, or else it is not; if it be not, why sit you here,
if it be, can any thing be too hard for God; Wherefore, let your faith laugh in
the face of difficulties. For as unbelief will make a thing difficult though
never so easy, so faith will make a thing easy though never so difficult.

But this work is not only exceeding hard and difficult, Object.
but very dangerous. In great reformations, there must be some alterations, and
alteration cannot be without danger and trouble.

1. There is much difference between smart and danger. Answ.
If a man have rotten, and aching teeth in his head, though the pulling them out
be exceeding troublesome, and full of ache, and smart even to bleeding of the
gums, and vexation of all the body, yet there is no danger, much smart, but no
danger. So in regard of the Church and Commonwealth, though the pulling out of
some rotten members may cause a bleeding, make trouble, and some disturbance,
yet there is no danger, some ache, but no danger.

2. Many things seem to be dangerous at a distance, that are not so at hand.
When Moses rod was at a distance from him, it was turned to a serpent, and he
fled from it; but when he took it by the tail at Gods command, it was his
rod in his hand again. Prisons, banishments, miseries, at a distance are
serpents to us; when we come to them, are exceeding comfortable, and our rods
in our hands.

3. Suppose there were danger in a reformation, and extirpation of all that is
Babylons, yet there is more danger in want of reformation. Vomiting Physic is
very troublesome, but disease more. He that ventures against Babylon, at the
worst can but lose his life, which may be taken away by the fall of some tyle,
on the turning of some humor in our body; but he that partakes with Babylon
in her sin, shall partake with her in her plagues and punishments to all
eternity. What a trouble did Achan cause, yet he was but one man, his act one,
and the Babylonish garment but one. O what trouble then will it be to suffer
many Achans, and that continually? Augustine says, that when the Jews would
not acknowledge Christ, lest the Romans should come, and take their place, in
preventing loss, they lost most. They would not lose their earth, and they
lost their heaven, they would not lose their place, and they lost their God.

4. But suppose that there were the most danger in the best reformation, is
there not enough in heaven to pay for all. Nay, my beloved, even on this side
heaven, there is no loss by Christ in losing for Christ; non habendo habemus,
In not having, we have. I remember what is written of fortis Zisca, and (as my
Author says) written upon his tomb in his Epitaph, thus, Eleven times in
joining battle, I went Victor out of the field, I seemed worthily to have
defended the cause of the miserable and hungry, against the delicate, fat, and
gluttonous Priests, and for that cause to have received help at the hand of
God. Mark the emphasis, it lies there, And for that cause. But ye have an
example of Jehoshaph at, which is exceeding full, and much encouraging, 2 Chro.
17. 3. And the Lord was with Jehoshaphat, because he walked in the first ways
of his father David. He brought up reformation to the first institution, and
he was full therein, for it is faid, he walked in the first ways, not in the
last, of his father David, and sought not to Baalim, Nor after the doings of
Israel, ver. 4. And see what followed. Therefore the Lord established the
Kingdom in his hand, and all Judab brought to Jehoshaphat presents, and he had
riches, and honor in abundance, ver. 5. The Prophet Haggai is most express,
and bids them compute, whether that from the very day that they set their hands
to the building of the Temple. God did not build them up in outward mercies.
Certainly, my beloved, the only way to gain, is to lose for God. It is a
greater mercy to have, that I may lose for God, then that I may keep for my
posterity.

But suppose that a man be in place of authority, Quest.
and find that his heart is exceeding dull, and dead, and backward to this
work of reformation, what should he do that may give wings to his affections,
that may move and quicken up his spirit in this particular?

In this case, Answ.
let him put himself upon the exercise of his authority in the execution of
Justice. For it is with the Magistracy herein, as with the Ministry, the way
to preach, is to preach; the way to prayer, is prayer. Iter ad gratiam est
gratia, The way to grace is grace. God is pleased sometimes to come in with
fresh strength, and to give new assistance in the heat of preaching. So in the
acts of Magistracy, God comes in also in the dispensation thereof.

2. In that case, present your souls with that great trust that is committed to
you, and put upon you. If a Minister when he is banding away his precious
hours between this, and that play-book; or when he is most prodigal of his
peoples time (for it is theirs not his) if then I say when he is most idle,
and indisposed to those great services, he could but realize a Congregation,
and present before him the many souls that depend upon him, and as it were
hear them calling out unto him; O Sir, study, study for our souls, study for
our eternity; certainly this would awaken, move, and put life into him. So if
those that are in authority, and place of Magistracy, would but present
themselves with those many thousands that have entrusted them with their
liberties, estates, lives, I had almost said consciences, and eternities,
surely it would be exceeding quickening, and helpful.

3. Consider your present opportunity. Opportunity once lost, is never recovered.
My words shall know no flattery, never did England see a Parliament more fitted
for the service and work of God, then this now is. A quiver so full of chosen
and polished shafts for the Lords work. I have often thought that God would
deal by our present Parliamentary assembly, as Sampson did deal with the
Jaw Bone, wherewith he had slain heaps of the Philistines, which when he had
done, he threw it away; but afterward thirsting, and being like to dye for
want of water, God sent him back to his Jaw Bone again, and tells him that he
would cleave that, and open a fountain of water to him from thence. So has
God used this great Parliamentary ordinance for the slaying of many
Philistines, but, in these latter times, this Jaw Bone of ours has been
thrown away, and despised in the eyes of the world; and it may be now God
will open a fountain of water from hence, that we may all be revived, and
live thereby. Wherefore then let all those that are of this honorable
assembly, think; It may be God has raised me up to this time, all the while I
was at the University, God was laying in of abilities in mine education for
this occasion; and shall I lose this opportunity, Oportunitas indicat virum,
opportunity shows the man, and makes the man, and sometimes has the casting
voice for man's eternity.

4. Consider this also, that if reformation be not now wrought, our sin and
guilt will be greater then ever it was. This Parliament time is a Commencement
time for good or evil; take a good work, and though it were never so private,
and personal, yet if it pass in this house, it does commence national: so
take an evil, and though it were never so private before, yet if it pass
here, it will take an higher degree, and commence national wickedness; this
is a fearful evil, and very dreadful, that a personal sin should become
national. I know you are unwilling that any sin should steal it is degree;
as therefore you do desire that no personal sin should become national, I
beseech you in Christ's stead, let the reformation be full and perfect, and let
every man say, Babylon shall fall, I also will have a hand in it, and shoulder
at it. Down with it, down with it, even to the ground.

And if you be a Minister, you know your duty; only (as Luther phrases it) let
your knowledge be incarnate into godly practice; good works are faith
incarnate, knowledge incarnate. Now you read Joshua 3. 13, 15, 17. That when
the children of Israel went through Jordan, those Priests that bare the Ark of
the Lord, were first to enter upon the waters, and to stay in the midst of
them, till all Israel past over. The water does note affliction, the feet of
those that bare the Ark, are to be first in danger, and there to stand till all
be over. In the place before mentioned, Ezekiel. 44. 10, 11, 12. Gods threatening
is very terrible. As if he should say, As for those Levites that go astray
when Israel goes astray, and do admit the uncircumcised in heart to mine holy
things, though they be suffered in mine house, yet they shall but do the
outworks thereof, as for those inward things of mine house, and self, they
shall not be admitted to them, nor trusted with them. Though they may preach
some outward truths, which they may read of in books, yet for those inward
secret heart things of the Covenant, I will never trust them with them, they
shall not draw near to me. O therefore beloved, that we could deny our own
knowledge, wisdoms, parts, gifts, liberties, and all that is ours in this
great service.

But if a man's condition, Quest.
and state be private, what must he do to help forward the fall of Babylon?

Take heed that thou do nothing to hinder Gods public design by your private
practices, Answ. 1.
put away the evil of all your doings, lest your private wickedness do ponere
obicem to Gods proceedings.

Achans wickedness was committed in the dark, and with much privacie, yet what
influence had it into public misery?

Miriam and Aaron murmured against Moses, and envied at him, for which she was
stricken with leprosy, whereby the whole congregation was stayed, and their
march hindered. It is said 2 Chronicles. 20. 33. that the high places were not
pulled down, because the people were not prepared for the Lord; not because
the Prince was not prepared, or the great ones not prepared, but because the
people were not prepared. It is in regard of truth, as in regard of error in
this particular, though the Baker may have kneaded his dough, that is, his
false opinion, and made it ready, yet as the Prophet Hosea speaks, and as
Zanchy interprets the place, he sets not in, till the Oven be heat, that is,
the heart of the people warmed, and prepared for it. So for a truth also, or a
public mercy, and deliverance, though God have provided it for a people, yet
it is not handed to them, and set in, till their hearts be warmed and prepared
for it. You may observe therefore, that when David had made his penitential
Psalm for his own sin, Psalm. 51. after much supplication for the pardon of
his own evil, and for grace, and comfort he comes at last in the 18. ver. to
this petition; Do good in thy good pleasure unto Sion, etc. How comes that in
here? Yes, when a man has once repeated of his own sin, and cleared that
reckoning, then he is fittest to ask mercy for the Church, and till then unfit.
Therefore though in regard of your own souls, your own eternity, you will
not part with your own sins, yet if you have any pity, any compassion, any
bowels toward y(...)wne Country, or Churches of God, put away the evil of
all your doings.

2. Though your condition be never so private, you may discover the ways of
Babylon, the works, and complotments of the Baby lonish party: and the
discovery of evil is half it is ruin, as the Apostle speaks, 2 Timothy 3. 9.
They shall proceed no further, for their folly shall be made manifest to all.

3. You may believe down the walls of Babylon. Faith removes mountains,
though it be but a grain; By it the walls of Jericho fell, in the blowing of
those poor Rams horns. And the walls of Jericho were built up to heaven,
surely then the Walls of Babylon cannot be higher. Wherefore seek out those
promises, and threatenings, set your heart toward them, bear your selves upon
them, urge, and press God by virtue of them, and say, though it be very
unlikely that Babylon should fall, yet God has thus, and thus promised, thus
and thus threatened, and he is faithful, here I will stay, and here I Will wait.

4. You may spread the blasphemies of the Babylonish faction in the eyes of
heaven. Thus did Hezekiah when Rabshakeh blasphemed, and we know how it
prevailed. Great, and grievous have the blasphemies been wherewith the men of
Babylon have blasphemed the Saints of God, and the footsteps of his Anointed,
which God takes as done against himself, and so repayes them, Ezekiel. 35. 12.
compared with the 13 verse. In the 12 ver(...) said, I have heard all thy
blasphemies which thou have spoken against the mountains of Israel, saying,
they are laid desolata, they are given us to consume: But in the 13 verse these
words are charged upon them, as if they were spoken against God himself, Thus
with your mouth you have boasted against me, and have multiplied your words
against me. Therefore at the 14 verse follows the punishment. The spreading of
their hellish blasphemies, is exceeding prevalent with God, and very potent.

5. You may use all the Interest you have in heaven, and whatsoever credit you
have there, improve it, which we beseech you do now in this particular. Your
prayers puts them under Gods curse.

6. Though your condition, and station be never so private, you may according
to your place, curse the practices and complotments of all the enemies. Does
not Jacob seem to pronounce a curse upon the practices of Simeon, and Levi,
though his own children, Genesis 49. 7. Cursed be their wrath for it was cruel,
etc. for in their anger they flew a man, and in their self, will they dug
down a wall. What is the endeavor of the Babylonians, but to dig down the
walls of Jerusalem, and of our protection. O my soul come not thou into their
secret. God has commanded that Merosh should be cursed, and cursed bitterly;
because they went not forth to help the Lord against the mighty. How bitterly
then are they to be cursed, that go forth to help the mighty against the Lord.

It was a Statute, and a Law in Israel, that if any removed the ancient
landmarks, he should be cursed. Cursed, says the text, shall he be that
removes the ancient Landmarks, and let all the people say Amen. What is the
ancient Landmark of England, but our Laws and Religion, and therefore if any
man shall remove this our Landmark, cursed shall he be, of the Lord cursed,
and let all the people say Amen.

7. What ever personal injury has been done unto you by any of the enemies
of the Churches, you may, you must pass them by, so far as it is a private
concernment, and you shall not lose hereby, your forgiveness hastens their
ruin. For this cause, as you may read, Numb. 12. 2, 3, 4. God himself took
vengeance on Miriam, because Moses was a meek man: see how the mention of his
meekness is brought in by way of parenthesis at the third verse, as the cause
of Gods proceedings against her, ver. 4. Wherefore my beloved, have any been
wronged, and injured by your, and Gods enemies, carry it meekly, carry it
humbly, no revenge, no revenge, but all forgiveness. And have they begun to
fall before you, let there be much rejoicing, but no insulting, praises, but no
insulting, prayer still, but no insulting. Let your moderation be known to
all, for God is at hand. These are your duties. Which things if they be in
you, and abound, in due time Babylon shall fall, and you shall see it; for the
second doctrine tells us it.

Though Antichristian and Romish Babylon be never so great, Doct. 2.
yet it shall fall, and fall assuredly.

This is but equal, Reason 1.
those that have fallen from God, shall fall by God; those that have made
others to fall, shall fall themselves. Now the man of sin is the star that
is fallen from heaven, who in the 2 Thessalonians. 2. 3. (as some observe) is called in
the abstract, Apostacy not an Apostate, a falling away, not one that is fallen
away, so notorious is he for sinful falling; and as God rewards grace with
his own grace, so he rewards sin with it is own likeness.

2. How else shall Sion rise, if Babylon do not fall? It is said, when the
Lord exalts the low tree, he brings down the high tree, then shall all the
trees of the Forest rejoice. God is making way to such a Jubilee, therefore
Babylon must fall, and that assuredly.

3. Those that are too big for themselves, and cannot manage their own
greatness, must needs fall. Pride goes before a fall; It is the natural
genius of Babylon to be proud, and great, great and proud. Babell was at first
built to affront providence, that the world might be no more drowned.
Afterward says that King in Daniel, Is not this great Babylon that I have
built for mine honor. And Revel. 18. says our late Babylon, Isu a Queen,
etc. They have been great, and in their own eyes great, surely therefore
their own weight shall sink them.

4. Must not those needs fall that are set in dark and slippery places, whom
the Angel of the Lord drives? Now, if ever, the places of Gods enemies are
very slippery, themselves in the dark, and the Angel of God driving them.
Therefore they shall fall, and fall assuredly.

And if so. Use.
Then learn we how to take notice of, and behold these great works of God
concerning the fall of Babylon, as they fall out in our generation. It is in
regard of the evil that comes to evil men, as in regard of the good that
comes to the good. Now when the Saints do receive any mercy, their hearts
stick not in it, nor their eyes on it, but they see it lying under it is
relation, in relation to the word, and promise, saying; It is indeed a great
mercy that I have a house, and place to dwell in, but God has not only given
me sweet habitation, but he has given it me in the way of a promise, to
perform the mercy promised. He has given me wife, children, and friends, to
perform the mercy promised, Nay, he has given me Christ himself to perform
the mercy promised, Luke 1. Thus they see all things, lying under a promise in
that relation. So also when ye see any judgment befall the enemies of Gods
Church, you are not to look upon them, as mere works of God, but to look
upon them in their relations, in relation to the threatening, as lying under the
threatening, and the fruits of it; and the reason hereof is this especially,
because otherwise you do not see the whole work of God, when you do see it
before you. As it is said of Israel, Deuteronomy. 29. 4. Yet the Lord has not given
you eyes to see, etc.

As now suppose that a fool, a mad man, or a beast should come into the
congregation, though they should see the water of Baptism, yet they would not
see the Sacrament, or half the Sacrament, because they could not see it under
it is relation. Wherefore my beloved, when ever you shall behold the hand of God
upon the world, in the fall of Babylon, and his great works, that way, be sure
that ye behold them under the relation, in relation to the Lords threatening,
and say; True, here is a Babylonish Priest, crying out, Alas, Alas my living, I
have wife and children to maintain, and all is gone, my preferment is gone, my
hope is gone, my place, and office gone. But all this is to perform the
judgment threatened; God threatened before, that he would put it into the hearts
of the Princes of the earth to eat her flesh, and drink her blood, Revel. 17.
16. Now it is in a great measure fulfilled, for her great revenues, and rich
livings are in part her flesh, and blood. God said before, Revel. 18. That her
Merchants should stand a far off weeping, and wailing, and saying, Alas, alas,
that great City. Thus is the word of the Lord fulfilled, and God is faithful.

As the fall of Babylon is very certain, Doct. 3.
so it is the duty of the Saints to speak of it as if it were done already.

We are bound to honor the faithfulness of God, Reas. 1.
more than the faithfulness of any other, because other things are faithful
to us, (as Salvian observes) because he is faithful. We expect cooling, and
cleansing from the water, and that is faithful: Why? For God is faithful, he
bids it be faithful to us. We expect warmth, and light from the fire, and
that is faithful: Why? for God is faithful, he bids it be faithful to us.
In all these faithful creatures there is but a drop of Gods faithfulness, and
when they promise, we believe them, and shall we not believe him when he
promises, and when he threatens? When a faithful friend promises, we say it
shall be, but we are to honor Gods faithfulness more, and therefore to speak
of the thing promised, or threatened, as if it were done already.

When we do but begin a good work, God Heb. 11. 17. It is said, by faith
Abraham offered up Isaac; yet he did not actually offer him up, but intended
it, and set him self to do it at Gods command; Exodus 4. 20. it is said, that
Moses took his wife, and son, and returned to the land of Egypt; Yet he was
but in the beginning of his return. When we have begun any good work for God,
he speaks of it, as done altogether; therefore he having begun that great and
good work for the Churches, the fall of Babylon, it is our duty also to speak
of it, as if it were done already.

Let us therefore correct our manner of speaking. Use 1.
If any storm or trouble arise upon the Churches, we are ready to break forth
into dispondent conclusions, saying, God is now gone, mercy gone, the
ordinances gone, we were in good hope to have seen good days, the ruin of
the Churches enemies; but they do so prevail, as that we have no hope at all
in this particular. But though the extremity of the Church be never so great,
and the enemies never so flourishing, we ought to say, They are fallen, they
are fallen.

But how can we speak thus when an utter improbability, Object.
and unlikelihood dwells upon the business?

Yes. Answ.
For when God destroys his enemies, he either takes them away by a weak
hand, as Jer. 50. 45. The least of the flock shall draw them out; Or they
shall perish by their own hands, as Psalm. 9. 16. The wicked is snared in the
work of his own hands; Or they shall be destroyed without hands, As Job 34. 20.
The mighty shall be taken away without hands. And is this true may the soul
say, that the enemies of the Church shall perish by a weak hand, or by their
own hand, or without hands; then will I never sink, and despair in my heart,
or give ill language to Gods faithfulness, though the condition of Gods
Churches be never so low, though the condition of the enemies be never so high.

If we are to speak of this work, Use 2.
as if it were done already, when it is not done indeed; then how contrary are
those to Gods word, who say it is not done when it is done indeed. That will
not acknowledge Gods work, that say on the contrary, It is not fallen, It is
not fallen, when it is fallen in truth. And such there shall be, who when the
vial is powered upon the seat of the beast, shall gnaw their tongues, and
blaspheme the God of heaven, not repenting of their deeds, Revel. 16. 10, 11.
But I hope better things of you, and such as accompany salvation. Only now if
there be any here, that have given any assistance to Babylon, by pen, tongue,
or hand, let them repent. O every one, repent you of your superstition, repent,
repent you left you partake with Babylon in all her plagues, and torments to
all eternity. And remember that speech of Godtes Calchus, I am afraid to deny
the truth, lest I be for ever denied by the truth. Christus est via and
veritas, non consuetudo, Christ is the way, and truth, not custom, not
innovation. And if there be ever a drunkard, swearer, adulterer,
Sabbathbreaker, or profane person here, let him labor to get into Christ,
lest when he shall see these great works come to pass (and come to pass ye
shall see them shortly) with greater works of God then I have mentioned, ye may
be able to rejoice in them; whereas otherwise you will say, I, these be
glorious works indeed, and comfortable for those that are in Christ, but I am a
poor wretched drunkard, and not in Christ. Wherefore above all things get
into-Christ; so shall you rejoice with the felicity of Gods chosen.

And if any have had any ill thoughts, or words, of, or against Gods people,
now change your words, and your thoughts of them: For, for their sakes it is,
that those great works are to be done, Is. 43. 14. Thus says the Lord your
Redeemer, the holy one of Israel, for your sake I have sent to Babylon, and
have brought down all the Nobles, and the Chaldeans, whose cry is in the
ships. (*)

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 3 line 3. for vexations, read vexatious. Page ibid. lin. 24. blot outin.
Page 7. lin. last. for Septiros, read Septicollis. Page 15. lin 25. for Anthor,
read Author.

Die Martis. 6. Apr. 1641.
At a Committee of the Commons House of Parliament, for licencing of Books.

It is ordered that this Sermon of M. Bridges be published in Print:

Sir Edward Dering,
Knight and Baronet.

