THE Lovesick KING, An English Tragical History: WITH The Life and Death of
Cartesmunda, the fair Nun of Winchester. Written by Anth. Brewer, Gent.

LONDON, Printed for Rob. Pollard at the Ben Ionson-head behind the Exchange,
and John Sweeting at the Angel in Popes-head-Alley. 1655.

Persons of the Play.
Etheldred King of England, slain. Alured his Brother, after disguised under
the name of Eldred, and at last King. Canutus King of Denmark, the Lovesick
King. The King of Scotland. Edmond Duke of Thetford Edulf and Edell, Lords. 1
Captain. 2. Captain. Osbert the Rebel, Duke of Mertia. Erkinwald, and Harrold,
Lords of Denmark. Osrick, Hoffman, and Huldrick, Danes, Walcolme, a Scot. The
Abbot of Winchester. Goodgift a Merchant of Newcastle. Randal a Coal-Merchant,
brother to Goodgifts wife. George, Factor to Goodgift Thornton the Pedlar. Grim
the Collier, Servant to Randal* A Blacksmith. A Goldsmiths. A Workman. (...).
Elgina, Sister to Canutus King of Denmark. Cartesm^nda the fair Nun of
Winchester. Wife to Goodgift, after his widow.
The Scene, England. The Love Sick KING.
ACT. 1. SCEN. 1.
Enter King Etheldred, Alured his Brother, Edmond Duke of Thetford, Edulf,
Edell Earl of Hampshire, with their Swords drawn, and some Soldiers wounded
before them. Alarms continuing afar off. King, O Stay and hear me speak my
noble Friends, my Subjects and my Soldiers hear your King; in nine set Battles
against the conquering Danes has Ethelred with various fortunes fought, to
rescue you and England from the spoils of War and Tyranny: Recall your spirits,
this City Winchester is all our strength,

And if you cease to fight, the Foe comes on,
With bloody rage, and sad confusion.

Cap. 1. The breach is made, the Danes rush ore the Walls, and like the pent up
Ocean 'bove his banks, falls from his height with roaring violence, and drowns
us all in blood.


Alu. despair not quite,
We yet may beat 'em back, arm, arm to fight.

Edm. The Danes are in the streets, slaughter begins, and execution is their
Soldiers words. O will you lay your throats beneath their swords, or does your
danger make you desperate? your houses will be preys to fire and theft.


King. Your Wives and Daughters slaves to Danish lust.

Alur. Your Children in their Mothers arms struck dead.

Edm. The names of English torn from memory;
Oh let your valors in one chance be buil'd,
Or quite extirpe a Nation from the World.

King. See, on my knees, I pray you, for your selves; O it is for Englands
safety not my own, makes me a Subject to my Subjects thus, pity your King,
your Country, and your selves that now are falling, let your valors rise, and
in this last resist your enemies.


Alu. Now by my Princely birth (my royal Brother) His sight amazes more than
all the Danes; rise, rise, and speak no more; put them away, the stones will
sooner yield you aid than they.


2. Capt. Rip up our Breasts, and see our loyal hearts to fight and die for you
in this just cause, But death has seized us, all our bloods are wasted, and
through our many wounds our souls exhausted.


1. Capt. And since we can no more, O let your swords take swift revenge, and
save the Danes a labor, In killing us you ease our present woes.


Alarm and cries within. Ent Edel. Fly royal Princes, save your lives by
flight, the day looks clouded, there is no hope of safety; The traitorous Osbert
Duke of Mertia makes Head against you, and with all his Troops, enters the City
gates, guards in the Danes, tryumphs in slaughter thorough every street. The
aged Father of St. Swithins Abbey, that with his holy Cross between his hands,
mounted the Walls to cause the Soldiers on to fight for Freedom and Religion,
Seeing this Treason, has retired himself, and on the holy Altar heaves his
hands, awaiting death; the chaste religious Mayds, with Cartesmunda their fair
Governess,

Flock to the Temple as their last defense,
Hoping that place may shield their innocence.

King. Come, Princely Alured, my noble Brother, lets seek to stop their
pressing through the City, if we must die --.


Alur. It Is but our Fate
Which even till death close by thy side I Will wait.

Exeunt. Alarm. Enter Osbert, Erkinwald, Harold, and the Danes crying Kill,
kill, the wounded Soldiers rise and fight, to them, the King, Alured, and the
English, who are driven out and the King slain. Edm. Seek for your safety, Sir,
the King is dead.


Alur. See noble Edmond what the Danes have done, a King, by Heaven created for
a Crown, now only made fit for a golden Urne, betrayed to death and slaughter
pittiless.


Edm. Curse on the Traitors heart that wrought this Treason, rebellious Osbert
that betrayest thy Country.


Alur. Leave his reward to Heaven that will avenge it, and brave Duke Edmond,
since the times are such, lets take disguise with speed and seek for safety; If
Heaven be pleased, brave Lord, we yet may live, if not, what Heaven has given,
i will freely give. Hie thee to Thet ford, raise thy friends in Norfolk, If I
escape with life, I Will post to Scotland, Donald the King is of a noble spirit,
and will not slack I know to send his aid against this common Foe to both our
Kingdoms.

There shall thou meet me, tho our journeys far,
We Will once again renew this dreadful war.

Edm. Spoke like the hope of England! Royal Prince! shake hands in this red
City, and then part, for in thy quarrel I will live and dye.


Alu. First bear hence this cold clay of Majesty, our hapless Brother, and
revenge his death.


Edm. That, and what else may but express thy Worth and Title to the Crown, i will
still pursue, or may black infamy my baseness tell.


Alu. My soul shall quit thy love. Brave Prince farewell.


Exeunt severally. Alarm, Enter Canutus, K. of Denmark, Elgina his Sister,
Erkinwald, Osbert, Harold, Osrick, Soldiers. Osb. The Cities wone, my Lord,
the King is slain, and great Canutus with his Royal Troops may rake possession
of this conquered Town.


Canu. Thy love brave Osbert duke of Mertia, revolting from the English to our
part, has overturned the City Winchester, drowned in the blood of Kingly
Etheldred and all his Host. Hie thee Duke Erkinwald, conduct our beauteous
Sister to our Tent: You shall go back Elgina strongly guarded, till with our
swords we clear all passages that may oppose our peaceful entrance.

Stand on you Hill, and hear the English cries;
While Trumpets sound the Da^ish Victories.

Conduct her Elkinwald. Erk. I shall, great Prince.


Elgi. The Gods protect my noble Brothers safety, and crown thy brows with
wreathes of victory.


Canu. Duke Harold take our Guards, and march before, ransack the Temple, and
each private house,

Who bears the name of English strike him dead;
This day the Kingdom's wholly conquered.

Osb. Long may it so remain to great Canutus; an hundred thirty years the
English Kings have paid just Tribute to the conquering Danes, which now
re-conquered, with assured hopes to hold possession of the State and Crown, see
here the slaughtered Body of a King

(...) and disloyal Etheldred,
Thus (...) his foot upon thy head,
That was a (...) late with precious (...),
Rejoicing (...) by me thy pride is (...).

Canu. For bear brave English Lord, remember this, he was a King, let not thy
Subject foot tread on thy Sovereigns head; Take off his Crown, and when the
slaughter's past present it to us, and we will then reward thy faithful
service; enter the Town, spare neither Sex no^ Age,

Whip out this English Race, with iron rods;
The vanquished are but men, the Victors, gods,

Exeunt. Alarm. A great Cry within. Enter Abbot bearing a Cross, Cartesmunda
with two Tapers burning, which she places on the Altar, two or three Nuns
following. Abbot. Come holy Virgins, hie you to the Altar.


Car. The raging Foe pursues, defend us Heaven, Take Virgin tears, the balm of
martyred Saints, as tribute due to thy Tribunal Throne; with thy right hand
keep us from rage and murder; let not our danger fright us, but our sins:
Misfortunes touch our Bodies, not our Souls;

Keep Faith before us, from Hell none escapes,
Our deaths may be thy will, but not our Rapes.

Abb* Fair Cartesmunda, bright illustrious Maid, O be thou constant in this day
of trial.

Virtue is Vice unless it do persever,
That is true Holiness that lasts for ever.

Car. Upon my knees to you and Heaven I swear, when I do yield my Virgin vow to
lust, in the soft I wines of an insatiate bed, may I give up the treasure of my
youth

To such a man, whose lust and poisoned breath
May soon reward my sin, and be my death.

Follow, follow, Alarm, Abb. Such Vows being kept are true religious. Hark,
hark, the bloody
Foe has forced the Temple.
Turn boldly and be constant, here is the trial.

All Virgins, To Nature we will be false, to Heaven be loyal.

Alarm. Enter Canutus, Erkinwald, Harrold, Hofman, Osri^k, Soldiers. Canu. On,
on, kill all, spare none; this by Canusus dies; ha!
Who holds my conquering hand? what power unknown,
By Magic thus transforms me to a stone,
Senseless of all the faculties of life?
My blood runs back, I have no power to strike.
Call in our Guards, and bid them all give ore,
Sheath up your swords with me, and kill no more;
Her Angel-beauty cries, she must not dye,
Nor live but mine: O I am taken strangely:
Methinks I lift my sword against my self,
When I oppose her: All perfection!
O see, the pearled dew drops from her eye;
Arise in peace; fair soul, will you be mine?

Car. If you be death not else.

Canut. Here is his power, for if my wrath thou move,
This blow shall rid my heart of torturing love;
Pale deaths effect shall take away the cause, and I be (...) as Air: Thou
Sorceress, that stay'st my hand with Witchcraft, and with Charms: I will unwind
thy cunning Ex^rcismes. Rare beauteous Virgin, Will you love Canutus?


Carts. When to these bodies dead, thou give new l^^e, I then will love thee.


Canut. I Will give thee death, As those in blood have fallen; and thou shall dye. I
cud, -- We will withdraw; Then kill her.


Carts. And I am ready. Ty^ant, do thy worst. O heaven!


Canut. Hold Traitor, hold, thou have killed thy Sovereign* Does she not bleed? O
Love how strong's thy fear? All England shall not buy this Jewel from me: Did
thou strike her?


Har. I had not drawn my sword, you came so sudden.


Canut. Nor never may thou draw it against her life, so she be pleased to
love.


Carts. To have thee I will love, but never love thee.


Canut. Grant me thy Love, my Royalties are thine, and thou shall strike the
Sun blind with thy luster, in Ornaments more rich then is the Treasure ^id in
the unknown bottom of the Sea; And for thy pleasures --


Carts. Peace, sleek Flattery. Thou seek to violate my Virgin
Vow with thy enchanting tongue, which (...) I break,
The heavens shall fright the earth; Saints prove unjust,
Death lose this power, ere I embrace ma^s lust.

Canut. She turns me wild with rage and passion; I Will rip thy bofome up to see
that wonder, a constant woman's heart: Sure thine is f^ne, yet thus I Will pierce
it were it Adamant: Oh!


Ho offers to strike, and his sword falls. Erkin. My Royal Lord.

Har. Great Prince recall your spirits.

Canut. I Am struck with lightning from the torrid Zone,
Stand all betwixt me and that flaming Sun;
Yet do not: Let her heat in death be spent.
Go Erkinwald, convey her to my Tent.
Let her be guarded with more watchful eyes,
Then heaven has stars, for fear she be surpised;
If here she stay, I shall consume and dye,
It Is time must give my passions remedy.
Art thou not gone? Kill him that gazeth on her,
For all that see her, sure must dote like me,
And Treason will be wrought against us for her.
Be sudden. To our Tents, Prithee away,
The hell on earth is love that brings delay.

Exit Erk in. with Carts. Har. The Duke of Mertia with the English Crown
attends the pleasure of my Lord the King.


Canut. Present him to us; O obdurate Maid,
The English Crown is value less to thee,
This thy Idea crowns my victory.

Ent. Osbert. Osb. Low, as obedience, thus the vanquished English yields
subject duty to the King of Danes, and with this conquered Crown our lives and
honors.


Canut. You please us well Duke Osbert; come invest us, thy warlike hand shall
crown Canutus head, For by thy aid, this Realm is conquered.


Osb. Long live Canutus mighty King of Danes, of Denmark, Norway, and of
England King.


Flourish. Canut. Thanks Duke of Mertia, We must now remember that by thy late
revolt we wan this City, slew Etheldred the Lord of many thousands.

Now for reward which should have come before,
Thou never shall crown King or subject more.
Off with his head.

Osb. My Lord.


Canut. A guard I say, stop up the Traitors mouth: Let us have fear, not love;
Man's nature will be bold where it is liked; A Kingdom got by blood must so be
kept: I will not hear him speak; Away with him; Bring me his wisdoms head into
my Tent, there weel converse.


Osb. Heavens wrath is justly sent.


Exit with Guard. Canut. Here was it that I saw that blazing Star whose bright
aspect promised a general peace to this affrighted Kingdom: Torches Slaves,
the night comes on us, we are all in darkness, prepare my bed, weel rest us
after toil, and sleep, thou mother of forgetfulness, drown all my thoughts that
ere I saw this Virgin, make her a stranger to my memory, that I may joy in
this, not dye for love. Hofman, her looks are heaven; her eyes are Cupids
darts; Go bring her to me: Art not gone yet slave? It is an Embassy too good
for Hermes, the Herald of the gods: Thou shall meet Lightning, yet on thou
must, go ask that weeping Nun, do hear me? Art not gone? Were Hellen now
alive, this Maid alone would stain her beauty and new Troy should burn, Paris
would dye again to live to see her: O bring me her, Dull slave with reverence;
Let not the Sun be more out-worshipp'd by the tanned Barbarian: Tell her, A
bleeding Lover sent thee to her, and name me if thou chance to see her smile:
Tha'st not forgot my name.


A cup of Wine ready. Hos. No my good Lord.


Canut. Let me not spurn thee, Go, Fetch me some Wine, weel war a while with
Love. Fair Phaedra, who in Corinth once was found, compared to her, as
different they would show, as sable Ebony to Alpine Snow; when first I saw her
at the holy Altar, Surely the gods more careful of her life, then of a mass of
souls brought me upon her, and fixed my soul to hers: Let Us have some Music.

Ent. Hofman. But thou prevent'st us with a better sound. The Accent of her
Name strikes Music dumb, for she is Air of all perfection. -- Her Name?


Hof. Her three times sacred Name, most Royal King, is Cartesmunda, a Religious
Nun.


Canut. It needs no Epithet t'express the Name,
For Cartesmunda is the worlds bright frame.
I charge thee Villain, strait conduct her to me. Her sacred Name is
Cartesmunda called; O fairest soul! I fear't a harder Task to conquer thee,
than all the spacious Bounds of Barbary; Had the gods none to take my glory
from me, but a weak woman? O strange destined Fate! Ten Worlds in Arms against
Canutus State.

Enter Osrick and Cartesunda. See the day breaks; Look where Aurora comes, and
see the Mornings dew falls from her eyes, begetting better Flowers than those
of May from the glad ravished Earth: O tell me Fair, Speak English Maid; How
came thou to my sight? What make thou here? Came thou to murder me?


Cartis. What all my friends have found but wretched I,
I seek for, death to end my misery.

Canut. But can not find him, for thou art immortal; Death wud dye for thee,
if he even saw thee, and for thy sake make blunt his Ebon dart; Pray weep no
more, He prays that might command; We will not force the Jewel thou so
prizest, till, thou bequeath it freely to my youth. We are oth' Eagles kind,
and scorn to stoop to an ignoble Thought: Sweet will you hear me; 'Twas King
Canutus fetched that sigh you heard: Still turn aside! Well, if you loathe me,
leave me; there lies your way: Yet be advised, Fond Maid; No sooner shall thou
pass from forth my sight, but the base Soldiers will lay hold on thee, and
what I value 'bove Religion, will not be thus much there, They Will ravish thee,
and therefore prithee stay, with tears I pray thee. Thou frosty April, woo't
not love for love? Do It then for Honor, Pleasure, Majesty: Ungentle still?
Then get thee from my sight: Go to the Woods, and learn of wilder Beasts a
little pity: You preserve chastity with a foul sin, Ingratitude: Goodnight;
Yet stay, We are strangers, We may kiss at parting; Thou have infused
Promethean Fires into me: I have two lives, Yet none of them mine own. Fair
Cartesmunda, If thou will be gone, bid me Goodnight, though in some Language
that I understand not:


Carts. Goodnight, My Lord.


Canut. When shall I have thy Love?


Carts. When men shall cease to think there is a God, or any thing more
strange: Alas, great Prince!

My Chastity stands at the Bar above,
My Life I owe to you, but not my Love.

Canut. So young, and full of gray hair'd Purity: In vain I shoot against a
wall of brass, that sends mine own shafts back upon my self. I must choose
fitter time to conquer thee. Lights, and a double guard to attend my Love.

(Fairest) Good rest; be dutious in her keeping,
He wake with thought of thee, and then with weeping.

Exeunt. Manet Erkinwald, Harold, Captain. Erk. The King is Lovesick Harold;
Join thy powers, and round begir^ this City Winchester; Beset the ways, let
not the English escape, That stood the siege and sack of Winchester.


Har. I think there is few escaped, the King is slain
And England now submits toth' conquering Dane.

Erk. Prince Alured, the Brother to the King, and Edmond Duke of Thetford both
are escaped and may raise powers afresh: Therefore be careful.


Enter Elgina. Har. Doubt not my Lord. See here comes the Princes.


Ex. Erk. Madam, I bring you dear commends from your great Brother, England is
won, and the white flag of peace is reared upon the ruins of this City, King
Etheldred slain, and great Canutus invested with his Crown and Dignity. What
conquest can be more?


Elg. That you subdue your thoughts; and sir, give ore, till I have conference
with the King.


Erk. And then you will love?


Elg. Till then i will love no other.


Enter two Soldiers dragging in Alured in disguise. 1 Soul. Drag him along,
he is English and must dye. Come forward sir.


Alu. Ye cannot fright me, it is my wish to die,
And I that seek it scoff your Tyranny,
O for fair Englands good and my lost powers,
Mine be the suffering, and the glory yours.

Erk. What prisoner have our Danish Soldiers got?

2 Sold. One of the straggling English, my good Lord,
And now are leading him to have him tortured.

Erk. Let him come near us, Say, what art thou?

(Whispers with Alured. Elg. Some God, I think, disguised in humane shape, come
down to court us with bewitching looks,

There Is something tells me, if my thoughts speak truth,
To thee I owe the pleasure of my youth.

Erk. Was that thy fortune, 'thad been better far
Thou Had fallen amongst thy friends in this dread war
Then live to further shame. Away and hang him.

Elg. Stay good my Lord.


Erk. Madam forbear, the King has sworn the deaths of all that barred his
entrance to this City; they scorned his profer'd peace, and now must perish.
This may suffice, He Is English, and must dye.


Elg. If all the English perish, then must I, for I (now know) in England here
was b^ed, although descended of the Danish blood, King (...) my Father, thirty
years governed the one half of this famous Kingdom, where I, that time was born
an English Princess;

Therefore I pray, my Lord, set this man free
Let me bestow his life and liberty;
I Will beg it of the King.

Erk. Madam, it is yours, go Soldiers drink this gold, and let our word to you
discharge your Prisoner.


1. S^ul. It shall my Lord, would we were rid of all the English thus.


Ex. Sold. Elg. Pray Sir, resolve me, what has your fortunes been?


Alu. The most of woes dear Princess, I have lived to see my Country ruined, my
friends murdered,

My self condemned to die, and but for you
I had been dead, that life I have's your due.

Elg. Comfort your self, henceforth you shall be mine,
Attend this, noble Lord, it is for your good;
Where mildness conquers, we must shed no blood.

Erk. You are all compact of Love and Mercy (Lady) attend me sir, and for this
Princess sake, we will prefer thee; come beauteous Madam you now must leave the
Tents to entertain the glorious tryumphs of the great Canutus, whom you must
comfort, for the Lovesick King sits sadly doting on a beauteous Nun.


Elg. Is It possible (my Lord) the King our brother,
In midst of Conquest should be Cupids prisoner?

Erk. Such is loves power, it flies with swiftest wings,
And midst his armed Guards he wounds Kings.

Elg. Venus defend me, if he be thus powerful we shall be all Soldiers, and
these stern Wars must be transformed into Loves encounters. Well, my good Lord,
we will see this English wonder my Brother so admires, call for our Guard and
Train.


Erk. They are ready (madam)

Elg. Go you before then (sir) and I Will not stay,
Look to your Prisoner, lest he ^un away.

Erk. O fear not Lady -- Come sir,

Ex. Erk. Alur. Elg. Would he would run, so he would take me with him, by Jove I
love him, but it is bashfulness, that thus makes women hide their passions, even
till we burst and die; we must not plead love,

Yea, though it be offered we must still refuse it.
With fo^d denial when we wish to choose it.
I see no sense for this; well amorous youth,
For thy sake I Will teach women what to do,
And spite of custom to begin to woo.

Exit. ACT. 2.
Enter Thorneton with Needles, and a A Lambs-skin, Singing. Thor. Be gone, be
gone, my Juggy, my Puggy, be gone my Love, my Dear, my Money is gone, and ware
I have none, but one poor Lamb-skin here: Why so, and who buies this Lamb-skin
now, A most fine, dainty, nappy Lamb-skin, if a Lady would line her Petticoat,
A sweeter Lamb-skin cannot kiss her Catastrophe: Let me see, how often do I
transform my self in four and twenty hours? First, Here in Northumberland, mine
own native Country, amongst poor people I change these myllan fustian Needles
into eggs, then my eggs into money, and then am I a Merchant, not of
Eels-skins, but Lamb-skins; and thus poor Thornton of Northumberland, picks out
a living in spite of Beggary: Yet this is not the living that I aim at
neither; for I may tell to all men that I have a terrible mind to be a horrible
rich man; nay, I am half assured on it too, for where ere I go, there is
something still whispers in mine ears, I shall be greater, and here at
Newcastle too, into which I am now entering. All which to confirm, a Witch or a
Jugler, has guided my fate in writing, and now I Will read it once again, that all
the World may know my fortunes, and wonder at them. Mark then, for thus it goes.

Reads. Go to Newcastle, take thy fate,
Yet ere thou enter, count thy State,
If service in that place thou get
Thy wealth will rise to infinite,
And Thorntons name in England stand,
The richest Subject in the Land.
O fortune, how have thou favored a poor Merchant stranger? I have all this
wealth in conceit already, and all this have I got of cunning man, for two poor
Millan Needles, and one of 'em lacks an eye too. No matter. Hope keeps the
heart whole, and I shall be rich, that is certain; but how I know not* nor care
not, so I come in any likeness; my Fortune says, I must get a service here in
Newcastle, but ere I enter I must count the wealth I have now, and that is soon
reckoned, one poor half penny and a Lambs-skin, is all the wealth I have in faith
and yet for all this my state must stand the richest Subject in the Land; it is
certain, my mind gives me it, and I am assured on it, yet I must put my self in
remembrance of my poverty, lest I should forget my self when I am grown so
rich, I will write a note on it ere I enter the Town* and hang it here upon some
tree, to keep it in mind, as long as the River of Tine runs under it. Let me
see, instead of paper this Tile-stone shall serve, and here is and Ink-horn I
stole from my Hostis, a scurvy Queen, if I had not given her money for my Ale,
she would have chaulked me presently, this shall serve the turn. I Will sit down
and write, sweet Hellicon inspire me with thy Castalian luck.


Enter Goodgift, and Randolfe, and George, his Wife. Good. Come, come dispatch,
the wind is North North West, and blows fair on us; Where is George my Factor?


Fact. Here Sir,


Good. At the next ebb, good George, I and the ship fall down to Tinmouth; are
your books made even, the goods made fit, and all things fitting for the voyage.


Fact. All Is done sir, the Commodities prized and summed; their value at my
back return from Sea, I hope to treble to you.


Good. Heaven deal in that, or gain, or loss we must be still contented, and
therefore are we called Adventurers, because we know it is hazard.


Rand. ^Tis indeed sir, and I do wonder at this gain of hazard you will set so
great a state, seeing the time joins with the Sea in danger; the Danish Fleet
watches to pill the English Venturers. Then be advised.


Wife. Yet to avoid all dangers Husband, I Would have you do as here my Brother
does, ve^ture your state in your own Country, tho the gains be smaller, the
safety's not so doubtful.


Good. I, I, Wife, thy Brother Randolfe here is known a famous Merchant for
Newcastle Coals, and England holds the circuit of his traffic, but we that are
Adventures abroad, must fame our Country through all Christendom, nay far
beyond our Christian Territories, to Egypt, Barbary, and the Tauny Moors, Where
not indeed? if Sea and wind gives way unto our dancing Vessels; nay, nay,
Brother, your merchandise compared with us, I tell you, is but a poor
fresh water venture.


Rand. Well brother, well, pursue your Foraign gain, I rest content at home, at
the years end we will cast the difference 'twixt your far-fetched treasure, and
our Newcastle homebred Minerals, you shall perceive strange transformation,
black coals turned to white silver, that is my comfort sir.


Good. And take it to you sir, with much good I wish it. But stay, slay, who is
that?


Rand. One that is very brain busy it seems.


Good. Peace, peace, observe him prithee,


Thorn. Here did Thornton enter in
With hope, a half penny, and a Lambs-skin,
It shall go in faith. I Will never strive to mend it; foot this Poetry, and a man's
brains were not well laid in his head, wooed make him mad, I think if there be
any Hellicon in England it is here at Newcastle, I am inspired with it, every
Coal-pit has a relish on it, for who goes down but he comes out as black as Ink.


Good. Is not this fellow mad?


Rand. Good faith I doubt it.


Thorn. Well this writing will I set up here at the Towns end, that when I have
got all these riches together, and sit amongst my comely Brethren, I then may
staulk the pace of wit, and worship, here to read this Manuscript, then will I
view my Warehouses, disperse my coin, comfort the poor, I and perhaps build
Churches.


Rand. Either he speaks to himself, or he is possessed with some strange talking
spirit, that Dialogues within him.


Thorn. Then will I have some Fifty Beades-men in my life time, for that is the
first way to be prayed for here, and mourned for when I am gone, and on their
Gowns their Cullisance shall be six millan Needles, and a silver Lambs-skin.


Good. Ha, ha, the more he speaks, methinks it is more distracted. Lets question
him.


Wife, Is he not, think you Husband, one of those Players of Interludes that
dwells at Newcastle, and conning of his Part, for surely these are other men's
matters he talks of? Do you hear honest man, and Friend, let me instruct you
to be wise and sober.


Sings. Thorn. I come not hither for thee to teach,
I have no pulpit for to Preach,
I wooed thou had kissed me under the Breech,
As thou art a Lady gay.

Wife, Marry come up with a vengeance.


Good. La you wife, you see what it is to trouble a man in his Meditations,
prithee let him alone, he is not mad I warrant thee.


Thorn. With hope, a halfpenny, and a Lambs-skin, I protest I never pleased my
self better. Let me see, what day's this; O Monday! I shall love Mondays vein
to poe^ize as long as I live, for this trick.


Good. Good speed, Good fellow.


Thor. Ha, Whose that? O I thank you Gentlemen; If I have good speed, I Will do
good deeds the sooner: Your sufferance a little I beseech you; Then will I
build some famous Monument.


Rand. Thou build'st in the Air I think: Prithee, what Countryman art?


Thor. Faith Sir, a poor Northumberland man* and yet I tell ye Gentlemen, not
altogether the poor Fellow, which you behold me; Fortune may change, If you
seek what I shall be, It Is infinite, and cannot be summed together: But if you
would know my present store; It is all summed on this Tyle-stone: I shall be
very rich, that is certain; and this Town of Newcastle must be the raising of my
fortune, if there I get service, then are Wealth and Treasure my servants.


Good. And such a servant cannot want a Master. But Prithee tell me, Whence
have thou these hopes?


Thorn. Pray Sir, read that, then tell me your opinion.


Good. Prithee let us see it. Go to Newcastle take thy Fate,
Yet ere thou enter, coun^ thy State:
If service in that place thou get,
Thy wealth will rise to infinite;
And Thorntons name in England stand
The richest subject in the Land. -- Excellent in faith. And do thou believe
all this?


Thorn. As sure as you live Sir, and all the world cannot drive me from this
opinion, but that I shall be a very rich man.


Good. I like thy confidence: How do desire to have Employment? Will thou go
to Sea.


Thorn. Sea or Land, Fire or Air; Let Newcastle be my home, and some honest man
my Master. This Halfpenny, and this Millan Needle, shall I multiply to a
Million of Halfpence, and this innocent Lambs-skin to a Magnificent Lordship.


Good. Stay there, I prithee, it is wealth enough for a subject, come, I Will give
thee handsel, that is Entertainment, my name is Goodgift a Merchant of
Newcastle, where thou desire to serve, give me thy hand, If I do live to see
thee this rich man, I shall be proud to say, I was thy Master.


Thorn. I am your servant Sir, and will be faithful.


Good. Obey me then at first, as I Will employ thee: Thou shall to Sea, I see thou will be thrifty: Come hither George, take him a Shipboard with thee, change his
Apparel strait, and make him handsome; I begin so well to relish his
Plainness that I am half persuaded of his hopes. How say thou wife?


Wife. Nay, Nay, He bad me kiss his Breech, B^rlady, but that is no matter
Husband, seeing I see his Fortunes are so hopeful, he shall have my likeing:
Come hither Thornton, since thy Master sends thee out to Sea, there is something
for thee to begin thy stock with, and if thou double it, I Will never grudge
in faith, So thou't remember me, when thou art a rich man.


Good. Ha, Ha, -- she is confident already.


Rand. So shall I never be, till I see it Sir.


Good. Well, Well, Do as I bid thee George, under thy self, let him have charge
of all.


George How will he put off these Commodities he has Sir?


Thorn. Tush, Tush, I Will have an outcry Fellow George, for so I take it Sir,
your name is now.


George Why what is thy Lambs-skin good for?


Thorn. Marry Muff Sir.


Wife. Thou say true indeed Thornton, and I Will purchase it of thee, for that
purpose, I Will give thee a Groat for it to line my Muff withal.


Thorn. And you shall have it Mistress, It has been lain dead on my hands a great
while, and now it shall be dead on yours, only this, Sweet Master, I must
inteat you, that ere I enter the Town, I may hang up this writing here; I doubt
not Sir, but at my coming home, I shall be able to have it cut in stone.


Good. Agreed, Agreed, an honest Motion. How now, Who Is this comes here?


Enter Grim. Wife. It Is Grim the Collyer, Ist't not brother?


Rand. O yes sister, the main Over-seer of all my Coals, I warrant you, his
heads more troubled too, then Thorntons was to count his hop'd-for wealth, and
mark how wisely he proceeds about it.


Grim. Let me see now, first five hundred Chaldron of Coals at ten Groats a
Chaldron, that is, in Coals, and money; ten Groats, and ten Groats, is twice ten
Groats; Then take twice ten out of two times ten, and there remains four times
ten: fivescore Chaldron at ten Groats a Coal, comes to five shillings, then
take me thirty Coals out of thirty Chaldron, and put them together, and there is
the whole Voyage, so thirty Chaldron of Coals, comes to five Chaldron of Angels.


Good. O rare! He multiplies bravely.


Rand. I told you what a reckoning he would make on it.


Grim. Then to cast how many Fourpence halfpennies there are in a Chaldron of
Angels: Let me see, take half a Chaldron out of a whole Chaldron, and there
remains -- No, No, this is not the way; I must begin lower: A Chaldron of
Angels, if you take nothing out, there remains something: This is the honest
way for a servant when he casts up his Masters Reckonings, to take nothing out,
and then the whole Stock remains untouched still.


Rand. I marry Sir, I like that well; Why, How now Grim, What art thou doing?


Grim. I cry you mercy Master, I am even doing my good will to make your
Accounts right Sir: There Is five hundred Chaldron of Coals leaving the River,
and shipped away: They Will be Sea-sick to morrow.


Rand. How many for London (Grim?)


Grim. Three hundred Chaldron, Sir.


Rand. And whither go the rest?


Grim. 'Twas purposed they should ha gone to Winchester, but its thought since
the Danes came thither, they have little need of Sea-coal, every place is so
hot; they say a Tailor burnt his Goose, and yet no fire came near him.


Rand. That Is strange* Well Grim, bid them alter their course for Winchester,
bid them put in at Lyn, and Yarmouth, and let London be the farthest of their
journey until these Wars afford us better safety.


Grim. Alas Master, if you stow up your ships, you may even hang up your
Collyers, for they will starve and dye if they come above ground once; you have
sevescore pits, and seven hundred lusty Collyers daily digging in them, and if
they come above ground once -- What Thornton my old Acquaintance! How ist't,
How ist't man?


Thorn. Never better in faith.


Good. Do thou know him?


Grim. Better then the Tailor that made his Doublet: Know Thornton, the famous
Needle-maker of Northumberland? There Is not a Beggar that carries a Patch about
her, but knows him; All our Collyers buy Needles of him for the same purpose:
Many a night has he lain in the Sellerage amongst ^ Thornton, How many Eggs
have you roasted at our fire in the Coal-pits?


Thorn. Thou posest me now in faith Grim, I have been infinitely beholding to
thee, and when I am a rich man, here is my hand, I Will requite it.


Grim. I had rather thou would set a certain day to do it. Do thou think to
be rich by Pedlers Eggs, and Lambs-skins?


Thorn. But I have other Employments now Grim.


Good. He is my servant Sir, and is already by my best liking voyaging to Sea.


Grim. Does he go a foot Sir?


Good. Sir, Sir, He Is a Venturer too, and when you see his safe return
again with wealth from Sea, you will make legs to him.


Grim. How legs to him? I scorn him and his Lambs-skins. No Sir, Thorxton must
remember I am Controler of the Cole-pits, and that many a night I have
committed him to the Hole, and there he lay forty Fathom deep beneath me, where
I co'd have buried him alive, if I had thought on it: Make legs to him?


Good. Come, Come Sir, We Will have you friends at parting; Go George, follow my
directions, and let Thornton have that Employment I prescribed to you; Come
Sir, you shall first erect your Character according to your mind at the Towns
end, to keep a Record of your Entrance in.


Thorn. With hope, a Halfpenny, and a Lambs-skin, that is all Sir.


Grim. Ha, Ha, a brave rich man I promise you.


Exeunt. Enter Erkinwald and Alured. Erkin. Is thy name Eldred?


Alur. Yes, My good Lord.


Erkin. Thou art my prisoner still, and we have power over all, thy Life and
Fortunes.


Alur. I still confess it, Sir.


Erkin. It Is well, Can thou guess then, why my love extends it self so
lineally toward thee? Thou know that even from death I have advanced thee
close to my self, and trust thee with my secrets, and one above the rest,
requires thy aid, thy subtle and quick brain can better forge matter of fair
discourse than mine can be, The bright Elgina thou must court for me. In Peace
and War she has been still my aim, for her the tedious night I do beguile, with
serious thoughts of her divinity, and watching till the midnight Chimes be
past, have waked again before the Village Cock had called the Plowman to his
early labor.

Go plead my love, yet ere thou go, here swear
(Yet I with love will win thee, not with fear)
Never to injure me in this disguise, Nor with Icarian wing to soar too high.


Alur. I were a villain to betray your trust, being so meritless of your great
favors, and therefore vow by all that man may swear by, I Will be as true to you
in this employment, as truth is to the just.


Erk, Thou have said enough, I leave it to thy tr^st -- Go, return and make me
happy, there is gold, spend freely.

Exit.
Alu. Fortune I see thou now art blind, and foolish, and without aim direct'st
thy giddy shafts, these gifts thou give to me, which I despise, what physic
h^lps a man just as he dies? It Is Englands peace that I would live to Court, but
she is fled, and I a captive Prince, slave to my mortal foes, till time release
me, that once I may regreet my English friends, which long ere this, I know
have wished my presence, to join our forces for our Countries freedom. Enter
Elgina. But here she comes whom I must plead for love; my faith is past, and
were she beauties Queen, and half the world her dowre, I would not wrong

The trust I have received, I Will court her for him,
And plead my Masters love, though she abhor him.

Elg. Who Is there, Eldred?


Alu. Your pardon beauteous Princess, I must woo you.


Elg. But i will prevent you sir, for i will woo you.


Alu. For noble Erkinwald my warlike Master. All love from him.


Elg. Is nothing like to thee,
That conquer'st love, and Cupids Deity.

Alu. You do amaze me Lady.

Elg. Be not afraid,
But tell me boldly, could you love a Maid
That for thy sake would be a president, and teach all women a new way to win
the often wished desires of stubborn me^? In me you shall observe patience and
duty, tender care, and fear; by thy bright eyes, I Will teach the constant Turtle
truer love, and make the Nuns at Vesta's Altar swea^,

The Virgin state is not so strict to move
As the obsequious life* you lead in love.
And cannot you yet say, you mean to love me.

Alu. Beshrew me Madam but you tempt me shrewdly, pray give me leave to think
upon it --. Ha! my vow's not broke yet; for I woo not her, that was my oath
sure, and I think there is no man that can withstand the wooing of a woman. Fond
fool, how quickly youth and blood transform?


Elg. Come, What Is your answer?


Alu. Dearest Lady, There is but one thing in the world that hates me, and you
have brought it with you.


Elg. O me! what should it be?


Alu. Forgive my rashness, it is a thing within you, not you, that charms me
from you.


Elg. Be it my heart, i will pull it out, so thou will love me.


Alu. O gracious Princess, it is your Royal blood, so near allied i^to the great
Canutus

Keeps me at distance, were our states made even
My love should be as strong as zeal to H^aven.
Therefore Imperial Maid --

Elg. No more, if that be all, we will dispense with greatness, use me like one
that loves you, I Will Invent a plot that shall in short secure us both; I crave
but this, that thou be true of faith: For by my life I love thee.


Alu. And (gracious Princess) since now I see your passions are unfeigned, I
vow not only to requite your love, but with affected and sincere intents to
crown your wishes, though it work my ruin.


Elg. Our faiths and hearts are one then, Cupids wings,
Can crown mean births, with joy, make slaves of Kings
Knew Erkinwald my heart, he would change with thee,
And be thy slave to have command ore me.

Lend me thine ear in private. Enter Erkinwald. Erk. At it so close? I Will hear
their conference, win her, and gain thy Freedom, Love and Honor. Ha! That kiss
(bold slave) past thy Commission; Death and the Devil, she kisseth him too. O
fond Erkinwald be blind and do not see them; thy office was to speak, but not,
for thy self.


Alu. Natures Divinity is in thy looks, and he an Atheist sees thee, and not
loves. Should Erkinwald now see it, I would love thee, tho for each kiss I had a
several torture, ten deaths for thy enjoying were my Bliss.


Elg. So high I pr^ze thee, by this Virgins kiss.


Erk. Yet you make shift to reach him with your lips; Degenerate Princess, I
suspect thy birth: Yet well may thou be Sister to thy Brother, For Great
Canutus blood runs low as t^ine, and Lovesick doa^eth on an English Nun.


Alu. Then you resolve to ^ly?


Elg. Heaven knows I do.


Erk. Here Is one will stop your Journey. Thunder part ye, slave.


Elg. Ha, O me unfortunate!


Alu, Tush, fear not Madam. See here I stand my Lord.


Erk. A perjured Villain.


Alu. That tongue lies that speaks it -- Hea^ me, I courted for thee with my
best of speech, and showed my faith as firm as Adamant, till fate that rules
all love, ore-rul'd her so, that she became a Suitor for my love,

And on my worthless self her smiles has thrown;
My tongue was yours, but my consent mine ow^.

Erk. I Will have that heart she loves -- hold eyes from weeping.


Elg. But I shall hate that heart if in thy keeping.

Sheath up thy sword, and hear me Elkinwald, what shall I give thee to renounce
my love?


Erk. As much as thou would give to attain Elysium should not avert my love
from these fair eyes, Jove's thunder, or eternal miseries shall never so
transform me.


Elg. Yet I cannot love thee.


Erk. But i will remove the cause of that. Villain, thou have seen our slaves dye,
when their Lords have laughed, Come, run on my weapon, this is Princely favor,

For greater tortures do attend on thee,
But we will be merciful in Tyranny.

Elg. See, on the Earth, thy Sovereigns Sister kneels, to beg thy pity.


Erk. There Is nothing but thy love can purchase it.


Elg. Yet have mercy, the fault in love was thine, thou did betray me when
thou let'st me see him; and Villain thou, if thou but touch his life, the Great
Canutus shall revenge my wrongs,

For after him Elgina will not live;
Bethink thee then, O yet some pity give!

Alu. Do not debase your self, for my poor life,
I dare his worst, my love is constant still,
More resolute to die, than thou to kill.

Erk. It Is worthy praise, then see, behold thy death.

Alu. With open eyes, as I would view her state,
And like a man thus I pursue my fate.

(They fight, Elgina goes between, Erkinwald kills her.) Elg. Hold, hold. O I am
slain, farewell dear friend, the loss of thee is Tyranny in death

And death a dream, so thou but close mine eyes.
Chaste love is born in Heaven, and never dies.

Erk. Amazement to my soul, O my Elgina! O I am most accurs^! 'twas this hand
struck thee.


Alu. For which I Will be revenged; thus Heaven is just.

Kills him. Erk. Base Villain thou have slain me.

Alu. It Is thy fate, Farewell.
Oh pure, unspotted Maid, unhappy Princess,
This hand shall keep thy will and close thine eyes,
Let thy soul joy, for here thy Murderer lies
Dead at my foot, and I with thee could die,
Were my poor Country free from misery.
War calls me to the field. O my Elgina. Autumn is on thy ch^eks, the
Rose is withered, and thou look like the Alablaster statue,
Upon thy lips I print this parting kiss,
And flying from thee, leave all earthly bliss.

Exit. Enter Harrold, Osrick, and Captains. Har. Osrick, we hear the Duke of
Thatford raises men in Norfolk.


Osr. All England sure, I think will mutiny, if (...) the King neglect his
hopeful Conquest, by doting on a woman's lustful Beauty.


Har. Never was man in love bewitched like him, he will not suffer speech or any
counsel that may dis-swade from her; he bars his fight from any but the Nun,
and his loo^e Panders. Ha! what sight is this? Duke Erkinwald and the Princess
murdered, this sight wo^d sad even Tyranny it self, draw tears from Tigers, and
make wonder dumb.

Oh Great Canutus what por^ents are these
This heavy curse lights on thy lust and ease.
Thy sister, and thy best of friends are slain,
And safety now is frighted from thy Throne.
Convey this spectacle of grief aside, and let a guard pursue the m^^derer.
I Will hie me to the King, and there relate
Their deaths, his lust, both guided by strong fate.

Exeunt. Banquet. Enter K. Canutus. Can. She is an Angel in the shape of woman,
chaster than Dian, colder than Freezland snow, and yet she burns me; if I miss
her now, my death must be the period of my love; Go, let those Jewels, Cates,
perfumes and Music, be all produced together in one sense.

Unite all raptures, let us have nothing s^ant,
That she may taste at once, what all Queens want.
Music. Strike heavenly Music, with a tuneful measure,
And with thy raptures swell her blood and pleasure.
Enter Cartesmunda and Osrick. The star appears, welcome dear soul, to make our
joys more full, fit to this Banquet, Great Queen of my heart, and fully joy
thy senses in each part.


Cart. My senses are intranc'd, or do I dream;
O let me back return to hide my shame.

Can. O stay divinest soul, hear me but speak.


Cart. O I have lost my sense with these Enchantments; I am I know not how, for
all my powers are useless, but mine eyes to weep.


Can. Make not the earth proud to receive thy tears, lest being subject unto me
her King, I force her to restore again those pearls, more rich than all the
Jewels of our Crown, so high I prize thy tears, yet thee 'bove all.


Cart. I am your Servant, Prisoner, Vassal, worse.

Can. Thine eyes upon my freedom laid that curse.
If thou be mine, I do command thy love;
Where Kings of Subjects beg, let pity move.

Cart. How can so great a King, be weakness slave?

Can. In doting of those joys I near shall have.

Cart. Men that lust women once, no more endure 'em,
In health they loathe the physic that did cure 'em.

Can. When I neglect thy love, or touch thy life, may all my Battles prove
unfortunate, and I lose all the conquering Danes have got, and end my days with
shame and inward grief.


Cart. Your words be registered, with hands divine,
O keep your vow (great Prince) for I break mine.
I blush to say, I yield, I Am wholly yours, a spotless Virgin now is in your
power, and as you mildly courted, so this kiss confirms me to you.


Can. And my soul to thee.
Never did man meet more felicity.
Run Vassals run, prepare all sweet delight
For Cartesmunda sleeps with me to night.
Enter Harold. England shall sleep in peace, for all my force
On Cartesmunda's love shall now be spent,
Thy Arms shall be my Arms, thy Bed my Tent.

Har. Defend me Heaven, how is this King transformed? my news is not so sad, as
is this sight.


Can. Whose there? Harold? what news?


Har. The English Princes (mighty Sovereign) seeing your Highness thus forsake
the field, threaten fresh war, and England will be lost.


Can. But Cartesmunda won, In thee we have all good that England holds,

All Conquest in these Arms Canutus folds.
Have more to say?

Har. Yes, but with grief (my Lord) The fair Elgina, your beauteous ^ister, and
that only one that made her Sex admired, is slain, great King.


Canut. Give me this Bracel^t, I have begged it long.


Har. And noble Erkinwald lies murd'red too.


Can. Why now thou art my pretty one, Come, kiss thy Canutus.


Har. Had you (my Lord) as I, beheld that sight, the Tyranny of death had sure
amazed you.


Can. What does he talk on?


Car. Do you not mark, my Lord; he says, Your Sister's dead.


Can. Let her be buried then: Remove out of mine eye, thou fright'st my love.
Some Music there: Come Cartesmunda kiss me: Go bid our Soldiers hang their
Arms up; Fold up our Ensigns, and unbrace our Drums, England is conquered, all
our Wars are done, and all in this, that Cartesmunda's won. --


Exeunt. Manet Har. Har. O strange Enchantment, the sad news I brought, Though
now regardless, whilom would have made his eyes start from their orbs to hear
of it: O fair Elgina! happy now thou art dead, and do not live to see thy
brothers folly. This is not now Canutus, nor his Palace, but rather seems a
Roman Theater, and this young N^ro acting Comedies, with some light Strumpet in
bold scenes of Lust; This change with wonder I behold, and see

That love is powerfulo're inferior things,
When thus to baseness it transforms great Kings.

Exit. Act. III.
Enter Grim and Colliers with Baskets and Sacks. Grim. Come Bullies, fetch more
Coals, and aboard with 'em lustily, show your selves Newcastle-men, not proud,
but honest and humble, and such as do not scorn to carry Coals.


1 Col. I warrant you Mr. Grim, We^'l send'em going, Newcastle Coals are
Here^icks, and must be burnt at London.


Exeunt Colliers. Grim. You say well, We Will put'em to water first, and then
let them put fire in their Tayls afterward.


Enter Randolph. Rand. Well said Grim, I see thou art not idle.


Grim. No Master, I am Bailey of your Cole-pits, and your Worships Benefactor: I
will do what lies in a true serva^t; Seven hundred (...) Indians, or Newcastle
Collyers, your Worship keeps daily to dive for Treasure five hundred fathom
deep for you, and as they bring it up, I Will send it out to your profit, Sir.


Rand. It Is well done Grim, thy gains will one day be a Gentleman.


Grim. A Gentleman? Nay I hope one day to purchase a Lordship, and all my
Collyers under me shall be Ladies, for I Will maintain'em with black Masks on
their faces already; but do you hear Master? I hear there is some disadvantage
toward us, and it behooves us to look to it, they say there are a new sort of
Colliers crept up near London, at a place called Croydon, that have found out a
way by scorching of wood to make Charcoals, and '^is to be feared this may
hinder our Traffic Master.


Rand. How? To make Coals of wood, art sure it is so?


Grim. Most certain Sir, but never fear it Master, Newcastle Coals shall
conquer Croydon, we can give a Chaldron of Sea-coals for a sack of Char-coals.


Rand: Thou say well Grim; but I hear my brothers ship's returned with large
Advantage, I mean to see him, mean time insist upon ^hy care, good Grim.


Grim. O sweet Master, Let me go with you, I Would fain see how Thornton our
Needle-merchant has sped, I doubt me, his Lambs-skin is turned to three
Sheeps-skins the wrong side outward.


Rand. Come, Let Us go; but see they come to us.


Enter Goodgift, his Wife, Thornton and George. Good. Now brother Randolph how
is'^ with you Sir?


Rand. Glad by the happy tidings of your News Sir; Fame has outstrip'd the wind
that brought your ships, and tells us of a rich and prosperous Voyage: I Will talk
with your Factor, Sir, and know your Pur^hase.


Good. Do, Do, Mean time I Will talk with Thornton here my honest Merchant of
Millan Needles; How have thou sped in thy Voyage, how did thou brook the Sea?


Grim. I think he was glad to pump overboard; How say you Thornton?


Thorn. Tush, Tush, Thou art a Fresh Water Fellow (Grim.)


Grim. A Fresh Water Fellow? O disgrace to a Collier! If ever I kill a Whale
hand to hand, it shall be thee.


Good. Nay, good Grim.


Grim. Mr. Goodgift, I pray pardon me: Shall Grim the Collyer that has been
thus long Controler of the Cole-pits, chief Sergeant of the Selleridge, nay the
very Demigorgan of the Dungeon, be called a Fresh Water Fellow?


Good. Quietness, I say, We Will have no quarrelling.


Grim. I beseech you Sir* Let Us both be let down into a Cole pit five Fathom
deep, and he that kills the other, shall be sti^led with a Damp, and so you
shall never be troubled to hang, nor bury us.


Good. Go to, I say, I Will have ye friends again: Come, shake hands.


Grim. Never, unless I may call him, Porpoise, now at single hand, Sir.


Good. I, I, Thou shall.


Grim. Thou? go thy ways, thou art a Porpoise, and now I am friends with thee.


Good. So, So, It Is well, and now as I was saying, Thornton, What Voyage have
thou made to benefit thy hopes, your Halfpenny, and your Lambs-skin? My Factor
tells me here thou have been careful and diligent, but to the wealth and
greatness you expect, I yet hear nothing.


Wife. I marry Husband that is the news I look for; Sir, Come tell us Thornton,
How have you bestowed the money that I gave you?


Thorn. Faith Mistress, as the rest, my full stock to Sea, you, and my good
friends gave, was five shillings, and putting in at Preston for fresh water, I
turned it there into six Tun of Iron, one of which Tuns I have already sold
unto an Anchor-Smith here in Newcastle for four pound; the rest, if I put off
so well, will multiply my stock most richly, Mistress.


Good. It Is well, but far from hope of wealth and Lordships Thornton.


Rand. Yet that re-multiplied again, good brother, may help his Halfpenny and
his Lambs-skin somewhat.


Good. Well, well Thornton, thou art welcome home however; So art thou George; Go
see the ship unl^ded, we will go before, and view the Warehouses.


Fac. I shall Sir.


Good. Come brother, will you go?


Rand. Yes, Sir; You Will quarrel no more, if we leave you together now?


Grim. No Sir, I mean to borrow some money of him now.


Rand. That Is not his way to thrive; Look to him Thornton.


Exeunt. Manent Thorn. Grim. Grim. I warrant you Master, we will agree well
enough; Ah Sir, Mr. Thornton, you have got six Tun of Iron already, you must
take heed now that you fall not into some crafty Ironmongers hand to deceive
you of your whole stock; Look to it, they are hard dealers that deal in Iron,
if you be gulled, remember what Martin said to his man, Whose the Fool now?


Thorn. Tush Grim, Look there man, my whole stock lies not in Iron; a little
stock I borrowed of my fellow George at Sea, and with it, I have purchased
these Pearls.


Grim. Pearls? Prithee tell me true: Are they Pearls in faith?


Thorn. Pearls? I, and precious ones too, I hope.


Grim. Ha, ha, good Oyster Pearl, worth twelvepence a pound, I think.


Thorn. No matter man, I cannot lose by them howsoever; they cost me little; I
have sent for a Goldsmith a purpose to know the certainty.


Enter a Smith. Grim. That Is well, and in the mean time, here comes your first
Chapman: How now good man Iron-fist, Why do you puff and blow so?


Smith. O Mr. Thornton, I Am even out of breath with seeking you, unless you
stand my friend, I shall be undone for ever.


Thorn. Why, what is the matter man?


Sm. Your Iron, Sir, your Iron, that I bought of you, is not the metal I took
it for, 'twill do me no good Sir, there will not a nayl be hammered out of it,
when I heat it, it melts, and when it is cold again, it bends like-lead, and if
it lie on my hand, I am undone for ever; I beseech you, Sir, take it again,
though I lose ten shillings in the price I paid for it.


Thorn. Nay, I must not rise by hurt of any man; I Will take it again, and thou
shall lose no penny. I prithee let me see it, Is this a part on it.


Sm. I, for here is the end of one of the Bars, the poorest piece of Iron I e're
hammered on.


Thor. Well, leave this with me, and bear the rest home to my Masters
Warehouse, thou shall sustain no loss, thou shall have thy money.


Sm. I thank you Sir, I Will bear it back again, and my wife that yet curses you
most terribly, shall pray for you most horribly.


Thorn. This is strange, my great Venture turned to nothing now?


Grim, Faith Mr. Thonton, and your pearls prove no better than your Iron, you
were best turn Merchant of Lambs-skins again.


Enter Goldsmith. Thorn. Well I know the worst on it Grim, see here comes the
Goldsmith that I sent for; if my Pearls prove as bad as my Iron, I am quite
beggered in faith,


Gold. Now Mr. Thornton what is your business with me?


Thor. Your advice in these few pearls sir, and I would know the value of them.


Golds. They are fair and round, are they your own sir?


Thorn. I Will answer the sail of them.


Gold. And have you any more of 'em sir?


Thor. Some thirty more, and far more orient than these are too.


Golds. I Will give you twenty pound for these two at a venture sir.


Grim. You shall have Pearl my dog at that price sir.


Gold. What say you Mr. Thornton?


Thorn. Twenty pound say y'? there is some hope then toward my halfpenny, I
see. Come sir, I Will make a rash bargain, you are my first Ch^pman, and shall
have first refusal, both in the price of these and all the rest; and since you
give me this good comfort, sir, pray let me trouble you a little further, you
have good skill in Metals sir, pray look on this; what metal should this be?


Golds. Let me see it sir, I Will tell you presently.


He touches it with a Touchstone. Grim. A beastly piece of Iron it is, it came
new from the Forge, old Iron-fist the Smith has been hammering, but he can do
no good on'^.


Thor. What think you sir?


Golds. Ha! fore Heaven, it touches fair, have you any store of this metal sir?


Thorn. Yes sir, six Tun I assure you, I brought it for good Iron, but my small
skill has deceived me.


Golds. You were well deceived sir, for if the rest*
Of your six Tun with th^s in trial stand
You 're now the richest Subject in the Land,

Thor. Ha! Gold? Delude me not I beseech you sir, let me believe you plainly.
You Have touched this piece, and this I Will give you to make good your word.


Golds. Upon my life I will, it is perfect gold, and for this Wedge I will
refine it all to its pure luster, and your infinite profit.


Thorn. I make that bargain with you, this piece is yours, and since you give
these hopes, I pray conceal it, and meet me at the Warehouse, there I Will show
you the full six Tun I spoke of, and confer.


Golds. I will a^tend you sir, and tell you thus,
Your For^unes all are rich and wondrous.

Exit. Thor. I have a thankful heart to heaven for it, that is my comfort: Why
how now fellow Grim, how stand'st thou man?


Grim. Six Tun of Gold? O that I durst but embrace you Mr. Thornton!


Thorn. Tush man, I prithee do; I Will never foget my self nor thee, I am honest
Thornton, and thou honest Grim.


Grim. Poor Grim the Collier sir, but I Will never be your worships equal, you
shall be tryumphant Mr. Thornton, and I poor Grim, your honest friend, and
quondam fellow.


Thorn. Come, come, no more of this, help me to cast my venture honest Grim:
Six tun of gold?


Grim. Most right sir.


Thor. Three pound an ounce, is threescore pounds a pound.


Grim. And that is horrible usury for your worship.


Thor. Nay, nay, no worship good Grim, this is Heavens blessing thrown on a
poor man's head.


Grim. Would I were thrown into a Coal-pit with such a blessing on my back.


Thor. Nay prithee let us reckon further, three pound an ounce, and threescore a
pound, is full sixteen thousand pound a Tun, and doubling that to six times
six, comes near to forty hundred thousand pounds, almost four millions.


Grim, O Lord sir! is not that better than twenty millan Needles that your
Lordship had wont to sell amongst the Colliers, and when you came to Newcastle,
as your writing says, Here did Thornton enter in, with hope, a halfpenny, and
a Lambs-skin.


Thor. True, true, good Grim, and I shall never forget it.


Grim. O that my mother had lapp'd me in a Lambs-skin the first hour of my
begetting, for now I see there is no luck to a Lambs-skin, six Tun of gold at
one purchase, and besides all this your Highness does forget the ^earls too.


Thor. Nay, nay, no Titles Grim, it is all heavens blessing still.


G^im. It Is true sir, and I think your Majesty's the richest man --


Thor. Away, away, thou'^t speak Treason anon Grim. The wealth I have I see is
in^inite, and be thou secret and conceal a while, and I Will reward thee with
large recompense.


Enter Smith. Grim. I am your Vassal sir, and will be obedient to your
Excellence in all things. But see the foolish Smith is returned to see you.


Thor. Prithee be silent. How now honest Smith, have thou sent home the iron?


Smith. O yes sir, I thank Heaven I have rid my hands of it, you have made me a
man Mr. Thornton, my house is quiet, my wife silent, I have carried home your
leaden iron, return me my silver back again, and my wife and I shall pray for
you when you are dead and rotten.


Thor. Well sir, withal my heart. I received four pound; Look you sir, there
it is, all your full sum to a penny.


Smith. Sweet Mr. Thornton, shall I not give you four pots for all this
kindness? pray sir, it is fit I should lose something.


Thor, No, no, I Am satisfied.


Grim. Do you hear ancient Iron-^ist, the old Smith of Newcastle, I can tell
you one thing, if the Almanac or Erra-pater be true, you will hang your self ere
to morrow morning.


Smith. How, hang my self!


Thor. Nay, prithee Grim, thou will discover all anon.


Grim. No I warrant you sir, I do it but to work a little profit. Do you hear
Smith, what shall I give you for the ashes and rubbish that came off of that
old Iron that you refused now?


Smith, How? the ashes? marry I mean to sweep 'em out of my shop when I come
home in faith, for fear they infect the rest. What will thou do with 'em?


Grim. That Is all one, Let me have all the ashes and the pieces you broke off
that Bar you brought to Mr. Thornton, and I Will give thee five shillings.


Smith. Five shillings? I Will not be said to gull you Mr. Grim, but an you will give
me a groat ready money, they are yours.


Grim. A bargain: There Is your groat.


Smith. The ashes, and all the pieces of iron are yours sir.


Grim. Bear witness Mr. Thornton, come, I Will go fetch 'em presently, y'^d best
make haste, your dismal day's to morrow, you know what I told you, and unless
you rid your self of 'em quickly, you will hang your self, that is certain.


Exeunt. Manet Thornton. Thorn. Ha! Have my hopes ore-tane me? think on it
Thornton, and thank Heaven fo^'^t; here at Newcastle first

In low estate, did Thornton enter in,
With hope, a halfpenny, and a Lambs-skin,
And now my large Accounts, of wealth scarce told,
I keep possession of six Tun of gold.
The blessings strange, and I must now resolve
To tie my vows to my auspicious fate,
Lest the world curse, and Heaven call me ingra^e;
To make of this my gold a household God,
Were mere Idolatry, no'^ shall fly abroad:
Newcastle, to thy good, large sums of love
My promise owes, which i will pay, and prove,
To grace thy fame, I Will beautify thy ground,
And build a wall that shall embrace thee round.

Exit. Music. Enter Cartesmunda, and discovers Canutus asleep, Attendants,
Osrick. Car. That Music is too loud, tread softly sirs; How sweetly in his
sleep Can^^us looks? I Will not envy thee Juno, keep thy Jove, here lies the soul
of Cartesmunda's love. Now by this kiss Canutus I do love thee, thou needst not
dream it, fie, fie, sluggard fie, beshrew the God of dreams, what, did he
fright thee? Or art thou fighting of some battle now, wherein thou see me
taken prisoner, and startst with fear of that? There Is nothing else that could
afright thee, though it came like thunder, for thou were made for Arms, and
for these Arms; and yet thy sword Canutus did not win me. I saw these eyes,
when I refused to love thee, begin to lose their splendour, and in tears drown
their neglected brightness. I have seen this face half dead when I have frowned
upon it, and with my smiles life has returned again; go, go, you wanton, by this
kiss I Will beat you.


Can. How now Sweetheart?


Car. Art thou awake my Love? then I am well.


Can. Well Cartesmunda, sleep, and I will watch as careful as the tender
Pelican stands by her tender young; give me a kiss potent as Bacchus to raise
appetite, and le^'s go sleep together, if I get a Boy upon thy youth, he shall
be King, and half the world shall be his Dower. Knocks within. Whose that
knocks so rudely for his death? has not the slave described the noise?


Enter Hofman. Hof. Osr. It is Duke Harold, sir, entreats access.


Can. He does not choose his time well. Let him in.


Enter Harold. Osr. The King is angry sir.


Har. Angry, say thou? holy Saints defend us, 'has foes enough to vent his
spleen upon, and not to shroud himself thus from his friends. Most mighty
Prince.


Can. Rise Harold, ^e co'd chide you; But go on.


Har. Pardon (my speech my Lord) it is my duty, and I must needs make bold to
tell your Highness, y're no Soldier but a Lovesick Prince, And while you
dally out your days in love, the English all are raising head against you, the
Ga^risons that kept Northumberland are chased as far as York, two thousand
Danes, died in that bloody slaughter. And now again those warlike Princes all
their Forces join, and seek you forth.


Can. Fetch me some wine, we will drink to all their deaths that dare disturb us;
Cartesmunda, thou shall sweetly pledge me, come faster slave.

Dance. Thus in this wine we will wash away all care,
My pleasures and my conquest all are here.
Come pledge me sweet.

Har. The Duke of Thetfords Forces raised in Norfolk, have quite expuls'd the
Danes, the English Nobles bound to your State by conquest and by oath, forsake
Allegiance, and with sound of Drums proclaim Prince Alured the English King.


Can. Ho, ha, ha.


Cart. Why laughs my Love?


Can. To see thee pledge me such a hearty draught.


Har. You see my Lord he is careless, and neither minds us nor his persons
safety.


Osr. Most Royal sir, what order for your forces?


Can. Let Us have some music strait; Come Cartesmunda wee^l dance out half this
day, and that being done, we will retire our selves and sleep again. Why, when
ye slaves? do your souls sleep within you? here is good music.


Dance. Har. So was the warlike Drum and Trumpet once, great Hardiknute the
glory of the Danes. Thy Son plays now the King.


Enter a Captain Capt. Hail mighty King.


Can. Thunder to thee; Foot can we not be private?


Capt. Alas my Liege my news is of importance.


Can. So is my pleasure slave, avoid our presence, thou and the rest that come
to fill our ears with tumults and with bloody Massacres, frighting m^ heavenly
Love, for whose sweet sake let men fall thicker than the checkered leaves, the
stern winds rend and ravish from the tree^, when yellow Autum turns them into
gold.

Flourish. Be gone, come Cartesmunda let us retire,
We will not stir were all the world on fire.

Osr. Is this the end of all our former conquests? to be re-conquer'd now with
wine and women?


Har. I, this is she that bears so high a stroke, we dare not shake our heads
for fear we loose 'em; if she but dreams a dream that not del^ghts her, next
morning there are some are sure to bleed for it, whose lot so ere it be.


Osr. Would it were mine, my Lords, so she co'd dream, and it would come to
pass, the Devil might fetch her.


Har. This twelve month sir, he has not touched his Armor, nor been in the field
to cheer his Soldiers.


Osr. We now must make as great a suit to see him, as if we begged for Tipes of
dignity.


Cap. No more, I see your griefs and all our ruins, if we keep sile^t thus. I Will
speak to him, and venture life for such a general good, if my plots fail, my
tongue shall boldly speak

To touch his baseness, though I lose my head,
I Will die, or win him from this strumpets bed.
Fear not to second me.

Har. Not I, were death assured, I Will first begin,
A Soldiers best fight is to beat down sin.

Enter Canutus and a Guard. Can. Double my Guards about her, I will prove
There Is no happiness on earth but love.

Cap. Most mighty Prince.


Can. Audacious Traitor, wherefore come thou to us, did we not charge thee to
avoid the presence.


Cap. Your Father (Royal Sir) knew me a Soldier, and I have fought for you,
yet if you please, so I may speak, make me your humble Martyr.


Can. Slave what would thou say?


Cap. That which my life shall prove
You Have lost your conquest in a woman's love.
Could you unty the vail Cupid has bound about your eyes and forehead, you would
find she were not all so fair as you esteem her, Nature was never so impartial
to give to one to rob a million, arm but your self and lead your Soldiers
forth to win another City, you shall find her beauty far out-strip'd, sacred
Liege, if like a young man you take counsel ill,

Destroy me quickly, it shall be my fame
I di'd to win you from a Strumpets shame.

Can. Thou'st spoke enough to damn thee, Impudent Traitor, go dye unpit^ied;
Though thou have my hate* thou shall not have the honor of my sword o take away
thy l^fe, you of our Guard; See a base death performed upon this Slave.


Capt. Farewell my Liege you once must have a grave.


Exit with Guard. Har. My Resolution's firm, and I will speak, though hell
should gape to swallow me alive; What Is he chat's gone to death my Sovereign?


Can. A Traitor (Harold) to my best content.


Har. O pardon sir, your rage has lost a man of more true worth then all this
Nation; He was not of that strain of Counselors, that like a tust of Rushes in
a Brook, bends every way the current turns it self, yielding to every puff of
Appetite that comes from Majesty, but with true zeal he faithfully declared the
grief of all: Pardon me (great Canutus) I must speak, and let thy subject on
his knee entreat, the Kingly Lion yet to rouse his strength,

And chase those English that do only wound,
Because out Rescuer will not be found.

Can. Fond man, how dare thou check our Appetite: Have thou forgot, our frown
can strike thee dead.


Har. I know it, and willingly lay down my head;
For it is more honor by thy wrath to dye,
Then living to behold thy misery,
Which sure is coming on.

Can. Let it make haste. We Will beat it back with our triumphant Host.


Har. You cannot, till you beat that wanton hence; She has b^witch'd your
senses (mighty Lord)
Her Tresses, like to Adamantine Chains,
Have let all heat but lust out of you veyns;
When she is gone, your valor you will assume,
But while she stays, she does your state consume.

Can. No more: Go bid the Captains meet me in the Hall; Tell'em to morrow early
we will come down;

And in strange kind to all your eyes we will show
We can command our self as well as you.

Away. Har. I Will do your will, and hope for good event.


Exit. Can. There is no hell on earth but discontent. I feel my blood grows
chil, a sudden qualm in a deep Laethe seems to drown my joys.

Enter Carts. But here comes she, by whom those thoughts are gone,
Earths happiness, as whose creation
Nature spent all her stock: Welcome my love to make our joys full, Go adorn
thy self in all the richest Jems my Coffers yields; Wear all the Jewels
purchased with my crown, and outshine Dian in a Robe of stars.


Cart. For what, my Lord?


Can. To please mine eyes, and make all men admire thy Radencie.
Thy Beauty shall out-brave the glorious Sun,
Flourish. Somewhat Canu't must do to be talked on.

Exeunt. Enter Mr. Randolph, and his Sister in Mourning. Rand. Fie Sister, weep
no more, it is time to lay by grief, and with the death of your late husband,
now bury your sorrows.


Wife. Should I forget so soon so good a husband?


Rand. His goodness was your good, your late dead husband has left you rich,
and full Executrix to be over-seen by Mr. Thornton, whose care I cannot pass
without some note; For though his wealth be raised to Infinites, he not forgets
a servants love.


Wife. Alas good brother, I have wooed him from it.


Rand. How Sister have you wooed him?


Wife. I, from civility, Methinks it is unmannerly in me, to see a man so much
in state the better, to be so like a servant to me; I tell you I have wooed him
from it.


Rand. I think 'twere better far he wooed you Sister.


Wife. Wooed me? For what?


Rand. For Love Sister.


Wife. O ^ie, good Brother: The very word would wrong my husbands grave.


Rand. Tush, a Woman's Sorrow, has been in black to day, in green to morrow.


Wife. I, but I am none of those: No, no, I Will never marry.


Rand. Come, you are foolish, think upon him, Sister, He Is rich man, I tell
you. He Is now the wealthest subject England has.


Wife. O but my Husband!


Rand. Which of 'em? he that is gone, or this to come? Think of Mr. Thornton.


Wife. Alas, I am not his equal:


Rand. Tush you were once his Better, he is humble still.


Wife. Well, I Will speak no more on it.


Rand. Well, think on it then.


Wife. Hey, ho, He Is a very honest man truly, and had my husband dyed but two
months ago, I might have thought on it.


Rand. How fare you Sister?


Wife. As a green widow sir; Pray if you see Mr. Thornton, say I Would speak with
him.


Enter Thornton and a Workman. Rand. Are you there in faith Sister; See, he is
here already.


Thorn. Spare for no cost, and ply the Workmen hard, I Will pay'em all, they shall
not want for money; have you taken the compass of the Wall?


Work. We have, to a foot sir.


Thorn. How many Towers of strength may be erected, dividing each distance by a
hundred pace^.


Work. It Is cast already, and the compass falls,
A hundred fourscore Towers to grace the Walls.

Thorn. How high de'you raise the Walls?


Work. As you directed sir, full a hundred foot.


Thorn. Right, and twelve in bread^h.


Work. Just so sir, 'twill be a pleasant walk to view the Town:


Thorn. So I would have it; And therefore from the highest erect a Battlement
above the Platform four foot high a'both sides, both to secure, and make the
place more pleasant; See it raised so.


Work* I shall sir.


Wife. O my dear Husband!


Thorn. Why, how now Mistress?


Wife. O Mr. Thornton, I never see you, but I think of a good husband.


Rand. I marry Sister, that is a pretty cast.


Thorn. Your pardon I beseech you gentle Mistress; Your Factor and my self have
summed your state, and find it cl^erly, all your debts discharged, in complete
value fifteen thousand pound.


Rand. Ha, ha, Sister, a good Dowry to get a new husband, trust me.


Wife. No, no, I Will nere marry again; I Will even follow Mr. Thorntons rule, you
see he lives a Batchellor.


Rand. Sir, Methinks' twere good you took a wife, and so leave your own to your
own posterity.


Thorn. In all, I Will take my Mistress counsel: Pray resolve me, Had I, a mind to
marry, which in your judgment were the sitter, a Maid, or Widow?


Wife. Truly, I think a Widow sir, you may imagine, I may speak somewhat inmine
own Flattery; but alas, it is a state I shall not change!

It Is for your good, I speak in love, no hate,
A Widow sir, will best secure your state.

Thorn. You counsel well Mistress, and I Will think on it.


Wife. The sooner the better too, I can assure you; you will find much comfort
in it, you may elect some young green thing out of a Maiden choice, that may be
fury and froward, she may please your eye a little, and other parts about you,
but vex your heart, and be a gulf to swallow your estate; If you will deal wisely
(as I hope you will) take me a Widow, that knows how and what to do, that has
been seasoned in a husbands usage, and one that will obey as you shall honor:

He that will quietly lay down his head,
Let him contract a Widow to his bed.
And still I say, take me a Widow, sir.

Rand. Why, you say honestly Sister; Do you understand her sir; she bids you
take her a Widow.


Wife. You are merry Brother.


Thorn. Nay you said so Mistress, speak't again then, for by my Faith, were not
for two things Mistress, I Would come a wooing to you.


Rand. Two things? Why three things shall not hinder it; What are they?


Thorn. My first fear is, the marriage of so much wealth as ours compounded,
would choke all content, and with the superflux change all to cares.


Rand. You take good course for that already, sir, your charitable works so
well begun, will help to disperse the o're-plus freely.


Thorn. You have removed that well, the other is, that the remembrance of my
poor estate, which is so publicly proclaimed to all men, might make my wealthy
Mistress here disdain me.


Wife. Nay, that is your glory, sir, and cannot be accounted as your shame.


Rand. Why La sir, she has helped that her self now.


Thorn. In Faith, say then Mistress (I am a bad Wooer, it is my beginning) shall
it be a match?


Wife. I cannot so forget my late lost husband.


Rand. Why, this repairs your losses, Sister, you lost a good one, and find his
equal with a wealthy purchase.


Thor. Put me in hope that I may once enjoy you.


Wife. I will not marry, sir, these seven years, trust me.


Rand. How? this seven years Sister* fie upon it, we may be all dead and rotten
six years before it; come, come, speak in compass sister.


Wife, Truly Brother under half a year I will not here on it.


Rand. I marry sir, that was well bated. Speak again Sister, and let it be a
fortnight.


Wife. A fortnight? no, no, not this month, believe me.


Ran. Away, away, a months too long, hark you sister, we will clap it up
privately to night, and the Town shall not know on it till a month hence.


Wife. To night? O fie upon'^! an you love me Brother let it not be till to
morrow morning, I beseech you, for the speech of people.


Ran. Afraid of wind? tush let it vanish Sister, I say he shall marry thee to
night.


Thor. Let it be so, and here is an earnest Mistress.


Kiss. Wife. Alas I kiss coldly in a morning Gown sir,


Thor. Tush it shall off; we will marry, then to bed, Wooing is idle, better to
be sped.


Wife. Use your own will sir.


Ran. Why, so, it is as it should be now; embrace him sister,
And live in love and wealth, 'bove all admired,
Here Is seven years quickly in an hour expired.

Exeunt. ACT. 4.
Enter King of Scots, Alured, Malcome, Edmond, and Captains, Drums and Colors.
K. Thus far tryumphantly with good success, my Princely friends we have
together marched, and from the North parts quite dispersed the Danes, alone the
City York holds firm again, whose buildings we will level with the earth,
unless they suddenly yield up the City; give your advice most Princely Alured,
on your fair quarrel all our Fates depend.


Alu. Your Highness has been fruitful in your love, bringing the best that
Scotland can afford, in honorable Arms to right our wrong, let us forward then,
and dare 'em to the Gates our horses hoofs shall furrow up their Land, and sow
the fields with blood instead of corn.


1 Cap. Spoke like the Brother of dead Etheldred, summon 'em to the Walls. Drums
beat a parley.


Enter Above, Harrold, and Soldiers. Har. The meaning of this Parley.


King. Danes ye see all hope of Conquest has forsaken you quite, Two thousand
of your stoutest Soldiers are fallen already by our conquering swords, if ye
will yield affirm it, if not death shall in his meagre fury through your Host,
revel and catch your Jubilee. Then tell us, do you resolve to fight it out or
fly.


Mal. Or stay and have your throats cut in the fight?

Edm. Or leap the walls, and break your necks before us?

Mal. Resolve so quickly, and save us a labor.

Har. Yes, with immediate speed, set opo the gates
And like a torrent on their heads we will fall,
The Field and Air shall be their burial.

King. If there we fall, our fame out-lasts times date
On to the field, blessed with propitious fate.

Exeunt. Alarm, Excursions. Enter King, Alured, Malcome, Edmond, Captains. K.
All earthly honors are thine own, fair Prince, and Heaven fights in thy cause,
the Cities taken.


Alu. The Danes are all expuls'd and fled for safety.

Edm. The Danes are fled from danger, not from shame
That still pursues 'em wheresoere they fly
And on their Tombs shall live eternally.

Mal. Let Us seek the Lovesick King Canutus forth,
And in one Battle try his valors worth.

Alu. That Is our intent most noble Malcome, but we must war securely, all their
strength will now be band^ed to oppose our coming, and therefore whilst you
here refresh your Army, Duke Edmond and my self will try our friends, and in
these North parts gather up new Forces to aid us against all Danish stratagems.


King. We like it well, assist us gracious Fate,
To seat a true Prince in his Royal State.

Exeunt. Enter Thornton, Wife, Randolf, the Partners, Workmen, and George, with
the table of the writing in golden Letters, and Grims Speech. Part. You Have stolen
a wealthy marriage Mr. Thornton unwar^^ to all the Town, but we are glad we are
so well deceived.


Thor. Faith Gentlemen, it was not to abridge the Nuptial Feast, for that shall
have his full Solemnity, but from some private causes of my Mistress.

Whose power retains all former duty from me,
And as a Servant still she shall command me.

Wife. Not so sir, I resign that title now, my self and state are only by your
power to be disposed and swayed.


Rand. I, well said sister: This match was richly made, with liking and with
joy to all the Country. And Brother Thornton (so I Will call you now) I came
prepared to give you fit surrender of the last Bargain which you purchased of
me.


Thor. Your Coal-pits and your Servants Brother Randolf.


Rand. Yes sir, and look you, this is the Orator must speak for all, in his
mouth they have put the Law and willingness they have to serve.


Enter Grim. Thor. Who honest Grim?

Grim. Yes sir, and I am the Prologue to the Play,
And for them all I have to say.
Seven hundred men in sable wise,
From forth the Coal-pits shall arise,
Not melting men made out of wax,
But such as use Spade and Pick-ax.
Who when you bid 'em use their skils
Shall make a Dale of Mauburn hills,
Then raise a Mount as high as Poles
And turn it strait to burning coals.

Thor. This speech I think was penned on purpose.


Grim. I speak deep things, some sir, of 50 fathom deep, I do it de profoundis,
and no disparagement to the Author, that which I have spoken was in as

Good ryme as entering in,
With hope, a halfpenny, and a Lambs-skin.

Thor. Ha, ha, thou hit'st me there in faith.


Grim, I give you a taste sir, how you shall find me here, and as for my seven
hundred fellowers they are honest Tartarians, and whosoever deals with 'em
shall find them grim fellows I assure you.


Thor. Grim thou were always honest, and on my word thy love shall have reward.


Baily. Sir, all your works, both finished and in^ended, are pious, holy, and
religious.


Part. And in the goodness if you still persever
You build your self a house in Heaven for ever.

Thor. Heaven have the praise of all, and look ye Gentlemen. Reach me the Table
George, I have here repai^'st the copy of my first arrival here, which yet
hangs up insculp'd on a tileshard; but now it is rectified in golden Letters,
with the same phrase still, only thus altered, Here at this West-gate first,
came Thornton in


Grim. With hope, a half penny, and a Lambs-skin.
I remember that still sir.

Georg. How now Grim, are you so saucy Sirrah?

Thor. It Is well done Grim, I Would ha'^ remembered ever, go place it ore the gate
that all may view it, and witness these great blessings heaven has sent. The
reason why I urge this Register,

To have my memory thus kept in store,
Is not my wealth, but to record me poor.
Go see it done.

Ex. Workmen, George George. For ever may it stand to your renown.

Part. And all succeeding fame,
While this Town stands still honor Thorntons name.

Thorn. Amidst these poor endeavors of my love, my careful Master must not be
forgot, whose Heir I am become, and for his sake, I will reedifie Alhallows
Church, where in the peaceful bed of death he sleeps, and build a Tomb for him
cut out in Touchstone, which in our Persian Voyage was returned, from whence my
golden Mineral arrived.


Grim. In the likeness of old iron sir.


Thorn. I, thou say true Grim.


Grim. I have wondered a thousand times old Iron-fist the Smith did not hang
himself for refusing the first Tun of it, a whoreson Coxcomb.


Wife. They say you got somewhat by it Grim.


Grim. Alas Mistress, a few chips or so, some ten pounds worth for a groat, I
think I bought on him,


Shout, Rand. How now, what mean these shouts?


Grim. I think there is some Match at Foot-bal toward, the Colliers against the
whole Country cut, and long tail.


Enter George Thor. What Is the News good George?


George* Prince Alured and Edmond Duke of Thetford are newly lighted, and
desire to speak with the Town Magistrates.


Thor. We shall with joy receive him as our Prince, and wish he had as free
possession of this whole Kingdom, as this Town shall give him.


Enter Alured and Edmond. All, See where he comes; All duty to your Highness.


Alu. Rise Gentlemen, we have your hearts, forbear your knees, your true
Allegaince has proclaimed it self that never yielded yet to foreign Scepter,
you have fortified your walls against all invasions

And in that circuit gloriously she stands
With kind embraces to infold your friends.

Thor. Our Town, our selves, our lives are all your homigers, as the most
lawful and indubitate Heir,

To our late Sovereign Lord, and to your Throne.
We fall as Subjects, you we know our own.

Alu. My best of thanks is due to my best friends. Which is the man amongst ye
Gentlemen that bears the name of Thornton?


Thor. Your Subject and your Servant, Royal sir.


Alu. Let me embrace you sir, and tell you this, your goodness speaks you
nobly: England is famed in this fair Town, much honored by your virtues. Our
Countries conquest by these Danish wars

Have not such blazon from our shame exhaled,
As these your good deeds now have countervail'd.

Thor. I can do nothing but my duty sir.


Alu. It Is worthy praise in all, and trust me Gentlemen, we have good hope to
see a happy day, and once again make England singular, Free in her self and
Princes. I came now with my best Hors-manship from the Scotch Army, whose Royal
King in Neighbor amity, is armed in my just cause, has past the Tweed with
prosperous forage through Northumberland, all Holds and Castles taken by the
Danes restore themselves to his subjection in our behalf. The City York is won,
from whence I came.


Ed. And whilst we forage thus, their King Canutus, doting on the beauties of
Cartesmunda Nun of Winchester,

Of his estate so careless now is grown,
He I put no arms but Cartesmunda's on.

Thor. Go forward noble Princes, your work's good, and to encourage it, ten
thousand pounds I Will lend your grace to leavy Soldiers, which if you never pay,
I Will never ask, and for my own employment to your aid, I Will lend (if you will
honor me so far) all the full strength Newcastle can afford, I have seven
hundred men that call me Master.


Grim. Besides Grim the chief Controler sir.


Thor. Very true sir, and these I Will four times double,
And three months shall their charge be mine alone,
To back your Right and seat you in your Throne.

Alu. Your bounty and your love exceeds all means of p^esident and recompense.


Thor. It Is but my duty still, which I Will not slack, go Grim and muster my seven
hundred Colliers, to them i will add two thousand more of our Newcastle strength,
and thou shall be an Officer to conduct 'em.


Grim. For a Corporal or so, let me alone with my Squadron, I dare undertake
with my seven hundred Colliers in six days, under ground, to march to London,
they shall dig their way themselves too.


Rand. And know it is two hundred miles.


Grim. That Is nothing, I Will march forty miles a day with 'em at pleasure, there
is no Pioneer to be compared to a Collier in his Coal-pit, if you will have a
dozen Cities as we go, undermined and blown up, give but every man a bushel of
Apples to his Breakfast, and you shall hear the wind roar and shake the ground
like an Earthquake.


Thor. Well sir, wee'^ try their valors; go George, get Armor ready, and Grim,
get thou a Drum and Marshal 'em.


Grim. If you would rake hell and Phlegitan, Acaron and Barrathrum, all those
Low Countries cannot yield you such a company. Tara, ra, ra, ra, ra, O brave
Master, now for a company of conquering Colliers. Come George.


Exit. Thor. Now would it please my Liege so far to grace his humble Subjects
and their new built Town to take a homely Banquet, we should think 'twere royal
Neighborhood to heat our buildings.


Alu. We cannot be unkind, though to your hurt, we will dispense with our great
have so long, and then from Banquets unto Battles fly; Which Heaven (we hope)
will guide successfully.


Exeunt. Enter Harold, Huldrick, Osrick, Captains, and Lords of Denmark. Hul.
Go let our Drums and Trumpets spite of fear, thunder aloud in the Air, and tell
Canutus, his Captains do attend to speak with him he promised to come down.


Har. Yes down toth' earth.


Hul. And in the shameful ruins he prepares with lust, and murder, bury up his
name, he is known by nothing but a large defame, the City York for want of aid
is lost, and still the foe pursues, if thus we stand to sooth him in this sin,
our conquest dies.

And we in blood must end our victories, 'sfoot sound and call him.


Enter Hoffman. Hof. Give your attendance Lords, the King is coming.


A flourish, and Drums and Trumpets. Hul. It Is time he should, he has been
absent long*
And done his honor, fame, and Country wrong,
How did he take your reprehension Harold?

Har. It startled him at first, but when with mildness he did appoint this
general meeting to us, to what good purpose it inclines I know not.


Osr. I hope the best. see here he comes, my Lord.


Flourish. Enter Canutus leading Cartesmunda, richly attired and decked with
Jewels, Hofman, and Gentlemen attending. Can. Where are our Vassals, attend
your charge, and our delight, with all your best of care and diligence, or by
those s^ars whose influence made me great; you dye in Torments all, let not the
Sun extort from her bright Rays, to give him luster (or if inamor'd as we know
he is) unless the Alps have frozen up his Flames.

Let him not on her smooth front dart his heat,
No, not for all his glory or arched seat.

Omnes. All health and honor to the great Canutus.


Can. Rise in our favor, vail thy face my love, we must not have thee seen too
much by slaves.


Cap. Content, attend the King and his fair love.


Osr. Long may she be the Mistress of his youth:


Capt. And give him heaven on earth.


Har. And hell to boot: God's Death shall we flatter thus?


Can: So, now you crouch and fawn like daunted Curs that dare not look the Lion
in the face; Come Cartesmunda mount Canutus Throne.

Flourish. Let me unvail thy face, and tell me now, which of you all that thus
have taxed my lightness, cu'd (if possessed of such a Jem as this) less value it
then I: What think thou Osrick?


Osr. I have not seen the like.


Can. Nor ever shall, what Nature had in store was given to her,
And can one crowned with such a heavenly weight,
Live and forgo this Center of delight.

Hul. Let not these vain Affections (Royal Lord) sway you from reason thus.


Can. Ha! What is he?


Hul. Do you not know me sir? the time has been, when in thy Battles Huldrick
has been seen knee deep in blood, cutting his way by force, careless of life to
free thy Royal person, and does your Mightiness not know me now? Then hear the
news I bring to comfort you: The Danes once styled by Names of Conquerors, are
now subdued and slain, The King of Scots banded together with the English
forces, have late at York o'^ethrown our Garrisons, and now to London march
victoriously, defacing all, thy conquered Cities burn;

And in their falls, the flames do rise so high,
They seem to light the Tapers of the sky.
And since Fames Trump which of^ has summoned thee, is not so potent asto draw
thee forth, thy honor bids me dare thee to the Field, if thy high spirit be not
extinct by Lust: Let Us arm our selves for shame.


Can. Traitor, thou have deserved death ere thou dyest; and this thy proud
presume shall break thy neck, for chasing our high blood; O love thou art
unjust, I feel assaults far sharper in my breast, then all the English Forces,
against this wall; now love and honor, with their opposite powers

Afflicts my soul, and with their virtuous strife,
Plead for my Love, my Honor, Fame, and Life;
With this man's words, my passions strongly move,
He for my honor speaks. Honor, but Love
I am thy Martyr now, and must go on,
For what is Honor but Addition,
Got in our pride of youth; yet stay Canutus, think of thy wonted Fame, go on
and conquer. Give me my horse, and I will quickly quell 'um.


Carts. What will Canutus do?


Can. O Cartesmunda, with that heavenly voice, already I am changed, stern War
remains; Kiss me, and kiss me dead, my best of Loves.


Osr. He Is changed again.


Hul. This Strumpets eye, does sure bewitch him with her Sorcery; I Will not
endure this shame.


Enter a Post. Post. Where is my Lord?


Can. Where thou shall not be long: What would thou Villain?


Post. Arm mighty Prince, we have descried at hand, the Horse and Ensigns of
the English Army, troop'd with their Leaders like the gods of War, who in
bright steel, the fields do stoutly bear.


Can. And there seek that which thou vile Dog shall have; Come thou to fright
my Love?


Kills him. Hul. Do not expose a mighty Nation, thus naked, to the Tyranny of
Lust, Canutus.


Can. Traitor.


Hul. As thou art great, be just, Let not ^ Strumpets love, work all our
Ruins; the Enemie's at hand, and from thy side; I Will force this painted Whore.


Car. Help me Canutus.


Hul. What, can you cry?


Can. Were thou Jove's Mynion, slave, thou thus had died


Canutus runs at him, catches her up in his arms, and runs upon his sword. Hul.
I Will meet it thus,
And dying so my end is glorious.

Car. Oh I am slain!

Hul. I have my happy wish then, Welcome death,
I dyed (Canutus) to preserve thy breath.

Dies. Can. Sink down to hell; What has my rashness done?
O Cartesmunda, stay thy fainting breath,
Thou still shall live with me in spite of death:

Car. My Fate is come, great King, my vestal Vow, that broken, with my wish is
fallen upon me.

For your fair love I fayl'd my faith with heaven,
And from your hand my death is justly given.
Such was my former wish, farewell Canutus.
And with my fall may thy great Fame arise,
Poor Cartesmunda, thus untimely dies.

Dies. Can. May all the world dye with thee; now I see
The heavens envy an earthly Diety.

Har. Brave Huldrick that durst dye for Countries good,
And for our freedom spent thy life and blood.

Canut. Ha, sit you weeping there; or has Amazement turned you into stone,
That like men gasping all Medusia's stand,
To see my Love thus fall by mine own hand:
Our Self will instantly be in the Field, and scourge the English pride and
Inhabitants. Sound up our D^um, and call our Troops together, and arm with
speed, I Will to the Field, and fight; Farewell dear Love, whom I of life bereft,
for which unwilling Act, O pardon me;

Canutus arms, a while shall be thy Tomb,
Then gold enclose thee till the day of Doom.

Exeunt. Act. V.
At one Door, Enter Canutus, Harold, Captains, with Drum and Colors. At the
other, Malcol, Alured, Edm, Drum, with Colors. Can. How harsh these Drums
sound now, that once like Music, did more delight mine ear than Orpheus Lute*

Sweet Cartesmunda's death my senses kill,
Like one long sick, I relish all things ill.

Enter all the Colliers. Har. Courage my Lord, see where the English stand
braving your Mightiness: Let Us set upon 'em, and never leave till to their
mother Earth they pay their lives as Tribute. Now, what says Canutus?


Can. That ye all are Rebels.


Om. Eng. Rebels?


Alu. Stay let him speak it out.


Can. An hundred thirteen years, the English Kings have paid to Denmark, and
our Ancestry an annual Tribute of ten thousand pounds, which you unjustly and
rebelliously detain from me, a lawful successor.


Alur. It Is true Canutus, that the Denmark Kings, so long our native Island
has usurped, and whilst they kept within their Danish bounds, and left us to
enjoy our own in peace, we justly paid our homage F^alty. But since your Father
Hardiknut^ arose, and you succeeding him, neither content with that our
Tribute, but would further seek our utter Extirpation, which five and twenty
years you have attempted, planting here your selves in Norfolk, Suffolk, and in
Cambridgeshire, erecting Garrison^ through all our Kingdom against the Laws of
former Articles, we now resolve to spend our Royal blood, and either
countervail our former loss, or hazard all we hold, by doubtful battle.


Can. That is your answer then?


Omnes. Resolvedly for all.


Can. Now by the high, and Royal blood of Kings.


Edm. Swear by the beauteous Nun of Winchester; you often have kissed that book.


Can. And that one word, has raised more vigor in my active blood, then ere her
beauty flamed my Appetite to crop the sweets of Love.


Mal. It shall be cooled with better spells than erst her wanton Magic could
e're invent to lay thy burning Ardor.


All. Danes. Parley no more Canutus.


Can. O Cartesmunda from thy gentle Arms,
I fly to conquer in Wars rough Alarms.

Exeunt. Al^rm, Excursions. Enter Canutus and Alured. Can. Why do not
strike? do thou not like thy Aim? or do not know me? I am the Danish
King, that which all Soldiers seek in bloody War, may here be got on me,
eternal honor and easily too, for by the powers that made me, my senses are
benumbed.


Alur. I dare not, nor will take no such Advantage, though I on thee could vent
my roughest spleen; pass safe, my Lord, I will not fight with you for your fair
Sisters sake, whose love was to me so high and potent, that it did attract her
Virgin-thoughts to dart Loves joys into me, and for the zeal due to her
Memory, keep what I co'd take from you, Life and Honor.


Can. I prithee take it, I Will yield it willingly, and, for I see thou art
religious in thy love, let me embrace thy breast, and of my Love, bright
Cartesmunda Nun of Winchester, I Will tell so sad a Tale.


Alur. I cannot stay to hear it, hark great Sir,
Wars Mu sick summos me, for Elgina's sake,
I slip the Advantage that Fate bids me take.
Exit.
Can. O for a Midwife, I am big with grief,
And fain would be delivered, tho with death.

Alarms. Enter Harold, Osrick, Captains, and Soldiers. Har. See where he
stands, secure him Soldiers, Never did man so feebly use his sword in such sad
times of Terror, O my Lord, can you in all this danger be thus calm?


Os. Though you neglect your self, yet prize your honor, or if not that, yet
for your subjects sake, be pleased to reassume your wonted valor.


Can. Can he be valiant that is without a heart? or can a senseless
Trunck have sense of Loss?
Such have you made me, therefore share the gain,
And to these English leave your Lives and Fame.

All. There is no way but Flight.


Can. Thank your selves for it; had Cartesmunda lived, and graced mine Attempts,
but with a smile; these English, would as soon take part with those that from
Olympus strove to pluck down Jove, as look upon Canutus ^ound Retreat, the
blood of Cartesmunda stirs the gods for this Revenge; and if this may appease
her angry soul, we get by losing it; Do what ye will, for I will never more
taste joy on earth; her death makes all things poor.


Omnes. What shall we do?

Har. What else, but fight and dye,
And in our deaths hide all our Infamy.

Alarm. Enter Thornton, Randolph, and the Colliers, they fight and take Canutus
prisoner, and drive out the rest. A Flourish and a Retreat sounded. K. Scots.
Enter Alured, Donald, Malcolme, Edmond, Thornton, with prisoners, Grim, and the
Colliers, leading Canutus, and Osrick. K. Thus from the usurped Temples of
Canutus, we take the English Crown and plant it here, to whom in right it
legally belongs. Princes and Soldiers, now with me proclaim Victorious Alured,
Englands Sovereign.


Omnes. Long live great Alured our lawful King.

Flourish: Alur. First to all-helping heaven due thanks we give,
Then next to you, by whom our glories live.

Grim. 'Twas I that took him prisoner, my Lord, the Colliers are the Conquerors.


Alu. We will reward your Valors.


Har. Propose a ransom Royal Alured, to sad Canutus and his Countrymen.


Can. Give me no Ransom sir, O let me dye, in Cartesmunda's death I brake my
vow, and for her sake I have neglected all, and willingly have sought mine own
sad ruin; I Will have no Ransom, Cartesmunda's dead, let me be buried with her,
that is all the mercy I now will beg of thee from all thy Conquests.


Alu. No great Canutus, for I pity thee, I call to mind thy Royal Sisters
love, beauteous Elgina, worthier then thy Nun, whose loving heart was once
unbosom'd here, and for her ^ake, I Will like a brother use thee, this one
condition frees thee ransomless, that you abate the Fealty we paid you, you
shall return unto your State in Denmark, and henceforth even as brothers we
will live, exchanging Embassies of Love and Honor. And now to you my worthy
Countrymen it shall be texted to your lasting fame, that your Newcastle
strength set England free in this days fair and happy Victory, for which, and
for thy sake (most worthy Thornton) we will give a lasting honor to the Town, now
beautified by thee with Walls and Towers to which we will add all noble privilege
belonging to a Town Incorporate; and for your former Government of Poretereans,
we here establish it a Majo^alty, and Thornton as the first we here create
Mayor of Newcastle, and give thee the power to elect a brotherhood of Aldermen,
with choice of Sheriffs to assist thy Government, your

Charter shall be drawn wi^h fullest strength,
Even with the fairest Cities of our Land,
This Sword confirms it from King Alureds hand;
Bear it before ye still.

Thorn. Your Highness gives us honor 'bove our Merits.


Alur. We have not yet done all, but what we want, we will study to requite to
thee and them.


Grim. Then since your grace is got into the giving Vain, I beseech you sir,
Let Corporal Grim be bold to put a Colliers request into one of your ears.


Alur. What Is that Grim?


Grim. Only this sweet King, I that for thy service sake was Corporal to be
Warden of your Coal-Carriers, to provide Coals, Surreverence, for your Highness
own tooth, I Will promise you weight and measure, if none of your Officers do
purloyn, and warm their Noses at your fires in their own Chimnies.


Alu. A reasonable Request: Thou art our Coal-carrier.


Grim. Nay, I Will carry no Coals neither, I can tell you, and yet I have another
Chaldron of courtesies to (...) from your kindness, that in remembrance of
Newcastle Colliers that have fought so bravely, we may from henceforth have the
upper shoulder, and the wall of Croydon Colliers, and that if ever they be
found with a Goose in their sacks, they may be made to stand a whole Market day
in the Bakers Pulpit, because they showed themselves Cowards to their Country,
and durst not fight against the Danes, as we have done.


Alur. All this is granted sir.


Grim. Then stand thy ground, old Coal of Newcastle, and a fig for Croyden.


Alur. How now, still sad Canutus? We now must war with love, to raise this
siege, which we will do with Banquets, and with Revels. Great King of Scotland,
we are yet a debtor to your kind love, which thus we 'gin to pay, all those our
Northern borders bounding on Cumberland, from Tine to Tweed, we add unto your
Crown, so 'twas fore-promised, and it is now performed; Most fit it is that we
be ever lovers; The Sea that binds us in one Continent,

Does teach us to embrace two hearts in one,
To strengthen both against all invasion.
Look up Canutus, now all is clear ab^ve,
Let Cartesmunda dye in our^new love;
And let swift fame thy former glories ring,
And hide the sollies of a Lovesick King.

Exeunt omnes. FINIS.

