THE TRUTH OF THE TIMES VINDICATED:

WHEREBY The lawfulness of Parliamentary procedings in taking up of Arms, is
justified, Doctor Fernes Reply answered, and the Case in question more fully
resolved.

By WILLIAM BRIDGE Preacher of Gods word at great Yarmoth.

PSALM. 127. 1. Except the Lord keep the City, the Watchman waketh but in vain.

Quaeso lector, ut memor tribunalis Domini and de judicio tuo te intelligens
judicandum, nec mihi nec adversario meo foveas, neve personas loquentium, sed
causam consideres.

Hierom. Printed according to Order.

LONDON, Printed by T. P. and M. S. for Ben: Allen, and are to be sold at his
Shop in Pope's Head Alley. 1643.

Errata.
IN the Frontispice for soveas read faveas In the Epistle, for being asked,
read having asked. P. 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. for Truths of the time, r. Truth of
the times* p 4 for there r. they p 5. for Altha^ius r. Altha^ius, for Henomus,
etc. r. Henonius. Henning and Amisaus. p* 7. for yet r. yea. p. 8. for (...) p
10. for duct a naturar. d^cta naturae. p. 13. for Rainervus r. Rainerius. p.
13. for affect r. effect* p. 14. for under r. into. p 15. for oppose r. expose.
p. 15. for governed r. governing. p. 26. for Junius, Josephus, Brutus, read
Junius, Brutus, Josephus p. 29. for ropos. r. propos. p. 35* and 36. for dwell
r. dwelt. p. 37. for that's read its. p 39. for Wisd. 22. r. Rev. 2. p. 39. for
but passive r. not passive, p 40. for if lawful r. lawful. p. 41. for take
of, r. take heed of. page 45. for to which, r. which. p. 45. for see will* read
so will. p. 46. for Commit r. community. p. 47. for that Prince r. the
Prince. p. 47. for being read bring: for that that r. that it. There are many
faults escaped in the marginall Latin, yet because the Latin is turned into
English, and the Authors cited, I do not note those Errata.

TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFUL, The Knights and Gentlemen Deputie-Lieutenants of
the County of NORFOLK.
Honored Sirs:
GIve me leave to join you together in one Epistle whom God and your Country
has joined together in one service; It is not in my purpose to blazen your
worth before the world, your own actions speak you in the gate, and wise men
had rather do worthily then hear of it; only observing your unwearied labor
of love for God and your Country. I count it my duty to come forth and meet
you with this pen-service in testimony of my thankful respects to you. You
read Numb. 25. when the wrath of God brake out against Israel, that Phineas
stood up and executed judgment, and the wrath was not only diverted but
himself blessed, yea the blessing was a blessing of peace though wrought out by
the sword: your like action in this time of wrath will carry the like blessing
on your selves and houses, yet your work is rather to bring men to justice then
to execute it. Many blessed comforts w^it on your service.

First, we read in Scripture but of one man so potent in heaven that he could
command the Sun to stand still, and he was a Soldier, Joshua; but of one man
of whom it was said, that he had an heart after Gods own heart, and he was a
great Soldier, David: but of one man of whom Christ gave that great
testimony, I have not found so great faith no not in Israel. And he was a
Soldier too the Centurion, thus ha^h God honored your calling.

Secondly, your work is good, for you are the Ministers of Reformation. I read
of a King of Meth, sometimes in Ireland, that being asked how certain noisome
birds that came flying into that country and bred there might be destroyed:
Was answered thus, Nidos eorum ubique destruendos: The way to be rid of them
was to destroy their nests. Now for a long season many noisome birds have been
flying over into this Kingdom, and have bred here; the work of these times, is
to destroy those nests of Jesuits and Jesuited persons, and it is that work
which now you are upon. Foelix necessitas quae ad mel^ora ducit.
Though it cost some pains its worth your labor, happy is that necessity
which leads to better things.

Thirdly, your cause is just also, agreeable to the Law of Nature; for,
Conservatio sui ipsius est opus naturalissimum, to the Law of God: for David
though not the representative body yet lawfully took up arms for his own
defense; to the Law of the Kingdom, for what more legal then that the Houses
of Parliament should bring in Delinquents to trial, and how can that be
without Arms when the Delinquents betake themselves to their Arms? Vetustatem
si spectes est antiquissima, si dignttat^ mest honoratissima, si jurisdictionem
^st copiosissima.
The Schoolmen say three things concur to a just war. First, Jurisdictio
indicentis, and for that you have the Authority of Parliament, which, as one
writes, if you respect Antiquity, is of all Courts the most ancient; if
dignity, is of all Courts the most hononorable; if authority and
jurisdiction, is of all Courts the most copious. Secondly, Offensio patientis,
and for that you have matter too much, and your enemies too little, the great
cause of their arms is but some piece of prerogative (if they pretend truly) a
cause infinitely beneath so unkind and bloody a war as this is. Thirdly,
Intentio boni convenientis, and for that I dare say you are bellando pacifici,
your war being to prevent war, and your present bleeding to prevent some
great sickness which this State would sink under.

Fourthly, your Forces live and march under as many prayers as ever English
Armies did, you have preces arma^as; and though Joshua fought valiantly, Exodus
17. yet the prayers of Moses (who was not in the fight) got the field.

Fifthly, If you do overcome, you shall not make your selves slaves by your own
victories; we may truly say of some, Dum vincunt victi sunt: when they have
overcome others, they are slaves themselves; your Religion, Laws, and Liberties
stand all ready to reward your prowes.

And sixthly, If you be overcome and die, you die for God and your Country;
who can bring his life into a better market? blessed are those that dye for the
Lord, so that word ^ is rather to be read, Rev. 14. 13. Wherefore as heretofore
so now much more labor to hold forth the virtues of him that has called you
to this great employment. As Soldiers are more honored then others, so they
should be more virtuous; he had need carry much grace in his heart that does
daily carry his life in his hand; and your Soldiers should as well overcome
the Countries with their good examples, as the Enemies with their swords. When
Joshua went out to battle against the Amalakites his men were all chosen or
choice men, Exodus 17. 9. And says the Lord Deuteronomy. 23. 9 when the host goes
forth against thine enemy then keep thee from every wicked thing. It is
ordinarily observed, that when the jews marched out of Egypt into Canaan, they
carried in their colors some significative sign, Judah carried a Lion in his
Standard, Ephraim an Ox, Reuben, the picture of a man, Nepthali an Hind; a
Lion noting their courage, a Man noting their skill and understanding, an Hind
noting their swiftn^sse and readiness for execution; and an Ox for patience,
strength and obedience. Such colors should those wear in their lives that are
Soldiers for God. The enemies of the Churches had their Colors also; the
Bear, the Leopard, Quo modo fidem praestabunt autboritat^ qu^ Deo sunt
persidi. Cons. sa^^ff. pa. 56.
etc. Dan. 7. cruel in humane practices, being more fit to be worn in their
lives then ours. How can men be faithful to you that are unfaithful to God?
Dr. Fern, your Adversary and mine, writes thus of the Parliaments Forces; If a
list of the Army against his Majesty were examined, there would be found if
not a considerable number of Papists, yet of such as they that employ them
would have cause to be ashamed of, etc. It may be some of your Soldiers would
say as David's did, Let me go over I pray thee and take off his head. But let
your answer rather be* Let him alone, and let him reproach, it may be that the
Lord will look on mine affliction, and that the Lord will requite good for his
reproaching this day. And as formerly so now yet more and more let your
endeavor be to wipe off such aspersions by sending and employing such
Soldiers as may not stain your good cause with their ill practice, let your
Motto be, Militia fine malitia. And as for your success either it will be good
or bad; if bad, measure not the goodness of your cause thereby. Eventus est
stultorum argumentum, It is Gods course to give by denying, Non habendo
habemus. Wicked Benjamin who took part with the delinquents of G^beah, must
first prevail against not representative, but all Israel, who took up arms to
do justice, that Israel might be the more provoked against them. Judge. 20. And
if your success be good, let your men carry it humbly: humility after mercy
makes men fit for more mercy. And he that boasts in his own body, Qui
gloriatur in viribus corports gloriatur in viribus carcer^.
boasts in his own prison: Rejoice not, says Solomon, when thine enemy
falls. Pro. 24. 17.

Your Soldiers may rejoice in Gods providence, but not in their enemies blood.
Zonarus writes that this was the manner amongst the Romans when any triumphed,
that an Officer stood behind him, saying, (...), look what is behind, and there
he saw a bell and a whip; a whip noting that for all his greatness he might
come under the lash of misery, which bell-like would sound very loud.

Nos autem rerum magis quam verborum amatores sumus ^tilia potius quam
plausibilia sectamur, and in his scrip is non lenocinia esse volumus, led
remedia. Salv. Epist. ad Solon. To the end that the Abbat might have an happy
beginning of this work from some luckie manner of presage, he solemnly
appointed the day of St. Perpetua and of St. Felicity, in which he would lay
the first foundation Cambd. Britan* Lincolnshire.
Thus have I taken the boldness to present you with my rude thoughts and this
small Treatise, concerning which I say as Salvian, I have not sought smooth but
profitable words. And in which because it has pleased God to lay the
foundation of your proceedings in your good success at Crowland, by the hand
and Command of that worthy Gentleman Sir Miles Hobert, I wish you that
blessing which the Abbat of Crowland when he began to build the Abbey would
have made the foundation thereof, Perpetuam foelicitatem.

Your humble Servant in the Gospel of Christ Jesus. W. BRIDGE.

An Advertisement to the Reader.
THou may perhaps wonder that this Answer was no sooner returned to the
Doctors Reply, which came forth so long ago, so that now it may seem to come
forth too late: Know therefore first, that the Doctors Book it self, some
while went up and down in the dark, seen only of a few. Secondly, that the
Author of the Answer living far from London, it was much longer before he
could have the sight of it: After he had it, he soon dispatched his Answer,
which he left in the hands of some friends here, a month since, to be
published, but new Licencers being appointed, much time was spent in carrying
of it from one to another for leave to travel safely: as also Printers being
full either of business or negligence, it comes to pass, that it has been
much longer in the birth then in the breeding. I hope it comes not too late to
satisfy the conscience of the well-affected, or to encourage those that are
engaged in this so necessary a defensive war; and it may be much more
seasonable then if before, whiles peoples minds are generally inclined to go
up with one unanimous consent personally to maintain the true Religion, Life
and Liberty of the Subject, which seems to be the likeliest way to put an end
to our unnatural uncivil wars, and happy shall that man be called, that
shall help forward that great work, and be a means to still the storm, the
end of a inst war being peace, as the lancing of the wound is for the cure of
it. Farewell.

I. A.

AN INTRODVCTION TO THE READER.
GOOD Reader, you see into what sad times we are now fallen: our English Sun
is almost set, out day of peace and plenty is almost done; workmen go from
their labor, and beasts go forth to their prey. And it war be the worst of all
miseries, and civil war the worst of all wars (as indeed it is: For there
the parents do bury their children; Nemo it a amens est ut bellum quam pacem
malit: nam in pace filii patres, in bello patres filios sepeliunt. Herod.
whereas otherwise the children do bury their parents) then is our condition of
all the most lamentable. The disputing time is almost now over: The Doctor has
stared so long in bringing up his Rear, that I fear the controversy depending,
is now rather to be determined with the dint of the sword, then with the
strength of the pen: yet because the Temple must be built in troubleous times,
and the tide of truth does usually at the first creep up by the bank side
against the stream; I am not unwilling for truths sake, once more to appear
in this cause, that I may deliver it from those exceptions wherewith the D ctor
has burdened the same. It is not long since I met with the Doctors reply, and
at the first I thought it not necessary to give any answer unto it; partly
beeause the subject is so well beaten, that he is almost answered before he
has objected; partly because I count that Reply scarce worth a sober answer,
which is clothed with so many scoffing jeeres, and vile reproaches, things
unworthy* of a D. D. especially such as pretend satisfaction of conscience: but
it will find entertainment with conscience according to its own nature: For
what Luther speaks of certain Preachers, is true of Writers also. Multi sunt
Praedicatores aestuantes and tumultuantes, artibus qui ut dixerint omnia facta
velint, non tam volentes audiri quia verbum Dei dicunt, quam quia ipsi sunt
verbi doctores, organum magis quam sonum commendari petentes horum portio, qui
meditatis and conceptis a se verbis permittunt sibi ipfis nunc bos nunc illos
pungere and mordere, and statim convertere, ubi fit miro Deiconsilio, ut nihil
minus impleant quam quod cogitaverunt. Sentit enim naturaliter anima bominis
verbum art super se compositum esse, and stercore humano ut apud Ezekiel. est
opertum, id est, humano affectu pollutum; ideonauseat super illo and potius
irritatur quam convertitur. Luther.
Multi sunt (says he) there are many hot and tumultuous Preachers, who would
have all things done as they say, not so much willing to be heard because they
speak the word of God, as because they are teachers of it, desiring rather
that the Organ then the sonnd may be commended; who having meditated and
conceived some words, do promise to themselves presently to convert those that
hear them: Whereas through the wonderful wisdom of God, they do nothing
less then what they thought: For the soul of man perceiving that the Word
preached is compounded with their Art, and covered over with humane dung; that
is, poluted with humane affection and passion, it does therefore nauseat the
thing delivered, and is rather provoked then converted. Yet because I have been
earnestly desired by friends, to open more fully the nature of government and
civil government of England, I am not unwilling to set pen to paper again.
For your better satisfaction therefore give me leave to lead you on by some
steps or propositions which I shall lay down in the first and second chapters,
and then shall come more nearly to answer the Doctor.

CHAP. I,
NOw because the Basis of our Question is, concerning the nature of Government,
Rule and Authority, or ruling and governing power (in which principle our
Doctor is so much mistaken) I must (though at last) show what that is. Power in
it self therefore, or (...), the word used Romans 13. properly signifies a
liberty or authority to Potest as in genere est facultas quae dam propinqua ad
exercendum aliquam operationem in aliquo supposito, ut domificator babet
potestatem domificandi, id est facultatem qua in propinquo potest exire in
talem operationem. Alman. depotest Eccl. and Laic q. 1. apud Gerson.
work or act toward others, translated licentia from (...), as licentia a
licet: Sometimes the word is used in the abstract, as Luke 4. 6. Luke 19. 17.
Sometimes in the concreate, as Matthew. 8. 9. Romans 13. 1. 2. Where, says Gerard,
Vbi non sine gravi ^onfilio Apostolus abstractivalocutione uti voluit, ut
ostenderet subditos non debere ad personas imperantium respicere, sed adipsorum
officium quo divinitus sunt instructi. Ger. de mag. polit. cap. 1.
not without great advice the Apostle Paul does use an abstractive manner of
speech to show that subjects ought not so much to respect the persons
commanding, as the office it self in their commandments. Take the word in the
abstract, so it is all one with jurisdiction, which is ordinarily described to
be Jus dicendi in invitum. Now this governing power is either Ecclesiastical
or Civil: civil Concerning which our question is according to the Apostle
Paul, as Gerard, In Epist. ad Romans Regem ettam definit prope ad dialectica^
subtilitatem esse enim ait ministrum cui gladius traditus est ut malos puntat,
ac bonos foveat and sublevet. Buchan de Jure Regni apud Scotos. Magistratus in
abstracto ex loco Apostolico, Rom 13. sic dosmire potest, Est potest as a Deo
ordinata, gla^io armata ut sit custos divinae legis and aliarum honest arum
constitutionum ad conservand. pacem in genere hnmano, and re^pub. salutem
obtinendam, Ger. de pol. mag conclus genesis
Bucanan, and others have it, is that ordinance of God which is armed with the
sword for the terror of those that are evil, and encouragement of those that
do well, Romans 13 1 2. 3. This dominion of jurisdiction is distinguished from
dominion of propriety: for dominion of propriety, as Medina observes, Dominium
jurisdictionis est potest as gubernandi subdiios suos cujus actus sunt p
aecipere vetare, judicare, punire, pr^miare. Dominum oroprie^atis jus
disponendi de r^ aliqua in suum com^^^dum. Medina de jure and justitia.
is a power of disposing of any thing that is a man's own to his own profit.
The power of Jurisdiction or government is not so; which while some have
mistaken, they have attributed so much power to the Prince, in regard of
Towns, Castles and Forts, as if he had therein dominion of propriety, which
breeds much confusion in men's apprehensions, and does bias their thoughts into
state errors. According to Alman, Secular or Civil power, Potest as Secularis
vel Laica, est potest as a populo vel successione haere atarea, vel ex
electione alt^ui, vel alicubus traaita regulanter ad aedificationem
comm^nitatis quantum adres civiles, secundum leges civiles pro constitutione
habitationis pacifi^ae. Alman. ibid.
is that power which regularly is given to one, or more, by the people, for the
ordering and preservation of the Commonwealth, according to the civil Laws
thereof. I shall go no further then the Scripture will lead us plainly in this
particular: As Ecclesiastical power or jurisdiction is ministerial, and
therefore called, Jus clavium, the power of the Keys; so Civil power is
Lordly, and therefore called, Jus gladii, the power of the Sword, whereby some
are authorized to exercise jurisdiction in Commonwealths over others, for the
reward of those that are good, and the punishment of those that are evil: that
is, governing or ruling power.

2d Proposition.
IF we take governing or ruling power as abstractively considered, so it is an
ordinance appointed by God himself, By me Kings reign, says God. And our
Savior when Pilate said: Know thou not that I have power to loose thee?
etc. said, Thou had it not unless it were given thee from above. And again,
Give unto Caesar the things that are Caejars, showing that as God has his dues
in the world, so the magistrate has his. Besides, we are commanded to obey and
submit unto the higher powers, Romans 13. And why should there be any obedience
if the power it self were not commanded of God; yea, the Israelites are
faulted for contemning of God himself, in casting off the government of
Samuel, which there should not have been, had not government been appointed by
God. (...), said the Heathen. Luther calls Magistracy, Necessarium naturae
corruptaremedium, the necessary remedy of corrupt nature. And Tertullian says
well, Inde Imperator unde homo antequam Imperator. The voice of nature is the
voice of God: now nature it self teaches, that in a commmunity, or body
politic, there must be justice administered, otherwise the community can never
be preserved: but justice cannot be administered, nnlesse authority, power or
jurisdiction, be first appointed; for what has a private man to do to put
another to death? Thou shall not kill, is made to all men.

Object. But the Apostle calls it, (...), an humane constitution or creature,
how therefore is it true that ruling power is an ordinance appointed of God
himself.

Answ. The Apostle dorh no where say, that power it self, or Magistracy in
the abstract, is an ordinance of man, but the form or qualification of it, as
Monarchy, Aristocracie, Democracie, (which are the channels in which this power
runs) is (...). And therefore the Apostle having said, Be subject to every
ordidinance of man, he adds, whether to the King as supreme, or to the
Governors, etc. Potest as secularis sive lai^aest a Deo quantum ad debitum,
sed frequenter non est a Deo quantum ad acquisitionem vel usum nam secundum
dictamen rectum debitum est taiemesse potestatem naturaliter enim iudicant
bomines quod oportet eos subdi alicui qui eis judicium and ju^ a^ministres,
exordinationem enim ^incitum est nobis tale judicium naturaleut consormiter
adipsum veniamus, and boca Deo, sed non est a Deo regula^iter ad istum sensum
quod alicui Deus communi^aret istam jurisdictionem laicam, etc. Durand. lib. de
origin juris.
Durandus here distinguishes between institution of power, and acquisition of
it Secular power, says he, considered according to its institution, is of God,
but according to its acquisition, and way of use, so not: Our Doctor does
ordinarily confound these in his reasonings; yea, though he distinguishes them
when he sets down his own naked judgment, yet when he comes to reason
against us, he will take no notice of his own distinction, neither can we
persuade him to it: but the thing being as visible as the Sun, I pass to the
third and chief step of my discourse, which is this following.

3^ Propos.
THough power abstractively considered, be originally from God himself, yet he
has communicated that power to the people, so as the first subject seat and
receptacle of ruling civil power under himself, is the whole people or body
politic. To this purpose Doctor Ruherfords words are very plain, Afree
Commonwealth, says he, contains ordines regni, the States that have
Nomotheticke power, and they not only by the law of Nature may use justa
tutela, a necessary defense of their lives from a tyrants fury, but also by the
law of Nations may authoritatively repress and limit, as is proved by Junius,
Brutus, Bucherius, Althasius, Haenomus. Therefore Heming, Amiceus do well
distinguish between Plebem and (...), populum: for indeed the multitude
(excluding the States) or base of the people, can hardly have another law
against Ioh. Brut. q. 3. Bucher. lib. 1. p. 6. Althusius polit. cap. 15.
Henomius polit. dis. 2. 1 1. 6 Isod. lib. 9. Origin cont. Celsum. cap. 9.
Aristot. polit. lib. 1. c. 3. Plato de Rep. cap. 8. Livi lib 4. Aeneus Silvius
de gestis Council. Basil. Vide Rutherford in his plea for Presbytery, chap. 4.
page 46.
tyrant, then the law of Nature. But the Commonwealth, including the States of
a free Kingdom, has an authoritative. So Isodore, Origin, Atistotle, Plato,
Titus Livius, Plutarch, and that of the Council of Basil, Plus valet Regnum
quam Rex, The Kingdom is more worth then the King, approved by all. Thus far
Doctor Rutherford, professor of Divinity in Scotland. The reasons of my
position are these:

First, when God gave the power of the Sword to men, Genesis 9 6. he gave it
indiscriminatim, without difference, to all the world, Noah and his sons
being all the men that were then alive in the world; and he gave not the Sword
only to Noah, but to all his sons that then were upon the face of the earth;
not that every one might ordinarily use it, but that they might, as they
thought fit, appoint one or more who might exercise that power that was given
to all, as the first seat of it.

Secondly, because the power of ruling and governing is natural, and what ever
is natural, does first agree to the community, or totum, and afterward to the
particular person or part, as the power of seeing and hearing (as Vulgar est
atque indubtratum fidei axioma Deum and naturam prius atque immediate us ad
totam suppositum quam ad aliquam partem suppositi quamvis nobilissimam
intendere; eum que ob causam faccultatem videndi datum esse bomini ut per
oculum tanquam per organum and ministrum hominis exerceretur; namoculus per and
propter hominem exist it. Facultas Parifiensis de pol. Eccles* Et istudetiam
deduci potest ex Thom Aquin. 2. 2^. q* 64. Omnis enim pars ordinatur ad totum,
cujus est pars vel imperfectum ad perfectnm, and sisalutitotius corporis
expediat abscissio alicujus membri puta quia est putridum aut ceterorum
infectivum in toto corpore residet potestatem illud perscmdendi. Quid ergo
quelibet persona comparetur ad totam communitatem sicut pars ad totum, ideo si
aliquis sit pernitiosus in communitate laudabiliter a communitate interimitur.
Almain. de authorit. Ecclef. apud Gers. cap. 1.
Facultas Parisiensis observes to this purpose) is firstly in the man and from
the man in the eye or ear or particular member.

Thirdly, because the Fluxus and Refluxus of civil authority, is from and to
the people: If the authority of ruling in a Commonwealth be given by the people
to him that rules (I speak what is Jure and Regulariter) and returns to
them again to see justice done in case that there is no particular supreme
Magistrate left to rule then the first subject seat and receptable of ruling
power must needs be in the people. Now so it is, that both these are true,
which I shall prove one after another: As first, The Fluxus of civil authority
is from the people, civil government or authority is derived from the people
to the Prince, or him that rules: they ordinarily and regularly do and are to
communicate that governing power where with such or such a person is so
invested: therefore says the Lord, D^ut. 17. 14. 15. When thou art come into
the land which the Lord thy God gives thee, and shall possess it, and shall
dwell therein, and shall say, I will set a King over me, like as all the
nations that are about me, thou shall in any wise set him King over thee whom
the Lord thy God shall choose, thou shall not set a stranger over thee whi h is
not thy brother.

Where we shall see, that the whole power of appointing and setting a King over
them, was given unto that people (as other Nations had it) by God himself. For
first, God directing them herein, does not say thus: When thou dwell in the
land which I shall give thee, Take heed that thou do not set a King over thee,
which thing belongs not to thee; but as a matter belonging to the people, he
says, when thou shall say, I will set a King over me, be sure that he be a
good one, and such as is pleasing to me. Secondly, In that he does take away
the power from them of making a stranger, he grants them a power to make a
brother, as Auferendo potestatem ad faciendum externum supponit ad faciendum
naturalem nam qui potestarem solam excipit ad regem ex peregrina natione
constituendum plane illam supponit ad constituendum expropria. Mendoza in Sam.
1. 8. 12.
Mendoza well observes. Now says God to them, thou may not set a stranger
over thee, which is not thy brother. Thirdly, what can be more plain then the
words themselves? In the 15. verse the words are reduplicated, Ponendo pones,
according to the Hebrew, in placing thou shall place: And that there might be
no mistake in the matter, God is pleased to explain the former word (...),
which we translate, set or place, by an afterward in the ^5. verse, (...),
which signifies to give, Thus, thou mai^st not give a stranger over thee, so
that setting and giving in these two verses, are all one, showing that is
firstly in the people to set or give a power unto others to rule over them.
Secondly the Apostle Peter calis this civil power (...). Now it is not
therefore called so, only because it concerns men, or because it is conversant
about men, or appointed for the good of men: for then the government Et sic
^angitur prima differentia inter has duas potest ates quia Ecclesiastica
estimmediate a Ob* sto instituente, sed laua quamvis sit a D^o ex ordinatione
quantum ad debitum nu^qu^m tamene^. a Leo regula^iter and immediate
instituendum. Almain. de potest. Ecccles. and laic cap. 1.
of the Church also should be so called but because the way of governing is
raised appointed, established by man himself, as is observed out of Oecumenius
Vocatur human a ordinatio non respectuprime originis and principalis causae
efficient is, sed respectu cause instrumentalis, quia per bominem sapius
constituitur magistratus ut Oecumenum in Commeut. humanam (...) opponit per
(...) quod constitutus and positus sit magistratus ab hominibus Deo tamen sic
innuente and sanctiente Gererd loc. com. fol. 481.
. Thirdly, this derivation of authority from the people will appear also, if
men do seriously consider the state of Jewish government. There was no people
nnder heaven whom God did so immediately reign over, as their King; yet if we
observe those Kings that were the most immediately appointed by God himself, we
shall find the intervening choice of the people, insomuch as it is said of
Saul expressly, that the people did choose him, 1 Samuel 12. 13. Behold your King
whom you have chosen and desired, upon which words Mendoza observes, that by
the word chosen cannot be meant desired, because that word was added too, as
different from the former, yet it is said, 1 Samuel 11. 15. That all the people
went to Gilgall, and there they made Saul King: Whereupon, says Quil apertius
neque enim videtur aliter eum Regem fa^ere potuisse quam ei regiam potestatem
conferendo. Mendoza 1 Samuel 8.
Mendoza, What is more plain? Neither could they make him King otherwise, then
by conferring Kingly power upon him. I do not say that God did not make a
designation of his person to the Crown, there is much difference between the
designation of person, and collation of power. When the Israelites were under
the government ofthe Judges, they desired and chose a new way of government,
saying to Samuel: Now make us a King to judge us, like all the Nations, 1. Sam.
8 5. And when God had yielded to them, and had designed Saul over them, the
people also came in with their election and sufftages. Neither are these two,
Gods designation and man's election repugnant, but may stand together: For as
Zepperus observes on those words, Deuteronomy. 17. Vbielectio regis Deo constitutio
susceptio velcomprobatio populi suffragiis tribuitur. Zeppeperus leg. Mosaic.
Forens explan* lib. 3. cap 7.
Thou shall set over thee a man whom God shall choose; the election may be of
God, the constitution, susception and comprobation of the people by their
suffrages. And Car. Scribanius Qnod autem adcreationemipertinet creatus est
primum s^ffragiis populi universi* etc. Car. Scr. de rep Hebr l. 7. c. 3.
who purposely writes of the form and manner of the Jews government and
Commonwealth, speaks abundantly and plainly thus: But for that which concerns
the creation of the King of Israel, he was first (says he) created by the
suffrages of the whole people. And if God would have it so then among the
children of Israel, whom he intended in special manner to reign over
himself, much more may we think that God would have the first constitution of
Kingdoms to be so ordered now, and amongst other people: Wherefore I conclude
this, That the Prince does and ought at first to receive his government and
authority from the people, and that the people themselves do give it to him.
And if so, then the first seat and subject of civil government, is the people:
Ergo illa authorit as est perprius in communitate quia nemo alteridet quod non
habet. (...)
For that nothing can give that to another, which it has not it self first
either formally or virtually.

And now secondly, for the reflux of authority, so it is, that in case there
have been a supreme Magistrate in a State, and all particulars cease, and the
Royal line be spent* and justice to be executed, it returns to the whole body
to see to it. As when Josua and diverse Judges had ruled in Israel yet we read
that after them, Judge. 19 1. There was no King in Israel, and then was the
great sin committed by the men of Gibeah with the Levites Concubine:
whereupon all Israel did take the sword of justice, and they said Judge. 20. 13.
to the men of Gibea, Deliver us the men the children of Belial, which are in
Gibea, that we may put them to death; which Gibea refusing, they did all as one
man, go up in Arms against them, God himself approving their act. And what
had all Israel to do to execute justice, if the power of the Sword did not
return to the people, vacant magistratu supremo: Neither can it be objected,
that though Israel had no King and supreme Magistrate amongst them, yet they
had several heads of the Tribes, by whose power they did come together for the
execution of justice, as it might seem to be Judges. 20. 2. For sometimes the
chief of the Tribes does in Scripture phrase signify those that are chief in
age, wisdom and riches, not such as were chief in authority. Besides, this
action is imputed to all the people, there being four hundred thousand men
that came together upon this design, verse. 2, unto whom the Levite made his
complaint, verse 7. Ye are all children of Israel, give here your advice and
counsel And all the people arose as one man, verse 8 saying verse. 9. Now this
shall be the thing we will do to Gibea, and verse 11 So all the men of Israel
were gathered against Gibea. And least that any should think that this work
was done by the power of some remains of regal authority amongst them, it is
not only said before this work begun, that there was no King in Israel in
those days* Judge. 19 1. But after all was done* i is said further chap. 21.
25. In those days there was no King in Israel, and every man did that which
was right in his own eyes; so that Jus gladii, the right of the sword, in case
of defection, returns to them again, so far as to see that justice be duly
executed: And therefore if both the Fluxus and Refluxus of authority, be from
and to the people, then must they needs be under God the first seat, subject
and receptacle of civil power.

Object. But the Scripture tells us, that the powers that be are ordained of
God Romans 13 1. And it ordained of God, then not of man, nor by any Fluxus, or
appointment from or of man.

Ans. Not to speak of the word (...), which signifies rather ordered then
ordained: Government is of God two ways, either by immediate donation, as that
of Moses, or by mediate derivation, as that of Judges, and the Kings of Israel.
The government of Princes now is not by immediate donation or designation, but
by mediate derivation, and so it is both of God and man too, as Fortescue
speaks, Quicquid facit causa secunda, facit and causa prima.

But the Doctor tells us, that Kings at first were not by choice of the people,
but that election was a defection from, and a disturbance to that natural way
of descent of governing Kingly power by a paternall right, page 9. of his
Reply. That Monarchical government is not a mere invention of man, as
Democracie and Aristocracie are; but that it is rather ductunaturae, though not
jure naturae, we being led there unto through the veins of Nature in a
paternall or fatherly rule, page 8. as is plain by the Book of God, that the
first fathers of mankind, were the first Kings and Rulers: For we see (says
he) that the earth was divided amongst Noah and his three sons, and still as
they increased, new Colonies were sent out, who had the government both Regal
and Sacerdotall, by primogeniture; whence it appears, (says he) that Monarchy
was the first government, it being late ere any popular rule Aristocraticall or
Democraticall appeared in the world: And that Monarchy, how ever we cannot say
that it was jure divino, yet it was exemplo divino, the government which God
set up over his people, being Monarchical still in Moses, Judges and the Kings
of Israel, page 8.

Ans. First, whereas the Dr says, that the first Kings were not by the choice
of the people at the first, p. 8. And that popular election was a kind of
defection from and a disturbance to that natural way, etc. I refer Doctor Fern
unto Doctor Fern, who says both in his first and second book, page 67. of his
Reply, It is probable that Kings at first were by election here as elsewhere.
This I have spoke to already, and shall speak to yet afterward; neither do we
take it unkindly that the Doctor cannot agree with us, seeing he cannot agree
with himself.

Secondly, whereas he says, Monarchical government is not a mere invention
of Man, as Aristocracie and Democracie are, I refer him to what he says
himself: For in his first book, page 13. 14. he says: We must distinguish
power it self, and the qualification of that power in several forms of
government: If we consider the qualification of this governing power, and the
manner of executing it, according to the several forms of government, we
granted it before to be the invention of man. And when such a qualification or
form is orderly agreed upon, we say it has Gods permissive approbation. Yet
in his Reply he makes this form of Monarchical government, rather an
appointment of God, both ducta natura, and exemplo divino, and not a mere
invention of man, as other forms of government are. Here I must leave him to
agree with himself.

Thirdly, whereas he says; That the first Fathers of mankind, were the first
Kings and Rulers: for we see the earth divided amongst Noah's three sons, etc.
I refer him for information to the 1 Chronicles. 1* 10. where it is said
expressly of Nimrod, that he began to be mighty upon the earth; whereas if
Noah and his sons were Kings, their dominions being greater before the
d^vision of the earth into after Colonies, they should have been more mighty
then he. And what his might was* is declared to us, Genesis 10. 10. And the
beginning of his kingdom was Babel, etc. Here is the first time, as Mendoza
well observes, that we read of a kingdom after the flood, and that is marked
with a (...), Rebellavit: For Nimrod comes of (...), to rebel, as if in
erecting his Kingdom, he had rebelled against the way of government which
before wasused if not appointed. And it should seem strange if God had
appointed that way of government by making the sons of Noah Kings; that Cham,
from whom came Nimrod, who was that cursed and wicked posterity of Noah, should
keep that government alive which was set up by God; and that Shem, who was the
godly posterity of Noah, from whom came Abram, should not: for we read not that
Abraham was a King, or that his government was Monarchical* but rather the
contrary, as 1 Chro. 1. 43. Now these are the Kings that reigned in the land of
Edom, before any King reigned over the children of Israel. To this purpose
Mendoza Ante discensum in Egyptum in quo Hebraei non Ren publicam sed samiliam
constituebat; Nam (ut Ari^t) non nisi ex multis samiliis coales^it respub* tune
autem una erat Abrah^e domus, in quam successit Isaac, and in bane domus Jacob,
and quamvis in tempore Jacob: post connub^a plures ^am familtae darentur,
quarum omnium gubernatio non potuit esse Oeconomica, ta^en non e^ant it a
m^ltae u^ politicum Rempublicum* conflarent, sed medtant quandam commitatem
quam vitalem seu collectaneam appellant. Mendoza 1 Tom. Annot. 3. Proem. Sect.
10.
writes who says, Before the descent into Egypt, the Jews did not constitute
a Commonwealth, but a family: for (as Aristotle) a Commonwealth does not
arise but from a conjunction of many families; but the^ Abraham's family was
one, to which Isaac's succeeded, and to that the house of Jacob. And although
in Jacobs time, after several marriages there sp^ang up diverse families (the
government of all which could not be Occonom^^al^ or Domestical) yet were
there not so many families as could constitute any political Commonwealth,
but a middle kind of Community, which is called Vitalis, or Collectanea. Yea
in Sect. 6. he proves out of Austine, Anton. Isidore, that Kingly government
fell in the fourth age of the world: and therefore Rupertus compares the fourth
Age of the world to the fourth day of the creation, Quia ut hec sideribus, it a
illa regibus fulgurant. 6. Sect Proem.
Because as that did shine with stars, so this with Kings.

And whereas the Doctor tells us, that this Regal Monarchical government is
natural, though not jure, yet ductu naturae, we being led thereunto through
the veins of Nature, in a paternall or fatherly rule, as is plain by the
Book of God, that the first Fathers of mankind were Kings, and so Regal
government to descend upon the first borne by primogeniture, as their families
increased and spread further, etc. page 8.

I refer him to what Molina and Pineda say, Quaedam namque potest as est quae
ortum babet ex solo jure naturali, quae de causa potestas naturalis dicitur
talis est potest as patris in filios and in alios descendentes alia vero est
quae ortum babet ex bominum voluntatibus se illi subjicere voluntium and
idcirco civilis potest as dicitur- Molina de Jure and Just. Disp. 20. Tract. 2.
Molina will tell him, that power is of two sorts, some that has its rise ex
solo jure naturali, and therefore called natural, as the power of the Father
over his children, and those that descend from him: Other power there is, which
has its origination from the will of Men, they being willing to subject
themselves to the supreme, and is therefore called a civil power. So that
paternall and civil power are not the same, but have two originals.

And if Monarchical government should be by paternall right, then is it not
only ductu, sed jure naturae; ductus naturae is that whereby we are led to
any thing by the principles of Nature: and that which we are led to by the
principles of Nature, is jure naturae: For natural est (says the Philosopher)
quod fluit ex principiis naturae. And so the Membra dividentia should
interfeere, whereas they ought to be fully opposite. Besides, if paternall
government do lead us to Regal, and Monarchical, then Kings should and ought
to rule as arbitrarily in their Kindomes, as Fathers do in their Families: And
if subjects do deny this Arbitrary power to them, they sin, because they are
led thereunto by Nature, and so all the Kingdoms of the world should he in
this sin: for in what Kingdom of the world does a King rule as arbitrarily
as a Father in his family.

Again, this contrivance of government by the Doctor, supposes that the eldest
Man, or Father after the Flood, though he were never so silly and weak, should
be King, and that this Regal government must necessarily descend upon the
first borne, by virtue of primogeniture.

Ex succedentium line^ in qua paucissimos invenies primogenitos succedentes
parentibus, qua e Abulensis aperte satetur se retractare communem sententiam
quam ipse aliquande sequutus fuisset, and jam tunc asserere successionem in
regnum aut principatum nunquam fuisse ^lligatum ^ut debitum primogenitis, and
confirmat ex to quod Paralip. 1. 5. 1 Primogenita Ruben data fuere Josept,
Fili^s and tamen Juda regnabat. Pineda derebus Salomonis, lib. 2. cap. 1.
Ipsonatur^ jure omnes aequaltter Filios Patri succedere do^uit. Arist 7 Ethick.
Decreto item and voluntate divina indiscriminatim Salomonis posteritati
pollicetar. Them regnum sed ub^plures erunt filii ad solum parentis voluntatem
spectasse videntur.

Abulensis addit posteriorum regum tempore invalescente consuetudinem
b^reditarium regni jus ad primogenitos devolutum esse; Ego vero perpetuum
fuisse existimo ut regni successor expar^utis a rbitrto and voluntate penderet
ut ex serie regum patet. Pineda lib. 2. de rebus Salomonis cap 1. 2. 3.


For this I refer him to Pineda, where at large in his Book de rebus
Salomonis, he may read Pineda proving that among the Israelites the Crown did
not descend upon the first born, but was always disposed of according to the
will of the parent, appointing it to this or that child; where he brings in
Abulensis retracting his opinion, and professing, that though he did formerly
think that the Crown did descend upon the first borne, by virtue of
primogeniture, yet at the last he was of another sentence, because it is said,
1 Chronicles. 5. 1. 2. Ruben the first borne of Israel, because he defiled his
Fathers bed, his birthright was given to the sons of Joseph; yet verse 2.
Juda prevailed above his brethren, and of him came the chief Rulers.

Now as they argue, if the Crown belonged to the first borne, as part of the
Birthright that should have been given unto the sons of Joseph; unto whom it
is here said expressly the Birthright was given: but the rule and Crown was
given unto another Tribe, arguing that it was no part of the birthright, or any
necessary annexum to the primogeniture in those days.

This doctrine Pineda proves by examining the series of all the Kings,
instancing especially in Solomon who was appointed King by David,
notwithstanding he was not David's eldest son; and Abiah who was appointed by
Rehoboam, though Rehoboam had many elder children* as he clears from 2 Chronicles.
11 18, 19, 20, 21 22.

Fifthly, whereas the Doctor says, This Monarchical government was the first
government that God set up; In Moses, Judges, and Kings of Israel, and so
though not jure divino, yet exemplo divino. I consesse I cannot but wonder at
the conceit, seeing the difference between the government of Judges and Kings
is so abundantly made out by Car. Sigonius, Feverdentius, Ranervus, Abulensis,
and many others ( Ceterum cum deforma Reipub. quaritur nibil aliud quaeritur
nisi penes quem principatum summa rerum fuerit constituta; hae^ vero apud
Haebreos primum penes optimates posita fuit deinde penes Reges quorum
principatum illum Aristacr^cian, hoc regnum Greci vocarunt, Aristocratia suit
sub Mose, Joshua, ^^^ioribus and Indicibus, reg^um sub reg^bus de Aristo^ratia
(...) non facietis, etc. Car. Sigon. li* 1. ca. 5.
) Sigonius says expressly, the first government among the Hebrews was by the
chief of the people, and after by Kings, that by the Greeks being, called
Aristocracie, and this Monarchy; Aristocracie, says he, was under the Judges,
Joshua, and others, Monarchy under Kings, which Aristocraticall government of
theirs is signified to us by these words in Deuteronomy. 12. 1. 8. These are the
statutes and judgments which ye shall observe to do in the Land which the Lord
thy God gives thee. Verse 1. then verse 8. Ye shall not do after all the
things that we do here this day, every man whatsoever is right in his own eyes.
And indeed if the Israelites were under Monarchical government in the times of
the Judges and Monarchy was then on foot; why should they desire it as another
kind of government which yet they had not, 1. Sam. 8. saying to Samuel, Now
make us a King to judge us like all the Nations: verse 5. By which it appears
that the government which they had before under the Judges was not Monarchical
as that which they had afterward.

Let no man therefore swallow this principle so often inculcated by the Doctor,
that the government of Israel under Judges was Monarchical. For though some of
the Judges were called Kings, yet as Drusius and others observe, the word King
was taken either more strictly for Monarchs, or more largely for such Captains
and Governors as did rule over them; Surely God at the first, by all we can
read in the Scripture, was pleased to appoint Magistracy it self and left the
children of men free to set up that way and form of government, which in
prudence might best correspond with their condition, still making people the
first subject and receptacle of civil power: In proof whereof I have stayed
the longer, it being the foundation of all this controversy. And now pass on
to the fourth Proposition, which is.

4th. Proposition.
Effectus non exce^^t virtutem causae suae.
SEeing that the people are under God the first subject of civil power,
therefore the Prince o^ supreme Magistrate has no more power then what is
communicated to him from the community, because the affect does not exceed the
virtue of its cause.

5th. Proposition.
ANd as the Prince has no more power then what is communicated from the
community; so the people or community cannot give away from themselves the
power of selfe-preservation. Because the same Commandment that faith, Thou
shall not kill: does also say, Thou shall preserve. Precepts that forbid evil,
do command the contrary good. Now the moral natural Law of God forbids a man
to kill himself, and therefore commands him to preserve himself: and as by a
positive act men cannot make a Law to kill themselves, no more can they not to
preserve themselves; the one being as strongly commanded by the moral Law, and
as deeply seated in Nature as the other. Secondly, because if the community
should give away the power of self-preservation, the state should not be in a
better but in a worser condition then before. The King and Prince is taken into
Office for the good of the people, therefore called Pater patriae, and Pastor
gregis: not because he may arbitrarily rule in the Common wealth as a Father
does in his family; but because of his tender care that he is to have over his
people; and that the people might live more secure and peaceably in all
godliness and honesty: But if the community should give such a trust to any
one that they might not at all defend themselves beyond his actual
appointment, they should be infinitely in a worser condition then before,
because before such trust they should be freemen; but after the trust they
should be slaves, unless it pleases the King through his own gracious
condiscention to let them be free still: for what is a slave but such a one who
is so absolutely at the power of another command, that he may be spoiled, or
sold, or put under the Galleys, and there beaten daily, having no power to make
any resistance or selfe-defence. Thirdly, it is agreeable to the Law of Nations
and Reason, that no inferior Court can undo what a superior Court has done,
As where an estate is settled upon children by Act of Parliament, no inferior
Court of Justice can cut off the intayle. Now selfe-preservation is enacted in
the Court of Nature, as he that has read but Magirus unbound, I mean common
natural principles, will grant, and therefore no act of a community can cut
off this intayle from their posterity, or make such a deed of Conveyance
whereby themselves and their children should be spoiled of self-preservation.

Ob. But though by nature a man is bound to preserve himself, yet he may
destroy or put himself upon that which will be his destruction for the public
good; does not natura particularis go cross to its own disposition, ne detur
vacuum?

Respons. True I have read indeed that Natura particularis gives way to natura
universalis, but never heard before that natura universalis gives way to natura
particularis, or that natura universalis does seek its own destruction, or
loose the power of self-preservation for the good or betternesse of some
particular nature. Wherefore if the seat of power be in the community, and
therefore no more power in the supreme then was and is derived from the
community, and the people cannot give away the power of self preservation:
Then in case the Prince does neglect his trust so as not to preserve them, but
to oppose them to violence, it is no usurpation for them to look to themselves,
which yet may be no act of jurisdiction over their Prince, or taking away of
any power from him which they gave him, but is in truth a stirring up acting
and exercising of that power which always was left in themselves.

CHAP. II.
HAving now spoken of power in general, I shall say somewhat of the governing
and ruling power of England; yet because that concerns the Parliament to
declare (which they have done) and Lawyers for to clear which they do, I shall
but touch upon it, and no more then comes within the compass and verge (I do
not say) of a divine but subject. I find therefore in learned Fortescue, Lord
Chief Justice, and after Lord Chancellor in King Henry the sixth time, that he
does distinguish of governed or ruling power into two sorts, the one merely
royal, and the other politic. When Kingdoms are ruled by royal government,
says he, then men in Homines quondam potentia per pollentes, avidi dignitatis
and gloria vicinas s^pe gentes sibt v^^ibus subjugarunt ac ipsis servire
obtemperare quoque jussionibus suis compulerunt quas jussiones ex tunc leges
hominibus illis esse ipsi sanctierunt.

Fortes. de laudibus legum Angl. ca. 12. Ad tutelam namque legis subditarum and
little corpus and bonorum Rex homini erectus est, and ad hanc potestatem a
populo esluxam ipse haec, quo einon li^et potestate alia suo populo dominari.
c. 13. Princtpatum namque nedum regali sed and politica, ipse suo populo
dominatur. c. 9.


times past excelling in power, and greedy of dignity and glory, did many
times by plain force subdue unto themselves their neighbors the Nations
adjoining, and compelled them to do them service, and to obey their commands,
which commands, they decreed afterward to be unto the people, very Laws. Cap.
12. The form of institution of a politic Kingdom is that where a King is mad,
and ordained for the defense of the Law of his Subjects, and of their bodies
and goods, whereunto he receives power of his people, for that he cannot
govern his people by any other power. Cap. 13. Now, says he, the King of
England cannot alter or change the Laws of his Realm at his pleasure, for he
governs his people by power, not only Royal, but also politic. And
accordingly Will. the Conqueror (to go no higher, in whose entrance to the
Crown Dr. F. makes the first contrivement of his English government for
conscience to rest upon) seems to me to have possessed himself of this Kingdom,
who though he did conquer the same, yet the first claim or title that he laid
to this Crown was gift, which Edward the Consessor Fox Act. Monum. of Will.
Conqueror.
had made to him; Herald the former King having promised the Crown also to
him. In this right he first set foot on the English shore, not in the right of
a conquest, but in the right of a gift and promise, as Speed, Cambden and
others affirm. Ex lib. Regum Antiquorum in Pretorio Londinensi. Mr. Fox Act.
Moxum. ibid.
And afterward when he had obtained the Crown, he swore to use and practice
the same good laws of Edward for the common laws of this realm;
notwithstanding says Mr Fox, Amongst the said laws I find in ancient Records,
this was part, that the King because he is Vicar of the highest King, is
appointed to rule the kingdom, Nam precedentibus diebus Edwinus and Morcardus
apud London audito interritus Haroldi nuntio urbanos solicitaverunt ut
alterutrum in regnum subl^varent, caeteriproceres Edg irum eligerent si
Episcopos hererent, sed Angliqui in unam coeunies sententiam pot^issent patrie
reso mare ruinam dum nullum ex^suis volebant ^ d^xerunt alienu^. Gui Malms. ^e
Will primo, lib. 3 page 102.
and the Lords people, to defend the holy Church; which unless he do the name
of a King agrees not to him, but he loses the name of a King, etc.

2ly, As the King and Conqueror came into the Kingdom by this claim, so we
find, that in those times the consent and choice of the people was in use for
the establishing of Kings amongst them: For when William the first sent to
Herald to make good his promise, Herald answered, that he was rightful King,
as being so by the consent and choice of the people, as is reported in Cambden
in his Britannia, thus: As concerning the promise of King Edw. William is to
understand, that the Realm of England could not be given by promise, neither
ought I to be tied to the said promise, seeing the Kingdom is fallen to me by
election, and not inheritance. And as for his own stipulation, he said, it was
extorted from him by force; neither he if he could, nor might if he would, make
it good, seeing it was done without the consent of the people. Yea, Histories
tell us, that when William the first had beaten Herald in the field, the people
still were in doubt whom they should choose and setup for their King: For says
Culiel. Malmsburiens Edwin and Morcard came to London and solicited the City
that they would prefer one of them to the Kingdom; and the rest of the
Nobles would have chosen Edgar, if the Bishops would have stuck to them: But
the English, who then might have healed the ruins of the Kingdom, whilst
they would none of their own, brought in a stranger. So that though William
the first had gotten the field, yet was not he brought to the Crown, but with
the consent and choice (though much over-pow'red and overawed) of the people.
So says Speed expressly, Consent thus gotten, and all voices given for
William, he was crowned King at Westminster.

3ly, As the Crown in those days was obtained by the consent and choice of the
people, so I say, that even William the Conqueror did not come to the Crown
without all conditions: for the Kentish men would not receive him but upon
condition, which they proposed thus, Most noble Duke, behold here the Commons
of Kent are come forth Speed Chron. of Will. the Conqueror.
to meet and receive you as their Sovereign, requiring your peace, their own
free condition or estate, and their ancient laws formerly used. If these be
denied, they are here presently to abide the verdict of battle, fully resolved
rather to die then to depart with their laws, or to live servile in bondage,
which name and nature is, and ever shall be strange unto us, and not to be
exdured. The Conqueror driven to these streights, and loath to hazard all on
so nice a point, more wisely then willingly granted their desires, and pledges
on both parts given for performance. So says Speed in his Chronicles, so that
it is plain, that even William the first came not to the full Crown of England,
without all conditions, and therefore our Kings and Princes pleading their
right from him, cannot be Kings and Princes without all conditions. I know Dr.
F. tells us, that the Kings oath imports no condition, but is taken for
confirmation and strengthening of mutual duties: whether that be true, let any
judge who reads but these things. And indeed, if the Kings of England were such
absolute Monarchs, as that no resistance might be made to their commandments
for the taking up of Arms for the defense of the country, when enjoined by
Parliament, then the subjects and people of England must lose this power of
selfe-defence: (for they once had it all men by nature having a power to defend
themselves) either by conquest, as being by force spoiled thereof, or else they
gave it away by some indenture at the election of the Prince (for inheritance
is but succession of election inheritance or immediate donation from God, or
else God has forbidden this forcible resistance by Scripture. If it be said
that this people are spoiled thereof by conquest, and are as a people meetly
conquered, then any other sword that is longer then the Princes, may fetch back
that power again. If it be said that this people gave away this power by
Indenture at the first election of their Prince, then let men show us such
Indenture. If it be said, that God has forbidden such a forcible resistance by
Romans 13. 1, 2, 3. or the like Scriptures, then it must be affirmed that the
Parliament are not the higher powers, which Dr Fern grants: for if the
Parliament come within the compass of those words (higher Powers) then that
Scripture Romans 13. does not reach them, but rather requires others to be
obedient to them; yea, if by the higher powers is understood only the King,
then the two Houses may not* make any forcible resistance against any petty
Constable that comes in the K^ authority to do violence to the two Houses.
Surely therefore this and the like Scriptures are much abused, the meaning
being only to command obedience to authority in all things that tend to the
encouragement of good, and puishment of evil; and therefore there is such a
power in the subjects, both by the law of nature, and constitution of the
kingdom, to take up Arms when the State or two Houses express it; not
withstanding the expression of any one man to the contrary.

CHAP. III.
HAving showed the nature of power in general, in the first chapter, and the
way and manner of Englands government in some measure in the second Chapter, I
now come to the vindication of the truth, as opposed by Dr Fern in his last
Book called Conscience satisfied, wherein he spends the 7 former chapters
mostly in answer to a book called a Fuller answer. In his 8. Sect. he comes to
examine such grounds as I premised for the lawfulness of Parliamentary
proceedings in taking up of Arms as now they do. That I may not weary the
Reader in turning from book to book, I shall sometimes briefly set down what I
had written, then his Reply, then give my answer unto it.

Mr. Bridge tells us, says the Doctor, that there are three grounds of their
proceeding by arms: to fetch in Delinquents to their trial, to secure the
State from foreign invasion, to preserve themselves from Popish rebellon. Dr.
Fern replyeth, Yet this must be done in an orderly and legal way; and if
conscience would speak the truth, it could not say that any delinquents were
denied, or withheld, till the Militia was seized, and a great delinquent, in
the matter of Hull, was denied to be brought to trial at his Majesty's
instance.

Ans. How true this is that the Doctor writes the world knows I need not say:
the Parliament to this day never denied to try any that were accused by the
King, so that they might be tried legally by himself and the two Houses, which
is the known privilege of every Parliament man according to Law.

Dr. F. But Mr. Bridge tells us, all this is done as an act of
self-preservation, not as an act of jurisdiction over their Prince; and the
Fuller Answer would have us believe they are enabled to it by Law* and
constitution of this government, and that they do it by an act of judgment:
let him and Mr. Bridge agree it.

Ans. There needs no great skill to untie this knot, not mediator to make us
friends, the Parliament has raised this Army by an act of judgment and
jurisdiction, not over their Prince, but in regard of Delinquents: so the same
act may be a work of jurisdiction in regard of others, and yet an act of
preservation in regard of our selves. The execution of any malefactor in an
ordinary way of Law is both preservation to the State, and a work of
jurisdiction in regard of the offender, so here; yet I do not say it is a work
of jurisdiction over our Prince, but in regard of delinquents that are about
him.

Dr. F. Mr. Bridge gives us proofs for this way of self-preservation from the
Law of Nature, it being natural to a man, and so to a community to defend it
self. And were this argument good, then might private men and the people
without the Parliament take up arms and resist, for self-preservation is
natural to them.

Ans. It follows not, because, though I say every thing may defend it self by
nature, yet I say also it must do it modo suo and naturae suae convenienti; we
say that all creatures do defend themselves, and it is natural so to do; yet
we do not therefore say that a beast defends himself in the same manner as a
man does, or a man as a beast, but in a way suitable to every nature. Now if a
private person be in danger to be oppressed by a Prince, flying is more fit
defense for him, and therefore says our Savior, If they persecute thee in one
City, fly to another: but if the State be wronged and oppressed, which is a
public grievance, then the State, and those that represent them are more fit
to take up Arms for its preservation. For Nature in general teaches
self-preservation; Nature specificated teaches this or that preservation: now
the nature of a community, and of a particular person are distinct, and
therefore though I say a community is to defend it self because sui tutela is
natural to every thing; yet I do not say, that a particular private person may
ordinarily defend himself in that way which is most suitable to the community
as the taking up of Arms is, yet I suppose no moderate man will deny this
that the Subjects (though) not invested with authority have a power to keep
out an enemy from landing incase of foreign invasion, yea though the Kings
Officers should be negligent therein; or so malicious and treacherous as to
forbid them to defend themselves and their Country.

Secondly, says the Doctor, He proves it by Scriptures, 1 Chronicles. 12. 19. where
the Word of God says expressly, that David went out against Saul to battle,
but he was Saul's subject at that time; A desperate undertaking to make people
believe this is express Scripture for subjects to go out to battle against
their King. But he should have added what is expressed there, it was with the
Philistines that he went out, and that he helped them not* for he did but make
show of tendering his service to Acis^.

Ans. Here I need give no other answer then repeat those words fully that he
replies to (which were these) which Scripture I bring not to* prove that a
Subject may take up arms against the King, but that the Subjects may take up
arms against those that are malignant about the Kings person, notwithstanding
the Kings command to the contrary. For seeing that David's heart smote him
formerly for cutting of the lap of Saul's garment, and yet it is said in
express words in this text that he went out against Saul, its likely that his
intentions were against those that were evil and wicked about him.

Then the Doctor brings in another piece of my argument, not the whole reason
or the sense of it, thus, Be subject to the higher powers, Romans 13. but the
Parliament is the highest Court of Justice. pa. 3. To which he replies (modo
suo) well assumed, and so it is, for is not the highest Court of Justice an
higher power; We grant (faith the Doctor) there is a subjection due to them,
and if he meant by the Parliament the 3. Estates concurring all manner of
subjection is due unter them. It Is well he will acknowledge any subjection due
to the Parliament without the third estate. And if any subjection then they
have some authority; but none they can have, if not power to bring in the
accused to be tried before them. And if they have power to bring in 20 by
force, then 100. then 1000. then 10000. which cannot be done without raising an
Army.

Then he undertakes, says the Doctor, to show out of Scripture, that Kings
receive their power from the people, and has the ill hap to light on Saul,
David and Solomon for examples.

Ans. The Doctor has the ill hap always to miss the argument which lay thus:
If it be the duty of the King to look to the safety of the Kingdom, and that
because he is trusted therewith by the Common wealth; then if the Parliament be
immediately trusted by the Commonwealth with the safety thereof as well as the
King, though not so much, then are they to look to it, and to use all means
for the preservation thereof, as well as the King. But so it is, that the King
is bound to look to the safety thereof, and that because he is entrusted
therewith, as was Saul, David and Solomon, who came to their government by the
consent and choice of the people. Whereupon the Doctor replies, He has the ill
hap to light on Saul, David and Solomon.

Answ.
But it seems the Doctor had not the good hap to meet with these several
Authors which affirm that even these Kings, Saul, David and Solomon, were
chosen by the people* If he had read or minded them, he would not have imputed
this as an ill Quod si objicias Samuilem ungendo, Sa le a absque ullo populi
consensu* acdicendo ecce unxit te Dominus super heareditatem suam i^ principem,
1 Reg, 10. n 1, manifest indicasse Regiam potestatem Sauli collatam, non a
populo, sed a Deo immediate profecta^ esse; Facile responder i potest, illam
unctionem non fuisse signum potestatis collatae sed confe^endae, ut probari
potest ex unctione Davidis (...) ^ Samuel unxit, 1 Reg 16. n. 13. ^^guante
adhue Saul, im^multis post annis regnatu^o. Vnde per eam vnctionem non accepi
David regiam potestatem, led per ^^m qu^ postea sacta est ab universis
Tribabus, et ^enio^ib^s, quando venientes in Hebron un^e^unt David in regem
super Israel Reg. 2. 5. 3. Q^a^e illa prior unctio non fuit colla io regiae
potestatis, sed tanti^m significatio qu edam hujus posteriotis unct^oni^^ per
qua^ confe^end^ erat illa regia potesta^^ sic ig^tur et prima illa Saulis
unctio ante populi consensum, non significav^t regiam potestatem collatam, sed
confercudam, quando (...) quin s populus a Samue^e congregatus in M^^pah, (...)
praebuit consensum, and ^lamavit vivat (...) Ita possunt p^o hac pa^te ^jus
auctores non pa^um prob^biliter argumenta^^, Mendoza in 1 Reg. cap. 8, number. 5
page 5^2.
hap unto me for to light on these examples, I will give him but the testimony
of Mendoza who though not of our judgment in this matter, yet ingeniously
confesses, that with great probability Authors do reason for a popular choice
of Saul, David, and Solomon. Whereas says Mendoza, it is objected, that Samuel
by anointing Saul without any consent of the people, saying, the Lord has
anointed thee King over his heritage, did thereby clearly show, that the regal
power was conferred upon Saul not from the people, but from God, that is easily
answered, that that Unction was not a sign of power already conferred, but to
be conferred as may be proved by the anointing of David, whom Samuel anointed,
1 King. 16. 13. Dureing Saul's Reign, yea while he had many years to ra^gnt.
Whereby it appears that David did not receive regal power by that unction, but
by that which he had afterward by all the Tribes and Elders; when coming to
Hebron they anointed David King over Israel; Therefore that first unction was
not the conferring the regal power, but only a signification of this latter
unction, by which this Kingly power was to be derived or conveyed: so also that
first anointing of Saul before the consent of the people, did not signify the
Kingly power already conferred, but to be conferred upon him, to wit, when all
being gathered together by Samuel to Mispah gave their consent, and cried out,
Let the King live.

He has found an example and proof for thetrust of Parliement in David's time,
1 Cro. 13. 1, 2. Because David consults w th the Captains and Leaders which
were Officers ^ot of the King, but Kingdom, but those were Officers of the
King and Kingdom, merely designed by him not the People, and called by h m to
that trust, page 43 44*

Answ.
True I have found an example indeed in David's time for what I alleged:
Namely, that there were then certain Officers of the Kingdom, not of the King
only, and though under him, yet were they with him trusted with the affairs
Hujus autem temporis respub. Monarchica fuit, Aristocratia tamen perm xta, et
accellit ali quid etiam Democraticum, habuit enim Senatum Septuagint, cujus
Judices pat^ien et principes vocantur; Regi assidegtes summum regni, judicium
conficiebant, ad quod di^^iciliores ^ausae* regis and pontifiers elect^o, beili
gerendi consultatio, al^a que totum populi corp s concernentia refer. ^ban.
tur. De hoe Synedrio Josephus nihil agat ex sine Senatorum Sententia fue runt
^ue hi eo apnd reges loco, ut fiatres eos suos dicerent Zepperus Mosaie. fo^en.
Expla. l. ^. cap. 6.
of the Kingdom. This also was the judgment of the Protestant Divines in
France (whose Testimony I shall relate afterward) of lumus, Josephus, Brutus,
Zepperus, Sigonius, and many others. Zepperus says thus, That in Saul, David
and Salomons time, and so before the Captivity, the Kingdom of Israel was mixed
with Aristocracie, for it had a Senate of 70. or great Synedrim, which sat at
Jerusalem, whose Judges were called Princes, who sitting by the King did
dispatch the great affairs of the Kingdom, unto whom was referred the choice
of the King and High Priest, and matters of War and other things greatly
concerning the people. Of this Synedrion Josephus says, Nihilagat Rex sine
Senatorum sententia, Yea, these Senators were in such place with the King, that
they were called his friends and brethren, 1 Chronicles. 2. 2. And though the Dr.
says, Those Officers in David's time were designed by the King, not the people,
Yet if we look to the original in the first of Deuteronomy. 13. We ^inde that the
people did first give them to Moses before he did make them Rulers, for v. 13.
Moses relating the first constitution of that Government says, I said unto
you, give me wise men, and understanding and known men among your Tribes, and
I will make them Rulers over you: The English Translation reads, Take y^e
wise men, the Hebrew is give ye us, as Montanus has it, and when they had
given them to Moses, he says, v. 15. So I received them (so is the Hebrew) he
would not make any rulers over them, but such as he had first e c eived from
them and they had given unto him and so though at the first it pleased God to
appoint those Rulers or Dedit illis Deus seniores. q^i per omma ill* equales
forent, ut patet Numb. 11. 14.
Council of State called the Sanedrym or Synedrion (whereupon Mendosa says,
that they were equal to Moses being appointed by God as Moses was, Numbers 11.
14, 15, 16.) Yet that was by Etin ipsis s^eptrum ipsum pen* debat, nemo autem
dijudicat tribum Sceptrum, etc nisi domus Judicii, Ca^. S^r^t. ^iv. 6. cap. 7.
and with the consent and choice of the people, not merely by appointment of
the King as our Doctor would. Car. Sigo^ius will tell him out of the Tolmodists
and other Divines, that he had searched into, that this Sinedrion or College
of Elders, did represent the Scepter, that the Scepter it self did depend on
it, that none did judge the Tribe and the Scepter, Penes quos erat summa
potestas judicandi controversa, and exer^^ndi judicia publici, quin and reges
elegendi, et deponendi, unde a Talmodistis vocatur domus judicii magna, vel
collegium Sceptri and publici po^estatis, Gerardde Eccles-pol.
but this house of Judgment. To this purpose Gerrara shows that this
Synedrion was chosen of the chief men of Israel, in whom was power of judging
controversies, exercising of public justice, yea of choosing and deposing
Kings; And therefore of the Talmodist, this Council was called the house Hoe
Seniorum Synedrian perpetuum suit in populo Dei, usque ad Herodem test Josepho
Zepper lib. 3. cap. 5. Sc Dr. Bilson of Subject. and Rebellion, p. 338.
of Judgment, or the house of the Scepter and public Authority. And
Zepperus with Doctor Biljon says, this Synedrion continued with that people of
God unto the time of Herod, Iosep^us being witness. I press not so much as
these Authors speak of; But whether there were not in those times of David
Officiari^ Regns, which were not merely designed by the King: and what inference
I do make from thence let Conscience judge.

Again, whereas I argue from the being and nature of Parliament, that if it
has not power to send for by force, those that are accused to be tried before
them, that should not be a Court of Justice; seeing that even inferior Courts
have a power to force those before them that are to be tried: And if the
Parliament may send one Sergeant at Arms, then 20. then 100. then 1000, etc.
The Doctor Replies: Therefore Inferior Courts have a power to raise Arms.
(Answer) this follows not? For though I say every Court has power to force in
the accused; yet it must be in a way suitable: Now this raising of Arms is not
suitable unto an Inferior Court, but to the Parliament being a more National
and public Court then any other is. The Dr. tells us indeed that other Courts
have their posse comitatus. So the Parliament have their Orders* to fetch and
force in the accused, which are established by law, as well as his posse
Comitatus is: But says the Dr. I did not know before that all the Parliament
Soldiers were Sergeants at Arms. Answer, how does he catch at the word, and
let the sense go; the sense, scope and drift of the Argument, was to show that
as they might send forth one who by force should fetch in the accused; by the
same reason they might send forth ten, and by the same Reason that they may
send forth, 10; they may send forth 20, so 100, so 1000, so 10000: The Dr. puts
off the Argument with a Jeere, because he has no list to meddle with the
Reason.

In the 45 Page* he would enervate the Testimonies of Divines, which I brought
to show that all Protestant Divines were of our mind. Let us see therefore
what he says to them. And first he begins with the Testimony of the Germane
Divines* and for that says he: The Testimony of the Centuriste, speaks
nothing to this purpose; A short answer, soon and ^^sily given, but why nothing
to our purpose, nay stay there, the Dr. will keep his Reason to himself; I
set down therefore the Testimony again, and let men judge whether it be
Gubernato^es e^go in iis reb^^ quae cum de alogo et j stis legibus puguant,
nihil juris aut immunitati, h^bent prae ex^e^is humin^b^^ privatis, et
perpet^antes id quod malum est, coguntu^ tam metuere o^din^ti ouem De^* glad^.
umpraestantem ad vindict im n^cc^tium, quam a^i hene* pri^ i nam Paulus Romans
13. docet. Deum ordinasse et insti^^isse potestatem illa^ gladio defendendi
bonum, et puniendi malum* et praecipit, utomn^ anima (et fie gubernatores) tali
Dei ordinationi sit subjecta; hoc est obligat ad faciendum bonum, si velit
defendi ista Dei ordinatione, et non ob sua facinora impia puniri. Magdebur
gensis cens. lib. 20.
to the purpose. Governors say they in such things as are repugnant to the law
of God, have no power or (...) above other private men, and they themselves
commanding that which is evil, have no power or immunitie above others; Yea,
they themselves commanding that which is evil, are as much bound to fear the
Ordinance of God, bearing the* word for the punishment of vice: for St. Paul,
Romans 13. says that God dia instance and ordain a power both of defending that
which is good, and punishing that which is evil; and he commands that every
soul, and so the governors themselves should be subject ^o this Ordinance of
God if they would be defended by it, and not by their wicked deeds, makes
themselves liable to punishment.

Of the French and Low Country Divines, he brings no testimony (says the Dr.)
but (for proose* tells us ne know their practice; so I for answer may return
him his own words; we know what has been the practice of those Protestants,
and so they are parties interessed not so fit to give in witness.

An. Very well if they be parties interessed, and so not fit to give in witness,
then they are of our judgment: observe Reader here he grants that the
Protestant Churches, and the Divines of France and the Low Countries, are
parties interessed, and so of our judgment; What Protestant Churches or
Divines then will he allege for his sentence. Will he have the Diviner of
Switzerland? I brought a Testimony of the Divines of the Council of Basil, and
that he does not contradict: Are the Divines of Geneva of his mind? I brought
the Testimony of Calvin, that he says nothing to, but it passes with him as
granted by him. Are the Divines of Scotland? I brought him the Testimony of Mr.
Bucanan, that Testimony also he does not deny; It may be that was but one, and
so he would not take notice of it; Read therefore what Mr. Knox says: Because
this occasion is laid against Gods true Ministers; We cannot but witness
what Trade and Order of Doctrine they have kept and keep in that point; they
affirm that if wicked persons abusing the authority established by God,
command things manifestly wicked, that such as may, and do, bridle this
inordinate appetite of Princes, cannot be accused as resistaries of Authority,
which is Gods good Ordinance, to bridle the fury and rage of Princes in free
Kingdoms, and Realms. They affirm it appertains to Nobility sworn and
borne Counsels of the same, and also to the Barons and People, whose Wills and
Consents are to be required in all great matters of the Common wealth: Which
if they doenst, they declare themselves criminal with their Princes, and
subject to the same vengeance of God. This was the doctrine and judgment of
the Divines in Scotland, in Mr. Knox History of the Church of Scotl. p, 343.
the beginning of Reformation, as related by Mr. Knox; And what the judgment
of the Scots Divines is for the present, seeing he will not take practice for
Testimony of Judgment, he may Read in their Answer to Lysimachus Nicanour
thus: As for the lawfullnesse of resistance he may understand that that has
been the tenet of our Church since the Reformation, it has been the right and
practice of our Kingdoms, since the first foundation. A number of instances
thereof are approved in our standing acts of Parliament, unrepealed to this
day; It has been the practice of all Reformed Answ. to Lysima chus Nicanor.
page 8.
Churches abroad, wherein by Queen Elizabeth, King James, and King Charles,
they have been all allowed: And the most of them allowed by powerful
assistance, both with Men and Money: To this purpose Dr. Rutherford also as I
have showed already, Chap. 1. ropos, 3. But it may be the Dr. will tell us that
the Scottish Divines are also Parties, and interessed in the Cause. Very good,
We shall shortly have a great Party in the Protestant Churches for us and with
us; What Divines then are against us in the Doctors opinion? Are the Divines of
England? He tells us also, page 45. yet do some of them allow of Resistance in
some cases: Good still; By and by it will arise to somewhat, here is yet more
of our Party (as the Dr. calls them) by his own confession. As for the
Testimonies that I brought of Dr. Bilson and Dr. Willet, he says that is plain
they speak of such Government, such States, such cases as will not agree to
this Kingdom at this time. But why not, the Dr. will not tell us. If I tell him
that Peter Martyr also Professor of divinity in England, was of our Judgment,
as he may read plainly, ^udg. 1. he will tell Peter Mart* in Judge. cap. 1.
me, it may be, that Peter Martyr speaks not of this time, or of this case, or
of this State: If I refer him to Polanus, Dan. Polanus in Dan. 11.
11. who writes largely in this matter with us, it may be he will tell us
also that Polanus speaks not to our case, to our time, or to our State: But if
I refer him to Barkley and Hugo Grocius who well knew the judgment of the low
Country divines. I suppose the Dr. will not say those are Parties: Barcleus
says Hugo Grocius the most strong defender of Regal Empire, Barcleus regn
imperii assertor forti^^imus, hue tamen descendit, ut populo, et insigni ejus
parti jus concedat se tuendi* adversum immanem s^vitiam* Cum tamen ipse
fate^tur totum populum regi s^bditum esse; Ego indiscriminatim (...) aut
singulos, aut partem populi minorem, quae ultimo necessitatis praesidio, sic
utatur ut interim et Communis bo^i respec^^m non deserat. ^ix ausim nam David a
matos circum se aliquanto habuit; quo nisi ad vim arcendam, si inferetu^. Et
hos ipso tempore David i prudente f^emina dieitur Bella Dei, i. e. pia gere^e;
quod male multi ad s^la belia p^io^a trahunt, quum potiu, emendatio fit ejus
quod Nabal dixe^at, multos Subditos a rege ^uo defic^re, quod at corrigat
Abigal bella Davidis pia esse dic^t, utpo^e non defectionis, sed solo vitae
tu^ndae confi^io suscepta Hugo, Grocius de jure belli and pac^s lib. 1. cap. 4.
yet descends thus far to yield unto the people, and the chief part of them
a power to defend themselves against immane cruelty, when yet notwithstanding
he confesses that the people are subject unto the King: and as for ^ne says
Hugo Grocius, I dare not indiscriminatim condemn those or that part of the
people which do use this defense having respect unto the public good: For
David had many armed men about him* that he might repel violence offered unto
him; And at that time David was commended by a prudent Woman, that he sought
the Lords Battle, which words many do ill refer to David's former Battles,
where as Abigails Speech is rather a correction of what Naball said. Many
Subjects are now fallen from their King, which words that Abigail might
correct, She says the Wars of David were Godly, as being undertaken not out
of defection from his Prince, but for tuition and preservation of his own
life. But because the Doctor seems to want some testimonies of the French
Protestant divines; I will give him one for all, and surely he will not say
the words are not spoken of such Government, such States, such cases, or such
times as ours are. This question Quid agendum est Subjecto cum a Magistratu
violatur; vel si summi Magistratus in ty^nn*s degenerarent, e^quid Subject is
faciendum* necessartone illis obtemperandum an illis repugnandum. ^s quidem
armorum vi adhibita.
being on foot in Charles 9 time: What is to be done by the Subject when he is
violenced by the Magistrate; or if the chief magistrate degenerate into a
Tyrant, may the Subjects resist by force of Arms.

That was Answered by one Learned Man, for, and in the defense of the
Protestants in those times, thus, Respondeo. Varia esse Subjectorum discrimina,
alii mere sunt privati homines, nullum publi^um munits gerentes; alii infe*
iorem, et quasi subalternum Magist, atum gerant; alii ita sunt sum^^o
Magistrat^ inferiores; it tamen ex patriae (...) legi^
Subjects are of three sorts, either me^re private men, bearing no public
Office, or else they are such as are in some inferior and subordinate place of
Magistracy; or else they are such as are so inferior to the chief Magistrate
that by the laws of the Land are appointed to bridle the chief: as for private
men (says the Author) it is evil for them to resist with force of Arms,
either they must sly, or suffer: As for the second sort they not being the
Kings household Servants, but rather to be called Officers of the Crown,
depending not so much on the King as Kingdom, the King abusing his power to
the overthrow of Laws; these inferior Magistrates ought to oppose, for the
conservation of those who are committed unto their trust; and if need be to
take up Arms tilthings be otherwise provided for by the Estates of the
Kingdom. As for the third sort says he, though they in some respect are
under the chief Magistrate, yet in some respect they are keepers of the
Supreme dignity, that the chief Magistrate may be kept in his Office; These
may if need require repress and chastise him, for the people is not made for
the Magistrate, but the magistrate for the people; his power taking its rise
from them. bus summi Magistratus, moderandicausa tan quam fraena quedam
constituantur, quod ad primum attinet certum est, nefas else privato cailibet
privata authoritate vim tyranni vi opponere, sed vel tyranni vis subcunda, et
toll. randa est aut cedendum, et alio migrandum. Quod ad Secundum subjectorum
genus attinet eorum qui s^b^lternos Magistratus gerunt; non regis quidem
familiae Domestici, sed regni potius ministri; quos officiarios Coronae vulgo
nuncupant; i^a statuendum est, illos non tam a nege quam a regno pendere. illi
regi manifest ^yranno, et ad lege. evertendas sua potentia abutenti opone^^
se, debent ex jure jurando p estito; obligati ad ^o um s^l^tem, et
conservationem qui suae fide^ commissa sunt; armi^ si opus est etiam adhibi^is,
done* a regni o din^b is aliter provisum sit. De tertio autem Subjectorum
genere, illud constituendum est quamtus illi revera; et certa quadam ^atione
summum magistratus imperio submittuntur; alia tamen ratione dum u^git
necessitas sup^e ^i illius pigni^atis vindices, et custode; constituuntur, u^
supremum Magistratum in suo ollicio contineant; imo ut et illum cum necesse
sue* it reprimant, atque castigent.


Si quis excipiat ut prima illa fuerit Magistratuum, origo ve um tamen ^sse
popul^^ omnem ^^am libertatem in sol dum its resig. nasse quos ^ummos
Magistratus sibi p e^t. c rent caedo vero tesig^atiom. illius ullam
probationem, qum sta^uo pop^l^s qnantum quidem valuit jus et e^nitas, nec
creasse, nec recipisse reges nisi ce^tis conditionibus, qnibus a magistratu ma
ifel^e vi^latis consequ^tur cum jus illo^um abdicandorum h. b. e, qui habnerat
^reandorum. ^d de^t populum summos Magistratus legiti o^imperio abutentes; abdi
are imperio posse. Et id quidem apud omnes nationes celebrio^^s usa^patum
fuisse perspicuum est, Romano; Athenienses Israelitos, Danos, Swedo^, Scotos
and Anglos.

Secundo excipitur Regibus si in tyrannos degene a^ent; non esse seele um
quidem p^aebendum ministerium, illis tamen vim minime opponendam; de privatis
conced^; de inferio tb^s ve^o Magistrate bus minime. Ad superio^es ve o regum
quasi Ephoros de tyrannis coercendt, curam maxim eorum per^i^. e^e contendo.


Ob. But though this were the first rise of magistracy* yet after the people
have chosen their magistrate, they have resigned up their power to him.

An. But the people never created or received their Kings, but upon certain
Conditions, which being manifestly broken and not kept, those have power to
abdicate, who have power to create; and this has alwa^es been in use amongst
all the most famous Nations in the World; the Israeltes, Lacedaemonians,
Romans, Danes, Swedes, Scotch, Polonians, and English.

Ob: But if a Magistrate do degenerate into a Tyrant, as we are not to be
obedient to him, so neither are we to resist him.

Answ. That is only understood of private men.

Object. But David spared Saul though it were in his power to ^nth moff.

3. Deinde affertur exemplum Davidis q^i Sauli ^y^ ra^no tam studi^^e pepercit,
quamvis illius interficiendi facultatem haberet illud exemplum superio^i
doctrinae minime repugnare ai^; David enim m litarem hominum turmam coegerat,
quorum opera si ita postulasset necessi^a^, hand dub^e adversus Sa^^em. usus
fuisse. Ita tamen egit def ensionis potius quam offensionis causa.
Commentari^rum* partis de statu Relig. et reipub, in Regni Gallis, sub Carol.
neno Reg. ib. 10. page 120, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. in ^ctav^.
An. That is no way contrary to the doctrine delivered for David had many armed
men about him whose help (if need had required) he would without doubt have
used against all, yet thus he did, having respect rather to his own defense,
then his enemies offense. This testimony tells us what has been the practice
of all Nations: the testimony of the Scots in their answer to Lisimac^us
Nica^our, says expressly that our doctrine is according to the judgment of all
the Reformea Churches: And if these testimonies will not yet prevail with the
Dr. I must leave him to his resolves, he tells us that our homilies are
against us, but let him produce any place out of the homilies where it is said
that the two Houses may not take up Arms to bring armed delinquents to their
Trial. Indeed the Homilies speak against Subjects taking up of Arms against
their King, so do not the Parliament, but to defend themselves* and to bring
Delinquents to tirall; And therefore when the Dr. or other bring forth
testimonies of Divines ancient, or late, to prove that Subjects may not take up
Arms against their Prince, they had as good say nothing, that is not to our
case but let them prove by testimonies that it is not lawful for the Parliament
to take up arms to secure the Kingdom, to bring accused Persons to trial, and
to deliver the Prince out of the hands of Malignants, and then they say
something to us, else it is but clamor, not Reason.

At last the Doctor speaks somewhat of arbitrary government, p. 46. which is
no way any answer to the reasons that were given by me, proving that his
opinion raised the King to an arbitrary government, only he sets down his
further sentence about arbitrarines, eadem facilitate rejicitur qua affirmatur;
The Rest of that Section is either spent in naked Assertions, or jearing
expressions, or seeming Answers to his other Answerers.

CHAP. 4.
THe Dr. having spent some time upon his other Answerres at the 49. page he is
pleased to return to me, where he would prove that the people of Israel did
not by any forceable resistance rescue Jonathan out of the hands of Saul, which
work says he, was but set off with a soldier like boldness: Let the Doctor
call this work what he please, Saul the King had sworn that Jonathan should
dre, and the people swear be should not dye and they being in Arms did rescue
Jonathan says the Text. This rescue the Doctor calls in his first Book, a
living violence, and in his reply, a setting off the matter with a Souldierly
boldness (I hope the Doctor will give us leave to use the like terms, if a
Prince swear the death of some Parliamentary men, who deserve not to die but to
be preferred, and the people rise up in Arms and rescue their Ionathans,
saying, as we live they shall not die that have wrought this great deliverance
for us, this is no resistance, it is but a loving violence, and a setting off
the matter with a Souldierly boldness, why may not we call this so, as well as
the Dr. That. But I appeal to all reason whether a rescue by men in Arms, from
those that have swornea man's death, be not forceable resistance.

But say we this is more then Prayers and tears, which is the only remedy
allowed by the Doctor, to which he replieth, The Dr. had no where said, though
Mr. Bridge makes him often say so, that Prayers and Tears is the only remedy
left for Subjects, but besides their cries to God, he allows them
intercessions, reproves, denial of subsidies and aides.

Answ.
I will not search into the Doctors Book for every word, take what he grants
here, yet this souldierly boldness of rescuing is more then Prayers, tears,
reproves, or denialls of subsidies and aids, which is all the remedy that he
affords as he confesses now: Yet the Doctor is so full of this sentence
still, that in the 51. page of this book, he says, that the Children of Israel
being under the oppression of their Kings, had no remedy they had, was by
crying to the Lord; And again in the same page says, all the remedy they
had, was by crying to the Lord; so also in his first book page 10. the people
are let to understand, I Sam. 8. II. how they should be oppressed under Kings,
and have no remedy left them but crying to the Lord. Thus do men forget
themselves, and what they have said whilst they contend against truth.

Then the Doctor comes down to the example of David: And whereas it is urged
by us that David did take up Arms to defend himself from the violence of his
Prince Saul, the Dr. replies now as before, that David's example was
extraordinary. Well but when it is said that David having advantage of Saul,
did not lay hands upon him to cut him off as he might have done; what if we
should say, that Act of David's was extraordinary would not the Doctor tell us
that our Answer was but ordinary: he tells us, page 31. of his Reply, that
Conquest, one of the meanesiby whch Godiranstates Kingdoms, and that David
being provoked by the King of Ammon, brought tha people ^rder, 2 Samuel 12. And
that the Edomites were so brought under the Dominion of Judah: What if we
should give this Answer that these were extraordinary cases. Would not the
Doctor take it for a poor shifting Answer from us; When we say any practice is
extraordinary, we must also prove by circumstance, that there was an
extraordinaries in the fact, or else acquies in it for our example: But be it
so, that David's example was extraordinary, is not our case now extraordinary?
Is Englands case ordinary: has it bin thus ordinarily, that Arms have bin
taken up against the Parliament, and Delinquents kept from legal trial by
force of Arms? has this bin for many years? see how the Doctor helps himself
by this extraordinary Answer. He tells us in his first Book p. 8. that this
work of David was a mere defense without all violence offered to Saul; and is
not this ordinarily lawful for subjects to do so much; the Doctor grants it
himself, p. 9. of his first Book, That personal defense is lawful against
sudden and illegal assaults of the Prince himself, thus far, toward his
blows, to hold his bands, etc. and the like; But the Doctor in his Reply has
thought of a new reason to prove David's example extraordinary, because else may
private and singlemen do so too.

Answ: not so, David was not as every private man, he was anointed of the Lord
one that fought the Lords Battles the great Statesman in the Kingdom; with
whom were joined Jonathan, and many other chief of the Tribes therefore it
follows not from David to every private man, but to the Parlaiment rather, who
though not anointed as King and as Saul, yet with some anointment from the Lord
into the place of Magistracy, especially being as the Dr. confesses,
Coordinate with the King in Supremacy, so far as concerns Nomotheticks.

I said before, if David's example were extraordinary, then he had an
extraordinary command for what he did; If so, how does the Dr. say, there is no
command or warrant in Scripture for such a practice or kind of resistance.

To which the Dr. replieth, as if all extraordinary warrants, and instincts
given to special persons, should be written in Scripture.

Answ. So then this works of David's, which before was called by the Dr. a mere
defense is now come to be a matter of special instinct though acts done by
special instinct, had not always warrant from written Scripture before they
were done, yet being done and recorded in Scripture, there is ground and
written warrant for the lawfulnes of our actions, upon the like occasions. I
did not say, why then does the Dr, say, there was no warrant in Scripture for
David, but why then does the Dr. say there is no warrant, or ground out of
Scripture now for us to do what we do? though it might be instinct then, and
without written Scripture yet it may be written warrant now.

Then whereas that Scripture is urged (though not to take up Arms against our
King as the Doctor suggests) 1 Chronicles. 1219. Where it is said expressly, that
David went out to Battle against Saul, the Dr. Replies Desperate shifesthat
thesemen are put to, when pretenses and simulations, must be Scripture ground
for Co science. It Is said before that David made show ^f madness before King
Achish. Mr. Bridge might as well infer* therefore he was mad.

Answ. Will any else besides this Dr. make such an inference? The Scripture
faith, totidem verbis that he went out to Battle against Saul that this was
but a simulation is not said in Scripture, but the Scripture does not say that
David was mad, but that he fained himself so; is there then the same reason of
the one and the other?

The example of Vzziah is next to be cleared: We find that the Priests are
commended for valiant men, because they thrust out K. Vzziah from before the
Lord, 2 Chronicles. 26. To which instance the Dr. says, that Uzziah the King was
stricken with Leprosy, and by the Law the Leper was to be put out of the
Congregation, and awell apart, which is not consistent with Government,
therefore it is said of the King; he was a Leper, and dwel^ in a several
house, and Jotham his Son Reigned in his stead, 2 Kin. 15 5.

I shall ever give the Dr. the full weight of his Reason; it seems by this
Answer, that he would have Conscience believe that the King was discharged
from his Crown* by his Leprosy, and ^p o^acto thereby dethroned. Now see what
Dr. Bilson says directly contrary unto this Doctor Vzz ah, says, Dr. Bilson
differ, between (...) and Rebel^ion page 326,
he dwell a part in a house from others, because of his Leprosy, but you d^e
not find that he was deprived of his Kingdom, Jotham his son Governed his
House, and judged the people of the Land, because the King might not be
conversant amongst men* by reason of his sickness, but the Cronne still
continued in the father though a Leper, and Jotham 2 Kin. 15. 5. 7.
began not his Reign till his Father was dead. Whom the Scripture calls the
King of Juda, in the twenty year of his Reign, and last year of his life.
Thus Dr. Bilson; And though our Doctor can (with what conscience I know not)
join these 2 Chronicles, 26.
words together thus, He was a Leper, and dwell in a several, house, and
Jotham his son, Reigned in his stead, 2 King. 15. 5. as if all these words
were one, and did touch one another in holy writ, yet in truth they are part of
two several Verses, and two other Verses coming between them, as in the 5.
Verse it is said, the King dwelt in a severalt house, and Jotham the Kings son,
was over the Kings house, judging the people of the land, not Reigning in his
stead as the Dr, reads it then at the 6 and 7 Vertes, the Scripture having
spoken further of the King his deeds and death at the end of the seventh it is
added, and Jotham his son Reigned in his stead, these words being annexed to
his death as a consequent thereof; and the Dr. takes them and annexes them to
the 5 Verse at the mentioning of his Leprosy, as if upon his Leprosy his
Son Reigned, whereas it is plain he only governed and not Reigned, until his
Father died; Here I cannot but wonder, that the Doctor should so boldly venture
to lay violent hands upon Scripture, that he may lead men's Consciences into
his own sentence: But I hope the Consciences of those that fear God, will
take notice of such dealing as this, and abhor that sentence, that must be
borne up with such practices; He would persuade us also, that the Priests here
are said to be valiant men, because of their home reproof which they gave to
the King or because of their withdrawing from him the holy things which he was
not to meddle with, but let him show us any one place of Scripture, where
valor being joined with an expression of force (as here it is, it being said
that they thrust him out) does only note faithfullnes in ones place, by giving
reproof or the like.

At last the Dr. comes to his own Arguments, and labors to recrute them; and
first he tells us that none might blow the Trumpet for war amongst the People
of Israel, but the supreme Magistrate, and therefore the Parliament may not
take up arms or blow the Trumpet for war, as now they do; To this Argument
diverse Answers unanswered have been given, yet he is not satisfied but still
replieth, and I wonder that he should, considering there is no such matter that
I can find as he alleges in the 10. Chap of Numbers. It Is true the Lord
speaks there unto Moses, saying, Verse 5, when ye sound an Alarm; and ver. 6.
when you blow an Alarm the second time, and Verse. 7. when the Congregation is
to be gathered together, ye shall blow. and verse 9 If ye go to war in
your Land, ye shall blow an Alarm with your Trumpets, but these words in the
Hebrew are all in the plural number, showing that the blowing of the Trumper
belonged as well to the State and Princes, of whom he spoke Ver. 4. It is not
said that Moses should use those Trumpets exclusively he and not they; but
rather he joined with them.

Secondly, he comes for his defense to that place of Samuel; I Sam. 8. 18.
where says he, it appears that the people had no remedy against their unjust
Kings, but their crying to the Lord. Mr. Bridge answers says he, Samuel, tells
them not what should be their duty, but what their punishment, the Lord will
not hear you, etc. It was indeed says the Doctor, their punishment, because
all the remedy they had, which was by crying to the Lord should not help them,
which had not been such a punishment, if they had had means to help themselves
by power of Arms.

Here the Dr. says, that all the remedy this people had was by crying to the
Lord, which Scripture he brings against our resistance to prove what is our
duty and how far it extends: yet Page 49. of his Reply, he will not own such
a Speech as this, saying, the Dr. had no where said, that prayers and tears,
are all the Subjects remedy.

Secondly it appears plainly that this Scripture I Sam. 8. is not spoken of
the Kings right, what he might do; but of his fact what he would do, for the
King had no such right over his Subjects as to take their Childrens fields, and
vineyards from them, for which Ahab was so severly punishment, yet says this
Text of Sam. he shali take your Daughters fields, and Vineyards, etc. Neither
can it be objected, that the word used in the Hebrew is (...), which signifies
Judicium, Judgment, or, right seeing; it also signifies Consuetudo, order or
manner, as it is well translated in the English, verse 9.

Thirdly, though it be said, ver. 18. then shall ye cry out in that day
because of your King which ye shall have chosen, and the Lord will not hear
you on that day. Yet it does not follow that they had no other remedy but
crying to the Lord, that is said in Scripture that the People being oppressed
with Foreign Enemies should cry unto the Lord in their distrcsse and because
of their sins the Lord threatens not to hear them, but bids them go to
their Idols, and let them help them if they can; does it therefore follow that
they might not detend themselves against foreign Enemies, no such matter: 4.
Whereas the Doctor says in this Reply, It was no such Judgment to cry and not
be heard, if yet they had a power to defend themselves by taking up Arm; This
answer is very strange from one that calls himself a Divine: for suppose that
God should say to his people, that had a power to take up Arms against their
foreign ^nemies, that they should notwithstanding their power cry unto him,
and he would not hear them, nor deliver them from their oppressors; was this
no such judgment, because they might take up Arms alas what will all our
taking up of Arms doc, either way if God will not hear our cries and prayers.

The Doctor for his own defense, and the Defense of his Cause said in his
first Book, that if such a Deferce as we now use were Lawful, it is a
marveilous thing that so many prophetsreprehending the Kings of Israel and
Judah for Idolatry, cruely, and oppression, none should call upon the Elders of
the People for this resistance, page 10.

To this I answered, see the Propher Elisha expressly calling on the Elders to
imprison the Kings Messenger, 2 King ^6. 32. The Doctor after he comes to
himself out of a railing and jeering fit replies, What (...) Elisha call upon
those ^laers for, to impreson the Messenger? that is more then the Text will
bear, unless to shut the door against a man be to imprison him.

Ans. But the Prophet Elisha, not only called upon them 2 Kings 632.
to shut the door, but to hold them fast. Shutting the door indeed does not
note imprnonment, but shut the door and hold him fast does: for what is
imprisonment, but arcta and violent a custodia, and these are the words of that
Text, shut to the door and hold him fast at the door. But it is the Doctors
manner to take part of the Text, and leave the other part which makes against
him; so he deals by our Answeares; so he deals by Scriptures. At length
the Doctor having left me to visit my fellow Answerers. as he calls us for the
space of three or four leaves, he is pleased to return again to me about
13. Romans and page 60. He takes it unkindly that I will not stand to the
English Translation of the word (...), damnation, but rather translate it so,
They that resist shall recoive to themselves judgment.

To which I say, that I do not deny but grant that the Word may be translated
Damnation: but seeing the word firstly signifies Judgment, as Piscator
observes; I would not have the Dr. so peremptory, scaring people with the word
damnation, when as more naturally the word may be rendered otherwise, I told
him before what Piscators reason is, for Ambiguum est autem quod de judicio
insert, an de eo quo Divinirus olim puntentur inobedientes loquatur, vel de co
quod expectandom est a Magistratibus; in posteriori sententiae videntur
sequentia savere, pri^ri vero praecedentia. Verum nihil resert ut^om
intelliganus, nec quie un n prohibit quo minus de utroque exponamas, cum utrum
ne sit timendun immorigeris. Masculus in Kem. 13. Ita^ue qui resistit non (...)
etc. de ills potestatibas dicit quae prosecutores fuerint Fidzi, ibi en^m
dicendum est, Deo oportet obremye ^ate magis qham hominibus. Sed de istis
communitat b^s dicit quae non sunt terro^ib^m ope^is, sed mah, qui^i s utique
qui resistit, etc. Orig^n in Romans 13. Negare vero obedientiam est resistere
Para, in Romans 13.
the translating of it Judgment, he may read what Musculus also said, and in
him what many other Divines, who speaks thus. It is doubtful what Judgment
the Apostle speaks of here, whether the Judgment where with all the
disobedient are punished by God himself, or that which is to be expected from
the Magistrates: the latter way those things that follow do favor the former
way those things that a^e precedent: but it matters not which way we understand
it, neither does any thing hinder but that we may expound it to both: When as
both judgments both of God and Magistrate are to be feared by those that are
un^uly; But the Doctor gives as he thinks a good reason why it must needs be
translated damnation, and so meant, because resistance there forbidden is a
breach of the fifth Cemmandement, which deserves Damnation.

Ans. What then we read Rev. 2. that the Church of Thiatyra had broken the
second Commandment in her Idolatry and Superstition, yet she is threatened with
an outward punishment, Wisd. 22. 23. behold says Chr^^t, I will cast her into
great tribulation, and kill ^er Ch l^ren with death, yea the fifth Comman dement
is strengthened with an outward promise, H^nour thy Father and thy Mother that
thy days may belong in the Land, and therefore well may the breach thereof be
threatened with an outward Judgment.

Again, says the Dector Mr. Bridge answers that only active obedience to
Lawful Commands is there enjoyed, but passive under unlawful Commands: To
which the Doctor answers, both say we, but not so Origin: not so Jerome, not
so Chrysost^me and diverse others: and Paraeus his reason is good, who observes,
that according to the Apostle, the denying of obedience is all one with
resistance forbidden in this 13 Rom, for in one verse the Apostle says submit
or he subject unto the higher Powers; in th next v hegives the reason, for he
that resists, etc. So that resisting and not subjecting, or obeying is all
one. It is no sin not to obey unlawful Commandments, but the Apostle makes
it a sin here to resist, and therefore the resistance forbidden does not
relate unlawful Commandments but if lawful. But then the Doctor tells us
that if these words should be understood only of active obedience to Lawful
Commands, and not of passive to unlawful Commands; the Apostle had given the
Romans but a lame instruction, page 60. and his reason for that speech follows
at a distance, page 61. because then the Romans should not have been
sufficiently instructed how to answer the unlawful Commandments of Princes,
as also, there would have been a gap open to Rebellion, for says he, how easy
would be the inference, therefore we may resist when they command unlawfully.

Answ. This is a strange work to charge the Apostle with lame instructions, in
case that a passive obeidience should not be here commanded, God does not
command every thing in every Scripture, yet those Scriptures wherein he
commands something and not all, are not lame instructions; The first
Commandment commands the substance of Worship; the second the right means,
the third the manner; and the fourth the due time of Worship; yet the first is
not lame because it does not command* what the second; nor the second lame,
because it does not command, what the third; nor the third lame because it does
not command what the fourth; so here though God should command only active,
not passive Obedience in this Text, this instruction would not be lame; but why
should it be a lame instruction, the Doctor tells us, the because the Romans
should not be susffciently directed how to answer the unlawful Commandments
of Princes; yes surely, if God did here command them obedience to Lawfulls, He
should at once forbid them disobedience to unlawfulls: but says the Dr. then
there will be a gap for Rebllion, for how easily would men infer, therefore
we may resist in things unlawful: I answer, the Doctor takes this for granted,
which is to be proved, that all forceable resistance is Rebellion. 2. Suppose
that true which himself grants, page 1. the first Book, that it is lawful
to resist unlawful Commands, though not with forceable resistance. And if so,
then why might not the Romans as well say, this instruction you give us is
lame, for you forbid resistance, and yet in some kind resistance is lawful a
suffering resistance lawful, and a forceable resistance unlawful: And yet you
have not in this 13. Chap. given us any such distinction, so are we left in the
dark, and your instruction lame. But good Doctor let us take off our own
halvings, whilst we go about to charge the Apostle with lame instructions, in
case he come not just up to our opinions. But to put an end to this matter
concerning this Text. I appeal to the Doctor, whether he does not think that
these words (Higher Powers) v. 1. Did not include the Roman Senate: I say when
the Apostle commands, Let every Soul be subject to the higher powers. Did he
not command the Christian Romans to be subject to the Roman Senate? We know
that after this Epistle was written to the Romans, as Eusebius reports, the
Roman Senate was not only in being, but so potent and powerful* that when
that was propounded to the Senate, whether Christ should be acknowledged as
Good, that was in the Senates Power to grant or refuse, and they refused. So
Estius also says, that the Governors of Provinces were appointed by the
Senate, as well as by Caesar, when ^eter wrote his Epistle: So Praesides
provin's ciis praeficicbantur non tam authoritate Casaris quam Senatus. Estius
Ep. Pet. X. 2.
that still notwithstanding aesar, the Roman Senate was a high Power, and the
higher Powers unto the People; And if th y were the higher Powers, who were to
be obeyed by this Commandment of the Apostles: then why does the Doctor bring
this Scripture to urge our higher Powers, and Senate to obey, especially when
the Doctor himself confesses. page 62 that the two Houses as distinct from the
King, fall under the words, Higher Powers. At last in the 62. page the Doctor
comes to that place of Peter, 1 Pet. 2. 13. Submit your elves to every
Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether to the King as Supreme, or unto
Governors as those that are sent by Him; where after the Dr. had a little
strok'd himself on the head, and labored to spit some filth on our faces, he
comes to that Testimony of Calvin (for that which he says concerning Dr.
Bilson is not much material) who proves that the Pronoune Him relates to God
and not the King: for the reason which I alleged in my first Book; now the
Dr. replies* true, all are sent by God, but it is as true that the Governors
of the Provinces were sent by the King, or the Roman Emperor.

A^. The Reader may observe how the Dr. does deal by the Scripture again, for
he sets down the words thus; To the King as supreme, or the Governors as
those that are sent by him; and thus indeed the word Him; must needs relate to
the King, but conceales that part of the v. wherein the word God is expressed
thus, submit your self to every Ordinance of God: for the Doctor knew, that if
he had set down that part of the ver* the Reader would have perceived that
the Pronoune him should have related to God, and not to the King; Secondly,
observe what he answers; he tells us that the Governors of the Provinces were
sent by the King or Emperor; that is not the question now, but whom the
Pronoune him, does relate, whether In e^ quod additu^ tan quam ab e^ mi^is,
(...) Rege^ refe^unt nonnull^ quod non plac^ (...) Apo^tolu* vul^ hoc in
presi^h us istis confide^ar* quod De^s e^s miser it, i^ ^^od ad obediendum
movere debet, ac ^t taceam quod praesides p^oviuciis praeficiebant non tam
authoritate Caesaris ^uam Senatus, illi alters relationi non quadra^ quod
sequitur ad vindictam ma^efactorem, etc. quem scop^m mali^eges non ^sq^e qua
jue hab^bant propositum, ^ectius igitur ad Deum refe^tur, qui hunc finem
omnibus Magistratibus praescribit, unde and Paulus de potestate Romans 13. Dei
enim Minister est tibi in bonum etc. ex quo apparet missos a Deo hic intelligi
debere non solum Duces sed Regem ipsum. Estius in Epist, P^^ 1, 2.
God or the King. And for this he gives no reason, not answers Calvin's, and
therefore I need add no more: yet Estius his reasons are very full, proving
that the Pronoune him, must relate God and not the King for says he, the
Apostle Peter would move the people to obey the King and Governors, which
Argument is full, because they were sent by God; whereas if the pronoune him,
should relate to the King, here were no motive. 2. Because the Apostle Peter
says that they are sent by him for the punishment of evil doers, and the
praise of them that do well, for which cause the wicked Heathenish Governors
did not send the Governors, it being known that they sent them for the
punishment of those that were good, and for the praise of those that were
evil. and therefore the pronoune Him, is to be carried on God, and to have
relation to God, not to the King in this place; And therefore what the Doctor
brings from this place, to set the Parliament at a greater under then God would
have, is nothing worth. The rest of the Chapter is spent with his other
Adversaries; I having thus delivered the Scripture; from his Objections, shall
be the more brief in Answer to the after part of his discourse because the
only ground of conscience is Gods word.

CHAP. 5.
IN the tenth Sect. of the Doctors Reply. I find little to hold us long; I had
told him in my former Book that the Parliamentary proceedings were an Act of
self-preservation, and used the Similitude of a steeres man showing that in
case he do not his duty, even the very passengers in time of a storm, for
their own preservation may look to the matter, which does not implye the
unofficing of a Steersman; so in State, where the chief Magistrate neglects
his duty, etc. The Dr. replies page 64. That the Prince is not as the
Steersman, but as he that stands above, and commands, to the Starbord or
Larbord.

This is to hang upon the word, and let go the sense, for Answ.
the reason holds to him that stands above, and commands as well as the
Steers-man, neither will common reason say; that he is unofficed, because the
passengers for the present desire or cause him to stand by, that they may look
unto their own safety in the time of a storm.

Then he comes to prove that Authority and Magistracy, abstractively
considered from the qualification or several forms of Government, is of
divine institution. Wherein we do all agree, only I excepted against some of
his Media, that he used to prove it thus, By those words the powers that are
ordained of God; the Doctor understands, the power it self of Magistracy
distinguished from the qualification thereof, and the designation of persons
thereto, how then did he say, Sect. 2. The higher power in Paul is the same
with the King, at Supreme in Peter; the Dr. replies, the power of Magistracy
abstractively taken, may by these words be proved to be of God, though the
higher powers here be understood concretively with Connotation of the persons
that bear the power, for they are here proposed as objects of our obedience
which cannot be directed but upon power in some person, And here it is said, a
(...) existent etc.

Answ.
But how does this prove either what the Doctor would; or answer me? it is true,
the words higher powers, note both as I have showed already, both the
authority, and persons in the authority. But then the word (...) I say,
signifies ordered, and so to be translated, not ordained, for otherwise if the
words higher powers note both the abstract and concreat, and this word be
translated, ordained, then this Scripture shall as well prove the qualification
and designation to be of God, as authority it self: Which thing the Doctor
denies, and first brought this Scripture to prove that Magistracy is of God in
opposition to qualifications and designations. Some metaphisical notions about
esse and existere, the Dr. would find out in the word (...) but I pass them as
never intended by the Apostle.

At last the Doctor promises, or rather threatens to give me a visit: for so
he says, page 65. I must come home to Master Bridge, to make him understand
the force of my Inserence. I had said thus; In like manner the Doctor proves,
that power it self is of God, because the Magistrate is called the Minister of
God: Slipping from the power it self, to the person designed, for the power it
self is not called the Minister of God; Whereupon the Doctor says, I must come
home to Master Bridges, the Major of N^^s the Kings Minister, therefore his
power is from the King; will Master Bridge reply no? for the power it self is
not the Major, or called the Minister of the King.

Ans.
Thus whilst he comes home to me he comes from his own home and reason;
forgetting what he had said before, page 60 61. A lawful Prince, though
commanding unlawfully, is still still the Minister of God. So then it seems one
may be the Minister of God in that which is evil; and it is true a penal
Minister one may be a man may sin in afflicting another and yet he may be the
Minister of God to him that is afflicted, how therefore does this argue, that
because the Magistrate is called the Minister of God, that his authority is
lawful: And therefore whereas the Doctor says the Major of N. is the Kings
Minister, therefore his power is from the King; Will Master Bridge say no?
Answ. He will say there is not the same reason in regard of God and the King,
for a man cannot be the Kings Minister in a bad action but he must receive
power from him but he may be Gods Minister, I mean penally in an unlawful
action, which God never gave him right or power to do.

In the after lines of this page the Doctor says, that both the Fuller Answer,
and Master Bridges, every where takes it for granted by me, that Monarchy,
Aristocracie and Democracie are equally the inventions of men? Answ. I do
indeed, and the truth of it may appear from your own words, p. 13, 14. of
your first Book as I have showed already.

Lastly, says the Doctor, Master Bridges concludes that my proving of the
governing power to be of God, but the qualification of it, and designation of
the person to be of man, gains nothing against resistance, or deposing a
Prince that does not discharge his trust: for still the people may say, we may
alter the Government, and depose the person, because hew as of our designing.
Doctor Fern, nothing so for of they resist, they usurp Authority, and invade
the power that God has given him, if they depose him, they quite take away
that p were which God, and not they placed in him, because he is still the
Minister of God.

Answ.
This seems to prove that people cannot depose their Prince or alter the
Government that is set up amongst them; But what is this to the reason that he
pretends an Answer to? to which was thus: If the Doctor grant that the
qualification of the power is from man, and the designation of the person, then
though the power it self be confessed of God by the Doctor, yet his
adversaries that are for the deposing of Princes, (if any such be) may as well
plead a power to depose the Person, or alter the Government, as well I say, as
if the power it self was appointed, or set up by men. Now the qualification
and power of designation is granted by him to be of man: And therefore he helps
himself nothing by proving that Authority or Magistracy in the abstract is of
God. To take away this, he proves that the people cannot depose their Prince,
or alter the Government; I will not say a wild but surely a wide Answer as ever
came from a Dr. D. The other part of this Section is against others, who are
sufficiently able to plead their own cause against this Dr.

In his 11. Sect. p.64. the Doctor complains that we have left the King
nothing we could take from him; and this kind of speech is ordinary amongst
some, who are so bold as to affirm* that because we do not make our selves
slaves, we make our Sovereign no King. Let him and them read what Almaine
says, Non ideo dicitur politia aliqua regalis, quia vaiens ei praesit qui sit
tota commnnitate in jurisdictione major, nec ei quovis modo subjectus, sed
solum propter hanc causam, quia unicus p^cest qui in quemlibet alterum de
communitate jurisdictionem habet, et est eo superior.

Nec conveniens feret aliq em unam talem taliter communitate pre^i^i, piesset
ea totai* o m came supe ^or, insi talis fo^et indeviabil^s, ^uema ^modi^ de
Curisto confi etur, qui communiratem erige e potest sua voluntate, secundum
legem, tuncista politia esset pe^fecta regalis, Sen Almain de pet stazlarca ad
Gerson. cap. 1.

Miserum est non facete ^un na ju^ velis m scri s vero velle quod licet
miserrs. mu n posse facere quod ita velis, lun. i. ^.


A pol tic, says he is not there o^e said to be regal because there is one
above all tl at is greater then all the Community, but because there is one
above the rest who has ^urisdictionover every particular man in that
Com^unitie; neither were it fir, that there should ^e one such who were so
superior, unles he were indeviable as Christ who is able to rule the
Community according to his own will, ^hen the Poli ie should be perfectly
reg^l. And Fortescut says, Poss^ male ^g repotestarem potius m^ni it quam
augment it We do not say that God is less powerful because h cannot sin;
nothing is more truly regal then to keep ones will within the bounds of good
Laws. It is some miseric not to ave all which you would. It is more misery to
will what you may not; It is most misery to have a power to do what you see
will. But if you d^not. says the Doctor reassume power from the Prince, what
means the d fference you make of things disposed of by trust, from things
disposed of by donation, because they may be recalled, these may not, so you
say, page 25.

I said not so, but that there is a difference between things disposed by way
of donation or sale and things disposed of by way of trust: Things disposed of
by way of sale or donation are not in our power to recall, things disposed of
by way of trust are in our power to look to when the trust is neglected: I
would this Doctor would but do us the favor as to allege our words rightly.

The 67. and 68. of his Book, are spent in proving assertions of the same
things that he had said before only page 67. he confesses it is likely that
Kings were at first by election, which acknowledgement we receive: but how does
this agree with what he had said before Sect. 3. page 8, 9 where he had said,
that election was a defection from that government that God set up at the
first; In the 69. page he comes to the matter of the Kings Covenant and Oath,
which (says the Doctor) is no condition on which the Kings of this Land are
admitted to the Crown, but a confirmation and strengthening of their mutual
duties by Oaths and promises, as it was with the Kings of Israel.

The nature of this Oath we must leave unto the Parliament and Lawyers, who
better know then we how it is taken, and on what terms, only thus much I read
in Speeds Cronicle, that the Kencish men would not admit William the Conqueror
to the Crown, but upon condition as I have showed before; And if the taking of
the Oath were only for Confirmation carrying no condition with it, why should
it be taken at the first coming unto the Crown, and not rather afterward.

What else remains in that Section is so easy, that the dimmest eye that has
conscience in it, may see thorough, for who knows not, that it is a greater
evil for a Comittee to be wronged by a particular person, then for a
particular person to be wronged by a Comittee. Bonum quo communius eo melius,
malum quo Communius eo pejus. And why does not nature teach, that a Prince who
is married unto his people, is to be faithful to them as well as that the
husband is to be faithful unto his wife, and therefore that conditions are
employed, though not expressed between the King and his Subject, as well as between
a man and his wife; And so I pass from that Section to the Doctors two last.

CHAP. 6.
WHereas the Dr. had said, we sharpen many of our Weapons at the Philistims
forge, and I had showed the difference between us and Papists in this cause. He
replieth, difference there must needs be between you and Papists in this
particular, for they challenge such a power from the Pope; you from the People.

Ans*
Very well and is not here a vast difference, the Papists say the Pope may
despose Princes, we say in case that Prince does not perform his trust, the
People may look to their own safety.

Dr. Fern, But we see your party making use of those examples which the Papists
being for deposing of Kings, as of Saul, Uzziah, and Athaliah.

Answ.
The Papists bring these examples of Vzziah, Atholiah, etc. to show that the
High ^riests did, and so the Pope now may depose Princes, proving that the Pope
is above Princes. We say with Chrysostom and others, that every soul, even
Priests as they and you call them, are to be subject to higher Powers, That
that lies in the power of no Priest to despose Princes.

2. Is this to whet our Sithe at the Philistims Forge, to use the same
Scripture for one purpose, which the Philistims do for another: The Papists
use that Scripture, Tibi dabo claves. Thou art Peter, and on this Rock I will
buila my Church, to prove the Popes Supremacy; The Reformed Churches use the
same Scripture to prove that the power of the Keys is penes Ecclesiam, given
to the whole Church, and not unto a Peter only: do all the Reformed Churches
therefore whet their weapons at the Philistims forge, or are they therefore
Popish because they use the same Scripture to other purposes: So here.

Put you will give the Prince leave, says the Doctor to change his Religion,
so will the Papists, if al^ his Subjects may have free liberty for their
Religion.

Answ.
Not so but he turning Heretic, as the Papists phrase it, is to be
excommunicated and so deposed. Dr. Fern, But in case he endeavor to force the
contrary Religion upon his subjects, for that must be supposed how then will
your Allegiance bold?

Answ.
Very well and yet not whet our ^ythes at the Philistims forge for they say that
a Prince apostatising, is to be excommunicated and so deposed, as you shall
presently see: We say that Princes are not to be deposed for altering their
Religion, yea though they should be excommunicated, for the Crown is not
intailed upon Religion.

2. They deprive Princes, we only defend our selves.

3. They deprive by the Popes authority we defend our selves by the highest
civil authority of the Land.

Again, whereas I said the Papists hold it lawful to kill a Prince and that a
private man invested with the Popes authority may do it, we abhor it; The
Doctor replieth, that is their new forge under ground, set up of late by
Jesuits, I did not mean you sharpened your weapons there, but at the old
forge, and however you say you abhor this Doctrine of killing Kings, yet I
fear and tremble, to think, if your Sovereign had fallen in battle by the
edge of your swo^d, or sh^t of your artillery, you would have found him guilty
of his own death, in that he would not (being desired) forbear to go down
himself into battle.

Answ.
1. It Is well the Dr. will excuse us from Jesuitisme in this particular, and
well he may in all things else, especially here where he knows there is so
much correspondency between his own opinion and the Jesuits who (for the most
part of them) hold, that as all Fcclesiasticall power is given to Peter, and so
to the Pope and Bishops, not to the Church so that all Civil Power is given
immediately to the King, and not to the Commonwealth, but only as derived from
him; And therefore well may the Doctor excuse us from whetting our Swords at
the new forge of the Jesuits, that being a forge which he reserves to whet his
own weapons at.

2. Neither do we whet our weapons at the old forge, for I suppose the Doctor
will say, that Aquinas his forge, is of the oldest frame, and he speaks
directly contrary to us, thus, as soon as ever any is denounced excommunicate
for Apostacy from the It ideo quam rito aliquis per sententiam denimciatur
e^communicatus propter aposta^ram a side, ipso facto ejus Subditi absoluti sunt
a domnio ejus et juramento fidelitaris quo eitenebantur Tho. Aq. 2. 2. ^. 12.
a^s. 2.
faith, his Subjects are ipso facto, absolved from his dominion, and the Oath
of Allegiance, whereby they were bound to him.

3. We say, if a shot of our Artillery had fallen on the King (whereas you say
we would have found him guilty of his own death,) we say, we would have found
you* and such as you are guilty thereof, that put him on such designs; As if a
man make a fire to preserve himself and his family, and another comes and
thrusts a third man into it, we will not fault him that made the fire to
preserve his family, but him that thrust the man into it; but in this matter
Doctor you have answered your self, for you told us in your former Treatise,
That it is lawful for Subjects to ward their Princes blows, to hold his
hands, and the like page 9. Now if the Prince raise an Army against his
Subjects, how can his blows be warded, but by an Army, and if his Army
discharge their Ordnance and Muskets upon his Subjects, how can his Subjects
ward them blows, but by discharging likewise. And then answer your self: what
if a shot of Artillery should fall upon your Prince: But says the Doctor, if
you back again will gather strength for your assertions from the Papists
Reasons, be as like as you will to one another, etc.

An. Who are most like to the Papists you, or we, I refer you to all that
knows us. See the Canterburian self-Conviction. And if we may not gather
strength of reason from Popish Authors to dispute against them; why do either
you or we read them. Reason is good where ever we find it; neither would
Abraham refuse the use of the Well because Ahimilechs men had used it, no more
will we refuse good reason, because the Papists have used it; they using it
rather from us, and not we from them, and yet in this matter (as I have showed)
we do differ much from them.

But you prove a Power in the Body politic, says the Doctor, to disburthen it
self (at the Church has) of evil Members, as Papists do.

An. But not as the Papists: for we only press a necessity of Power in the
body, to defend and save it self from the injury of Princes; they plead for a
power in the Church, (and who that Church is you know) to depose Princes; but
then says the Drs. has this Church a power of excommunication still; so it
should be indeed, but since the Act which took away the High Commission; and
(as the party you plead for would have it interpreted) all Ecclesiastical
Censure too, where does the exercise of that power rest, upon, whom now is the
Argument turned? page 73.

An. Surely upon your self, for there is no Church of Christ, but whilst it
remains a Church has a power left in it (though the exercise may be long
suspended) to see to it self, and its own preservation, I say a power from
Christ to excommunicate, though it should be denied from men; and it seems a
strange thing to me, that the Churches of England have no power left, because
the High Commission is down, as if that Court were set up by Christ himself.
The body natural has power to disburthen it self says the Doctor, so has
the Commonwealth too; but will you have the natural body disburthen it self
of the head, or work without it.

An. Neither do we go about to cut off our head, but say in the general; if
the Head should be distempered through ill vapors that arise from inferior
parts, so that it cannot discharge its Office, it is lawful for those that are
in place, to give Physic to the body, that even the very head it self may be
the more healthful.

And whereas I had shown, that there is not the same reason, that the People
should reassume their trust in case the Parliament be negligent; as there is,
that in case a Prince neglect his trust, the Parliament and People should see
to it, the Doctor replies, but if by Ordinances thence issuing, they be
spoiled of their property and Liberty, which is supposed in the case they will
quickly feel it so.

An. This is but an infinuation of a gross scandal, no reason: only the
Doctor argues p 75. will not the people as easily conclude, they may free
themselves from the trust given to those Parliament men, chosen by them, as
renounce (according to your Lessons) their trust given to their Prince: in all
reason they will hold their representatives more accountable to them then their
Prince can be.

An. This is a scandalous charge to say that we lessen men to renounce their
trust given to their Prince, whereas we only say; the people have a Power to
defend themselves, and when cause requires to excite, and actuacte that Power
which was always residing in them, and never given from them. Secondly, how
can the people as easily renounce their trust given to the Parliament, when the
People themselves conclude and say, that what is done by the Parliament is Law;
which they do not say, as concerning the Prince, but rather know that for Law
he is directed by them; but says the Doctor this is to make them arbitrary,
and to lead the people after them by animplicite Faith.

An. The Doctor is much against the implicit Faith of the People, both in
this* and his former Book: It were well that men of his strain had been so
much against implicit Faith in the matters of the Church, where it is more
dangerous, where they were not, witness the etc. as now they are against the
implicit Faith in the Commonwealth, where it is of less danger. Again, why
will this make the Parliament arbitrary, or cast the people into an implicit
Faith? it is granted by all that the King and both Houses may enact Laws,
whereby the people are to be ruled, believing that those Laws are best for the
Commonwealth; does this make the Government of King and Parliament arbitrary,
or raise the people to an implicit Faith? no more does it here. An arbitrary
government is where a King may rule pro a^bitrio, as a Father in his Family,
which power the Doctor does give unto the King by his paternall right, Sect. 3.
and so indeed there is room for an implicit Faith, for that children have
most of all an implicit Faith in that which their Fathers say. Finally Master
B. endeavors to show (says Dr. Fern) how they can answer the Oath of
Supremacy, an^ the Protestation, by taking of Arms; but who knows not (says
the Docto^) if that party of Brownists, and Anabaptists, which are now so
prevalent in the Arms taken up against the King, should get the upper hand,
what would become of the Kings Supremacy and Government?

An. Here is a loud cry against Brownists and Anabaptists, but who are
Brownists? not all those that are against Prelates, and not for the English
Common Prayer Book; for then all the Reformed Churches are Brownists. And as
for Anabaptists, I wish it may be considered, whether they do not take some
footing for their opinion from the Common Prayer Book: They deny Baptism to
Infants, upon this ground, because actual Faith and Repentance is pre-required
to Baptism; and does not the Common Prayer Book seem to acknowledge as much,
when as before Baptism, the witnesses in name of the Infant must answer to
these Questions, do thou believe? do thou renounce the devil and all his
works? I must nakedly profess my judgment against that opinion, yet were it
not good, that the very Common prayer book should come under consideration
upon this and other Reasons.

Secondly, if men were so much for Protestant Religion, and against Papists, as
is here pretended, they would never be more afraid of Brownists, and
Anabaptists, then of Papists; seeing they are of the Protestant Religion, and
differ not from us in fundamentalls, as the Papists do.

Thirdly, suppose that that Army should prevail, wherein there are Brownists,
and Anabaptists, as you say, yet is there not so much danger that they should
prevail to mislead the Parliament, who are three or four hundred; as that
Papists, should prevail to mislead one.

Fourthly, though there should be Anabaptists, and Brownists in the Army, yet
they do not sight against the Kings Supremacy and his Government as the
Papists do against the Protestant Religion, and being of Parliaments, whose
Powder Treason is famous* or rather Infamous to all Generations.

At last the Dr. tells us concerning Supremacy, that the King is Supreme, not
so much in opposition to particular persons, as in relation to the whole body
Politic, of which he is head.

We say the King is Supreme and head of Kingdom severally and jointly
considered, Dr. Fern indeed tells us, that the two Houses of Parliament are in
a sort Coordinate with his Majesty, to some act or exercise of the Supreme
power, that is to making laws, by yielding their consent. And if they be
Coordinate in that act of Supremacy, Paraeus and others will tell him that the
Nomothetick part of Supremacy is the highest. We acknowledge the King our
Supreme to defend us; But not to defend our selves where cause requires, gives
a supra-Supremacy unto him. Dr. Fern Reply page 6. Potestas politica seu
civilis dupliciter consideratur; vel ut Architecto nica, quae occupat in
legibus ^ferendis ad quodvis bonum Reipub. pro novendum; et vocatur (...) ut
Architectonicae s^bordinata, quae Rempse^undum leges ill^s deliberando,
judicando, et exequendo, administrat, and vocatur simpliciter (...) seu
Civilis, lib. 6. Ethic. Cap. 6. Perse vero patet quod Architectonica (...) sit
superior civili simpliciter d^cta, et omnibus aliis potestatibus subordinatis
quod que sit potestas Suprema. Par^us in To. 13.


What else remains in this Sectionis either matter of words and bare denial
to what has been said or answered to his other Answerers.

In the next Section* page 89* the Dr. says, Mr. B. enters upon a loose
Discourse against Episcopal Government, I reserve him for his better
instruction to a Book entitled Episcopacy asserted.

Ans. No other loose Discourse then what his loose Treatise lead me into; and
for the Drs better instruction I refer him to Mr. Baynes his Diocesan, Mr.
Parkers Ecclesiastical politieor Altar Damascenum. And whereas I said, now
the Dr. shows himself, he had rather the Kingdom should be imbrued in a bloody
War, then Episcopacy should down, because he had said in his Treatise page
25. that the King has Reason by power of Arms, to divert the abolishing of
Episcopal Government.

The Dr. Answers Nay, Mr. Bridge, you and your party in arms show your selves
what Spirit you are of, who will have this Land imbroyl'd in a bloody War,
rather then Episcopacy shall not down.

Not so Doctor, there is not the same Reason, why you should retort these words
upon us, for I had no where said, the Parliament has Reason by power of Arms,
to divert the evil of that Government; yea I am so far from it, that I
profess freely that if the King and Parliament would establish that Government
still to be continued, that the people is not bound to rise up in arms, to root
it out, though I judge it evil: Yea if any Man be of that opinion I think he
is to be suffered to live, enjoying himself and his estate here.

Then page 56. the Dr. says to that of Saul's spear restored; Mr. Bridge
Replies, though restored before demanded, yet not before Saul had humbled
himself to David saying, I have sinned, etc. We know, says he, what you look
for, his Majesty has not bin ashamed to do it with great condiscention.

An: It Is possible a King may fail for not humbling himself before his
Subjects, Chron. 2. 36. 13. And Zedekiah did that which was evil in the sight
of the Lord his God, and humbled not himself before Jeremiah the Prophet.

And though His Majesty had yielded and humbled himself yet lower, he would
be no loser thereby, we know what the old Counselors said, 2 Chronicles. 10. 7. If
thou be kind to this people, and please them, and speak good Words to them,
they will be thy servants for ever.

Finally* whereas I had showed that Ziba, and those that resorted to David in
his distress, were not of another Religion, and by Law to be disarmed, as the
Papists now are; who have entertainment in His Majesty's Army: The Doctor
answers, though by law Papists are not to have Arms at their dispose, yet are
they not quit of the duty and service of Subjects.

They owe no more duty to King but according to Law, and by Law they are to be
all disarmed; Wherefore good Dr. maintain this illegal way no longer, give
glory to God, and say you are convinced of this truth; which indeed you cannot
but be; if you do not shut your own eyes: for you told us in your former
Treatise, that Subjects may lawfully for their own defense, hold the Kings
hands, and how so, (if he raise an Army) but by an Army. Neither can you be so
weak as to think that the great Senate of the Kingdom, that all the Commons,
Gentlemen, and Nobles, should be so at the mercy of every mean person,
invested with the Kings Authority, that if a petty Constable, or other
inferior Officer do offer violence unto them, that it shall not be in their
power to make a forcible resistance, because they are clothed with the Kings
Authority: Good Sir, in the fear of God, make your humble addresses to His
Majesty, and Petition him to return to those that are faithful to him: The
worst that he can lose, you know (if you pretend rightly) is but a piece of
prerogative, or some exercise thereof for the present; why should so good a
Land as this be imbrued in blood for such a cause war, being the worst of all
evils, and therefore not to be undertaken but to prevent gravissimum malum.
And is the loss of some part of the Prerogative or exercise thereof for the
present such; I believe you cannot say so: Wherefore labor, labor you to take
off those exasperations that are amongst men with you; and do not still put
your unguem in ulcere ut recrudesoat dolor. Tell the People amongst whom you
are of that sinful way wherein they now are so shall you liberare animam tuam.
But if you will not it may be those words which you read in Ezech. 3. 12. will
lie hard on your Conscience another day. Now the God of all Peace* give us
peace, but truth with Peace, in Christ Jesus. Amen.

FINIS.

