DIVISION DIVIDED; OR, Ruins forerunner DISCOVERED and DECYPHERED, In a
Sermon before the Right Honorable and the Right Worshipful the Lord Major and
Aldermen of the City of London, Preached on the Lord's Day, September 20. 1646.
in Paul's Church, London.

By one that wishes well unto, and daily prays for Unity and Uniformity in
these three Kingdoms.

Now I beseech you Brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak one thing, and that there be no dissentions among you; but be ye knit
together in one mind, and in one judgment, 1 Cor. 1.10.

Infaelix populus Dei non potest in bono tantam habere concordiam, quantam mali
habent in malo, Hier. in Ps.

Neque enim Civitas in seditione potest esse beata, nec in discordia dominorum
domus, qu^ minus animus a seipso dissidens, secumque discordans, gustare partem
ullam liquidae voluptatis, and liberae po^est. Atque pugnantibus and contrariis
studiis, consiliisque semper utens nihil quiet videre, nihil tranquille
potest, Cicero.

(...), Homer. Odyss. (...).

London, Printed for Andrew Crook, at the Green Dragon in Pauls-church-yard,
1646.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, A True pattern of the old and good Way of Piety and
Charity, and a cordial Patron of Truth in these unsteady and giddy Times,
THOMAS ADAMS, NOW Lord Major of this famous City of London, all blessed
establishments in all the ways to Grace and Glory.
My Lord,
YOu have made that saying true, which heretofore was spoken, Amicus Plato, and
Amicus Socrates, but amicissima Veritas; I love Plato well, and Socrates too,
but Truth better than either of them; yea, than both of them. The hearts of
Gods people bless you, and God for you, and we hope your zeal for Truth
against every opposite Error, shall still provoke many. Confess. lib. 12.
Veritatem celare, est aurum sepelire, To conceal Truth, is as to bury gold,
says Austin: And Bernard convincingly, Si propter timorem mortis tacere
Veritatem impietas est, quomodo non est major impietas, propter miserum ventrem
and honoris vani spem tacere Veritatem? Videtur meliorem facere gratiam panis
and honoris, Bernard.
quam gloriam Veritatis; If for the fear of death to conceal a Truth be sin
and wickedness; o what a sin is it, for the bellies-sake, or some such
sinister end to dissemble it? Truth in 1 Petition. 2 Presence. 3 Possession.
My Lord, Inquisitio Veritatis est ejus petitio, scientia Veritatis est ejus
praesentia, sed creditio Veritatis est ejus possessio; Truth when sought after
is excellent, when found and known it is yet more lovely, but when believed
and practiced too, it becomes ours in possession. Faith, what?
And indeed, what is Faith, but I believe? that is, I understand and conceive
of it for a truth, I assent unto it in my Judgment to be a truth, I consent
unto it in my will as good, and build mine eternal comfort on it as good for
me; this act of belief carries the whole soul with it. It is pleasant to
stand upon the shore, and see the Ships tossed in the troubled Ocean; to stand
upon a Castle safe, and see a pitched Battle fought, in the variety and
success thereof; to stand upon a rock and see (so it be with pity, and
without pride) the Errors, wanderings, mists, clouds, and storms, which are
below in the valley of this world. Your Lordship has like a stable Christian
stood fast in God, and in the power of his might, while you have seen many (too
many) tossed to and fro with the wind of every Doctrine. Doubtless, every
godly, Movet men's pia in charitate, quiescit in providentia, non vertit denique
nisi super pol^s veritatis.
truly godly mind moves in charity, rests in providence, and does not turn,
but upon the poles of Truth, while the portion of wicked men will be; that
they deceive, and are deceived. Mixtures of falsehood, Simile.
I may fitly resemble them to that allay which is in gold, silver, or pewter,
it may indeed make the met all work somewhat the better, but it abas^th it
much; even so our notionall mixtures may indeed in preaching, press, etc. make
things take the better among giddy heads, but they abase Divinity, and render
men delighting therein too full of levity and emptiness. Gods attire if he
did dwell among men.
It was wont to be said of our Learned Critics, That if God himself were to
dwell in humane shape amongst men, he would take light for his body, and truth
for his soul.

This City has been exceedingly honored in sending out Champions to fight for
Truth abroad, wherein with what gallantry and success our Londoners have
behaved themselves, Chronicles will not conceal in after times, and there are
yet private Anniversaries of thankful remembrances for Newbery, The 20 of
September, that day this Sermon was Preached.
etc. And it will be no little Fame to this City also, to have it recorded,
that in the time of such a one, and such a one several Lord Majors of London
successively, Heresies, Schisms, Sectaries were suppressed, or at least not so
countenanced, as that the tares overgrew the wheat in Gods Field; Salvian.
Dum mali esse volunt, Veritatem esse nolunt, qua mali condemnantur; but let
Truth prevail, and let it be glorious. Of all pieces of our Spiritual armor,
Truth is resembled unto a girdle, Ephesians. 6. for indeed, Truth should incompasse
us about; Truth fourefold.
And a fourfold Truth, scil. of judgment, heart, speech, action, is required of
every Christian. My Lord, the Lord of Lords take a double portion of the Spirit
of Paul, and put it on you, and on all them that shall succeed you, that you
may withstand them to the face, which go not with a right foot unto the Gospel
of Jesus Christ, Non been vivitur, Holy life, what and how?
ubi non been de Deo creditur, Aug. A holy life is indeed nothing else, but the
infusion of holy truths. The Spirit opening general truths to a Christian,
has another work also, and that is to reveal our particular interest in
those truths, and to breed special faith, whereby we may make them our own:
that so where sacred truths are truly apprehended, there may be an impression
in the soul, suitable to the things believed. The Lord make our believing of
God Almighty, to bread an impression of dependence, reverence, etc. Some
dispute of Faith, some preach it, some swear by it, but few live thereby.
the belief and knowledge of Christ crucified, to be a crucifying knowledge;
of Christ rising, a raising knowledge; of Christ abased, an abasing knowledge
to our souls, and so of all truths else whatsoever. The good Prince George
Anhalt, (who in Luthers time became a Preacher of the Gospel) intending to
comfort his brother Prince John, raises strong consolations for him from the
last three Articles of the Creed, Remission of sins, resurrection of the
body, Comfort in trouble, what and how?
and life everlasting. There is one Article before these three, and that is the
Communion of Saints, which we believe too, but find as little influence from
in these our days, as from any truth that ever our Lord Christ left us; and
reason I know none thereof, but that there is so much of that knowledge which
puffs up, and so little of that love that edifieth. He that strives for
Error strives for Satan against God, A holy strise.
he that strives for victory, strives for himself against other men; but he
that strives for truth against error, helps the Lord against Gods enemy and
his too, namely, Satan the Father of lies. And this specially, Bonum, been, God
loves Adverbes better than Adjectives
if withal he handle Gods cause according unto God; A man shows most
knowledge and understanding in the matter of truth, but most grace in the
manner of handling of it with reverence, holiness, and modesty.

Your Lordship has so behaved your self in your Year, that I doubt not but it
will turn to your account before God, and amongst us your Name shall be as an
Ointment poured forth: Jesus Christ bless you more and more with sin's
decreases, and graces increases, that you may be perfect and entire, wanting
nothing; So prays

Your Lordships that loves you for loving Truth, Walter Bridges.

TO THE FOUR ESQVIRES FOR THE Service of this Honorable CITY, William
Gunthrop Sword Bearer, John Clutton Common-Hunt, Henry Hodges Common-Cryer,
Edward Peerse Water-bayliffe, Grace and Peace, with light and truth in the Lord
Jesus Christ.
YOur last Lord and Master Gentlemen, (O many such more may you serve in that
place) and you, are not such men as some are; there is a rule among the
Romanists, and it is this, We are bound to the obedience of the Pope, when he
ordaines a Holy Day, but we are not bound to do against our consciences; How
shall this now be reconciled? For the Pope may happily command that which I
cannot in conscience do: The Roman Doctors reconcile it easily, and it is
thus, Make the word and will of the Pope, the rule of your obedience, and then
it is enough; O slavery of all slaveries for any poor soul to lie under! Your
Lord, and you love inlargements, not to take any thing upon trust, which does
concern your souls for eternity: but to be persuaded in your own minds, and
to have your senses exercised to discern good and evil, your Lord, and you
together, made it your requests that this poor word of exhortation might pass
from the Pulpit to the Press, it has done so now, through the good hand of
God, and here you have it, if it help you in any thing, one good turn
deserves another, do you help him with your prayers, who is

Your loving Friend and Servant in such works as these, WALTER BRIDGES.

DIVISION DIVIDED; OR, RVINES FORE-RVNNER Discovered and Disciphered.
The TEXT, Every Kingdom divided against it self shall be brought to
desolation; and every City or house divided against it self shall not stand,
Mat. 12.25.
THis is such a piece of Gods truth, as being spoken by Christ himself, ought
much to be regarded, the occasion thereof very easily gathered out of the
Context; and as to that, or to the Text, with reference to the Context, I shall
have nothing to say, I shall look on the Text with reference to our times
rather, and labor to hold forth therehence unto this Honorable and grave
Assembly such truth as is Land, Church, and Commonwealth concerning: Calvin's
note is excellent and too true, Right Honorable and wel-beloved, Est kic
Divini verbi quasi quidam genius, ut nunquam emergat quieto et dormiente
Satana; Call. Praes. ad Reg. Gall.
that though while men slept, the envious man took his time to sow tares, yet
men never can take a time to wake and watch to preach truth while Satan is
asleep. Origin once being to preach on that place of the Psalmist, Unto the
wicked God says, What have thou to do to take my Name into thy mouth, etc.
seeing thou hate to be reformed; wept over the Text in stead of Preaching
upon it. It is Pareus his observation upon that of the Apostle, 1 Cor. 1.10.
Now I beseech you brethren, by the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ, that ye all
speak the same thing, and that there be no divisions among you; but that ye
be perfectly joined together in the same mind, and in the same judgment.
Pareus, I say, marks, that the Apostle being to cure division^; Huic morbo
exulceratissimo primum malagmata quaedam adhibet. Par. ad loc.
to this disease, says he, Paul first applies Playsters and Poultesses to
ripen it, and draw it to maturation, before he cut or make incision: our
disunions, disjoyntings, disaffections and dissensions are very great, very
unreasonable, very unseasonable, tongue-disagreement, and pen-disagreement; I
yet hope God will keep us from discord, for that sounds harsh, and is not till
hearts be broken asunder, from which God deliver us. I would not have that
said of Christians, which had wont to be said of Chronologers, Chronologi non
magis congruunt quam Horologia; Victorin. Strigel. Proleg. in Chron. Melancth.
the Chronologers agree like clocks, scarce two of one mind throughout. It
would be our advancement in the eyes of God and good men to advance unity and
one-mindednesse, lest it be said of us, and truly too, that Demades the
Orator said of the Athenians in Plutarch, that they never sat upon Treaties
of Peace, but in black and mourning garments, when they had paid before too
dear for their divisions: Vis unita fortior, has hitherto gone for a good
Proverb, and indeed if we have a fancy of crossing such Proverbes, it may
prove to our ruin. God, because he is Ens simplicissimum, a most simple and
undivided being, is therefore Ens fortissimum and inexpugnabile, a most strong
and impregnable being; and surely, if we hold together amongst our selves, it
will be more hard to harm us: what is the destruction of a man, but the
division of the body and the soul? as long as they two hold together, the man
is not destroyed; so is it also, and will be found to be amongst us. Besides
that glorious light shining forth of Gods Word, whereunto they do well that
take heed as to a light shining in a dark place, such as that, Romans 16.17. I
beseech you brethren mark them which cause division ((...):) and that 1 Cor.
3.3. For ye are yet carnal; for whereas there are among you envyings, and
strife, and divisions; are ye not carnal, and walk as men? Besides these, and
such as these Scriptures, the very light of nature, and men guided by no better
Principles, will rise up in judgment against men that call themselves
Christians, and yet love divisions. Aristotle in his fifth Book of a
Commonwealth, and sixth Chapter, lays down this as an infallible rule,
Imbellum est quod discordat, that which disagrees with it self, (...), Arist.
de Rep. l 5. c. 6.
and is disconcordant, must needs be weak.

But I come to the Text, wherein I observe:

First, the subject here spoken of, and that is, a Kingdom, a City, an house;
a threefold subject is here spoken of.

Secondly, the adjunct which serves to express our Lords meaning, and the
Doctrines concernment, which is (every) Kingdom, City, House, it is true in
all that our Lord says of any.

Thirdly, the predicate, or that which is spoken of every of these subjects;
which is both, 1. Affirmative, shall be brought to desolation. 2. Negative
also, shall not stand.


Fourthly, the condition annexed, if divided against it self; Every King some
divided against it self shall be desolate, and every City or House divided
against it self shall not stand. Then I come to the first part of the
exposition.

First, for the concernment of this Doctrine, 1 The concernment.
it belongs it seems unto our Kingdom in general, unto our City in
particular, yea, and unto our very houses, our habitations where we live; a
Doctrine doubtless well-besitting the ears of such an Honorable, such a
Worshipful Auditory. Quintilian.
Modus orationis Auditor est, was wont to be the old rule, speak to thy
hearers profit, or say nothing. If men are not pro ara diminica, yet their hara
domestica I know will move them, the Kingdom, your City, your Houses, all is
here concerned. Lutherus me alloquitur quasi me intra erat.
It had wont to be said of Luther, that he spoke to his hearers as if he had
been within them: I shall not study ourious words, a conscientious discovery,
yea, a cordial reproof is far better; and I am of Chrysostomes mind,
(...), new ways are no ways. When Aristippus was asked, what it would profit
ones son if his Father should give him Learning; why (says he) if for
nothing else, yet herein it will advantage him, that when he comes to the
Theater, he shall sit not like one stone upon another. If this Doctrine will
serve for nothing else, yet this it will serve for to warn you ye Senators of
London, that ye be not such of whom mine Author says, they had rather perish
in a common calamity, Pateroulus. ut Publica ruina quisque malit, quam sua
proteri, et idem passurus minime conspici. 2 The Objection.
then in a private misery, that their destruction may be hidden in the public
ruin.

Secondly, If any lazy objection shall be awakened here from negligent ones,
and those which are secure, of which sort we have our thousands, and ten
thousands in this City: If any such shall say unto me, what is this to me? I
do not trouble mine head with your divisions, preach me Jesus Christ, I take
no care for any thing else. I Answer.

The men of Laish that lived securely are risen again in our times: Rev. 18.7,
8.
It was Babylons voice, Rev. 18.7, 8. I sit as a queen, and am no widow, I
shall see no mourning; and she speaks this so loud and so long, till at
length in the next verse God says to her, As is the Preacher, so is the peace
always.
Therefore shall her plagues come in one day, death and sorrow, etc. Therefore,
wherefore? as is the peace, so always is the Preacher thereof, when they say
peace, 1 These. 5.3. When who says so? wicked men, when they Preach a wicked
peace, the just God even then holds himself engaged to be against both the
Peace, and Preacher, And your Covenant with death shall be disanulled and your
agreement with Hell shall not stand, when a scourge shall run over and pass
through the Land, then shall ye be trod down thereby, Esa. 28.18.

That word of Paul comes like thunder from Heaven, and it is such language, as
I desire to speak to such men: Bountifulness toward thee if thou continue in
Gods bountifulness, or else even thou also shall be cut off, Romans 11.22.

I would have the Citizens of London do, as the Citizens of Nineveh did at
such a message, Jonah 3.6. When the King, and Nobles, (...), etc.
and others, saw the word of God, (not heard it only, for so the Original
expresses it, Luke 2^15) see the gradation, or rather the descension, yea,
condescension, 1. The word came (like lightning.) 2. To the King, not to the
inferior only. 3. He arose, as if he felt his seat shake under him. 4. Cast
off his Robe, as if it had been a burden. 5. Covered himself with Sackcloth,
as a corpse made ready for the burial 6. And sat down, not among violets,
flowers, etc. but in the ashes: the word of God if it have power to work
repentance, that repentance will have power to work pardon at last.

But thirdly, 3 The Obligat.
What obligation find you in the Text to tie us to all this?

1. The lesser obligation, the Kingdom, City, 1 Lesser.
or house so divided, shall not stand: when Israel could not stand before her
enemies, Josh. 7.8. that Governor presently breaks out into this expression,
O Lord, what shall I say when Israel turn their backs before their enemies?
The Kingdom, City, or house divided shall not stand, they shall be as
Ireland; let our Governors then do as he did.

2. But then the greater, they shall be desolate, be as Germany, 2 Greater.
where there has been neither earing nor seed-time this Twenty years and
upwards, for body nor for soul. When Christ foretells the ruin of Jerusalem,
it is in such terms as these, Verily, I say unto you, there shall not be here
left a stone upon a stone which shall not be cast down, Mat. 24.2. such, such
a desolation it will be, that follows division hard at heels.

Fourthly, then mark that ( if) in my Text, 4 The Condition.
If it be divided, if it, if another thing, if any thing, if thou be divided
against thy self, thou shall not stand, thou shall be brought to desolation,
For a double-minded man is unstable in all his ways, I am. 1.8. Now this I
would have enlarged and understood.

1. Implicitly, if a Kingdom, City, 1 Implicitly.
or house be divided against others, there may be misery enough, the sword
will soon pierce unto the heart, Jerem. 4.10. Then the horseman lifts the
bright sword, and the glittering spear, a multitude is slain; yea, the dead
bodies are many, and they stumble at their corpses, Nahum 3.3. England can now
tell, and Ireland too sad stories, and then we were divided against others
only, against men, which though they were amongst us, were not of us. But

2. Explicitly, if divided against it self: 2. Explicitly.
Divines use to say there is one word in a Text which is always to be marked:
This same word ( self) The Kingdom divided against it self, the City and the
house against it self, occasions us to inquire further for a further
exposition, and to make search into the second part of this exposition.

1. What is the Self of a Kingdom, City, house, Commonwealth, or person? To
which I answer:

First, generally, thus, by Deuteronomy. 4.^, 6. Behold I have taught you Ordinances
and Laws, Self, what^ 1 Generally.
as the Lord my God commanded me, that ye should do even so, within the Land
whither ye go to possess it: Keep them therefore, and do them, for that is
your wisdom and your understanding, etc. Or by that of Solomon, Eccles. 12.13.
Fear God, and keep his Commandenients. For hoc est totum hominis, this is the
self, the soul, the all of man: and what Kingdom, City, or house soever is
divided against this, is divided against it self, and will be desolate.

Secondly, 2 Particularly. 1 Kingdom self.
but particularly: 1. The Self of a Kingdom, is the Religion of that
Kingdom, from which whosoever is divided, he is separate from God, and God
from him; and God will make him to know (at one time or other) that there is a
God whom he has not served. At the beginning of their dwelling there, they
served not God; therefore the Lord sent Lions amongst them, which slew them,
says the History, 2 Kings 17.25. If my people, which is called by my name,
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their wicked
ways, then I will forgive their sins, and will heal their Land. Religion
you see is the only misery-diverting, and mercy-procuring thing in a Land or
Nation.

Secondly, 2 Commonwealth self.
the Self of a Commonwealth, is the Law thereof, the Law is the common Surety
between the Governors, and the governed, surety from the King to me, that I
shall enjoy my protection, and surety for me to him, that I shall pay my
tribute, No^heire of restraint.
and do mine homage. Over and over again in that History it is recorded, In
those days there was no [King] in Israel, and every man did that which was
right in his own eyes, Judge. 20.25. Now a Kingdom or Commonwealth divided
against this Self also, will be desolate.

Thirdly, 3 Church self.
the self of the Church is Doctrine and Discipline, which like the body and
soul must not be divided; Remember Jesus Christ of the seed of David, how he
was crucified according to my Gospel, 2 Timothy 2.8. This is that foundation other
than which no man can lay, 1 Cor. 3.11. the doctrine of the Prophets and
Apostles whereon we must be built, whilst Jesus Christ himself is laid for
the chief corner Stone. This Jesus Christ who made a whip of cords, and drove
out the buyers and sellers out of the Temple, which was a piece of Discipline,
while he was preaching heavenly doctrine to them, gave also the keys unto
Peter, Mat. 16. and Paul puts the power of them in execution. 1 Cor. 5.45. and
writes to the Colossians thus, Though I be absent in the body, yet am I with
you in the Spirit, joying and beholding your order, and your steadfast faith in
Christ, Col. 2.5.

4. The self of a family is the Peace of that family, Peace I say, 4 Family
self.
the Religious peace, while the family is reconciled to God, for then they know
that peace is upon their Tabernacle, that is, they are assured thereof, then
they visit their Habitation and do not sin, Job. 5.24. and the mutual
peace between the several members thereof maintained by commanding and
obeying, the man dwells with his wife and family like a man of knowledge, 1 Pet.
3.7. the wife also knows that she is not permitted to teach, nor to usurp
authority over the man, but to be in silence, 1 Timothy 2.12. this is a self
against which it will be found very dangerous to be divided.

5. There is a self of a man's self, 5 Self of selse.
and that is good conscience; good I say, tender, and wel-informed conscience,
not accusing when it should excuse; nor on the contrary excusing, when gross
faults are committed: Conscience persuaded of the nobility and necessity too of
Religion: Quas non opertet mortes praecligere, quod non suppliciwn potius
far? imo in quam profundam inferni abyssum introire, quam contra conserentiam
attestari? Zuing. Epist. 3.
such a Conscience as the godly Minister writes of, saying, O what deaths would
not a man first choose? what punishment would not a man (a godly man) undergo,
even the very bottom of hell it self, before he would do any thing against
conscience?

I proceed to the further exposition, the third Part thereof.

Shall they be brought to desolation indeed if divided? is our Lord in good
earnest? and shall this come to pass?

I answer, the meaning is, 1. So it happens to be probably and very often.

2. Yea, and more than so, so it will be certainly, 3 Part of Exposition.
and without all doubt, unless such divisions as have been, or are in Kingdom,
City, or house be confessed, repented of and forsaken; For so are the two
standing rules which God gives, one is Jerem. 18.7, 8. 2 Rules.
At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a Kingdom,
to pluck up and to pull down, and to destroy it, If that Nation against whom I
have pronounced, turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil that I
thought to do unto them. The other is Prove. 28.13. He that hides his sin
shall not prosper, but he that confesses and forsakes shall have mercy. If
our divisions continue in Kingdom, City, House, they be of sad presage, what
ever men think.

Here now with reference to the Text and Context, let me conclude something
doctrinally by way of observation.

First, Observations.
A Kingdom divided amongst themselves, against themselves, is worse in that
regard than the Devils Kingdom, Satan's Kingdom is not so.

Secondly, The Favorers and Fomenters of such discord are, shall I say Devils?
or worse? the Fiends seek the peace of their own kingdom.

Thirdly, The Devils do agree, that they may do evil, but we cannot agree
that we may do good, and receive good too, namely that we may settle peace
and truth in our borders, and when we have done, sit down and eat the fruit
thereof. Suidas writes that there was a family at Corinth, Ventisopii (...).
that could lay the winds, and that that family was in very great esteem among
all, but especially the sea men, and had therefore a name given them,
Ventisopii: That storm of sad division hanging over our heads, His hand surely
must be in the calming thereof, of whom it was said, that both the wind and
waters did obey him, Mat. 8.27.

But I proceed, 4 Part of Exposition, what?
and ask again in the fourth part of the exposition.

Whether the divisions of a Kingdom, City or house be all alike, or all alike
dangerous, and presaging ruin? No surely.

First, ^ Division against self.
of Kingdom division, you may read the History of Rehoboam, 1 King. 12. and of
the rending away of 10. Tribes of 12 from him? Here now is the ruin, but was
this Kingdom divided against it self? O yes, for it was divided against
counsel, and Counsel is the very self of a King and Kingdom too, v. 14. it
is said, that the King spoke unto them after the counsel of the young Men
saying, My Father made your yoke heavy, and I will add to your yoke: My father
also chastised you with whips, but I will chastise you with scorpions.

Secondly, ^ Division.
For a City division, you may read that History, Acts 14.4. But the multitude
of the City was divided, and part held with the Jews, and part with the
Apostles. Here now is a City division, you see part siding against part, and
tending (as all divisions do) to tumult and trouble, for v. 5. There was an
assault made both of the Gentiles and also of the Jews with their rulers, to
use them despightfully, and to stone them, they were ware of it, and feign to
fly to Lystra and to Derbe; But were these also divided against themselves? yes
surely, they were divided against Religion Preached, and wisdom to judge
thereof. To discern things that differ, is that which Paul's prayer is for,
Phil. 1.10. Sapientia ceruitur in Comparatis.
and this wisdom is best discerned, when things are in competition, and the
question is, what to choose, and what to refuse.

Thirdly, Of House difference you may also read 2 Samuel 6.16. ^ Division.
20, 21. David a good husband, doing devoutly, and with much zeal before the
Arc of the God of Israel, Michael his wife is of another opinion, and she
looks on and despises him in her heart, v. 16, she says, How glorious was
the King to day, who uncovered himself to day in the eyes of the Handmaids of
his servants? v. 20. as one of the vain fellows openly uncovereth himself.
Here you see is a House badly divided, and against it self too: namely Consent
and Submission of the wife to the Husbands judgment, in the undertaking of
things in Gods service; several divisions are doubtless severally ominous,
and to be taken heed of, they bode ill.

But yet fifthly in my exposition, they, the people, 5 Part of Exposition.
I mean the Jews, might take Jesus Christ for an exorcist, or Conjurer, and if
so, Satan should then be against himself; we see among the Papists sometimes
what a work they have in their dispossessings, and yet Satan does but cast out
Satan, if the work be done: we read also Act. 19.13. that certain of the
vagabond Jews exorcists took upon them to call over them which had evil
spirits, the Name of the Lord Jesus, saying, We adjure you by Jesus whom Paul
preaches. To omit much that might be said to this particular, I say only this:

1. Our Lord argues against his blasphemers, 1. Arg. Ab absurdo.
here ab absurdo from the absurdity, thus a Kingdom, City, or House to be
divided against it self is absurd. If Satan's should so be, it would be
destructive thereto.

2. Our Savior argues from example, 2. Arg. Ab exemplo.
I cast out Devils by the same power that your sons, (which can so do) cast
them out, but ask them and they will tell you, that they cast them out by the
finger of God, therefore by that power I cast them out. 3. Arg. Ab officio.


3. Another Argument our Savior draws from his office, as if he should say,
you would hardly stumble at my casting out Devils, did you but know this, that
Jesus Christ came to destroy the works of the Devil, 1 John 3.8.

Sixthly, 6 Part of Exposition.
a clear difference is here held forth, and ought to be marked, between some
differences and others: for the Text does not say, that all differences in a
Kingdom, City, or House are destructive and tending to desolation, but such as
are against the self. The Scripture gives us to understand that there are

Josh. 22.16. Thus says the whole Congregation of the Lord, What trespass is
this that ye have committed against the God of Israel, to turn away this day
from following the Lord, in that you have builded you an Altar that ye might
rebel this day against the Lord? To be divided from them that seem to divide
from the Lord, is a good division.

Exodus 32.26, 27. Then Moses stood in the gate of the Camp, and said, Who is
on the Lords side, let him come unto me: And all the sons of Levi gathered
themselves together unto him. And he said unto them, Thus says the Lord God
of Israel, Put every man his sword by his side, and go^ in and out from gate to
gate, throughout the Camp, and slay every man his brother, and every man his
companion, Poenaemirabilis. Caie^.
and every man his neighbor. Here is a division you see, though bloody, yet
blessed, a piece of Justice acceptably done upon the ringleaders into
Idolatry, one of Gods wonderful punishments, as just as secret.

King. 12.15. The King hearkened not unto the people, for the cause was from
the Lord, that he might perform his saying, which the Lord spoke by Ahijah the
Shilonite, unto Jeroboam the son of Nebat: and what word that was, you may see,
1 Samuel 11.11. Ferasmuch as this is done of thee, and thou have not kept my
Covenant and my Statutes which I have commanded thee, I will surely rend the
Kingdom from thee, and give it to thy servant.

Heb. 4.12.

Tim. 2.15. He must divide the precious from the vile, Lev. 10.10. By all this
then is plainly to be seen, that there are divisions which are good, and to be
observed.

Seventhly, then we are to understand, 7 Part of the Exposition.
that this is a proverbiall speech that our Lord uses here, and how such
parables and proverbes are in holy Scripture used is worthy observation, they
conclude probably, and convince notably, and to such purposes are for the most
part used, 1 Samuel 24.12, 13. The Lord judge between me and thee, and the Lord
avenge me of thee, but mine hand shall not be upon thee: As says the
Proverb of the Ancients, Proverbes.
Wickedness proceeds from the wicked, but mine hand shall not be upon thee:
see also 2 Samuel 20.18. they were wont to speak in old time, saying, They shall
surely ask counsel at Abel, and so they ended the matter, or surely they will
ask of Abel, and so make an end; it is a reference unto Deuteronomy. 20.10. When thou
c^mmes^ unto a City to fight against it, then thou shall proclaim peace unto
it: and so the sum of the Woman's speech is this, I and my Citizens thought,
surely this General Joab will make his demands known before he come with fire
and sword, but thou followest no such order; Joabs answer you see in v. 20. and
thereby you may see how concluding and convincing the woman's language is, so is
our Lords here.

Eighthly, this Text must also be looked upon in the harmony, 8 Part of the
Exposition.]
three Evangelists have it, Matthew, Mark, and Luke, out of all which the
terms must be very carefully expounded in their several orders: As

1. Shall be desolate. I would ask here what is desolation? 1 Desolation, what?
and make answer to this question by that place, Genesis 47.19. Wherefore shall
we die before thine eyes? etc. give us seed that we may live and not die,
that the land be not desolate, that is, that the land be not untilled; an
unhusbanded land is a desolate land, and divisions in a Kingdom, City, or
house will make them to be unhusbanded both in heavenly and earthly sense. 2
Not standing
2. Shall not stand. Standing in Scripture is taken diversely, as to stand in
grace, that is, to be certain and sure of grace, Romans 5.2. By whom we have
access by faith into this grace wherein we stand, and rejoice in hope of the
glory of God: This way divisions in a Kingdom, City, or House, make it and
them they cannot stand, it is loving of one another, and watchfulness over one
another, that is to edification^ dividing against one another tends to
destruction.

Standing, Standing in the acceptions
in Scripture, means also standing still, that is to say, to be quiet and rest
on God, 2 Chronicles. 20.17. Ye shall not need to fight in this battle, set your
selves, stand ye still, and see the salvation of the Lord with you. O Judah
and Jerusalem; This way also divisions in a Kingdom, City, or House weaken
much, for when men divide and side it one against another, they are turbulent,
not waiting on God with meekness of spirit.

Standing again in holy Scripture, notes standing fast, contrary to going
away or falling from somewhat, or being carried away; so Gal. 5.1. Stand fast
in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not entangled again
with the yoke of bondage. Thus divisions in a Kingdom, City, or House are
dangerous also; for in these tongue and pen-divisions, most of our people are
either lost and become Atheists, looking after no Religion at all, on else are
become children tossed to and fro, and carried about with every wind of
Doctrine, by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in
wait to deceive; so says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.14.

3. House falls upon house, House falling upon house.
Luke 11.17. an excellent expression, I expound it by that of Jotham, Judge.
9.20. Let fire come out from Abimelech and devour the men of Shechem and the
house of Millo; And let fire come forth from the men of Shechem, and from the
house of Millo, and devour Abimelech. Divisions make fire break out of one
house, and burn another, contention is a flame, dissension is a kindled fire.
Not without cause is it that the Holy Ghost, reckoning up the fruits of the
flesh, places them thus in the catalogue, seditions, heresies, envyings,
murders, to teach us what division will come to, if God do not restrain it,
Gal. 5.20, 2^.

4. If Satan cast out Satan, that is, Castings out of
if they be against one anonother, which should be together, 1 The House.
there will be nothing but casting out. And there is a threefold casting out.
1. Casting out of the house, so Abram cast Hagar and her son; and 2 ep. Joh.
10. If there come any unto you, and bring not this doctrine, receive him not
into your house, neither bid him God speed. When divisions arise, even they
that were intimate before, then cast one another off, and out too, and hardly
bid God speed, give a salute each to other.

2. Casting out of the heart; 2 The Heart
and therefore to be observed, Jer. 15.1. Though Moses and Samuel stood before
me, yet my mind could not be toward this people, cast them out of my sight,
and let them go forth: When divisions come, men, and good men too are cast out
of one another hearts, the mind of one is not toward another.

3. A third casting out yet there is mentioned by St. 3 The Society.
Paul to Titus 3.10. A man that is an Heretic, after the first and second
admonition reject; that same reject, is as bad as an eject. For it imports.

1. To cast him out of all familiarity in things temporal.

2. And out of all society in things spiritual also. And such castings out are
the effects of divisions too, we are divided about judging of Errors and
Heretics; and divided again about the casting out and taking into communion.

I shall therefore now come to Use and direction, that all this may be made
yours, Jesus Christ blessing his own Ordinance.

Caution.
as is written, 2 Chronicles. 19.6, 7. Take heed what ye do, for ye judge not for
man, but for the Lord, who is with you in the matter of judgment. Wherefore
now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, and take heed, and do it. But I
have another take heed, Self, Englands abomination.
and such a one as I am confident will be welcome, and that is, take heed to
your selves; yea, I beseech you take heed that you do not welcome this take
heed under a wrong notion. I know there is an Idol called Self, set up in
every corner almost, and men fall down and worship it, great men, learned men,
all sorts. I am an enemy to this Dagon, and do heartily wish that some
Hezekiah may be stirred up, or at least much of that spirit to make it (a
Nehushtan once) a piece of brass whenever abused to idolatry.

Three kinds of selfe-denyall I conceive ought to be found in every Christian:
Abnegatio 1 Mediorum. 2 Morum. 3 Mentium.
abnegatio, 1. Mediorum, the means allowed by others; a right Christian will
not use the means, lawful enough, thereby to bring unlawful purposes to
pass.

2. Morum, self-denial in the manners allowed by others; what other men think
may be spoken, done, etc. he dare not, that is a right Christian, meddle in.

3. Mentium, self-denial in the mind, the very mind which the men of the world
have, the same mind is in them, which was also in Christ Jesus, Phil. 2.5. Who
made himself of no reputation, but took upon him the form of a servant.

Such a sweet temper of heart, such an aptness and readiness to deny and
forsake what is most dear unto us for Jesus Christ, and for his Gospels sake;
this is it, 1. Whose voice speaks thus to God and the world, I am ready to be
bound and dye, Act. 21.13. I account all Things dross and dung, Phil. 3.8. 2.
The parts of self-denial are affection and action, readiness in habit, and
readiness in act. Selves to be heeded.
3. The condition of things stand in competition with God. 4. The caution
thereof, which is, that neither affection be destroyed, nor obedience, etc. but
reduced into order, namely, that God be first, and all things after him.

But for the particulars:

First, 1 Self mystical
I would entreat your to look unto your self mystical; that is, I pray you
look to your Religion, (...), God is the best of beings, and Religion the best
of wel-beings. He that has little zeal, and less courage for godliness, may
(in appearance) look after many Religions, but he will hardly love any. Nor do
I press Religion only here, no nor it reformed, though I daily pray that the
work of Reformation may find as many helps in the end, as it has found
hindrances in the beginning and midway. But I pray you take heed of your
Religion under Esay's notion, Religion what in good earnest
One shall say, I am the Lords; and another shall call himself by the name of
Jacob; and another shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname
himself by the name of Israel, Esa. 44.5. your subscribed Religion with your
hands lifted up to the most High: I press Religion under Paul's notion, Acts
10.35. To fear God, and work righteousness; and under the description of St.
James, Jam. 1.27. To visit the fatherless and widow in their affliction, piety
and charity going hand in hand.

1. 1 In praxei.
In practice is sacras Scriptures recte legit qui vertit verba in opera,
Expositors of Scripture in their books we have good store, and welcome light,
but the Lord increase the number of them which expound Scripture, not in leaves
only, but in lives also, turn words into works.

2. In trial, bring Religion to the touchstone; 2 In probation
between Heaven and Hell, there is this difference in Heaven, there is Light
without Heat, but in Hell there is Heat without Light, take heed of such
religion.

3. In influence, as the Heavens work upon our bodies, 3 In influentia^
so indeed should Religion on our souls: with, 1. Light. Lucis.
2. Heat. Caloris.
3. Motion. Motus.



That is worthy of notice which one said wittily: Reprehensio i^ipit a modestia
cum minoritis, Reformatione vero a Majestate cum majoritis, Modesty shows it
self well in the reprehension of the Minorites, but Majesty shows it self
better in the reformation of the Majorites. I add some Counsels:

1. He that will give God his due in Religion, Counsels.
must be exceeding careful to make him, 1. The object, and 2. The appointer of
our Worship; it is said, Revel. 9.20. That they worshipped Devils, not because
they served them, but because they followed their suggestions in the devised
way of serving God.

2. An afflicted estate had need of Religion to sustain it, a prosperous state
to perfect it in the end, and to moderate in the way, because therefore
Religion is to God alone, and the manifestation of it unto man; let men be 1.
well grounded in it. 2. well resolved of it, and 3. very zealous for it, what
times soever they are wherein we live.

3. Things are not therefore comely and orderly because they are done of
custom, or commanded by authority, but are therefore both used and commanded
(lawfully) because they are comely and orderly; yet if either Custom commend,
or Authority command things that are such indeed, wise, godly, and peaceable
men should hold themselves (even therefore) the more bound unto them.

4. Church-religion, and Chamber-religion toward God he regards not, if it be
not accompanied in the house and streets with loving kindness and mercy, and
all goodness toward men.

5. Some wear Religion for ornament only, that is naught, and of them that
have it for use, some are led by custom, some by admiration of some persons,
passion guides some, appearance others: without due examination men had best,
1. not leave Religion lightly, 2. Not further in any particular then we needs
must. 3. Not at all, in the things which God has blessed to our spiritual
good.

6. Disputations in Religion are sometimes needful, but always dangerous;
because (usually) they draw the best spirits away from the heart and life, into
the head and tongue: take heed of venturing nothing but words in your voyage to
Heavenward.

7. To love differences with any about Religion is a hateful thing,
wantonness, affectation of singularity, contempt, ostentation of wit, envy at
superiors, gratifying men with things not meet to be done; are usual
companions of such a man.

8. Religion has to do with these sorts of men most commonly.

1. The feeble, such as Nicodemus, with whom yet how our Savior dealt is to be
seen, Joh. 3.3.

2. The inconstant, such as would know every thing, but are unsteady and
wavering, Ephesians. 4.14.

3. The examining questionists, they must be awed with commands of practice,
Luke 18.22, 23.

4. The Talkeative.

5. The Reviling.

6. The Presumptuous.

It was once objected unto Erasmus, Est mihi meus admodum catholica, sed
stomacuri habeo plene Lutheranum. 2 Selfe-politicall.
eating flesh upon a Fishday, that that was not like a Catholic; to which he
answered presently, My mind is very popish and Catholic, but my Stomach is
Lutheran clearly, I love no Fish; we have such Religious men too many.

Secondly, great care must be taken concerning your self Political, that is
to say, your fundamental Laws and constitutions. It is not to no purpose the
Mulcts and punishments, Goales, Gallows, and such things are ordained; for
hereby evil men are restrained, and the good live quietly among those that aue
not so; if the War make Thieves, then Peace must help to hang them, Lex a
ligando diciter, the Law must bind men, vel legendo, because men must read
them; Read them, where? even in their execution, there they are best read. When
God wrote Laws, his order was to write a Ceremonial Law for sins expiation,
and a judicial Law for sins punishment. Sen. ep. 67.
True it is, that Politus and liberalis homo sibi lex esset; a good man, every
such a man should be a Law unto himself, and I know that of Seneca well,
Inestimabile bonum est suum esse, it is a royal thing to be really a man's
own; yet I say, let the Law be regarded and reverenced, Homo dirigibilis in
deum, and bonum common est subjectum legis canonicae, says the Lawyer; now
say I, But how shall this man be directed without a rule, and that rule is the
Law Divine, in things of the soul, therefore David, Psalm 119.126. It is time
for thee Lord to lay to thine hand, for they have made void thy Law: and the
Law humane in things of the body; excellent is that of Austin on the 76. Psalm.
10. The residue of wrath shall thou restrain. Austin says, In ipsis in probis
dum, formidato supplicio, frenater facultas, invocato Deo savator voluntas;
this is the excellency of the thing, that while the outward man is restrained
by the fears of man, the inward man is also healed by prayer to God. Here then
I would have marked first Law-giving, I would have marked with this distinction:

1. To the disobedient for a rod the Law is given, Lex dator. 1 Duris infla^
gellum.
to which purpose that of 1 Timothy 1.9. The Law is made for the lawless and
disobedient, for the ungodly, and for sinners, for unholy and profane, etc. If
thou do that which is evil be afraid, for he bears not the sword in vain,
for he is the Minister of God, a revenger, to execute wrath upon him that does
evil. Romans 13.4.

2. To the proficient for a rule, Psalm. 119.105. 2 Proficientibus in
paedagogiam.
Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path. He that in
Divinity thinks to make the Gospel a refuge, must make the Law a rule; and he
that in humanity thinks to be safe in protection, must live also under the
Laws direction.

3. To the perfect for a reward, The Commandment is not grievous to us, 1 Jo.
5.3. Such men say with David, Oh how I love thy Law, 3 Perfectioribus in
selatium.
Psalm. 119.97. that is, O Lord, judge thou how I love it by this, it is my
meditation day and night: Qui diligit legem, ex voluntate facit, quae sibi sunt
imperata. Infirmity is sometimes the Mother of Virtue, impunity always the
Nurse of vices.

2. That it be considered whether there ought not to be some additionall Laws,
we have many for errors in practice, but none at all for errors in Doctrine;
nay, wise men say, That it is more safe a great deal to be erroneous,
seditious, or schismatic then to reprove such; and indeed there is a
fearful kind of modesty now amongst men, they blush to help to bear out
godliness, and to stand for truth; but i will entreat them to consider, that
Inutilis and mortuus equiperantur in lege, an unprofitable man and a dead man
the Law holds both alike, truly this world is nothing else; nay, give me leave
to say, our Kingdom, our City, Non ad rationem sed ad similitudinem vivimus,
inde ista tanta coacervatie, aliorum super alios ruentium, Sen. Devit. beata.
our very Houses are nothing else but Islands of dreams, Non ad rationem, sed
ad similitudinem vivimus, says he well, Reason is not the rule of our lives,
but example and conformity of our selves to others, which is the cause of so
many falling one upon another, and dividing one from another. When Luther began
the great work of Reformation, Albertus Crancius a Bishop, (a man friend
enough to Luther, but hopeless^ of a success in that business) said these
words unto him: Frater, Frater, abi in cellam tuam, and ibi dic miserere mei
Deus: Brother, Brother, go into thy Cell, and do no more but sigh, and say,
Lord have mercy on me: I pray God we have not yet cause to say so one to
another, Ministers are divided, and Magistrates, and I hear wise men say, That
the better part of our Magistrates now either are neutrall, or inclining to the
worser part; but courage, Michol. irasiter sed Deus delectater etc. a Greg. ad
loc.
Right Honorable, and you ye Senators too, I say to you as heretofore the
Father said on that place, 2 Samuel 6.21, 22. Here Is good sport indeed; Michol is
very angry for that, for which God is well pleased; if any be so among us, let
them so be, it is good sport to see men angry for that which pleases God. To
conclude this point therefore, I find an Edict of Justinian which goes thus,
Monicheo in loc. Romans apprehenso etc. Cod. lib. 1. tit. 5.
If a Manichee be taken in any place of Rome let his head be chopped off; a harsh
censure you will say, but mark the reason, Because says he, whatsoever is done
against Religion, is done to the injury of all men. I know it will be objected,
I, this is that which you would have to persecute the Saints. I give answer,
Three Emperors together made a Law, That it should not be lawful for any of
the Clergy to receive Tithes, Rents, etc. Saint- Jerome writing to Nepotian,
says thus of it, It grieves not me, says he, that the Emperors made such a
Law, but that the Priests by their covetousness deserved it; I am loath a Law,
such a Law should be made, but more loath good men should deserve it as they do.

3. Heed must also be taken unto our selfe-Ecclesiasticall, that is, 3
Selfe-Ecclesiasticall.
Doctrine and Discipline, and those two they are like the Corn and the Hedge,
both needful; some Doctrine is that which the Apostle calls for, and
fore-tells that The time will come (we may say, The times are come) when they
will not endure it, but after their own lusts shall they heap to themselves
teachers, having itching ears, 2 Timothy 4.3. and for Discipline, our Lord has
left Keys in some-bodies power, at some-bodies Girdle, that Scripture holds
clearly forth such a thing, Matthew. 18.16, 17. Now those within are to be
judged, 1 Cor. 5.12. Potestas. 1. Concionalis. 2 Judicialis.
Et jus excommunicandi non est penes quemvis privatum, sed hoc jus pertinet ad
totam ecclesiam? is the rule among Divines, there is a power of
Excommunicating, and it belongs to the whole Church. Again, there is potostas
clavium, which is, conscionalis, belonging to Preachers only, and judicialis,
belonging to the Presbitery; when Moses gave the charge to the Levites to kill
every man his Brother, and every man his Neighbor; And the children of Levi
did according to the word of Moses, and there fell of the people that day about
three thousand men. The Father says well on that, Exodus 32, 28. Moses says
he, Causum Dei apud populum gladiis, causam populi apud Deum precibus. Greg. ad
loc.
a gallant man, etc. He pleads Gods cause to the people-ward with the sword,
and the peoples cause to Godward with his prayers. For Discipline in the
Church of God, and its execution orderly I mark these four things:

1. According to the former distinction, let the Minister by preaching shut the
Kingdom of Heaven against impenitent sinners, and open it wide unto all them
who humble themselves; let also the Governors exercise the judicial part.

2. Without the consent of some Church let no man be Excommunicated, yea I
add, If it be a small Church, and not consisting of many learned and skillful
men, Excommunication ought not to be done, except the neighbor Churches be
asked counsel of, Zanch. in 4. praec. 756.

3. He that is to be cast out Communi Presbyterorum consensu, Zanc. vide in 4.
praec. 756.
thus by a common consent of the Presbytrie, is to be cast out in the name of
the whole Church, and by the authority of God.

4. The manifest consent of the whole Church is required, Frustra enim ejicitur
ex Ecclesiae, and consortio fidelium privater quem populus abigere, and a quo
abstinere recuset; that is, In vain is he cast out of the Church, whom the
Church casts not out, though in such cases where the consent of the Church
cannot be had: To the execution of this Discipline, every Pastor and Professor
ought to take heed, that he have no fellowship with the works of darkness,
but rather reprove them, yea, they ought to excommunicate them negatively, who
should be, but are not, excommunicate positively, Virga dominationis, and virga
discretionis, Ruper. l. 8. in Mat. 10.

I have some Counsels here.

That the things in our way of the Church, Counsels.
yet in doubt and uncleered, be all of them thoroughly discussed; as namely,
whether the Fathers, being visible professors, have right to the second, as
well as their children (under the notion of the children of such) have right to
the first Sacrament? And why any man should be suspended from any one, not
being before excommunicated from all Ordinances? what infection is caught, and
why more by men in the company of the wicked at the Sacrament, than at the
Word, prayer, or the like, and other such?

2. That our notions and distinctions used in preaching, be not made use of to
veil but reveal truths, Distinctionibus utendum est, non ad velandum sed
revelandum ut ubi obsourior loquendo, ibi distioguendo clarior and apertior
fuit veritas, aliter non distinguiter sed extinguiter.
least instead of distinguishing, we come to extinguishing at last, as we have
already done. The true worshippers of Jesus Christ in the service of him, do
willingly relinquish their greater part, that is, their reason, for spiritual
things, are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.15. and the Spirit is to be served
in spirit, Joh. 4.24. when the Gods were entertained in the old man's cottage,
and he was bid ask what he would, Nothing at all (says he) but this, That my
cottage may be a Temple, and I a Priest to do you service there. Such prayers
made such practice.

3. I do not think, nor ever yet could be brought to do, that there is any new
light to be looked for, there may be a better managing of the old, prophecies
indeed are now accomplished, which heretofore were not, and so the helps are
more then were, Curiositas reos facit non peritos, Curiosity makes men rather
guilty than skillful; that of Solomon I think would be expounded, Eccles. 1.9.
No new thing under the Sun, and that propounded to men in these times, Psalm.
39.6. Man walks in a vain shadow, they are disquieted, and disquiet in
vain, the people might be more profitably taught, to walk in their old than
wait for new light.

4. Self-denial, self-submitting, much meekness, a spirit like David's, O let
not that precious balm break mine head, a frame of heart like those that
heard Peter, with readiness to do whatsoever is commanded, Acts 10.33. were
worth all; It is our hatred of reformation, which makes us so unwilling to
stoop to the yoke of our Lord Jesus Christ: There is a seeming contradiction
in the Scriptures, but it is but a seeming one, some presenting to us a
mavelous ease in the yoke of Christ, and a lightness in his burden; and
others a mavelous difficulty. It is thus reconciled, Heaven and grace are
both the most easy and the most hard that can be, they are most easy to the
soul which will be taught of God, and will not resist his method by attending
their own wisdoms. But to others they are matters of great difficulty: to God
all things are possible, to flesh and blood, to the wit and will of man, to the
freedom of our own choice, nothing is so impossible. I remember the answer of
a Philosopher to a great Prince, who had been his scholar, and was
discontented at him for publishing his books, Be content, Sir, says he, my
books are published, and not published, none are ere the wiser for them, but
those to whom they were read and made evident, so may be said of this mystery
of our Lord Jesus Christ.

4. Care must be taken also of the self-Oecanonicall, 4. Self-oecanonicall.
or family self, that is to be regarged, the house is, Quotidiana societas,
our quotidian company, our every day guests are th^^^, House what?
elsewhere we are but as strangers, as for a time here we stand bound to take
care of the earthly, spiritual house, yea, and an eternal one too, your
servants are entrusted with your goods, and you are entrusted with their
souls; Those families whose resolution is like Joshuahs, I and mine household
will serve the living God, Josh. 24.15. their religion will be like his too.
Many houses here in London look like the Devils Chapels. Where are your
servants on Fast days and Thanksgiving?
Austine of his time says thus, Is there any that yet mock at Jesus Christ, I
would there were (says he) but one, O that there were but two, O that they
could be numbered. The Physician has an axiom, it is this, Catechizing.
Caput malum, est caput omnium malorum, an evil head is the head of all evil;
Masters and fathers if they look not to promote grace and godliness in their
houses, and in the hearts of theirs, out thence is sent furniture for the
Alehouses, illhouses, Goales, and Gallows, too too too often. The Apostle
says, Col. 4.15. Commend me to Nymphas, and the Church in his house. Here when
Masters, Parents, Servants, children, keep house together in the fear of God,
walking in ways of heaven, hereafter also they come to keep house together in
the House of many houses eternally. See ye therefore I pray ye:

1. Catechizing to be regarded, a duty that we in these times have no thoughts
of, yet Abraham's christianity was hereby characterized, For I know him, that he
will command his children and his household after him, Genesis 18.19. Moses gave it
in charge, Deuteronomy. 6.6, 7. The Psalmist practices it, Come children, hearken to
me, I will teach you the fear of the Lord, Psalm. 34.11. When our Lord spoke
unto Peter, that John 21.19. Simon, love thou me? three times over, at length
the command is given, and what is it, Feed my sheep, feed my lambs, to signify
unto us, that lambs also belong to the sheepfold of Jesus Christ. You shall
find a servant sent about his Masters business, Genesis 24. and a great
business too, namely, to take a wife for his Masters Son, and he begins his
work with prayer, ver. 12. Lord God of my Master Abraham, send me good speed,
and he ends it with prayer, ver. 27. Blessed be the Lord God of my Master
Abraham. Out of what family came this servant, but out of Abraham's? out of a
catechized family, see ver. 63. and you shall find a Son out of the same
family, going into the fields to meditate, observe it then, That Sons and
servants out of catechized families, go about their business meditating and
praying; but others out of rude and uncatechized families, go about theirs, I
fear, swearing, drinking, cursing, etc.

2. Masters and fathers of families must have care to get custody of, Adviros
pertinet virtute vincere, and exemplo regere foeminas. Aug. l. 2. c. 8.
to keep custody of, yea, to recover the custody of, in case it should be
lost; of, I say, 1. Authority. Now two places are in Scripture to this purpose,
1 Pet. 3.7. to dwell with the wife, according to knowledge, and not like a sot,
a fool, and 1 Timothy 4.12. be an example in word, in conversation, in charity,
in etc. this, this is that way for men to have, keep, and recover their
authority, 1. maintaining their authority to direction, Memento semper quod
padisi colonum de possessione sua, Mulier ejecerit. Hieron. ad Nepot. Ambr. ep.
l. 5.33. Maxim observate vos, etc. ab uxoris concitationibus, etc. per hanc in
ultimo supplamare Job, visne est diab^lus. Orig. in Job lib. 2.
and 2. by managing it unto good example.

2. Orderly knowledge, and that is knowledge of the right object, that is,
Jesus, made of the Father, wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and
redemption, 1 Cor. 1.30. 2. Knowledge in the properties, pure, peaceable,
gentle, easy to be entreated, full of mercy and good fruits, Jam. 3.17. 3.
Knowledge in the School thereof, namely, begotten in and by the public
Ministry, 1 Cor. 4.15. 4. Knowledge in the end thereof, namely, a pious and
sincere practice, such knowledge I would have kept in our houses.

3. Casting quite out of the family, affectations, prating, popularity, or
boasting, out of the house, I say, and the heart too (if possible) of all
those, in whose religion we would have comfort. As the stately rivers, which
(being very deep) pass along silently, with a still and stately stream, so
are truly wise men, they are such, the shallow brooks beating against sand and
stones, make a great noise indeed, but have no depth, so are they which trouble
the whole world with their garrulity, that unruly evil, The tongue, James
says, is full of deadly poison, James 3.1.

Some counsels I give here to our talking ones.

1. Too much good tongue is in other things vanity, Counsels.
in diverse things profanation, Paul's speech was not with enticing words of
man's wisdom, 1 Cor. 2.3.

2. Some persuade, some are persuaded, but if there be not judgment going
before, the former do deceive, and the latter suffer it, a wise man follows
reason, and not passion, Romans 14.5.

3. The more low people are (commonly) the more loose their tongues are, Vt
quisque abjectissimus est ita solutissimum a linguae. Sen.
therefore see and be wise in quietness and confidence, ( silentio and spe)
shall be your strength, Esaias 30.15.

5. Heed must be taken to the self of selves, our consciences I mean: One of
the good old fashioned Puritans, wrote a book and called it, Christian see to
thy conscience. Paul's Religion is, I have hope toward God, that there shall be
a resurrection of the dead, both of the just and unjust, And herein do I
exercise my self, to have always a conscience void of offense toward God and
toward men, Acts 24.15, 16. this, this is it that is the Index judex carnifex,
of which the Apostle says, Friar and the Shoemaker.
If our heart condemn us not, then have we boldness toward God, 1 John 3.21.
The Friar had cozened the credulous Shoo-maker of a pair of Shoes, the maker
dies, but the wearer lives to wear that which he never paid for; some years
pass, and at last to the conscience of the Friar it comes, and he comes to
make restitution, inquires for him, and receiving answer, That he was dead,
Dead, says he, he is alive to me, I am sure. This, O this, is the continual
feast, Prove. 15.15. this is the Book, Lycurgus Plutarch.
Rev. 20.12. I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God, and the books
were opened. Lycurgus was chosen King of the Macedonians, King, I say, if his
brother the dead King, left not his wife with child; the Queen is so, and
sends Letters privately to the King Elect, that if he le gratify her, she will
take a course the child shall never crouble him, Scientiae multvm parum
conscientiae.
for which he gives her thanks, and promises recompense, but with all
desires the child may be borne, and then he can find ways to destroy him;
borne he is, and brought to Lycurgus, who kisseth, crowns, and proclaims
him, choosing rather to lose a Kingdom than a good conscience. The science (men
tell me) in the days we live in, is exceeding great, the good wine kept till
now, the Gospel glimpses were never so lovely, the Temple is full of the
smoke of the glory of God, old men dream dreams, young men see visions, etc.
All this I rejoice in, and will rejoice; But what means then this bleating of
the sheep, in mine ears? and the lowing of the oxen which I hear? I come no
where almost, where I find not complaints, for want of conscience, let me
therefore say a word or two to this auditory, in behalf thereof, conscience is
too sullen to be among such as cannot endure to be sorrowful for sin,
conscience is it self a book, whereof all other books are but Expositions,
our knowledge in them serves only to inform us in this, or else we read them
to no purpose. Conscience is that which teaches Lawyers best to plead their
own Cause, Praise of conscience.
and Judges to judge of themselves and for others aright; Conscience is a thing
so divine, and has such familiar acquaintance with God, that it will tell you
(being often asked) whether God be with you, or against you, whether he be
friend or foe: Of all news the most soule-refreshing, and sin-suppressing
tidings, conscience is the best counselor to a christian, when he is alive,
and the best comforter when a man is dead, yea, the best executor of his will
and testament; conscience is the comfort of faith, truth and uprightness, and
the ship wherein we carry that great venture of the Mystery of godliness.

One word more.

1. Mark well that Scripture, Jer. 23.23. Am I a God at hand, says the Lord,
and not a God a far off? a God, our God is every where, and conscience is,
Concludens scientia, conscience is a concluding science, accusing and excusing
are all from conscience; if awaken, and if not, the judgment is the greater,
Job 13.26. we read, Thou writest bitter things against me, and make me to
possess the iniquities of my youth, This is an heavy thing, when God comes
near a man thus, For it is fearful not to forget that God remembers all my
sins, Hos. 7.2.

2. He that would punish an evil conscience, Judas ipse Iudae sit accusator.
Aug. ad loc.
let him but only leave it to it self, Mat. 27.3. Judas himself is Judas his
accuser; the working of conscience in hell, is set forth by a worm that never
dies, weeping, and why? for not being in Heaven, for being in Hell, because
they are with devils there, the worst of all bad company; if they would cry to
God and Jesus, yet none would hear, none would pity; and they gnash their
teeth, against whom? themselves the acters, the devils the inticers, and
others the provokers unto sin; this is accuser, judge, executioner indeed.

3. He that has no conscience, or at least no use thereof, what shall be said
to him? when Joseph was intised, his answer was, Genesis 39.9. How shall I do this
great wickedness, and sin against the Lord? Here is to see the workings of a
tender conscience; on the contrary, where there is none or a seared conscience,
see the effect, Luke 16.14. the Pharisees who were covetuous heard all these
things, and they derided him. Timor Dei janitrix animae, Fear of God, and a
soft heart, keep out thousands of sins, which other men commit with
greediness.

4. He that has a good conscience, O what boldness has he toward God and
man. Paul says to the Hebrews, Heb. 13.18. Pray for us, and mark the reason,
for we trust we have a good conscience in all things, willing to live honestly.
What would our Apostle have? precious men their precious prayers, the duty God
has put upon him, and the continual danger in execution thereof, engage him
to require these things, why then would he have it? I am a man that desire,
yea, deserve prayers from you; I have a good conscience, and who would not sue
to God in that supplication, O Lord save all the good conscioned men in the
world. Nay, Paul has a good conscience in all things, a rare president; many
make conscience of nothing, many of many things, but the rest they slight, and
sin in not a few; few make conscience of all things, lesser, greater, how
therefore shall this appear? he is willing to live honestly, not compelled so
to do, by fear, gain, etc. and willing to live so in all things, for some
refer that hither, howsoever it is, you here see the glory of a gracious
conscience. O take heed to the self of your selves. Theodoricus, (...). etc.
one of the Emperors of Rome was an Arrian, and one of his Courtiers desiring
to ingratiate himself with his Master, forthwith became an Arrian also, leaving
his former way of Religion? the Emperor hearing of it, strait commands his
head to be chopped off, and gives this reason, If, says he, he will not keep
his faith to God, how will he keep his conscience toward man? I would all
those that are siding time-servers to every faction, would learn this.

The second Use which I am to make of this Doctrine, 2. Use. Reason of take
heed.
is to give a reason of all these take heeds, for I am to speak reason unto
rational men; nay, I am to speak Religion, which is reason refined; Division
brings desolation probably, and very often, That Is enough; but there is yet
more to engage us, division brings desolation certainly, if not foreseen,
repented, prevented, Chrysostom.
that is more. Chrysostom said once, If his pulpit were the highest mountain,
his voice like the voice of an Archangell, and his audience the whole world, he
would choose a text for himself and his time. And so would I for my self and
our times, and it should be such a one as this I have chosen, Take heed of
being divided amongst your selves, or against your selves. Desolation is in
such cases nearer than we are aware of, there are degrees of the neernesse of
ruin and desolation. Neerenesse of mine.
That ground which bears thorns and thistles, is rejected, and is nigh to
cursing, Heb. 6.8. nigh, very nigh it, Salvation is far from the wicked,
says David, and how far? as far as they are from it, and the ways
thereof, and that is far enough. Now If I should say, A Kingdom, City, or
house divided, are near to ruin, and in probability like to fall one upon
another, how shall this be proved? By a gradation from our Saviors Argument.

1. If any one of these be divided against it self.

2. But if two of these be so divided. Spiritual Geography.


3. If then all of these be divided.

4. And if more than all the Church too begin to be divided, then desolation is
near, and nearer than secure men are aware of. But me thinks I see amongst us
such Divisions as these:

1. In Causes; when Gregory the seventh differed so long with the Emperors,
both pretend it is for Religion, and it makes the difference a great deal the
more irrecoverable.

2. In Principles, for the Fundamentalls are destroyed, and Conversion,
Repentance, Charity, Duty neglected, in stead whereof, Notion and nothingnesse.

3. In Assumptions. Most Preaching is not sound Doctrine, most men regard not
Preaching, but such, ergo most men must needs be deceived and divided.

4. In Judgments; we judge not aright of enemies who they are, nor aright of
enmities, what they are; nor yet aright of excellencies what they are.

Then comes Desolation, this ushers it in; What becomes first desolate by
divisions?
and if any ask me desolation of what? Paul answers, The desolation at
Corinth, how came it, and what became desolate? their very best things,
Preaching became an empty thing, when one said, I am of Paul, and I of Apollo,
and I of Cephas, 1 Cor. 1.12. Men may cry up servants so long till they forget
the Master, and consider not in whose name they were Baptized, and who was
Crucified for them, and so did they, verse 13. their Communions began to be
desolate: Paul says of them himself, This is not to eat the Lords Supper, 1
Cor. 11.20. There is a Prophecy, Esaias 3.5. The people shall be oppressed every
one by another, and every one by his neighbor; the Child shall behave
himself proudly against the ancient, and the base against the Honorable; and
what then, verse 8. Jerusalem is ruined, and Judah is fallen: this truth fits
our time, the King will have a new-fashioned Altar, 2 King. 16.14.15. such a
one as he had seen at Damascus, and the Priest will build him one, if he will
have it so; the observation the ancient made thereupon was Erexit Altar, See
Aug. Ad hoc.
versus altar; now there is Altar against Altar in Israel, Is there so in
England too? Pulpit against Pulpit, Preacher against Preacher, it is an ill
sign, Am^^ 6.11. God has smitten the great house with breaches, and the less
house with clefts; nay, their hearts are divided, now shall they be found
faulty, He shall break down their Altars, and he shall spoil their Images,
for now they shall say, We have no King because we feared not the Lord, What
company he must have with him which means to come by his own.
what then should a King do to us, Hos. 10.2, 3. We have spirits amongst us,
the good Lord calm them; such as Melancthon spoke of in his time, of whom if
you mean to get any thing you must come furnished with a Divine and a Lawyer,
yea, and a Soldier too, or else go home empty. When men prove errouns it is a
great wonder if they turn not turbones; unfaithful men are for the most part
unreasonable men, and the unright in judgment turbulent. 1 Right of
Parliament. 2 King. 3 Subject.
There is a threefold right which our eyes are on here in England, the right
of Parliament, the right of King, and the right of Subject; we said in the
beginning of these Wars, and we said truly, That the former and the latter
could not be preserved unless the other, the Kings Right and Prerogative were
pared a little, that it might not prove too redundant and burdensome: Was this
a good rule for Kings? and why not for Subjects? 1 Right Parliamentory. 2
Independent 3 Presbyterian.
Let us try a little, there is now the right Parliamentary, the Independent
right, and the Presbyterian, they that sit at Helm are able to Judge whether
the two latter had not both need to be cut, that the former may grow the
better. I only press the reason of all these Take heeds, and leave the use to
the Lords blessing.

The third use gives a direction to take heed, 3 Use, direction to take heed.
our great Prophet would have no man plead ignorance, and therefore has laid
down an order, wherein we shall do well to observe him; for, He is the God of
order and not of confusion; and we are then likest him when we do things in an
orderly way. They wrote a profitable Book once, and called it as it was,
Londons Survey; a great help to many men for many purposes; Here is a Survey
of our Divisions, taken by the skill of the Master Builder himself, wherein as
in a Map may be seen what it is that troubles our Israel, and yet makes us
afraid. First, our Kingdom Divisions, what are they?

1. The Wolf and the Lamb lie down together, our people are divided about
this, they say, They are Wolves still, and not so much as musled; yet men are
divided in their opinions about this, and do not know what to say or think.
One of the Civilians, in my hearing, once in his Speech at a Visitation said,
envying against the conscientious Non-conformists, Some of these Dogs must be
tied up, and some hanged up, said he, the Gentleman lives now in Town, and
has his liberty; such spirits are indeed conjured down by Parliament Magic,
but the sin is but pocketed, not mortified.

2. Our Worship of God now adays is just like that, 2 King. Exscind^inum, sed
abscondit peccatum etc. Lactan.
17.28, 33. They feared the Lord, and served their own gods, the men of
Babylon made one god, and the men of Cuth another, verse 30. We have two ways
of Praying, Marrying, Preaching, Baptizing; the Ministers drop away apace out
of London: But it is no matter, say many, the Clerks of London (most of them of
the right stamp) find out Curates enough to do the Work which came lately
from Oxford.

3. Our people say now as heretofore they in Jud. 21.16. Pity, how?
How shall we do for Benjamin our brother? If a man ask them, Why would you
have them pitied; they presently give in answer that 2 Chronicles. 28.10. Ye
purpose to keep under the children of Judah and Jerusalem for Bondmen, and
Bond-women unto you, but are there not with you, even with you sins against
the Lord your God? I would have the State deal with those men, as God does
with poor sinners in his dealings with them, so they shall be merciful as
their heavenly Father is merciful, and that is the rule; he restraines a toto,
altogether, when he hinders the sin, True restreint what? 1. a toto. 2. a
tanto.
all of it; so was Joseph restrained, he restraines a tanto, in part, when
though there be desire, resolution, preparation, process, and the like, yet
God keeps from extremity; desire, resolution, etc. may yet live, it may be
less actions destructive be strangled; twenty City discentions, and
differences, what are they? Essentials of a well-governed City.
Famous Cities of old had these things, which they made much of, their
Husbandry, Artificers, Militia, Merchandise, their Priesthood, and their
Judicature; these were thought Essentialls, and indeed they were so, they are
so; your Associated Counties have filled your Sacks with Corn by the good hand
of God, Kent was a little wild once, but God reclaimed them; your Artificers
begin now a little to hold up their heads, your Militia has been the Gallantry
and envy of England, this very day remembers me of Nubury Battle, but your
Ministry decays, it decays exceedingly, London had never more need of, nor
less care for a good Ministry. Some men say, It is superstitious to pay
Tithes; our people say, better a great deal to turn their Tithes into Gifts
and Oblations, and then they are offered at another Shrine. Let no man, I
beseech you, curse your Judicatories, for want of justice doing to all.

1. Counsels.
Let God speak one word to you, and mark it well; For the transgression of
Jacob is all this, and for the sins of the house of Israel, Micah 1.5. All
this, all which? see verse 4. the Mountains are molten, and the Valleys cleft;
What is the transgression of Jacob, is it not Samaria? And what are the high
places of Judah, are they not Jerusalem? A strange kind of speaking, Samaria
and Jerusalem are the great places, the great sins; London and Westminster
are so, the Idolatry of England, the evil example of England, the poison of
places. O amend your ways, your Manna-loathing, your giddy-headednesse, yea
Londoners, for fear you make God and good men weary of you.

2. Let me speak another word to you, it is but a word or two, Magistratui
cives, Magistratus legibus, till the people obey their Governors, and till
they obey the Laws, no good will be done. Boni domo, malus civis.
Every good man is not presently a good Citizen; you say, Keep thy Shop, and
it will keep thee; I say, Keep your Laws, and they will keep you. The two
great Ordinances of Magistracy and Ministry have been the envy of wicked men
in all Ages of the world. Austin says, There were three great sins,
Idolatry, Exodus 32. punished with the Sword, the burning of the Roll, Jerem.
36.23. punished with Captivity, but Division, Numb. 16. in Corah, Dathan, and
Abiram, punished with the Earths dividing and swallowing them up.

3. Our House-Dissention, what? O what not? Father against the Son, Son
against the Father; Husband against Wife, House Dissensions.
Wife against Husband; and indeed a man's enemies are those of his own
Household. The Canonists have one rule, Omne malum a sacerdotibus, no evil that
comes not from the Priests: and Luther has another very blunt, but very true,
Nunquam periclitater religio infiniter reverendissimus, Religion never comes
into greater danger than among the right Reverend; Preaching advised, devised.
whether the Priest be most, or the people most in fault he cannot tell; one
thing I know, that what the Apostle says is true, There are that creep into
houses, and lead Captive silly women laden with diverse lusts, ever learning,
and never learned. I think things will never go well till we of the Ministry
be by Ordinance as from God, so from man enjoined to preach all our errors,
without partiality Truth-ward, all our Heresies whatsoever Hell-ward, all our
own sheep (if we have any) to Repentance, Obedience, and Duty-ward; and all
other men's sheep either stolen, or stragled to their own Fold-ward again, so
shall we pray for ours, as the Christians heretofore for their government.

The fourth Use will inform us, Use 4. Christ mistaken.
That here is to be seen Jesus Christ in a mistake indeed, where is he not so
to be seen; I meet him so almost in every place, in not a few Pulpits great
mistakes, and fundamental, never more Hay, Stubble and Straw built upon the
foundation than now; this must be amended also. He said to the purpose, That
Optima Respublica quae maxim legis, minime rhetores audit, If it be the best
Commonwealth that obeyes rather than disputes, I think it will be found also
the best Church that does so. It will be a good warning to let the people know
that there may be much mistaking about truth; therefore observe:

1. The Lord Jesus cannot be divided, a truth to which the Apostle sets to his
testimony, 1 Cor. 1.12. why then if they shall say unto me, Behold, he is in
the Desert, I Will not go forth, behold, he is in the secret Chambers, I will
not believe it, Matthew. 24.26. I will even resolve to seek him where I have
found him, and that is even walking in such public Ordinances as these in the
midst of the seven golden Candlesticks, Rev. 1.13. No greater deceit can be
obtruded upon a man, then to set him to seek there for a thing where we know
it is not, or where (indeed he is not) though we did not know the same. Juggling
about Antichrist just as about Christ.
How is the Jew deceived in his Messia? How the Turk in his Mahomet? but even
so. The type of Antichrist is in Daniel, himself in John, now the Papists
seek for himself in Daniel where his type is, and in John where himself is;
they are afraid to seek him for fear to find him. Counsels.
I would not have us to deal so in seeking for Jesus Christ; in the public
ordinances, He has bin found of those that sought him to their comfort, and to
their conversion. To send a people to look him where he is not, for fear they
should find him were a sad sin to be guilty of; I did never think, nor yet
do, that he is rather to be found in the private than in the public meetings;
nor that he is at all to be found in many of those places which the people are
made to believe are better than Church-meetings.

2. The Devil and Sin cast out both one way.
There are not two ways of casting out Beelzebub; What, does Satan cast out
Satan? Does the Independent cast him out one way, and the Presbyterian another
way? Indeed all our work in the Ministry is nothing but to cast out Devils,
for every sin is a devil, and every Minister is or ought to be a man
endeavoring i^ the strength of Jesus Christ to cast out these Devils out of
himse^^^ others, and all the people of God; It is a work that has been done
heretofore, and the dispossessed have given thanks therefore to God. So then,
as our Lord asks one question, so I Will ask another; he asks, By whom did
your children cast him out? As our fathers served Christ, so must we in this
particular.
and I ask, By whom did our Fathers cast him out? Paul excellently, F^^ though
you have ten thousand instructers in Christ, yet have you not so many fathers,
for in Christ Jesus I have begotten you through the Gospel. Are they now then
become your enemies because they did you good? Take heed you do not cast off
your Preachers, their old precepts, and your old practisings, till at length
you grow from something to nothing; those whom God has honored with the
conversion of many, are scarce honored now with the company of any; of any, I
say, no body almost to hear them. None of those who must acknowledge, even
them to be the instruments of Gods mercy to them.

3. The work; the very business of Jesus Christ, is the destroying of the
works of the Devil, so says the Apostle, 1 John 8.8. Hear ye then and be
not proud, for surely God has spoken this thing, our Ministry and our
Government, while they are acting so to destroy the works of the Devil, they
act with Christ, and they act for Christ, and Christ will doubtless
(whatsoever foolish men say) act with them, and act for them. Let us therefore
give up our selves to this service, let us make this our business, God has
made it so, and resolve to say with Bernard, Nitius me privares amaro mors,
vitae meae usu quam fructu, it were better to lose life it self than the
purpose to which God intended it. There are two great Works of the Devil to
be acted against in our sins.

1. Decrease of duty must be acted against, Our public concerning Duties, our
Fasts fail, Alehouses and Tavernes about London take more money on those
days then they do till such days come again almost, some of them have
bragged so. Cui bonites sive De^, ui Deus si^^ Christo. Tert. Sins merese.
certainly if duty fail as it has done, and does daily, we shall all fail
with it. I hear some say, I^le sing no Psalms at home, or at Church either,
unless I be sure they be all Saints I sing with; I hear others say: I Will not
Catechize my children, for fear I should make Hypocrites of them. Whence came
this Doctrine forth? Are these indeed the words of truth and soberness?
Heretofore good Christians have found benefit by the old way of duty, and yet
not trusted to it, or any thing but the only to be trusted; For what goodness
is there without a God? and what God ^i^hout a Christ? Heretofore these things
were thought to be the way to the Kingdom, though not the cause of reigning.
Between trusting to a work done, and not doing it when it ought to be done,
is a great difference.

2. Increase of sin must be acted against, increase of all sin, but
especially of such kind of sin and wickedness as becomes a man's sins,
that they are also Gods punishments; because they believed not the Gospel,
because they received not the love thereof, God gave them up to believe a ^ye,
2 Thessalonians. 2.11. If any man shall do his will, he shall know of the Doctrine
whether it be of God or no, Jo. 7.17. These two sins increase mightily amongst
us, the want of love and truth, and the want of practice thereof; under which
two notions indeed the whole of the sin of our time is committed. Between
wit, learning, authority, (...) (...) and (...)
and experience there has been a great question which should be the greatest,
but it was always granted to experience to (...) for it being conversant about
sensible things, and by (...) tained, doubtless it does not so easily err in
the ^bject, as (...) courses and deductions of skill. We have had gracious
experiences of the conversing with, and finding of God in public ordinances,
and of the sweetness that is to be found in the love of practice, and of duty;
if any man have found another, a newer, a nearer way to communion with God; I
do not grudge him his, nor will I (till I see more) be drawn out of mine
own. Prudence among the Ancients had wont to be painted thus; Prudence what?
An Hand full of eyes, with five fingers, long, strong, and very white and
fair; that is to say, Memory, understanding, circumspection, foresight and
execution; if there be prudence amongst us, as I hope there is yet much left,
nor do the prudent keep silence in the gate; I hope we shall remember our
peace, how yet young it is, understand the things that make for it, look about
and see who causes divisions; foresee that which our Lord says will be the
issue, and do execution impartially on the Peace-disturbers.

The fifth Use leads us to see, 5. Use, Direction.
That there is a rule of Condemning Divisions, not all of them, nor
promiscuously are they to be adjudged against, but regularly and with
discretion. Some have said, Cause of all error.
and thought, That the causes of all the errors of our times have been such as
these, mis-application, fallacy, credulity, supine carelessness, and the
cleaving unto antiquity, and authority overmuch, without such disquisitions as
become those that would Try all things, and hold fast that which is good. And
if I should stay a little here, and take these into consideration surely much,
and exceeding much might be said. Men are made up of mis-applications, they are
preached and practiced, if fallacy and sophisme ever would pass for current
reasoning and Religion, surely they are now gilded over to deceive the eyes of
the simple; credulity, such as the wise man hints, The fool believes every
thing is the Idol of the times, and when all these go before, you must needs
think what follows after amongst many men, even a resolved negligence of
every thing till every thing be established; The King of Navarre to Beza.
or if they seem to do or say something, it is but as the King of Navarre
said to Beza, That he would go no further to Sea than he might sleep ashore,
when pleased him; or as the Politician said, He would follow Religion as he
followed a Horse, not too near for fear he should kick, and hurt him: A man's
foolishness brings him into formality, and that into nothing. But this is that
which undoes our times and people, they have false selves, and they have false
Glasses whereinto they look themselves, False selves too truly looked unto.
and a false Glass will not easily show a true face; mark then these
false-selves-following. Men will say, They have a care of all these selves, and
they have a self of Religion. Then for answer:

1. The Self of Religion men speak of so much, 1 Times Self mystically.
it is a Religion without Reformation; I read men as well as books, and hear
men scoff at the great Reformation, at our great Reformers too; but these are
great sensualists, a Generation of men and women, concerning whom our Apostle
is very plain, They speak evil of the things they know not, 2 Pet. 2.12,
That place of the Author to the Hebrews is to be marked diligently, its
design, and the Doctrine therein, as exceeding fit for our times; Reformation.
the first Tabernacle stood only in meats and drinks, and diverse washings,
and carnal ordinances imposed on them, until the time of (Reformation) which
word I hear find only in the New Testament, and may be expounded thus; (...).
till the season of better judging; so then I conclude that till the time, such
a time only, a time of Reformation some things were to continue; who therefore
destroys Reformation, destroys one of Gods designs: speak not against
Reformation. Common Prayer.
And here now for our Book of Common Prayer, men are divided strangely. For:

1. Some ask, Shall we have none of this, and complain that for want of
forms of Baptizing etc. for the Country, their Ministers make but half
Marriage, and commit such whole absurdities in the Baptizing of Infants,
Administration of the Lords Supper, etc. That it grieves some, causes others
to jeere* and shames the Ordinance, and that Solemnity wherewith the things of
God should be performed. The Slavonians seeking to Pope Formosus, that they
might have Service in their own Mother Tongue, Slavonians request.
it was debated in a Counsel, wherein a voice was heard from Heaven, saying,
Let every Spirit praise the Lord, and all Tongues confess him: Whereupon for
that time it was granted. This is found in En. Silvest.

2. Some stubbornely, again say peremptorily, We Will have none but this; in
this we have been brought up; thus our fathers served God; Raboldus.
and as they, so we. The Duke of Frizland, Raboldus by name, about the year of
our Lord 900. being persuaded, as he pretended, to embrace Christianity, as he
went to be baptized, and had the one of his feet in the water, he demanded of
the Bishops, Whether all his forefathers were damned? the Bishops answered,
more rashly then wisely, That they were all damned, whereupon the Duke pulled
back his feet again, saying, Then will I also be damned with them. This was a
resolution scarce becoming a man, much less a wise or noble man. This
division of ours, which every foot gives out a crack of discontent, which makes
a loud noise among our people, I take not upon me to determine any thing in,
Who am I, that I should guide our guiders? only this I say, That were it but
considered, in how many places every Lords day, something is done this way in
not a few parishes, and that not without railing against the Parliament, and
the persuading the people that they live under tyranny and persecution, because
this is withdrawn; how much better were it, either to let us every day be
drawing nearer unto covenanted Uniformity? Covenanted uniformity.
or else to give satisfaction, that what is done this way, is done by a granted
connivency? I must needs confess, I find this a very heavy burden to many,
and some seeing this, and some other pressures, are ready to say, We shall see
the day that the Parliaments friends will be the greatest sufferers, even they
whose zeal caused them to do and speak most in worst times.

2. 2. Selfe-Liberty.
The self of Liberty which men speak of, what is intended, I judge at, but
what is pretended, that I hear, and it is a Gospel liberty, such as wherewith
Christ has manifested us, Gal. 5.1. even the Son of God has made us free,
such a freedom, and under such a purchase at that (on a right and well
grounded persuasion of it) a man would willingly rather loose himself, and
what is his, than the least part of his right and interest in it: Let us
therefore give ear again to our vox populi.

1. In all things.
Liberty in all things! there is a Religion indeed, say some, and they are
scandalized, they sit them down, and say, Is this it I have fought for, says
the Soldier? is this it I have preached for, says the Divine? Sure I was
greatly mistaken, I wrote preached, and prayed for, not libertinisme, we had
too much of that before, but st^ictnesse in Doctrine, Discipline; every way the
reins were too loose before, and to throw them now quite into men's necks, what
will become of this? Gods people are chidden for sparing any of the Heathen,
Jud. 2.3. Must we tolerate all and mingle with them.

2. Liberty in nothing! Here Is a government indeed, In nothing.
tyranny and pesecution this is, and no less, and here I hear men railing at
and envying against the Parliament and Assembly, and who not? as though they
were abridged of some of that their liberty which was borne with them, or
bestowed on them; I hear men exhorted to prepare for sufferings; and one
Doctrine I met withal the other day, pressed strongly, and I thought applied
as strongly, the Doctrine was this, That it was Gods new Testament design,
that his new Testament Saints should patiently suffer under old Testament
counsels and persecutions.

Our liberty, which is temporal, is set down, 1 Cor. 10 29. Liberty.
Temporal.
why is my liberty judged of another man's conscience? there indeed we have a
liberty, and such a one as is best when offense is neither given nor justly
taken thereby.

Our liberty spiritual is held fotth in 1 Pet. 2.16. as free, Spiritual.
and not using your liberty for a cloak of maliciousness, but as the servants
of God, we are rather as free indeed, than altogether so, and yet whom the
Son of God makes free, they must be free indeed, in a rightly understood
freedom.

Our liberty celestial is expressed, Romans 8.21. Celestial.
the creature it self also shall be delivered from the bondage of cor^uption,
into the glorious liberty of the children of God. Now here is liberty truly
complete, and indeed such it is, as is a liberty from sin and causes thereof,
such a liberty in the full, as is there promised in part, where God says, He
will put his people in a place of their own, and the wicked shall trouble them
no more, 2 Samuel 7.10.

I think there is no more but Liberty-carnall, Carnal.
of which a man shall need to read nothing but what he sees some men take
liberty to swear, to drink, to serve God when they will, and how they will,
to refrain public meetings, etc. For which he that will plead, I say of him,
as heretofore Joash said unto all that stood against him, He that will plead
for him, let him be put to death while it is yet morning, Jud. 6.31. Mine
advice therefore in this point is, Forasmuch as this is a very weighty point,
and much, insisted on, a point about which so much division is, and not a
little of it (it may be) such as wherein men fight with shadows rather than
adversaries.

That the liberty be:

1. Deliberated.
Soundly deliberated, by whom? how? why? when? in any cases, to any persons to
be granted, questions fit to be left unto some exactly learned Casuist in
matter of Divinity, and to some subtle Statesman in matter of policy; for by
whom? if the Parliament, then power is in them? how should it be given?

2. Delivered.
Sweetly and meekly delivered, without bitterness, no morosity, it is
unprofitable, it does no good at all, much harm rather, and if delivered, to
whom and on what terms, and under what notion.

3. 3. Self.
The self of Doctrine which men speak of, for they would have teaching too is
a Doctrine yet without Discipline: pleasing things, a Gospel utterly without
the Law, no chastisement, all of love, nothing of fear, constraint is very
unGospell like, men think and say so too, Meliores amor flectit, sed plures
timor, Love bends many, but fear bows more, was the old rule. Against the
light of Doctrine no man will be so bold as to bark; To ask whether light be
pleasant, is a blind man's question; Why most men care for no Discipline.
to ask whether knowledge be sweet, is an ignorant man's question; but to ask
whether divine light is most sweet, is a profane man's question, but no
Discipline. The reason of this, no wise men say to be because the Nobility is
to blame to say no more, and the Gentry filthy, the Clergy flattering, and the
Communalty so exceedingly overwhelmed with profaneness, that they would
willingly go down into the pit, and not be troubled; as if it were an ease to
go to hell easily, or as if the spirit of Satan were got into the sons of men,
that they said to all the means of saving them, as the Devils said to our Lord
Jesus Christ, Why art thou come to torment us bofore the time?

They were brave days our people think, when

1. The greater sort in their Adulteries. Whoredoms, etc. were all above,
quite above the reach of any discipline; the Courtiers durst say to the
Preachers as he to the Prophet, prophecy no more at Bethell, for it is the
Kings Chapel, and the Kings Court. Amos 7.13. Impiety increasing with mighty
increases, and no reason, but because his old friend Impunity clapped him on the
back with encouragement, such as we read, Ps. 12.4. who is Lord over us? let
the Almighty depart from us, who is the Lord? etc.

2. The other sort, none of them were under the lash, if able to turn white
sheets into white shillings, they were comutacioners, changes very sad, we
changed our glory into our shame, when Parva lequor quidvis, Nummis presentbus,
apta, eveniet, clansam possidet arca Jovem: How unlike to those times was this
where the charge runs thus, If the Delinquent would have pardon, let him ask
it with his own tears, Si veniam reus speret, petat cum lacrimis, petat
totius ecclesiae fletibus, Amb. de pen. l. 1. c. 16.
yea, and with the tears of the whole Church, it was so in ancient times.

1. To the willing to learn I propose Saint Austin's rule, I think it is a
good one, and it is this, He that goes against reason is no wise man: and he
that goes against the Scripture is no sober man; and he that goes against the
Church is no peaceable man: There are but two places appointed for the
cleansing of a sinner: earth and hell, there also, but two means, fire and
water: He that washes not himself in the water of penitential tears here,
must lie hereafter in flames of fire to endure, pains unutterable, and without
end.

2. To the willing to submit, I say one word more

Of great experience doubtless, of Gods dealings, and soul refreshings was
that weeping prophet, who in the Churches name delivered that, Lam. 3.27. it is
good for a man that he bear the yoke in his youth: And indeed I never read
but of two yokes, and they are one of Doctrine, and the other of Discipline:
and it is good, God says, The yoke of God.
to bear them both.

Fourthly, The Family self which I see men making so much of, 4 Self
economicall.
it is riches, and the pomp of the world, riches gotten with wrong and held to
the hurt of the owners thereof. Heaven is amongst most people a kind of
superfluity and hang-by; gain is their Godliness; the Religion of Ephesits,
God wot, and no other, then whom God has blessed from the dunghill; O how
uncharitable, proud, cruel, disdainful, for earth providing, and heaven
neglecting they are; overreaching our brethren in bargaining is now counted a
virtue, indeed a matter of ostentation, Quod Gillias possidebat, omnium quasi
commune patrimonium erat. Fitipsius precordia liberalitatis habuit, et domus
eius quasi quaedam muni ficentiae officina.
but why is it? even because the word of God must needs be true. Fools make a
mock at sin, Prove. 14.9. The saying of old was of Gillias, that what he had
was every Man's patrimony; the clean contrary is very true of very many men,
what every man has is theirs if they can lay their hands thereupon: O the
noble spirits of Luther and such manner of Hem: Germana illa bestia non curat
aurum, when it was said of him, bribe him, tempt him with money: no, (says my
author) he is a man regards no coin, that speech of his, when such great,
offers were made unto him is very heavenly. He refuses with these words valde
protestatus sum, me nolli sic satiari ab eo. I have strongly engaged my self,
not to be satisfied with mean things from God; noble minded Basil gave the
Emperor Valentius this peremptory, but gallant answer. Haec pueris non
Christianis offer. Sir, you should offer these to children, and not to
Christians, Bernard, sicut mea non sibi place^t, etc. As what I give thee,
cannot be pleasing to thee without my self, so Lord, the contemplation of what
thou have given us does refresh us, but not enough, without thy self: and the
reason that he gives is very precious, True spiritual pride.
Habet enim vera sapientia sui generis superbians, for true wisdom has its
kind of spiritually wise pride, and will not be long, or always contented
with any thing, less then the living God; Somewhere it is said in Scripture, I
have smitten mine hands at thy dishonest gain.

Some Apollos mighty in the Scriptures, whose Preaching is like thunder,
Precept for rich men.
and his life like lightening; I would have set upon it to tell, yea, and
charge those rich men too.

1. With that precept, 1 Timothy 6.17. Charge them that are rich in this world,
that they be not high minded, nor trust in uncertain riches, but in the living
God: the more rich and plentiful God makes men, the more humble harmless,
and heaven providing to be, laying up for themselves a good foundation, good
works they are not lost, but laid up, and for foundations to eternity. Dorcas
her coats, God has them in remembrance; the great Preacher, who gave the lewd
rich man a visit, speaks thus to him, after some time; Sir, God be merciful
to you if he will, and pardon your sins, which I believe not; and bring you
to Heaven, which is (as your case is) impossible.

2. with that example too; Example for them.


With that Luke 12. where Christ befooles the men that are only worldly wise,
and no more ex rosis, non ex stellis, plures epicuri quum astronomi, the wise
man said, and what a fearful thing will it be after a man has seen all
other gain, to sit down and sigh, because of the souls loss. Dives and
Lazarus their comparison in regard of outward and present things, is without
comparison; but if you look upon them after death, you see they are as far
asunder as Heaven and Hell. Didiceram elatus domine, iniquitates meus, discam
humiliatus justificationes tuas, If men be lifted up, they mind nothing but
their sins; but if they be cast down, then they remember Gods mercies: and
indeed, how much better is it to be broken with afflictions unto salvation,
then to be preserved by prosperity unto evils, which God will not pardon, 2
Reg. 24.4. Self of self in the world what?


Fifthly, The self of our selves, what is that? the thing that men desire herein
is either no Conscience, or none use thereof, men think themselves, least
themselves when indeed they are most so; and on the contrary, when they can
out-brave sin, outlive tenderness of Conscience, and say as he said of old to
his reprover. Thou fool, Stulte tu nonne putas me vereri Deos cum talia
faciam? Nero to Se^:
do thou believe that I believe there is any God, when I do these things?
then they are themselves they think; I have heard men give thanks to God, for
that which indeed is one of the heaviest judgments under Heaven: namely, they
thank God they were never troubled in all their lives, ubi non hoc bellum, ibi
pax diabolica, says Saint Austin. Where there is not this war, there is a
devilish peace. How happy was Paul in his smiting to the ground, his
blindness, distress of Conscience, prayer and the like? you know the story,
Act 9. the excellency of godly sorrow, and the effects thereof, 2 Cor. 7.11. are
set forth unto us, if we would hearken to Gods holy word, as in the body so in
the soul; there is but the wound and the medicine in the body, and but the
sin and the sorrow in the soul, no more to be regarded.

1. Chrysostom's resolution concerning swea^ing.
Some zealous man for God, must do as heretofore, Chrysostom did when he was
to preach to the Athenians, it seems they were a people much given to swearing,
and he protests that until they leave their swearing he will never leave
preaching against it; even so would I have the Ministers of God to resolve
never to leave preaching against false bottomes, till our people be settled upon
a true one: and our falfe bottomes are not a few whereon men settle themselves.
Mat. 7.23. and then will I profess unto them, I never knew you. False bottomes
Depart from me all ye that work iniquity, profession without practice; the
mistaking of the means of grace and holiness, for grace and holiness it
self. Self-love, and thinking our selves to be something, when we are
nothing; formality and mere out-sidenesse in Religion, opus operatum, and the
serving of God with an action done: these are the things which breed so many
miscariages amongst us.

2. Fundamentals.
But how shall this work be done? No other way, but by preaching and pressing
the fundamentals; Such texts as that Mat. 18.3. except ye be converted ye
cannot enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Verily, verily, I say unto thee,
except thou be regenerate and borne again, thou can not enter into the
Kingdom of Heaven, John 3. Such texts I say as these are, they must be
preached, opened and applied. The Fathers tell us in good earnest, that they
did never believe another man had need to be converted, until they were
converted themselves; this is downright dealing, I like it very well, and it
remembers me of what Lactantius says. Were there (says he) but 7 wise men in
Greece? If but 7 wise men in Greece, none at all.
no, but 7 only, why then there was none: there must be some more wise men to
judge of their wisdom, otherwise, a wise man is not a wise man in the
judgment of a fool. Wise men think that Religion is exceedingly decaying in
England, because a young Hipocrite makes an old Atheist sure; and there are now
so many of the first, that in the next Century we think there will be not a
few of the last; our God provide for his people.

The great Prophet always preached a way, He that preaches not a way, preaches
nothing.
and so must the lesser do; it is dangerous to presuppose a people to be
Saints, and holy, and so to preach unto them; it were better to teach them how
to be so, and to try whether they be so or no. Better I say, I think, to ask
our Saviors question, whom do you say that I am? 2 Questions.
Mat. 16.15. then to ask that question Acts 19.2. Have you received the Holy
Ghost since you believed, let the godly wise consider it, and they that have
the work of the harvest in their hands. Not a few I believe in this great
City, puffed up with their persuasion of themselves and others of them; if they
should come to clear dealing withal, must say that they had need to be
instructed in the doctrine of Faith, Baptism and the Holy Ghost too. Well the
Scripture speaks of a good conscience, Acts 23.1. of a clear conscience, Acts
29.16. of a pure conscience 1 Timothy 3.9. of a purged conscience, Heb. 9.14. of
an evil conscience Heb. 10.22. of a weak conscience, 1 Cor. 8.12. and of a
seared conscience, 1 Cor. 4.2. which of these now is thy conscience, it
behooves thee to take notice of.

And take this with thee, whosoever thou art. 1 Ad sui preservationem. 2 Ad
preservationem universi.
I never heard a description of virtue that pleased me better then that Brevis
et vera definitio virtutis est, ordo amoris, Aug. virtue is nothing else, and
grace too, but the very ordering of our love; take heed of a heart and
conscience loving divisions which God hates.

The Philosophers say there is a twofold motion, in natural things; one
whereby they move unto the preservation of themselves; and another, whereby
they move unto the preservation of the whole universe. Water naturally moves
downe-ward; nevertheless, for the general good, it will move upwards rather
then fail; so should Religion and good conscience do; move to our private
good, so, as that withal we remember that we serve our generation, and be
useful also. It is an ill spirit, and a worse conscience, that has so much
mind of its own things, that it regards not the things of the Lord Jesus
Christ.

Course of convincing men.
How to convince I say, a work of the Holy Ghost; a work, which is sometimes,
as immediately going before conversion, as the morning before the day, as in
those Act. 2.37. they were pricked in their hearts, and they said, men and
brethren what shall we do to be saved? and in all the such like instances
wheresoever. For, of this let men be well assured, that whenever God does
clearly reveal himself to the soul: Marks of a man rightly convinced.
He presently works this great work of conviction, and in this order.

1. God makes a man to believe his misery by sin, and to be much troubled for
it.

2. He consulteth in this case what to do, and is much troubled about it.

3. He is exceedingly broken in heart, and humbled to the dust.

4. Above all things in the world he desires forgiveness of those sins which
with a free heart he now confesses.

5. He forsakes all for the assurance of that pardon, and highly prizeth it;
yea, all things dross and dung in comparison of it.

6. He applies Christ and his promise, lives therein, groaning after all
excellencies, effects, and evidences of pardon. In this order holy Scripture
sets forth conviction to be wrought; But yet further it may be marked, that

1. Gods work sometimes.
Conviction is indeed the work of the great God, and of him alone, he is the
heart-opener: Whose heart the Lord opened, that she attended unto the things
which were spoken of Paul, Act. 16.14. For it is not the willer, nor the
runner, but God that shows mercy, Romans 9.15, 16. of old the Lord had these
ways to convince his people.

1. There were Philosophers, Prophets, or Poets, and Orators and Wisemen, of
whom what vice was it which was not brought into disgrace? what virtue was
unperswaded? that a man may safely say of some of them, that they left unto
posterity more clearness, and Prints of Divinity, than all the books of the
Schoolmen put together. So (as I remember) said Bucer also of Seneca.

2. Bucer's saying of Seneca.
They had their proverbs, and voices of men, publicly against them, as that
against the Cretians was a proverb, Tit. 1.12. The Cretians are always liars,
slow-bellies, and evil beasts; and this in my Text a proverbiall sentence also.

3. They had the works of God, by which he intended to leave men without
excuse, Romans 1.20. As rain and fruitful seasons, Act. 14.17. Nay, they had
yet more, the natural knowledge whereby they knew the Law, Romans 1.32. and the
natural conscience whereby they did by nature the things contained in the Law,
Romans 2.14. All this I observe to let you see how zealous God is to keep afoot
this work, to teach us that it ought not to be lost, our Lord in his time used
it, and convincing preaching will be found to be the lively Ordinance, when all
is done.

2. Sometimes he will have men to do this work, Man's work when God will have
him do it.
and then he conveyes into them his power, and bears a presence with them;
thus he was with the Apostles, Peter in a great conversion and conviction;
Paul, and others also; Apollos was a man instructed in the way of the Lord, and
he mightily convinced the Jews, and that publicly, showing by the Scriptures,
that Jesus was the Christ, Act. 18.25, 28. Such ingredients as these go to the
making up of this spiritual medicine, as to convince by answering, to silence
by answering, Job 32.12. to convince by reproving, 2 Timothy 3.16. to convince by
preaching, Tit. 1.9. to convince by chiding, rebuke them sharply Tit. 1.13. to
convince by correcting with all authority, Tit. 2.15. to convince every way, to
convince any way that is lawful, and by the word warranted. I read of Cicero,
that pleading for Ligurius, Mine Author says the bills fell out of Caesar's
hand, the bills of his accusation, as it were forced by the eloquence of the
pleader; a great power there is in conviction. Natural and Spiritual thunder.


We learn from all this that has been said, that men are exceeding hard to be
brought to any thing of God, they must be convinced, the natural thunder is
the voice of God, so is the spiritual too, that is exceeding subtle, so is
this, it divides between the marrow and the bones, the natural thunder breaks
a pieces, what resists it only, so does the other, it is like fire, and the
hammer that breaks the stony rock asunder.

3. Some men there are, whom of all others, Who ought soonest to be unvailed.
I would have conviction to find out; namely, the subtle, cunning, crafty
ones, such to be silenced, is a great victory, a very great conquest. When the
Word of God, the truth of Christ comes off like Stephen, Act. 6.9, 10. The
Libertines, and Syrenians, and Alexandrians and those of Cilicia, and Asia,
were disputing with Stephen, but they were not able to resist the Spirit, and
the wisdom by which he spoke, O then the word of God and those which handle
it, come off like David from Goliath, with the head of the champion in his hand.
The Herodians Court-flatterers, a sycophanticall generation, see how
convincingly our Savior deals with them, Matthew. 22.21, 22. Render to Caesar
the things which are Caesar's, and unto God, the things which are Gods, and they
marvelled. We have a like instance Joh. 8.7. He that is without sin among you,
let him cast the first stone at her, and they that heard it, being convicted,
went out one by one. The Gospel is always the power of God unto great things,
but never more visibly, so then when we can say with the Apostle, Where is the
wise? where is the Scribe? where is the disputer o^ this world? Has not God
made foolish the wisdom of this world, 1 Cor. 1.20. As David prayed, so I
would we should do in a time of distress, that the Ahitophels of our time may
be infatuated.

4. Means for conviction.
How may a man best convince enemies, such as our Lord here had?

I answer, even as our Lord did, surely that will be found to be the very best
way. His direction is the only infallible one, therein we may abide, therefore
observe,

Jer. 9.3.

Samuel, 1 Samuel 12.5. and so did Joshuah also, Josh. 34.22. so ought we to do,
and it serves to chide them, who jangle about words to no purpose, the least
truth laid home to the conscience would do more good.

Matthew. 22. of tribute paying to Caesar, against the Herodians, and convinces
them; He that bids us be ready to render a reason, shows himself ready on all
occasions so to do; It reproves them that are Nicodemites and Neuters in these
sad times, of which sort we have not a few.

4. Our Lord retorts upon his enemies, their own arguments, fights with them,
with their own weapons, he casts out devils as their children do, this is that
convinces, if the Master Builders of Israel would observe, it may be there
were arguments enough to be found in our adversaries to overthrow both them and
their cause, so some have done Popery.

5. When convinced and no more.
And one word more I have to say to all ye that are the blaspheming Cavileers
of this generation, of you I know there is not a few, If once ye be convinced,
and no more, behold the glass of these men, in which I entreat you look your
faces, the glass I say which Jesus Christ has opened you to look in.

1 You will fall into extremity of sin. More sin.


If you be convinced and no more, if you have the flashes falling upon your
eyes, and no more, if you taste of the powers of the life to come, and no more,
if you weep for sin once, and laugh, and to it again, you will fall into
extremes of sinful courses, your later end will be worse then your beginning,
you will begin in the Spirit and end in the flesh woeful and everlastingly, so
will be the condition of such a man doubtless.

2. You will fall into extremity of judgment, More judgment
into extremity of judgment I say, when God makes sin our punishment for our
sin, and one of our evils to be the reward of another, it was these peoples
case, see ver. 30.31. they fall into a scattering where Christ gathers, and
from thence the next step is into the sin against the holy Ghost, a
blasphemy not to be forgiven.

Some Counsels.
1. See thou take heed of exalting thy wicked self, so did the Scribes and
Pharisees, and above them Jesus Christ must not be, though God the Father give
never so clear evidence of him: Ye that set your selves in your ways above
the way God has owned, heed this;

2. Love not cavilling scorns, nor jeering scoffs, they are unbecomming, Jesus
Christ is but a fellow with these fellows, verse. 24. I do not know what sin a
proud spirit is not fit to fall into.

Danger.
gives us in a word or two of the danger in case all this be not disgested,
touched by our Lord in all those expressions, shall be desolate, shall not
stand, an house will fall upon an house, and the like; these doubtless are all
added to this purpose that we might be more cautelous, for if ruin, desolation
and such things will not engage us to take heed of divisions, nothing at all
will.

1. 1. desolation.
Desolation will come; will come shall I say? Nay rather let me say, and I
shall say true; Desolation is come, it is at hand already, But when he saw the
multitude, (says St. Matthew) he was moved with compassion on them, because
they fainted, and were scattered abroad, as sheep having no shepherd: Then
says he unto his Disciples, The harvest truly is plentious, but the laborers
are few, Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, who to by pitied.
that he will send forth laborers into his harvest, Matthew 9.9.36 37. 38. The
field of God is untilled and desolate, the gardens indeed of the
Congregationall, the Church way, these are dressed, trimmed and fine, these are
weeded, rolled, dug, dunged, what not, not any thing amiss; But the poor
people in the Field, on these no pity of God, no pity of Man falls; Ninevehs
6000000. makes me remember them which knew not the right hand from the left: I
am confident there are not in any place in the kingdom of England so rude,
heathenish and ignorant a people as are to be found in the suburbs of London,
and the adjacent places thereabouts, no greater people nor living more
inconsiderable: Now he that looks here may see desolation; I would have these
fields tilled, and some of that feed which here falls in the high way and in
the stony places, cast there abroad, who knows but that it may there (some of
it) fructify by the blessing of God, and bring forth fruit in abundance.

2 Instability will be in Religion, 2. Inst bility.
nay I pray to God that instability be not for Religion; some such tenets I
hear and see already: Some men glory in having so dark and doubtful a
behavior, that no man can tell what to make of them; the more scepticall a man
is now, the more religious he is thought to be, to walk as a staggerer, neuter,
and unresolved one, as if a man's Religion were still to choose: is this
becoming them whom God bids to be persuaded in their own mind? Romans 14.5.
Nay, such men as these do affect to have, and indeed bear the bell away for the
wisest men in the Country, because they will utter themselves no further than
if need be they may keep their retreat fair, and have the wind on their backs.

If such a one as I might speak without offense, I would here insert two words
of warning, the first to my self and such inferior ones as I am; wherein I
would desire to observe

1 Under what Banner Gods holy war best prospers, Preaching I mean, namely,
neither under strength, nor might, nor wisdom, Ru^es for preaching
but his own spirit, Zach. 5.7. let us take heed therefore of pleasing our
selves too much in our own inventions.

2 They that draw their people on to the carnal admiring of their parts and
persons, teach them a lesson which lames cries out against, the having of the
faith of our Lord Jesus Christ with respect of persons, I am.

3. Let not be forsaken the maine truths of God, and the channel of wholesome
doctrine to run into some od muddy creek of our invention for fear we loose
our peace, with seeking to get the peoples praise.

4. I would we might all be as little carnal in preaching Jesus Christ as may
be, and as much spiritual as possible might be; the evidence and
demonstration of the spirit that is it.

5. I would our subjects might be often changed, and if we see we have
preached Mercy up, till Duty be quite done, then change the subject, and
press original sin; preach Selfe-denyall, Mortification, the New creature,
taking up the Cross, Preparation for death, etc.

The second unto the people of this City.

1. The end of preaching is Common edifying, nothing else, And for Hearing.
Know it, and lay it for a ground; every thing is best used when to the end
which God appointed it.

2. Take heed of partiallity and the balking of any man's ministry that is
faithful; God is able to fit a truth to thee, which yet was not studied for
thee.

3. Do not catch at new points, forsaking old grounds, it is the common fault
of London hearers, they have better brains then either hearts or lives.

4. Eye the Minister, in not thy relation to him, nor in thy knowledge of him,
nor according to the infirmities that are in him, but as the dispencer of the
mystery of Christ, that will best prepare thy spirit God being entreated) that
thou may be like one of Peter's hearers, willing to hear whatsoever is
commanded.

3. An house will fall upon an house, that is the third danger, and it is a
danger if our Lord has so set it down to be: Houses are but of four sorts,
as the Private house, the Politic house, the Ecclesiastical house, and the
house of Clay the Corporal house, and all these are in continual danger of
falling one upon another, if divisions cease not, For we read,

1. 4. Houses.
A difference that fell among the Private houses and Families, concerning the
spies, Numb. 13.31.32. Some said one thing concerning the land, some another.

2. A difference that arose betwixt them concerning the Altar, Josh. 22. There
some said one thing, some another; but the cause of fear being good, a good
God gave a good effect unto it.

3. A difference about the Sacrament grew, the poor were despised by the rich,
and one separated from another, 1 Cor. 11. but were at length reconciled by a
good God, whose instrument was a careful Ministry, then settled among them,
preaching against (what they then practiced) Self-divisions.

Now what discouragements were then used against divisions, Our preaching.
the same will be now used to quell the last of these, and we hope in God with
the like success, for I begin with the last first, preaching against it.

As for the second difference, Our brethrens discovery.
It was easily blown over with a fair discovery, which mended all when their
minds were once known, a course which we hope will be taken in Gods time by
our good brethren, that jealousies may all be blown away, and unity shine
forth.

But the third is of most importance, The peoples quietness.
that relates to the Reformers and the Reformation too, and is of evil
consequence, some say they give too much to the Parliament, some say we give
too little, and too many amongst us are like the uncomfortable spies, which
say, this difference will not end without more blood shed.

I shall impart my mind freely, and it is this.

1. I dare not but believe, that the God which brought the Parliament out of
the greater will also (if our sins hinder not) bring them out of the lesser
difference, Faith.
that we may once say with Paul, He has delivered us, and will deliver us
with strength of believing comfort.

2. Moderation
Though it has been observed that never any people have been earnest for a
tolleration, but those which have had great, and it may be too great power
with, and influence upon the present Governors, yet my council is, that our
moderation appear, for fear lest we spoil some of their prudentialls (not
yet come to maturity, and of which ordinary men are not able to give an
account) with our want of discretion, prudence, piety, prayer, things wherein
if we be obediently and waitingly conversant, we act where we should do,
and move orderly in our own spheres.

For the house Politic in Israel, House politic.
there indeed we read of divisions also, and those were either at the time of
the settling of the Government, or after it was settled, or last of all at such
time when God for sin of King and people, quite took away the Lawgiver from
between Iudahs feet, that he might make away for the birth of the King of
kings, according to the prophecies of truth, which went before of the Lord the
Messiah.

Nothing I see is herein necessary for our marking and some profit, Cause.
but 1. the cause of all these stirs and civil dissensions which I find to
be, 1. The sin of the people, whom how easily it is to be persuaded they are
not well governed, woeful experience tells us, thus they rejected Samuel and
God in him, God himself tells them so. 1 Samuel 8.7.

The sin of the Governors too, For if men lifted up to such a top of
preferment, 2. Then are indeed as Nazianzen phrases it instar Funambulorum,
like dancers upon ropes, all whose safety is in their uprightness, and they
happened to go awry, so that with their sin the people, and with the peoples sin
the King comes to be smitten, then sword and pestilence showed themselves forth
to be Gods servants, for to execute his sore displeasure on those that had
offended, as is to see throughout the History of the Kings and Chronicles of
Israel.

Secondly for the cure, Cure.
we shall apparently find that the sins of the Governors of Israel they were.
1. Pride; Pride.
David's sin in numbering the people, 2. Sam. 24. David will see how many hundred
thousand he may call himself the king of; and the Lord lets him see that he can
soon ease him of some of his subjects, and cures this distemper by letting a
great many thousands fall of; the pestilence until the the same King David
come and beg that God will spare some of them, whom his sin has spoiled.
Intrusion.


2. Intrusion and usurpation: Vzziah's sin, he will intrude into an office, and
destroy an ordinance in Israel, a sin which God punished with an earthquake, as
the Prophets say that speak in his sin and with divisions, then God smote the
great house with breaches and the little house with clefts Amos. 6.11.

3. Blood, the sin of, Manasses, blood.
he filled Jerusalem with innocent blood, and the catalogue of his offenses
stands recorded for posterity to look upon and dread, 2. Chron. 33.

Such an affliction God sent this King, so sanctified as that he washed away
the eternal guilt of blood from his soul; but that God may let men see what a
sin blood is, there stands a piece of Scripture still as if written with a pen
of Iron, or the point of a Diamond; it is in the 2. Kings 24.4. He filled
Jerusalem with innocent blood which the Lord would not pardon; that is to say,
as to the eternal guilt.

If in these glasses then we see any glimpse of the face of our housepolitick,
help with your prayers I pray you, you that see the danger, that it may be
prevented.

3. Church-house.
The New Testament best holds forth unto us the divisions of the church; house,
when the Gospel came to be preached, and the Church to be established with
Governors and government, then the envious man sowed tares, and in both
doctrine and practice men showed themselves of what seed and side they were,
the woman or the serpent. Some held no resurrection at all, so the Sadduces,
some held it was past already; some erred one way and some another, and men
full of faith and the holy Ghost, had their miscarriages, and went not with a
right foot unto the Gospel; I am of Paul says one and I of Apollos says
another, and a third subscribes himself for Cephas. Thus was the house of the
church divided, and one fell upon another, some preached Christ of envy; some
one way, some another. All this while I observe two Rules to guide men, one
divine which Paul gives and takes, well says he every way Christ is preached,
and therein I do and will rejoice; if any glory acrew to Jesus any way, I hope
I shall be glad of that, and the Lord will get himself glory sometimes when,
and where, we do not think of.

The other rule I walk by is humane, and it is this. Quisquis vel quod potest,
arguendo corrigit, vel quod corrigere non potest, salvo pacis vinculo excludit,
vel quod salvo pacis vinculo excludere non potest equitate improbat, firmitate
supportat, hic est pacificus and ab isto maledicto immunis. Esa. 5.20 Aug. That
is to say, he that by reproving corrects that which he can, or that which he
cannot correct, does (peaceably) exclude, or that which he cannot peaceably
exclude, disalowes, or wisely bears with; he is a peaceable man and free from
that curse, woe unto them that call evil good, and good evil, that put
darkness for light, and light for darkness, that put bitter for sweet, and
sweet for bitter. House corporal.


Lastly the houses of clay, the houses corporal, they will be falling one upon
another, if they be divided against themselves and among themselves, and some
Spirits make no more of clashing even against the greatest of authority, than
he did of fighting, which said, let the young men arise and play before us, 2.
Sem. 2.14. only here is the difference; that in the battle there, there was a
name, Helkath-Hazzuzim, the field of strong men, verse 16. But all these
clashings, conceits, invectives, alarms, araignments etc. they get no name
among wise men, but weak, worthless, and empty nothingnesse; For it is a
judgment for the child to behave himself proudly against the ancient, and
the base against the Honorable, Esai, 3.5. Roma forte egrotat sed sanitas a
talibus? I would entreat these men to learn.

1 Obedience, Not blind, that wants discretion; nor implicit obedience, that
wants truth; nor slavish and seditious obedience, that wants justice; But that
they be content to let Theologicalls have an influence upon their souls,
Politicalls upon their bodies, and Prudentialls have some guidance of those
unruly evils, their tongues, so often set on fire of Hell.

2. Moderation; that they bring not a railing accusation: Its exceeding
unbecoming men that would be thought godly, to vomit and belch out such
blasphemies against things I am persuaded many of them know not; for all such
books, I say of them as heretofore it was said of the Popes Cannons; Canones
multi facti fuere in favorem Canonum -- Concilia per Canones ij vero per
semetipsos -- Ignorantes admirantur, Doctirident, Superest una litura, that is,
Many Canons were made in favor of the Canons, the Councels were guided by the
Canons, and they by themselves; ignorant people they admire all this, but the
learned smile: Nothing is wanting but one good dash to blott them all out, or a
good fire to burn them all.

4. The last danger is, we shall have casting out of them which indeed had
more need to hold together; there is a twofold casting out of a man; the one
more private, whereby every Christian is bound to forbear the familiar
conversing with such as are openly wicked and scandalous in doctrine or life.

The other is a more public casting out of an incurable person, who will
receive no good, but is likely to do much harm in the Church by infection, if
he be suffered; let him therefore be an outcast.

And whereas there are two degrees of excommunication, the former separating
from all brotherly society, with the members of the Church, and the latter
cutting off from the body of Christ, which is nothing else, but that fearful
Anathema and curse pronounced by the Church against him who is discerned to
have sinned the sin against the Holy Ghost; the former of these two is called
a casting out, a rejecting, Tit. 3.10. a casting or thrusting out of the
Synagogue, John. 9.22. the Churches censure, and that which Heretics and
others are subject unto.

If it be asked, who must do this? I answer, The whole Church; but especially
the Pastors, lest their remissness or familiarity with such, make the people
more bold with them; for it is meet that the whole Church should have
knowledge, approbation, and consent in that which concerns the whole.

If it be further asked, how far they must be avoided, and cast off? I
answer, Holy Scripture must be consulted with, and there we find

1. Generally it is set down, Matthew. 18.17. where it is commanded that such as
will not hear the admonition of the Church, shall be accounted as Publicans,
and as Heathen men that is, as such with whom we will have nothing to do, for
John 4.9. the Jews meddle not with the Samaritans.

2. More especially, 2 These. 3.6. withdraw your selves from every one -- with
such a one no not to eat. 1. Cor. 5.11. receive him not into your house,
neither bid him God speed. 2. Epist. John. 10.

And yet all this must be understood wisely and with these cautions.

1. This censure infringeth not any of the bonds of civil right and society, an
excommunicate Magistrate remains a Magistrate still, and ought of all
Christians so to be acknowledged and obeyed, the ensure only makes them as no
Christians, not as no Magistates.

2. This censure loses not the bond of common humanity, but that every thing
must be administered to such a one as is necessary for the preserving of his
life, Romans 12.20. If thine enemy hunger, feed him, If he thirst give him
drink.

3. The censure takes not away natural right, nor house, nor bed, nor table,
must be denied to excommunicate husband or wife; the censure does not make them
to be no husband, father, master, wife.

The censure does not loose all the bands of spiritual society, but that
notwithstanding it we may and must love the excommunicate in the Lord:
secondly, pray for him, though not with him: thirdly, admonish and rebuke him
still: fourthly, upon his repentance, receive him like a brother, as before.
The censure then

1 Takes a man off from communion with Gods people in word, Sacraments, and
prayer; and indeed renders him as a dog or swine, for whom these holy things
are unmeet, Math. 6.7.

2 Takes a man off from converse, so far as necessarily we are not bound to
them; as is to be seen in the behavior of John the Evangelist toward the
Heretic Corinthus, when he found him in the Bath,; and of Policarp toward
Marcion: out of Irenaeus.

And if any man shall stumble at that, why the censure should not extend to the
shutting of men out from all Ordinances whatsoever, and ask why now they should
be admitted to the word: I answer, it is the indulgence of the Church only, for
in the Primitive times it was not Ambrose kept Theodosius the Emperor being
excommunicate quite out of the Church of Millaine.

Some cast themselves out of the Church as Demas, forsaking Paul, and embracing
the present world, some were cast out and restored again, and made better by
discipline, only we never read amongst them such unkindly casting out of one
another hearts, as we have amongst us; And as to the other, something I would
say also.

First, I think we have been somewhat too nimble in casting out, and seeking
power so to do, before we well knew who we had in, and amongst us, I hear
many men say that the very assaying of the Presbyterian Government too too
ridgidly has not made a few Independents, neuters, raylers, etc.

Secondly, I think we have been somewhat too flow in the securing our
kernel of doctrine from heresies, and gratings upon the foundation, before we
were too zealous of the shell of Discipline; We had done well I believe, had
we given our adversaries leave to have been blemished with all the
innovations, exorbitancies in writing, separations, precipices, petitions,
petulancies, etc.

While in the mean time we had acted nothing, but as God the two Houses and the
present opportunities had gone before us: I conclude with some counsels fit
for our times, such as these.

First, Men do not dispute now adays, but brawle and wrangle; In the handling
of controversies, no moderation nor meekness is used: We should consider
that the things we know are the least part of those we know not: If more
reverence were given to the word of God, the holy Spirit implored, prayer made
to God more frequently, If care were had to abstain from all curious
questions, and practical and profitable things, preached and pressed, we
should I am persuaded agree sooner, and God would I am of opinion bless us
better.

Secondly, In Controversies of great moment do but see the Devils cunning, He
stirs up men to hatreds, pride, reproachful speeches: Alas, the author of
error must be handled friendly, and if chidden at any time, it must be done
without bitterness; arguments used, fitted not to the person, but the thing;
And if we could always aim at this, that not our opinion, but Gods truth
might be glorious, And that whenever we enter into preaching, or writing,
or conference, or the like, Pride might be put off, and modesty with humility
and moderation out on, there were some hope we might live to see the day, that
we might live like brethren, and the Lord might delight to dwell amongst us.

Thirdly, Heed ought to be taken that by the two great Authorities no injury
be done; I mean first, That by the authority of the Church, neither Man nor
Doctrine be rashly condemned, that difference be wisely made between the
points of Faith, which are necessary to be believed, and certain, and things
controversall; that opinions be weighed with much of judgment, and affection
too, wherein the best Scale will be the word of God; that men be very tender
of things necessary to be known and believed, that the things flowing from
principles be observed, and in the rest there be kept a Brotherly concord.

Secondly, That the authority of the Magistrate be also very venerable, the
Hangman not called in to be a Moderator or Umpire in controversy of Religion;
the Magistrate not made an instrument to execute every fool and knaves lust
and madness; nor in cases of error, and humane lapse, recantations enjoined
for fear of punishments.

Fourthly, Many times doctrine is depraved and spoiled, Men not observing it,
and this comes to pass either from the doctrine it self, because indeed the
finest bodies soonest putrify, or because changes by little and little, are
made insensibly, as the turning of the hour wheel: Sometimes miscariages come
and are not seen because of a great fame of learning and holiness in the
teacher, and sometimes because of the ignorance and negligence of the hearer.
Surely the way to preserve purity of doctrine, is carefully to cleave unto the
very words and phrases of holy scripture, quietly to give leave unto the modest
and moderate use of any man's gifts, public peace preserved; Dilligently to cry
down all lust of contention; and soberly to consider of, and submitt the
authority and irrefragibility of counsels, if such be in them.

Fifthly, Because dissembled sanctity is double iniquity, therefore it would be
observed that some men maintayn their own name no better any way than by
detracting from all men's else, and then they indeed act their own cause when
they seem to stir in the cause of God: Very angry they are if any man
contradict them; too too ready to reproaches and flyings out; then they come to
trust their own wit, parts, and labor, more than God; and if there be not the
more mercy, fall to sinning against knowledge, and conscience: Without all
controversy to the preserving of holiness and goood manners, Censures
Ecclesiastical are very needful; which yet have been and may be so exercised
as that it may be truly said of them, the Devil rebukes sin; many wise men
think and that upon good grounds too, that public Pennances are neither
needful nor useful.

Sixthly, I think that a modest liberty of opinions concerning Religion, is much
against Satan's kingdom, because I know that he desires to take away all desire
of enquiring after Truth; the people think they may cast off all care and study
of Religion to their Ministers; and are like him who when he was asked by his
Minister, How many Sacraments there were? gave that answer to him, Sir you can
tell.

Two things I think we ought to be very careful of; First, to set down
exactly the marks of true and false Religion, which may stand as so many Dooles
or Landmarks, as well to show men where they ought as where they ought not to
go.

Secondly, to consider well how they which govern Church and Common Wealth, are
usually incited against Truths professors, I confess I have thought, and yet
do, exacted confessions from our people very inconvenient; for if Ministers
carry themselves lovingly, they will win their people to more profitable
discoveries a great deal another way.

Seventhly, How Satan labors that neither truth might enter, nor error be
cast out, let that be observed, He now lays his ax to the root of the
Ordinance of the Ministry, that there may be none to teach; quarrels at
their maintenance, and fills the very calling with slander, begins by his
instruments to talk of fear, hope, and reward, things which every religiously
noble spirit, lays as low as that whereon it treads, and looks a great deal
higher unto that, He that wins souls is wise, He that turns many to
righteousness shall shine as the Stars in the firmament: They that have this
great work in their hand, O that they would not wound one another, lest God
leave them at length to be wounded one of another. Much ado is made about
having a Confession, I think the Law of God well read and shortly glossed would
serve, and none better; and such a Creed, or Symbol of faith, I think were
good as might be definition-wise, wherein nothing might be deficient or
redundant, only such things being therein contained as are necessary to be
known to salvation.

Eighthly, The Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, he is never but either
doing, or endeavoring to do some mischief, privately or publicly; He often
transformes himself into an Angel of light, and puts on shows of holiness
and sanctity, with which h^e oftentimes so deceives good men, that unawares
they lend him in his business, an helping hand, Eminently Godly men do not
escape him without either crime or calumny if he can help them to it, and he
is not wanting to seek his advantages every where, to that purpose, his great
engine that he uses to do mischief, which is the sowing of strifes,
discords, and divisions, between men, and therefore we had need to be prepared
for prevention.

When the Senators conspired against Caesar to kill him in the Senate house,
Antemidorus delivered him a paper entering in, wherein all the Plot might have
been discovered, which Caesar (then busied with complements) wrapped u^ amongst
other Papers and Petitions, and thrust into hi^ pocket, and so not seeing the
paper, went in, but lost his life, and never came out again; what an
opportunity was here lost? We beseech you in Christ his stead to be
reconciled, let it not then be said of this and such other messages, who has
believed our report?

FINIS.

