The merry Jests of SMUG the SMITH, Or the Life and Death of the Merry DEVIL of
EDMONTON.

With the pleasant pranks of Smug the Smith, Sir John, and mine Host of the
George, about the stealing of Venison.

Whereunto is added Mr Peter's Fables. And Smugs Ghost.

By T. Brewer Gent.

Sir John. Mine Host of the George.

Smug pursued by the Keepers for stealing of Venison got upon the White Horse
to escape his catching.



London Printed for Francis Coals dwelling in the Old-Bayley. 1657.

The Induction, with a Description of Master PETER FABELL.
MAster Peter Fabell, otherwise called the merry Devil of Edmonton (for the
many excellent jests he did) was a man of good descent: and a man, either for
his gifts external, or internal, inferior to few: for his person he was
absolute; Nature had never shown the fullness of her skill, more in any then in
him: for the other, I mean his great learning (including many Mysteries) he was
as amply blessed as any.

Very pleasant, kind, and free-hearted was he* to, or with his familiars: very
affable and courteous to strangers, and very liberal, full of comiseration and
pity to the poor and needy: both abroad from his Purse, and at home from his
Table. In his time very well known to him, and sometime (in pastime) very
familiar with him were these men: Oliver Smug, Sir John the merry Parson, Banks
the Miller, and mine Host of the George, in whose companies many times for
recreation he would spend some hours. In Edmonton he was born, lived and died
in the Reign of King Henry the 7.

How Master Peter deceived the Devil with a Candles end.
AT the first entrance of M. Peter into the Art of Magic, by charms, spells,
and incantations, he raised a Spirit, and with the Spirit concluded, that if he
would be obedient to him, serve, help, and further hime at such times, and in
such things as he should command, his soul should be his reward. This
Firebrand of Hell (with great sign of rejoicing) yielded and served him him
(as his slave or vassale) with very great diligence in many matters and
employments. When this officious servant thought he had been at his command
long enough (for no term or time was set at the contract) he demanded his
commanders soul, as the reward of his pains. Why, (said Master Peter) I have
made thee a promise thou should have it, and thou shall have it, but not yet:
when it has left my body (by my death) take it to thee, till then thou may
not have it, so rest thee contented. The Spirit began to threaten, and terrify
him to make him set a time of payment for his pleasure: and so affrighted him,
that he knew not what or how to answer him. Come (quoth ye Devil) be brief,
for Lucifer every minute looks for that soul of thine. Is there no remedy
(quoth Master Peter) will thou allow me no time to set my business in order,
and take my leave of my friends ere I go? allow me some small time for that,
and do thy will. Why how long time (quoth. the Devil? desire thou I should
allow thee? why I faith (quoth Master Peter no long time: spare me but till
this inch-long end of candle (pointing to the candle burning in his study) and
take my soul. Well (quoth the Devil) though by my charge I can hardly stay a
minute, I Will stay so long: about it presently. If I neglect or oreslip my time
(quoth. Master Peter) take thou the advantage of it: yet one request more thou
must grant me. What is that (quoth. ye Devil) marry this (quoth, Master Pater) to
confirm thy promise with an oath: I am very loath to trust thee on thy bare
word, for all the world reputes thee but a knave: therefore come swear to
forbear me till this candle is burned. By hell I will (quoth the Devil) and by
great Lucifer, as I hope to draw down thousand souls to the deep Abisse (the
place of my abode) I will forbear thee till this candle is burned. Then Master
Peter, presently after his hellish protisttation, put ye canle out, and into
his pocket: look here (quoth he) till this is burnt, thou maye^t not claim my
soul: I Will keep this safe enough. Go I command thee, and tell thy proud Lord
Lucifer, how finely I have overreached thee.

When the Devil saw he was so cunningly deceived by Master Peter, with many
bitter execrations he left him.

How Master Peter deceived the Devil again.
NOt long after the Devil had been deceived by the merry Devil Waster Peter
Fabel, he went again to him, and finding him a sleep took the end of the candle
(before spoken of) out of his pocket, and awaked him: when he had so done, he
showed him the end of his candle.

Look here (said he) here is this that thou keptst to keep me from my right
(thy soul I mean) when this is burnt, thy soul must burn with mine: I Will
quickly burn it now I Will warrant thee.

When Master Peter saw he had lost his candle (upon the loss of which lay the
loss of his soul, if his policy had not helped him out) he entreated him to
spare him a little longer.

No, no (said the Devil) all entreats are vain, thou have deceived me once,
thou shall deceive me no more. It Is a good world when men are so cunning in
deceit, as to deceive the Devil: but it is no matter, thou art so much the
readier for me.

Yet here me speak (quoth Master Peter) as thou likest my speech so deal with
me.

Well, be brief then (quoth the Devil) what have thou now to say?

No more but this (quoth. Master Peter) if thou will spare till my timely death
put that thou seek into thy hands, I Will labor all the time I have to live
for hells advantage: I Will bear more souls along with me to hell then twenty of
your cunning Devils shall.

Shall I once more trust thee (quoth the Devil) on thy word? well, swear, why
(said Master Peter) by the black river Lucifer thy Lord swears by I swear I
will: and when I am buried, either within the Church, without the Church, in
the Church Porch, Churchyard street, field, or high way take thou my soul.

Well (quoth, the Devil) in hope thou will gain me many souls to thine, take thy
rest, and so he left him.

Many years after, when Master Peter Fabel by his whte hairs weakness, aches,
and such like signs, perceived he could not live long: he went and digd his
deathbed in the Churchwall, and there rested day and night heartily praying and
repenting him of all the evell he had committed.

When the hour was well nigh come, that should separate his soul and body, the
Devil went to him again and blam^d him for neglecting his business by
promise, and withal told him yt he wa^ come for his soul. When Mr. Peter heard
that word he presently started up, and charged him to depart, my soul (said he)
you come too soon* and yet too late to have it, he that redeemed my soul has
took't to keep, thou can not have it.

Did thou not swear quoth. the Fiend, that I should have (...) soul at the
hour of death? thou did, and I will have it. I (said M^ster Peter) when I am
buried either within the Church, without the Church, in the Church Porch,
Churchyard, street, field, or high way, take thou my soul.

See foolish fiend thou art deceived again, this hole is my grave, if this be
either within the Church, without the Church, in the Church Porch, Churchyard,
street, field, or highway, my soul is thine: thou see it is not, therefore
I charge thee (so deceived) depart. Still the Devil was eager on him for his
soul till at last by his earnest prayers and zealous Invocations, he for'st
him to run ro^ring to hell again wthout it.

How Master Peter Fabell punished a Friar and his Lemon for their knavery.
MAster Peter Fabell one morning very early, walking in the fields (as his
custom was, to meditate by himself) spied a Friar at prayers upon his beads
very devoutly: when Mr. Peter saw him so earnest in his prayers, he went to
him, and demanded him what his reason was, that his chamber would not serve for
his prayers, as well as that place. Oh! Sir (said the Friar) all places are
alike to me for this business, and all times, for I pray when the prick of
conscience comes upon me, in what place, or at what time soever. I commend thee
much (quoth Master Peter) thou art an honest fellow, and so for that time they
parted.

The next morning Master Peter went again: and again found the Friar in the
place where he left him yt morning before, so devoutly praying, but not at the
holy exercise, ye spirit did not move him unless the evil spirit moved him,
for instead of his book and beads, he had got a wench and sat colling her so
close, and kissing her so thick, kiss upon kiss, that she could hardly fetch
her wind for him. A good while stood Master Peter behind a hollow tree unseen,
seeing them trick and toy together, at last to fright them from their venery,
he went into the tree, and with a heavy hollow voice, cried out to the Friar in
this manner: Friar, Friar, Friar, the Friar hearing a voice, presently started
up, and looked round about him to see if he could find the Master of that
tongue that caled him: but in vain he stood looking, for he stood far enough
from his eye, though he were close to his ear. When the Friar had stood a good
while looking about him, first on the one side, then on the other, and could
spy no body, like a kind lecherous bald-pats, very hansomely, or rather very
knavishly, he went to his wench again. He was no sooner laid down, but M^ster
Peter the second time cried out (to disturb him) Friar, Friar, Friar. At the
second call the Frer half affrighted started up again, and looked about him (a
tip toe) to see if he could find a body to that voice but he found none.

Now our Lady defend us (quoth the Friar to his wench) what voice is this that
calls me so often? Did thou not hear it? yes faith sweeting (quoth she) I heard
some body call to thee: can thou not see him?

No faith chuck (quoth the Friar) I can see no man: and yet surely this voice
is the voice of a man. But it is no matter, let it be what it will if we cannot
see it, sure we cannot feel it. Come chuck let us buss and be merry, be of good
comfort and cross thy self, and I warrant thee safe for a farthing, down lay
old bald-pate again: but before he could give her three kisses, the voice
raised him the third time, crying as before, Friar, Friar, Friar. Th^n the
Friars face began to bewray his fear: he had no more color in his face at that
time, (though at all other times he had color enough) then one of these fine
whay-fac'd Oate-meale eaters, or a wench troubled with the green sickness.

Friar, Friar, Friar, (said Master Peter) (still keeping himself close in the
hollow tree) he that sees thee now, unseen of thee, sees at all times, in all
places, and all these thy actions.

Here yesterday I saw thee at thy prayers very devoutly, with thy book and
heads, is this the book thou bring to pray on now? does the prick of
conscience move thee to do this? speak thou black sinner. There thou have red
thy damnation without present repentance and penance. Therefore presently both
of you if you respect more ye good of your souls, then of your bodies, by the
penance I shall appoint you purge your selves: when the Friar and his wench
heard these words, they were verily persuaded in their minds that it was the
voice of an Angel, they both kneeled down very reverently together, and said*
thy will be done: appoint our penance, and we are ready (wi^h all
willingness) to endure it. Then (said Master Peter) you both shall presently
be whipped from this place (the place where you offended) into the Town and about
the Town. This suffer and desire you to be done by the next man comes near you,
and this sin is forgiven you, refuse this and desparing dye damned wretches.

This or what else it shall please thee to inflict or lay upon us, for this
sin (quoth the Friar) we will patiently suffer.

Then Master Peter presently stepped out of the hollow tree, and went (very
cunningly) round about the back side of a hedge, and came directly upon them,
as if he had meant to pass by them.

As soon as ever they saw him, they verily humbly on their knees told him how
that in a place they had offended, and for that offense they were by the voice
of an Angel, commanded to take present penance, or their souls could not be
saved.

And what (said master Peter) is the penance ommanded.

Marry this (said the Friar,) to be whipped by the next man came near us, from
this place (the place where we offended) to the town, and about the town, and
this sin should be forgiven us. If we refuse this (this was our heavy sentence)
to live in despair and die damned wretches.

This therefore is our request sir (you being the man by ye Angel appointed)
that you would perform your part appointed, while we (very patiently) bear the
reward of our wickedness.

Well (quoth. Master Peter) though I am loath to plea the Beadle, I Will do thy
request, you shall not be damd for want of a whipping.

To be short, Master Peter tied the right hand of the Friar, and the left hand
of his wench together, and having so done (with a sound smarting rod of willow)
Ierkt them to the Town before him.

There in the view of all the people, he lasht them from one end of the Town to
the other, telling them at every second or third stripe of the heinousness of
their fault. When he had thus soundly whipped, the lecherous bald-pate, and his
Lemman, with most pitti^ull bloody backs, he left them, and loosing their
hands, he ga^e the Friar this caveat.

Take heed good Friar, of Venus fire,
You see the hire, of foul desire.
And so farewell, I have done your request, if at any time you have occasion to
use me, in such a piece of service, command me. Away went he very heartily
laughing, and the Friar and his wench very heavily weeping.

How Smug won a wager of Master Peter Fabell by a trick that he did.
AS on a day Master Peter Fabell, (an excellent Scholar and well seen in the
Art of Magic) was conferring with certain of his friends about certain
business and employments, Smug being in the hearing of them, between drunk and
sober (for he had been plying the Pitcher in Master Peter's sellar) ran nodding
in amongst them; and the very first word he spoke to them was how do you my
Masters. They being in very serious talk, unwilling to be disturbed with his
foolish babbling, with very fair words, requested him to leave them a little,
and within half an hour (or such a thing) they would give him the hearing of
that which he had to say to them. But he like an importunate beggar then he
would not leave them till he had spoke his mind to Mr. Peter.

When they saw there was no remedy, but he would have his will, come (said
Master Peter) honest Oliver be brief, utter thy ignorance roundly, what have
thou to say to me mow? Marry quoth. Smug, Master Peter, I hear say you are a very
cunning Gentleman, and that you have done as many fine tricks and feats in your
time as ere a Iugler in Europe has done, what will you say now if a plain
fellow, a hard-handed labourer, a poor leatherne-apronwearer, do such a
cunning trick, as you Master Peter, with the help of all your great
gogle-eyde, bottle-nos*d, blobber-lipt, bladder-cheekt, beetle-browed,
ex-headed detestable Devils cannot do the like. Why ho^est Smug quoth Master
Peter, who or where is he that will do this? Marry (quoth. Smug) I am he. Art thou
he quoth Master P^ter? Who would think thou had such tricks in thy budget?
Pr^tee Smug tell me, do not thou (as thou say I do) u^e the help of some
infernal? have thou no Devil in thy trick? come tell me: Devil quoth Smug,
marry God bless me Master Peter, I cannot endure to look upon those filthy
foule-mouthed fire-spitters, no Master Peter. What I do I will do of my
extraordinary wit and invention. Well lets hear quoth Mr. Peter, wh^t is it you
will do? Marry this I Will do quoth Smug, I Will set a candle burning in the midst
of this room where we all are, open and easy to be seen as my han^: this
(...) M, Togood shall see, Master Dauby, Master Dauty, Mistress Friskin, and my
man Ralph, here yet you shall not see it, mass Smug (quoth. Master Peter) if thou
can do such a ^^ck, th^^ put'st me down indeed. Come begin, let us see it
done nay first (quoth Smug) let as have a lay upon it, I will not show my skill
for nothing. Agreed (quoth Master Peter, what shall the ^ager be? why ^^ith
(quoth Smug) Master Peter you know my mind, for that I love all^^ies when I
make a wager, rather to have it in (...) ^^en dry, for you know Master Peter I
am dry my self, and ye say the word, the wager shall be a dozen of double Ale,
you know I am merry Smug, and merry Smug must have his merry go down, or else
he is no body. Well I agree (quoth. Master Peter) here is my hand, if thou perform
what thou have said, I Will loose, and I Will pay it. Then Smug called for a candle
and candlestick, which when he had placed M. Peter in the middle of the room,
and set the candlestick with the candle burning upon his head: now M. Peter
said he do you see this candle: why no (quoth. M. Peter) how should I see it? is
it possible for a man to see the crown of his head? you cannot see it then
quoth Smug, no I cannot see it said he.

Then Smug demanded of the rest, before named, whether they did fee it or no,
they all answered I, asking how they should choose but see it, and yet you
cannot see it, they say they cannot choose but see, and yet you say it is
impossible for you to see it.

Come Mr. Peter, you know what you have lost? if there had been a Kingdom laid
on it, when Mr. Peter saw how prettily Smug had overreached him, he smiling
sent for his losses, and in pastime made Smug take his well won liquor so
soundly, that he lay by the walls that night.

How Smug when he was made drunk, would needs go to fight with the shadow of a
sword and Buckler.
SMug one day being angered among a company of true drunkard^ like himself, came
chasing out of the Alehouse, like a mad man, as you know drunkards and mad men
are not much unlike, vowing to be revenged, or he would never drink draught of
good drink again, as long as he had a day to live, and so chasing reeling
homeward, as fast as his legs would give him leave.

This reeling infirmity threw poor Smug from post to post, and from wall to
wall, here he knocked his face against one stock, there against another, till
half the wild blood in his body was run out at his nose.

Still on he ^^aggered, till he came to a seat near his home under a sign of
the sword and buckler: where he sat a while to rest him, and as he sat like
an honest man careful to keep both ends together, cast up, as near as he
could without either ^en or counters, what he had received in the day before.

But all his casting could not cast the remembrance of his quarrel out of his
mind: for still be sat railing against his ^ot-companions most grievously,
calling them Scound^els, scabs, slaves, Knaves, and perpetually damb'd or
drunken Rogues.

As he sat thus, fretting and chasing vowing to be revenged, spyed, as he
shought the instruments of revenge lying before him: for it was a fair
Moonshine night, and the shadow of the s^^^e he safe under, seem to him to ^e
no loss then that it came off, the very sword and buckler that h^ng over his
head, unseen or unthought off.

Now you Rogues and Raggamuffins (quoth. Smug) I Will tickle in faith, I Will ^'ne make
no more add but take up my tools and to them again, by Pharaoh, by thi^ Sun
that shines says he (and looked up to the M^n) I Will kill them all, though every
one of them had as many lives as a Cat: presently keeping to take up his
supposed sword and buckler, he fell flat on the ground (for his head was so
h^avy, that when he ad put it downwards, he could not raise it up again for his
life.) There lay he sprawling and gropeing about to get his sword and buckler
into his hands, so long that he fell ^^st a (...), and waked not till morning,
he was fetched home by a couple of his honest neighbors.

How Smug laid a wager with certain Shoomakers that he was a Shoemaker, proved
it, and wone the wager.
THree or four honest good fellows of the gentle craft, traveling together
with Sir HUGHES bones at their backs to get work, passing through EDMONTON,
went to an Alehouse the next door to Oliver Smugs, to drink, where when they
had sitten a quarter of an hour, or there abouts, drinking healths, very
kindly and courteously, one to another, and to all good fellows of their crafts
and acquaintance, to make themselves merry, they sung a song in three parts
very orderly and well.

Smu^ (as he was at his work) hearing them sing so merrily, presently left his
work and went to them again, bearing in either hand a full can of the best
liquor.

Here my old Lads of mettle (quoth he) here is to you, and to all good fellow
Shoomakers in Europe, of which number (for want of a better) I my self make one.

Why sir (quoth one of them) are you one of the gentle craft? faith quoth Smug
I am as I tell you, and honest good fellow, and a Shoo-maker, and for the love
I bear to all kind Shooe-makers, I have made thus bold to come and drink with
you.

They all very courteously welcomed him into their company, and made him ^it
down amongst them.

When they had sitten a good while together drinking and singing very merrily,
one being a mad wag amongst them (above all the rest) suspecting Smug to be (as
he was indeed) a Smith; looked very earnestly upon him, and about him to find
something about him that might truly tell him whether he was as he said he was
yea or no.

At last prying very narrowly, he spyed his hammer hanging underneath his
Apron, in a great round brass ring.

Then half angry with Smug, because he told him he was a Shoemaker and was
not, he began to jest, slout and scoff at him, showing to the rest of his
fellows and companions the hammer that hung under his apron.

Why (said another of them) my honest friend, came you hither to slout us?
wherefore have you told us you are that you are not? Why (quoth Smug) what did
I tell you I was? why (quoth he) you did tell us you were as we are, a
Shoemaker I did indeed (quoth Smug) I told you so, and again I tell you so, and
will make good my word upon a wager with the best of you all, agreed (quoth
one) what shall the wager be?

Why in faith (quoth Smug) I think you do intend to travel no farther then this
town to night, and you say the word, the wager shall be a shot of six
shillings to be spent in shear drink: what say you sirs, are you contented with
it? if you be, strike hands and a match.

A match said they) I know said one of them you are a Townsman, and therefore
we shall not need to go far for a touchstone to try you.

Presently came a Serving-man into the Alehouse to Smug, and desired him for
Gods sake to give over his drinking and to go to work, for his Masters Horse
staid for shoes: what do you now think my Masters (quoth Smug) you see I now
am sent for, and must go presently to put on a pair of shoes, will you yield
you have lost? why look you here then my bullies, here is a shoe, pulling a
Horseshooe out of his pocket, of his own making, what say you now? am I a
Shoemaker yea or no? A Shoo-maker (quoth. one of them) here is a shoe in deed
but it is a Horseshooe, nay (quoth. Smug) I Will prove it to be shoe and no Horse
shoe, for I made it for Moss his Mare of Endfield, but be it mares or Horses
shoe a shoo it is, and I the maker, Ergo I am a Shoemaker because I made it.

Therefore come, deliver your purses of a five shillings piece, or so many
small pieces as amounts to so much, and let us stand close to our liquor for I
think long till I fee it.

The Shoomakers for all this would not yield they had lost, but would needs
have him into the Town for further trial: But all gave judgment on Smugs
side, that he was a Shooemaker, and had wone the wager. Then the shoomakers
when they saw there was no remedy, turned back with Smug to their old hostess,
and paid their losses, with the loss of their wits for that night.

How merrily Smug answered one that gave him good counsel.
SMug one day being set in the midst of his merry (...) swaggerting and
swilling very quick in c^r^^ling and ^^lling in for more as if he had
Fortunatus his purse in his pocket, was by an honest well governed man, that
sat by, (and noted his humor) sharply reproved, and after reprehension, kindl
yadmonisht him with these ensuing verses,

It thou the name of Husband good would have,
Then toil to get, and getting, getting save:
For he his gettings cannot wisely keep;
Shall wake with care, when savours soundly sleep.
To which Smug merrily, and very readily made this answer,
Alas good sir, good husbands name,
My Dad nere had before me:
For me to have it then, it were a shame,
As long as Kate will scorn me.
(As Parson plie-po^, counsels here)
I Will freely take my liquer,
It makes good blood, the fight more clear,
And dull wit gr^w quicker.
And so fell to his liquor again, till (contrary to his merry answer) it made
his quick wit grow duller: for within one half hour or more, he had not one
wise word to spare, though he might have had a Kings ransom for it.

How Smug was frighted by the Nuns of Chestone, thinking them to be Spirits,
and how afterward he frighted them by his sudden appearance.
SMug on a time, as he was stealing Venison, hearing the Keeper in the Park,
got up into a tree, to keep out of sight till he were past by him which he did:
scaping the Keepers eye, and so consequently his hand, very hansomely. But
sitting there a little while, prying and peeping between the branches (like an
O^^le in an I^y bush) to see, if the coast were clear, he spied the Mother Nun
of Chestone, with three or four young ones (attired in white long robes, with
railes and ti^^its, as they used to wear) coming toward him with a little
bell rung before them, sprinkling holy water, and praying upon their beads very
devoutly: withal the circumstances of that ceremony they used when they
received a sister into that holy order.

The very sight of these holy creatures, made Smug quiver, quake and shake like
the leaves of the tree he sat upon, for he thought verily that they had been
Spirits Furies, Fiends, or Hobgoblins, that came thither a purpose to carry him
away for stealing of (...) but they (poor souls) meant no more harm to him, then
^e to them, but past by, not casting so much as a look upon him.

When they were p^st him, his heart (that till then was as heavy us a (...)
^aind spittle-mans) was as light as a Mor^is Dancers: And very lightly from
knot to knot) got he from the top of the tree, thinking to have run to his
fellows that stayed for him: but by that time he was gotten from the bows to
the root, the Ni^^^ was turned back again upon him.

When he saw there was no way to get from them, suddenly he stepped right before
them and upon his knees with a ^^retcht throat (like an (...) bawling
Broom-man) desired them for Gods sake not to hurt him, and he would never walk
so late a Deer-stealing again while he lived and still he yawled and bawled
(with his hands claspt together in very pitiful manner, as though he would
have rent his windpipe.

The good old Nun, so suddenly encountered, by such a roaring raggamuffin, knew
not what to do, but ran as f^^st from him as ere she could and all her young
ones after the Dam, she run not so fast one way to leave him, but he run as
fast another way to leave her, and to find out his fellows. When he had found
them, he told them (in boasting manner, how he met with a company of Spirits in
the Park, and they durst not abide the sight of him. Therefore be of good cheer
my Masters (said be) if spirits be afraid to look upon me, and run so fast
from me, I hope the sneaking Keeper dares not abide my fury, and so they past
on again to their thieving pastime.

How Smug presuming upon his courage, after his exploit, (frighting these
supposed sp^rits) would needs go the next evening again a Deere-stealing: and
how dear ^^ he paid for it.
THe next evening Smug and his fellows went again a Deerstealing, but it was a
dear Deerstealing to him and the rest of his companions for they has not been
in the Pack above a quarter of an hour privily peaking about for their prey,
but they spyed the Keeper well weaponed with his great mastive dog at his
heels. Now out alas said the Par^on, what shall we do my Masters? what shall
we do? g^^ Banks as thou art an honest Miller, and would have me pray for
the forgiveness of toledish sin, tell me what I shall do.

Why alas good Sir John (quoth the Miller) what should I tell you, I know
neither what to do nor say for my self? what say thou Smug, thou see we
are all in danger: I prithee good Oliver, as thou love a good fellow, and
good fellowship, as thou love that, thou know we all love good liquor,
give us some good counsel, and good Smug be brief, for thou see our
destruction is at hand.

Why alas my Masters said Smug, what would you have me to do? by Vulcan I
protest, I know not what to say to you: I would I were at my Forge, you good
Sir John, a sleep in the bellfrey, and Banks in his Mill, or I would we were
all there, that we might be as safe as a thief in a Mill.

As they stood there prating and talking the one to the other, they saw the
Keeper coming directly toward them: Oh now Sumg (quoth. Sir ^ohn) stick to us all
my trust is in thee, I prithee Smug show thy self as valiant now against this
Keeper, as thou did against the Spirits and Hobgoblins thou mettest here the
other night.

If thou be remembered thou gave us words of comfort then and did did us
all be of good cheer and fear nothing, for thou said thou would make the
sneaking Keeper sly from thee, as fast as thou made them sly. Now honest
Oliver, be as good as thy word, make them fly and defend us, and I even I, Sir
John your mad merry Parson, will pray to God for thy health and welfare, as
long as I have a day to drink in: Why content you sit John (said Smug) I Will see
what I can do, go you two and lie close behind that hedge: It I have but as
good luck against this scurvy Keeper this night, as I had against my little
long-taild Hobgoblins ye last night, weel no leave the Park, without that we
came for. They (as smug told them) went behind the hedge and left him alone to
deal with the Keeper: but alas for all his big looks, and ^^aving worde^ the
Keeper thwackt him so soundly, that he made him lie sp^a^ling on the ground,
and so left him.

When the Miller and the Parson (pee ping through the hedge) saw the Keeper
gone, and poor Smug lie in such a pitiful case, they went to him, now alas
poor Smug (said Sir John) how is it? what cheer man? I perceive your ^utious
looks could not fright away the Keeper, as if did the Spirits you told us of.

Oh sir John (said Smug) this Keeper is a Devil, he has paid me in faith, and
yet all these blows grieve me not so much sir John, as that you and my
neighbor Miller did not stay to take part with me, for you would have had your
^hare in the Venison as deep as I and I had thought he had been wo^fe to deny
withal then Spirits, the Devil should have dealt with him ere I would have
come into his ^^^^ches.

Smug had no (...) spoke this word, but the Keeper was upon them again, and
mightily imaged against them all, gave the Miller and the Parson as much as he
had given Smug, and sent them all halting home together.

How Smug, was revenged upon a Barber, (his Rival) that made him kiss his
tail.
AS honest Smug loved (as he lo^ed his life) the society of his bearded a^^
defated, so in like manner, loved he sometime to be mad merry, amongst a mad
company of his bare-chind boon companions, his little wanton Wagtailes: his
sweet and twenties: his pretty pinckinyed pigmies, etc. as he himself used
commonly to call them.

Amongst all the kind Lasses he used to keep company withal, one (above all)
he best loved, and by that one whom he loved (above all) he was least loved:
for fine Philip the Bather had so labored in trimming his best beloved Barbara
(for so she was called) that he when he came to her was as welcome as water in
a Ship bad news to a sore grieved person or the shadow of a man to the longing
Mistress, of a long kept Maidenhead.

To be short, one evening Smug went to see his sweet Barbara, but when he was
come where he thought to have been very kindly welcome, to the house of his
best beloved, to his great grief he found the doors locked, bard, or bolted
against him: she he looked for looked not for him, nor any other at that time:
For the (as any kind whore will be) was content with one at once, and one she
had: The Devil had put the Barber and she together, and she was very loath
that any man should put them asunder. A good while Smug stood knocking, but no
body would stir to let him in, then he went to the window, and there he kept a
whewing, and a whistling to raise her, but all would not do: Then he fell to
knocking with his knuckles against the casement, and last raised the Barber out
of Barbaras bed, not in his own likeness, but in ye likeness of Barbara his
best beloved: for the Barber like a subtle knave slipped on his bedfellows
peticote, night-raile, and head-tire which became his hair-less face, as well as
hers it was made for, and so went to ye window in Barbaras apparel, he spoke
Barbaras voice as near as he could, and past as currantly with Smug in
conference, as could be wished. After many loving words, Smug desired he might
have a kiss ere he parted, for the Barber (for Barbara had told him he might
by no means be let in at that time.

This kind he-she very lovingly yields. I prithee sweet Smug (quoth. this fine
counterfeit) com buss me through this broken pane, that I will, in faith (quoth.
Smug) with a good will as ere I came from school, or went to the Alehouse:
then I prithee Smug (quoth. the Barber come smack me quickly that I may to be:
again, and to morrow I Will meet thee where thou will appoint: why come sweet
heart (quoth Smug) I am ready, and thrust his lips as far as he could through
the broken pain, against Smugs lips, the Barber instead of his lips turned his
AR. his lips I should have said: Smug smackt, and smackt that sweetly five or
six times together ere he could tell what he kissed. At last he perceived he was
played the knave with all and by whom: yet in policy very patiently put it up
and with these words took his leave. Farewell sweet Barbara, for the kindness
thou have shown me at this time, for all thy former kindness and these sweet
kisses, I rest by thee to thee to be commanded, whenever, wheresoever, and in
whatsoever thou please, and so sweet Barbara for a while God be with thee.

To bed went the Barber again, and Smug as fast as he could foot it homewards:
as late as he was when he came whom, he found his folks hard at work, and a
heat in the fire ready to be stricken out. Smug presently took the iron out of
the fire (sparkling hot) and ran as fast as he could back again to Barbaras
window, and there very hastily called for his sweet Barbara: desiring her most
heartily to let him have one kiss more, and he would raise her no more that night:
the Barber presently started up to the window again, as he had done before, and
(as he had done before) set his buttocks close to the broken pain, thinking
that Smug, as he had done before would have ^ist them: but instead of kissing,
or putting his lips too, he put his hissing hot iron to him, and made him fly
from the window as fast, as it the great Devil himself, and a dozen little
ones had been at his tail. Now (quoth Smug) my neat tremmer, I have trimmed
you aboat the lips, as well as you have trimmed me about the lips: as you like
this, play ye knave with me another time, and so farewell good plaster-maker,
hie thee home; and clap a plaster to it quickly, or thou't feel me when thou
do not see me. When Smug had thus revenged himself upon his rival he left
him crying and fretting, and w^nt laughing home again roundly.

How Smug foxt the fellow that went to cornute him in the Fox-chamber.
TWo brothers (young gallants in Edmonton) who had often made themselves merry
with Smugs company, had an equal desire to cornute or in plain terms, to
cuckold honest Smug eene on ye night his weding night, not so much drawn to it
by her beauty (for she was but a homely Smug Less) or any part or quality in
her ^s a desire they had to do him that wrongs and especially upon that night:
privy strife was between plotting and contriving the one to deceive and
prevent the other; Upon the weding day as opportunity served, the elder brother
(...) the Bride into a corner, where he spent many persuasive words to wi^^ her
to accord to his (as he called it) loving request man^ of poor Smugs faults
and imperfections he laid open, and withal his purse with very large proffers
to draw her on the more easily: but all could not do: She liked never the
worse of her ^mug (whom she had taken for better for worse) for ye disprai^^^
of him nor the better of him for all his large proffers: and therefore wild
him, to give over his honest suite, and be packing: for she was not a Woman
(howsoever she seemed in his eye) of ye unchaste disposition. This and many such
like answers she made him, as very willing to be rid of him but could not: for
he (scorning to show ^ ^^^^full blush) came upon her still, after her cross
answers with a fresh supply of smooth words, and left her not till be made her
(with the appointment of place and mi^^te) make him promise th^^ he should have
his desire, but alas that promise pa^^ not from her heart, for ^he was of a
settled conscience, that no means might move herineither profer, person, or any
other ind^c^ment whatsoever, to prove false to her Oliver.

When he had thus received his answer, and was gone his younger Brother privily
set upon her to the same purpose, and with ye answer he had was sent away very
pleasant, but his expected pleasure was his pain in the end. For she as soon as
they had left her, acquinted her Gr^^m, or her Bridegroom with their purpose
and to (...) that ten a clock was the hour, and the Fox Chamber the place
appointed, wishing him for ye night to lie there alone in her stead, ready to
receive them or any of them. When Smug understanding the knavery that was
practiced against him, after two or three smacking kisses, and thanks for her
kindness in telling it, he began to talk to himself in this manner. A ha my
little (...) Iinglespurs would you be nibling? would you in faith Lads, I Will have
a bait shall bait your boldness a little, I Will Fox you in faith come to the
Fox-chamber as soon as you will.

To be short, a little before the time appointed, Smug got him to be^ in the
Fox-chamber, against they or one of them should come: about the hour appointed,
both the Brothers met in the dancing room, or Hall, for they must pass through
that to the Fox, prepared to perform their promises: but this unhappy meeting
had almost marred all, for neither of them durst enter into the others sight.

By and by, before a minute of the prefixed time was past, the younger slipped in
whilst ye elder stood talking amongst the dancers and to bed he went. He was no
sooner got into his Hostess (as he thought) but Smug stepped out, and with an
old dry ^oot that he had (laid ready for that purpose) so belabored this young
Mutton-munger in his shirt, that he had been as good have had a sound whipping
as that basting.

A ha quoth Smug, i will for you in faith boy, do thou think mine Host of the
George had a Whore to his Wife? no thou lecherous Bab^^n, Smug is better liked
of in his frize or sheep-skin, by his own smug Less, then ere a spruce sleeked
Gallant of you all.

Why I prithee good Smug (quoth. the youngster) be contented, if I have made thee
a fault, I will make thee amends: Nay alas (quoth Smug) it is no fault, I rather
account my self, for the kindness you should have shown to me, in your debt,
but I Will pay you ere you and I part, and about him he laid again: Then Smug made
him slip on his clothes and beat him out of doors. When the elder Brother (who
all the while he was as he thought) in the Fox chamber with Smugs Wife, saw how
be was ^uld by her, and basted by him, be smiled to himself to think how well
be was rewarded for his forwardness, and how cleanly he himself had escaped
that scouring.

Why how now Brother (said he) what is the matter? has your Bedfellow beat you?
is she such a Devil? how chance you ple^sed her no better? please her (quoth
he) the Devil please her and him too, they have pleased me a plague on them,
but it would have pleased me better Brother, if you (as it was your desire this
evening) had had my place.

Why Brother you may see (quoth the Elder) what it is to be so forward in
seeking to deceive your Elders.

Well come Brother, lets go home and fleep honestly, for we see what is got by
tempting honesty, he has taught thee, and thou have taught me to take heed how
we enter i^to any such action again. Then home they hied them hand in hand, one
smiling and jesting, and they together fretting and chafing, cursing poor Smug
and his Wife, and the Fox-chamber extremely.

How Smug being drunk, lost his fellows in the Park, and how when they got
together by whooping and hollowing, he took them for The^ves, and would by no
means know them till he was soundly thwackt by them, and made to know his
friends from his foes.
ANother time Smug was fetched out of the Alehouse by Sir John, the Miller,
and mine host of the George, in such a case as it had been fitter he should
have gone to bed to sleep, then to ye Park a Deer-stealing, but drunk as he was
they would have him along with them, for without him they were no body, he must
needs go though he could hardly stand alone.

Well to the Park they got him with what great ado, consider of the case he
was in and imagine: when they were entered into the Park, and were ready to
enter upon the business, they severed themselves every one to his appointed
standing, with their weapons for that purpose, as Crosse-bows, Long-bowes, and
staves.

Smug he was set (because he was not in case to take steady aim) to watch that
the Keeper came not upon them before they were aware, but while they were close
at their business, their centinell (honest smug) forgetting both where he was,
and also what charge he had taken in hand, went reeling down the Park, clean
out of sight and hearing. When Sir John, the Miller, and the mad host had
struck the stroke, and made them all glad men, and bound their prize up
hansomely together, they went to fetch their continell, but when they came to
the place where they set him, he was not to be found: body of me (quoth. Sir John)
what shall we do? kind neighbors and friends, what shall we do? honest Smug
with his head full of liquor is gone God knows whether, I pray Jove he be not
fallen into some of these ditches, that I hope he is not (quoth. mine Host) he was
w^t ^nugh before: why what a mad knave is this Smug (quoth. the Miller) he is sure
asleep somewhere, faith then (quoth. sir John) we were best give over seeking for
him by the eye, and try what we can do by the voice. Then they fell to whoo^i^^
and hollowing as loud a^ ^hey could, that Smug might hear and answer them: a
good while they went whooping and hollowing, but Smugs ears was two far off for
their voices to reach, they could by no means hear their answering hollow: the
babbling Echo answered every whoope they made, but Smug not one. So long they
walked whooping and hollowing up and down, that the discoverer of every bad
action, the morning was ready to discover theirs, and yet Smugs hollow could
not be heard. At last when they had given over hollowing and were going without
him, they heard him whoop: bush (quoth. sir John) I think I hear his voice: from
whenc comes it? mass and I hear it too (quoth. yt host) but from whence I know not
why then (quoth yt Miller) we were best by our hollowing to keep him hollowing
still, and so we shall come to him I Will warrant you. They did as the Miller
counseled them, and within less then a quarter of an hour had sight of him.

When they were come near together, sir John (out of the love and good will we
bear to Smug, ^^ept forward before his fellows, and with an outstretched arm,
and smiling countenance would have embraced him. But Smug in his drunken humor
(not knowing him to be sir John nor the Miller and mine Host that followed him,
to be his old honest familias Copes-mates) took him such a knock ore the pate,
that he made Mr. Parson stag^er like himself, though their causes were much
unlike. Why how no^ Smug (quoth. ye fiery-fac'd Host) will thou fight with thy
friends? Friends (quoth. Smug) foot you rogues do you come rob me? Keep out, keep
out I advise you, and you mean to go home again to see your Wife and Children
(if you have any) keek out, by Ph^raoh you all dye else. Why I pr^thy Smug (quoth.
the Miller) put down thy ^^^pon, we are all thy friends: I prithee Smug (quoth.
mine Host) put thy staff on thy shoulder, and let us go home together do thou
not know me? Come, give me thy hand. That I will (quoth. Smug) There, and knoct
him ore the pate with his staff; there is a hand for thee, and still stood
striking at him, laying about him like a mad man. When they saw he would by no
fair entreaty come to ye knowledge of them, they all laid at him, and well, and
soundly basted his sides, and by that time they had thwaekt him soundly, indeed
his wits were come to him. Then he knew his friends from his foes, and desired
them very kindly (every man by his name) to hold their hands, and very orderly
and well helped his fellow thieves to bear ^^me their booty.

How Smug was deceived of his Red Cap by his Wife, and by that deceit forced to
leave his swaggering Company, and go with her home to his labor.
AMongst diverse Articles that were a reed upon betwixt Smug and his Wife, is be
kept unviolated on either part, this was one:

That day that Smug ha^ his red Cap on, (which Cap he called his Cap of
Maintenance) he was like a Lord of Mis-rule, to have rule and dominion over his
Wi^e, both at home and abroad: that day he had to spend at his own pleasure, to
Card, Dice, Drink, Drab, domineer, and do all that i^ pleased him to do,
without any interruption, or contradiction. But without that Cap he might do
nothing, but what stood with her good will and liking.

If at any time he were gaming, drinking, domineering, etc. without this Cap of
Authority, if his wife came into the place where he was and did but hold up her
^inger, he was presently to give over his company, obey, and follow her home to
his business.

One morning betimes, Smug was called from his work by a company of true
Tosp^ts (like himself) to go a Fox-catching: Forth he went with his red Cap
upon his head, swaggering and swearing, amongst his most abominable boon
Companions, like the Captain of a Gally-Foist.

First they tasted Liquor in one house, then in another, then another, and so
from house to house, till they had not left an Alehouse in all Edmonton
untasted.

At last, when their brains began to be dizzie, with running ^o long in this
maze of Good-fellowship, (as one evil leads to another) they went all as wise
as Woodcocks to a house of Iniquity, and there they drunk and swaggered helter
skelter: And to make them leap the more lustily, they sent for a noise of
Minstrels: and after that pitiful noise, the Treble and the Bagpipe, they
danced all out of measure. One while this creaking Music would go creeping
after them, like a tired follower after his leader, and another while it would
run so fast before them, that they were fain to run more then a Lacquey pace to
overtake it.

In ye midst of this merry pastime came Smugs Wife fretting and chasing into
the Room, to fetch him home, but ^y no means he would give over his pastime,
it was his day, and he would spend it at his pleasure.

When she saw he was so far in, that he could hardly be got out, she fell to
entreating, desiring him very kindly to go along home with her: but the more
she entreated, the more he stood against her.

Why thou confounding Cockatrice (said he) do^t thou not see my Cap of
Maintenance, my Scarlet colored Cap? am not I to do my plea^ure, without check
or control, so long as this Cap is on my head? Away, beg^n, or by the life of
Pharaoh I Will he humble thee: I tell thee, so long as this Cap is on my head, I
will not be crossed in mine humor.

Then she perceived it was but a folly to seek by entreaty to get him home, and
yet she was very loath to leave him behind her in that disordered Company. A
good while she stood musing with her self, what she were best to do to get him
along with her: in vain she studied not, for her study begat a trick that
effected her will, and that was this:

She took her man Ralphs Gray Cap from his head, and very handsomely, when she
saw her Husband was ^u^^e in talk (and had lost the sense of his feeling) she
took his Red Cap off, and put the Gray Cap on, in the stead of it. When she had
so done, she placed her self right before him again, and held up her finger;
for ask before said) at the holding up of her finger he was to fulfill her
pleasure, his Red Cap being from him.

When Smug saw her finger up again (little thinking of her subtlety) he was
very angry, and out of his anger said thus unto her: How dare thou presume to
hold up thy finger, and see this, (pointing to his Red Cap, as he thought?)
Down with that finger, or I Will set down finger and body and all, by the life of
Pharaoh; now by broad-cheek'd ^^cchus, that sweet swilling God of Good fellows
I will: shall I be crossed in my humors? If my Red Cap were at home, and ^here, I
would obey thee: but being both here, I will not.

Why you are deceived (quoth. ^he) your Red Cap is not here, and therefore you
must and shall along with me: look here, is this your Red Cap (said she?) and
took it from his head to show it him; I pray you look upon it well.

When Smug had looked well upon it himself, and had asked ye Miller and the
merry Priests Judgment of the color of his Cap, and found it to be a Gray Cap
he looked as pale as a poor respairing Debtor at the sight of a Sergeant, or
his cut-throate Creditor, and presently yielded, made a low leg, took his leave
of his Company as handsomely as he could, and reeled home with his Wife very
lovingly.

How Smug was taken by the Watch, and set in the stocks for abusing of them,
and how he kept such a coil with whooping and hollowing under a sick woman's
window, that the Constable was fain to set him at liberty, and glad to be so
rid of him.
Drink and good Fellows had kept Smug out so late one night, that the Watch,
as he walked homewards, had him in examination, both where he had been, and
about what business.

Smug half ^u^^el'd, or (as many term it) some what rugged, answered every
demand very crossely: whereupon the Watchmen (as men in Authority will) taking
it for a great presumption, that he should answer them so unhappily, grew very
choleric, and in their heat of anger struck him, and heaves him, and shoved
him between them, as they would have ^^ook him to ^^ters.

But, as before this rigorous usage, he could not well brook their words, he
could now well worse brook their ^^owes, and therefore resolved, as before he
had given them one cross word for another (I, and perhaps returned them with
the vantage) seeing they were so ready to give blows, to give them blow for
blow. So long he laid about him with his Mammer, (for that was his Morglay)
that scarce two of half a dozen that began with him, would stay to make an end
with him.

By and by came the Constable, with the bloudi^ Runawayes, to bear Smug to the
Stocks (which stood under the Constables Window) with much ado they dragged him
to them, and with as much ado got in his leg.

When they had thus set him fast, they left him, and every man returned to his
place again.

Being thus left alone, he fell to singing, to pass away the time as merrily
in the stocks, for once, as he had done in the Alehouse many a time and often:
He was as well furnished with odd pieces of b^^dy Ballads, and drunken
Catches, as a man of his profession might be: which he so roundly trould out as
he sat, that the Constables Wife was feign to send down her Maid to desire him
to sit quietly, and hold his tongue. How hold my tongue (said Smug) no: though
Master Constable have a trick to force me to hold my legs still, he wants a
trick to make me hold my tongue still.

But I prithee Wench, tell me from whence, or from whom come thou, to bid me
hold my tongue. Marry (said the Maid) I dwell here; you sit under the Chamber
Window where my Mistress (who sent me) lies very sick: How sick (quoth Smug) I
prithee tell me Less, who is thy Mistress? Marry (quoth ^he) the Constables
Wife: How? (said ^mug) the Constables Wife? What? his Wife that set me here? I
even his Wife (quoth the Maid) therefore I prithee good fellow be quiet. O I
will, I will, (said Smug) go tell thy Mistress I will not sing one Song more to
disturb her: I prithee do not good fellow) (quoth the Maid) and so went up
again to her Mistress. She was scarce in the Chamber with her Mistress,
delivering his answer but he was as loud and far louder then he was before,
though not in the same manner, because of his promise: for he had turned from
bawling like a Ballad-singer, to shouting, whooping and hollowing like a
Forrester. Such a noise he made as he sat with hollowing and whooping (as is
if he had been a hunting) that Master Constables sick Wife could by no means
take a minutes rest by him.

Twice or thrice she sent her maid down to him again, to desire him to he
quiet: but as often as she sent, he strained himself to raise his voice higher.

Nay in faith (quoth. Smug) your Husband set me here I thank him, and do you
thank him, if I be a trouble to you, for setting me so near you: Blame not
me, for in faith I must be doing somewhat to make my self merry. When he had
thus told her his mind, he fell to whooping and hollowing again.

Then she sent for her Husband, thinking by his presence to still him: but he
being with him, Smug was ten times worse then when he was from him (for he
played the knave so on purpose to cross him.)

When Master Constable saw, that neither fair means, nor foul, could make him
hold his tongue, and that by the noise he made his Wife grew worse and worse;
he commands his Beadle (or some other under Officer) to let him out, and
desired him very kindly to go quickly home to his dwelling.

Thus honest Smug by's knaverie,
Go^'s heels again at liberty.
How knavishly Smug was dealt with by three or four of his fellow Drunkards,
and how he broke the Glass that showed him the shadow of his one face.
SMug in his time had played many mad pranks by many, and one day it was his
chance to light into the company of three or four mad consorts, that played
the knave as well with him, as ever he had played the knave with any.

When they had spent a fore-^^^n in quaffing together, and filled him with
liquor, (which he was very easily entreated to take) and filled him so full,
that he was too heavy to stand or go, they led him out of the Alehouse into
the Church Porch, and there laid him all along upon his back upon a Bench. Under
his head (instead of a Cushion, or a pillow) they put a Cricket, or a litte
Joynt-stoole, (such as Children use to sit on in the Chimney-corner) and under
his feet, a great rough-hewed Freestone.

Yet as hard as they laid him, he slept as soundly, as if he had been laid down
upon a bed of Down; and lay with such a grace, as few Smiths (I can tell you)
can lie: for he had upon his head his Red Cap, his Cap of Maintenance, buttoned
up before, with a fair Feather of a Peacocks Tail in it, bound about with a
Carnation silk Ribband; his Leather Apron turned round together, and wound
about his middle: his Hammer hanging (Hanger-like) by his side, and both his
hands in his pockets.

Thus lay Smug at length, like ye Image of Duke Humphrey, over his long ago
consumed Carkas, or his Dust, Earth, and Ashes.

Had honest Smug (thus lying) been grated about, with some pitiful Epi^aph,
or Deaths-Head, and Memento Mori, and his sleep lasted as long as the sleep of
one of the Seven Sleepers; I am persuaded he would have had more Spectators
then the richest Monument that stands either in Saint Paul's Church, or
Westminster.

But to the matter: when (as he lay thus) the mad crew that laid him so, saw he
was as deep in Sleep as Drink, they began to work their wills upon him in this
manner:

They got a good handful of small Coa^^s which they beat to powder, and having
^^at them to powder, put them into a dish of fair water* when they had
Well-mingled (like right dawbing Painters) their Small-Coale powder, blacking,
and Water together, and made a perfect Coale-black, without either Size or any
such like selling Stuff, they said it on his face, which was reasonable black
before, not leaving so much white or red to be seen as a small pins-head will
cover.

When they had thus he blacked and b^smouched him, with his Devils look, they
left him (snorting on the Porch-Bench) till he should either wake of himself,
or be waked of the Sexton, or some other kind of bald-pated Officer.

There he slept foundly three or four hours without moving; till at last, with
a remove that removed him from the Bench to the ground, he waked, and after
long stretching, reaching, and yawning, got upon his feet.

But alas, when with much ado he was got up, he had as much ado to stand: yet
out of the Church Porch he made a shift to stagger, and up into the street.
When he was ther^ (reeling homewards to his own house) the Boys at play in the
street spyed him: at the first sight half afraid of his black face, they ran
apace away from him; yet at last, when a great company of them were gathered
together, they turned to him again, and followed him close, shouting and crying
after him, Devil, Devil, Devil.

When Smug, as drunk as he was, heard them call him Devil, Devell, Devil, he
marvailed much in his mind wherefore they called him so (for alas he knew not:)
Had they called him Drunkard, it would never have grieved him; for that he knew
to be his ordinary Title.

Still followed the boys at his heels, (crying as they begun) Devil Devil,
Devil, throwing old shoes, Boo^^s, and Pi^^le stones after him: so long they
followed him, that they made him (whole drunk) ^alfe mad; yet all he could do,
he could not mend it: The boys loded him so well, they would not leave him
till they saw him at his door.

His Wife (busy within) bearing the noise and shout the boys made, looked
out, and spyed her own sweet Husband in that sweet taking presently she got him
in a doors, and there began (very prettily) to make use of her tongue to him.
After many brabling words between them, she showed him a glass, in which he
saw the shadow of his face, in that most pitiful case.

Then Smug began to swear (not like a Smith I can tell you) Gogs Nowns, Foot
and nails, thou most abomi^^nable whore, do thou show me the Devil, to
fright me from that little store of wit which I have? and thy Devil were ten
Devils, I am not afraid of him, and that thou shall quickly see: With that he
took his Hammer from ^is side, (still seeing his own swee^ shadow in the
Glass, which he took to be the Devil (struck at it, and with one blow
clattered the Glass all in pieces.

Now you Whore (said he) where is your Devil now? I think I have mauld him I
faith: Bring your Devils to me, do thou? Thou whore do thou. Alas sweet
Smug (quoth she) seeing him so very much moved, be patient I prithee sweet
Chuck, and showing him the ^rackt frame: look here, here is no Devil:
therefore I prithee sweett Oliver be quiet.

Nay (quoth Smug) I Will tickle your Devils, in faith; and your Devils come to
^^^est (...) within mine own House, upon mine own ground, I Will Devil them.

Come good sweet heart (quoth she) now thou have beaten the Devil away, let us
go to bed, after a quarter of an hours fretting, with very good words she got
him to bed.

In the morning when she knew his sleep had made him sober, she showed him his
black face in another Glass; which when ^e saw, and knew well what he saw, he
blushed; but the ^est was it could not to see^, till his ^izard was taken off
with fair w^^e^ and soape: then he confessed himself faulty, promised amends,
and went very close to his labor.

How cunningly Smug escaped the Keeper, and others that pursued him, and made
him run up and down from place to place to seek him in vain.
SMug and his and ^rew of Venison-^aters, one night being at their (...), were
suddenly set upon by their old Enemy yt Keeper, and two or three more; that
after they had taken great pains to get their prey, and bound it up handsomely
ready to bear it away, they were forced to (...) them, for fear of a further
mischief. The Miller he r^n one way, and nimble sir John in his ^uckram (...),
another way, and Smug another way, as fa^^ as if they had him (...) up to
running all their life time. They had no time to take their leave one of
another, or appoint a place of (...).

As those (...) took several ways to run, so the Keeper and his (...)
themselves to pursue them, one far after the Miller, mo^^er after sir John, and
two or three after Smug for he was the ^^ly (...) they looked for, though all
them were kn^^n to the Keeper well enough* The Miller be r^n not far, ere he
was stayed with a good p^t ^^ the (...): Sir John^ followers followed ^o close,
that he was (...) to leap for his liberty over a ditch: over he should have
(...), (...) a short leap laid him ^^ along in ditch and so he was stayed and
taken up with never a drye^^* ^o on him* Smug ^e (...) homewards, followed at
the heels ^y the Keeper and another, yet they could not overtake him.

When he was got to Edmonton, with running to and fro up one Lane, and down
another; he got out of the fight of his pursuers: but it was so late, he could
not get into any house to hide him, save his own: and into that he durst not
go, fearing they would go thither to seek him.

A pretty while he stood studying which way to shift for himself resol^ing one
while to do this thing, another while that, another while another. At last,
standing thus in a brown study, turning his eyes first one way, then another
way, one while up, another while down, he spyed the sign of the White ^orse:
not painted upon a board (as they use to be here in the City.) but fashioned
out of Timber, and set gallantly over the Digne-post. Mass (quoth he) I care
not greatly, if I get up and bestride this White Horse, and make another S.
George here in Edmonton: I Will do it in faith, it may be I may sit safer so then
any way else; if I do, I do: if I no not, I know the worst on it, it is but
wearing two stocks upon one leg, and I am as well able to endure it now as ere
I was. Up to the White Horse he get and backed him bravely, with his arm
stretched out, his hammer in his hand in stead of a Sword, and the Lippit of
his Red Cap tied under his Chin, which stood for his Helmet most featly.

While he set thus gallantly st^^^^ing upon his Wooden horse (yet no
Hobbyhorse) the keeper that followed him so close, to have gotten him into his
keeping (with the other that was with him) went peaking and prying in every
(...) of ye street to ^^d him: twice or thrice (backward and forward*) they
went under him, and yet could not see him, but he saw them well enough.

When they had lost an h^^rs labor, or thereabouts in seeking after him
without doors, they resolved another while to seek him within: Come said the
Keeper to the other; let us go search the Inns, and first this, this White
Horse is his daily haunt, and therefore it may be we shall find him here this
nighte^^^^ let us in.

As the Keeper was going into the White Horse (under Smug) his fellow looking
up, had him stay, stay: quoth the Keeper, wherefore should I stay? Why look you
(said the other) this is not the White Horse as you take it to be, this is the
George. Mass (quoth. the Keeper) it is the George indeed come let us over to the
White-Horse. When they had crossed the Way, (as they thought to the White Horse)
they found the George again. Zounds (quoth. the Keeper) Jack, this is the George
too. What? have we two Georges in Edmonton? Foot man, where are we? If this be
Edmonton, here was but one George yesterday, and the white Horse over against
it, now here are two Georges one against another; this is strange: it is very
strange indeed (quoth the other.) Bones man are we not at Hodsdon? For thou
know the two Georges are in Hodsdon. Mass thou say true, Jack; and by
these Signs, this should be Hodsdon. Come come. (quoth the other) we mistook
our way t^^ the dark: this is Hodsdon; come, let us up to Edmonton. Content
(quoth. the Keeper) and together they ran as fast as they could to Hodsdon, to
find Edmonton.

When Smug, who heard all their talk (and sat laughing, ready to bewray
himself with laughter saw them trudging toward Hodsdon, be gat down from his
white Horse, and went to bed, leaving them in their Wild-Goose-Chase, to seek
him.

When they were come to Hodsdon, there they saw the two Georges too, for there
the Signs stood indeed, then they chased, swore, and stamped like madmen,
cursed poor Smug and his company, and vowed to be the death of him if e're
they could take him handsomely. There they took up their Lodging for that
night, and the next morning went home to their business.

How Smugs Wife locked him in a Doors, when he would have gone abroad a
Swaggering, and what shift he made to get out and amongst them.
SMug one-day very early prepared himself to go abroad, according to promise
the day before a Drinking: and to go handsomely, he tricked himself up in his
holiday Suit, put on a clean Band and his red-Cap that he might go through
stitch with his business, without cross, or controulement. But alas, even as
he was ready to go down the stairs, his Wise perceiving his intent, presently
to cross him, stepped out of the Chamber before him, passed the body after her,
and locked him in: now, said she, and p^n be hot with anger, walk up and down
and cool your self; If your walk tire you, lie down and rest you, for you
shall rest upon no Ale Bench this day.

This cross deed and these cutting words of hers vexed him, that he was almost
in a bad a case with fretting, as he had been the day before with drinking;
yet he saw there was no remedy but patience, for neither fair words nor foul
could make her turn the Key to let him out.

From the time he rose till almost Dinner time, he walked up and down in his
Chamber, cha^^ng, fretting, and mumbling like poor Tom of Bedlam in his Barn,
or bowsing Inn.

At last (to cross his Wife as well as she had crossed him) he took an empty Can
that stood by upon a little Table tied it to the end of a long string: and put
it out at his Chamber-window; where it hung dangling like the poor men's Box al
Ludgate, and he himself, like the bawling Box*man, stood peeping through his
Lattice, crying, For the Lords sake, for the Lords sake, good people, pity a
poor Prisoner; making his Can dance at the end of his whip cord, with drawing
it up and down as nimbly as one of the little thread Puppits in the lamentable
Motion of Dives and Lazarus. Well, there he stood in this manner bawling and
yawling, fill he had drawn as great a company of people together, as the
babbling of a cheating Mountebanke, or the foule-fur'd, throat of an itchis
Ballad, singer in a Fair or Market-time. To conclude, when his Wife saw such a
company of people, Men, women and children gathered about him, she (poor
wretch) ashamed to hear him, and vexed at those that stood gaping about him, in
a cha^^ng heat as she locked him in, let him out, and was glad to be so ^^d of
him.

How Smug was revenged on his Wife, for Locking him in a doors.
THe day succeeding this unkind Cross, Smug rose again very early, and put on
working day apparel, with his old Sheepes-Russet-Button-Cap, and went to work
as hard as if he had wrought for a wager; he labored at the Forge (but 'twas
to forge a piece of Knaverie) till his sweaty face ^eeked again. All the day
long wrought he thus hard without any stop, stay, or hinderance: nay, which is
more to be wondered at he drank not above thrice all day and that was as he
used to call it, small comfort, commonly called small Beer.

His Wife to see him work so close (as she very well might) mervailed and gave
him as kind words as he could wish for, and swear by the faith of her body, she
was glad to see such a sudden alteration. He still plying his work, gave her
good words for her good words, very kindly.

When his labor had brought on the Evening (which brings an end to labor) he
very kindly requested his Wife to walk with him, to nip themselves a little in
the Evening for it was a very fine frostie Moone-light evening: she very kindly
took his kind request, and went with him.

Very lovingly they walked together, arm in arm out at the Towns end, one
while this way; and another while that even as it pleased him (her most
virtuous Leader) to lead her. They walked thus lovingly up and down together
so long, that there was no Candle burning nor one eye open in all the Village;
then home apace he hyed him. When he was come to the door, ready to enter, he
sent his Wife on a sleevelesse Errand to the Turning-Stile, to his honest
neighbor Noddamus: while she poor woman, was about his bidding, mistrusting
no Knaverie to be done against her, he presently turned the Key on the outside
to let himself in, and on the inside to lock her out.

When she was returned from the place aforementioned and found the door locked,
and the Key sticking in the inside, she knocked, and with her knocking called;
but bonest Smug lay snug, and would neither rise to let her in nor make her any
answer. Then she knew not what to do, but (as Women do wanting their wills)
safe and cried, to ease her stomach. His resolution was set to make her sit all
that Night, to knock her heels and blow her nails at the door, like a poor
back-bitten Stall-creeper: Never did she chatter better with anger, then she
did at that time with the coldness of the weather, that made her teeth go
faster then her tongue.

When she saw, that neither reasonable knocking, nor unreasonable calling could
raise him, she took up a great Flint-stone, and beat against the door, as
though she would have beat it down. Then Smug started up to the window in his
shirt, and very strangely asked, who it was kept such a bounsing at the door?
Marry good man Drunkard, quoth she, it is I that knocks: Wherefore have thou
locked me out? Nay first, quoth Smug, answer me, Wherefore did thou lock me
in? 'Twas so lately done, I am sure thou have not forgot it; or if thou have,
thou see I have not.

Thou lockedst me in, and J have locked thee out,
Good Agnis walk, -- go walk about.
So, talk no longer; for I swear by my Red-Cap, and by Bacchus, the god of
good Liquor, I mean to keep thee out all night, as thou kept'st me in all
day: and so sweet Agnis, till between Seven and eight in the morning, farewell.

To bed went he again, and left her to shift for her self till morning: how
they agreed when they came together, I know not; but you may judge, she scarce
took it patiently.

How Smug quarreled with his Fellows, and was ready to fight about the singing
of a Catch: and how till they turned it to his mind, he would not be quie^ed.
SMug one day being very merry with his honest swilling Associates, from
Drinking fell to Singing; and amongst all the odd Alehouse Catches they had
up, this was one, Jle tie my Mare in thy ground: this, I Will tie my Mare in thy
ground, was ^ost so long to and fro between Smug, the Miller, and the merry
Parson, that Smug had forgot that he was singing a Catch, and began to quarrel
with the Parson, thinking verily he had meant (as he said in his Song) to tie
his Mare in his ground. Will you tie your Mare in my ground (said Smug?) the
Parson sung still, I Will tie my Mare in thy ground: In my ground, said Smug?
still went the Parson for ward with his Catch, I Will tie my Mare in thy ground,
etc. Then Smug began to swagger indeed, and swore, If he tied his Mare in his
ground, he would make his Cap and Scull cleave together: besides, he would
give his Mare such a Drench, that after that Drink, she should never eat
more. The Parson seeing Smugs rage increasing with very good words entreated
him to be patient, and cast away Choler; for as I am an honest Sir John, and a
boon Companion, I meant no harm in the world: I did but sing the Catch, as
the Catch was. But all these kind words and entreaties could not win Smug to
patience, till Mr. Parson turned his Song, and himself in singing, from him to
the Miller: Then they were as good friends as could be, and in kindness, went
again to drink together, till they were all laid drunk to sleep.

How Smug being drunk in his Bed, pist upon his Wife through a Cullender,
taken in stead of a Chamber Pot.
Laboring at the Liquor all day, many times tired Smug far worse then his
labor at the Forge, as it was often seen by him; but most especially at this
time, that I am now to speak of: For at this time be had labored so hard
(and no body blame him, for he ceast not from morning till night) that his
legs were not able to bear him to his Bed. But what be could not do
himself for himself, the helping hands of some kind Neighbors and friends
did: in Bed they laid him, and left him, to get that sleeping that he lost
waking.

There lay be grunting and groaning like a Hog in a Stye, turning to and fro,
from one side of the Bed to the the other: for the Liquor wrought so within him,
that he could not sleep, as he used to drink, soundly for the life of him.

Within half an hour after he had lain thus tumbling and tossing, as if he
had lain upon Nettles, his Wife went to Bed to him, to rest her after her
(indeed) true Labor: But (poor Woman) she found less rest there then in her
labor; for he kept such a retching and stretching himself, such a hunching
and punching with his Legs and elbowes, that she might have lain better at east
between two ^ad-men, then by him in that taking.

As he lay thus laboring (laden and over laden) with the Liquor he had taken
the liquor lay laboring within him for vent; Which though he could very
hardly rise to give it handsomely, yet he did his goodwill, and reached out of
the Bed for a Pispot; but in stead of a Pispot he took a Cullender (that stood
close by his Bedside upon a Settle) and kneeling upright in his Bed, let his
ill-digested Liquor run as freely into it, and through it, upon his ^^umbring
Wife, as a Conduit-pipe at waste.

She presently (feeling her self warm wet) start up and began to brabble with
him, and cry shame upon him, for doing such a beastly deed.

Why thou Whore (quoth Smug) will thou not give me leave to piss? If thou
crossest my humor but with two cross words more, I Will break the Pisse-pot
about the pate of thee, therefore be quiet.

But for all his threatening, she would not h^ld her tongue; That she kept
walking still, till Smugs fists walked about her ears.

There was such a sore Ba^taile in the bed between them, as I think never was
seen between Bed fellows before; and had not a Candle and a clean pair of
Sheets been quickly carried up to part them, there would have been great
bloodshed.

THO: BREVVER.

SMUG'S Ghost,
When with the Ayrie Essence sempiterne,
You might a Body (now is dust discern)
I was of many set by for Mirth:
Good Company I loved with all my heart,
And like a boon Companion played my part,
(It was fore spoken at my hour of Birth.)
Heart-eating sorrow never with me remained,
While I your shape, as I have said retained,
My Cogitations were all Airy light:
I never loved Hoarder, nor the hoarding sin,
That coin my labor brought me one day in,
I spent in pleasure e're the next days night.
Mad Mr. Peter, and my Red faced Host,
My dapper Parson, whom of all I most
Entirely loved for his merry vain:
And Banks the Miller that poor thin checked knave,
That help to bear my body to the Grave,
Were men of mettle, of a perfect strain.
These men and I, made up a matchless Crew
For merry Meetings, till the ground looked blew*
We'd sit and send, our soaking Healths about:
We'd sometime Thieve together in the dark,
To fetch a feast of Venison from the Park,
And where we came we made a fearful rout.
Then grant my Ghost this, though our bones be rotten,
Our Names may live, and never be forgotten.
FINIS.
Here SMUG the SMITH, with leave of his Host:
Does baffle the Keepers, upon a Signe-Post.


LONDON, Printed for Francis Coals, dwelling in the Old Bailey, 1567.


