THE SUCCESSES OF OUR Cheshire Forces: As they came related By Sir William
Breretons own Pen, to a Minister of note and eminency in the City.

In which Victory we may observe;

1. Courage borne up, against the greatest discouragements.

2. Though the engagement was fierce, yet the rage of the devourer was far
beneath the mercy of our Deliverer, who gave them so great a victory without
the loss of a man.

3. The Victory was received by them, as it ought to be read by us, not without
spirits raised high in thankfulness.

To which is added, Late good news from Lancashire, of the taking of an
hundred and forty horse and their riders near Latham House.

Published according to Order.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Underhill, at the Bible in Woodstreet. 1644.

The Successes of our Cheshire Forces* as they came related by Sir William
Breretons own Pen, to a Minister of note and eminency in the City.
SIR,
AS you have been frequent in your addresses to God in our behalf, so you may
look upon a wonderful and extraordinary deliverance and victory, as a return
of your prayers, for which I desire such return of thanks may be made, as
shall be thought fit for so great a mercy, which God gave us upon monday
morning, being August 26th 1644. Upon Saturday evening intelligence came to
Namptwich of the enemies passing by us toward the King, and quartering about
Whit church, whereof I met with the news at my coming out of Lancashire that
day, where I had leave to meet Sir John Meldrum, and the Lancashire Gentlemen:
And my Horse were not (since they had the fight at Tarvin) returned hither, but
were quartered about Middlewich. Two or three of our Troops came not in, which
made the assault the heavier upon the rest; which together with some seven
Companies of foot (whereof three or four were of my own Regiment, one of
Collonell Brooks, and the rest of Collonell Duckenfeilds Regiment) marched out
of Namptwich upon Sabbath day in the evening about six of the clock, and came
to Malpasse, the next morning about spring of the day, where my Troop charged
the Enemy three or four times, the other Troops which followed, not being
able to come up in the narrow lanes.

The Enemy were judged to be about forty Colors, and betwixt two thousand and
three thousand in number: The Commanders thereof being many of them Papists,
(for this was the remainder of the Earl of Newcastles Army sometimes commanded
by Goring) did fight and come on very gallantly, but their Leaders never went
back again. There was in the Front of my Troop diverse Officers, who behaved
themselves very gallantly, as Lieutenant Collonell Jones, Captain Zanchy,
Captain Finch, Captain Church, Lieutenant Buroughs, and diverse others. When
we came to the top of the hill, they discovered the Enemy to stand in six or
seven several bodies, or divisions, in very good order. But before this time
we had killed diverse of their Colonells, and great Officers. It was not
thought fit to pursue any further, we having beaten two strong parties of
them, and followed them through Malpasse Town: Nor was it safe to engage an
handful against so great a number; And we could not retreat without apparent
danger to have lost all: Therefore it was resolved that we should stand in the
mouth of the lane till the foot came up to relieve them, which were commanded
by Major Lanchane, and Lieutenant Collonell Venables, which was accordingly
done: But before the foot came up, our Horse were very much spent, having
received three or four fresh charges, by several fresh Brigades or Divisions,
wherein was neither man, nor one foot of ground lost, but rather gained every
charge; And when the foot came up, they performed very good execution; yet
were they all in danger to be surrounded by the Enemy, who as they were
sufficiently strong, so they wanted not opportunity when God delivered up so
many of their Commanders into our hands, which were killed, wounded, and taken
prisoners, as will appear by the enclosed.

Their common Soldiers upon the loss of so many of their Commanders
retreated, and we were not able to pursue them far; But had we had five
hundred Horse, we might (by Gods blessing) have wholly destroyed this Army;
whereof there may be still about two thousand remaining, which with the
addition of Sir William Vaughans Regiment, and Collonell Trevers, and the
remainder of the Princes Regiment of Horse, they cannot be but above three
thousand strong. They were then upon their march toward Shrewsbury, and so to
the King; but fled back toward Chester; where they could not be admitted, but
were looked upon very scornefully, because they were beaten back with so
inconsiderable a number, which they exceeded above ten to one.

The enemy being still an overmatch for us, it is not improbable they may force
their passage to join with the Kings Army; therefore it were much to be desired
that what horse and foot is intended us might be speeded unto these parts. It
is uncertain where the Prince is, but some say he is gone toward Shrewsbury,
some say toward the King, but it is not known to very many in Chester.
Lieutenant Colonel Jones, Captain Zanchy, Captain Finch, Captain Church, and
others, showed much courage and resolution, in standing so valiantly, not
shrinking a foot at several charges by the enemy, which did so much amaze the
enemy, as that some of them swore; They were Devils and not men. Hereof I
desire God may have the glory: I have no more to add, but with my respects to
you, desiring the continuance of your prayers, subscribe my self

Your assured friend, Will: Brereton.

The Postscript.
BY Letters from Colonel Haughton I am informed, that the Lancashire horse are
drawn near to Leverpool, and have blocked up the town by land, as our Ships
have done by Sea; and that they have lately taken a party of horse out of the
town, whence there come diverse, both horse and footmen, to submit themselves;
and it is hoped before long, the town may be gained, and the sooner, were it
not (as is conceived) that the English and Townsmen were overruled by the
Irish soldiers.

A List of prisoners taken by the Cheshire Forces for the Parliament at
Malpass, Aug. 26. 1644.
I. MAjor Cromwell, who commanded as Major to the Duke of Yorks Regiment of
horse. II. Major Maxie, Major of Sr. Charles Lucas his Regiment, of which
Regiment there is no field Commander left; Sir Charles himself (who was
Lieutenant General to the Prince) being taken at York, and his Lieutenant
Colonel also. III. Major Cranthorn of Col. Foriers Regiment (formerly
Claverings Regiment) who contended to be Lieutenant Colonel of that Regiment,
and lead up the same as Major. IV. Captain Thomas Clavering, brother to Colonel
Clavering of the North, who is dead at Kendall. V. Captain Barker, and
Lieutenant Mountan, with some other inferior Officers, and about twenty common
soudiers. The two Majors and the Lieutenant are dangerously wounded.
At the same time there were slain Col. Conyers, Col. Baynes, Major Heskitch,
and it is said three other Majors, and other Officers about forty: others say an
hundred slain more. Sir Marmaduke Langdale, as is reported by a Trumpeter,
(whom he sent to Mr. Brereton for a List of prisoners) is wounded in the back,
so is Captain Harris, and both lie wounded at Chester; but on our part we lost
not one man, neither taken nor killed, nor any dangerously wounded. Lieutenant
Col. Jones, (who behaved himself most gallantly) being shot in the thigh, but I
hope but slightly, and some other Officers and soldiers of Sir William
Breretons own Troop (woe were in the van) very slightly wounded.

August 29. By intelligence from Chester, we are informed, that there is one
Major and one Captain dead and yet unburied.

By Letters newly come out of Lancashire, from, and to persons of quallity, it
is certified, that our forces being to pass by Latham House, and Ambuscado of
horse was placed near the said House, and being discovered by the shooting off
of a pistol, our men encompassed them, and took an hundred and forty horse and
their riders; and that Leverpoole is besieged by Sea and by Land.

FINIS.

