THE SPIGHTFUL SISTER. A New Comedy. Written by Abraham Bailey, of
Lincoln's Inn, Gent.

Licensed April 10. 1667,

Roger L'Estrange.



LONDON, Printed for Thomas Dring the Younger, at the White Lion next
Chancery Lane, in Fleet Street, 1667.

To the Reader.
EPistles and Prologues being for the most part skipt over without reading, I
had thought to have silenced my Pen as to either of them both, had not the
importunity of the Stationer (who was unwilling to have a blank page, but that
the Buyer might have enough for his money) prevailed with me so far as to give
thee this short account of it; That as it is a Play, so I made the writing
thereof only my Recreation, not my Study; done in few hours and youthful
years, that may (rightly considered) excuse the Faults therein, which (if I am
not partial) are not great, nor many; only these few committed by the
negligence or oversight of the Printer: I must desire thee either gently to
pass over, or else with thy Pen to correct.

PAge 3. line 20. the comma at weary, and for steps read sleeps. p. 4. l. 19.
for warrant 1. torrent. l. 31. for a fable r. affable. p. 5 l 2. for surprise
r. suppress. l 27. for come r. can p. 7. l 31 for time r. line. p. 12. l. 32 r.
Kidnappers. p. 14. l. 6. r. expostulate. p. 16. l. 15. r. what p 18. l. 31 r.
solicited. p. 26. l. 17. r. favor. p 35. l 17. r. Occus. p. 47. l. 12. r.
Beucer. p. 62. l. 23. r. you.

The Persons Names.
Occus. An old Humerous Lord. Beucer. His Clerk. Hare. A Debtor to Occus.
Litus. A Suitor to Berania. Harpes. Litus his Ruffion. Petus. A young Lord,
afterward Berania's Sweetheart. Lidorus. A Lord, Friend to Petus. Marus.
Petus's Father. Lonus. Litus's Father. Admetus. A Virginia Tobacconist. King,
Chancellor, Clowns, Watchmen, Constables, Gods, Goddesses, Nymphs, Servants,
Murderers. Berania. Daughter to Occus. Losana. The Spightful Sister to
Berania. Thele. Waiting-Maid to Losana. Hacca. Waiting-Maid to Berania. Sarah.
An old Sweetheart to Beucer. Winifred. Sarahs Humerous Mother.
Books Printed for Thomas Dring Junior, at the White Lion in Fleet Street,
where you may be furnished with most sorts of Plays.
A General History of the Caribby Islands, being an exact Description of all
the English Plantations, etc. in the West Indies, adorned with Sculptures,
Folio.

Direction for the Study of the Law. 12o.

Cupid's Courtship, 8o.

THE SPIGHTFUL SISTER.
Actus Primus,
Scena Prima.
Enter Occus Smoking, and Beucer. Oc. I Say, It is not so good to be cheated
as to Cheat: So I do.


Beu. Does he mean honestly?


Oc. Hang honesty, he has put me to I-know-not-how-much trouble. I vow, so I do.

A-Deuce take him for a knave.


Beu. Patience Sir, he did not intend --


Oc. Intend a fool; I protest so I do, I don't know what to do, I Am so vexed
about it.


Enter Hare. Beu. He comes.


Oc. How de y' Sir? Well, what say you? de y' mark, I protest
So I do, you had almost hindered me of seeing
You; so you had, if you had not come as you
Did: Will you pay-in the Money, and have your Bond?

Hare. My fortunes bow to you. --


Oc. I cannot abide this elegant Fortune,
Not I; My money, My money, Man?

Hare. Let my Condition plead for me.


Oc. That will not: the condition of the Bond is, to pay it
Double, (de se?) double, I vow.

Hare. Your Honor's Merciful.


Oc. Merciful me no more than I Merciful you:
For I vow (de se?) get it me quickly, or I Will
Know why you will not: so I will as I live-law.
Exit Hare. Go bid Berania come to me, do so.
Exit Beucer. Enter Berania, and Hacca. Well, how now Berania, what say you to
me about
Litus? I protest, I believe he looks like a rich Man.

Ber. More tortures yet! The harmless dove pursued
By threatening death from the Jar-falcons Talons,
Avoyds that cruel touch, and lives secure;
My duty checks too great a scorn but Love.
Can utter stranger to his qualities,
Free me from Inquisitions, worse then Death?

Oc. Well then, you will not have him? I Will tell him the
Long and the short of the business, so I will.

Exit. Ber. It Is strange to see wealths power more then the strength
Of Virtue, stack't by Craesus his false fame;
Mony's Lord Paramount, and Riches sway
My Fathers fancy, for a prudent Soul
Content's a Paradise, as unknown to most,
As are the furthest Limits of Euphrates.
Every Sense turns Secretary, to record
His or my own hard Fortune, yielding's fatal;
I have set my Resolution, and I Will see
Myself Incloystred e're his wife I Will be.

Enter Occus, Litus, two Foot-boys. Lit. Well, how stands the wind of your
Daughter's Good liking?


Oc. Why I protest-law it was so sharp North (so (...)
(...), that it had like to ha blown my Nose
Away, I vow, so soon as I mentioned you to her;
Law-ye.

Litus. Be plain.


Oc. Why, the Long and the short is, de se? she says, she
Will Not have you, I am in haste I vow, good b'y.

Exit. Li. To Fortune's Jiggs the vulgar sort apply
An armed resistance, whose weak affronts
Dare not consult with Passion, unless
It sings their requies sum: To love
Is to be resolute, our wealth's a blessing
To be contemned by none but those whose thoughts
Fly to a Pin-feather'd Philosophy,
And use a Microscope, mounted on wings
Of rare devotion to see if the World be any thing:
My blood thaw's silence at a woman's scorn;
Stay till I come.

Exit. 1. Footboy. My Lord will have her sure, if Means can do it.


2. Footboy. He Is too well known, to be beloved by her.


1. Footboy. In his land her denial may walk so far,
Tell it is weary steps, and forget itself.

2. Footboy. I don't know what they will do.


Enter Litus. Li. Go deliver this Letter to Madam Berania,
Exeunt Fool-Boys, The labor of a strict persute,
Is recompenc't by handling the Prize.
Delay, like Poppy, invites to a sleep,
That cutting news should be the hardlier felt.
Provide a bow for smiles: but if disdain;
I Will get by Force what fair Means cannot obtain.

Exit. Enter Berania, Reading the Letter. Ber. Your syllables make worse than
banishment:
throws it to them. More captive to impiety, then the unwearied Passenger
Toth' fained mourning of a Crocodile
Whose jaws, while reeking in the blood of those
His last allurements sung sad Dirge's to,
Seeks larger Preys.

Enter Losana. Lo. May duty teach my Sister.


Ber. What?


Lo. A Nobler lesson than Rebellion prompts to.
Recant your error, so your Reason may
A Prospect of all happiness seem clear
As day, whose Minut^ are seldom favored by
Such smiles of Chance, as those were proffered you:
Resolve amendment; to your changed mind
The Golden Sands of Factolus come flowing;
Embrace Honor.

Ber. How?


Lo. By nourishing the hopes of Litus, whose soul,
As sad as Niobe's, takes pleasure
In throwing down the Gems that dwell in it.
His Birth never taught him Courtship for a Maid
Below it self.

Ber. His rashness, like a Warrant,
Seconds his malice: to these I am an Enemy,
Had he no more blasts of Morality.

Lo. To call him rash is Passionate, Passionate witty,
An ornament to Youth.

Ber. Malicious too.


Lo. Hatred's a Puritan compair'd, and frowns
To see you learn your lesson but by halves,
Too openly bore down his friends at this.
Would keep the Scent, and were you a Man,
Turn bloud-hounds, ore-turn weapons 'til revenge
Had gi'n the Lie, to all that dare maintain
Him otherwise then a Fable, he sighs
Meekly for you.

Ber. He Is worse then Savage, that to get his will,
Will Not Fawn and Flatter; but denied still,
His expectation suddenly converts
His feigned Love to hatred and imparts
Envy to Force, till with his wile he gets
His own desire, by 'Proteus Changing fits.

Lo. All fancies Suppositions worse, his wealth
It Is so weighty, 'twould quickly surprise
The swelling of a crook-back't quality,
Nobles are a Pumice, hard enough to grind
His errors into nothing.

Ber. Rich and Noble,
Be coverlids of vices wrong, it is pity
Who Is greatest fit to govern, he is not fit
To govern others, that cannot rule himself,
They should grow big together, Pliny never
Mocked Physic better. He comes, I Will not see him.

Exit Berania. Enter Litus. Li. To paint out to my self the warlick Trophies,
Due to a Conqueror, of all that is bad
And strong; the stolen hours
Of Leander and Hero, when the Hellespont
Was but a Kennel to him; argues their joys,
Pigmies Fiction short of truth: my Sense
Has made no Plaudit, 'til your Sister
Seemed checking my hasty courtship, with a brow
Clear of Anger.

Lo. A pleasant Landscape!


Li. False.


Lo. A Dream, may be.


Li. Worse.


Lo. My Industry may embalm your hopes.


Exit. Li. I come senseless here with equal passion,
Heaven or hell mop't to a Bul-begger;
I Tantalize my self, such a dull Agent
Deserves to see a foollish Messenger
Bring back his Letters, covered which the mocks
Of a Chambermaid. Harpes, true Harpes, come,
Why stay'st so long? 'Its past the time you promised.

Enter Harpes. Harpes. An't I within my time, my Lord?


Litus. No less
Then Ten pound, for an hours work: what say?

Harpes. Propose.


Litus. Trusty; have forgot that Virtue?


Harpes. My Bonus Genius, I am never without it.


Litus. Canst' Fight?


Harpes. No matter: I can murder, may be, without it.


Litus. Pish you are wide of the mark,
We are about Venial sins.

Harpes. Nay that is the mark I Would aim at.


Litus. A Lady, I Would ha'you and I steal from her Father.
Every night they walk at six a clock here:
Her Father^s an old fool cannot fight,
Be ready: But if we are caught, can swear?

Harpes. If I cannot swear, I can do nothing.


Litus. Get a Coach ready at six a clock precisely,
Then meet me here.

Harpes. I will, Sir.


Exeunt. Enter Lord Lidorus, Lord Petus, attended. Lid. What Friar graced his
Order by a Miracle,
In Spelling you to a Platonic love?

Pet. Resolves after Deliberation make
A Circle; in whose Center, the best life
Lies hid on puny spirits such as boast
They have the Summum Bonum when they tread
In an old Mark made by their Mistress Shoo;
I Will bestow pity.

Lid. To receiv't again,
When tired with burdens of a way to Honor;
Your Motion's quick, your Hands gripe labor, Mind
Resolute to advancement, purchased by
A weary diligence: a Ladies lap
Inchants your purpose to a solitude,
That into sleep, sleep to a dream, whose language
Courts you to sweetness inconceiveable:
As Considerations of Eternity.
A Thousand presidents, bewail lost time, in your condition.

Pet. He Is well can beware of others Harms,
Example don't excuse a Fault,
Love-sick's a great one.

Lid. Hold, a line of this subject.


Pet. Let Us hear it.


Lidorus sings. O Sacred! Sacred Love,
earths chiefest joys above!
That with thy nimble bow,
take'st pride to stick below
Thrice happy he whose Heart has felt,
the quiver of thy Golden belt.
2.
When Moping spirits Muse,
what pleasure here to choose.
Then Love's great shrine draws nigh,
with enterprises high,
To sway Men's hearts and wrap them Eeven,
to joys divine, a taste of Heaven.

Pet. Parturiunt Montes. To our business.
Letters Inform me of the near approach of Death toth' Reverend
Old Man: already 'tas took up all but his breath-room:
Those Industrious hands that have so often acted his words,
When they moved Audients passions to Love,
To Hate, to Mirth, to Tragedy,
Have now nothing to do but second fervent Prayers for you and I.

Lid. I Am promised news to day.


Pet. I expect some too.


Lid. At six a clock let us meet here,
We'll impart the Novelty of each stop,
And drown the time with tears that speaks him dead.

Pet. 'T may fall out not so. Stars, and the b^st of Men,
Do rise to set, and set to rise again.

Exeunt. Enter Occus, Losana, Thele, Berania, Hacca, Hare, and Beucer. Oc.
Well, how now, Mr. Hare? well, de se? I don't know
I vow, Oh will you pay in the Money, law-ye?
And have the Bond?

Hare. You let others have it: upon that condition,
I told you of, my Lord.

Oc. Sir I do, and I do not.


Hare. How do you then?


Oc. Very well, but that is nothing: my Money, Man!


Hare. I Will provide it,


Exit Hare. Oc. Good-buy: come Daughters, it is almost time to walk,
As I live, so it is, in the Garden: so I do.

Ber. Will you bear us company?


Los. My hours an't my own.


Oc. Well Beucer, you se (so do you,) that this Hare
Will Not pay-in the Money, so he will not,
I Vow now, de se, you may go if you will, I don't
Need your Witnes-manship.
Exit. Beucer. Come Daughter I Will walk presently, as I live law-ye:
And tell you, you are a Fool! so I will, I vow, for not
Marrying the Gentleman.

Exeunt. Enter Harpes, and L^tus, with a Beard. Lit. I shall not be known, well
Harpes art' resolved?


Harpes. My horse needs nothing but a Silver spur,
To hasten it on in such an Ambuscado.

Lit. She Is leight, my Boy, we'll carry her with ease.


Harpes. Leight! All the sex are so, She has been too leight
For you already, you may speak Probatum.

Lit. Stand in that corner you, but first provide
A Sword to fright the old Man, the young one's got
The sooner.
Exit Harpes. Honor's not repaid with Checks.
If her estate be it bladder's her Pride
I excel it; if her birth excel, that too.
These things well weighed, my brest's too generous;
To be submissive, and, at a Woman's scorn,
Turn Novice.

Enter Harpes with a Sword. Harpes. A cold Iron!


Litus. Hot enough to make him run, as Firebrands do
The Beasts of Greenland within that place:
I Am here. Let 'um walk a turn or two, we may
Take 'um at the more advantage.
Harpes, Coach waits.

Aside both. Enter Occus, Berania, and Hacca. Berania. Are you ready, Sir?


Occus. I Am ready to blow my fingers, they are so cold I vow,
So I am.

Step in the Garden and walk. Enter Lidorus. Lidorus. Haste Petus to his Elegy.


Enter Boy. Boy. My Lord, Lord Petus stays to speak with you.


Lidorus. Bid him come in, and bring hither a Table.


Exit Boy. Enter Petus, Boy sets down the Table, and exit Lidorus. He Is gone,
those Ensigns of Honor;
Your proper due Succession ushers in.

Petus. His Monuments.


Lidorus. Rich with the power of a holy Relic,
Read it.

Go to the Table. Throws it upon the Table. Harpes and Litus set on Berania.
Berania. Help, help.


Lidorus. Hark; the cry of some distressed Gentlewoman!


Petus. At the sight of a Frog.


Berania cries out again. Lidorus. Hark, hark, in earnest let us run.


( They run and see her between them.) Occus crying. Lidorus. Dishonorable
Villains! what Commission?


Litus. Our fancy's to your cost.


Petus. We Will try, provide.


all fight. Occus creeps under the table, and peeps. Litus runs, Harpes falls
down. Enter Occus from under the Table. Occus. The Rogues! pitiful unvalourful
Dogs! I was mad as
I live-law, to see what Cowards they were, I vow,
To set on us as we were walking: but I
Wished 'um hanged in heat of blood; as I Am here,
So I did: thank the Gentlemen, Daughter, that
Have so finely delivered you.

Berania. Gentlemen,
To your protectors I Will be devout,
And beg for a reward due to your Virtue;
All the entreaties of a bended knee
Shall guard my Sacrifice till courteous Heavens
Know the deliverance of an innocent Maid.

Lidorus. Confirm we have served you by excepting it,
The Gods make apprehensions of a Traitor,
Confound himself, his means, all died with horror,
Speaks daggers to his guilty soul, and saves
His enemy a trial.

Berania. My life pays tribute to your valor.


Petus. If it be valor, Madam, we no way
Can guess it is rising, but from the bright day
Of your own Beauties, which great Nature throws,
And duty ties to the hearts of all those
As profess honor.

Berania. Humble thanks your licent to my departure.


Both. Your obliged Servants.


Occus. Well, Gentlemen, I protest, so I do, this is a
Great kindness; and I vow, I don't know how to
Make you amends, so I don't: but good by.
I would thank you a great deal longer, as I
Live-law (de se?) but I vow I am a going home.

Exeunt Occus, Bera. and Hacca. Petus. Do know this pretty Gentlewoman,
prithee?


Lidorus. Why do you ask?


Petus. Her Wit, Beauties, and Behavior are excellent.


Lid. Surprised indeed.


Petus. Be impartial to a Corrector.


Lid. Maintain it who are most secure
From Love his torments, soonest do endure.

Exit. Petus. What sudden passion, like damp news of death,
Conjures my blood about my heart grown weak?
Because I cannot expound a petty riddle
Delivered her, what then? I Will never believe,
I always dreamed till now I have been Garlic,
Destructive to Love's adamantick virtue;
Her very posture how it presents it self
Before my intellect, as a true prologue
To some future and stronger invasion.

Exit. Enter Berania, Hacca. Hacca. Prefer the memory of those Gentlemen;
Doubtless, Madam, they were some that knew you.

Ber. Not one thunderbolt to kill this monster?


Hacca. Trouble finds ease when opened, Madam,
To my obedience here is, my life. Your counsel
Is further from my mouth than Mahometism.

Ber. He in the beard had the voice of Litus.


Hacca. Monstrous villainy! Can so foul intents
Lie in the pavement of so smooth disguise?
The world's deceitful, who by fair words,
Credit, performances just and honorable,
Find one is empty, the other void,
Perfidious.

Ber. I wish all been't so.


Hacca. That all for one be blamed, Heavens forbid!
Though foul pretenses under fair he hid;
Yet mischief gathers mischief, and who thought
Others to catch, in his own net is caught.

Ber. Providence may pay him so.


Sigh. Hacca. Let my industry ease you of these sighs,
Your Sister's with him often.

Ber. Innocence is preserved by Angels.


Sigh again. Hacca. Be it criminal, and take away my life,
To speak my Mistress Secrets; tell me, Madam,
What I have been I Will ever be,
In life a trust, to death fidelity.

Ber. Inquire the names of the two Gentlemen
That rescued me, describe the blackest most.

Hacca. You love, I will dear Madam when I have done:
He begs admittance to kiss your hand.

Ber. Hush, here is my Sisters Maid, be intimate, enquire.


Hacca. What she knows is my own already.


Enter Thele. Thele. Madam, your Sister prays your company.


Ber. I Will go my self.


Exit. Hacca. Do'nt Litus often wait upon your Mistress?


Thele. I know nothing.


Hacca. Yes, she would have her Sister marry him;
His treachery has burdened all men's ears.

Thele. How!


Hacca. worse than a Rape.


Thele. Who told you?


Hacca. I was by, and see it my self.


Thele. Since you know it, no longer I Will deny
Her private malice, his invet'racy

Hacca; Shall be no more the cause of discontents,
To expectation happen cross events.

Exeunt. Actus Secundus.
Scena Prima.
Enter Admetus and Beucer. Beucer. It Is all as I tell you.


Admetus. Your Pilot taught you that trick.


Beucer. I lost my silver Hatband aboard.


Admetus. You thought she had been a prey conveyed thither;
By Cidnappers upon that built your hopes,
That Virginia would a nursed your Bastards:
Instead of writing your Masters Accounts,
Nothing was heard but, pray give Mistress Sarah
More Punch, white Biscuit, Oil to her Fish; her mother
Will oil your Fish.

Beucer. By this hand I Would not love
A Wench as well as thou for more money
Than you got by Annoque-Tobacco last year.

Admetus. You love smoke too it is a sign, or else
You Would never a crept in the Stow.

Beucer. But say, Wilt marry her? I Will add to the Sum.


Admetus. Marry, I may do so.


Beucer. You may.


Admetus. I don't love Flie-blows tho, farewell.


Exit. Beucer. It Is easy to do that with one finger
Cannot be remedied: my business don't fadge.

Enter Thele. Thele. Did you see Hacca?


Beucer. Not I.


Thele. How long have you been here?


Beucer. Mum.


Thele. Pray tell me, Sir.


Beucer. -- --


Thele. The man's in a maze sure.


Exit. Beucer. I Am in a maze sure enough with your face.
That sure is a Screech-owl to my advancement;
I wish I had a Wife, to spoil this ugly business,
This Gentlewoman's better, my conscience
Is in the Spanish mode, I Will see to get her:
Her name's Thele; my Schoolmaster I remember
S'ed, the Beast Hyena had that in her
Would be witch a man to love: I think
This Maid has some Hyena in her too,
I have a Book at home s'es, Marriage is
Angol. Honorable, but it is good to be honorable.
I Will take another course, use this no more,
It Is better love a Wife, than keep a Whore.

Exit. Enter Petus. Petus. Imperial Madam, Could no lucky merit
Resist the charm of an insulting passion?
A foe as just as cruel, resents affronts
With rage, impetuous beyond proud Tarquin,
I Will do more penance than a Gally-Slave,
That spurns his thraldom with laborious strokes:
Eager to anticipate his destiny,
I Am guilty to expoliate my crime.
As your despiser strike my heart assunder,
But save the Love within it, carry it to her,
And tell my own words did it, may be then
One Tear may fall to glue it up again.

Exit. Enter Litus Covert from the Wood. Litus. A vow, as fatal to my purposes,
As his wished Sword, whose glist'ring brandishings
Makes accents to his words, commands attention:
Must I be pillored to dishonor, stand
The moveless subject of both their hisses:
It Is for Berania dye or cut through throngs
Of danger, were revenge in the same place,
Her favor should a graced, surprise his chants,
E're they cleave air, and come unto her ear.
I speak of things above me, to his strength
My wounds set seal, may be he is innocent;
Then 'twould be base to intend a mischief, change
Thy fury into reason, may chance that may
Invent a safer and securer way.

Exit to the Wood. Enter Berania and Hacca. Ber. What Bird has crossed thy way?
and drove you back
With Omens to our meeting, tell me prithee:
I Am Miserable of all lovers, that love
And dare not reveal it.

Hac. Nothing but Sunshine to our intents, Madam
Why grieve you? To your smiles I Will bett my Honor,
He suffers more for you, than you for him.
I see his blood daunt in his face: as if
It were Eclipst, and strove to master Love.
His eyes were steady, you paid it again;
Not without checks to those inamoring Lamps,
For taking so much liberty.

Ber. Recount your Progress, to me dissemble nothing.
Have spok to him? if he be sworn already
To serve another Mistress, I Will but weep,
And sing her happiness, where signs shall keep
Time to my Song, and part each line from other.

Hac. It Is no such matter Madam; let us make
This hour remarkable, by finding out
A way may ease us, and resolve our doubt:
I Will do it thus.

Ber. How?


Hac. I Will go a purpose, to ask if he took
The sword from him, that had the black beard on;
Pretending your misdeem is singly placed:
And could by seeing the sword judge who it was
Before he answers: a dissembled qualm
Shall beg my excuse, for leaving him so quickly,
He comes my life for it, to resolve your self.

Ber. I like it, go, let providence bespeak
A crown for this imposture 't may deserve one.

Exeunt several. Enter Sarah and Beucer. Sarah. If Love will not, pray let Pity,
of your oths
And earnest promises, incite you to
A kinder satisfaction for my Honor.

Beu. What, always haunted with you as a Ghost?
I have found me a new Love: Seek you one too.
Admetus told me what would come of me^ling with Sluts:
I lost my Silver Hat-band aboard, following him about.

Sarah. Consider, how your self swore and protested,
You were enamoured, of my poor Beauty;
Let the remembrance of your former Love
Be a privation, to your present Hate.

Beu. Why? rest contented, I tell you, if you had not
Been so free of your flesh, I should a loved you still:
And according to Plato, I may again.

Exit. Sarah. Justly disdained Sarah, now thou reap'st;
The fruits of thy over fond credulity.
How often might I have been heartily entreated?
Had I not thrown away my self upon
The Charybdes of his flattery; which brings
Me to the Scilly of this extremity
To repair my esteem, by his enjoyment,
Or take revenge for his disloyalty.
Away! should I, under a nother's name
Disguised, seek to vindicate my self
Or reputation, a las I may dye,
I love him too well, use fair means, I Will humbly
Go and complain to Mother, and seek her help.
To urge affection, Treason lets refrain,
What meekness cannot? Malice will never obtain.

Enter Winifred. Winifred. Oh! my Daughter! my Daughter! my Child! my
Chick! Where hast' been my Love?
Come pretty Sarah, I have not seen you I
Know not when.

Exeunt. Enter Lidorus. Lid. Man is but Mortal, his resolves more brittle
Than Ice a minute old: Certainty
Rests til 't'as breath, and fly's away again
For one new reason, all faculties strike sail;
But sundry passions we are subject to,
Make Civil-war: then to the victor must
A pleasing object be presented. Love
Revels in's humors: What sad ditty is this?

Petus singing within. Petus Sings. Help ease great Powers, Why do you thus
prevent me,
And laughing takes a pride still to torment me?
My fears and sorrows sadly mourn within,
To see their cause from troubles still begin.
Then miserable I, how shall I bear it:
Languish for Love, and yet must not declare it.

Entering with Hacca. Hac. I fetch her, Sir.


Lid. It Is he
From moaning your condition, your own plaints
Besought me silence; let us confirm our friendship.
Embrace On your resolve to love none, experience
Has preached a better lesson, then Meditation
Furnished me with before you sung.

Enter Hacca, and Berania. Hac. Madam, here is the Gentleman, here is both I
think.


Ber. While hot a wound's not felt, in the amazment
Your arms gave period to, I thought of nothing
But gratitude: since (all things quiet) Circumstances,
As Treason seldom goes unpunish't, offers
Me means of finding't out, the Sword, my Lords,
Discovers his Master's vilany if it be he,
Had either of you it from him.

Petus. He run woo't in his hand (Madam) it is kept,
To cut his Conscience when he gazes on it.

Enter Occus. Oc. Well, how now Daughter? I protest (so I do)
I wondered where you were, I vow, your servant, humble Sir,
Your servant, Gentlemen.

Both. Yours.


Ber. Father, to these Gentlemen we owe
Our rescue in the Garden.

Oc. I vow, I think, I thought so, pardon me Sirs, I
Did not know you, I vow, so I do, why we fought
Bravely, I protest law-you, I was never in a worse
Combat in my life, as I live-law, but we came
Well off (de see?)

Lid. Heavens, be thanked.


Oc. Gentlemen, will you please to drink a cup of Wine?
I vow I Would have you come in, (so I would,) be merry
All danger's over now, de-see, I pray' come in do so.

Pet. We Will follow your courtesy, my Lord.


Exeunt omnes. Enter Thele and Beucer, fudled. Beucer. Ah! Sweet Thele, Mistress
Thele love me.


Thele. I wonder, you importune me so.


Beucer. Thou, sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet-sweet face,
Would I had thee I Would give all the desks in my Bond.

Thele. I must confess you are so charming, that
Your Rhetoric, like Orpheus his Harp, would make
Stones fly about your head.

Beu. If you will have me,
My Rhetoric shall make stones fly about your
Ah ah ah ah ah head too.

The. Why, you are fuddl'd, you are in a pickle


Beu. Of Cucumbers, it is salt to see you want ha me! I Am sure.


Thele. Go sleep: till sober sober carriage, then,
And better manners learnt, come we again.

Exit. Beucer runs after her. Enter Winifred, Sarah, and Admetus. Win. Ah my
dear Duck! where have been my Love?
Come Dear, we will go home and have a pot of ale, my Love:
Alack I Am undone! help, help, help, my Delight weeps:
Who has hurt my Love? I Will ta' 'um away.

Sar. If I, dear mother, have transgrest the Law
Of Nature, what I expect but Justice.

Win. Tell me my Joy, I Will beat, kick, scratch, claw, bite 'm:
My Dear, who has hurt my Love?

Sar. Have patience Mother, and provide your car
To hear my loss, the story I Will declare,
And beg your pardon: my Lord Occus his man.

Win. I am a'most mad, my Love.

Sar. Pray hear. Beucer coming aboard the Ship
Where I was then to take my leave of my Uncle,
Professed me Love; and with a thousand sighs
Mingled entreaties, soliced.
weeps.
Win. Come, come, come, go on quick, speak my Dear.


Sar. My good will that Heavens know I thought
Was innocent and conjugal, his lasting
Importunities and promises
Of Marriage took my honor from me. I
Overcome by his deluding tongue, am forced
To wail my hard fortune, and wailing so,
Augment my griefs, and they augment my woe,
Without the least hope of comfort.

Win. Oh oh! I Am undone, I have lost my Daughters Virginity,
Virginity, I have lost my Daughters Virginity.

Sar. Pray Mother hear.


Win. Oh! I have lost my Daughters Virginity.


Sar. Good Admetus be pleased to relate his leaving me,
Tears stop my utterance.

Win. Tell on Love, tell on Duck; tell me Sir.


Admetus. After this the Knave dishonestly leaves your Daughter,
And I believe is in love with another.

Win. Is this true Daughter, my Joy?


Sar. True, Mother.


Win. I Will claw the Rogue's Nose off.


Exeunt running. Exeunt all. Enter Lidorus and Petus. Lid. The entertainment
was good.


Pet. Cruel Love! that takes his chief delight,
To use his fury, and display his spite;
Frowning he laughs, and strives to punish still
A Wretch with death, and yet denies to kill.
I love to see her, and her very eye,
As soon as seen, make me dissolve and dye.

Lid. Unless you would shake me off, expel these words,
'T bewraies your folly.

Enter Winifred wildly. Win. I pray did you see Beucer the Rogue, the Villain?
I Will
Claw him to pieces, the Rogue.

Exit. Lid. You want not the Lion's Kall or Herb Philocrassa,
As Naturalists name't, to touch her hand,
Perfume her chamber, or mingle in her drink:
S^e loves you well enough already: nothing
Disorders notes, and breaks your harmony,
But silence to a friend runs open-arm'd,
The sweetest message of all history.
I Will be your Spokes-man.

Petus. Miracle of honor!

Embrace. Lid. Promise to meet me here betwixt those Walls,
I Will sing your Lullaby, and borrow breath
From the winged words of your Berania.

Petus. My life and fortune wait upon the news.


Lid. Attend my return.


Exeunt, several. Enter Litus and Losana, several. Li. Your Sister loves.


Losana. Any other than your self?


Lit. To be disobedient.


Los. And perverse.


Li. More than all this.


Los. How?


Li. She sleights your counsel, mocks your Fathers threats,
And, worse, over throws her modesty: that custom
Which bears out Ladies, to expect the prayers
Of servants kindled by a hot denial,
Is buried in her thoughts; she out-does shame.

Los. Be particular.


Lit. Among these Trees I heard her Lover mourn,
The giddy mixed words of a stricken Soul,
Desires Orator for Berania.
He went, she came attended by her Maid,
'Twixt his complaints and her rash impudence,
Comparison is lost; she stretched invention
For ways to make him know she loved him,
Devises stratagems to see him, runs
The rest of punishments for violating
Her self, and friends to your serious thoughts
Contempts as plain as day; her wantonness
And toleration in it, it plows up duty,
Sows pride in'ts place; and, if suffered to grow,
Will o're-top your endeavors to reclaim her.
Your birth puts briars in your hand, why use them,
Blow down her Babel.

Los. 'Twas my Father's will
As well as mine, a mischief before it is hatched
Is bended; lightly grown benums those Joints
That reach it is head: For desperate Maladies
Let Us use severe purgations. Tyrants rule
By being smoothed up in their Cruelty.
Then torments pay their tutors negligence,
Who nourish sucking Vices with a Flatter.
I Will break her or my self, let us set a time.

Lit. Do it when you please.


Los. Don't fail, till then I Will seem
Honey to both.

Exit. Lit. My heart forbids me, and I Will never see
Her wed another that refused me.

Exit. Enter Berania and Hacca. Hac. He Is a fine Gentleman, Madam.


Ber. His carriage puts me to a greater muse
Than Sphinx's Riddle; What do gather Hacca
From his motions?

Hac. I Am no Diviner, Madam.


Enter Lidorus. Lid. A Gentleman, Madam, whom I dare speak virtuous
In doing Justice, was surprised and taken;
He suffers hardship in his close Confinement,
And seeks deliverance; his courteous Keeper
Craves but your hand and word for his Release.

Ber. I know him not.


Lid. A Stranger assaulted by a crew of Thieves
Already his masters, when past hopes of life,
Is succored by a noble Passenger,
Not without wounds to the Victor, whose dumb signs
Seek help from him he rescued: if he can,
And will not contribute to the cure of the other,
Ean't he ungrateful?

Ber. In the highest degree.


Lid. The Prisoner is Lord Petus, Madam.


Ber. You astonish me.


Lid. Your Prisoner.


Ber. How?


Lid. To your Graces and Beauties; it is so.


Ber. I l^ke your mirth, but change your subject.


Lid. Millions of sighs beg leave to kiss your hand,
Confirm your Judgment to the case I put;
His flames consume him, quench 'm with one word,
Let me haste to his Deliverance.

Ber. 'Twould be too coy his Service to deny,
To grant it argues too much levity.

Lid. 'Twould not be lightness to resolve a Grant,
It Is for his Life, Madam, deny't you cannot.

Ber. Love e're he seeks it, that is immodest, so,


Lid. Mercy before modesty ought to go.


Ber. Yea, where the time can dispense but of one,


Lid. It don't this kill that will revive alone.


Ber. Let Us try both then, one with the other will
More welcome be, good is discerned by ill.

Lid. To afflict one so cast down would be too rough,
It Is sin to tread what is trodden down enough.

Ber. Time future may what present cannot produce;
Then of this favor let him make good use.

Lid. I Will carry his pardon.


Exit. Hac. The Stars take care of you, Madam,
Here Is a Present beyond expectation;
You saved your blushes in the conquest too.

Ber. Our inventions may sleep hereafter.


Hac. How finely coy you were! I see Disguise
Is the Familiar of a Lady, Madam.
This verifies the Proverb:
Women like Shadows are, which if you shun,
They Will follow; but pursue 'm, away they will run.

Exeunt. Enter Beucer and Thele. Beucer. Mistress, the emptiness of my belly may
tell you
How sorry I am for my last offense.

Thele. Then you fast for your looseness


Beucer. Of life you mean; I can sooner be without my
Ears than seeing you.

Thele. You flatter.


Beu. Like a Magpie.


Thele. You dissemble.


Beu. This knocks down my ambition, if I do not wait
Upon you, that is to say, have your company; for
Sadness I am a second Melpomene.

Thele. But not half so grave.


Enter Occus and Winifred with a stick. Win. Oh you Rogue Beucer, it is he, it is
he.


goes to beat him. Beucer runs behind Occus. Occ. Why I vow so I do, this is a
disgrace.


Winifred runs about after Beucer. Occus holds her stick. Occus. Nay, hear
woman, I vow I never see such a woman
IN my life, I protest so I do.

Win. I have lost my Daughters Virginity, the Rascal had it
Aboard the Ship, and now leaves my Girl.

Beu. Speak softly, and I Will answer you.


Occus. Why I vow, why did you do so? you are a Knave;
De se, as I live-law, marry her, marry her.

Win. Do, she is my only Girl, then I Will love thee my Chuck.


Beucer. Be patient, she is handsome I must needs confess.


Exit, Occus. Why law-now he may marry her in time.


Win. If he don't, my Lord, I Will scratch the Rogue.


Enter Berania, Hacca, Losana, and Thele. Ber. Here Is my Father, Sister.


Occus. I Daughters I am here about an ugly business:
I vow I wish the Devil had it, so I do.

Los. Pray Sir tell it us.


Occ. I vow one thing comes before another, that I cannot
Speak a word, I Am so vexed, as I Am here.

Los. Pray Sir tell it us.


Win. Weeping and curching I will forsooth Mistress.
My Daughters Virginity! Beucer, the Rogue Beucer
Has lain with my Daughter, and sleights her.
Goes and speaks to Thele. How d' you Cozen, Beucer the Rogue has defiled
My Daughters Virginity aboard a ship, and now has left her.

Thele. Has he so! (O Goodness!) Aunt be patient.
Is It possible? pray Aunt say nothing of it,
Till I give further order; seem to forget it.

Win. I will indeed forsooth Cozen.


Exit. Thele. Beucer, how can you profess love to me,
And have abused my Cozen? It Is well I know it;
May be I Will help it, Wisdom instruct me in it.

Exit. Occus. Well Daughters, de se, I Will leave you I vow.


Exit. Los. Sister, your strangeness troubles me; if Love
Take up your fancy, tell me, to your counsel
I Will be as faithful as your inward thoughts.
Your Looks speak Passion.

Ber. Yours not Philosophy.


Los. Truth needs no gloze, Lord Petus claims you his.


Ber. Who told you?


Los. A Friend,
They know more than my self.

Exit with Hacca. Los. Wan't Litus potent good enough for you?
Ha^s too much pride bewitched you? he s'es true,
You do insult, and more, if suffered, will.
It Is good remedying new sprung mischief still:
It Is my resolve e're you two married be,
I have vowed a stop.

Litus, A Tragedy.


Exit. Actus Tertius.
Scena Prima.
Enter Lidorous and Petus. Petus. Welcome Lidorus --.


Lidorus. Snatch that word again,
Do not mistake the liveliness that sits
Upon my Face is to add to persuasion;
That you would bear the news of doubtful things
With a stayed Courage.

Pet. Some religious man
Be fo't to prepare me for a death
To the world and all his vanities: within
A narrow Cloister I Will hem in it my wishes;
And when the Bell rings to a rigid meeting,
Repent my earthly thoughts, and punish them
With hard mortifications: speak my doom,
Or point it rather, let some dying sign
Throw my misfortune in my face, that I
May hush up all in silence.

Lid. Take it then,
makes a sign. Stayed courage lest you should be extasi'd
With joy, and make your succor your undoing,
Like those are a'most starved when they see meat,
Expire with greediness.

Petus. What doubtful things
Should check my welcome to you.

Lidorus. Can believe
A man may be in Paradise e're he prays for it?
Or hover amongst Angels e're he thinks it?

Pet. As to his thoughts may be.


Lid. Then be so.
Upon my honor all she commands you,
Is to be faithful; such a glorious Flower
Never blossomed in so short a time before:
Her words are full of sweetness, mild and fair,
Courteous as may be, free from fond allurements.
I begged your life, she grants it, visit her,
And find more than I tell you to be true.

Pet. Say but she is mild, and I Will out-dare worst fate,
And kind, there is never another word like that:
It lifts my fancy higher than the story of Elysium.

Lid. Take my faith to it, mild and kind too.


Pet. Sure the Spears sing to beguile me;
Upon your memory ten thousand thanks
Shall dwell: I Will publish how much friendship is
In Lisborn, in your self with such an accent,
Embrace. 'T shall more an imitation till the world,
Know to be honorable.

Lid. Your pardon, Sir.


Enter Occus. Occus. Well, how do you Gentlemen? do you see, Sir, I am come
About a business of very great exigence as I
Live-law, so I am I vow the case is thus Law-you;
I heard you were in Love with my Daughter,
(D'e-see) and I vow she might a had a Lord
With a great Estate, (d'e-see) but as I live-law
I am so much a friend to Valor, I vow, that if
You have a good Estate, look you, Sir, I had as
Live you should have her (d'e-see) as any body else.

Lid. He possesses the Revenues of a noble and industrious Family, my Lord.


Occ. Look you, Sir, I an't for complementical words; but here
Stands the case, if my man Beucer s'es you are
A pretty Gentleman (do you s'e) as to Estate, as I live-law
I Will present to my Daughters marrying you I vow, so
I will with all my heart: Can a man say more
For his heart-blood, Gentlemen?

Pet. You are all-obliging, my Lord.


Occ. Why every body se's so, as I live-law: Come smoke
A Pipe of Tobacco at my house, Gentlemen.

Both. We attend you my Lord.


Exeunt omnes. Enter Beucer and Thele. Beucer. Dear Mistress I sigh till I am as
hoarse as a
Parrot, and cry every day, I beseech you love me.

Thele. If I thought you were in earnest, I Would let loose
The reins of love, it is hard to keep 'um in;
You are so bewitching.

Beu. To my fovour, my face you mean:
If I ben't in earnest, I wish the hands of a
Pick-pocket may deprive me of my Looking-glass,
Before I see home.

Pulls out a glass and looks in it. Thele. A deep curse, is it so precious?


Beu. A representitive of the external faculties of the
Face; or rather to talk elegantly: The lively object
Of Beauty or deformity; In which we view as it were
The heart through the eyes.

Thele. These are high words indeed,
To be no longer wooed, I love: and think
The day too long till we are Married.

Beu. I am mad with joy! Your goodness! Your goodness!


Thele. Ben't carried away with every beauty,
And leave me; seeing I have been so free:
And opened my self to you, I could not help it;
Every sight of you made my stomach dance.

Beu. Will you grant one favor, sweet Mistress?


Thele. In Modesty, what is it?


Beu. Cool me a little Mistress, it is my modesty makes Me mince it so.


Thele. Are you hot then?


Beu. Oh! Beyond the Superlitive degree far, alas, that is to say,
Otherwise tormented, you don't know how I burn!

Thele. You an't burnt yet, Sir.


Beucer. But scorcht very much, add that favor to the rest.


The. My Service is due to you as my Husband, Sir.


Beu. Give me leave to satisfy my self with you now,
And then, I shall dye without it, sweet Love.

The. I Will obey your will virtuously inclined, Sir, but
I don't know what you mean.

Beu. Only your company.


The. Henceforth command it.


Beu. And the sight of Alablaster Legs, Mistress.


The. Away, Sir, that must crown our Marriage;
Rejoice in this your sincerity made you the
First in my favor.

Beu. I do indeed, this Verse of my own making tells you
So; for I had a good sign that you would
Love me: A Raven cried, Marry, Marry, at my
Chamber-window afore-day;
Now I have all, what else can I implore?
I have got my Love, and I desire no more.

The. Very good.


Beu. A very good Verse, we call it a Heroic, it has
Just ten feet, which is the Orthodox Rule
Of our Modern Poets.

Exit Beucer. The. The Fool, or rather Knave, thinks I am enamored;
I am so but to see my Cozen vindicated:
Heavens have heard my prayers, and smile down
A perfect grant to our own intents;
He sleeps in's pranks securely, little dreaming
That I am privy to his waggery.
How men speak double to ensnare our Sex
With gilded words, when all their purposes
Are more remote than East from West, I wish
I could but speak with her: Boy, you boy.
Calling. Enter Boy. Go to Sarah Moren, and tell her I stay to
Speak with her.
Exit Boy. Poor Maid, how she builds Castles in the Air,
And dreams of peace if he would love her again:
Such is the thoughts of pleasure after pain.

Enter Winifred and Sarah. Win. Here, here Cozen, here is my Daughter, my Duck;
I came running in such haste, that I sweat
Intollerably.

Fans her self. Sar. Dear Cozen, I threw away sadness at your message,
Thinking it might have good news in it.

The. I sent to renew my former charge that you
Would carry all things close and hush, and you,
Aunt Winifred.

Win. I forsooth.


The. Be not so mad and furious
With Beucer, 'tmay contribute to your good.

Win. I forsooth: I will indeed forsooth.


The. My Mistress expects me. Adieu.


Exit she. Win. Now Daughter, this is brave in faith! this is gallant!
Hie Boys! my Daughter, my Duck.

Sar. Let things be carried on in course, I have found
Fortune so fickle, that I cannot repose
Trust to a benefit before I se't.

Win. Well, my Dear, I Will do so too my Joy, so I will my Love.


Sar. It Is possible to see good days once more,
Till then submit to that mishap it may be,
To others common in this world we see,
Nothing that is constant but inconstancy.
Not to remedy, yet to grutch is vain;
Use patience where we cannot redress our pain:
The darkest nights bright morning still ensue,
After grief joy.

Exeunt. Win. It may be so with you.


Enter two Clowns. First. You Tom, this way mon.


Second. Where are they?


First. I saw their faces, they were like a Queen for gallantry.


Second. You make a fool of one, so you do.


First. I tell you you lie.


Second. Then they would be here before now.


Recorders: A Scene discovering Petus sleeping in a Field, four
Nymphs lay their hands on him, and sing.

1. Nym. I freely here thy pleasure: pronounce in Joys rich Banquet;
O happy thee, whose eyes shall see: such bliss great love be thanked.

2. Nym. Your prayers are accepted: her heart does well affect thee;
Venus affirms, her Son from harms: of envy shall protect thee.

3. Nym. My coming warns thee, Petus, of disasters,
Which with a hare thy head hang quivering over;
The Gods agree, no remedy
Shall save thy mirth, O harmless Lover.
By Fate ordained, e're thou were named,
A sudden hate thy Love shall cover.

4. Nym. Then rest contented, till the time's expired;
This past, your Joys shall once again renew,
Thy fury will, lead thee to ill,
Of fight, and almost murder too:
Before the space of many days,
What we predict, you will find it true.

Chorus. Apollo's will's obeyed, let us address
Our Nymphly posture to the Wilderness.

Exeunt. Enter two Clowns more. First. You Rogue you came too late; here was the
Rarest singing that e're you saw.

Second. Rare! all mirth I brave Maids! I believe they were Spirits.


Third. You kiss my -- Fool, they were Women.


Fourth. So they were, we see 'um go you way mon.


Second. They sung, and did so fashion.


Sing. First. I can tell best, they sung so.


Both sing together. Fourth. What, what Gentleman's this?


Third. U^snigs, look here you, here is a Gentleman.


Fourth. Law-ya-now, you must pay ten groats for Swearing.


Third. What, in jest you Puppy.


First and second. He Is no more Puppy than your self.


Strike him both. Third. Who s'es he is? remember this
When you come in our ground.

First. What then, Sir?


Third. There you may stay for me.


All. A Coward, a Coward, ah ha, aha.


Exeunt jearing him. Petus wakes. Petus. What Vision dare control my quiet? Now
I Am Berania's I Will meet the shapes of night,
And jear their threat'nings, gaze on busy Spirits,
That would tempt men to dread their hellish Rhimes,
A power garrisons me from the mumblings
Of huge Succubusses, whose weighty load
Presses men's folly, makes a spill, and then
Turns to a Prophecy as false as may be.
Till now I feared to have the idle actions
Of a disturbed brain, lest it had figured out
Some omen to my aim; but since she is mine,
Im not deluded with the lovely shape
Of fallest Nymphs that bless me in a Tune,
Nor pant a'th' curses of the two last Sisters.

Enter Berania. Ber. What makes you look so sad, Sir?


Pet. Apparitions.


Ber. Of what?


Pet. They say I shall be a murderer.


Ber. Who?


Pet. Some that do not know, Madam, what strength I fetch from every word you
speak to tear 'um.


Ber. Tell me the business.


Pet. Sleeping on this Bank,
Viewing your Idea derived from my last thoughts.

Ber. Mine!


Pet. When it is not yours, let it be deaths.


Ber. A shape too grim, my Lord; but pray tell on.


Pet. A couple of Maids, I like't them pretty well,
Assured me of my Heven, your self, Madam.

Ber. No Heven.


Pet. I Would lose ten thousand lives for it.

Ber. Angels
Ordain you for a better.

Pet. Two came after.
Put clouds upon my hopes, and strove to vail 'um
With darts of envy, as thick as showers of hail.

Ber. Shine clearer by contemning fooleries.


Pet. I Will change them to ambition, that you
Instruct me to it, and speak what is in my mind,
A dream, it happens, by contraries this has;
'Twas trouble, till now this pleasant Meadows could not
Be sweet by the presence of Berania,
Nor I blessed with such an encounter.

Ber. Dreams are but fancies, and who grieve or joy
At their portendment, dread and fear a toy.

Enter Occus, Losana, and Lidorus. Occ. Mishap of Beucer for me, as I live-law
he is an arrant
Knave, I vow; well, how do you my Lord? we come I vow to
See what you will do about Marriage: I protest, so I
Do, do you love her still? I vow I ask because I don't
See you prate and talk, and hug her.

Pet. To answer your demands is not --


Lid. To speak, we know your mind, an imprecation
Tail'd with a sigh, and silence is enough
To your favor, Madam, this man owes --

Ber. Inquiry how you pleaded for him.


Occ. A Lawyer are you?


Los. What Is your Fee, Sir?


Lid. But to kiss your hand;
Then I Will confine your angry brow to limits,
Your servants dye else, take a President.

Points to Berania. Los. A Gypsy cannot speak more, know things aforehand.


Lid. I Will work that wonder, Madam, he confirms; Points to Petus. I have studied
Phisnomy, told him his fortune.


Ber. What was that?


Lid. His imprisonment.


Pet. To you?


Lid. He Would sooner speak a line without a vowel,
Than leave abusing, those were Ladies Servants.

Los. It Is punished with a great deal of sorrow.


Occ. Do You talk of trouble and sorrow already, (d'e-see?)


Ber. She speaks backwards, Sir.


Occ. Why, I vow that is the way to raise the devil, they
Say to speak backwards, so they do, don't, don't I pray.

Pet. No Sir, the Devil is raised by a Planetae impositione Retrogressa, as
they call it.


Los. What Is that? what is it like?


Occ. Why I vow, it is like to fright me out of my wits,
So it is, to hear you talk so barbastically of
Old-Nick, as I live-law.

Litus passes through behind them. Los. Language will be cheap, my Father farms
it.


Occ. Come, come prithee.


Exeunt. Enter Hare, and three other Comrades. Hare. Troth I am vexed at the old
Fool Occus, he has
Got a Pond of me for almost two hundred Pounds,
And no Witness but my Hand and Seal, (I would I had it)
And the Dorerd keeps such a quarter to have in
His money, that I cannot rest for him, and to
Disbarst so much I cannot neither: He Is an old doting
Fool as ever I see.

First. Why don't you make one of him, and get your
Bond then?

Second. May-be he is a cunning Fool.


Third. I rather think so.


Hare. Here stands the business, I borrowed this money to
Build two or three small Houses; afterward I morgag'd them,
And spent the money, and now this old Lord Fool
Would have me pay it. --

Second. We can tell your meaning, you would put a trick
Upon him, and get the Bond without money.

Hare. Why faith I would and I know companions you
Are very ready in such businesses, you don't want
Wit; if you do it, I Will give you forty Pounds betvveen you.

First. I am afraid it would be difficult to obtain, by
Reason his Man Beucer has the keeping of it; we
Must do it by a vveild.

Third. For forty Pounds we will venture a broken Pate.
A trick, a trick.
Hannibal often by policy has got
The Fort, his military strength could not.

Hare. My true hearts be stout, I Will vvarrant we do the deed.


Enter Occus. Occus. Mr. Hare, I vow I believe you will put me to trouble, to get
my own money, so I do: I wonder you will be so dishonest, as I Am here.


Hare. Have patience my Lord, I am here with three men that owe me money, to pay
in yours, if I can get it: they promise to do their best for me.


Occus. Best and worst, all is one to me: if you pay it in, do you see? you will
have your bond, and be out of harms way, so you will.


Hare. Why I tell you Sir, stay but till these men tell me what they will do, and
I Will have my bond.


Occus. Why law you, because you are my friend I Will stay so long, so I will;
but I vow, no longer, so I will not.


Exit. First. 'Twas well you said we owed you money; a good conceit.


Hare. You hear him say he will be delayed no longer, it will be worth our time,
prethy gentlemen lets plot quickly; the reward as soon as the work's performed.


Third. You speak nobly, lets lay our heads together
To get the Paper, let our Genius tend,
And if we loose our labor there is an end.
Walk about a turn or two. Look here Sirs, I conceive this will be the best
way, one of us shall go and tell Occus that he believes Hare is in a very poor
condition; and that he believes Occus will loose his money, if he don't look
after him, but shall dissuade him from arresting him, for fear that undoes him,
etc. Then if he requires counsel in this case, he shall tell him, that he knows
a cunning man, to whom if he goes with his bond, he is sure he can give him good
advice.


Hare. Well said, by this hand thou have a politic pate of thy own.


Third. Then I Am sure he will go, for the old fool will ask of the Devil before
he will loose his money: then one of you shall be the Conjurer: when he comes,
don't ask to see the bond, lest it beget suspicion; for Beucer has taught him
not to trust his Father with such things: but make a Circle. You Mr. Hare shall
be dressed like a Devil: strange words we must use (but my life for it) rather
then he will be torn to pieces, he throws down the bond; if so, take it up and
keep it.

All hallow. Hare shall be the Devil; you the Conjurer ( to the second;) and
I Will be his perswader.


All. A match.


Third. Go attire your self ( to Hare:) And you Mr. Conjurer be ready at a call.


Second. I will, I warrant you: do you stand and see private ( to the first
man,) I Will to persuade him.


Exeunt all but first man. First. I shall get my part of Forty pounds for seeing
A trick; I Would be hired so always; it is good.
Money, and pleasure too, 's a double gain:
I Will have the cole, and they may share the pain.

Exit. Enter Occus and third man. Third. I came a purpose, my Lord.


Occus. Well Sir, what do you say?


Third. My Lord, love to you bids me tell you of a thing that may something
concern you.


Occus. What is it? what is it, do you see?


Third. Sir, I hear Mr. Hare owes you nigh two hundred pounds; he is in a very
poor condition, and I believe, except you get it of him very suddenly, you will
loose it, for he is down the wind.


Occus. Why I vow, so I do, I Will arrest him, so I will, as I Am here.


Third. No, Sir, then he is an undone man, you will never get it so.


Occus. Why, what would you ha'me do, do you see?


Third. Here lives a cunning man hard by, that is able to resolve you in all
such points, how you shall get your money, for a small piece.


Occus. Prethy tell me where he lives, I protest I Will go to him, I vow, so I
will.


Third. Stay, my Lord, I Will go fetch him, he lives at next door.


Exit. Occus. Why, I vow, I think I was wrapped in my Mothers smock, so I do,
every body loves me so, so they do, I vow, to tell me how to get my money, as
I Am here.


Enter third Man and Conjurer. Third. This is he, my Lord.


Occus. Why, Sir, after humble commendations, I vow, there is a man, his man is
Mr. Hare, as I Am here, a duce take him for a knave, owes me almost two hundred
pounds, and he will not pay me, I vow: I came to ask your counsel, so I do, for a
small piece, do you see?


Conjurer. Have you brought your bond, my Lord?


Occus. No, Sir, but I Will fetch it, do you see?


Exit running. Conjurer. Now for my skill.


Enter Occus with the bond. Occus. Here it is, do you see?


Third. I have business, my Lord.


Exit. Conjurer. Well, will you stand still?
I, I, I, I, I, vow.

Conjurer makes a Circle. Conjurer. Your money comes, my Lord, all to you, I Will
warrant you, when we have made a Scheme; Earth and Saturn, you will have it.


Occus. So much the better.


Conjurer. My Lord, you will stand still be sure.


Occus. Shall I have my money then?


Conjurer. No fear: hold up your bond in your right hand.


Occus. I, I will hold it as fast as you will, I vow.


Conjurer. Hy surge tu grande nebulo.
He makes figures. Occus shaking, draws further off. Iterum per nomen Poldavi
surge.

Devil rises. Occus. Satan I defy thee, Satan I defy thee, do you see?
O I Will ha'no money, I Will ha'no money.
crying.
Conjurer goes behind Occus and holds him. Conjurer. Throw down the bond, or we
shall be torn.


Devil rumbles. Occus goes to throw it down twice or thrice, and pulls back.
Occus. In The Red Sea for ever, in the Red Sea lay him.


Conjurer. Down with it, or you dye.


Devil steps further. Occus. O good, O good.


Throws down the bond, and runs away. Devil takes it up, unvails his face.
Devil. Here it is, our will's obtained, our skill is shown,
The deed is done, and now the bond's my own:
Wit plays the critic, Policy keeps school,
I Have got my wish, and Devil take the fool.

Exeunt Omnes. ACT. IV.
SCEN. 1.
Enter Lonus and a Servant. Lonus. DIsconsolate old man under an Aspect
Showing afflictions, were thy Infant-griefs
Conceived: Oh my Son Litus, is he dead?
Gray-hairs repose your sorrow in the Grave;
Oblivious of all future happiness;
Is he devoured? Monstrous cruelty!
Barbarism in wild Beasts; could you not content
Your hungry stomachs, with the woeful ruins
Of my deceased life, so often walking
Through dismal Alleys of your woody territories?
But you must chaw the Branch of all our Race.

Servant. Be not immoderate, my Lord, in sorrow;
May be some nimble Buck, while he was hunting,
Was traced to death by his toilsome pursuit;
Or else so far, some honest passer by
Must guide his looks to homeward: thousand chances
Hinder intents of coming back; and yet
When he returns, makes mirth to think upon it.

Lonus. No, he is lost.


Enter Hacca. Pray young Gentlewoman, do you hear report of Lord Litus?


Hacca. Do I dream? or is his Villainy before me? I Am terrified at's thoughts.


Lonus. How dare O base woman
Takes her by the sleeve. Stain my Sons honor with the name of Villain?
Unless your words be reasonable, I Will make
My aged hands the tragic instruments
Of your untimely murder.

Hacca. Hold, my Lord, I have cause enough to speak it.


Lonus. Out with it quickly.


Hacca. If he is your Son, Sir, understand he lately
Fained to sigh for my Mistress Berania;
But she knowing his rashness, would not suffer
Him see, much less to confer with her: At which,
I weep to name it, he gave so much scope
To his vile passion, that he hired a Ruffin,
Helped by himself, to force her from the Garden,
As she was walking with her Father and me:
She had perished, had not two young Gentlemen
Rescued her fainting soul; they killed his Ruffin,
Drove him away, my Lord; and since that time
Shame has concealed him.

Lonus. Swear that this is true.


Hacca. By all my love to truth.


Lonus. Now farewell comfort,
Long since I have predicted some disastrous
And gloomy accident to follow his
High-minded stubbornness; Oh me, oh me!

Servant. A chair, a chair, my Lord faints.


Enter Servant with a chair: he sits in it. Lonus. My sons departure, tells me I
must have
A doleful life, or else a doleful grave.
Fear never to see him more, affrights me so,
It makes me loath to stay, and loath to go;
Lest he should live still, then if I expire,
'Twould kill his joy, and kill my own desire.
I Will tarry, perchance Heavens so kind may be,
To revive my Son, and so to revive me.
By his return, if not, I Will yield my breath,
First due to sorrow, and next due to death.
But why cheer I so? if he lived, ah then,
He Would send me news by word, or news by pen,
To ease my fears, or else expel my grief
By a quick burial, or a quick relief.
He Is gone, I forgive you, now suffer me
To Hacca. To slide from this vale of extremity.

Enter another Servant. Servant. My Lord, I Have here one lately see your son
in the wood hereby.


Lonus. Away, kill me no more.


Enter Marus. Marus. What news, my Lord, has taught your eyes to weep?
Shed one tear more, and let that be bestowed,
For not accepting crosses as you should:
The change of all things here puts you in mind,
You're tossed like a Ball between the Rackets;
Show your self Master of your passions; use 'um
As a wise Angler, play 'um all to death.

Lonus. My son is buried, but where I know not.


Servant. Since this days dawning, Sir, his son was seen
Alive and well in these adjacent Woods.

Marus. Will Not all persuade a change, my Lord? believe it,
Breath while there is hopes, the truth is quickly known.

Lonus. How I pray?


Marus. If he is there, you have ways enough
For his recovery: beseech the King
His Forests may be searched, and every place
Suspected, entered by his Commission:
The Seal makes people double diligent;
Let your reward provoke them to industry.

Lonus I Will go and beg that favor of the King.


Exeunt all but Hacca. Enter Thele. Hacca. Poor man, how sad he is!
Joy to you Mistress,
Make much of your Servant Beucer.

Thele. Is he mine?
Steward, count out a hundred Dollers for her,
Your news deserves it; till now, I could not trust
So fair a Fortune.

Hacca. It Is so, never mock.


Thele. Forget to part the Cash, add ten times more,
It Is seconded; the Guinian Neger never
Humm'd for his passage more to serve a Master,
Then I at this; may it be credited?

Hacca. As what you see.


Thele. The business Amorous
Takes up the thoughts, awakes and conveys them
To skreeks of slumber; as the matter is,
A pill eant half so pleasant; this has washed
Disturbance down: I can freely inquire
The love and progress of Berania.

Hacca. Dissemble what you know, all is providing;
We wish his voice be clear, bids 'um good morrow
After the Music of the Marriage-night.
My Mistress airs out sweetest expectation
To drive the time away.
Occus is free to it, no impediment
Stains blew proceedings, but Lord Petus Father,
Who I don't know his reason, keeps at distance,
But 'twill away, it has been motion'd twice.

Thele. Patience to hearing's the first sign of grant:
He Is faint, whose Fathers first repulse does dant.

Exeunt, Enter Occus. Occus. Vile, damned, rotten, pockie, ugly, devilish Dogs,
I vow, they have got my money and my bond, so they have; a Devil on 'um, I Will
see the Devil Hanged, as I live, law so I will, before I Will go to him again,
for a Rogue as he is, I vow, to come to cheat so, as I Am here: I believe the
Witches sent him: it is a damned thing to be a Conjurer.


Enter King, Guard, Chancellor and Lonus. Occus aside peeping. Lonus. May't
please your Majesty.


King. Rise up, my Lord.


Lonus. To grant me one Petition 't may put off
The sorrows that do over-whelm my heart,
For my sons loss.

King. Name it, be confident,
Your former Services lie fresh within me,
I Will do more then you ask.

Lonus. Humble thanks, Sir,
Betwixt this mornings fits of fate, when scarce
I could wish any thing but to end my life,
A beam warmed me a little; and thus it was,
My son was seen alive; grant me so much,
All places may be searched with your order:
His golden mouth that tells me tidings of him,
Shall be enriched with a reward that is fit.

King. Why went he away?


Lonus. I know not, but being out,
Some private grief is pleas^d with wandering,
And keep him there, if he is alive.

King. I grant it,
Give whom my Lord appoints a large Commission,
To the Chancellor. To examine what is suspected; wish you tidings.

Chancellor. It shall be done.


Lonus. Heavens bless your Majesty.


King going forth, enter Occus. Kneels. Occus. Your worship, your honor,
Majesty, King, King, the Devil has got my bond, so he has, I vow, I pray give
it me again.


King. The Devil your bond, my Lord? I cannot help that.


Exit. Occus. So, so, this is very brave, the King can grant other things, so
he can, I vow; but he will not grant me, so he wont, I shall be plagued still; a
Devil 'um all for me, that money would a bought me and my daughter new clothes
to the Wedding, so it would, I vow; he had a confoundable great pair of horns,
so he had.


Exit. Enter Hare and the three Men. Hare. Now our business fadg'd gallantly,
it did.


2 Man. I, thank me.


3 Man. I got him here with a flea in his ear, to you Mr. Conjurer with your
figures.


First. Your figures got the bond.


Second. Sings Old Occus thought we Saints had been,
He see us stand so civil;
Till I took him by the shoulder,
And thrust him to the Devil.

Third. Now you have your bond, let us go and have our money.


Hare. It Is due.


Exeunt Omnes. Enter four Clowns listening. First. My Lord Lonus says I shall
have money enough, if I find him.


Second. You? I Will find him first, or I Will look as Nunkle Morris does the
Hedges for a Hare, faith.


Third. Swaukers, we'll all go, go whoop and hollow, till we make him see, if
he be to be seen, I Will warrant you.


Fourth. You Owls, I Will make him come with a sussorarah, as the Gentle-folk say.


First. If I find him, I Will drink Sack with all the money.


Second. You drink Sack? you drink a -- will not you?


Third. Out on such an unmannerly bastard to say -- you're a great booby.


Fourth. Hie to our work, before George.


Exeunt singing. Enter Petus and Marus. Petus. Tell me some reason, Sir, it is
easy for you
To contradict my remedy, because
You have forgot its torments; yield to it,
Requite my duty with a Fathers grant:
Did you but feel the flames I do, your own
Tortures would kneel for a whole Sea to quench 'um.

Marus. Check your pretended fancy; to my care
Commit your self, I Will choose a match shall please you:
Our Countries wide, within the circle on it
I Will fetch a beauty shall deface your Mistress,
And bring you to your right mind.

Petus. Give consent
I marry her, or else command my grave;
One of them two must end my love or life.

Marus. In sons obedience best besuits the mind
To Fathers precepts, as the Clouds by wind.

Petus. Yea, where obedience grees with good, it is so:
But it is not good to kill me; pity show.

Marus. I will in giving what my self affects.


Petus. To please it self, Love others still neglects.


Marus. Why Love approaching mischief cannot see.


Petus. If that betyde, lay all your blames on me.


Marus. It Is vain to move what is fixed: Heavens bless your choice,
That in your joys, we both may like rejoice;
And not to strive against the stream, I here
Approve your love shown to your lovely deer.

Enter Losana, Thele and Lidorus. Petus. Tell Berania, I am happy, sister;
Heavens shroud from ills: Lidorus now descend --

Lidorus. Maskers, or what?


Petus. Undisguis'd, I Will show
Them all the way to Heaven.

Losana. Why must we leave you?


Petus. Understand me, Lady, it is so nigh,
I Will look at it as the wise Elephant
Adores the Moon, and use variety
Of contemplation to express my Jubil.

Lidorus. Forget to sigh then.


Petus. I may use a few that it is no nearer.


Losana. I Will go carry her word,
'T would be too harsh tho: will not your patience, Sir,
Make earthquakes till its spent?

Lidorus. Now what are Ladies?


Petus. Forgive, my Lord, have NOT I had punishment?
If not, I Will leave the seat of Cherubins
And be your Vassal; 'fraid to speak, I Will wait
the slowest motion of your hand or eye
That calls me to it again: consult definers
Of Angels or of women; let 'um ring
With words of rapture above all the flourishes
Have been invented since the time of Rome:
I Will swear they say true, when they call 'um gods.
If this will not do, persuade some gentle Beauty
To stick me for a year; and all that while
I Will cry its just, and with my latest breath,
Damn my condition, before I was converted.

Losana. You make us think you worship every thing a Lady has laid hands on.


Lidorus. I, and cringe
At a white Peticote a mile from him;
Be real, and under that consideration,
You Will find a new world all made of delight.

Petus. There Is other things between.


Losana. How now, my Lord!


Lidorus. Else every one would make discovery.


Marus. Women and truth are best, when naked, have
The sweetness of imagination, when
Their lovely blushes in a pretty face
Are fancied, telling us of all our sins.

Lidorus. Or but one touch of their hands charm with pleasure:
Refiners are not half so jocund, Sir,
To see gold drops fall thick as Rain from Ore
That promised little. --

Marus. As I, my Lord, have been
About your age to dwell on the melting lips
Of those sweet Females.

Lidorus. Excellent, I faith, it posts to him, my Lord.


Losana. Nothing more welcome,
I have often wished to see my Sister muse;
A reverend Priest would join 'um both together.

Lidorus. What undiscerned mischief dare lurk private?
The assenting trumpets of our holy Temples,
Confound all Treason; her one presence has
Power to kill the infection of an Adder
That leaps cross their can did intentions.

Losan. None can be sure of futures; every point
Of time's defended from black Maladies
By something pious, or the influence
Of prosperous sighs.

Lidorus. Where both are pure as they,
I Will prophecy the eights of Harmony.

Losana. Cursed not to credit you.


Lidorus. Your bashfulness
To Petus. Kept you at distance, like a well-bred Masty,
Will see a shoulder of Mutton in a Dish,
And Perish ere he will taste it. 'Twas me Madam
Beat the Alarm.

Petus. Noble Sentinel,
To acknowledge it, I Will wait upon your safety,
And beg for watch-nights to attend your person.

Exeunt all but Losana and Thele. Losana. Go for Litus: Thele stay you there,
Hell be almost angry I tarry so long.
To kill, or wound, or poison, some of these
Shall open to the right or left: I cannot
I cannot, nor will not bear it, see my own self
Spit upon, while my younger flattering imp
Is always prayed for and admired? away,
Let me be melted into nothing, if
I don't cure this ere I am two Suns older:
Enter Litus. Stab me if I don't convert my promise
To performance. My Lord, their visits tire
The day: Cabinets full of letters stand
For gold to stare on, every breath brings message
Of new devoyrs, and returns deep laden
With Lovers whimsies: to your last discourse
I have paid reverence, 'twas right and true:
The hodge-podge words of her fantastic pate
Serve for good morrow to me: all their studies
Are for others to conjure one another,
In changing hearts: catalogues of their flouts
Swell when I Am amongst 'um; every moment
I ha'been urgent in persuasions to her,
She has scorned 'um.

Litus. Troth Madam, I wondered you
So long together could forget your birth:
Two gallant spirits, their continual practice
Strikes deeper then a Chinian Dart: You know
The unfit receiving she has of your counsel,
To all but who their cogging words and looks
Buy respect of; your Nobler mind is plain,
Kill bad examples; famous for a Pattern:
Show their dull Genius the way to mend;
Correction's studied quickly, though I must
Confess revenge is hungry at their carriage,
I thought to come ere now.

Losana. Take this prevention, shortly I intend
To put in practice arms that shall divide 'um:
It Is time enough, the more entire they,
One bullet takes two bodies glew'd together.
Do You think I can forget their outrages?
Sooner my name and Country; I Will bear both
Fair looks till then.

Litus. My Father, I Am informed,
Has ordered for my search; I Will sooner dye
Then be discovered before we have ended this.

Losana. I Will flee to 't.


Exit. Litus. If you don't, and quickly too,
I Will be contriver and Executioner:
She cannot help it, may be, but my oath
Tears out the heart of one, if not of both.

Exit. Enter Sarah, Winifred and Thele. Sarah. I have deferred so long, dear
Cosen,
In expectation of your promised help,
That I cannot hide it longer; my shame begins
To increase: I fear without your sudden counsel,
I shall be forced to give the world an Infant:
I blush to think on it.

Winifred. Don't do so, my Joy.


Sarah. Heal my distemper, use time while you have it.


Winifred. I do, do my sweet Nephew, my love: my Daughter's with Child for
sooth.


Thele. Be diligent, ben't absent, shortly I Will send,
Till then I Will pray for good success.

Sarah. Heavens grant it,
My Cause is just; what rockie heart can hear
My sad complaints, and not relieve me? Wonders
Have brought content to the harmless; let some vision
Threaten his disloyalty; and then beseech
Him view the curses ready to fall on him,
For taking holy things to witness how
Clear his thoughts were from this impiety.
Man's not impenetrable, cannot a sin
Be frighted into goodness? sure it may:
Skies send I live to see that happy day.

Exit she and Winifred. Thele. Witness impartial ordinances how
I loath the falsehood of a perjured lover:
Nature commands me to do justice, and
It Is in my power; she admires him still.
Help me some shining Spirit to consult
Your own affairs, and reap the glory on it.

Enter Beucer. Beucer. Dear Mistress, I have seen a thousand doomsdays since
you said I pleased you; one word now makes me lighter hearted then a feather;
in sober sadness I shall be seen no more, if I dye for love: My tears run
faster then Greyhounds for you: a good simile is the chiefest part of Language:
I Have read over the Academy of Complements, and picked out the best rhetoric to
woe you; a Parson may Marry us: be attracted, be attracted.


Thele. The eagerness I have of Marrying you,
Makes Moons seem twelve-months, every minute hours:
But for my friends good will, I had long ere now
Sealed to our Wedding.

Beucer. You are so wise, Mistress, that I should be worse then a Fanatic, to
wish any thing till you say the word.


Thele. These are expressions fit for strangers, Sir,
Not her that duty ties to you, cease 'um pray.

Beucer. The best quality of a Suitor, is to be well spoken, and pronounce every
word with an emphasis; and I thank my Stars, I have both as sure as a dye; and
if I live, will delight your ears with the high-flown words of Romances: Amadis
de Gaul, and Palmorin de Oliva, shall be my every days discourse.


Thele. High properties.


Beucer. And I Will delight your ears with songs of my own making.


Thele. Would you not have me coy?


Beucer. 'T would kill me twenty times.


Thele. Provide a Priest, we'll invite nobody.


Beucer. Am I above or no? methinks I turn round, and see a hundred nooks, and
a bag of gold in every one; so high and mighty is my rapture: when, Angel, when?


Thele. Be Lord of the time your self, when you will appoint it,
I have changed my condition already:
What a tode am I (to speak passionately?)

Thele. Why, Sir?


Beucer. I bought a Token of my love, and forgot to give it you.


Gives her a stomacher of Ribonds, and a Love-hood. Thele. You put your self to
charge, I humbly thank you;
These shall be my Wedding-Furniture.

Beucer. Every particle of 'um, I bought them for the same purpose; to be
privately and suddenly Married, are the symptoms of a fiery and Elegant Lover,
you know my meaning.


Thele. You have forced my will, meet me at S. Thomas Church,
Ere half an hour's spent, I Will be your wife:
Shall I use flattery to my dearest heart?

Beucer. I Will hire a Parson, you prodigious heap of virtues, and meet you
sooner then I would Elyzium delights.


Thele. Be swift, sweet Sir: for since it must be so,
I Will haste to Church, and dress me as I go.

Beucer. I am going to Paradise in a down Blanket.


Exeunt. Enter four Clowns with a glove lugging. First. You lie you Cur, I see
it.


Second. Sir, I say, I see it first tho.


Third. You, guds Waukers, I came when it was welly hot within side, so I did,
you fools.


Fourth. So did I, and I Will go carry it to my Lord Lonus.


Third. So do, it is warm still, and so it was, when we all see it first, Wan't
it? then it must be his Sons Glove, and he must be somewhere hereabouts.


First I Will carry it.


Second. You shall not, you whelp, I will.


First and second fight. Third takes it up; all take it from him. Fourth. We'll
teach you better manners then to steal: I dare swear it is Litus his glove.


Second. So I say, you may see it is a Lords glove mon, by the Ribonds, what
do talk of that?


Third. And he is within shot.


First. I Will carry it to his Father and tell him so.


Second. If you don't say we all found it, I Will swinge you agood.


Fourth. You fool, would you trust him? I Will cudgel you faith, so I will, have
you no more wit? we'll all carry it together, else he will get the money to
himself.


Second. You have more wit then us all.


First. Shall's drink when we have done?


Third. All wheaters, my honey.


Exeunt all. Enter Beucer leading Sarah in Theles Apparel. Beucer. My humor
was feigned, I Will counterfeit no longer, but be serious.


Thele enters, and pulls off Sarath 's Love-hood: Beucer amazed. Beucer.
Witchcraft, Witchcraft!


Thele. It Is so, it is so;
Negromancie vanish, no Negromancie.

Enter Winifred. Winifred. It Is so indeed, it is so my love, my chuck.


Beucer. I married her by the name of Thele Moron,
Hers is so, and I changed mine to make
Your Marriage firm, and you religious:
She hers from the beginning by design.

Beucer mourns. Sarah. It Is just, my Lord and husband.


Beucer. It Is just, just Maiden, and I free remit
To Thele. Your sacred wisdom that invented it.
Great powers above ordained it; and I yield
I Am rightly served, who sows shall reap the field.
And now to you dear Mistress, I forgive,
To his wife. And more commend the plot that makes you live
My dearest wife, protesting to Apollo,
This chastest Marriage, chastely true to follow,
With purest love embrace, I do repent
What Is past, and pray our lives hence be content.

ACT. V.
SCEN. 2.
Enter Marus and Occus. Marus. MY Lord, between Berania and my Son
You know proceedings, bless 'um both together.

Occus. A Devil Devil 'um, he has got my bond, so they have, I vow.


Marus. To the purpose.


Occus. Why, I vow, I think they did it a purpose.


Marus. I mean, speak to the matter.


Occus. So I do, I vow; it is a great matter I should be cheated so, so it is;
but she shall have him, if she will, as I live, do you see? we'll talk by and by,
I Will have new clothes to the Wedding, so I will.


Exeunt. Enter Litus and Losana. Losana. I Will finish quickly to that Gallery
there.
Exit Litus to the Gallery. Enter Lidorus. Sir, whether should one prize a
noble name
And virtuous, or the respect of a friend,
If both cannot dwell together?

Lidorus. Loose not the first for worlds.


Losana. Was ever any tried like me?
One of them two I must, it is your concerns:
I Will dye guiltless of your hurt, my Lord:
Please you to hear me, take the saddest story
That ere was told, yet short I Will strive to speak it,
It requires privacie.

Lidorus. Madam, we go.


Exeunt. Enter Occus: Walks about studying. Occus. Well, we have done a great
deal of business, let me see, we have, I vow; well, what then? if my Daughter
have Children, I shall be a Grandfather, so I shall.

Enter Petus. How do you Son-in-law? this is a damnable trouble, so it is, till
it is done; you will make all the haste you can, do you see? I vow, I was never half
so preteritory when I was a Bachelor; if you were Married, it would be over,
would it not?


Enter Losana. Losan. Our meeting, my Lord, tells me 't was ordained
To Petus, You should avoid: 'lass I can go no further;
I Have so much breath as shall tell you the strangest.
Forgive me Skies, shall I be false, my Lord?

Petus. Tell me why this sadness is upon you.


Losana. I will: turn Rock to hear it, let us be close.


Exeunt. Litus from the Gallery speaks. Litus. To kill, or to be killed 's the
largest scope
My injuries can give; though all the signs
Of Hell and Terror meet me, I Will go on,
And be as famous for my courage in it
As Nero for his tyranny: What boots
A man when dead, to be accounted good?
If his exploits be noted, though they have power
To give an ague at the relation of them,
And make men drop down dead with very fear,
To tell the most inhumane bloody murders
They have committed; yet some stander by
Adores the Actor for the strangeness of 'um.
Dionysius is as much talked on, as if
He had changed all Cicily to Almshouses:
I Am in the custody of sin, it whirls me
With his byas, and I cannot resist it;
As good proceed as draw back and be murdered:
Though I should be surpised in the midst of the fact,
My name shall signify a bloody act.

Exit from the Gallery. Enter Berania. Berania. Whence comes my ruin? he will not
speak to me;
What Sorcerer has had to do with him?

Exit. Enter Petus with his sword in his hand. Petus. Oh racks of horror! could
you find no other
Subject to work upon, but my destruction?
Lidorus, where is the truth your flattering tongue
Would dress in pleasant painted skins of Serpents?
Supreme Commanders, is my life alone
Enter Losana. Odious, that under such a black dark Cloud
You would smother all my joys?

Losana. With grief, my Lord,
I tell you of your faults: love blinded you,
Else many a time you might a seen him coming
Softly to meet Berania alone;
When you appeared, he slunk away; and still
It is his custom, try, and trust: Adieu.

Exit. Petus. Fawning delusions, you have took your pride,
To build higher the imaginations of my triumph,
That they the greater downfall may receive:
If I revenge my self, I Am worst of all.
Tho his disloyal heart can smother up
Such treachery to me, I Will never prove
Guilty of so much wickedness to him.
But stay fond kindeness, what, shall I incline
To spare him his life, that seeks to take mine,
I am reduced to this untoward end,
Either to loose my honor, or loose my friend.
If this my comfort's gone, that to forego,
Makes me ungrateful, and a Traitor too:
He gave it first, and who better then he
May borrow that which himself lent to me?
In this quandary make thy self a sheath:
Farewell once Mistress, I must bid adieu
To my own self, but first of all to you;
Enter Berania. When I am dead, that you may know the truth,
Sets it to his Breast. My blood shall be the pen and writer both:
Though you to others kindness could impart,
Yet your name onely's graven within my heart:
If asked, what did this tragedy incur,
You Have been the cause, but I the Murderer.
Throw fury on it self.

He goes to kill himself. Berania catches the sword. Berania. For Heavens sake,
my Lord, tell me the cause.

Lidorus enters; seeing Petus, walks away. Petus. It Is true, ye darts of Pluto
nail me here.


Berania. Good Sir, speak.
He turns from her. It Is too much to bear; he has been my friend,
Well, but now he is my foe; and I as justly
May make my self his, my sword shall reward it.

Exeunt. Losana and Litus in the Gallery. Losana. How now, what think you?


Litus. Whither is he gone?


Losana. To write an invitation to Lidorus.


Litus. Then one or both; Lidorus has the best judgment.


Losana. I know it, my Lord, tother's sooner dispatched;
He has no skill at all, he dies, my life for it.

Litus. It Is well contrived, thanks to your wit and will.


Go from the Gallery. Enter Petus with a letter and Page. Petus. Deliver this
to Lord Lidorus; flee.


Exit Petus. Page meets Lidorus, he reads it. Lidorus. Upon suspicion, my Lord,
where is the Wisdom
And sobriety was moderator
In all your passion? quite forgot? tho he
Be frenzied with an Amorous fire, I Will
Not take it as a challenge: Yet consider,
He Is in earnest; if I don't accept it,
A woman or a coward nicknames me.
In Challenges, we ought more to reflect
On honors splendour, then the fight's neglect;
And invitations warlike, ought to be
Answered with courage, not benignity.
Tell him I stay: how clear am I from it?
Exit Page. Sweet is a life retired from all affairs
Of State or Court; one sad mischance or other
Waits upon Pomp; 't has always emulation
To study ones own private houshold-good,
In the short walks of an enclosed Garden;
And there content strikes envy in the bosom.

Petus coming. Petus. My life or his, this treason must redeem:
Honor then friendship should have more esteem.

Lidorus bare to meet Petus. Lidorus. Sir. --


Petus. Hold, your villany's too obvious to admit of ceremonious parles.


Lidorus. Charge.


Petus. Defend.


Fight and breath. Lidorus. End it.


Petus. Dispatch in justice.


Fight again: Lidorus falls. Lidorus. One thing I crave before I dye; tell me
The reason of this fight.

Petus. By your life that sees his last period, resolve
The truth to what I ask.

Lidorus. Else Heavens show themselves my everlasting enemies.


Petus. Have not betrayed me? tell your unjust dealing.
With Berania, you are both dishonest.

Lidorus. Some miracle of the Gods show my innocence:
Or if I have been guilty, all the torments
In Hell torment me for disloyalty.
Who blowed this fire in your breast, my Lord?

Petus. Will It make me kill my self? is it not true?
Losana told me, and I see it too.

Lidorus. What did you see?


Petus. You walk away as soon
As entered; 'twas because we were together:
She must be alone to entertain your visits.

Lidorus. Losona told me, you suspected me
Of being too familiar with your Mistress;
Advised me to march off when I beheld
Berania with you, that in time it might
Abate your jealousy.

Petus. Your coming was upon a match, what say you?


Lidorus. If so, let me be matched with the worst fury
That ever howled in Hell: Losana bid me
Come to meet her here about some business:
I went when I see you, you know the cause.

Petus. I smell sulphur; Losana told me
What I have spoke, and that you were loved of her.

Lidorus. Traiterous Losana, she-Devil, she 'twas, she
Brought me to my grave; secure her, I am faint;
The house is full of treason, use your judgment
To punish it; I could divulge it now,
But I want breath: I am sent for, Sir, farewell;
Your innocent servant remits you his death:
Once more farewell, and think upon me.

Petus skreeks. Enter Berania. Berania. My Lord, what is this?


Petus. Speak woman, did thou think
He Would a dyed with a heavy conscience, and
Concealed your sin to damn him?

Berania. I Will be tried with fire, and in my defense
Kiss glowing steel: bring burning coals to me,
I Will keep 'um in my hand till they extinguish,
And never cry, to show you I am clear,
Believe me, Sir.

Body took away. Petus. Did not you and Lidorus 'gree to meet?
He was a coming, but seeing me with you, returned.

Berania. My Sister bid me come about some business;
I thought not to meet you, and much less him.

Petus. It Is clear a plot to make us fight; tells him
That I suspected he was too familiar
With Berania: then tells me, that he
Was naught with her indeed; and more, that he
Agreed to meet her, but to walk away
At any time, when he see her with me;
Then bids him walk away, when he see me,
That it might in time abate my Jealousy,
And so got's all together here unknown
To each other; a cast a contrived Devilry:
He went away, for fear of my displeasure;
And I thought he went guilty of what was told me;
That we were both innocent, and both suspicious.

Beran. Litus contrives it, my Maid once or twice see 'um together.


Petus. Desperate Losana, could the Devil invent
To cloak thy damned malice with this pretense
Of love to us both?

Enter Servant. Servant. Lidorus is dead, it is known you killed him.


Petus. Justice, suffer not
A wretch to tread the earth: Villainous woman,
Were here, I Would gore thy hellish heart. O Monster!
Treacherous Monster; no less then thy infernal
Life shall satisfy me. Dear Lidorus,
How dare I name thee? every noise I hear
Crokes horror to me: why, I could not help it,
He cannot be brought to life again: I Will dye,
And punish my self for so damned a sin.
Losana, Tiger-bitch, to thy breath
My hands enraged shall give a mournful death:
And for your witchcraft, I will make thee rue it
By just revenge, if my life's price can do it.

Exit with Berania and Servant. Enter two Watchmen. First. Hereabouts 'twas
done; Petus is fled.


Second. He Is gone, the King must pardon him, or we shall see him no more: what
was it about?


First. They talk of treachy in the business.


Second. Let Us return.


First. Good morrow my Masters all, good morrow.


Exeunt. Enter King, Guard, and Marus, and Chancellor. Marus. May it please
your Majesty, it is I am --


King. Why you know it is against our Act that Duels should be fought, the
penaltie's death.


Marus. I come not to know rigor, but crave pardon.


King. To pardon this, would against Justice tend.


King sits in a chair. Chancellor. Justice draws mercy, Sir, at every end.


King. Yea, where the offense is done against the will.


Chancellor. It was my Liege, he did not love to kill.


King. Why fought he then?


Chancellor. To vindicate his right.


King. That Is got by Law, and not by single might.


Chancellor. 'T was, Sir, so sudden done, forced by a plot,
That strength must needs decide, what Law could not.

King. The Fathers service, and the Sons deport;
One in our Wars, the the other in our Court,
Tho against my Law, command me to assuage
For once the penance of my Statutes rage;
But take notice, lest it should authorize
Others like manner precepts to despise,
Renew its force; and hence will hardly I
Give him his life that makes another dye.

Both. Your pardon,
But let it teach better things.

Exeunt. Litus and Losana in the Gallery. Litus. I knew it would not take,
Lidorus is dead.


Losana. I wish it had been Petus.


Litus. Wishes nothing avail, our treason's divulged; and
If we are caught, we shall soundly suffer.

Losana. My disgrace is so great, I dare not return:
But since it is so, I Will alter our design,
And have his life, or it shall cost me mine.

Exeunt. Enter Petus in a Nightgown, and Berania. Petus. A pardon? it were
better that I were
Condemned to death, by the most cruel torture:
To live, is only to be knawed upon,
And suffer lingrings, which subtly beguile
Me of my rest: One blow consumes them all;
But on my life depends a dearer; and
If I were dead, she would be exposed to the rage
Of bloody butcheries: I Will be revenged.
Dear Lidorus, how shall I pacify
Thy angry Ghost! I killed thee, and were served
But just, if thy deathy fingers should
Pull out my timorous heart.

Berania. You see, my Lord,
The fruits of too rash anger.

Petus. Would I had,
Dear Madam, so sudden a Burial; let me
Sacrifice my life to assuage this fault,
In doubting of your chastity.

Draw's his sword. Berania. Hold, my Lord, I shall dye to see you thus;
'T was foul, but now it is over.

Petus. Oh that I could come at this demons urchin!
Litus appears in the Gallery. I Would break the charms of Beelzebub, and bite
The sulphry links that keep her; all the flashes
Of brimstone should but heat my purposes,
Till with her blood I had made a deadly poison
Should kill all that but speak or think upon her:
Where art Air? cover her not, she will infect thee:
Ground swallow her up, or throw her to me, that I
May rid the world of lust and treachery.

Exit. Enter Litus and Losana. Losana. You see how things fall out.


Litus. It is reported
You are sled; Petus beside himself,
Studies to make a sad example of you.

Losana. Are you against me too?


Litus. Not I, I wish
I could but see the color of his heart-blood;
Till then I shant be quiet, nor you peel off
Perpetual shame.

Losana. Does he tear at me thus?


Litus. I heard him in the Gallery.


Losana. Enough,
I Will do his business: stay here, I have provided.

Exit. Litus walks about Litus. I wish I had never begun this, I am vexed;
I dream of Blood and War: in my condition
Distraction banquets: I have entered on it,
And will go on.
Enter Losana. But this one way to save our lives, go up,

Exit Litus. Enter three men. Losana. Here, here, come hither.


They whisper. All. We attend your will.


Losana. There Is one has done me a great deal of wrong,
Weeps. 'Twill do no good to name it; if you will
Undertake to murder him, you shall
Be satisfied largely.

First. No fear Madam, we can do it.


Second. I, and we will do it.


Third. Where Is the man?


Los. Stand in that corner; within a little while he comes to you Gentlemen, be
sure you kill him; I cannot describe him by his clothes, but there none comes in
a whole year; dispatch him quickly.


First. We'll use swords to it.


Second. Best we have them ready.


Third. Surest and safest, these ( All draw) will give him a meal he shall
never digest, I Will warrant you.


Losana. Go, and don't fail to kill the first that comes.


Exit. All. We will, faith.


All stand aside. Enter Losana with a Boy. Losana. Go to Lord Petus, and tell
him you saw Losana go down that lane just now; do your arrand well, and here is
for you; then out by my Chamber.


Boy. I will.


Exit Losana. Boy meets Petus. Boy. I was a coming to you, my Lord.


Petus. For what?


Boy. I heard you inquire for Madan Losana,
And I see her go down that lane just now.

Petus. Good Boy.
Exit Boy. Now pity be gone.

He goes apace: draws his sword. Four Clowns overtake him with clubs, and
surprise him, taking him for Litus. First. Ha, ha, now we have you; nay, go to
your Father.


Petus. What mean you, Gentlemen?


Second. Gentleman us no more then we Gentleman you; for In Faith you shall go.


He strives. Third. Hold fast there: you are an undutiful son indeed; we'll
Litus you, In Faith.


Fourth. So, I thought we should catch you at last.


Petus. Stand off, you rustic Bores.


He strives again. All. Hold him fast; if we let him go, we shall all be hanged.


Second. Get you home, we have searched the woods for you to some purpose.


Petus. How dare you Villains?


First. Uds waukers, we'll cudgel you, so we will, for all you're a Lord.


Fourth. There Is a good one, shall we please your father or you?


Third. Swinge him, swinge him agood if he will not go; the King man set us a work
to look you, and gave us leave.


Petus. Was ever Noble scratched with dogs before?


Strives again. All. In with him, in with him to his father; come along, good
my Lord Litus, come along, or we'll make you with a murrin.


All pull him in. Fourth. It must be Litus man, and nobody else.


Exeunt all. Litus and Losana in the Gallery. Losana. Now Sir, from an abyss of
discontent
Three thrusts have built us up security;
Peace over all those mists that interposed
Between Berania and you are vanished.
Petus is dead, the Boy came to my Chamber,
And see him run to eternal banishment:
Them three dispatched him, ere one cry could come
Toth' ears of any living. Court your Mistress;
But make devotion to me; I invented
His death, and your felicity.

Litus. Rare Madam!
Seeing there is no lets to my preferment, I Will
Adore your memory, and gratify
With forty Ducats, them that laid him dead:
Come along Madam, I Will see how they sped.

Losana. They could not find resistance from him.


Litus, ha. Litus. I Am ravished with these Musical words,
I Will see how they did their business, and
Content 'um for it.

Losana. Well enough, I warrant you.


Litus goes to the stage, and to the Thieves. Thieves set on him, follow him
out and fight. Litus. Hold, I am not the man.


All. He is dispatched.


They kill him, and stop his mouth with an Hankerchaer. Exeunt. Enter Petus.
Petus. Take me for Litus? Oh I fear she is gone.
He sees the body. Ho, ho; Watch, Watch, what is this? what bloody business?

Enter Watch and Constable. Constable. How came this, do you know, my Lord? I
dare not but ask you.


Petus. Coming by and seeing it, made me cry out.


Constable. Alack, he is newly killed;
Watch, go pursue the murderers: Alas, my Lord,
Exeunt Watch. This is my Lord Lonus his son Litus, for whom
We have searched so long.

Petus. I was subdued, and carried to his father
Instead of him, not twenty minutes ago:
Cursed be the foolish messengers for it.

Enter Watch with one of the Murderers. Murderer. O be gracious, good my
Lord, I Will confess all.


Constable. To the Justice with him.


Watch. We caught him by himself, just at the gate.


Exeunt all, and carry the body. Enter Lonus. Lonus. Oh my son! could I not see
him ere he dyed?


Exit. Enter a Nymph singing, Nymph. Now alls fulfilled, that I
Did with my Sister prophecy.

Within. It is, it is, it is.


Voices heard answering within. Nymph. Their days shall increase
In kindness, love and peace.

Within. Yea, yea, yea.


Nymph. Till the terms of their breath.
Shall be ended by death.

Within. Agreed, agreed, agreed.
Chorus.
Now the Season draws nigh,
That we welcome our Bride;
With our Songs Melody,
When all grief's laid aside.

Exit. Enter Petus, Marus, Berania and Hacca. Berania. For thee.


Petus. The Crocodel confessed it was:
But by kind providence those Clowns ordained
To stop me by mistake, I should have perished.

Berania. Is my father so long a getting my Sister clear?


Marus. You have run through trials.


Petus. This was the most horrid,
Take all the story at a fitter time.

Enter Occus and Losana distracted in a Nightgown. Occus. O come in my
Daughter, Losana does almost despair, so she does; she is forgiven, so she is,
and at liberty, I vow, come in.


Petus offers to run at her; Berania holds him. Berania. She is penitent.


Losana. Here they come, I will not go to the Justices, I shall be burnt, keep me;
there is Lidorus his Ghost.


Berania. What ails her?


Losana. I Will go to bed; the man in the white cap; the dead man bound under the
chin; the great Devils, and the little Devils twitch, and twitch off all the
clothes: Look the dead horse heads chop, and chop in the sea, and the water all
over my chamber: O dear, help, help, a cave in the Wet-wood; the Friars and the
Nuns that are dead, look how they run by me: Now, now again, there is the spirit
with the withered face stands boult upright: do you see the little beads tumble
about? tingle, tingle, tingle, that is the bell in the Monastery: Through the
grates, the woman in Pautado, is hanged without her head, for saying her
prayers: Here comes the Devil like a mourning Gentlewoman with a peak: The
Candles burn dim.


Occus. Hold, hold, what shall I do? here is nobody, what shall I do?


Marus. In the name of all the Powers be silent.


She falls down in a swound, they recover her; kneeling. Los. Oh I Am undone!
what ails me terror? I Am dead, forgive me.


Berania. Sister, you have offended grievously.


Losana. I am, tho grieved, not shamed to ask pardon
For that which will defile good lips to utter;
Caused by my envy to my Sister dear:
Envy, damned envy, makes me kneeling here.
The Devil and Litus urged me with their tongues
To cause my Sisters and your death at once:
Which sinful thought with grief I now repent,
To Litus vile, that I should so consent.
All men, me seemed, did only well affect
My virtuous Sister, and my self neglect:
That prompted me to this revengeful spite,
Fit to be named in Charon's dismal night.
I Am justly served, and Heavens just Judge has brought
My wicked purpose to this wicked naught;
And made that evil light on my own head,
With which I hoped you would be ruined.
Oh pardon me, and I Will henceforward be
Your humble Handmaid in captivity.

Petus. Rise Losana, I forgive you
Your basest Treason, and henceforward wish
That better graces may your Breast enrich:
Your freest freedom, I do not deny,
Do what you please.

Beran. Dear Sister, so do I.


Losana. I repent all for a preparative
To order and Religon, if I may
Be worthy on it: I humbly beg your leave,
That my devotion may be fitted by
A pilgrimage to the Shrine of Loretto;
By a new favor I may be absolved,
As penitent for all the impious stains
Of my bad life.

Petus. I grant you your petition;
Go, if I never see you any more,
Labor to expoliate these sins
By earnest penitence: live holy,
And the everlasting goodness be your guide.

Berania. If we never see more, adieu, dear Sister,
Weeps. I wish you all the sweetest contents of
Your strict and holy being.
Kisses her.
Occus. Well, dear honey, God b'w'y, I weep to part, so I do: you had best take
some Strong-water with you, I vow, so I do, to cheer you up in your long
Journey, do you see?


Losana kneels. Losana. That ere we see if this be the last day,
Do you for me, as I for you will pray.

Exit. All. Adieu.


Petus takes Berania by the hand. Petus. Now what remains, but after all our
fears,
Griefs, sorrows, troubles, terrors, frights and tears,
We beg. --

Enter Messenger, gives Petus a Letter. Petus. Make me not miserable again;
Or is it true? speak, can Lidorus live?

Messenger. Read the just cause of his being secret.


Petus. Stars,
That of a man have made me an Angel;
Or happier, if it be true; don't tantalize me.

Lidorus. My Master fearing your displeasure, vowed
In The Holy Temple to see you bestowed
On that fair Lady, or see his Winding Sheet
Laid at his head, ere you should know he lived;
But now rejoices at your welfare.

Petus. Where remains the crown of all our sweetness?


Enter Lidorus. Lidorus. Here, if you are resolved to call it so.


Petus. Forgive me, or punish, I am at your mercy.


Lidorus. Rise, and be as happy in your Mistress,
As I in seeing you: my wounds, though deep,
Were cured on this condition. --

Berania. Noble Sir.


Lidorus. For offering him a thrust, my eyes have since
I Have been recovered, paid the private walls
A thousand tears.

Marus. Let this bright day be worshipped:
A universal benefit lives with you.
The King has got his thoughts clad all in black
For your supposed loss; changed to ambition
My son, but you to make him glorious.

Occus. It vexed me to the heart to hear you were killed, so it did.


Lidorus. Don't let me hinder your proceedings, crown your expectation, my
felicity.


Marus. Your hands; I join you both, you're man and wife.
Takes 'um by the hand. The Ceremonies take another time.

Occus. And so say I, I vow: but hark, who comes here?


RECORDERS. Enter God Hymen. Hymen. WIth Joy and delight
We'll fill up the night;
That your marriage should be ended,
This dance we intended.
Minerva and the Gods,
When you first were at ods,
Did order this sporting
For your innocent courting.
Then happen what will,
We'll of mirth have our fill:
Your tears were our askers;
Look here come the Masquers.

Descend three Goddesses, two Gods, one singing. Hymen and all the Gods above
That on this Wedding kindly smile:
Grant your blessings, and your love,
Envy and mischief to remove,
Peace and plenty all the while.

Chorus. We grant it all, it shall be so:
The Stars our bounty, and our will shall know.

Hymen and Gods sing. Your nuptial pleasures shall abide
So long as love your hearts inflames;
Near to cease for time or tide,
In joy your days shall swiftly glide;
With honor we'll ingross your names.

Chorus. We grant it all, it shall be so:
The Stars our bounty, and our wills shall know.

Other God. Live like our selves, may every hour renew
Triumphs for constancy; Garlands for you
Shall be prepared rich, to make you prove
Shining below, as we are bright above:
Till then our Dance and Banquet shall display
The pleasure we have in this happy day.
Music. All dance.

Exeunt Omnes. FINIS.

