THE SCHOOL OF THE EUCHARIST ESTABLISHED Upon the Miraculous Respects and
Acknowledgments, which BEASTS, BIRDS, and INSECTS, upon several Occasions, have
rendered to the HOLY SACRAMENT of the ALTAR.

Whence Catholics may increase in Devotion toward this Divine Mystery, and
Heretics find there, their Confusion.

By F. Toussain Bridoul, of the Society of Jesus.

Printed in French at Lille, 1672. And now made English, and published, With a
Preface concerning the Testimony of Miracles.

Let us view more particulary what Rational Grounds Catholics exhibit of their
belief of a Corporal presence in the Eucharist, and so of Adoration. Def. of
Ador. of the Euch. p. 27. Printed at Oxford, 1687. LONDON: Printed for Randall
Tailor, near Stationers' Hall, 1687.

THE PREFACE TO THE TRANSLATION Concerning the Testimony of MIRACLES.
IF the Doctrine of Transubstantiation wants the Authority of the Holy
Scriptures, it cannot be proved to come from Christ and his Apostles, by
Tradition, unless the Fathers of the Primitive Church have conveyed it in their
Writings: If it has had no such Tradition, then the best Church Authority it
has to rest upon, will be that of the Lateran and Tridentine Synods. And if
they had no power to make new Articles of Faith, this Doctrine is in no good
case to recommend it self. There are but two ways remaining, I think, to put it
off; one is to persuade us, that our Learned Protestant Divines have several of
them affirmed such things concerning the Real Presence, as do amount to what
the Papists mean by Transubstantiation; and that they have laid down Principles
which will save the Adoration of the Host from being an Idolatrous Worship: And
this is lately attempted with great appearance of Gravity, by a certain Oxford
Author: But if this will not do, there is yet another way left, and that is to
prove Transubstantiation and the Adoration of the Host, by Miracles; which has
been undertaken, as by several others, so in particular by that Reverend
Jesuit, whose Collection is here Translated.

Our hands, I perceive, are now in about Transubstantiation, and the Worship of
the Host; and the Divines have gone so far in considering all that can be said
for these things, that it is pity the Controversy should not be ended all at
once; to which I think nothing is wanting but to represent our Adversaries
Appeal to Miracles; and that I suppose cannot be more fairly done, than by
exposing to our Countrymen what themselves have thought fit to publish in
another Language concerning this Argument.

That nothing else remains, is evident by what has been already done on
Discourse against Transubstant. Doctrine of the Trin. and Transubstantiation
compared in a New Dialogue. 2 parts. Transubst. no Doctrine of the Primitive
Fathers.
our side, upon all the other Arguments, and that, as time will show more
fully, beyond all possibility of Fair Reply. I had almost forgot the desperate
Defense of Transubstantiation, which our Adversaries have lately made, by
fastening it to the Doctrine of the Trinity, being for their parts content that
both should sink, if they could not swim together. They are, I hope, convinced
by this time, that neither is their Point to be gained so; and that we are able
to maintain the Catholic Doctrine of the Trinity, and at the same time to
overthrow the Roman Doctrine of Transubstantiation. That they cannot retreat
for shelter to the Judgment of any Divines of this Church, is now shown in the
Answer to the Oxford Author. In short, It has been See Bellarm. de Sacr. Euch.
l. 3. c. 23 and Discourse of Eucharist in Answer to the Book printed at Oxford.
p. 4.
confessed by eminent men in the Roman Communion, that the Scriptures do not
oblige us to believe Transubstantiation; and that the Fathers knew nothing of
it, has been confessed too by a Historical Treatise of Transubstant.
Learned Person of that Church now living, and which is something more, proved
also through the First Ten Centuries. Now whether Councils can make an Article
of Faith of that Doctrine which is neither to be found in the Holy Scriptures,
nor can be defended by Testimonies of the Ancient Fathers, but is in truth
contrary to both; I am very willing the Representer should determine; A Papist
Misrepres. and Repr. p. 33.
who tells us, That he is obliged to believe nothing besides that which Christ
taught, and his Apostles; and if any thing contrary to this should be defined
and commanded to be believed, even by ten thousand Councils, he believes it
damnable in any one to receive it, and by such Decrees to make Additions to his
Creed. A great deal less than this, if it had been said with more sincerity,
would have served our turn as well: If Ten thousand Councils will not stir him
in such a case, methinks the Fourth Lateran, and the Trent Councils, the one a
Western, the other little more than an Italian Synod, should not be able to do
what Ten thousand Councils cannot do; as for the Lateran, it is yet a
disputable point, as See Peter Walsh's Letter to the Bp. of Lincoln, Sect. 22.
some of themselves will have us believe, whether the Council, or rather the
Pope only, made the Decrees that bear its name; and for the Tridentine Synod,
the World knows how it was from time to time influenced by the Court of Rome;
so that when the matter comes to be looked into, it is indeed the Papal
Authority that gives to the world this pretended Point of Faith; but because
certain Popes have miscarried in the Faith, to the great discredit of St.
Peter's Chair, it was necessary that the Popes pleasure should upon all
occasions of defining matters of Faith, be a little disguised, by being
conveyed to the Church under the venerable name and Formality of a Council.

Transubstantiation then has nothing left to stand upon, but Miracles, which is
as much as to say, that it stands upon its last legs: Bellarmine, I find, De
Sacr. Euch. l. 3 c. 8.
reserved this Argument for the last, to prove the substantial Presence of
Christ's Body in the Eucharist; I know not whether he thought it the best or no;
if he did, I dare undertake to answer what he thought his best Argument, and
that by showing, that it is none at all; for if we are to trust the Old Miracles
of Christ, and his Apostles, as without all question we ought to do, then we
are not to try Doctrines by new Miracles, but rather to try the Miracles by the
Old Doctrine.

Which one would think should have been a Rule to all Christians, since our
Blessed Savior has warned us not to trust to Signs and Wonders, Matthew. xxiv.
24, 25, 26.
no, tho they be Great ones. Behold, says he, I have told you before. Which
Caution I must confess has sometimes surprised me with astonishment, when I
consider, what the Conclusion is for which according to our Blessed Lords
Prediction, Miracles should be pretended; viz. to make us believe a man, when
he says, Lo, here is Christ, or there is Christ; For what said our Lord Christ
himself? Believe it not, says he, if they shall say unto you, Behold he is in
the Desert, go not forth; Behold he is in the secret Chambers, or in (...).
close Receptacles, believe it not. I dare not say particularly what sort of
men are here pointed at exclusively to all others, for this would be to strain
beyond my reach: But this I dare say, it is not for any body's credit to come
within the compass of this Prophecy, since it seems it is a dangerous sign for
men to pretend to new Miracles, which if they who do so, will not see, yet at
least I hope others will take notice that it is a dangerous thing to hearken to
such pretenders. What St. Paul says to the same purpose with our Savior is so
sharply pointed, 2 Thessal. ii. 9, 10, 11.
that I had rather others should go to the Bible for the words, and make the
Application, than do it my self for them.

But by all means, let it be considered, that this was the way which God took,
under both Testaments, to secure his People from Delusions; that is, he warned
them not to rely upon Miracles without further inquiry, but to prove the
Divinity of Miracles by the established Doctrine. For thus did Moses instruct
the Israelites, If thtre arise among you a Prophet, or a dreamer of dreams, and
gives thee a SIGN or a WONDER, Deuteronomy. xiii. 1, 2, 3.
And the sign or the wonder come to pass, whereof he spoke unto thee saying,
Let us go after other Gods (which thou have not known) and let us serve them;
Thou shall not hearken unto the words of that Prophet, or that Dreamer of
Dreams. For the Lord your God proves you, to know whether you love the Lord
your God with all your heart, and with all your soul.

So that the Law of Moses, and the Law of Christ being once established, All
new Miracles were to be tried by the Old Religion, whether they were of God or
no: And warning was given not to give any heed to them if they came to
establish a new Doctrine.

Nor do I in this matter say any thing that is New. For St. Austin, amongst
others, has observed it long since. De Vnitate, Eccl c. 16.
Let the Donatists, says he, demonstrate their Church if they can, not by the
sayings and rumors of Africans, not by the Councils of their Bishops, etc. nor
by DECEITFVL SIGNS and WONDERS, because against these we are prepared and
forewarned: But in the Prescript of the Law, in the Predictions of the
Prophets, in the Psalms, in the Words of our great Pastor himself; in the
Preachings and Works of the Evangelists; That is, in all the Canonical
Authorities of the Holy Books. And afterward; Let them not say this is true,
because Donatus, or Pontius, or any body else has done these and these Wonders,
or because some pray and prevail at the memories of our dead men; or because
this Brother, and that Sister of ours, saw such a Vision waking, or dreamt such
a Dream sleeping. Let these, either Fictions of Lying men, or Illusions of
deceitful Spirits, be all set aside; for either these things are not true, as
they are given out; or if any wonderful things be done by Heretics, we should
be the more cautious; because when our Lord said that Deceivers should arise,
who by working some Signs, should, if it were possible, deceive the very Elect,
he added vehemently, Behold I have told you before. But perhaps it may be
thought, that tho St. Austin would not allow Miracles to be a concluding
Argument for the Donatists, yet he believed they were an Invincible proof
against them. No such matter, I assure ye; for not long after, he proceeds in
this manner, For neither do we say that we are to be believed to be in the
Church of Christ, because Optatus of Milevis, or Ambrose of Milan, or other
Bishops of our Communion without number, have recommended that Church to which
we hold; or because it is made known by the Councils of our Colleagues, or
because so many mavelous Cures have been wrought, so many Prayers heard all
over the Earth in those Holy Places which are frequented by our Communion;
insomuch, that the Bodies of Martyrs which had lain hid for so many years, were
revealed to Ambrose; and upon the approach of them, one that had been Blind
many years, and well known to the City of Milan, recovered his sight; or
because this man had a dream, and the other taken up in Spirit, was bidden not
to go over to the Donatists, or to come away from them. So that St. Austin
rejected this way of proof, as Insufficient on either side; and bids the
Donatists prove their Church out of Scripture if they could, and that by plain
Testimony of Scripture. For he has these remarkable words hereupon, amongst
others, But produce something out of Scripture that does not need an
Interpreter, and of which you cannot be convinced that it belongs to another
matter, and that you endeavor to wrest it to your own purpose.

Now if any body should be so weak as to fancy, that St. Austin's rejecting
this Appeal to Miracles, must needs weaken the testimony of those Miracles
which were wrought by Moses and the Prophets, and by Christ and his Apostles; I
must send him back to St. Austin again, who has well enough provided against
this offense, by laying weight upon those words of our Savior, Behold, I have
told you before. For certainly we are not bound to reject all Miracles, even
those, against which there was no Divine warning beforehand, because we regard
not those which God in his goodness has warned us not to trust to: Which I
take to be the true Answer, and shall therefore insist upon it by and by; tho
two things may be said not unfit to be considered also.

1. As to the Miracles themselves; The old ones had sometimes the Finger of God
in them, something that satisfied prudent and honest observers, that there
could be no slight or juggle in the Case; and that what was done, exceeded any
created power. Exodus viii. 19.
This the Magicians did at length confess of the Miracles of Moses before
Pharaoh; And of this kind were the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles,
especially those of Curing Diseases by a word, and Raising from the Dead. To
which we may add also, that for the most part they were Miracles of goodness
which they wrought, which was another Divine Character upon them. But now the
later Miracles, we hear so much talk of, are many of them justly suspected of
sleight of hand and combination, of which kind we have heard good store, about
the Images of the Blessed Virgin and the Saints: And most of them are so idle
and ludicrous, that if there be any Truth in them, a wise man can reckon them
to be no better than the illusions of deceitful Spirits, as St. Austin speaks.
And to find enough of these, I need not send the Reader any farther than to the
Church History of the R. F. Mr. Cressy.

2. The Miracles wrought for the establishment of the Law in the Old Testament,
and of the Christian Faith in the New, were not done in a corner, but openly
and publicly, and very often in the face of Enemies. Now the Church of Rome
still pretends to the Power of Miracles, and indeed we hear of strange things
done amongst them; but we see none. Sometimes indeed our Savior wrought
Miracles in a more private way, but then he Matthew. xvii. 9. Mark viii. 26.
charged those that were concerned, to make no words of what had been done; and
that, I think, lest the want of public Evidence should be objected against the
sincerity of the Relation. But things are very much altered since our Saviors
time. The Miracles said to be done in the Roman Communion, are indeed publicly
talked of, but they are privately done, if they be done at all; for they are
all done amongst themselves. Now what St. Paul said of Tongues, will hold true
of other Miracles: 1 Cor. xvi. 22. Greg. in Evang Hom 29.
That they are a sign not to them that believe, but to them that believe not.
St. Gregory (and so do many more before him) applies this to every outward work
as miraculous as that. And this at least must be meant by it, That the
principal use of Miracles is to bring over unbelievers to the true Faith: For
which Reason, the person that is to be convinced this way, should either see
the Miracles wrought, or be assured that they were done by such Testimonies, as
there lies no reasonable objection against. But for the strange things that are
said to be done in the Communion of the Roman Church, we have only their own
words for it, and as far as I have observed the reports they make of them, they
seldom pretend that any body sees them but themselves; upon which account, they
want that evidence which the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles had, and
deserve indeed but little credit. If they do so many Miracles, I cannot
understand why they should still be done in Countries, or before Persons that
are all of one mind, at least all of one side; for thus they do not serve the
main end of Divine Miracles, which is to be a Testimony to those that want
Conviction: And if this were all, I should have great reason to question
whether they were Divine Miracles or not, tho I might be disposed to believe
some of the Reports.

If they say, that the Reason why Miracles cannot be done before us, is our
unbelief; in as much as St. Matthew reports of our Savior when he was in his
own Country, That he did not many mighty works there, Matt. iii. 58.
because of their unbelief. Nothing can be more frivolously alleged; For some
mighty works were done there, at that time of which it is said that he did not
many. But they do none amongst us, whither great or small Miracles. And besides
this, our Savior had also wrought some mighty works amongst his own Countrymen
before this time, as will appear to any one that considers where the Gospel of
See Joh. ii. 11. iv. 54. vii. 3, 4.
St. John is a supplement to the other Evangelists; so that although our Lord did
not think fit to multiply these means of conviction, upon a people so
obstinate, that St. Mark says, He marvelled at their unbelief; Mark vi. 6.
yet they had these means of conviction both Then and Formerly. And what is
this to us, and to our Case, who have heard, and do hear still of Miracles
which they do in the Church of Rome, but neither we nor our Fathers could ever
see any of 'em? But as we must believe them because they work Miracles; so we
must believe they work Miracles, because they say so.

Now although these two differences of the Case will go a great way to justify us
in receiving the Miracles recorded in the Scriptures, while we reject the
pretense of the Church of Rome to Miracles; yet I confess it does not give
complete satisfaction as to the point we are upon. For it may be sometimes a
difficult business to distinguish Divine Miracles from others, by the Nature of
the work it self. And it may also be asked what we are to do, if God should
permit some such things to be done before our eyes, as they say are familiarly
done, where they may say so safely enough for any bodies contradicting them. I
add therefore,

3. There is a great difference to be made between Miracles which we are not
forewarned against, but rather warned beforehand to regard; and between
Miracles that God has not told us we ought to regard, but on the other hand
has forewarned us against giving any heed to them. That the Jews were obliged
to examine all New Revelations by their correspondence with the Old; and that
they had been warned not to trust to Miracles at all adventures, we have
already observed. But because it was foretold that the Messiah should come with
Miracles, they could not have had just reason to believe that Jesus was the
Christ, if he had not come with the Testimony of Miracles; so that they were
necessary. But to deal plainly, they had not been sufficient means of
Conviction, if he had not also fulfilled the Law and the Prophets; because the
Law and the Prophets were to be fulfilled by him. For by an unquestionable
Divine Revelation God had warned the Israelites not to trust to mere Miracles.
But after it had been foretold, Deuteronomy. xviii. 1^.
that God would raise up a Prophet from the midst of that people like unto
Moses, to whom they should hearken: After a Law had been given consisting of a
vast number of Ordinances, which was to be a shadow of good things to come, and
to be fulfilled in Christ: After that from time to time there were predictions
of those marks by which he should be known; and amongst other things it was
foretold, that he should work Miracles; when, I say, after all, Jesus answered
every one of these Characters, and did every way fulfill the Law and the
Prophets; this all together was a demonstration that he was the Christ; and as
his Miracles, and the Miracles of his Apostles gave testimony to him, and
corroborated all other Divine Testimonies which he had; so they also received
strength from other Divine Testimonies in conjunction with them; and in
particular, from those very predictions that Christ should be known by
Miracles, amongst other things.

No wonder therefore that we do not find the whole stress of the Divine
Demonstration of the Gospel, laid upon the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles
in the New Testament; and that tho our Savior did appeal to his own works, yet
not to them only, but likewise to the Scriptures of the Old Testament, and this
rather more than to Miracles. Thus to fix the two doubting Disciples that were
going to Emaus, he upbraided them in this manner, O Fools, Luke xxiv. 25 26, 17.
and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets have spoken; Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his Glory? And
beginning at Moses and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the
Scriptures the things concerning himself. This method was indeed suitable to
the obligation that people were under, to examine all New Revelations by their
correspondence with the Old. And for this Reason, I make no doubt, but that our
Savior in his discourse upon what Moses and All the Prophets had foretold
concerning Christ, did not omit to bring to their minds what Miracles himself
had wrought in the sight of the people, because this would naturally fall under
that head of Prophecies which foretold that part of his Testimony. But then
still it was the Testimony of the old Scriptures, into which the Testimony of
his Miracles was in great part resolved: For there he laid the aggravation of
their Incredulity, O Fools, and slow of heart to believe all that the Prophets
have spoken.

It was foretold, That when God should come to save them, The eyes of the blind
should be opened, Isa. xxxv. 4, 5, 6.
the ears of the deaf should be unstopped, the lame man should leap as an heart,
and the tongue of the dumb should sing. To which Predictions, our Savior
seemed to refer in that Answer which he gave to the two Disciples sent by John
the Baptist, Go, Matt. xi. 4, 5.
says he, and show John again those things which ye do hear and see; The blind
receive their sight, and the lame walk, and the lepers are cleansed, and the
deaf hear, and the dead are raised up. For besides that there is no great
variation of the Phrase from the words of the Prophet, there is another mark
added, which had nothing in it of Miracle, viz. And the poor have the Gospel
preached to them; Isa. lxi. 1.
but then it was foretold by the Prophet, The Spirit of the Lord God is upon
me, because the Lord has anointed me to preach good tidings unto the meek.
This was in it self a good mark no less than the other; but both received
strength from the Predictions of the Scripture. I make no question, but that
many believed in Jesus chiefly for his Works sake, before they had much
considered the correspondence of his Doctrine to Moses and the Prophets; but it
seems also, that one reason of their forwardness was this, that they expected
according to the Prophets, that he should come with wonderful works: For thus
we find in St. John, that the people who believed in him, said, When Christ
comes, Joh. vii. 31.
will he do more Miracles than those which this man has done? In saying of
which, they discovered an expectation of a Messiah that should work Miracles.

Now when Christ came into the World, to fulfill all that had been foretold of
him in the Scriptures, he indeed, and his Apostles after him, wrought such
Miracles, as without all question had been sufficient means of Conviction, if
God had not thought fit to raise first, and then to answer the expectation of
other Testimonies besides Miracles. In a matter of this high concernment to
mankind, he was pleased to give us Testimony upon Testimony, and not only the
Testimony of Miracles added to others, but some such Miracles too, as are in
themselves convincing; as that of Raising from the Dead. And we may boldly say,
That God who has given us caution against Signs and Wonders, never yet suffered
so great a temptation to happen, as that any one should be raised from the
Dead, in confirmation of a false Doctrine; and this, notwithstanding the bold
stories of I know not how many, that have been said to be raised from the Dead
in the Church of Rome. But now as strong an Argument as this is by it self; yet
St. Peter in his first Sermon to the Jews, Acts ii. 22.
having observed that Jesus of Nazareth was a man approved of God by Miracles,
signs and wonders, which God had done by him in the midst of them, and then
proceeding to that most convincing sign of all, viz. the Resurrrection of Jesus
from the dead; he did not think fit to lay the whole stress upon the Nature of
the thing it self, but produced that prediction of David concerning it; V. 25.
Psalm xvi. 10.
Thou will not leave my soul in hell, neither will thou suffer thy holy One to
see corruption: And from this prediction of the thing he argued industriously,
as you may see, to prove that the Testimony of the Resurrection was a Divine
Testimony; David, Acts ii. 31, 32.
says he, seeing this before, spoke of the Resurrection of Christ, etc. And
then he affirms the Fact, and offers the proof of it; This Jesus has God
raised up, whereof we all are witnesses.

The same St. Peter affirming the reality of that miraculous testimony which
our Lord received in the Holy Mount, made no doubt to prefer the Testimony of
the Scripture, before that Testimony; We have not, says he, followed cunningly
devised fables, 2 Pet. 1.16.17.18.
when we made known unto you the coming and power of our Lord Jesus, but were
eyewitnesses of his majesty; for he received from God the Father honor and
glory, when there came forth such a voice to him, from the excellent glory,
This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well-pleased: and this voice which came
from Heaven, we heard when we were with him in the Holy Mount. Now although this
was in it self a very clear and convincing Testimony, yet St. Peter, who
understood these things as well as any that have sat in his Chair, rather
refers Christian people to the Testimony of the Scriptures, in those remarkable
words; We have also a more sure word of Prophecy, whereunto ye do well that ye
take heed, as unto a light shining in a dark place, until the day dawn, V. 19.
and the day star arise in your hearts. Where the Old Testament is called a
word of Prophecy, because the great business of those Holy Books was to
prepare mankind for the coming of Christ, by all kinds of prediction: and now
that Christ was come, if there remained any darkness or doubting in their
minds, who had seen or known other Testimonies given to Jesus, they were to
take heed to the word of Prophecy, and diligently observe the correspondence
of the event to all things that had been foretold concerning Christ; in doing
of which their doubts would by degrees vanish, and at last they would grow to a
clear and strong persuasion. And St. Peter therefore calls the word of
Prophecy a sure word, because it is in it self the best means to make us sure.

Nor was this forgotten by St. Austin in that Discourse of which I have already
cited some part; De unit. Eccl. c. 16.
Our Lord Jesus himself, says he, after he had risen from the dead, and when he
exposed his Body to be seen by the eyes, and felt by the hands of his
Disciples, lest they should think some Deceit was upon them, thought it more
necessary, that they should be confirmed by the Testimonies of the Law, and the
Prophets, and the Psalms, showing that those things which had been foretold so
long before, were now fulfilled in Him. I should unreasonably exceed the bounds
of such a Preface as I designed at first, if I should bring together those
Testimonies of Fathers more Ancient than St. Austin, which run in this strain.
But I must make the more have, because having said thus much on the one side,
concerning the Authority which the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles
received, from their being foretold, and from all other Testimonies concurring
with them; before I come to the other side, viz. in what case Miracles are not
to be relied upon, I take my self to be something obliged to show what there is
peculiar in the Testimony of Miracles, and distinct from other Testimonies and
Arguments of the Truth of Christianity, and for which we have infinite reason
to bless and to praise God, That our Religion is grounded upon Miracles, as
well as upon the correspondence of both Testaments, upon Prophecies, and the
Divine Temper and Design of the Doctrine of our Lord Jesus.

That which I take to be peculiar to the Testimony of Miracles, is, that they
make strong Impressions upon the mind more suddenly than any other Arguments:
When a thing is done, that is evidently above the course of Nature, it does not
only raise Admiration, but sets the thoughts a work concerning the reason and
meaning of what is come to pass. Miracles do arrest and fasten the minds of men
all at once, and forthwith engage them to consider what God would instruct them
in, by these supernatural effects of his Power and Presence: If they do not
presently cause belief, yet they dispose the mind to it presently, and fix the
attention in order to farther instruction; they make way into our minds whether
we will or no; whereas other Arguments do not penetrate, till we have made way
for them, by comparing one thing with another, and by laying a great many
things together, which it is not easy to persuade men to do first of all,
unless they are raised something above the common pitch; and it is probable
that many, even of these, had never engaged their abilities in the search of
Truth by the examination of other Arguments, if they had not been first
awakened by Signs and Wonders, into a concernment about Divine Revelations. But
for the generality of mankind, it is evident that Miracles are the arguments
which lead them more suddenly and unavoidably than any other; for which reason
St. Chrysostom affirmed that the Doctrine of the Cross made Rusticks and
ordinary persons become Philosophers: Chrysostom. in 1 Cor. 2. Hom. 4, 5, 6.
For, says he, the demonstration by miraculous Works and Signs, is more
manifest than that by Discourses. And he prefers the short way of the Apostles
in making Converts, before the tedious methods of the Philosophers in
instructing their hearers, not only because Miracles are a Divine Argument
adapted to a Divine Revelation; but because also they are adapted to the
understanding of all sorts of people, and God would have all men to come to the
knowledge of the Truth.

There is this then singular in the Testimony of Miracles, that they rouse the
attention of the dullest; and if they do not at once both amaze and convince,
yet they engage men to farther consideration, and lead them to all other
Arguments that are fit to be inquired into; in saying which, I believe I speak
to the sense of all persons that are acquainted with the motives of Faith. When
we first read the New Testament, they are the mighty works of Christ and of his
Apostles there recorded, that first lay hold upon our minds, and command an
earnest attention; other Considerations and Arguments come on by degrees. Thus
also the Evangelists describe the effect of those Miracles which our Lord did;
when he made the Blind to see, and the Dumb to speak, Matthew. xii. 22, 23. Mark
i. 22.
All the people were amazed, and said, Is not this the Son of David? And when
he had cast out an unclean spirit in the Synagogue, they were all amazed,
insomuch that they questioned among themselves, saying, What thing is this?
What new Doctrine is this? For with Authority he commands even the unclean
spirits, and they obey him. Which are manifestly the words of men surprised
with earnest thoughts of a matter that they were little or nothing concerned
about before, and who were now in the way of considering it farther, if they
were not yet fully satisfied: For it is not to be doubted, but that diverse were
overwhelmed by the evidence of his mighty works, and yielded without much
farther enquiry: But there were others again, whom the Miracles of Christ and
his Apostles had not brought to a full persuasion, but only raised in them a
vehement desire of farther satisfaction; and such as these the Jews of Berea
seemed to be, Acts xvii. 11.
who were more noble than those of Thessalonica, in that they received the word
with all readiness of mind, and searched the Scriptures daily whether those
things were so.

Thus far have I been carried away by the Argument, beyond what I first
designed; but I hope the Reader has not forgot, that this last Digression
concerning the singular Force of Miracles, was upon occasion of the Third
Difference between the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles on the one side, and
the latter Miracles that are so much talked on, on the other, viz. That tho
there was an admonition beforehand, not to trust to Miracles at all
adventures; yet the Jews were made to expect Miracles from him who should by
all other Characters be known to be the Messiah: And this we have spoken to
already.

Now on the other hand we also are forewarned in the New Testament, to take
heed that we be not deluded by Signs and Wonders; for it is foretold, Matthew.
xxiv. 24.
That some should arise, and show great Signs and Wonders: And who are they
that should do so? Our Savior tells us, that they are false Prophets; and
therefore a man that runs after Miracles, may happen to fall into the hands of
Deceivers: Well, but was there any alteration of the state of Religion
soretold, from what Christ and his Apostles left it? Moses, we know, told the
Israelites, That God would raise up a Prophet like unto him, to whom they
should hearken in all things; and they had reason to expect a Prophet that
should make a great alteration in Religion, not by destroying, but by
fulfilling the Law: This then I ask, Have we the like reason (or had our
Fathers) to expect a Reformation of that state of Religion which Christ and his
Apostles left? Was any body to come after the Apostles, and to supply what was
wanting in the Faith which they delivered to the Saints? Was it foretold that
he or they who should arise to make this Addition to the Doctrine of Christ,
should amongst other marks, be known by the power of Miracles? If nothing of
this can be shown, as I am sure nothing of it can, then we are under greater
obligations than the Jews were, to beware lest we be deceived by a noise of
Miracles, nay though they be really Great Signs and Wonders: And though we have
very great reason to rely upon the Miracles of Christ and his Apostles, yet we
have no reason at all to regard the Miracles of the Church of Rome: For Christ
was to come and make an alteration in the Law of Moses; But neither was the
Pope nor any body else to come and make an alteration in the Law of Christ. I
know indeed, that the Scriptures foretell great changes would be made in the
Christian World; but they are not for the credit of those that pretend to
Miracles; St. Paul says, that the spirit speaks expressly, that in the latter
times some shall depart from the faith, 1 Timothy iv. 1.
giving heed to seducing spirits, etc. And he assures us, that before the day
of Judgment, there shall come a falling away, accompanied with power and signs,
and lying wonders. 2 Thessalonians. ii. from v. 3. to v. 12.
These predictions I suppose will not be produced to encourage us to trust new
Miracles, but they give us some reason to stick to the old Religion, and then
the old Miracles will serve our turn; and I think they make it very necessary
to examine their Doctrine with a little more care, who pretend to Miracles,
than if they pretended to no such thing.

It pleased God to continue the power of Miracles in the Ancient Church for
some time after the Apostles; and it may please him, for ought we know, to
awaken the world again by Miracles; but whenever this happens, it will not be
for the bringing in of new, but for the confirmation of old Doctrines. But as
for those that would recommend Doctrines to us which have neither Scripture nor
Ancient Tradition for them, their Miracles are so far from proving them to be
true, that they do but help to prove them false; because it is foretold, that
Deceivers should use this Argument: St. Paul said, That if an Angel from Heaven
preached any other Gospel than that which was preached at first, Gal. i. 8, 9.
he should be Accursed: Methinks Miracles should not be able to recommend new
Doctrine, any more than Angels from Heaven; especially since we are not only
forewarned against regarding Angels from Heaven, if they should preach a new
Faith, but likewise against regarding Miracles if they should be done in
confirmation of it; for as the believing Jews could say upon the Miracles of
Christ and his Apostles, Now are those Scriptures fulfilled, which foretold the
Coming of the great Prophet with Miracles; so when we see (if we could see
them) the Miracles that are said to be wrought, for a Doctrine that has neither
Scripture nor Fathers for it, but both against it, we must needs say, that the
Scriptures are thereby fulfilled too, which foretold the coming of Deceivers
with Great Signs and Wonders, and all deceivableness of unrighteousness: And
therefore now is the time to remember that necessary caution of our Lord,
Behold I have told you before.

To conclude therefore, If we have good reason, as most undoubtedly we have, to
believe a Doctrine that was confirmed by the most public and unquestionable
Miracles that ever were wrought, and which had all other concurrent Characters
of a Divine Revelation; for such is the Doctrine of the Scriptures; then we
have the same reason to reject those latter Miracles that come to prove new
Doctrines, because God has in the Holy Scriptures warned us against them; but
there was no reason why the Jews should have rejected the Miracles of Christ
too; for they were told that he should come working Miracles, and he had all
other Divine Testimonies, and in all other respects he fulfilled the
Scriptures, and answered the Characters of that Prophet, to whom they were to
hearken in all things.

I must now confess that I have pursued this Argument with great seriousness,
but without any great need for it in this place. One would now imagine that
here follows a Collection of Stories most Wonderful and Convincing, and such as
might even shake the Faith of a simple man, and almost constrain him to believe
Transubstantiation, and to Adore the Host: But I am of opinion that we might
have ventured the Miracles and the Man together, without a Preface; only I was
willing to say something not altogether impertinent to the Subject of the Book,
that the entertainment here offered, might be as profitable to some, as I guess
it will be pleasant to most Readers.

The Reverend Father, the Collector, being resolved to send the Heretics to
School to the Beasts, that (as he tells us in his Preface) they may become more
wise, and return to their Reason, being taught by the Animals that have none,
has also assured us, That this is the last Remedy. I suppose he means the last
in the way of Reason, which happens to be true with us; for all other Remedies
of this kind, such as they are, have been tried upon us, and found ineffectual:
And therefore it is now requisite to to try the last, of going to School to the
Beasts, that we may return to our Reason, being taught by the Animals that have
none. To which School we should not be ashamed to go, since we are sent thither
in very good Company, as well of grown and aged Catholics, who are sent to
enkindle their zeal; as of Catholic Childron, upon whose minds the first
Belief is to be imprinted, by putting these devout Histories into their hands;
which last is a good reason why we should go to this School, and be put into
the same Form with the Children, because the First Belief is yet to be
Imprinted upon our minds too. By all means therefore, let every one go to this
School; and that no man who is come thus far, may be altogether Ignorant of the
Lessons that he is to learn, I do not care if I give him a sample or two, out
of the Liber Festivalis.

There was an Earl of Venys was called Synt Ambrighte, Lib. Festi. de Corpore
Christi.
that loved the Sacrament in the Auter passing well, and did hit all the
worship and reverence that he cowde and might; so when that he lay syke and
should be deed, he might not receyve the Sacrament for casting; than was he
sorry and made Dole, and than he let make clean his right side, and to cover
it with a fair clothe of Sendell, and ley Goddis body thereon, And said thus
to the Oste, Lord, thou knowiste that I love the with all my heart, and would
feign resceive the with my mouth, and I durst, and thirfor that I may notte.
I ley the on that place that is next to my heart, and so I show the all the
love of my heart that I can and may, wherefor y beseech the good Lord have
mercy on me. And even therewith, in sight of all the people that were about
him, his side opened, and the Oste went therein to his side, and thanne his
side closed agin, and so anon after he did.

We Read, that there was a Jewe that went with a Christen man, a fellow of his,
into a Church of Christen people, and herd Mass; and after, when Mass was
don, the Jewe seyde to the Christen man, if I had eton as much as thou have
eton, I should not be an hungered, as I trow, in many days. And thanne seyde
Christen man, Forsouthe, quod he, I ete no mete this dey. Than seyde the Jew, I
saw the ete a Child, the which the Priest held up at the Auter. Thanne come a
fair man that had many Children in his armies, and he gave each Christian a
Child, soch as the Priest ete.

In Devynchire, beside Exbridge, was a Woman ley sick, and was nigh deed, and
sent aftyr a holy person abowte mydnyghte, to have her rightes; Than this man
in all the haste that he might, he arose and went to Church, and took Goddis
body in a Box of Yvory, and put hit into his Bosom, and went forth toward
this Woman. And as he went thourgh a Foreste in a fair mede that was his next
wey, it happid that his Box fill out of his Bosom to the Ground, and he
went forth and wosse hit not, and come to this Woman, and herd her
Confession. And than he asked her if She would be Hosiled, and She seyde, ye
sere; than he put his hand in his Bosom, and sought the Box, and when he
found hit naught, he was full sorry and sad, and seyde, Dame, I woll go
aftyr Goddis body, and come anon agene to you, and so went forth sore weping
for his simpleness; and so as he come to a Welow Tree, he made thereof a Rod,
and strypped himself all nakyd, and so beat himself that the blood ran
down by his side, and seyde thus to himself, O thou simple man, why haste thou
lost thy Lord God, thy Maker, thy Former, and thy Creator? And when he had
thus beat himself, he deed on his clothis and went forth. And thanne he was
ware of Pilour of fire that last from Earth to Heven, and he was all astoyned
thereof, yet he blessed, and went thereto, and there ley the Sacrament fallyn
out of the Box into the Grass, and the Pilour schon as bryghte as any Son,
and lastyd from Goddis Body to Hevyn, and all the Bestys of the Foreste were
come about Goddys Body, and stood in compass round about hit, and all knelid
on four knees, save on black Horse that knelyd but on that on knee: Thanne
seyde he, if thou be any Best that may speak, I charge the in Goddis name here
present in form bread, tell me why thou kneliste but on thy on knee? Thanne
seyde he, I am a fend of Hell, and wolle not kneel and y might, but y am made
agense my will; for hit is wreton, that every knelying of Heven and of Earth
shall be to the Lord God. Why art thou like a Horse? And he seyde, to make the
people to stele me; and at soche a Town was one hanged for me, and at soche a
Town another. Thanne seyde this holy person, Y command the by Goddis Flesche
and his Blood, that thou goo into Wilderness, and be there as thou shalt never
discese Christen people more. And anon he went his wey, he might no longer
abide: And thanne this man went forth to this woman, and deed her rightes, by
the which she was savid.

Which last Story is very much to the purpose of the following Collection; and
is singular in this, that here the Devil is brought in adoring the Host against
his will, amongst the Beasts that did it without any will at all.

For the Translation of this Book, I think the Gentlemen of the Roman Church
have no reason to be offended with it, unless it be for this, that it is done a
little out of season. They would I believe have done it themselves in due time:
For tho Divine Miracles are usually the first means of Conviction, yet the
Church of Rome reserves them for the last; and then tries to make the people
believe her Miracles, when they are made to believe every thing else
beforehand. But since Miracles are for a sign to them that believe not, why
should we not for once put them to the right use, and try how these will work
upon our honest Countrymen? For which purpose they are to understand that these
are not Old Wives Tales, nor made, however they may happen to be told, in
Chimny Corners. The Story of the great Spider at St. Paul's is told by
Bellarmine himself: And so is that of St. Anthony of Padua's Mule, De Sacr.
Euch. lib. 3. c. 8.
which after three days fasting, left his Provender to worship the Host. And
all of 'em, as the French License tells us, are collected out of Catholic
Authors. And there is something the less reason to question the credibility of
them, because signs and wonders were to come one day, as we observed before.

But we have now been long enough in the Porch, The School is opened; The
Reverend Father invites all persons to enter into it, both old and young, and
Catholics as well as Heretics. I invite them too, making no doubt, of what
the R. Father would fain hope, that some will come out a little wiser than they
went in.

THE PREFACE.
THE H. Sacrament of the Altar, instituted in the Church, for the nourishing,
inlightning, fortifiing and comforting the Faithful, is one of the most Sublime
and Salutary Mysteries, that is to be found in the Catholic Religion. It stood
in need also of a God, for to institute it, and to propose it to us, as the
strongest Argument of the Love that he bore toward mankind. Which makes me
astonished why the Heretics should conspire with all their might for to
extirpate it, conducted, no doubt, by the Devil, who pretend only to take away
the belief and the use of it, so to destroy Souls more easily, who cannot
subsist long in grace, without the participation of this Divine and Celestial
Food. Wherefore without troubling my self to confute these hair-brained People,
who turn a deaf Ear to all that the Holy Fathers have said about it, and have
renounced their reason, I resolved to send them to School to the Beasts, who
have showed a particular inclination, not without a Superior conduct, for the
Worship and Defense of this Truth. I have put my discourse into an Alphabetical
order, to the end that by this last remedy, they may become more wise, and
return to their reason, being taught by the Animals, that have none. If they
receive no benefit hereby no more than others, yet I hope it will be
serviceable to Catholics, to enkindle their Zeal, by a more careful
frequenting this Bread of strong men: and not only serve the grown and aged
persons, who have already a full belief and high esteem for this Divine
Sacrament; but also (which is one of my motives hereto) to imprint on the Minds
of Children, the first belief, and a wise regard for this Sacrament, to the end
that they may come to it, when they are judged capable to receive it, with more
devotion and reverence.

Which is that which I have seen put in practice by good Fathers of Families,
who use to put into their Childrens Hands, such like Devout Histories, to
dispose them to communicate worthily, when they first receive the Sacrament.

It is also most certain, that Histories and Examples, however it comes to
pass, have a great advantage to make impressions on the minds of Children,
above discourses and reasonings, which are above the capacities of youth.

Note. Where the English word for Birds or Beasts, etc. agrees not to the
Alphabetical order, I have set the French word in the Margin.

THE School of the Eucharist, Established upon The Miraculous Respects and
Acknowledgments which Beasts, Birds, and Insects, upon several occasions, have
rendered to the H. Sacrament of the Altar, etc.
A Abeilles, Bees.
1. Bees honor the H. Host diverse ways, by lifting it from the Earth, and
carrying it in their Hives as it were in Procession.
A Certain Peasant of Auvergne, a Province in France, perceiving that his Bees
were likely to die, to prevent this misfortune, was advised, after he had
received the Communion, to reserve the Host, and to blow it into one of his
Hives. As he tried to do it, the Host fell on the ground. Behold now a wonder!
On a sudden all the Bees came forth out of their Hives, and ranging themselves
in good order, lifted the Host up from the ground, and carrying it in upon
their wings, placed it among their Combs. After this the man went out about
his business, and at his return found that this advise had succeeded ill, for
all his Bees were dead. Moreover when he lifted up the Hive, he saw that the
Host was turned into a fair Child among the Honey-Combes. Being much astonished
at this change, and seeing that this Infant seemed to be dead, he took it in
his hands, intending to bury it privately in the Church; but when he came to do
it, he found nothing in his hands, for the Infant was vanished and gone. This
thing happened in the County of Clermont, which, for this irreverence, was a
while after chastised by diverse calamities, which so dispeopled those parts,
that they became like a Wilderness. Pet. Cluniac. l. 1. c. 1.

2. Bees adore the H. Host, and sing the Divine Praises, dividing themselves
into two Quires.
IT is reported of another poor man, that going to visit his Bees, perceived
them to make a sweet harmony; he stood ravished a while with it, not knowing
what it meant. The night following as he went out about some business, and cast
his Eyes toward his Bees, he perceived them to rejoice, and sport themselves,
making an admirable melody. He first informed his Curate of it, and afterward
the Bishop, who after they had consulted about it, advised him to break up the
Hive, where they found a Box or Pix made of Wax, but of such whiteness, that it
looked like Ivory, and within it the H. Sacrament adored by the Bees, who
ranged themselves into two Quires, and sang the praises of their Creator. The
Bishop gave order for a goodly Procession, to carry back the H. Host to the
Church; and in that place was erected a fair Chapel, which became a place of
refuge for the sick and afflicted. When no body knew from whence and by whom
that Host had been brought thither, two Thieves of their own accord discovered
themselves and confessed, that having stolen a Pix, they had thrown the Host
against the Hives. Cantiprat. l. 2. c. 40. sec. 1.

3. Bees erect a complete Chapel with their Wax.
A Certain Woman as covetous as the former Peasant, having received the
Communion unworthily, carried the Host to her Hives for to enrich her Stock of
Bees; and afterward coming again thither to understand the Success, she
perceived that the Bees acknowledging their God in the Sacrament, had with
admirable Artifice erected to him a Chapel of Wax, with its Doors, Windows,
Bells, and Vestrie, and within it a Chalice where they laid the H. Body of
Jesus Christ. She could not long conceal this wonder: The Priest being
advertised of it, came thither in Procession, and he himself heard a consort of
most harmonious Music, which the Bees made flying round about the H.
Sacracrament; and having taken it out, he brought it back to the Church full of
comfort, certifying that he had seen and heard our Lord acknowledged and
praised by those little Animals. Caesarius l. 9. c. 8.

4. They revenge the injuries done to the H. Sacrament.
A Peasant, swayed by a Covetous mind, being communicated on Easter Day,
received the Host in his Mouth, and afterward laid it among his Bees,
believing that all the Bees of the Neighborhood would come thitherto work
their Wax and Honey. This covetous impious wretch, was not wholly disappointed
of his hopes; for all his Neighbors Bees come indeed to his Hives, but not to
make honey, but to render there the honors due to the Creator. The issue of
their Arrival was, that they melodiously sang to him Songs of praise as they
were able; after that they built a little Church with their Wax from the
foundations to the roof, divided into 3 Rooms, sustained by Pillars with their
Bases and Chapiters. They had there also an Altar, upon which they had laid the
precious Body of Jesus Christ, and flew round about it, continuing their
Music. The Peasant who took notice of all this, though he could not
comprehend the meaning of this harmony, yet was right glad to see all his
neighbors Bees met together there. When the time came to examine what profit
he had made, then it appeared how he was deceived. For when he would take a
view of the quantity of honey and wax, which all these Swarms had made, he
found all his hives empty of both; and coming nigh that hive where he had put
the H. Sacrament, the Bees issued out furiously by Troops, and surrounding him
on all sides, revenged the irreverence done to their Creator, and stung him so
severely, that they left him in a sad case. This punishment made this miserable
wretch come to himself; who acknowledging his Error, went to find out his
Parish Priest, to confess his fault to him. The Priest discoursed the Bishop
about it, who advised him to go in procession with all his Parishioners. At his
Arrival the Bees testified the joy they had by their hummings, they came forth,
and raised themselves into the Air, making an excellent Melody. When they
lifted up the Hive, they found that artful fabric, where they saw upon the
Altar the H. Body of our Lord, which they carried back with reverence and great
ceremony to the Church, singing the praises of the Lord, who should be more
honored and reverenced by men, since he had honor from these little Animals.
Vincentius in spec. moral. l. 2. did. 21. p. 3.

Agneau, Lamb.
1. A Lamb of St. Francis makes signs to a Lady to go to Mass.
ST. Francis had at Rome a Lamb that used to be present at Mass and Divine
Service; and when the Saint went from thence, he recommended it to a Noble
Lady, whom the Lamb awaked amornings by its bleating, when she forgot to go to
Mass, and signified to her by signs that she should go to Church. S. Bonav. in
vit. S. Francis.

2. A Lamb of St. Coleta kneeled at the Elevation during the Mass.
THE Humility and Sweetness of St. Coleta was such, that the Birds of Heaven
were emulous to sing in her presence, and came to feed at her Table: for this
quality she accepted a Lamb, which one made a present of to her, as a meek
simple Animal, and also because in the old Law it was offered in Sacrifice,
representing Jesus Christ the Lamb without Spot. She took so much pleasure in
this little Animal, that she made it go with her to Church, as the Sheep of St.
Francis used to do) where without making any noise it behaved it self with
great modesty and reverence and when the Priest that Officiated came to the
consecration, the little Lamb bended its knees, without stirring till the
Elevation was over. Surius ad 6. Martii.

Aragnee, A Spider.
1. A Spider does not at all impoyson at the Mass: What happened to one of the
Cistertion Order, to St. Conrade and St. Norbert.
A Religious person of the Cistertian Order, celebrating the Mass, in the
presence of his Abbot Walenus, a Spider fell into the Consecrated Chalice. Upon
his doubting whether he should drink the Consecrated Wine, his Abbot commanded
him to proceed and he in obedience took and finished all with great courage,
and with fervor and devotion. At his return being among his Brethren, his
finger itched, he rubbed it, and then a swelling appeared; and after that
before them all, this Spider opened the Skin and came out alive, and by the
Abbots command was burnt. Henriquez. in fascic. S.S. Cisterc. l. 2. did. 26.

2. Another instance to the same purpose.
ST. Conrade Bishop of Constance swallowed a Spider, that fell into the
consecrated Wine. They that knew what he had done, looked every moment for his
death, but it happened, quite otherwise. The Bishop sat down at Table, but
eating nothing, one asked him the reason, he answered, that he waited for his
Host, who would come presently; and leaning his head upon the Table, and
opening his mouth, the Spider immediately issued out. This is what our Savior
had said in St. Matthew, That if his Disciples should drink poison, it should
not hurt them at all. Surius 26. November. Corbin. lib. 7. c. 2. fol. 497.

3. Another like the former.
ONe day as St. Norbert said Mass in a Chapel underground, a Spider fell into
the Chalice already consecrated. Norbert, that he might lose nothing of what
was there, swallowed it. When the Mass was done, as he was preparing himself
for an unaviodable death, he found a great inclination to sneez; and though he
looked upon this as a sign of death, yet he found that to him it was a sign of
Life; For this Animal came out alive at his Nostrils. A miraculous Effect,
which so increased his faith, that it is a common saying nowadays; the Faith
of Norbert, the Charity of Bernard, and the Humility of Milon Bishop of
Teroanne. The Bishop of Bellay in his Life.

4. A Spider revenges an affront done to the H. Sacrament.
THomas of Arundel, being assembled with other Prelates in the Church of St.
Paul at London, to labor the conversion of a Tailor, who held that the
consecrated Host, was only bread blessed, and not at all the Body of Jesus
Christ; When after many disputes they found him obstinate in his Heresy, he was
commanded absolutely to submit himself, and to adore God with all reverence in
the H. Sacrament. Upon the opposition that he made there even as far as to
blaspheme, saying, that a Spider rather deserved to be honored than the H.
Sacrament of the Altar. Heaven revenged this saying so outrageous against his
God: for immediately an old overgrown Spider unloosing it self from the roof of
the Church, came down by the guidance of its thread, upon this stinking cursed
mouth, where being entered, he was grievously tormented, answerably to that in
the Proverbs, c. 6. Thou art ensnared in the words of thy mouth. After this,
all judged him to deserve death, and in conclusion he was condemned to be
burnt, which sentence was executed in the presence of the Chancellor of the
Kingdom, in the year 1384. Bredek. 1. 30. Tho. Walden l. contr. Joannem
Wicklef. and alii.

Asnes, Asses.
1. Asses honor the H. Sacrament, making way for a Priest that carried it.
AN Old and Simple Priest of the Parish of St. James at Colen, carrying the
Holy Sacrament out of Town to a Sick Person, and going up a very rough Hill,
met some loaded Asses, descending toward the Town, which often jostled him, by
reason of the narrowness of the way. At length not being able to get before
them, and fearing to be overturned by those Beasts, he spoke to them according
to his simplicity in this manner: My Asses, what do you mean? do ye not see him
whom I carry? go aside and stop, to make more room for your Creator, which I
command you in his name. O admirable Obedience! those Asses, which used not to
stir but when they are beaten, presently went on one side, where the Hill was
more steep without apprehending any danger, or letting fall their load. The
Town of Collen remembers this wonder to this day, and mentions it with
astonishment. Caesarius l. 4. c. 99.

2. Another such like Story.
IN the 16 Century within the Venetian territories, a Priest carrying the H.
Sacrament without Pomp or Train, to a sick person, he met out of the Town Asses
going to their Pasture; who perceiving by a certain Sentiment, what it was the
Priest carried, they divided themselves into two Companies on each side the
way, and fell upon their knees. Whereupon the Priest with his Clerk all amazed,
passed between those peaceable Beasts, which then rose up, and, as if they
would make a pompous show in honor of their Creator, followed the Priest as
far as the Sick man's house, where they stayed at the door, till the Priest came
forth, whom they did not leave till he had given them his blessing. Father
Simon Rodriguez, one of the first companions of S. Ignatius, who traveled then
in this part of Italy, informed himself carefully of this matter, that it
happened a little while before our First Fathers came into Italy, and found
that all had happened as has been told. P. Orlandin. in his Hist. of the
Society. tom. 1. l. 2. n. 27.

3. Another admirable History of what happened, not to an Ass, but to a man
turned into an Ass.
A Certain Knight of Jerusalem, arriving at the Town of Famagusta in Cyprus,
with some others of the same Order, as they were busied to provide themselves
of things necessary for the finishing their Voyage, this Knight went abroad,
and walking along by the Sea side, he accosted a Woman, and asked her whether
she had any Eggs to sell. She, that was another Medea in Sorcery, seeing him
young, lusty, and a stranger, that the Country people might suspect nothing,
desired him to wait a while, and she would furnish him with every thing he
wanted. As she tarried somewhat longer than he would have had her, so her fear
lest the Pilot should not leave him ashore, caused her to make more have: So
she brought him the Eggs, and told him, that if the Ship was gone, and he would
come back to her, he should be welcome. With this provision he drew toward his
Ship, and seeing that his Companions were not yet come, he fell to eating his
Eggs. As he was eating them, to his admiration, he found himself wholly
altered, and that he went as it were out of himself, so that in an hours time
he became dumb, and as if he had lost his Brains (so he expressed it after he was
well) not knowing whence this happened. Moreover, when it was time to set Sail,
he drew toward the Ship to take his place there, but was driven away by great
blows of a Staff, since he was changed into an Ass. He suspected now ill
dealing, and that this Woman had bewitched him, hearing them call him Ass;
notwithstanding though he could not make answer being dumb, yet he made another
attempt to get into the Ship, but was treated just as before, being repulsed as
an Ass by the strokes of a good Cudgel. Being thus abandoned by all, he was
forced to go back to that Woman's house, whom he served as an Ass, for the
preservation of his life, the space of 3 years, this Witch making use of him to
carry provisions to the House: at 3 years end this poor young man following the
Sorceress at a little distance, coming into the Town in shape of an Ass, by
good chance, passing by a Church, he heard the Bell ring for the Elevation of
the Host; and presently he turned toward the Church; but not having the
hardiness to go in, fearing to be driven away, he staid without bending his
knees and legs toward the ground, and raising his head, bowed it to adore the
H. Sacrament. This being observed by some Merchants of Genoa, and being greatly
astonished, they followed this Ass, which a Woman drove away with a Cudgel,
and went after them both as far as to the house. Hereupon, they advertised the
Judge of the Town concerning this matter, who caused both the Ass and Woman to
be apprehended. She being exaamined, confessed her crime, and promised the
Judge, that if he would suffer her to go home, she would restore the young
Knight to his former shape, which she did: As for her, she was afterward
condemned to the fire and burnt for a Witch. Nic. de Laghi p. 244. and Hier.
Mengi de art Exorcistica.

B.
Biche, A Hind.
1. Hinds come to Mass on a H. Martyrs day, and make an offering of a young
Cheverel.
ST. Athenogenes, a Martyr, under the Emperor Dioclesian, whose feast is kept
on the 16th of July, returning to his Monastery, found none there save a Hind
(the Monks being before laid in Prison) which he had a long time nourisht. She
presenting her self before him and moving his Compassion, he blessed her, and
prayed God, that she might never be taken nor fall into the Hunters nets,
neither she, nor her young ones: Charging her further, that she and others of
them should yearly bring a Cheverel to the Monastery, to perpetuate the memory
of this favor and privilege. All came to pass as the Martyr had required: for
every year, after the reading of the Gospel at the time of celebrating the
Mass of the H. Martyr, they saw a Hind enter into the Church, and after she
had offered a Cherevel to the Saint, went back into the Forests: It was
ordained that this Cheverel should serve for the feasting the Priests that had
celebrated the Office on the day of that Feast. Raderus Viridarii SS. p. 1.

Boeufs, Oxen.
Oxen adore the H. Sacrament.
CErtain Robbers broke into a Church of a Town called Homel, siezing upon a
Casket, in which they found naught besides some relics, and the Pix, in which
they kept the H. Sacrament. But this booty not turning much to their profit,
they left all in the Fields. In the morning before day, a Peasant went out with
his Oxen to plow; the Oxen being yoked in the plough, began to draw; but when
they were come to the place where the H. Pix lay, they stopped on a sudden; the
Peasant, not knowing what was the matter, cried to them aloud, and pushed them
with his Staff to make them go forward, but all in vain. He increased his blows
and his noise to no purpose, only that he received their kicks, they having
more regard to the H. Sacrament, than to their Patron. The Peasant in great
anger left his plow, to look whether any thing was there which might cause this
stop. As he did this, he took notice of that Pix lying at the feet of his
beasts, with the Relics belonging to his Village. Being in a great
astonishment, he left the field and his plough, to advertise the Parish Priest
of what he had found. Upon this report the Priest came out in procession with
the people to the place where the Host and the H. Relics lay, which they
carried back to the Church with the same devotion; where they put them under a
more safe Custody. Caesarius l. 9. 7.

2. Another story to the same purpose.
IN Bavaria not far from Ingolstad, a Peasant who was a simple but devout man,
not being able on all Festivals to be present at Mass; because he was obliged
to look after his Cattle, put a part of the consecrated Host, which he had
reserved, into a hole made in his Staff, which when he could not go to Church,
he always fixed in the ground, and addressed his prayers to it, adoring the H.
Sacrament. Now one time, as he saw his beasts run about hither and thither, and
would fain stop them, he heedlesly threw down his Staff, where the H. Sacrament
was: But presently reflecting upon what he had done, ran in great haste to take
it up: As he fell on his knees to do it, he saw that the ground, where his
staff was, depressed it self, and so much the more, as he lift up his hand.
This wonder troubled him, and still more, when rising up, he saw all the Oxen
round about the hollow place, with bended knees adoring our Lord. Upon the
sight of these wonders, he ran bitterly weeping to give an account thereof to
his Parish Priest: He addressed himself to the Bishop, who came thither in
Procession, and with great reverence and humility took up the Staff, in which
was the Holy Sacrament. In memory of this Miracle, he built a Chapel under the
Title of Savior. A world of people came thither and took of the Earth of this
hollow place in testimony of their Devotion. R. P. Lucas Pinelli at the end of
his Meditat. on the Mystery of the Sacrament.

Brebis, A Sheep.
4. A Sheep kneels at the Mass, at the Elevation of the Consecrated Host.
AT St. Mary de Portiuncula one gave S. Francis for an Alms a live Ewe, which
he willingly received as a Symbol of innocence and simplicity. He admonished
her to live in the Convent without disquieting the Friars; when the Friars went
to the Quire, this Ewe went into the Church, and kneeled before the Altar of
our Lady bleating, as if she would salute her; and at the Elevation of the most
H. Sacrament at the Mass, she kneeled in token of adoration. S. Bonavent. in
vit. S. Francisci.

C.
Cannes, Ducks.
1. Ducks are present at Mass on St. Nicholas day. May 9.
THere is in the Suburbs of Monfort in Brittanie, a Parish Church of St.
Nicholas, and at a little distance from thence one may see a Lake not far from
a Castle of that Territory. From that Lake, for more than a hundred or 200
years, came forth a Wild Duck; which on St. Nicholas day, 9th of May came into
this Church with a number of Ducklins, and among the people there assembled to
the number of three or four thousand persons, chose its way and entered the
Church, and abode there some while, without being frighted, and afterward
returned peaceably to its Lake. Some years since it did the same, but more
seldom, and not every year. As a Lord of the Country whose name was Dandelot,
who was of the New Religion, related this as a contrivance of some Priest; one
day dining in this Town of Monfort, this Wild-Dack came thither, as if she had
a mind to appear to this man of a false persuasion; who being advertised of it
came in Querpo, and running with some of his company to the said Church, he
beheld that Duck enter in, and after some while returned quietly thither from
whence she came: He followed her by his Eye as far as to the Lake; after which
when any one spoke of this Duck, he said not a word. If these hold their peace
the stones will cry out. Le Seur de Argentre in his History of Britain, l. 1.
p. 63, 64. Joh. Bapt. Fulgos. l. de Mirac.

2. Young Ducks defend the Church, and punish Offenders till they make
reparation for the wrongs they had done.
IN the Lake of Lagenne in Ireland, one may see young Ducks among those Ducks
of S. Coleman, that had been made tame in his time, which were not afraid when
men came nigh them. These Ducklins that met together in this Lake about the
number of sixteen, constantly when any injury was done to the Church where the
H. Sacrament was lodged, or to the Clergy, they forsook this Lake, and flew far
away to another, and returned not till satisfaction was given, and reparation
made of the wrong done to the Church and Clergy. And during their absence, that
the reparation might not be deferred, the Waters of that first Lake which were
clear and chrystaline, became muddy and corrupt, and smelt so ill, that they
became neither fit for the use of Men or Beasts. The same Author also reports,
that if any should injure one of the Birds, for being Protectors and Defenders
of the Church, he would not escape long unpunished. He reports that a Kite
having caught up in his Tallons one of these Ducklins, perched upon a Tree to
devour it; but immediately all his Members became stiff, so that he could not
perceive the prey under his feet. Another time in a Winter Frost, a Fox caught
one of these Birds but he had better have let it alone; for in the morning he
was found in a Grot nigh to the Lake (venerable for the abode of S. Coleman
there) dead and choked; the Duck that he had in his throat stopping his
breath. Nieremberg ex Sylvest. Gyrald. lib. 2. de Mirac. in Europa.

Cerf, A Stag.
A Stag traces the Circuit and the place of the Church of Nostre Dame du Puy, at
Velay in France.
IN the days of S. George, the first Bishop and Apostle of Velay, a Woman of
that Country, who had a long time been sick of a Quartan Ague, one day as she
was asleep, heard this voice; Betake thy self to the Rock d' Anis, this is the
place where I will cure thee: She obeying this voice, found there a large and
square Stone like an Altar. Being seated there upon it, sleep surprised her,
and at the same time the Virgin appeared to her, saying to her at her awaking,
Thou shall be cured, and know that I have chose this place to be honored there
in Ages to come. All which coming to pass as had been foretold her, she made a
rehearsal of it to St. George, who went upon this Rock, where he was further
assured of the Virgins pleasure by a new Prodigy: for having attained to the
top of the Mountain, he saw at the foot of the Rock de Corneille, the place
where now our Ladies Church stands, all covered with Snow, though this was on
the 11th of July. At the same time a Stag suddenly leapt forward in the Snow,
took a round, as it were tracing the circuit and compass of the Church, which
was there to be built, and having done this, disappeared from the sight of all
that were present. S. George, prostrating himself on the ground, to adore the
traces of the Divine Providence, immediately ordained, that following the
prints of the Stags feet, the place should be encompassed with a strong hedge,
so that it might not be profaned, that since it could not be yet undertaken, it
might be deferred to a better season. S. George therefore contented himself
with marking out the place for the Church, and other Prelates that succeeded
him, had not the hardiness to undertake the building, till S. Vossi was
established Bishop there, who gave beginning to the Church, by reason of the
Miracle following. In his days a Lady of a very noble Family of Polignac, being
troubled with the Palsy, was advertised in her sleep by the Virgin, that if
she would be healed, she should go up to the Mountain called Puy d' Anis, and
there repose her self upon a Stone made in the fashion of an Altar: Being
seated upon this Stone, she fell there asleep, till such time as she was awaked
by an Angel: At her waking, she saw the Mother of God surrounded with a great
company of Angels and Virgins, and at her feet she lay prostrate; the Virgin
advised her to return thanks to her Son for the health that was restored to
her, and to let the Bishop know, that it was her pleasure they should build a
Church in that place for the invocation of her holy name, and that he should
translate thither the Episcopal See of Velay, according to the advice she had
given to S. George his Predecessor. This being resolved, S. Vossi went to Rome
to get a License from the Pope, where he arrived in the year 224. S. Calixtus
who governed then, received him courteously, and agreeing to his requests, gave
him an Architect called Scutaire for to manage the work: The Temple was in a
short time finished and erected with great firmness and perfection: When the
debate was about consecrating it, the holy Bishop considering that he had no
Relics, he concluded that he would return to Rome with Scutaire for to obtain
them of the H. Father. The Evening before they went away, they took leave of
the people, and made fast all the Church doors; the day following when they
were near the River Loize, a quarter of a League from the Town, they met two
venerable old men. S. Vossi approaching them, demanded of them whither they
were going, and what brought them into those quarters: They answered, We are
Ambassadors from the H. Pope of Rome, sent to Bishop Vassi, to bestow on him
these two small Caskets full of holy Relics. The H. Bishop gave them thanks,
and entreated them that he might carry them up to the Mountain: They answered,
that they had no intention to pass any further, and at parting when they had
delivered to them the Relics with the Breviates, yet further to confirm them
in the truth of all they had said, Know, say they, that when you shall arrive
at the Church gates, which you have firmly barred, they will open to you of
themselves; and you shall find in the Church three hundred and twelve lighted
Torches, the Altar anointed and marked with Holy Oil, and you shall also hear
the harmonious Songs of Angels, and perceive a most sweet Odor. Upon this they
disappeared; at their return to the Town the people had notice to be ready for
a Procession, and the H. Bishop barefoot and in his Pontifical Habits, came
with the people to Church, which as soon as they approached, the doors opened
of themselves; the Church was lightened with three hundred and twelve Torches,
with all the other circumstances marked by the two old men. The Bishop
approached to the Altar, which he found anointed with H. Oil, upon which he
placed the Holy Relics. After they had solemnly sung the Mass of Dedication,
he published and declared by the Authority of our H. Father the Pope, that the
Episcopal See was from thenceforth translated, from the Old Town of Velay, to
the New place, now called d' Anis, and in Latin Anicium, which is one of the
most illustrious and ancient Churches of our Lady, that is in Europe. P. Odo
Gisse, in his History of our Lady du Puy.

Chenilles, Caterpillars.
3. Caterpillars revenge the injury done to the H. Sacrament.
A Priest exorcising one that was possessed, demanded of the Devil, why a woman
whose name was Hardifa, had been so grievously tormented by him; She has well
deserved it, replied he, for she has sowed the most High upon her Coleworts.
The Priest not knowing what this meant, and the Devil denying to give him any
other answer, he went to that other possessed person called Hardifa, and told
her the answer the Devil had made him, which he did not at all understand. I
understand it well, says Hardifa, which yet I have never told to any Soul
living. You must know then, said she, that being very young, I took upon me to
look to the garden, and making no profit of it, because Caterpillars devoured
all the herbs, I learnt afterward of a wandering woman, that for to remedy this
I must break a consecrated Host in pieces, and scatter them upon the herbs, and
they would spring up again: I did so, said she, but to my own harm, as you see.
Behold here what the Devil meant, when he said; She sowed the most High upon
her herbs. Caesarius. l. 9. c. 9.

Cheval, A Horse.
4. A Horse given to a Priest that carried the H. Sacrament to a sick person.
WE will give the first place to a Horse of Ralph Count de Haspurg, and
afterward Emperor. This Prince going a Hunting heard the little Bell ring, as
the Priest went with the H. Sacrament to a Sick person. He thereupon turned
back to meet the Priest, and being come up to him, he lighted from his horse,
and presented him to the Priest, that he might pass over a Ford of the River,
himself following on foot. When he had communicated the sick Person, the Priest
returned a horseback to his Church, the Prince going all the while a foot. The
Priest paying due respects thanked Count Ralph, and offered to return him his
horse. God forbid, said the Prince, that I should profane the horse, which God
has thus far consecrated by the Service he has done him; My horse, said he,
belongs to God, and I give him to the Church. When he had made this donation
that the Church might not be burdened with the necessary charges for his
keeping, the Prince settled a certain revenue, to pay for the horses keeping,
and he made it perpetual, as well for the providing horse-meat, as for the
purchasing another horse, when he should fail, for the Service of the Church.
P. Gualterus Paulus in suis de Euch. Rithmis.

5. A Jews Horse pays respect to a Priest, who went with the H. Sacrament to a
sick person.
A Priest carrying the H. Sacrament, met a Jew on horseback, who endeavoring
to get before, his beast kneeled down bowing toward the H. Sacrament. The Jew
being in great disorder slackned his Rein, and Spurred him hard. But his horse
would not stir till the Priest was gone by. At the same time he heard a voice
from Heaven which said, Acknowledge thy Creator, whom thou denyest to be born
of the Virgin Mary. The Jew making reflection upon this foregoing action of his
horse, and this divine Voice, was converted and baptized. Prompt. Disc. exempl.
32.

6. A Horse signifies to his Master, that he should hear Mass, before he went
about his affairs.
A Person that was hard put to it to dispatch certain affairs, was exhorted by
some Clergymen, because it was Sunday, to hear Mass, before he took his
journey; he went indeed to Church to be present at Mass, but through his
earnest desire to dispatch his affairs, he went away before it was ended. He
came home and got on horseback; but when he was upon going, his horse would
not stir either for beating or spurring. This unusual obstinacy of his horse,
made the Master consider with himself; upon this he alights, returns to Church,
and heard a Mass from the beginning to the end. Ater which he got again on
horseback, and went without any difficulty about his business, which he
dispatched sooner and more successfully, than he thought he should have done.
Nicholas de Laghi ex Andr. Ebor. Lusit. de Orat.

7. Horses lose their lives for saving the honor due to the H. Hosts.
THe Marshal of Aumont, having brought the Town of St. Porcien in France under
the League, his Soldiers pillaged the Parish Church, from whence they took
away the Pix full of Hosts, which they carried to the stable where their horses
stood. Where having emptied the Pix, they threw the Hosts mingled with Oats
into the Manger to feed their Horses therewith; and as the horses could not
retire being tied to the racks, to prevent the indignity that might happen,
suddenly fire descended from Heaven, and killed the horses, without touching
any ways the Headstals. Thus the horses lost their Lives to hinder the affront
and irreverence, which the Heretics would have put upon the consecrated Hosts.
P. Fodere Hist. de la province de S. Bonavent.

Cheure, She-goat.
8. A Shee-goat brings up an Infant devoted to the H. Sacrament.
IN Poland an Infant was lost, its parents being ignorant what became of it,
for the space of three years; the Father and Mother greatly afflicted at this
mishap, had recourse to Heaven, to help them to some news of it. After all they
made a vow, that if they could learn where it was, they would go a Pilgrimage
to the H. Sacrament of Posnanie. After this the Child was found in a Forest,
and told them, that all that time, it had been fed by a Wild Shee-goat, which
had also taken care to defend it against the Nights cold. Traterus apud
Bzovium. Tom. 5. p. 205. in fine.

Chiens, Dogs.
9. Dogs revenge the injury done to the H. Hosts.
OPtatus Milevitan writes thus in his second Book against Parmenion, that the
Donatist-Hereticks, had given the H. Host to Dogs, but that their own Dogs,
instead of touching the H. Sacrament, to revenge the injury done to their
Creator, fell upon their Masters, and tore them in pieces.

10. A Dog punished by Heaven, for making a noise during the Mass.
IN the Life of Bl. Dalmace Monerio, of the Order of St. Dominick, it is
reported, that this Father, in an Embassy of his to the Convent of Castellon,
observed that a Lady called Villeneufue came to hear Mass at this Convents
Church, accompanied with a little Dog, which made a great noise, with little
Bells that hang round his neck. He entreated the Lady not to bring the Dog
thither any more, which she promised. One day having shut up her little Dog in
a Chamber, she came to Mass at the same Church: In her absence, through the
carelessness of a Servant that opened the Chamber door, the Dog slipping out,
went strait to Church to find again his Lady; as soon as he was entered, he fell
a barking and making a great noise, to the disturbing of the Priests Devotion
who was saying Mass. Whereupon Bl. Dalmace lifting up his Eyes, prayed God not
to suffer that Beast further to interrupt his Devotion. Behold a strange
Prodigy! at that instant there appeared in the Church a great Dog with black
and rugged Hair, seen by none either before or after, which seized so furiously
on the Collar and Bells of this little Dog, that he lay overturned for dead on
the ground, and the Bells he had round his neck, were never seen, the least
parcel of them any more. Of such importance is silence for the right
celebration of the H. Sacrifice; as S. Ambrose reports, that a certain H.
Priest commanded the Frogs that croaked a little way from the Church, to hold
their peace during the Divine Office, and they obeyed. Lib. 3. de Instit.
Extract from the Life of B. Dalmace by Nic. Eymeric. Jac. Bleda. Mirac. 153. p.
296.

A Dog respects and adores the H. Sacrament, and punishes the Blasphemy of his
Master.
NIcholas de Laghi, in his Book of the Miracles of the H. Sacrament says, that
a Jew blaspheming the H. Sacrament, dared to say in the presence of many
Christians, that if they would give it to his Dog, that he would eat it up
without showing any regard to their God. The Christians being very angry at
this outrageous speech, and confiding in the Divine Providence; had a mind to
bring it to trial. Presently one spreads a Napkin on the Table, upon which they
laid many Hosts, though there was only one among them all that was
consecrated. The hungry Dog being put upon the same Table, set himself to eat
them all up; but coming to that which had been consecrated, without touching
it, he kneeled down before it, and afterward fell with rage upon his Master,
catching him so closely by his Nose, that he took it quite away with his Teeth.
Jac. de Voragine in the Feast of Corpus Christi. De Laghi tract. d. 1. 9. c.
96. The same which S. Matthew warns such like Blasphemers, saying, Give not
that which is holy to Dogs, lest they turn again and rent you, c. 7.

A Peasant being delivered from mischievous Dogs, devoted himself to the H.
Sacrament.
A Peasant of Poland, going one Sunday in the Forest, set himself to work,
without regard to the holiness of the day and to cut down a great Tree: While
he was at work, there chanced to come thither a youth that was akin to him,
with whom he took his repast, to recruit his strength. Mean while he observed a
Gum upon a Tree hard by, and set this Lad upon the Tree to gather it. The Tree
about which the Peasant had taken such pains, and now bended toward the
ground, came down at the same time and fell upon the Lad, and killed him stark
dead. The Man sadly frighted with this accident, ran to the Village to get
counsel and help; but in his way, behold, two black Dogs and very furious met
him, and ran after him to fall upon him. He made the sign of the Cross for his
defense, and vowed to undertake a Pilgrimage to the H. Sacrament of Posnanie,
so he might but escape. As he thought them to be infernal Dogs, as indeed they
were, so he perceived them suddenly to toss up and down furiously, and to say
to him with a Man's voice, If thou had not defended thy self with those Arms,
there had been an end of thy life, both body and soul. The Peasant right glad
to see himself out of danger, took care to bury the youth, and afterward
performed his vow, and repaired to Posnanie, there to return thanks to God, and
to adore the H. Sacrament. Treterus apud Bzovium. Tom. 5.

An Infant was born with a Head like a Greyhound, whose Father was hunting
without regarding to say Mass.
A Gentleman of the Low-Countrys used to go a hunting at all times, without any
regard to the Mass or Divine Offices, for which he had been often blamed by
his wife, who was a virtuous woman. Among many Children that she bore him, she
had one born whose Head was like that of a Greyhound. The Mother and other
women with her that beheld this, were all so confounded, that they thought it
best to bury it privately, without making any noise. Upon this her husband
returns home, and knowing his wife was brought a-bed, asked to see the Child.
Upon the sad silence they all kept, without making him any answer, he was
enraged, and threatened, having drawn his Sword, to kill them all, if they would
not show it to him. His wife undertook to pacify him, and telling him all that
had past, afterward taking up the Infant out of the ground, gave him a sight
of it, and then said to him; Behold the fruit that is come of your not
regarding the H. Sacrifice of the Mass, nor Sundays more than other
working-days. The husband was hereupon so much ashamed, that he changed his
course of life, and from that time forward, he had such an esteem of the Mass
and Divine Offices, that it made him frequent it daily, to the great
edification of his Family, and all under his charge. Joh. Herold. a. discip.
Sermon. 22. Nic. de Laghi, trac. 6. did. 12. c. 121. p. 259.

The admirable vigilance and devoires of a Dog, in in honor of the H.
Sacrament.
THE History of the Dog of Lisbon, is counted a prodigy: It is reported by F.
Nieremberg almost in these words. In Lisbon, says, he, nigh to S. Justina dwelt
a Confectioner, who kept a middlesiz'd Dog, whose Hair was marked with white
Spots. It was two years ago (as he goes on) that he took up a Custom to follow
the Holy Sacrament, when it was carried to sick persons; they did not mind it
till several months after, as neither several other circumstances which begot
admiration. First, at all times when they tolled the Church-Bell to give men
notice of the honor which is to be paid to the Sacrament, on a sudden this Dog
went out of the house, after that he returned: When the sign was given that the
Priest was going abroad with the H. Sacrament, he hastily returned to the
Church, and stayed till he saw them come forth with the H. Eucharist under a
Canopy, then jumping toward the Children that marched before with the Cymbal,
he went and came to this side and that side, as if he would set in order the
procession that was made for Jesus Christ. The Dog is gentle and peaceable in
his conditions, being accustomed to live among men, but yet at such times, he
neither obeys nor owns any person, no not his Master, if he should chance to
call him. In this manner he goes along to the sick persons house, waits at the
door or in the street; afterward brings back our Lord to the Church, and stays
there till he be again placed in the Tabernacle. One night hearing the Bell for
carrying out the Sacrament, he would go away, as his Custom was, and finding
the house-door shut, he came to his Masters Chamber, and went round his bed,
barking lovingly, that some body would open the door; which not being done, he
found a Servant that was yet awake, after he had fawned on him, running round
him, he plucked him by the Coat, and drew him to the Gate, which when he had it
open, he went straight to Church, and the H. Sacrament being brought back, he
returned home. Another time accompanying the H. Sacrament, he met a Pedlar
sleeping by a fountain, and taking his Ass by the Halter, he ran barking at
him, and never ceased till he had waked him, and saw him kneel and adore the H.
Sacrament. Another time, following the H. Sacrament, he met a Country-woman
upon an Ass, immediately he fell a barking a-loud, and leapt upon the woman,
who being frighted, no body giving her notice, she alighted and adored the H.
Eucharist, and the Dog without making a noise pursued his way, leaving her in
peace. Another time following the H. Sacrament, he met a Gentleman of Quality,
who not seeming as if he would alight, he thereupon set upon him barking
furiously, till be had done so, and had adored Jesus Christ. Nevertheless the
horse gave him a kick, which hurt the Dogs foot, which the Gentleman commanded
his Servant to take care of, but he would not be caught, but followed the H.
Sacrament limping and holding one foot up; but when he came home, he let them
of the house look after his hurt foot, and it was quickly healed. The same
Father reports many other respects this Dog had shown, to constrain men to
honor God in the H. Sacrament; and though some endeavored to withdraw him
from such respects, yet he continued them. The Dog was then alive at Lisbon,
when the Reverend Father wrote his History in the year 1635. P. Nieremberg in
historia Naturae.

Colombes, Pigeons.
Several Holy Priests have been honored by Pigeons, while they said Mass.
SEveral have seen Pigeons often perch upon the heads of such as have
celebrated the H. Sacrifice of the Mass. It happened so to St. Kentigerne in
Ireland, to St. Cunibert, to B. Anselme of the Cistercian Order, to B.
Christopher companion of St. Francis. So it also happened to Pope Gregory IX.
when he said Mass in the desert of Camaldoli, which was a presage, that he
would come to be Pope. The same happened to Pope Marcellus II. while he said
Mass in the Church of our Lady of Loretta, a mark of the Sovereign dignity to
which he was called by Heaven, and was afterward confirmed to him by the
Mother of God, whilst he said Mass at the same Altar. Tursellin. l. 3. c. 20.
historiae Lauretanae.

A Pigeon brings a H. Host, to communicate one newly Converted to the Faith.
THe H. Martyrs Faustinus and Jovita, having baptized at Milan a Soldier named
Secundus, as they were about to give him the Communion, according to the usage
of the Church, having no bread at all wherewith to consecrate, a Pigeon flew
into the Prison with an Host in her Bill, and having assured them it had been
consecrated, being sent thither by Heaven, they therewith communicated the
new-made Christian. Surius in vita. SS. M. M. Faustini and Jovitae.

Pigeons informed the Eastern Bishops concerning the Holiness of the Sacrifice,
and of the Pope that celebrated.
ABout the year 1145, in the days of Pope Lucius, or as others of Pope
Eugenius, Ambassadors above a 1000. in number from the Armenian Bishops, and
from their Metropolitan whom they call Catholic, that is to say Universal,
came to find the Pope at Rome, to submit themselves to his Obedience, and to
take from him the most perfect form, which he should judge they ought to
observe in the most holy Sacrifice of the Mass. The Pope received them very
courteously, and invited them to come to see him officiate on a solemn day that
drew near. The Legates who were also Bishops, and had made a journey of 18
months, failed not to open all the Eyes of their souls and bodies, to observe
this Pontifical Mass. After the consecration, they saw a great light, like a
globe of the Suns Rays to fall down upon the Head of the Pope, and to encompass
it like a Crown, and two Pigeons also flying up and descending, without being
able to discover any hole in the Church, through which that light and those
Pigeons might come in; And when the Communion was over, all disappeared: Thus
our Lord would honor his Vicar in the presence of these Armenian Legates, that
so, being ravished with the Sanctity of his Vicar, and the wonders of so holy a
Sacrifice, they might submit themselves more easily to the Successors of St.
Peter. Corbin. mirac. 740. Paneg. 174. p. 460.

A Pigeon sucks the Blood consecrated by a wicked Priest, and restores it to
the Priest, after he had confessed his Sin.
IN the year 1200. at Leon in Spain, a Priest, though he had defiled himself with
a woman, yet dared to approach to the Altar, on the holy night of the Nativity
of our Lord, without confessing himself beforehand. At the first and second
Mass, before he had consecrated, and said the Paternoster, on a sudden a
Pigeon flew with great swiftness toward the Priest, and putting its Bill into
the Chalice, sucked out all the Blood, and with her wings took up the Hosts out
of the Priests hands and flew away. The Priest being frighted and concerned in
this accident that was repeated, took care not to pass to a third Mass,
without confessing himself, and repenting of his Sin. In the sequel, as he was
celebrating the third time, and came to the Pater, the Pigeon returned, and
putting her Bill into the Chalice, cast up again all the Wine she had sucked,
and let fall the two Hosts she had carried away, at the foot of the Chalice.
This extraordinary wonder, teaches Priests a good Lesson, how they ought to be
disposed, when they are to celebrate, and approach the Altar. Fr. James Bleda,
in his Treatise of the Fraternity of the H. Sacrament, Miracle 222. who says
that he had taken it out of the Spanish Chronicles of Peter Michael Carbonel.

S. Edmund was communicated by a Pigeon.
ST. Edmund Archbishop of Canterbury, after he had applied his mind seriously
to consider the Argument of the H. Trinity, on purpose to prepare himself for a
public Dispute, which was to be held upon this Mystery, retiring himself late
to take his rest, he thought that in the night time a Pigeon brought to him the
H. Sacrament, and that he received it. On the day of disputation, he came into
the Assembly, and discoursed in so high a manner upon this Subject, that all
that were present were greatly astonished and edified. Bleda 1. Mirac. 127. p.
227. ex sum.

A Pigeon marks out the outside lines, and form of a Chapel of our Ladies.
A Gentlewoman of Bononia called Ricoiola Galoni, with her Husband, had made a
vow to build a Chapel to the Virgin upon a Mountain nigh to that Town; they
had only dug for the foundations, when the Masons perceived a Pigeon, that
turned round about them, and seemed to mark a certain space with little sticks
which she had gathered together hither and thither, and this by the space of
two days. The Novelty of the thing made them look upon it as extraordinary; so
that the report of it having run abroad, many came thither from Bononia. The
Bishop came over thither with his Clergy, and had the pleasure to see with his
own Eyes this Pigeon, how busy she was in making this round, without being
concerned at the great number of persons that observed her. He presently judged
that the H. Virgin had sent it to trace the boundaries of the Chapel which
Ricciola had projected. Wherefore he advised her to cause it to be built round
in the same place that the Pigeon had marked; which she did with such
diligence, that on the first day of September following, it was ready for
Consecration: The frequent Miracles that were done, sufficiently testified,
that the H. Virgin had chose that place for to be honored there. Sigonius in
Episcopis Bononiensibus; Leander in descript. Italiae.

Ravens, Crows, Choughs, and other Birds of prey, Corbeux, Ravens. Corneilles,
Crows. Chouettes, Choughs.
assembled ordinarily nigh to Ravenna, on S. Apollinarius's day, during the
Divine Office, that was said there.
A Great number of Ravens, Crows, Choughs, and other such like birds, flockt
together yearly from all parts of Italy near the Town of Ravenna, at the Feast
of S. Apollinarius, first Bishop of this Town, for to make an extraordinary
concourse to this solemnity, during the time of celebrating the Office in the
presence of the H. Sacrament. The people of Ravenna, for an acknowledgment of
the respect they showed to their Apostle, had in readiness the dead body of a
Horse, upon which these Birds made their repast, before their return to the
place from whence they came. Some attribute this marvel to a miracle that had
been wrought by the H. Bishop; and it might happen that this sort of Birds,
might have been banished and driven away, because they defiled the Church with
their dung, and hindered the Divine Office at Mass and other times by their
doleful and troublesome noise, and for this reason some believe that the City
took its name from these Birds. Niremberg. de mirac. naturae, l. 1. c. 4. p.
389.

D.
A Dragon is made tame by the virtue of the H. Mass.
ST. Paul Bishop of Leon, of the Country of Ireland, being entreated by the
Inhabitants of a Sea-Town, to deliver them from a Dragon that ruined their
Country, and hindered them from going freely abroad the fields, he assured them
of the Divine help, upon condition that they repented, and renounced their
Superstitions. Which when they had done, he appointed his Nephew to prepare an
Altar at which he might say Mass. When Mass was done, he went out of the
Church, and being filled with divine confidence, he with a loud voice summoned
this Savage beast to make his appearance, without doing hurt to any one.
Immediately the Dragon appeared with open mouth and rolling Eyes sparkling with
choler, and went straight toward the Saint, casting himself at his feet. St.
Paul, cast a stole round his neck, and fixing his staff in the ground, he there
bound the Dragon without any resistance, or making any motion to get away from
him, as if he had been tamed and made as gentle as a Lamb. Colganus in vita S.
Jaonez. 2. Martii, page 442. n. 8.

Dragons revenge the injuries done to the H. Eucharist.
CErtain Inhabitants of a Town in Italy having received the Communion on an
Easter Day, through great irreverence spent the rest of the day in sports and
lascivious dancings. The Divine vengeance followed them quickly after. For
among their punishments God sent a Deluge of Water upon their Land, which
overwhelmed all their Harvest of Corn, and drowned all their Meadows; from
whence came forth Dragons that encumbred their ways when they were dried, so
that none could walk into the Field without fear of his Life. The Country lying
wholly desolate, a Holy person, moved with compassion, prayed to God earnestly,
to turn away his wrath, or at least to tell him the cause of it. Upon this an
Angel appeared to him, and asked him this Question, If any person should be so
daring, as to lay hands upon the Emperors Son, and by wicked Treachery and
Treason cast him into a dark and stinking Dungeon, what punishment would this
insolent person deserve? The good man answered, That he deserved to be put to
death and quartered: But, added the Angel, What if another should take the Pix,
in which the H. Host is kept, and before a great number of people, should cast
it into a sink full of filth and nastiness, what punishment was due to this
sacrilegious person? The H. man replied, That he ought to be burnt as Heretics
are. Upon this the Angel said; The Inhabitants of this place have put the Son
of God into a stinking obscure Prison; and, which is more, they have cast the
H. Pix, that is, their heart, into a dunghill of all sorts of uncleanness and
vanities, for which crimes they have merited these and greater Chastisements.
When the people understood this, they set themselves to repent of their sins,
that they might be delivered from these punishments. In Spec. Exempl. tit.
Euchar. Ex. 13.

E.
The Elephants at Goa, come in the Procession of the H. Sacrament.
I Find the Elephants also do honor to their Creator in the H. Eucharist As
this is a Creature braving and desirous of glory, they are wont at Goa, a
capital City of the East Indies, to introduce them in a solemn Procession they
make in honor of the H. Sacrament, on Corpus Christi day. The young ones march
first, after follow the older Elephants all magnificently clothed, carrying
the Cross and Arms of Portugal, painted in their natural colors on the head,
and their whole Body; each of them carries Men on his Back, one five or six
Trumpeters, others as many Musicians, whose loud Eccho's are heard during the
Procession. This vast Animal, which is easily chafed at other times, at this
time marches with a gate so peaceable, but accompanied with such gravity, that
he seems to appland himself and swell as men are wont to do, in this Pomp and
Magnificence: All Men and all Animals render this homage to their Creator.
Quantum potes, tantum aude. Nieremberg. in Hist. naturae, l. 9. c. 88.

The Ermine serves for a subject, to honor the H. Sacrament.
NIgh to Mariemburg in Prussia, a Carpenter being in company with a quarelsome
person in the same Lodging, and being forced to defend himself, he grievously
wounded this impertinent fellow. For this he was cast in Prison, and afterward
having learnt the wounded man was like to dye, he sought all ways to get his
Liberty. And calling to mind the Miracles which the H. Sacrament of Posnanie
wrought in high Poland, he promised to take a Journey thither, if Heaven would
bring him out of the danger wherein he now was. Presently after he had made
this Vow, he saw an Ermine creep along the wall of the Tower, to a certain
place; which he looked upon as a good token of his Deliverance. He went to that
place without delay, and found Tools there, fit to open a breach for him to
escape Prison. In conclusion, going to work with them, the Stones were loosened
and tumbled down without much difficulty, Heaven seeming to cooperate with his
just desire. When the passage was opened through which 2 men might go, he hastily
sprang out of Prison. Afterward he went out of the Town, without being
discovered, although the Magistrates had sent a Messenger afterward to apprehend
him: So he arrived safely at Posnanie, where he declared this Miracle, and
performed the Vow he had made to go thither, to render his thanks to God.
Traterus apud Bzovium. tom. 15,

F.
A Falcon teaches us the reverence and decency due to places, where the H.
Sacrament lies, and is kept.
IT is reported of a Falcon, which in the days of S. Brigit the Virgin, made
its abode continually in a Tower of a Church, that for the reverence owing to
the place where the H. Sacrament is kept, he would not suffer the company of
any female there, but at breeding time it retired afar off from thence to the
Mountains, and having satisfied nature returned again to its ancient abode;
leaving a good example of the decency that is owing to Churches and Holy
places. Nieremb. in hist. Not. l. 12. c. 38.

Fourmis. Ants.
Ants by the Punishment that befell them, show the reverence due to Altars, and
to the H. Sacrament.
IN a Church of one of our Colleges in Portugal, on the day of a great Feast,
the Sexton had set Pots with fine Posies of Flowers, round the Tabernacle where
the H. Sacrament reposes: In the night a troop of Pismires, which had their
retreat not far from the Altar, drawn by the sweet smell of these flowers, came
near to the Tabernacle, to forage for Provision: but this their irreverence
was immediately chastized, for the day following the Sexton lifting up the
Tapestry that covered the Altar, he found them all dead near the Tabernacle. Ex
Literis ann: prove. Lusitaniae.

Gelines. Henns.
G.
Henns honor the H. Sacrament.
BL. Ida of Lovain, before she entered into the Cistertian Order, had used to
feed Henns and other tame Fowls; and after she was a professed Nun, she had so
great devotion to the H. Sacrifice of the Mass, that she brought thither all
her Henns and other Poultry, which followed her at her call, and in the Church,
as far as they were able, humbled themselves, and kept themselves before the
most Holy Sacrament of the Altar without making any noise, to the admiration of
all the people there present. Corbin in his Panegyric on the H. Sacrament,
Miracle 741. p. 504.

A Hen revenges the injury done to the H. Eucharist.
IN the year 1561. at Nimegen, a Town of Gelderland, two Libertine Heretics,
stopping at an Alehouse the second day of the Feast of Easter, made a
challenge, which could soonest swallow his Egg. One of them hearing the Bell
which uses to be carried when the Priest goes with the H. Sacrament to a sick
Person, said, that he would sooner swallow his Egg, than the sick Person his
God or Idol, for so he called the H. Sacrament in contempt; but this he did to
his own hurt: for the Egg stopped in his throat, and he being seized with fear,
took a Tallow-candle, to make it pass down to the bottom of his Stomach, but
all in vain: for the Tallow stopped in the passage, without his being able to
bring up any thing save only the wicke, and in this estate, he fell down dead,
with a face as black as an Ethiopian, and his throat spoiled by a divine
Punishment. Also the Egg that had stopped, having made a bunch between the flesh
and the skin, appeared not in the throat, but on the other side of his neck.
This Miracle happened on the 8th of April in the year above mentioned.
Bredembachius. l. 7. c. 60. Sacr. Collat.

Grenoville. A Frog.
Frogs give respect to the H. Sacrament.
DV Ferrier remarks in the Life of S. Lindanus the Abbot, that the said Saint
hearing one day a number of Frogs croaking with troublesome noise in a Marsh
nigh to the Church, and disturbing the Priest, and those that were present at
Mass; he went and smote those waters with his Staff; upon which, all the
Froggs were still, and after that time were never heard to croak more. In the
Catalogue of the Saints of Italy on the 3. of July. p. 204.

H.
Hirondelle, A Swallow.
Swallows. The Honor paid by this sort of Birds.
THe Bl. Father Francis o Fabiano, of the Order of S. Francis, who was a very
devout Person, Praying one day before the H. Sacrament, and considering the
great Love Christ Jesus bore toward us in his Death and Passion, and on the
other side, turning his Eyes upon men's ingratitude, who think so little of it,
as if these benefits did not concern them; the Swallows that had made their
nests round about the Church, began to chatter so troublesomely, that they
interrupted the quiet, which Meditation and Contemplation does require; and
they continuing their chirping noise, he commanded them to withdraw, and to
return no more to that place: they obeyed readily this his command; and it was
observed that all that year, not one Swallow appeared any more in that place.
Wading. l. 3. ad. an. 1322.

Another History of the same kind.
FAther Peter Regalatus, of the same Order, a Priest of Eminent virtue, and a
Superior of the House of Aquila in Spain. He being a Person given much to
Prayer, his example drew many other Religious Persons to imitate him, so that,
if they were not otherwise hindered, one might find them in the Church before
the H. Sacrament, praying. But as Prayer requires great quiet and recollection
to find there and taste the Spirit of God, they found themselves deprived
thereof by the troublesome noise of Swallows, that had their nests round the
Church, and made their complaint of it to their Superior. The Holy man willing
to give some Satisfaction to the devout Priers, lifting up his hand and raising
his voice, he commanded these Birds to be gone from the Church, and not to
return thither any more, and ordered them to signifye the same command to the
rest of their company. Oh admirable event! after this time not one Swallow
dared to make a nest about the Church, without receiving a sure payment for its
disobedience. In the Memoires prepared for his Canonization, it is reported,
that one or two Swallows flying about in the Church, fell down dead upon the
Pavement. Wading. Tom. 5. ad an. 1448. n. 9.

Jument. A Mare.
J.
Jumens. Mares adore the H. Sacrament.
IN the year 1317, and the 25th of July, in a place called Vivieres, nigh to
the Town of Fumay, in the County of Looz; the Vicar of the forenamed place, was
required to carry the Sacrament to a Sick person. He went thither, and being
arrived at the House, he laid down the Box (or Pix) in which the Host was, upon
a Table, to go and hear the Confession of the Dying Person. Mean while some of
the house, not duly considerative, came round the Pix, opened it, and there
touched the Host with very great irreverence, and after shut it up again. The
Priest after he had disposed his Penitent, took up the Pix, and came back to
him to Communicate him. Upon the opening of it, he perceived that the Host had
issued out blood, and was stained with it, and stuck to the Linen that was
within. This sight cast him into a great fright, so that he durst not
communicate his Sick man, but having comforted him, and respited the Communion
to another time, he carried back the Pix and the Host to the Church. The Parish
Priest knowing what had passed, commanded his Vicar to carry the Host to the
Monastery of Herkenorode to consult with a venerable and knowing Priest, who
lived there: he did so; but as he was upon the rode to accomplish it, the
Mares, Asses and other Beasts that passed in the Fields where he went, paid
their acknowledgments to their Creator, adoring him with bended knees; and the
Vicar arriving at the Church of the Monastery, two Bells in the Steeple, rang
of their own accord, the Beasts and other animate things, bearing more respect
to the H. Sacrament, than Men had done. At his arrival they Sung the Mass of
the 1st. of August, (S. Petri ad vincula) the Priest that celebrated knowing
nothing of what had past, yet went back a little from the Altar, to adore the
H. Sacrament with a low bowing of his head. Whilst he did thus, our Lord
appeared to him in a humane form, with a certain Crown upon his head: which was
not seen by any but himself: at the same time one possessed was delivered from
the evil Spirit, and since that time the H. Sacrament has not ceased, nor now
ceases to produce some miraculous Effects. Bened. Conan. in histor. Euchar. l.
d. c. 82. ex Chrysostom. Henriquez in Menol. Cisterc. ad 29 Julii.

Mares and Oxen passing through a Marsh, adore our Lord in the H. Eucharist.
IN the year 1399, a Woman and her Daughter that served a Jew at Posnanie in
higher Poland, engaged themselves for a great Sum of Money, to deliver
consecrated Hosts to the Jews. To effect this, on the day of the Virgins
Assumption, they lay hid in the Church of the F. F. Dominicans, and when the
Friars were gone to Dinner, the Daughter being upon the watch, the Mother went
toward the Tabernacle, and tho the first and second time of her approach she
fell backwards, being repulsed by a divine force, yet she came on the third
time and opened it: she took out of the Pix three Hosts which they delivered to
the miserable Jews, after they of this Sect had assembled together in a Cellar
underground, they threw them down contemptuously upon a Table, and after they
had uttered many Blasphemies, they stabbed them with a Dagger, from whence
issued out great quantity of Blood, and the first man's face was so covered
therewith, that he could never wipe it away, but by the flames of his
Punishment; the Cellar also was all full of Blood, which they could not neither
any ways get off. The Jews being frighted with these wonders, charged two among
them, to hide these Hosts in the Marshes out of the Town: During this journey
many Miracles happened.

On Sunday the Octave of the Assumption, a Neat-herd and his Son; led the Mares
and Oxen they had the charge of, to these Marshes; the Father left his Son
there, whilst he went to be present at the Divine offices. This youth named
Paul, saw these three Hosts lifted up in the Air, and fly like Butterflies,
which the Mares that passed there, adored kneeling; and the Father at his
return saw the same, his Oxen kneeling also down to adore their Creator.

The Neat-herd returning to the Town, reported to the Magistrate that which he
had seen, but instead of being believed; he was thrown in Prison for a Fool;
where he crying to Heaven for succor, the Prison gates opened of themselves,
and he went out, and presented himself again before the Magistrate, who having
observed, that he was no man of tricks, made their report of it to the Bishop,
who went thither with great Pomp and Procession; the Hosts were gathered up by
a Priest at the Bishops command, and search being made the hardened Jews were
burnt, and their Goods confiscated. Vladislaus King of Poland caused a Church
to be built in that place, under the Title of the Body of Jesus Christ, where
God wrought Miracles of all sorts: among which they reckoned 36 raised from the
dead, and from the beginning of these Miracles, to the year 1604, their number
arrived to 382. This History was written by Tho. Treterus, Almoner to Cardinal
Rosius, and afterward Canon and Sacrist of Varme in Poland. Bzovius reports
this history in his 5th Tome in the year above noted.

A Woman appeared in form of a Mare, for her negligence in frequenting the
Communion.
A Magician not being able by his Charms to corrupt the Chastity of a Woman, in
favor of a young Man, who hired him thereto, he bewitched her, in such sort,
that she was seen by her Husband and by all others in the shape of a Mare: She
was brought to S. Macarius who took away the Charm with Holy Water, and told
her, that this misfortune had happened to her, for having omitted to frequent
the Communion, which she had abstained from for several Weeks. Palladius in S.
Maca^ius life, where that excellent Sentence of the Council of Nice is brought,
viz. We excite and exhort the faithful to their Combat, and that they may not
be left naked, we put on and arm them with the protection of the Body and Blood
of the Lord: And since the Eucharist is most profitable for the defense of
those that receive it, we desiring their Security against the Adversary, let us
arm them with the defense of our Lords wholesome Viande, which the Council calls
Munimentum dominicae salubritatis.

Lapins Conies.
L.
Conies adore the H. Sacrament.
IN the year 1412. one John Vanlangarsterden came to lodge at Herental in
Brabant, and went out every day secretly to catch a Prize: one day entering in
company into the Church of Vectrelesande, he carried away from thence the
Chalice with the Pix, wherein there were five consecrated Hosts. As he was
thinking to return to Herental with his booty, and was upon the Rode thither,
he was much surprised, finding that he could not advance forward, do what he
could, and at the same time knew not whether he went. This wandering, made him
inwardly reflect and think that this happened to him for his sin. Hereupon he
resolved to throw the stolen Hosts into the River, and going to put this in
execution, he found himself stopped short, without being able to stir from the
place, where he was. He being then hard by a Coney-Warren, that he might rid
himself of those Hosts, he threw and hid them in a Coney-burrough. After which
he found himself at liberty to return to his Lodging; where the Provost of
Herental, upon the noise that ran up and down of the Robbery, caused him to be
arrested; and putting him to the rack, it was not long ere he confessed the
stealing of the Chalice and the Pix, without saying any thing of the Hosts. But
when the Sentence was passed on him to dye, his Confessor pressed him to tell
what was become of the Hosts, and yet he would not say a word about it, till he
was just going to be thrown off the Ladder; then he freely confessed the whole
Fact, and discovered the place where he had put the Hosts. Upon which he was
brought down the Ladder, and led to the Warren, a number of People accompanying
him, and he showed the hole where he had cast them. But not finding them there,
one casting his Eyes about, saw them laid orderly upon the Grass, and round
about the Conies kneeling, adored with all respect their Creator. It was eight
days since this was done, and yet among all the Snows and Raines and other
Injuries of the Air which happen in the Month of February, they found the Host
entire and not at all endammaged: the very Elements and Beasts owning their
Creator, whilst the Heretics deny and blaspheme him. The Criminal was brought
back to the Place of Execution, and was burnt, for expiation of his enormous
Crime. Upon the noise of this great Miracle, Antony Duke of Brabant with the
Princess Elizabeth his Wife, came to the Place with a world of followers, to
testify their Piety toward the H. Sacrament. A Chapel was built over the
Coney-borrough, where the Hosts had been thrown, which is to be seen to this
day under the Altar. Great Devotion continued always, and does to this day
toward this place, but the Hosts have been lost by the fury of our new
Iconolasts and Calvinists. August: Wickman in Brab. Mariana. P. Rivero in
append. ad solenne sapientiae convivium.

Linx ou chere savage. A Shamois or wild Goat.
A Shamois, or wild Goat, serves to honor the H. Sacrament, in the deliverance
of the Emperor Maximilian I.
ABout the year 1470. the Emperor Maximilian hunting this sort of Game, one day
upon the Mountains by the City of Inspruch, as he pursued one of them, being
carried on with an earnest desire to seize it, he ran so high upon the point of
one of those Mountains before he was aware, that he saw himself in a condition
never to get off, without apparent danger of falling into an horrid precipice,
which he had before his Eyes, so that seeing himself lost, after he had
continued there two whole days, he called to his followers, who all in tears
viewed him below, not being able to succor him, that they should go and
entreat the neighboring Parish Priest to bring the H. Sacrament of the Altar,
that before he dyed he might have at least the satisfaction to see it and adore
it, since he could not receive it, in the extremity to which he was reduced.
They presently did so, and he having devoutly adored the H. Eucharist, he saw
immediately a young Shepherd by him, who removing the flint Stones with his
Crook, to plain as it were the way for him, said to him have a good heart
Prince, and follow me; He being thus encouraged, began to descend the Hill with
him, and presently was brought to his followers, who while they were
considering this Shepherd, and speaking of the great reward he deserved for his
good Service, he was vanished and they saw him no more. Upon this they believed
him to be an Angel, and with great joy conducted their young Master to the
Palace of the Emperor Frederick 4th his Father, who immediately went to return
public thanks to God for so miraculous a Deliverance. S. Romuald in thesaur.
chron. ad. an. cit. ex Pighio in suo Hercule prod.

Loup. A Wolf.
A Wolf, in consideration of the Communion received, quits his Prey, so doing
homage to the H. Sacrament.
A Devout Convert of a Monastery of the Cistertians, who had the charge of the
Muttons and Sheep, having one day devoutly received the Communion, went thence
to his Flock, to look whether any disorder had happened there. Who then saw a
Wolf returning to the Wood loaded with one of his Sheep: the good Friar fell
upon his knees, and looking up to Heaven made this Prayer. O Jesus the good
Shepherd, the Lamb of God, that take away the sins of the World, whom I though
unworthy have this day received, I recommend this Sheep to thee, do thou look
to it which has been put under my keeping; for my part, I see it safe in your
hand, but I can no ways save it. Behold a strange thing! upon this prayer, this
ravenous Beast immediately leaves his Prey, without hurting or touching it. The
devout Friar, after he had rendered his thanksgiving, brought back the Sheep to
the Flock, with great Joy. P. Major. in Spec. ex hist. Euchar. ex 20.

A Man and his Wife being transformed into a Wolf by force of an imprecation,
desire to receive the communion, which was done to the Woman, being at the
point of death.
A Priest of Ireland traveling from the Province of Vlster toward Media, was
forced to pass a whole Night in a Forest. As his Boy that went with him had
lighted a fire under a thick Tree, they perceived a Wolf to draw toward them,
and being come up to them, spoke to them thus; Be well assured and fear
nothing, since there is no cause for it. They however could not help being
afraid at the sight of a Wolf, and hearing him speak like a man, whereupon the
Priest conjured him in the name of the H. Trinity not to do them harm, and to
do declare what he was, and of what country, appearing in the likeness of a
Wolf: Thereupon he said to him, that he was of a certain race of Men called
Ossirians (Ossirienses) from whence every seven years, by force of an
imprecation made by S. Noel the Abbot, two from among them, a Male and a
Female, were constrained to leave their Country, and losing the outward shape
of a Man, to live under the hide and shape of a Wolf. After which term of
years, if they survived, two others were brought into the same condition, and
they returned back to their Country, and resumed their first form. I have not
far from this place, added he, a she Mate that lies very sick, whom I entreat
you in Charity to go see her and comfort her. The Priest following the Wolf
some time, perceived at length a She-Wolf in the thicket of a great Tree
complaining like a Woman. As soon as she saw the Priest she saluted him, and
courteously gave him thanks for his visit, praising God for having obtained
this comfort, in the extreme danger, wherein she found her self: after this she
prayed him to do her the kindness, that she might receive the Communion at his
hands, that so she might die more contentedly. The Priest having told her, that
he had never an Host about him to do it withal, the Wolf that was gone a little
aside, returned and showed him a little book, wherein he had some consecrated
Hosts; and then was importunate with him, that he would not disappoint his wife
of this last and important Consolation; and to take away from him all doubt,
making use of his foot instead of a hand, he thrust back the Skin that covered
her, from the head to the Navel, and then he saw her in the shape of an old
Woman. At length, though with some apprehension, the Priest communicated the sick
she-Wolf, which pressed him to it with all possible earnestness. All being
over, the Wolf brought the Priest back to his fire, stayed with him all night,
and in the morning brought him out of the Forest, and showed him a shorter and
safer way for him to take, to arrive at the place, whither he was to go.
Nieremberg. de naturis Mirac. in Europ. l. 2. c. 42.

A Wolf abusing the Beasts of S. Isidore, thereupon dyed, by virtue of the H.
Sacrament.
S. Isidore Patron of the City of Madrid, and by his Calling a Labourer,
praying before the H. Sacrament, and hearing Mass in S. Magdalen's Church, some
Boys came to tell him, that a Wolf was abusing one of his Beasts; to whom he
replied, My Children go in peace, and went on with his Prayer in the same
place. When Prayer was done, he went to the place which those Children gave him
notice of, and there he found the Wolf lying dead before his Beast, that
remained alive. Upon this wonderful accident, he returned to the Church, to
render his thanks to God for it. Bleda. mirac. 245. p. 153.

M.
Mouche. A Fly.
A Fly satisfies for the irreverence she had committed toward the H. Sacrament
by being burnt.
S. Annon Archbishop of Colen, a Prelat of admirable devotion, celebrating the
H. Sacrifice of the Mass; as he had broken the Host, and let fall one piece of
it into the Chalice, holding the other piece in his hand, he fell upon
considering its greatness, compared with his own unworthiness and baseness.
Mean while, by the artifice of the Devil, a Fly spotted with various colors
came flying about, and with one wheeling of her Wing and a stroke of her Teeth,
carried away a piece of the Host: The S. when he perceived it, resented it with
great sorrow, and abundance of tears more than ordinary, fearing that this
mishap came by his own fault, through the long pause he made while he was in
meditation and contemplation; and his apprehension of it was so great, that he
turned pale like a dead Person. But God who knew the heart of the Saint, did
not suffer him to lie long in this affliction; for he constrained this Fly to
bring back the same parcel of the Host, and put it under the Patine; and when
it attempted to fly away, was there stopped inmovably, as deserving to be burnt.
In fine, S. Annon made it be taken up and burnt, for the indignity it had
committed. And thus it is that God proves and comforts his Servants.

Surius ad 4. December. Novarini. in agno Eucharist. n. 802.

Another such like Story.
A Certain Priest celebrating the Eucharist in the presence of the Bishop, as
he was come to the fraction of the Bread, a Fly came flying with great
eagerness round the Chalice, as if she would force her entrance into it, the
Priest, not having his hands at Liberty, made use of his mouth, and blowed
against the Fly, which not desisting hereupon, he made a sign to the Deacon who
presented the Pax to the Bishop, to drive it away. Then the Fly mounting up
higher, and stopping a little, on a sudden fell down dead at the foot of the
Chalice, as a punishment for the trouble she had given them, during the
Sacrifice. Caesarius l. 9. c. 10.

Another like Punishment of another Fly.
ABout the year 1545. as one sung the Conventual Mass, in a Monastery of the
Celestines, the Priest that celebrated, perceived at the Communion, that a Fly
was got into the Chalice, he endeavored to catch it and to take it out, but
all in vain; but seeing she was disturbed, of her own accord she flew away. As
the Priest after dinner was thanking God, that he had escaped this mischance;
the same Fly, came to settle upon the Arm of the V. F. Friar John Bardoul^t,
and though he shook his arm, yet she continued fixed. Then thinking of what had
happened at Mass, he seized her being as yet wet with the Sacred Blood, after
this he carried her into the Vestry, where she received the Penalty of her
rashness, according as it is commanded by the Canons. Gone. in hist. ejus l. 2.
c. 126.

A Mule adores the Sacrament.
S. Anthony of Padua disputing one day with one of the most obstinate
Heretics, that denied the truth of the H. Sacrament, the Saint drove him to
such a plunge, that he stood mute, yet so it was, that not being willing to
confess that he was wholly convinced, he desired that the Saint would prove
this truth by some Miracle. S. Anthony accepted the condition, and said he
would work it upon his Mule. Upon this the Heretic kept her shut up three days
without eating or drinking. The third day the Saint having said Mass, took up
the H. Host with great reverence, and made them bring forth the hungry Mule; to
which he spoke in these terms. In the name of the Lord, whom I, though unworthy
hold in my hands, I command thee without delay to come and do reverence to thy
Creator, and confound the Malice of Heretics, making every one understand the
Truth of this most high Sacrament, which we Priests handle at the Altar, and
that all Creatures are subject to their Creator. Whilst the Saint made this
discourse, the Heretic sifted out Oats to his Mule to make him eat; but the
Beast, having more understanding than his Master, without minding the Oats,
kneeled and prostrated it self before the H. Sacrament, adoring and honoring
it as its Creator and Lord. This Miracle comforted all the faithful, and
enraged the Heretics, except him who had disputed with the Saint, who was
converted to the Catholic Faith. Wadingus in a^n. Minorum.

A Mule serves for an Occasion to honor the H. Sacrament.
IN the year 1453. on Thursday the 6th of June, this following Miracle
happened. A War being raised in Piedmont, between the Savoyards and the French,
about certain Merchants Goods, that had been detained at Juigtie; and the heat
of the War increasing, the Place was taken and left to pillage. A Soldier
entered into the Church and carried away thence the Tabernacle of the H.
Sacrament, where he had a consecrated Host; and having hid it in a Pack,
marched toward Turin. When he arrived there at the Gate of Suse, the Mule that
carried the Goods and the Booty, fell down to the ground, near the Church of S.
Sylvester. The Pack, where the Hosts were, opened of it self, and the Host came
forth, and flew up into the Air, accompanied with Splendors and casting forth
Rays like the Sun: This wonder having been seen by a venerable Person, called
Bartholomew Loconi, he went presently to give notice of it to the Bishop of
Turin, who was at that time the Reverend Lewis Nomagnano, who came thither
without delay, with the Cross and the Clergy. Being come to the place, he and
all that were present kneeled down on the ground, and whilst the Tabernacle lay
on the Earth, the Host alone remained hanging in the Air, brightly shining.
Whereupon the Bishop made them bring the Chalice, and standing with it devoutly
under the Sacred Host, it came down into it; which he carried with great
Respect and Solemnity to the Cathedral Church; where there was set up for it a
rich and artificial Tabernacle, which continued till the building of a new
Dome, for to perpetuate the memory of the Fact. There was also built a Chapel
of the H. Sacrament, in the foresaid Church of S. Sylvester, where this Miracle
is to be seen painted, and he erected a devout Fraternity also of the H.
Sacrament.

Nic. de Laghi tract. 1. did. 9. cap. 93.

A Mule by Dying acknowledges the Verity of the H. Sacrament.
A Little Town in Spain called Aroca, containing about a thousand People, being
besieged by an infinite number of Saracens, the Inhabitants resolved to defend
themselves, but so as they would first receive the Communion and hear Mass.
The affair was pressing, and therefore they committed the business of
communicating to six of the chief of them. The Priest put on his H. Vestments
to celebrate, and consecrated the Hosts; but a little before the Communion,
news came that an Assault was made by the Enemies; which obliged these
Communicants to run armed to the Walk, and God accepting the will for the deed,
did so favor these devoted of his, that they defeated the Enemies, some being
slain, and the rest put to flight. After which, these six returned to the
Church, with the People, to receive the Communion. But the Corporal (or Cloth)
being unfolded, the six Hosts were found all bloody and sticking to the Linen,
so that they could not separate them. Moreover the Enemies, to revenge their
disgrace, returning in greater numbers, gave a second Assault. The advice given
was, that the Priest should also go to the Fight, bearing the H. Corporal and
these six bloody Hosts, as well thereby to encourage the Citizens, as for to
terrify the Enemies; and it succeeded so well, that God gave the victory to the
Christians. After this, they deliberated, whither they should carry this parcel
of H. Relics, so as to be safely kept and honored. The Lot being thrice
cast, it fell upon the Town of Aroca. A Mule having been taken among the
Spoils of the Enemy, they set the H. Hosts upon her back, letting her go
whither she would, the Clergy and People following her with lighted Torches. In
the way they offered to her Straw, Hay, and Grass, all which she refused, tho
she was very hungry, as not having eaten a long while, and went on straight to
the Town of Aroca. Coming into a Church nigh the Hospital, she fell on her
knees on the ground, and being disburdned of this precious load, she dyed; it
being undecent, that she which had served in so worthy an Employment, for the
Glory of God, should serve any Man after that. There was another wonder in this
matter, viz. That after three hundred years, this most H. parcel of Relics,
continues in the same beauty, and lively color, as if the thing had but newly
happened; and all the People of the neighboring Provinces come to behold it,
as a very great Wonder. Illercas in Hist. Pontifical. Grenade. Corbin. Mirac.
90.

O.
Oiseau. A Bird.
A Bird brings S. Boniface and the Company with him, their Dinner, after he had
celebrated Mass.
S. Boniface the Apostle of Germany, being one Night detained in the Fields,
was constrained to lodge in a Tent, which he caused to be carried with him for
such occasions. He passed the night in Prayer, and as he prayed, a celestial
Light surrounded him on all sides, and in this Light S. Michael appeared,
encouraging the Servant of God to labor greatly for the Salvation and
Conversion of Souls. In the morning giving over his praying, he would
celebrate the Mass, to honor the memory of this Archangel; the Sacrifice
being ended, he commanded to make ready a Dinner in the same place. And when
his Steward told him that he had nothing to set on the Table: How! replied the
great Apostle, he that fed his People 40 years in the Wilderness, has he
nothing wherewith to feed his poor Servant, and his Attendants? then he again
commanded them to spread the Table: and having said this, behold he saw a great
Bird descend from Heaven, and fly toward him, holding in her beak a Fish,
sufficient to feed, that day, all the company. When the Fish was ready dressed,
it was set on the Table, and after all had liberally satisfied nature, at the
conclusion of the day, the H. Apostle commanded to gather up the remains, and
to cast them into the River, that so the Fishes that live in the water might
partake of that which came out of the water. In vita S. Bonifacii.

A fine Bird came to cheer a Monk with her melodious Singing, after he had
received the Communion, as if she invited him to Heaven.
A Monk of the Carthusian Order, drawing toward Death, after he had received
the Communion; a Bird decked with fine feathers, entered at his Window into the
Chamber, where in presence of all the Friars, that assisted the dying man, she
fell a singing so melodiously, that it seemed to them all that they were
solaced with the joys of Paradise: Some that were there endeavored to make her
void the Chamber, but in vain; for she would neither fly out nor cease singing,
till the Servant of God had yielded his Soul, which when it went out of his
Body, the Bird quitted the Chamber, for to accompany it and conduct it to
Heaven. Pet. Suitor. in Chron. Cartus. l. 5. c. 33.

Ours. A Bear.
A Bear serves for a subject to honor the H. Sacrament.
A Person named Stanislas, an Inhabitant of the Town of Fuchol in Poland, used
to go a Hunting with a long Harquebuss. Being entered the Forest, he saw a Beast
called Gallus Auritus, which leaping from one bough to another, led the man on
to a certain place full of tufts of wild Trees, where there was no Pathway.
Mean while he was surprised with a shower of Rain, which to avoid, he rested
himself against a Tree, where he fell asleep. Whilst he slept, he heard a Voice
that said to him, Make a Vow to the H. Body of Jesus Christ, who is honored at
Posnanie, and thou shall be saved to day from sudden Death. His weariness
keeping him asleep, he heard the same Voice again; upon which awaking, he
recommended himself to God, and made a Vow to go to the H. Sacrament at
Posnanie, yet apprehending no danger. But pursuing his way, he met a great and
very furious Bear, against which he discharged his Harquebuss, and laid the
Bear on the ground: whilst he was bending the Cock to discharge a second shot,
it through negligence slipped and went off, and the Bullet carried away the
little finger of his right hand, and struck off his hat, which it tore also in
pieces. Hereupon finding himself delivered from two dangers the same day, by
virtue of his Vow, without further delay he began his Journey to accomplish it,
and arrived at Posnanie on Saturday in the Octave of the Feast of All Saints,
in the year 1530. Treterus apud Bzovium ad ann. 1399. Page 206. Col. 2.

P.
Passereau. A Sparrow.
Sparrows by their Obedience and their Death, testify their regard to the H.
Sacrament.
JOhn Herolt, a Dominican, reports that Sparrows having used to build their
Nests in a Church dedicated to S. Vincent the Martyr, not only defiled it with
their dung and ordure, but also disturbed the divine Office. It being a very
hard thing to drive them away, the Bishop of the place brought an
Excommunication against them, threatening death to them, if they returned
thither any more. After the Sentence was passed, all these Sparrows quitted
this Church: it was also observed, that if any brought one of these Birds into
the Church, it immediately dyed. Sermon. 79. de tempore.

Partridges chastise the Hunter, who had taken them, for having been defective
in attending Mass, and flew away, tho they were put into the Pot.
IN the Diocese of Casal in Piedmont, a Hunter minding more to take his
Pleasure in that Sport, than to hear Mass on the Martyr S. Defendent's Day,
took indeed some Partridges; but as they were put into the Pot to boil them,
they came out and flew away alive: leaving the Hunter in the dark, and deprived
of the Contentment of filling his Belly, with the loss also of the Merit he
might have gained, by being present at the H. Sacrifice of the Mass. Bollandus
in actis SS. Januarii ad 2 diem.

Poissons. Fishes.
Fishes honor the H. Sacrament.
THe Curate of Alboraya in the Kingdom of Valentia in Spain, carrying the H.
Sacrament to a sick Person of Almacora, which is a dependant joined to that
Curacy; as he passed over a Brook, such a Torrent of waters came down upon him,
that to save himself he let fall the Custode (or Box) in which were two Hosts.
Returning to Alboraya, he told the Inhabitants of what had happened to him. In
the morning early, one ran with all speed to the place, where this misfortune
happened, but he found only the Custode without the Hosts. Certain Fishermen
passing along the Sea side, whether to gather Wood, or to catch Fish, told him
they had seen two great Fishes, each of them carrying an Host in its mouth.
The Curate being advertised of it, returned to the Sea side, habited in his
Surplice and Stole, with the Chalice in his hand. Upon the sight of this
wonder, he prostrated himself before the Fishes, which rendered themselves to
him with the Hosts, which he received and laid them in the Chalice, with great
reverence. In memory of which, the Chalice is to be seen at Alboraya, and the
Custode at Almacora. And to prevent such inconveniences, in the year 1352, this
Town before joined, was separated from the principal Parish, after many debates
and contests between these two places. This whole History is painted at the
great Altar of Almacora, erected under the Title of the most Holy Sacrament.
James Bleda, in his Book of the Fraternity of the H Sacrament erected at the
Minerva in Rome. Mirac. 18. page 89.

Another respect, rendered by a Fish to the H. Host.
WHilst the Heresy of the Albigenses infected all the Province of Narbonna in
France, an Heretic persuaded a certain Fisherman, that if he would thrive in
his Calling, he should go to the Communion, and from thence bring away the
Host, and make a Fish eat it, which he did. Twenty years after, when this
Heresy was extinct, this Fisherman seeing that the Feast of our Lords Body was
celebrated with so much solemnity, he repented of the Sin he had committed, and
confessed it to his Curate, who told him that this was a reserved case, and
that he ought to acquaint the Bishop with it. The Fisherman, in great wrath
said, If I must do this, I swear by God, I will never go to Confession more.
Hereupon the Curate for to pacify him, said, that he himself would go find out
the Bishop, and get leave of him that he might absolve him. Easter Day came,
and the Fisherman had a desire to communicate with his Neighbors, which yet he
did not, following the advice of his Priest. Mean while the Fisherman bewailing
his disgrace, went sorrowfully toward the River where he had committed this
Sacrilege: as he looked this way and that way, behold he spied on the other
side of the River a Fish, holding in his mouth an Host, which came toward him,
but not daring to touch it, he went to give notice of it to the Priest: and
both coming to that same place, the Fish appeared no more. Hereat conceiving
great displeasure, a little after, the Fish appeared again above water, with
the Host in her mouth as before, and being come up to them, the Priest with all
respect took up the Fish with the Host. He kept a moiety of it for the Parish,
and sent the other part to the Cathedral Church. Id. Bleda 1. Mirac. 104. p.
191. Lanuza in suis Sermonibus.

A Whale, a Fish of the greater kind, lent his Back to say Mass upon, on
Easter Day.
SVrius reports that S. Malo being upon the Sea on a Easter Day, prayed the
good God, to afford him the means to celebrate the Mass, and to those that
accompanied him to hear it. When he had thus prayed, one perceived a little
Island, which appeared in the midst of the Sea: they went down upon it, to the
number of a Hundred and eighty Persons; they set up an Altar, on which S. Malo
said Mass, and gave the Communion to a great number. After which retiring to
their Ship, they perceived that this Island, or rather the Fish sunk to the
bottom, having lent his Back, as God would have it, to satisfy the Saints
desire.

Surius in Vita S. Maclonii.

Pourceau. Swine.
Swine adore the H. Sacrament.
A Certain Woman not being able to believe that God was in the Sacrament, was
tempted by the Devil, to take some proof from thence to satisfy her fancy,
and although her Confessor, and also Albert Bishop of Perusia had exhorted her to
yield to the public belief, approved by so many knowing and virtuous Persons,
without desiring to be instructed and confirmed herein by a Miracle,
notwithstanding after all, she was led away by her fancy to make the Trial. She
went therefore one day to the Communion, and having taken the Host out of her
mouth, she went and threw it into the Hogs-trough, which upon the Noise she
made ran greedily to their trough: but being altogether, instead of opening
their mouth to swallow the Host, they kneeled down to adore it. The unhappy
Woman stopped not here; but put the Host upon the Spit to roast it at the fire.
As she turned the Spit, she saw drops of Blood that distilled from the Host:
notwithstanding she continued stubbornly in her false Opinion, and being afraid
to be apprehended and put to death, if what she had done should be discovered;
she dug a hole in the ground and there buried the Host, that it might be
spoken of no more. But she perceiving that the Blood bubled out of the Earth,
and ran in abundance like a Spring, the hardness of her heart was softened: so
that her understanding being enlightened in this Truth, and repenting of her
unbelief, she went to find out the foresaid Bishop of Perouse, who having heard
her confession, imposed a Penance on her to perform, during her whole life.
Henr. Instit. p. 1. Sermon. 9. Biga salutis in festo Corp. Christi Prompt.
Discip. Exem. 33. l. E.

R.
Renard. A Fox.
A Fox quits the Hen he had carried away, by virtue of the H. Sacrament.
S. Gregory the Pope tells us, that S. Boniface, whilst he was a young Child,
standing at the Door of his Lodging; he perceived a Fox running away with a Hen
in his mouth. Immediately away he went to the Church, and placing himself
before the H. Sacrament, he made this Prayer to it. Lord I beseech thee be
pleased to preserve the Pullen which my Mother feeds in her back-yard, for the
sustenance of her little Family. Having done this, he returned to his Lodging,
where this Fox appeared again with the Hen in his mouth, and laying down the
Hen, fell down dead at the feet of this Child. S. Gregor. Dialog. l. 1.

Rossignol. A Nightingale.
A Nightingale advertises a Devout Friar to prepare for his Voyage to Heaven,
for his having a particular Inclination to attend Masses.
THe Bl. John de Rieti, a most excellent Augustinian Friar, had a particular
devotion to attend on as many Masses as he could possibly, for the reverence he
bore to the H. Sacrament of the Altar and confidence he had in it. See now the
recompense which our Lord made him; a few days before his last Sickness, a
Nightingale came every day to sing her warbling Notes under his Window. Being
asked, what was the meaning of this, he answered, that this was the Spouse that
invited him to the Banquet of the Lamb. Also, a few days after, attending at
Mass, he saw an extraordinary Light, which continued all the time of the
Sacrifice, which he took for a Star that was to conduct him to Heaven. At
length, he fell sick, and having been armed by receiving the Sacraments, and
having repeated those words of the Apostle, I desire to be dissolved and to be
with Christ, he left the Earth that he might partake of the Banquet, of the
Lamb, to which he was invited.

Simplician de S. Martin, in the History of famous Men of the Order of the
Hermits of S. Augustine.

S.
A Scorpion taken and swallowed down at Mass, hurts not the Priest at all that
did it.
THe Bl. Francis de Fabriano, a Franciscan Friar, celebrating Mass one day, as
he was come to the Communion, and took off the Cover of the Chalice, he
perceived there a little Scorpion: he might have kept himself from all danger,
observing the Rules prescribed in such cases, but calling to mind the Saying of
Jesus Christ to his Disciples, if they drink any deadly thing it shall not hurt
them; banishing all fear, and overcoming all horror, he courageously swallowed
the consecrated Wine with this little Animal in it. When he was gone back from
the Altar and had offered his thanksgivings, he made them call a Surgeon.
When he came into the Convent, Bl. Francis was praying in that Church and
repeating these words, My help is of the Lord, who made Heaven and Earth. When
notice was given him that the Surgeon was come, he went into his Cell, and
there presented to him his right Arm to let him Blood; and out of it, by a
strange wonder, the Scorpion came out alive with the Blood, without doing the
H. man any harm, or putting him to peine. Waddingus tom. 3. ad ann. 1312. n. 7.
Nic. de Lag tr. 6. c. 13.

Sanglier. A wild Boar.
A Wild Boar shows what respect is due to Altars, the Sacred Mansions of the H.
Sacrament.
IN the year 1032. Sanchy the Aged, King of Navarr and Castille, going a
hunting, at the place where sometime stood the Town of Palence, he there
pursued a wild Boar, which tiring after a long chase, cast it self into
Sanctuary among the Ruins of the Church of S. Antony the Martyr, and there
stood unmoved against the Altar, as in a place of safety, and having ordinarily
the guard of Angels; the King entering on a sudden, lifted up his Sword to wound
it, but when he thought to discharge his blow at it, his Arm became stiff, so
that he could not use it. Whereupon he acknowledged his fault, since Churches
where God uses to dwell in the H. Eucharist, ought to serve for an Asylum and a
refuge to Men and Beasts, according to the Divine Oracle, Psalm. 35. Thou Lord
shall save both men and beasts. Immediately he asked Pardon of God and the H.
Martyr; and immediately by a Miracle he recovered the use of his Arm; teaching
all, what respect is due to holy Places, although ruined, since Beasts may there
find their safety. This Prodigy gave an occasion to King Sanchy, not only to
repair the Church of S. Antonin, but also to cause the Town of Palence to be
rebuilded.

Roder. Tolet. l. 6. Regum Hispan. c. 6. Rod. Sancius, c. 25.

Sauterelles. Locusts or Grasshoppers.
Locusts or Grasshoppers acknowledge the virtue of the Eucharist, and of the H.
Sacrifice, by their Death.
SVrius reports in the Life of S. Theodore, 22d of April, that the H. Abbot was
pressed by the Inhabitants of Neran, that he would help them against the Armies
of Locusts, that had invested like a thick mist, all the Fields of that
Territory, and went on brouzing and consuming all the Herbs and Fruits of the
ground. The H. Abbot was persuaded by their instant entreaties, and coming
upon the place, he said Mass. The day following, he sent again the People into
the Fields, commanding them to stop at a certain place, for to implore the
divine aid; mean while he took up in his hands some of these Locusts, and found
them dead. Hereupon he gave God thanks, and said to the People, My Children
return to the Churches, and you shall see the Miracles of the divine Goodness.
All the People being come thither, S. Theodore celebrated the H. Sacrifice of
the Mass, and the day following, they found in the Field an innumerable
company of Locusts, all lying dead; which instead of depopulating the Fields,
served to manure and enrich them.

Souris. A Mouse.
Mice, by a certain cognizance, yield respect to the H. Sacrament.
CEsarius tells us, that the Sacrist of the Abbey of Eberbac, having found
certain Hosts marred and cracked mixed among others, he cast them under a
Window near to the Altar; and some days after, he observed, that the Mice had
nibled and eaten all that which was round the Host (not what was Printed with
Letters) and it was held for a great Wonder, that these little Animals, so
greedy of such stuff, had spared them, in testimony of certain respect, and
only because they had been appointed for the use of the Sacrifice of the Mass.

Lib. 9. c. 11. about the year 1222.

T.
Taureau. A Bull.
A Bull acknowledges our Lord, under the Species of the Sacrament, deposing its
fierceness, to be present at the Mass.
IN the Town of Brosa in Spain, may be seen an admirable Prodigy, which has
been seen many years ago, and may still be seen every year, on the Vespers and
day of S. Mark the Evangelist. In this place is a Fraternity under the Title of
S. Mark, to which Heaven has given this Privilege following. viz. That at the
Feast of this H. Evangelist, this Congregation makes choice of one of their
Company, whom they send into the Fields, where he demands of the Neat-heard
that looks to the Cattle, which of his Bulls is the most fierce and furious.
When he has learnt this, he commands this Bull, in the name of S. Mark, to
follow him, which like a tame Lamb follows him to the Village, and is present
at Vespers on the Eve of this Feast; after which, he returns to the Meadows,
and the next day he presents himself on the same manner at Mass, where the
true Lamb of God is sacrificed; after this he marches in procession in the same
Posture, and suffers the Boys and Girls to touch him, and put Wreaths of
Flowers about his Neck. This Feast and Ceremony being over, he is sent back to
the Herd, and resumes immediately his wonted and natural fierceness, and from
that time People must have a care of him. P. Bibero in append. Solemnis
sapientiae convivii.

U.
Vache. A Cow.
A Cow revenges an Injury done to the H. Sacrament.
IN the year 1650. in a Town of the Province of Austria, called in Latin
Vnguarinum; on an Easter Eve when they were busy in a Procession, according to
the Custom of the Country, carrying the H. Sacrament in great Pomp, amidst
Acclamations, many Vollies of Guns shot off, and the noise of Kettle-drums,
Trumpets and Tabours, an old Minister's Wife, fell into a rage, through despite
to see the honor they gave to God in the H. Eucharist, and cried out furiously
with full mouth; Behold, says she, the Papists have again raised their Christ,
whom they put to death three days ago. This Blasphemy was immediately
punished; for a Cow, that came no body knew from whence, and followed this
Fury, on a sudden being as it were pricked forward by an extraordinary
indignation, ran furiously against this Heretic; and having pushed and gored
her back with her horns, rushed her down so wounded, that she expired a few
hours after, to be presented before him whom she had blasphemed, who is the
Judge of Quick and Dead. P. Nadasi in literis annuis ad an. Cit. prove. Austriae
par. 3.

Verse. Worms.
Worms are found dead, for having eaten up the Flowers designed for the honor
of the H. Sacrament.
IN the Convent of S. Catherine in the Province of Valentia, a Lay-Brother
called Assensius, one of great Faith and Devotion toward the H. Sacrament of
the Altar, looked to a little Garden of Flowers he had, which he made use of to
spread before the H. Eucharist. On the Eve of Corpus Christi day, he went into
his Garden to look on his Flowers, which he saw there growing very fresh and in
great numbers, of which he was extremely glad: but in the Morning going in to
gather them, he perceived a number of Worms all round about which had eaten
them up and consumed them. In this straight, he ran hastily to the H.
Sacrament, and after he had adored it, he earnestly beseeched it to deliver him
from his Sorrows, by restoring the Flowers he had reserved, for the honor of
his most H. Body. In confidence that our Lord had heard his Prayer, he returned
to his Garden, and found it all smiling with fresh and fair Flowers, and those
little Vermin lying dead, to enrich the Ground. This great Devotion which he
had testified all his life time toward the H. Eucharist, obtained for him the
happiness to expire and render his Soul to his Creator, in the presence of the
most Glorious Virgin Mother, of her dear Son our Lord, and of his seraphick
Father S. Francis, on the H. Night of Christmas. Franc. Gouraga de brig. and
rog. Seraph. Rel. S. Franc. 3. p. in prove. Valent. con. 12.

Worms revenge the Injury done to the H. Sacrament.
A Thunderbolt having by God's Providence, fallen upon Apollo's Temple in
Daphne, the building was beat down and lay in Ashes. Julian the Apostate
attributing this burning to the Zeal of the Christians, commanded that all the
H. Vessels of Gold and Silver of great Value, in the great Church built by
Constantin, should be brought into the Emperor's Exchequer as forfeited. Among
those Persons that were most ready to execute this Order, was Julian, this
Emperor's Uncle, who governed the Empire of the East; who was suddenly struck
with a Malady, that held him for forty days lying along on the ground, without
Speech or Sense. The cause of this sudden Malady was attributed to what he had
done in seizing upon the H. Vessels, as Pixes, Chalices and such others, which
he had broken in pieces, and had made them up for a Seat to sit on. He
recovered indeed his Senses, but it was to feel extraordinary Torments in his
Bowels, where strange Ulcers bred with so much corruption, that all the Flesh
ran into Worms, which though they endeavored by applications to allure as it
were and draw them forth, yet instead of that, they went further inward, and
fastened themselves to the live Flesh, and never ceased to torment him, till he
had vomited out his Soul, at his infamous and noisome mouth. Niceph. Callist.
in hist. Eccles. l. 10. c. 29.

Vipers honor the H. Sacrament, by quitting those whom they had afflicted.
IN the year 1651. at Breast, a Town in Poland, a great Lady was molested for
some while with so strange a Witchery, that she vomited live Vipers and Froggs,
which caused horror to all those that heard her speak of it, and to her self
who was afflicted thereby with very great torment. She advised with our Fathers
about it, and from them she learnt, that there was not a more sovereign and
effectual Remedy against such Witcheries, than to approach the H. Eucharist
with a great Faith and Confidence. She made use of this advice with such
success, that at length she found her self released and quit of this
Witchcraft, and restored to that health and quiet, which she enjoyed before
this Misfortune. Ex Literis annuis Poloniae, 1651. 5. Nadasi.

FINIS.
The LICENSE,
THese Histories taken out of Catholic Authors, and containing nothing
contrary to Faith or good Manners, may be made public,

Given at Lille. June 20. 1672. R. Du Laury, Provost of S. Peter's.


