THE MIGHTY CHRIST THE Saints Help: OR, A clear Discovery of the MIGHTINESS
and Excellency of CHRIST in all things of, and concerning him: from the first
Promise of him, to his last Appearing, and Kingdom. With Application thereof
to the several States and Conditions of Men.

BEING The Substance of several Sermons, preached at Northwalsham in Norfolk,
upon PSALM. 89.19. I have laid Help on One that is MIGHTY.

By RICHARD BREVITER, M. A. a poor Labourer in Christ's Vineyard.

Commended by diverse Ministers of Jesus Christ in LONDON.

Who is this that comes from Edom, with dyed Garments from Bozrah? this that
is Glorious in his Apparel, traveling in the Greatness of his strength? I that
speak in Righteousness, Mighty to save, Isa: 63.1. LONDON: Printed by M. S.
for Henry Cripps, at the first Shop in Popes-head-Alley next to Lombard-
street. 1662.

TO ALL The FRIENDS, and ENEMIES of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, especially in
England, Scotland, and Ireland.
FOR Christ's, and your sake, this plain Treatise (which about two years since
was composed for a more private use) is now by the importunity of diverse of the
LORDS Servants, held forth to public view. And though a sense of my own
weakness, and great unworthiness might have deterred me from this
undertaking; yet the excellency, weightiness, and suitableness of the Subject
to your present conditions (which will I hope make way in your hearts for its
entertainment,) has encouraged me to present it to your considerations.

Its chief design and aim is to lift up the SON OF MAN, who both in his
Person, Merit, Spirit, Ordinances, and Servants, is (by more than ordinary
unbelief, profanesse, superstition, persecution, and abounding of all sorts of
iniquity) so greatly despised and rejected of men; yea (to the great reproach
of Christianity) of those that in words profess to magnify him above all.

How it will be accepted, and of what benefit it will be to you, who as yet are
his ENEMIES in your minds by wicked works, (Col. 1.21.) I know not. This I can
say, in all the Reproofs, Cautions, Counsels, and Exhortations, I have had it
in my heart, earnestly to desire to be isntrumental to deliver some of your
souls at least, from perishing in your disobedience and rebellion against
CHRIST: For though you say peace and safety, while you walk in the imaginations
of your own hearts; yet great is the danger that you are in, through your
provoking this MIGHTY ONE against you. How easily, and suddenly can He break
you with his rod of Iron, and dash you in pieces like a Potters Vessel? (as
Psalm. 2.) And what though through his patience and long-suffering, you should
walk many years in the ways of your hearts, and in the sight of your eyes; yet
know, you must at last, (and how soon, you cannot tell,) appear before the
Judgment Seat of this Mighty One, that you may receive the things done in your
bodies, according to what you have done, whether it be good or bad, (2 Cor.
5.10.) And what account will you then be able to give to him of all your pride,
covetousness, and some of you of your cursing, swearing, deceit, drunkenness,
malitiousnesse, uncleanness, contempt of his Ordinances, persecution of his
Servants, and other high and horrid wickednesses, scarce to be paralelled among
the worst of Heathens. O fear and tremble before the true and living GOD
against whom you have sinned; trust not in your power, policy, friends,
honors, estates, and such like worldly enjoyments, which will not profit, nor
help at all in the great day of the wrath of the Lamb, (Prove: 11.4.) I shall
leave with you Luthers Caution to some in his days: viz: Take heed you be not
found among those roaring haughty Gentlemen, and Heaven-breakers, who do resist
the Holy Ghost, and Gods Word, and boast of their own strength and ability.

And further, in the spirit of meekness, love and pity, I beseech you so to
consider and lay to heart the things that are here following written, touching
the GREAT KING OF THE WHOLE EARTH, as to humble your selves under his Mighty
hand, to trust in his mighty name, and to be obedient to his holy will; that
(your sins and transgressions being blotted out,) you may in the end be made
partakers of his Heavenly Kingdom and Glory. AMEN.

And You the FAITHFVL, and precious servants of the LORD, especially the least,
and weakest of the flock, who are fearing and ready to faint under the weight
of present pressures, and apprehension of future troubles; For your
furtherance, and joy of faith in this Wilderness, I have set my self to
demonstrate the MIGHTINES, and ENGAGEMENT of CHRIST to HELP you in all
Conditions.

And though I may truly say, I have not told you one half of the Greatness of
his power, and wisdom; yet, I hope, what is here in much weakness displayed
before you, shall become mighty through God, in some measure to support and
comfort you in your several solitudes and sufferings here below, such being the
portion here of all that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, 2 Timothy: 3.11. Acts
14.22.

Which that it may be, I entreat you not cursorily to read, (as the manner of
most is;) but seriously to weigh and carefully to hide in your hearts, the
words of truth, contained in this Book.

And because I would not detain you from the perusal of what follows, I
only, yet earnestly beseech you, by all the help you have received from
Christ, by all the consolation you have in him, and by all the hope you have of
future Glory through him, that you give all diligence to walk more worthy of
that grace wherein you stand, by being more serious, spiritual, humble, and
holy in all manner of conversation; especially now when you are made to eat
the bitter fruits of former wantonness. Oh sin no more, lest worse things come
unto you. O love, and serve the Lord Jesus Christ, not in word, and in tongue,
(the common, and only sacrifice of most that are called Christians) but in
deed, and in truth.

In a word, be very faithful to him; make his work, your business; his
commandments, your Rule; his life, your example; his SPIRIT, your HELP; his
name, your refuge; and his glory, your end: And if you do these things, you
shall never fall.

Now, what is here humbly offered for common good, may (by a blessing from on
high) be of some use for the turning of the feet of some sinners from the ways
of wickedness; and for the strengthening the weak hands of some Saints in the
work of righteousness, to continue therein unto the end, to the Glory and
praise of this MIGHTY ONE, the LORD JESUS CHRIST; is the prayer of

Your souls friend and servant, RICHARD BREVITER.
From my Study in Norwich this 2d of the 4th Month June. 1662.
WE who desire the Exalting of our LORD JESUS CHRIST that MIGHTY ONE, on whom
the LORD GOD his father (and ours in him) has laid HELP; having observed the
holy end and scope of these Sermons on Psalm. 89.19. Blessing his Glorious Name
for his so assisting his faithful servant herein; and finding the Matter
according with what the Author has well expressed in this his Epistle; do
therefore heartily join with him therein, in what he has written to all the
Friends and Enemies of our LORD JESUS CHRIST.

James Nalton Minister of Leonards Foster Lane. Thomas Brooks. Robert Brag.
William Adderley. H: Jessey.


THE MIGHTY CHRIST THE Saints Help.
PSALM. 89.19. I have laid help upon One that is Mighty.
THe precedent Psalm contain a mournful complaint to the Lord powered out in a
way of prayer. This (especially the former part of it) is a pleasant Song of
praise.

The subject of it, is the Lord.

The things which he mentions as most sweetly refreshing his own soul, and most
eminently conspicuous in the Lord toward his people, are his mercy,
faithfulness and power.

First, His mercy, Verse. 1. I will sing of the mercies of the Lord for ever. So
verse. 2. I have said mercy shall be built up for ever.

Secondly, His faithfulness, verse. 1. With my mouth will I make known thy
faithfulness to all Generations; verse. 2. Thy faithfulness shall thou
establish in the very Heavens; both manifested in his Covenant which he made
with David and his seed; verse. 3. I have made a Covenant with my chosen, I have
sworn unto David my servant; thy seed will I establish for ever, and build up
thy Throne to all Generations.

Thirdly, His power, verse. 6. Who in the Heaven can be compared to the Lord?
who among the sons of the mighty can be likened unto the Lord? verse. 8. O Lord
God of Hosts, who is a strong Lord like unto thee? manifested by his works of

First, Creation, verse. 11. The Heavens are thine, the earth also is thine; as
for the world, and the fulness thereof, thou have founded them; Verse. 12. The
North and the South, thou have created them.

Secondly, Providence, verse. 9. Thou rulest the raging of the Sea, when the
waves thereof arise thou stillest them, showed

Partly toward his enemies in their destruction, verse. 10. Thou have broken
Rahab in pieces, as one that is slain; thou have scattered thine enemies with
thy strong arm.

Partly, Toward his people in their salvation, verse. 16, 17, 18. In thy name
shall they rejoice all the day, and in thy righteousness shall they be
exalted; for thou art the glory of their strength, and in thy favor our Horn
shall be exalted: for the Lord is our defense, and the holy One of Israel is
our King.

The Psalmist having spoken largely of the power of God, returns to that with
which his heart was most affected, The precious Covenant of God made with
David, expressed verse. 3. and shows at large the particulars of it, what great
things God would do for him, and how great and mighty he would make him: and
for a confirmation of faith in this great promise of God, the Psalmist declares

First, The Original of David's power and authority, viz: that it was from God,
from Heaven: he was no Usurper, nor Obtruder, neither of man's, nor his own, but
of Gods exalting, for so God says, I have exalted one chosen out of the
people, I have found David my servant, with my holy Oil have I anointed him.
So Psalm. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my holy Hill of Sion. Peter and the
other Apostles speaking of Jesus before the Council said, Him has God exalted
with his right hand, to be a Prince and a Savior. And therefore the Lord
challenges a peculiar propriety in David above all the Kings of the earth,
calling him his King, My King.

Secondly, The Lords discovery of it before he did it; And to whom? Not unto
the Princes of this world, but unto his holy One Samuel, who anointed David in
the midst of his brethren, 1 Samuel 16.1, 3, 13. By some the word is translated
in the Plural Number, Sanctis tuis, to thy holy Ones, to wit, the Prophets,
Samuel, and Nathan, one of which anointed David, and the other foretold of the
perpetuity of his Kingdom, 2 Samuel: 7.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Yea, the Lord spoke
the same thing to his holy One David by the mouth of his servant Nathan, 2 Samuel:
7.17. According to all these words, and according to all this vision, so did
Nathan speak unto David.

From the discovery of it, we may

First, Observe; That it has been Gods way of old, when he has had any great,
and remarkable thing to do for, or upon a people, to reveal it unto his
servants the Prophets.

Amos 3.7. Surely the Lord will do nothing, but he reveals his secret unto
his servants the Prophets.

More particularly

Secondly, Observe; That the discovery of Gods exaltation of Christ, his True,
and Great Holy One, sanctified and separated above his fellows, was first made
to his Holy Ones.

Thirdly, The manner of discovery thereof, and that was by vision, God in
diverse manners spoke in times past unto the Fathers, sometimes, but rarely by
Oracle, it being a wonderful condescension on Gods part, and more than
ordinary honor to the person to whom he so spoke; this honor God put upon
Moses, as he told Aaron and Miriam, With him will I speak mouth to mouth, Numb.
12.8. Sometimes, and more commonly, In visions, and in dreams, Numb: 12.6. It
was in vision God spoke to his Holy One, when he made discovery of his Grace;
Then thou spakest in vision to thy Holy One.

Here are two things chiefly to be enquired into.

First, The mercy provided, and that is a King; not a mean, weak one, unfit for
the Throne, but a Mighty One, I have laid help upon One that is Mighty: if it
be asked, Who is this King? the 20. verse. is in answer, I have found David my
servant, with my holy Oil have I anointed him. Of him the Lord has spoken,
saying, By the hand of my servant David, I will save my people Israel out of
the hand of the Philistims, and out of the hand of all their enemies, 2 Samuel
3.18. It is both David the son of Jesse, and Christ the son of David according
to the flesh, who was also David's Lord, of whom David, especially in his Kingly
Office was a Type and Shadow, who is also called David, Hos. 3.5. And Ezekiel
prophesying of the Kingdom of Christ, a long time after David the son of Jesse
was fallen asleep (having served his Generation according to the will of God)
says, I will set up one shepherd over them, even my servant David, I the Lord
will be their God, and my servant David a Prince among them, Ezekiel. 34.23, 24.
Again, David my servant shall be King over them; my servant David shall be the
Prince for ever, Ezekiel. 37.24, 25. This is that David that lives for ever, the
Lord Christ that Mighty One, mightier, and higher than all others, as the Lord
has promised, verse. 27. Also, I will make him my firstborn, higher than the
Kings of the earth; which words agree exactly to the Lord Christ, who is said
to be The firstborn of every creature, the Beginning, the firstborn from the
dead, that in all things he might have the pre-eminence, Col. 1.15, 18. And by
John, to be The first begotten of the dead, and the Prince of the Kings of the
Earth, Rev: 1.5. And this is he that the Psalmist principally sings of, as he
does also in other Psalms, who is, and shall be so great a blessing to Gods
people.

Secondly, The people who partake of this mercy, over whom this King, this
Mighty One was set, that he might help them, are not all the people of the
world, not his foes, such as hate him; not the proud and mighty ones of the
earth, who despise and oppose him (though he be Lord over them also) but they
are Gods people; one Translation adds, I have put help upon a Mighty One for
my people. They are Gods people Israel, the weakest and smallest of all people,
not only Israel according to the flesh, but also Israel according to the
spirit, Jer. 23.5, 6. Luke 1.32, 33. Who by reason of their weakness, and
smallness, the craftiness, mightiness, and multitudes of their enemies, stand
in as much need of the Lord of Christ, the son of David, (That Mighty One) to
help and save them, as ever Israel after the flesh did of David the son of
Jesse, (That Mighty One) to deliver them from their Oppressors.

I have laid, or put help upon One that is Mighty, A Champion, one strong, and
able to help my people.

These words may be considered

First, Generally and largely, as they contain the care, and goodness of God in
General to his people.

Secondly, Specially and strictly, as they point out the particular thing
wherein God is so good to his people.

From the General and large Consideration of the words

Observe; That the condition of the people of God in this life, is such as they
stand in need of help.

Though this be not expressed in words, yet it is necessarily employed; for help
supposes need, and we are sure that the Lord the most wise Agent, does nothing
in vain, he does not send help to them that need it not.

For demonstration of which (seeing I intend not to insist long upon it) I
shall only mention

First, The many and mighty Persecutors under whom they have lived (who have
been stronger than they) the four great worldly Monarchies, viz: Babylonian,
Persian, Grecian, and Roman, set forth by the four terrible Beasts mentioned
Dan. 7. whose natures are to tear and devour: of which the last (under whose
power yet they are) is most dreadful, and exceeding strong: whereupon they
ever did, and (being not yet delivered out of the hands of all the mighty Ones
that hate them) do still want the help of some other.

Secondly, The sore bondage and oppression whieh their enemies have, and do
keep them in (for the seed of the Serpent especially being prevalent, cannot
but persecute the seed of the woman) by reason of which they have in their
several Generations sighed, groaned, and howled (as they do also to this very
day in the Nations of the world, do plainly show that they have, and still
stand in need of a stronger arm than their own to deliver them.

Thirdly, The strong cries, and earnest prayers heretofore, and now also put up
to the Lord for help (which else were to no purpose, except to mock the
Almighty) do speak aloud the truth of this Assertion; That their condition is
such, as they stand in need of help. And it is not the worse, but the better
for the people of God, that their condition is thus; for though it be a
manifest evidence and demonstration of their own weakness, and
self-insufficiency; yet the great goodness and deep w^sdom of God is in it,
thereby withholding occasion from them of trusting, and glorying in themselves
(an evil which they are exceedingly prone to) and as it were necessitating them
(of whom otherwise he should too seldom hear) to a daily recourse to, and
continual dependence upon himself for help in every time of need; by means of
which they are safely preserved, and their Heavenly Father is daily glorified.

Secondly, Observe; The Lord himself does provide help for his people in their
several conditions.

I have laid help, etc. He does not leave them without help in trouble (as the
gods of the Heathen do those that serve them) neither does he leave it to
others who are unable and cannot, or unfaithful and will not do it; but that
they may not be failed in any time of need (they being a peculiar treasure unto
him above all people) he undertakes it himself for them (though he does
oftentimes make the meanest and weakest creatures an help to them,) so that
they may truly say, Our help comes from the Lord which made Heaven and Earth.
And this is the great privilege and advantage which the people of God have
above others, that they are the people whom the Lord cares for, according to
that of Jacob, Deuteronomy. 33. ult. Happy art thou O Israel, who is like unto thee O
people saved by the Lord, the shield of thy help, and who is the sword of thy
excellency.

Thirdly, Observe; The Lord does lay in a sufficiency of help for his people in
their various conditions.

What God does, he does to purpose; he dispenceth full mercies and blessings to
his people. I have laid help upon One that is Mighty. The Lord lays in a
sufficiency of help for service, as also to save and deliver out of trouble.

Sometimes he lays help upon Angels, those Mighty Ones, who excel in
strength, for his people, as he did in Hezekiahs time, he sent an Angel who
smote in one night 185000 in the Camp of the Assyrians, Isa. 37.36. He sent an
Angel to the help of the three children in the exceeding hot furnace, who did
sufficiently help, For the fire had no power upon their bodies, nor was an hair
of their head singed, neither were their Coats changed, nor the smell of fire
had passed on them, Dan. 3.27. And also to Daniel, when he was in the Lions
Den, who did help effectually, for he was taken up out of the Den, and no
manner of hurt was found upon him, Dan. 6.23. And likewise to Peter in Prison,
Acts 12.7, 10.

Sometimes he lays help upon men, who of weak, he makes mighty to help; he
made Moses and Joshua mighty ones, and sent them to the help of his people, he
made Gideon a mighty man of valor, and said unto him, Go in this thy might,
and thou shall save Israel from the hand of the Midianites; he made Ehud a man
left handed, as also Deborah a woman, mighty for the help and deliverance of
his people. ( Jude 3.4.)

Sometimes he lays help upon other Creatures, as upon the Stars, Judge. 5.20.
The Stars in their courses fought against Sisera; upon Hailstones, for with
them the Lord help Israel against the five Kings of the Amorites, and it was
help sufficient, for they were more which dyed with hailstones, then they whom
the children of Israel slew. ( Jude 10.11.)

Reasons why the Lord does lay in a sufficiency of help for his people.

Reason 1. From that All Sufficiency, and perfection of power which is in the
Lord; every thing as it is in Essence and Being, so it is in act and operation;
and according to this Maxim, the Psalmist sings of the Lord, Psalm. 147.5. Great
is our Lord, and of great power. As also, Psalm. 86.10. Thou art great, and do
wondrous things; so that the Lord being Allmighty, and All-sufficient in
himself; for him to lay in a sufficiency of help for his people, is but to act
according to himself.

Reason 2. From that height of affection which is in the Lord toward his
people, they being his peculiar treasure above all people, his sons and
daughters, the people of his love; this Moses mentions as the cause of that
sufficiency of help which the Lord afforded to them in Egypt, Deuteronomy. 7.8.
Because the Lord loved you, etc. has the Lord brought you out with a mighty
hand, and redeemed you out of the house of Bondmen, from the hand of Pharaoh
King of Egypt. This is also recorded, Jer. 31.3.9. as the reason of the great
things God will do for Israel. -- I have loved thee with an everlasting love.
-- For I am a Father to Israel, and Ephraim is my firstborn.

Reason 3. From his exceeding tenderness of his own Name, lest that should
suffer, upon this account the Lord often spared his people, Ezekiel. 20.9.14.22.44.
I wrought for my Names sake, that it should not be polluted before the Heathen.
So God will help sufficiently fot his Name sake, lest the enemy (who is always
ready to blaspheme) should reproach him, and either say, God would not help his
people according to their need, and so the glory of his goodness should be
somewhat darkened; or else he could not, and so the glory of his power should be
eclipsed; with this Argument Moses pleaded with God to help and save his
people, Numb: 14.13, 14, 15, 16. Deuteronomy. 9.26, 27, 28.

I shall add no more to the confirmation of that which the Saints of the most
High have so much experienced in their several Generations. And leave also the
improvement of all to Gods faithful Ones in their various conditions; and
hasten unto a more strict and particular consideration of the words, which will
afford these two Observations;

First, That Christ Jesus is a Mighty One.

Secondly, That the Lord has appointed this Mighty One to be for an help to
his people.

First, Christ Jesus is a Mighty One.

The Psalmist singing of him, says, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most
Mighty, Psalm. 45, 3. Isaiah prophesying of him, says, His Name shall be called
Wonderful, Counselor, The Mighty God, Isaiah 9.6. The Angel declaring unto
Mary his Mother what manner of Son he should be, says, He shall be great, and
called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him the Throne
of his father David, etc. Luke 1.32. John also testifying of him according to
the Revelation of him which God gave unto him, calls him Allmighty, Rev: 1.8.
I shall forbear to add more particular places, the whole Scriptures both of the
Old, and New Testament, being a large proof of this thing.

Mighty, is a word of large Extent, and of various Acceptance. Sometimes it is
taken Generally, for any eminent, excellent One, that is greater than others;
so it is used Gen: 10.8. where it is said of Nimrod, He began to be a Mighty
One in the earth, i. e. One great, and famous, excelling others; and in this
sense Christ is a Mighty One, greater than others, In all things having the
pre-eminence; as the Apostle speaks, and as shall be showed at large.

Sometimes it is taken particularly, and specially.

First, For one that is rich and wealthy; thus it is used Ruth 2.1. where it is
said, Naomi had a kinsman of her husbands a mighty man of wealth. Also 2 Kings
15.20. The rich man is usually called mighty: in this respect Christ is a
Mighty One, he is a rich, wealthy One, and that both in respect of

1. Spiritual and Heavenly things, he is so rich, That in him dwells all the
fulness of the Godhead bodily. He has more of the Spirit than others, being
full of all grace, wisdom, and knowledge; yea, full of Unsearchable Riches,
according to that of Paul, Ephesians. 3.8. That I should preach among the Gentiles,
the unsearchable Riches of Christ.

2. All other things, for he is heir of all things, Heb. 1.2. All corn, wine,
wool, and flax, all the beasts of the Forest, and the Cattle upon a thousand
hills, all the Fowls of the mountains, and every thing that moves in the
waters, are his; yea, the earth is his, and the fulness thereof, the round
world, and all that dwell therein, Psalm. 24.1. See what an inheritance his
father has given him, Psalm. 2.8.

Secondly, For one that has power and strength: strong men are mighty men; and
in this sense Christ is a Mighty One, being full of power and strength. The
Apostle speaking of him, says 1 Cor. 1.24. Christ, the power of God.

Thirdly, For one that is exceeding valiant, that does most vigorously put
forth, and act his strength, such an one is said to be a mighty man of valor,
full of courage, in this sense also, Christ is a Mighty One; he has not only
strength, but he does mightily exert, and put it forth, so that he makes his
power to be seen, the very spirit of Might does rest upon him, Isa. 11.2.
which he does show forth in all his works.

Fourthly, For one that has rule, and Authority, he is a Mighty One, and thus
Christ is a Mighty One.

First, He is Mighty in regard of the extent, and universality of his power,
and Authority, as to the subject of it; it is over all, for God has put All
things in subjection under his feet; he has left nothing that is not put under
him, he has

First, All in the Church under him, All Ordinances, all offices, all gifts,
all Administrations, all consciences under him, Ephesians. 1.22. He has put all
things under his feet, and gave him to be the head over all things to the
Church.

Secondly, All in Heaven under him, he said of himself, Math. 28.18. All power
is given unto me in Heaven; and it is said, 1 Pet. 3.22. that he is gone into
Heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and powers
being made subject to him, so that all in heaven is under him, the Father only
excepted, who did put all things under him, 1 Cor. 15.27.

Thirdly, All in Hell under him, the Devils themselves being subject unto him.

Fourthly, All in this world under him, He has all principality, power, might
and Dominion under him; he has power over all the Kings, and Kingdoms of the
world, therefore he is said to be the Prince of the Kings of the Earth, and to
be Lord of Lords, and King of Kings, Rev. 1.5. and 17.14.

Fifthly, All in the world to come under him; so much is hinted, Heb. 2.5, 8.
For unto the Angels has he not put in subjection the world to come, that is,
Honor peculiar to his Son, under whose feet he has put all things in
subjection (though now we see not yet all things put under him) so much is
expressed Ephesians. 1.20. God has set him at his own right hand in the heavenly
places, far above all principality, and power, and might, and dominion, and
every name that is named not only in this world, but also in that which is to
come.

Secondly, He is Mighty in rule, and Authority, in regard of the Measure of it,
he has not only power over all, but he has all power over all, Math. 28.18.
All power is given unto me in Heaven, and Earth; he has an Absolute dispose of
all things; he does whatsoever he will in the Church, in Heaven, in Earth, in
Hell; God has set him up over all, and left all things to him. Joh. 5.22. The
Father judges no man, but has committed all Judgment to the Son, so that he
has power to set up, and pull down, to save and to destroy, what and whom he
will. Thus it appears that Christ Jesus is a Mighty one in every sense, and
acceptance of the word.

Christ may be Considered,

First, In respect of his Eternal Essence, and being, as he was one with the
Father before the Foundation of the world was laid, and so considered he is a
Mighty One, the only Mighty One from everlasting, the true God blessed for
ever; the Apostle speaking of him with reference to his eternal essence,
says, Phil. 2.6. Being in the Form of God, thought it not Robbery to be
equal with God; thus he is the Mightiest, Highest God.

Secondly, In respect of his Mediatourship as he took upon him to come between
God, and man, to transact all matters between them; and thus considered, he is
a Mighty One.

Four things especially about his Mediatourship in General, speak forth the
Mightiness of Christ.
First, The singularity, and oneness of the person Mediating, not Many, not a
Few, not two, but One Mediator between God, and man, the Man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.5. There was none with him in his difficult work of Mediatorship, but
he carried it on alone, there was none with him to help him, therefore his own
Arm brought salvation both unto him, and us, which speaks him to be a Mighty
One; Moses was a Mighty one, in that he stood, and that alone between the Lord,
and the Children of Israel on the Mountain, and yet but a shadow of this One
great Mediator, Christ Jesus.

Secondly, The Greatness of the persons between whom he does Mediate, he is
usually a Mighty One that is Mediator between either Mighty Persons or Nations,
even the greatest, mightiest, and most excellent One they can find, then how
Mighty must he be that is Mediator between the Almighty, Highest God, and Man
the chief of the Creatures.

Thirdly, The weightinesse of the Matter it being of greatest concernment, no
less than the bringing of souls (which were afar off) unto God, 1 Pet. 3.18.
the making sinners righteous, yea righteousness, 2 Cor. 5.21; the reconciling
all things in heaven, and earth unto God, Col. 1.20. the turning away Gods
wrath from sinners, the destroying of the enmity that is in their minds against
him, and so the salvation of them that are lost.

Fourthly, The exact performance, and accomplishment of the whole business;
According to what was prophesied of him, Dan. 9.24. He did make reconciliation
for iniquity, and brought in Everlasting Righteousness; He did not begin, do
something, and then faint, and leave his work imperfect, but he finished it,
and that to the Glory of his Father that sent him; as himself testifies in
his prayer to his Father, Joh. 17.4. I have glorified thee on the Earth, I have
finished the work which thou gave me to do; surely he is a Mighty One.

Demonstrations of the Mightiness of Christ, the Mediator.
First, He is a Mighty One in his Original, and rise, from whence he came;
himself told the Jews, Joh. 8.23. That he was from above, and not of this
World, and that he proceeded forth, and came from God: When John heard he was
come, and manifested himself by preaching, and Baptizing, magnified him upon
this account, Joh. 3.31. He that comes from above is above all; He that comes
from Heaven is above all; And by this the Apostle does distinguish him from,
and exalt him above the first Adam, 1 Cor. 15.47. The first man is of the Earth
Earthly, the second man is the Lord from Heaven.

Secondly, He is a Mighty One in the first promise of him, the first hint, and
report of him is of a Mighty One, a Conqueror of the Devil, In that this
blessed seed of the Woman should bruise the Serpents head, according as it is
written, Genesis 3.15. I will put Enmity between thee, and the Woman, and between
thy seed, and her seed; It shall bruise thy head, and thou shall bruise his
heel; the first appearance, and coming forth of Christ in the promise, is as
of a Mighty one prevailing against man's mightiest Enemy, the Devil.

Thirdly, He is a Mighty One in the Types of him:

First, In the multitude of them, every thing almost (which was before him)
being a Type, and shadow of him, as the Passover, Rock, Mannah,
Brazen-Serpent, 1 Cor. 5.7. Joh. 6.32, 48, 50. 1 Cor. 10.4. Joh. 3.14, 15. The
Priests, Tabernacle, Altar, Sanctuary, the Feasts, Sacrifices, and all the
Ceremonial rites, Col. 2.16, 17. Heb. 1. ad 11 verse; Aarons Bells (as one
says) sounded Jesus Christ, and him crucified; surely he is some Mighty one
indeed that the Lord did fore-signifie by so many things.

Secondly, In the Mightiness of them (I mean the personal Types of him) who
were not mean, but mighty ones; As Adam whom God made so mighty, giving him
Lordship over the Creatures, was a type of him that then was to come, Romans
5.14. Melchisedec that great, and mighty one, of whose greatness the Apostle
exhorts the Hebrews to consider, Heb. 7.4. Now consider how great this man was,
unto whom even the Patriarch Abraham gave the tenth of the spoils; was a Type
of Christ. Moses, Josuah, David, those Great, and eminent Saviors and
Deliverers of the Children of Israel were but types and shaddows of that Great,
and mighty Savior, and Deliverer of his people, Jesus Christ. And if the
shaddows be thus Mighty, the body, and substance must be very Mighty.

Fourthly, He is a Mighty One in the Prophecies of him, I shall not lay any
weight upon the predictions of him to the Gentiles by the famous Sybils (to
whom much is attributed by some) who are said to Prophecy of him as of a Mighty
One, an universal King, that should be Lord over Romans and all others;

Nor yet upon Diabolical Oracles mentioned in History, as the Answer of Apollo
from Delphos to Augustus Caesar the Emperor (demanding of him, who should
reign after him) after long waiting, That an Hebrew child that rules over the
blessed Gods, commands me to leave this Habitation, and out of hand to get me
to Hell, but yet do you depart in silence from our Altars; which caused
Augustus, after much musing, to return to Rome, and to build there an Altar in
the Capital, with this Inscription (as Nicephorus affirms) Ara primogeniti
Dei, The Altar of Gods first begotten Son: But I pass by these things, and
shall speak of him only as he is prophesied of in the holy Scriptures,
according to which he will appear to be a very Mighty One.

First, In that he was prophesied of at all, for the Prophets for the most part
foretold of great things to come to pass. Great changes, and alterations in
the world, Great deliverances, Great prosperity, Great Judgments, and
desolations, Great Wars, Famines, Pestilences; as also of Great and Mighty
Persons, Families, Cities, Nations, as of the five Mighty Monarchies, the Man
of sin, that mighty one, who opposes, and exalts himself above all that is
called God, 2 These. 2.4. the Mighty Beast, whom the world worship, saying, Who
is like the Beast? who is able to make war with him? Rev. 13.4. The Great
Whore, that sits upon many waters, and the false Prophet that works
Miracles; so that Christ is a Mighty One, being One prophesied of.

Secondly, In that he is prophesied of by all the Prophets in their several
ages, and generations, Gods holy Prophets which have been since the world
began, have prophesied of him, Luke 1.70. As Christ was in the way with the two
Disciples going to Emaus, beginning at Moses, and All the Prophets, he
expounded unto them in all the Scriptures, the things concerning himself;
there was something in Moses, and all the Prophets concerning him; And this does
accord with what he minded his Disciples of, which he had formerly spoke to
them, That all things must be fulfilled which were written in the Law of Moses,
and in the Prophets, and in the Psalms concerning him, Luke 24, 27, 44. Philip
having seen Jesus, speaks of him with Great affection to Nathaniel, as of a
Mighty One upon this very account, We have found him of whom Moses in the Law
and the Prophets did write, Jesus of Nazareth, the son of Joseph, Joh. 1.45.
And Peter told the Jews, that God showed by the mouth of All his Prophets, that
Christ should suffer, Acts 3.18. And speaking of Christ to Cornelius, and those
with him, says, To him give All the Prophets witness, etc. Acts 10.43. Surely
he is a Mighty One of whom all the Prophets have spoken.

Thirdly, In that All of Christ is prophesied of, not only his sufferings, and
the glory which should follow, in the General, but his coming, the time, the
Tribe out of which he should spring, his birth, the place thereof, his offices,
works, particular sufferings, death, resurrection, Ascension, session, and
coming again, and whatsoever else was, and is to be fulfilled in him, and by
him, is spoken of in the Prophets; And certainly he is no Ordinary Person whom
the Spirit of God did so carefully predeclare in all things belonging to him.

Fourthly, In that he is the sum, and All of the Prophecies; for what are
they but Christ in his Sufferings, and Glory, they having all some reference,
and tendency unto him; yea all the Great things prophesied of, as the
Conversion of the Jews, the coming in of the fullness of the Gentiles, the
pulling down high, and lofty things, the establishing of Justice and
righteousness in the Earth, the pouring out of more abundance of the Spirit,
and all other Great things, are in a subserviency unto him, and have a special
reference to his exaltation, and kingdom.

Fifthly, In the Matter of the prophecies concerning him, which I shall reduce
to these three heads.

First, What he shall be, and have; Balam prophesying of Isreal's happiness,
says, His King shall be higher then Agag, and his kngdome shall he exalted*
out of Jacob shall come he that shall have dominion, Numb. 24.7, 19. The
Psalmist speaking of Christ, says, That he shall have the Heathen for his
Inheritance, and the uttermost parts of the earth for his possession, Psalm.
2.8. He shall be exalted, extolled, and be very high, Isa. 52.13. He shall have
a portion with the Great, and divide the spoil with the strong, Isa. 53.12. He
shall not only be Ruler in Israel, but also Great unto the ends of the Earth,
Micah 5.2, 4. Yea, he shall be King over all the Earth, Zach. 14.9.

Secondly, What he shall do; He shall judge the poor of the people, he shall
save the children of the needy, and shall break in pieces the Oppressor, Psalm.
72.4. He shall rule in the midst of his Enemies, he shall Judge among the
Heathen, he shall fill the places with the dead bodies, he shall wound the
Heads over many Countries, Psalm. 110.2, 6. He shall smite the Earth with the
rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked,
Isa. 11.4. He shall reign and prosper, and shall execute Judgment and Justice
in the earth; He shall build the Temple of the Lord, and he shall bear the
Glory, and shall sit and rule upon his Throne, Zach. 6.13. He shall overcome
the Beast, and the Kings of the earth, Rev. 17.14. and 19.19, 20. These and
other mighty things are spoken of Christ that he should do.

Thirdly, What others shall be, and do toward him. Unto him shall the
Gathering of the people be, Genesis 49.10. To him shall the Gentil^s seek, Isa.
11.10. The Kings shall shut their mouths at him, they shall be dumb, and not
dare to speak in his presence, Isa. 52.15. They that dwell in the Wilderness
shall bow before him, and his Enemies shall lick the dust; The Kings of
Tarshish, and the Isles shall bring presents; the Kings of Sheba and Seba shall
offer gifts; yea all Kings shall fall down before him, and all Nations shall
serve him, Psalm. 72.9, 10, 11. At his Name every knee shall bow, of things in
heaven, and things in earth and things under the earth, and every tongue shall
confess that he is Lord, Phil. 2.10, 11. All which speak Christ to be a Mighty
One.

Fifthly, He is a Mighty One in the expectation of the people.

First, In the expectation it self; he was one looked for before his coming, the
people were in expectation of him, and the expectation of the people is not
ordinarily of mean and ordinary persons, like themselves but of great and
mighty ones, of such, as some way or other excel others.

Secondly, In the nature and manner of their expectation, it was not a faint
and dull, but a strong and earnest expectation; they did expect him, and expect
him much, they did expect him with desire and longing, according to his own
words to his Disciples, I tell you that many Prophets and Kings have desired to
see those things which ye see, and to hear those things which ye hear, Luke
10.24. Therefore when God sent any one into the world more excellent than
others, they thought it might be he. The Jews as soon as they heard of John
Baptist preaching and baptizing in the wilderness, sent Priests and Levites
from Jerusalem to ask him, Who he was? suspecting he might be the Christ, John
1.19. And when Christ was come, they not knowing it was he, came round about
him as he was in Temple, and said unto him, How long do thou make us to
doubt? (or Do thou kill us? (...)) If thou be the Christ tell us plainly,
John 10.24. So great, and earnest was their expectation of him, and surely he
is some mighty, excellent one indeed, that is the strong and earnest
expectation of the people.

Thirdly, In the matter of their expectation, as they looked that he should
come, so they looked that he should be a Mighty One, and do great things when
he came, That he should be a Redeemer of Israel, a Restorer of the Kingdom,
which is evident from the words of the two desponding Disciples to himself, We
trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24.21. And
so much may be gathered from the words of the woman of Samaria to him, I know
that Messiah comes, which is called Christ, when he is come he will tell us
all things, Jo. 4.25. Her expectation of him was as of a Mighty One, surpassing
all the Prophets which were before; and such was the expectation of Simeon,
Luke 2.25. He waited for the consolation of Israel, whom when he saw, he called
Gods salvation, verse. 30.

Fourthly, In the continuance of their expectation, they waited long in their
Generations, and though he came not, yet they held up their expectation of him,
and did not faint in their minds, but lived and dyed in expectation of him.

Sixthly, A Mighty One in his Forerunner.

First, In that he had a forerunner, they are Mighty, not mean ones that have
forerunners to prepare the way for their coming, such an One was Christ.

Secondly, In that he had such a forerunner, a Mighty One, for so the Angel
described him to his Father, Luke 1.15, 16, 17. He shall be great in the sight
of the Lord, he shall be filled with the Holy Ghost, even from his mothers
womb, and many of the children of Israel shall he turn to the Lord their God,
and shall go before him in the spirit and power of Elias; etc. And so his
Father being filled with the holy Spirit prophesied of him, verse. 76. Thou
child shall be called the Prophet of the highest, for thou shall go before the
face of the Lord, to prepare his way: Yea, he was so mighty as Christ himself
testifies of him, That among them that are born of women, there has not risen
a greater than John; and yet he but Christ's forerunner; he that comes after,
is always mightier than the forerunner, and so John witnessed, He that comes
after me is mightier than I, Matthew. 3.11.

Seventhly, A Mighty One in his Incarnation: That he who is over all, God
blessed for ever, should take our flesh, and dwell among us; that there should
be a conjunction of two so infinitely differing Natures, the Divine and Humane,
in the Unity of one Person, remaining uncompounded, and unconfounded together,
that he in whom the fulness of the manhood dwells, is not One, and he in
whom the fulness of the Godhead, another; but he in whom the fullness of
both natures dwells, is one and the same, is very wonderful, and a great
Mystery, and must needs speak the person to be some mighty and extraordinary
One indeed, being both perfect God, and perfect man, and so every way fit for
any undertaking, to do and suffer any thing; for as man he could suffer, but
not overcome the sharpness of death, as God he could suffer nothing, but
overcome any thing; and thus incarnate, he became a Mighty One in our Nature
for us, fit to save us.

The Incarnation of Christ does especially comprehend his conception and birth,
in both which he appears to be a Mighty One.

First, In his Conception, which was not common nor ordinary, for he was not
conceived by the power of Nature, as all other Mighty Ones are, but By the
power of the Holy Spirit, Matthew. 1.18. His Mother Mary was found with Child of
the Holy Ghost, according to the word of the Angel to her, Luke 1.35. The Holy
Ghost shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshaddow
thee. Nonus modus novi hominis, A new way of conceiving this new man; for a
woman that knew not man to conceive a man in her womb, is the new and strange
thing which the Lord has created in the earth; A woman shall compass a man,
Jer. 31.21. And while Joseph was troubled about this matter, an Angel was sent
from Heaven to satisfy him, which said to him, Fear not to take unto thee Mary
thy wife, for that which is conceived in her is of the Holy Ghost, Matthew. 1.20.
Certainly he was some Mighty One, who was thus conceived, and whose Conception
was thus declared and confirmed by Angels.

Secondly, In his Birth, he was not only born, but born a Mighty One, a
Savior, according to the word of the Angel to the Shepherds, Luke 2.11. Unto
you is born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.
A King, as the Wise men styled him in their inquiry after him, Math. 2.2. Where
is he that is born King of the Jews? And he was not only Mighty in his birth,
because he was born a Mighty One, but also in his birth it self, it being a
more than ordinary birth, To awake (says one) the world to look for strange
things in this life, to signify that he should be a Mighty One, and do
wonderful things, the strange Births of persons did usually speak some
Extraordinarines to be in their lives, as in Isaac, Jacob, Samuel, Sampson, etc.

The Mightiness of Christ in his Birth will further appear.
First, In the subject of it, not only a Woman, but a Virgin, so wonderful a
thing that it was given for a sign unto unbelievers diverse hundred of years
before it was accomplished, even a sign of Gods own choosing among all the
wonders in the depth, and in the height above, Isa: 7.11.14. The Virgin bearing
this Son against the common order of Nature, without a man, whence he is called
The seed of the Woman; this Mary thought a thing impossible, when it was told
her by the Angel, and said, How shall this be seeing I know not man? Luke 1.34.

Secondly, In the time of it, when the three Monarchies of the Assyrians,
Persians, and Grecians were ended, and the Romans entered into the fourth, which
was greater and mightier than the former; this Mighty One the Lord Jesus Christ
durst show himself in his lowest and weakest estate, when the world was at the
highest and strongest, and then begin to build up a Kingdom.

Thirdly, In the Concomitants of it; diverse remarkable things accompanied his
Birth, which speaks forth his Mightiness. As

First, The message of the Angel to the Shepherds, Luke 1.10, 11. Behold, I
bring you good tidings of great joy, which shall be to all People; For unto you
is born this day in the City of David, a Savior, which is Christ the Lord.

Secondly, The praisings of the Host, the Shepherds they glorified and praised
God for what they had heard and seen; but men of the earth are not sufficient
for this thing, and therefore a Quire is sent from Heaven to rejoice and sing
praises to the Most High for this Heavenly and unspeakable gift, Luke 2.13.
Suddenly, there was with the Angel a multitude of the Heavenly Host praising
God. These extraordinary praises speak the person born to be some great and
Mighty One.

Thirdly, The homage of the Wise men, That they should come to tender their
homage and service to this Infant, and not unto Herod, nor Agustus Caesar, of
whose greatness no doubt they had heard (but did not esteem nor regard it in
comparison of this late born King of the Jews) speaks Christ to be a Mighty
One; especially if we consider

First, The quality of their Persons; if because (...), Wise men, is usually
taken in the worst sense, for men practicing Magical and unlawful Arts, it
should be understood so in this place; it shows forth the more of the
Mightiness and Power of Christ, when men that had been of such a profession
become such professors of Christ of any among the Gentiles, as to come and do
homage to him: howsoever, forasmuch as they were (as is most likely, not of the
meaner sort, nor yet persons of ordinary and common gifts, but men of learning,
understanding, wisdom, and of high esteem among the People; it holds forth the
greatness and excelleny of Christ, that such should come so early, and submit
themselves to him

Secondly, The greatness of their pains, without doubt it was a long and
tedious journey they took, although we cannot tell exactly how far they came,
because the particular term from whence (at which diverse have diversely
conjectured) is not to be found in Scripture, only it is said (with an (...),
Behold, prefixed, as a matter of admiration, that they should come, and come so
far) They came from the East to Jerusalem, and surely they would not have
undertaken such a journey with regard to an ordinary common person.

Thirdly, The reality and fullness of their homage; it was not in word, and in
tongue only, but in truth and in deed; we do not read of any thing they said
to him, but of what they did, and that was much, they first gave themselves an
oblation to this great King, and then made offering of their gifts; For they
fell down and worshipped him, and when they had opened their treasures, they
presented unto him Gifts, Gold and Frankincense, and myrrh, Matthew. 2.11. They
would not have tendered such large homage to a mean one.

Fourthly, The eminent appearing of God for their direction to him, and
preservation in returning; a Star did lead them to the very place where he was
for it is said, Math. 2.9. Lo, the Star which they saw in the East went before
them till it came and stood over where the young Child was. And for their
preservation, God did warn them in a dream, that they should not return to
Herod, and they departed into their own Country another way.

Fourthly, The dread of the Mighty, even of King Herod and all Jerusalem with
him, for it is said, When Herod the King heard these things (viz: of one born
King of the Jews, and of persons come to worship him) he was troubled,
terrified, yea, he shaked with fear, (Mat. 2.3.) so that Christ was a Mighty
One in his Birth.

Eighthly, Christ is a Mighty One in his Descent, even after the flesh.

First, In respect of his stock in general, for he was descended of the
Patriarchs, he was of the stock of Abraham, that Mighty One; the Jews counted
it a great privilege above what the Gentiles had, That they had Abraham to
their Father, that they were of his stock, branches of that root, Christ was
also a son of Abraham.

Secondly, In respect of his Tribe out of which he sprang, Judah; for it is
evident that our Lord sprang out of Judah, and it is as evident also, that
Judah was the mightiest Tribe, both according to Jacobs, and Moses blessing of
him, Gen: 49.8. Judah, thou art he whom thy brethren shall praise, thine hand
shall be in the neck of thine enemies, thy fathers children shall bow before
thee, Judah is a Lions whelp, etc. Deuteronomy. 33.7. Let his hands be sufficient for
him, and be thou an help to him from his e^emies. Judah was Standard Bearer in
the foremost Quarter as the children of Israel encamped about the Tabernacle,
Numb: 2.3. And Judah's Standard (Lyon-like) marched in the first place, as they
marched toward the Land of Canaan, Numb: 10.13, 14. and of this mighty Tribe
was Christ, yea, he was the Mighty One of this Tribe, The Lion of the Tribe of
Judah, Rev: 5.5.

Further, Judah was the Royal Tribe, the Royalty of a Kingdom appertained to
it, Gen: 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah, etc. The Kings and
Rulers descended from thence; and this speaks the mightiness and exeellency of
Christ, that he was of this Tribe, hence Mr. Perkins says, That Christ was the
most excellent and notable One that ever was, descending of the eternal
Father, as he is the Son of God, and as he is man descending of the Patriarchs,
and of the renowned Kings of Judah. And it is storied that it remains
registered in the Jews Talmud it self, That Jesus of Nazareth crucified, was of
the blood royal from Zorobabel of the house of David; so that he is a Mighty
One in his Descent.

Ninthly, Mighty in his Name; Isaiah prophesying of him, says, Chapter 9.6. His
Name shall be called Wonderful, Counselor, the Mighty God, the Everlasting
Father, the Prince of Peace, Jesus, for he shall save his people from their
sins, Immanuel, the Word of God; his name speak forth his excellency and might,
not that there is any might and virtue in the bare name it self, as consisting
of so many letters, as some have fondly conceited, that the bare name of Christ
used, had power to drive away the Devil, and that the name of Christ written
and carried about with them, was of efficacy to keep them from danger, but his
name declare his nature, for as his name is, so is he; it is not with Christ in
this respect as with some who had names contrary to their natures, and
dispositions to hide their weaknesses, and wickednesses, as the Impius named
Pius; the Coward, Leo; the Cruel, Clemens; the Oppressor, Innocentius, the
Earthly-minded, Celestinus.

Tenthly, Mighty in his Titles, I shall name a few; The Captain of Salvation,
Ruler in Israel, The Consolation of Israel, The Horn of Salvation, The
Deliverer, The Power and wisdom of God, The Lion of the Tribe of Judah, Lord,
The Lord frequently. It is diverse hundred times simply and absolutely ascribed
unto Christ, The Lord of the Harvest, The Lord of the Vineyard, The Lord of the
Sabbath, The Lord our Righteousness, The Lord of Life, The Lord of Glory, Lord
of Lords, King of Kings.

Eleventhly, He was a Mighty One in his Presentation, which though in it self,
it was but for his Parents to do for him after the custom of the Law, in which
respect he was but as others, yet that two such eminent persons, both of
singular sanctity among the Jews, should (by the special direction of the
Spirit) come into the Temple at that time when Jesus was there in his mothers
arms, and acknowledge, and declare him publicly, with great affection and
thanksgiving to be the Messiah and Savior of the world, does speak him to be
some Mighty One, Luke 2. from the 22. to the 40. verse.

Twelfthly, Mighty in his Baptism, which though in it self, it was but
ordinary, with water by John in Jordan, both as, and where others were, and by
him also by whom others were baptized, yet it was attended with three wonders;
For straightway coming up out of the waters, the Heavens were opened unto him,
and the Spirit of God descended like a Dove and lighted upon him, and there
came a voice from Heaven, saying, This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well-pleased, Matthew. 3.16, 17.

Thirteenthly, Mighty in his fasting, so mighty that he fasted forty days and
forty nights, Matthew. 4.2. And it was not a partial, but a total abstinence from
natural food, for in those days he did eat nothing, Luke 4.2. Neither was he
hungry all that time (for so much is necessarily employed, Matt. 4.2. When he
had fasted forty days and forty nights, he was afterward an hungered. And Luke
(having spoken of the forty days, the time of his fast) says, When they were
ended, he afterward hungered. Moses indeed fasted the same space of time, but
there was this considerable difference between Christ and Moses in this
respect: Moses fasted on the Mount, where he was eminently assisted, and
satisfied by his best and greatest friend, The Lord, Exodus: 34.28. Christ in the
Wilderness where he was violently assaulted, and troubled by his worst and
mightiest adversary the Devil, Matthew. 4.1, 2. This is enough to manifest his
mightiness in this particular.

Fourteenthly, Mighty in his Transfiguration, which was a glimpse of his Glory,
he was transfigured before the Disciples, And his face did shine as the Sun,
and his raiment was white as the light; so exceedingly glorious was he, Peter
was so affected with it, as he desired the continuance of it, he said unto
Jesus, Lord it is good for us to be here, if thou will let us make here three
Tabernacles, etc. Math. 17.2, 3, 4, 5.

Fifteenthly, Mighty in the Testimony which is given of him.

First, The Testimony of himself, I am one that bear witness of my self, John
8.18. And he did testify of himself, that he was a mighty One, That he was the
son of God, Greater than the Temple, greater than Solomon, That he had overcome
the world, That if a man had kept his saying, he should never see death, etc.
and his own testimony is true. But forasmuch as Solomon says, Prove: 27.2. Let
another man praise thee, and not thine own mouth, a stranger, and not thine own
lips. I shall consider chiefly what others witness of him.

Secondly. The Testimony of the Father who sent him, bare witness of him, The
Father has testified from Heaven that he is his beloved Son, Matthew. 3.17. Lo a
voice from Heaven, saying, this is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased.
The Author to the Hebrews notes, that when God brings in the first begotten
into the world, he says, And let all the Angels of God worship him, Unto the
Son (says he) Thy Throne O God is for ever and ever, Heb. 1, 6, 8. The Father
testify of him as of a mighty One.

Thirdly, The Testimony of the Spirit, I shall instance only in that to John by
Vision, Rev: 1.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. I saw seven golden Candlesticks, and in the
midst of the seven Candlesticks one like unto the Son of man, clothed with a
Garment down to the foot, and girt about the Paps with a Golden Girdle, his
head and his hairs were white like Wool, as white as Snow, and his eyes were as
a flame of fire, and his feet like unto fine brass, as if they burned in a
Furnace, and his voice as the sound of many waters. And he had in his right
hand seven Stars, and out of his mouth went a sharp two edged sword, and his
Countenance was as the Sun shines in his strength, This was a Vision of the
Son of God, The mighty One.

And according to this Vision are those seven Titles of Christ, given to him by
the Spirit, mentioned in the 2d. and 3d. Chapters of the Revelation.

These things says he that holds the seven Stars in his right hand, who
walks in the midst of the seven Golden Candlesticks, Rev: 2.1.

The first and the last, which was dead, and is alive, verse. 8.

Who has the sharp Sword with two edges, verse. 12.

The Son of God who has his eyes like unto a flame of fire, and his feet are
like fine Brass, verse. 18.

That has the seven Spirits of God, and the seven Stars, Rev. 3.1.

That is holy, that is true, that has the Key of David, he that opens, and
no man shuts, and shuts, and no man opens, verse. 7.

The Amen, the faithful and true Witness, the Beginning of the Creation of
God, verse. 14. All which speak forth the mightiness of Christ

Fourthly, The Testimony of faithful men, as the Testimony of the Prophets, of
John who was a man sent from God on purpose to bear witness of him; whose
testimony of him is recorded, John 1.15.32, 33, 34. The testimony of the four
Evangelists, as also of the Apostles, who have all spoken of him, as of a
Mighty One; And it were easy (if needful) to add the Testimony of other
Ancient Writers, of General Councels, of holy Martyrs, and many eminent
Confessors of Christ, who do agree in their Testimony with those forementioned.

Fifthly, The Testimony of Angels, those glorious Creatures did testify of
him, as of a Mighty One, so they testified of him.

To Joseph, Math. 1.20, 21. While he thought on these things, the Angel of the
Lord appeared unto him in a dream, saying, Joseph, thou son of David, fear
not to take unto thee Mary thy wife; for that which is conceived in her is of
the holy Ghost. And she shall bring forth a son, and thou shall call his Name
Jesus; for he shall save his people from their sins.

To Mary, Luke 1.30, 31, 32, 33. The Angel said unto her, fear not, Mary, for
thou have found favor with God; And behold, thou shall conceive in thy womb,
and bring forth a son, and shall call his Name Jesus, he shall be great, and
shall be called the Son of the Highest, and the Lord God shall give unto him
the throne of his father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever, and of his kingdom there shall be no end.

To the Shepherds, Luke 2.10, 11. The Angel said unto them, fear not; for
behold, I bring you good tidings of Great joy which shall be to all people; for
unto you is borne this day, in the City of David, A Savior which is Christ the
Lord.

Sixthly, The testimony of Enemies, and the testimony of Adversaries, is of
greatest validity.

The Jews themselves testified that he was a Mighty One, Joh. 11.47, 48. The
chief Priests, and the Pharisees gathered a Council, and said, What do we? for
this man does many miracles; If we let him thus alone, all men will believe on
him; so likewise, John 12.19. The Pharisees said among themselves; Perceive ye,
how ye prevail nothing; behold the world is gone after him. Josephus the Jew,
who was borne not long after Christ, writes; There was at this time One Jesus
a wise man, if it be lawful to call him a Man, a worker of most wonderful
miracles, and a Master, and Teacher of all such men as are willingly content to
embrace the truth. Yea the Jews do grant, and record Christ's miracles, and make
mention of many wonderful works which Jesus did that are not written by our
Evangelists; As the Author of the book called Proofs of Christianity,
observes.

The very Turks give this testimony of him, That he was a great Prophet,
Mighty in word, and deed; and that the Jews did evil in crucifying of him.

Yea the Devils themselves confessed, and acknowledged him to be a Mighty One;
For they came out of many, crying out, saying, Thou art Christ, the Son of God,
Luke 4.41. So verse. 33, 34. A man which had a spirit of an unclean Devil,
cried out with a loud voice, saying, Let us alone, what have we to do with
thee, Thou Jesus of Nazareth? art thou come to destroy us? I know thee who thou
art, The holy One of God.

Sixteenthly, Mighty in same, he is of Great fame; In the days of his flesh as
soon as ever he began to preach, and work miracles, his fame went thorowout
all Syria; In what Land, or Country soever he was, his fame spread abroad in
all that Country; his fame was not only spread thorowout all the Land of
Israel, but also into many other Nations of the world, by the Preaching of the
Apostles; for he sent them into all Nations, into all the world, Math. 28.19.
Mark 16.15. (Repentance, and remssion of sin being to be preached in his Name
among all Nations, beginning at Jerusalem) and they accordingly went, and made
him known where ever they came, and the word of the Lord mightily prevailed,
and his fame has spread abroad ever since; It has of late spread in
New England, and other parts, so that his Name is Great in the world, his fame
is gone into all Lands, even the fame of him as of a Savior, a deliverer, a
Mighty One.

Seventeenthly, Mighty in his Attendance; Not only men, Disciples, but the
Angels also ministered unto him; The Angels declared his Conception, and birth,
and attended him; when borne, an Angel appeared to direct Joseph, for his
preservation, Math. 2.13. Saying arise, and take the young child, and his
mother and flee into Egypt, etc. When he had been tempted of the Devil, Angels
came and ministered unto him, Math. 4.11. When he was in his sufferings, there
appeared an Angel unto him from heaven strengthening him, Luke 22.43. At his
Resurrection an Angel from heaven came, and rolled back the stone from the
door of the Sepulcher, and sat upon it, and declared his Resurrection to the
Women, Math. 28.2, 5, 6. Yea two Angels in white sat, the one at the head, and
the other at the feet, where the body of Jesus had layen, John 20.12. When he
ascended two Angels attended him, Act. 1.10. When he shall come again, he
shall come attended with his Mighty Angels, 2 These. 1.7. For he shall come in
his Glory, and all the holy Angels with him, Math. 25.31. And when he shall sit
upon the throne of his glory, thousand thousands shall minister unto him, and
ten thousand times ten thousand, and thousands of thousands stand before him,
Dan. 7.10. Rev. 5.11.

Eighteenthly, A Mighty One in holiness, and righteousness, so holy, as he is
called, by way of eminency, The holy One, Act. 3.14. The holy one of God, Luke
4.34. None so holy as he; so righteous, as he is called also the righteous, 1 John 2.1. The just, Act. 3.14. Righteous before God; The Lord calls him his
Righteous servant, Isa. 53.11. Righteous also before men, even Enemies; Pilate
who condemned him, did a little before pronounce him a Just person, Math.
27.24. he took water, and washed his hands before the multitude, saying, I am
innocent of the blood of this Just person; And Judas who betrayed him, cleared
Christ, and accused himself, saying, I have sinned in that I have betrayed the
innocent blood, Math. 27.4.

His mightiness, and eminency in holiness, and righteousness does appear.
First, Generally, in his obedience to the will of God, he said he came down
from heaven, not to do his own will, but the will of him that sent him, Joh.
6.38. and accordingly he made that his great business, and design, while he
was on earth, his mightiness therein may be seen.

First, In the universality of it, he did whatsoever his Father required, and
left nothing of his will undone, he kept the whole Law, and offended not in One
point, he did not only the easiest, and pleasant, but also the hardest, and
most grievous part of his fathers will; when his soul was exceeding sorrowful
even unto death, he prayed not so much for the removing of that Cup, as that
his fathers will might be done, Math. 26.39, 42. Hence that of the Apostle,
Phil. 2.8. He became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross.

Secondly, In the exactness, and perfection of it; he kept the whole Law
exactly, as he was not wanting in the matter, so he did not fail in the manner
of performing his fathers will; there was no defects, nothing lacking in his
obedience, he did all things well; what we are pressing toward, and reaching
forth unto, he attained, he was perfect in every good work, and stood
complete in the whole will of his father, and hence it is that it is recorded
of him, that he was without sin, knew no sin, did no sin; which could not be,
if he had failed in any thing.

Thirdly, In the Constancy of it; Christ did not obey by fits but constantly;
though we cannot, he continued in all things which are written in the book of
the Law to do them; This righteous one held on his way, he did not fail, nor
was he discouraged, yea when persecution and tribulation did arise against him
because of his doing the will of his father, he was not offended; but did
always do the things which pleased his father, as he told the Jews, Joh. 8.29.
all which speaks forth his might.

Fourthly, In his delight in it, his obedience was without murmuring, or
grudging, it was with delight; for the Law of God was within his heart, as he
spoke, Psalm. 40.8. I delight to do thy will, O my God; his fathers
commandments were not grievous to him; he professed to his Disciples, That it
was his Meat to do the will of him that sent him, and to finish his work, Joh.
4.34.

Fifthly, In the efficacy, and virtue of it, his Righteousness does not
return to him void, but it does accomplish that which he please, and prosper
in the thing whereto he ordaines it, and that is the making others righteous;
according to that of the Apostle, Romans 5.19. For as by one man's disobedience
many were made sinners, so by the obedience of one, shall many be made
Righteous; God made him to be sin for us, who knew no sin, that we might be
made the Righteousness of God in him, 2 Cor. 5.21. And accordingly we are; for
of God he is made unto us Righteousness; Now surely he is Mighty in obedience,
whose obedience effect the Righteousness of others.

Secondly, Particularly in the Graces of the Spirit which were in him.

First, In his Faith; for he, as well as we, had faith, and that a greater, and
stronger than ours; for he was so strong, and mighty in faith, as that he
staggered not at any of the promises of his father through unbelief; other
mighty ones in faith, sometimes feared, as Jacob, David etc. but Christ's faith
was perfect, he was never afraid of any ttouble, or any persecutors, he knew on
whom he had believed, he knew his father would uphold, and reward him; his
confidence in his father is prophetically spoken of by Isaiah, Chap. 50.6, 7,
8, 9. I gave my back to the smiters, and my cheeks to them that plucked off the
hair; I hid not my face from shame, and spitting, for the Lord God will help
me, therefore shall I not be confounded; therefore have I set my face like a
flint, and I know that I shall not be ashamed, etc. And he expressed as much at
the raising of Lazarus; Father I thank thee that thou have heard me, and I
know that thou hear me always; he was mighty and strong in faith.

Secondly, His love, he was and is mighty in that grace, which I shall
illustrate in particulars.

First, In the nature of it, it is above ordinary common love, above the love
of one friend to another; of a father to his child, of an husband to his wife,
or of a man to his own self; it is such a love wherewith the father has loved
him, Joh. 15.9. He tells his Disciples, As the father has loved me, so have I
loved you; which words do not only hold forth the truth, but the excellency of
his love toward them, it being transcendent, infinite love, without measure,
above Geometry, above all arts, and parts of men; the Apostle tells the Saints
at Ephesus, that it passes knowledge, Ephesians. 3.19.

Secondly, In the objects of it, not his friends as loving him any thing,
though his friends as loved by him, not Saints, or any excellent lovely ones,
but sinners, enemies, and he is a Mighty one that can love Enemies; flesh and
blood cannot do this; Paul sets forth the greatness of the love of Christ by
the objects of it, Romans 5.6, 7, 8. When we were yet without strength, in due
time Christ died for the ungodly, for scarcely for a righteous man will one
die; yet peradventure for a good man some would even dare to die; but God
commended his love toward us, in that while we were yet sinners, Christ died
for us; he was so mighty in his love, that he loved his greatest, mightiest
enemies, even those that took away his life, yea when they were taking it away,
at that instant, when it was doing, when he did hang on the cross, when they
were in the heat of their malice, and hatred against him, he prayed for the
choicest blessing for them, Luke 23.34. Father, forgive them, for they know not
what they do.

Thirdly, In the virtue, and operation of it, it did produce wonderful
effects, it carried him out.

First, To the lowest Condition, love brought him from heaven to earth, from
the highest to the lowest estate, from the throne to the dunghill; Though he was
Lord over all, yet love made him a servant to all, and that is the lowest
condition to be a servant; this the Apostle mentions, as the infinite
condescension of Christ, Phil. 2.7. And this himself minded his Disciples of,
that he the Son of man came not to be ministered unto, but to minister, Math.
20.28. I am among you as he that serves, Luke 22.27.

Secondly, To the meanest services, who though he was the most Mighty One, yet
so great was his love, as that he did not only condescend to men of low
estate, but to the lowest, meanest services for them, John 13. from the first
to the seventeenth verse is a full testimony of his love in this respect; that
he, their Lord, and Master, should wash his Disciples feet.

Thirdly, To the Greatest sufferings, both in life, and death; his life was a
life of sorrow and trouble, and his death was a a death of great pain, and
ignominy, the cursed death of the Cross.

Fourthly, To the largest communications, he has witnessed the greatness of
his love by the largeness of his gifts; he has given himself, This the
Apostle mentions as the evidence of the Greatness, and excellency of his love
to the Church, Ephesians. 5.2, 25. that he loved the Church, and gave himself for
it, and not only himself to die for it, but now that he lives, he
communicates freely to it of all spiritual blessings; for whatsoever he has
heard, or received of his father, that he imparts to his friends.

Fourthly, In the duration of it, it is for ever, he abides in his love toward
them, notwithstanding all their unkindnesses, its immutable, no length of time,
nor distance of place, can work any alteration in his love, the injuries that
we do to Christ, although they have their fruit in discomfort, and occasion the
suspension of the manifestation of his love for a season, (which is a burden
very grievous to be borne by a gracious soul) yet these do not remove his love
to his; yea though he visit their transgressions with the rod, and their
iniquity with stripes, yet his loving kindness shall continue with them; in a
word, it is Everlasting love, Jer. 31.3.

Thirdly, His self-denial, he was mighty in that, he was higher, and greater
then any, then all, he had more then all others, and yet he forsook all for
others, he emptied himself of all, never any so high, and never any so low,
never any so rich, and never any so poor as he; never any so glorious, and
never any counted so vile; and this not by constraint, but willingly; for as
the Apostle, Phil. 2. observes, he made himself so, yea when worldly honor
was offered him, (for the people would have made him a King, Joh. 6.15.) he
refused it; this was great self-denial; to lay aside a crown when he had it,
and to refuse it when it was offered, speaks him one Mighty in this Grace.

Fourthly, His patience; he had greatest patience in greatest sufferings,
others were not so patient in lesser sufferings, as he was in greatest; The
Prophet Isaiah sets him forth in his great sufferings, and withal declares his
incomparable patience, Isaiah 53. which he ushers in with a yet -- yet he
opened not his mouth, he is brought as a Lamb to the slaughter, and as a sheep
before her shearers is dumb, so he opens not his mouth; when he was reviled,
reviled not again, when he suffered, he threatened not; patience was perfect in
him; he was strengthened with all might unto All patience, and long suffering
with joyfulness; yea the patience of Christ in his most grievous sufferings was
so absolute, that in all that his enemies tongues, and hands could say, or do,
this Servant of God did not sin, so much as in word, but offered the sacrifice
of prayer and supplications with the sacrifice of himself for his persecutors,
he was Mighty in this Grace.

Fifthly, His zeal; he was earnest, and fervent in Spirit against all evil,
and for that which was good, he did cry aloud, he spared not, but lifted up his
voice like a Trumpet, and showed the people their transgression; he was full of
zeal against the sins of the Scribes, and Pharisees, freely denouncing woes
against them, Math. 23. He was full of zeal against the profanation, and
prophaners of the Temple, he overthrew the money changers, and the seats of
them that sold doves, and would not suffer that any man should carry any
vessel through the Temple, Mark 11.15, 16. Yea be made a scourge of small
coards, and he drove them all out of the Temple, and said to them that sold
doves, take these things hence, make not my fathers house an house of
Merchandise; And his Disciples remembered that it was written, The zeal of
thine house has e^ten me up.

Sixthly, His wisdom, and understanding; he was of quick, and great
understanding, when he was but twelve years old, all that heard him,
questioning, and answering the Doctors, were astonished at his understanding,
and Answers, Luke 2.47. He was wiser than all his Enemies, they could never
entangle him in his talk; when he answered to any thing, it was with such
wisdom, as they durst not ask him any more Questions, and no man was able to
answer him; he was of so great understanding that he knew all m^n, and needed
not that any should testify of man; for he knew what was in man, Joh. 2.24,
25. Yea he knew their very thoughts, Math. 12.25. Luke 6.8. He had (as the
Schoolmen speak) both Cognitionem matutinam, and verspertinam, both a morning,
and evening knowledge, he knew things in their Causes, as well as in their
natures and effects.

Seventhly, His faithfulness was great, without the least leaven of hypocrisy,
there was no guile found in his mouth, neither was there any in his Spirit; he
was faithful to his father, he did his work, and glorified his Name on Earth;
was faithful to his Disciples, he made known unto them all things that he had
heard of his father, Joh. 15.15. He acquainted them with sufferings as well as
the Glory that should follow; he reproved them for their evils, as well as
comforted them in their troubles; he was faithful to all, doing good unto all
men, as he had opportunity.

Nineteenthly, A mighty one in his works, he was mighty in deed, excellent in
working; his works (as himself said) did bear witness of him, that he was
some mighty one sent from God, he has declared his strength among the people.

His works were of two sorts.

First, Spiritual, and heavenly, relating to the souls and spirits of men.

Secondly, More external, and visible, relating to the bodies of men, and
others, and he was mighty in hoth sorts.

His works relating to the souls of men were chiefly.
First, His preaching and teaching, in which he was mighty, even in his first
Sermon on the Mount; The people were astonished at his doctrine, for he taught
them as one having Authority, and not as the Scribes, Math. 7.28, 29. Being in
Galilee, he taught in their Synagogues, being Glorified of all; He came to
Nazareth, and taught, and all bare him witness, and wondered at the Gracious
words which proceeded out of his mouth; he came down to Capernaum, and taught,
and they were astonished at his doctrine: for his word was with power; see Luke
4.14, 15, 16, 22, 31, 32. To these may be added the Officers answer to the
chief Priests and Pharisees, when they said unto them; Why have you not
brought him? Never man spoke like this man, Joh. 7.45, 46. Neither did the word
of Christ return unto him void, but did exceedingly prosper in the thing
whereto it was sent, many believed on him, Joh. 4.41. Joh. 7.31. and 8.30. and
10.42. and 12.42.

Secondly, His Praying, having received the spirit of Grace and Supplication
without measure, he must needs be mighty in prayer, and so he was, In the days
of his flesh he offered up prayers and supplications with strong crying and
tears, Heb: 5.7. Sometimes he prayed long, Luke 6.12. He continued all night in
prayer to God, sometimes he prayed more earnestly, Luke 22.44. and always
successefully; For as a Mighty Prince he had power with God, and ever
prevailed. God made him a King, and then bid him ask, Ps. 2.6, 7, 8. and indeed
he prayed like a King, like a mighty One, as one in joint Commission with his
Father (as one has well observed) John 17.24. Father, I will that they also
whom thou have given me, be with me where I am.

Thirdly, His Baptizing, John, and Christ's Disciples could but Baptize with
water in his name, he the master only was, and is mighty to baptize with the
holy Spirit. This was that great and wonderful thing which was made known to
John, that Christ should do, which he was to observe as that wherein Christ
excels all others, as is manifest in the record of John; John 1.32, 33. John
bear record, saying, I saw the Spirit descending from Heaven like a Dove, and
it abode upon him, and I knew him not, but he that sent me to baptize with
water, the same said unto me, upon whom thou shall see the Spirit descending,
and remaining on him, the same is he which baptizeth with the Holy Spirit; and
upon this account John preferred him before himself, Mat. 3. 11. I indeed
baptize you with water unto repentance, but he that comes after me, is
mightier than I, whose shoes I am not worthy to bear, he shall baptize you with
the Holy Ghost, and with fire. He plainly declared him to be a mighty one in
this respect. This was that which he promised, and accordingly accomplished to,
and upon his Disciples, to the astonishment and amazement of all, Acts 1.5.
with Acts 2. from 1. to 13. verse.

Fourthly, His conference; he had many conferences with very acute and subtle
adversaries, and he overcame them all, with the chief Priests and the Elders,
Math. 21. They could not answer him, verse. 27. with the Disciples which the
Pharisees sent unto him with the Herodians, after they had taken council how
they might entangle him in his talk; the issue was, when they had heard his
answer to their subtle Question, they marvelled and left him, and went their
way, Matthew: 22.22. The same day the Sadduces came and put a Question to him,
and when the multitude heard his answer, they were astonished at his Doctrine,
verse. 33. The Pharisees hearing that he had put the Sadduces to silence,
gathered together, and one of them which was a Lawyer, asked him a question,
which he answered, and when the Pharisees were gathered together he asked them
a question, and no man was able to answer him a word, neither durst any man
(from that day forth) ask him any more questions, verse. 34. to the end of the
Chap: The Ruler of the Synagogue fell upon him with great indignation because
of his healing on the Sabbath day, whom when he had answered, all his
adversaries were ashamed, and all the people rejoiced for all the glorious
things that were done by him, Luke 13, 15, ad 18. And conferring with the
Lawyers and Pharisees about his healing on the Sabbath day; it is recorded,
They held their peace, they could not answer him again to these things, Luke
14.4, 6. We may see also how mighty he was in his conferences with the Jews,
John 8. and 10. Chapters; and also with the Devil, the subtillest enemy, whose
several Temptations he answered by Scripture; and the conclusion of all was,
The Devil leaves him, and behold Angels came and ministered unto him, Mat. 4.1.
ad 11. verse. More need not be added to show that he was mighty in Conference.

Secondly, He was mighty in his works respecting the bodies of men, and others
which will appear in several particulars.

First, In the nature and kind of them his works were not common, and ordinary,
but special and extraordinary; and therefore it is said, He did mighty works,
wrought miracles and wonders among the people, works above, and beyond the
constituted order of Nature, and he wrought not only mighty works as they are
distinguished from the common works of others, but as they are distinguished
from the mighty works and miracles of others, therefore the people astonished,
cried out, What wisdom is this that is given him, that even such mighty works
are wrought by his hands? Mark. 6.2. He cast out Devils; we never read of any
before Christ, that cast out Devils, (though some other miracles they did)
therefore when he cast out a Devil, the multitudes marvelled, saying, It was
never so seen in Israel, Matthew. 9.33. He opened the eyes of one born blind, and
(as the man said) Since the world began it was not heard, that any man opened
the eyes of one that was born blind, John 9.32. He healed such diseases as
other Physicians could not, the woman that had the issue of blood twelve years,
after she had suffered many things of many Physicians, and had spent all that
she had, and was nothing bettered, but rather grew worse; she did but come
behind Jesus and touch him, and straightway the fountain of her blood was dried
up, and she felt in her body that she was healed of that plague, Mark 5.25, 26,
27, 28. When the Lunatic child, whom the Disciples could not cure, was brought
to Christ, he rebuked the Devil, and he departed out of him, and the child was
cured from that very hour, Mat. 17, 15, 16, 18. He did among the people the
works which none other did, John 15. 24. and he is a mighty One that can do
that which others of great skill and power cannot do.

Secondly, In the multitude of them, he did many mighty works, many miracles,
others before wrought a few, Moses a few, Elijah and Elisha a few by another
power, but Christ wrought many, healed multitudes of sick persons, all manner
of sicknesses and diseases among the people. If I should enumerate the miracles
written which Jesus did, they would appear to be many, and yet he did many more
than are written, it is said John 21.25. at the close of the history of the
life of Christ, There are also many other things which Jesus did, the which if
they should be written, every one, I suppose that even the world it self could
not contain the Books that should be written. Of those things which are written
that he did, most of them are wonders, or else have wonders in them (as I have
in part, and shall further make to appear) Now if we count him a mighty one,
that does a few great things in his life time, now and then a wonder, how
mighty must he needs be, whose miracles are more than all the other actions of
his life? the multitude of his miracles speak him to be a mighty One, according
to that of the people, recorded concerning him, John 7.31. Many of the people
believed on him, and said; When Christ c^meth, will he do more miracles than
these which this man has done?

Thirdly, In the variety of them, not a multitude of miracles of one kind, as
to heal multitudes of one disease only, but he healed all manner of sickness
and all manner of disease among the people.

(...), Diseases, as blindness, witheredness, lameness, fevers, dropsies.

(...), Languishings, weaknesses, consumptions, diseases which are not so
painful, as wasteful of the body.

(...), Tortures, wracks, aches, convulsions, palsies, lunacy, painful
diseases; and he did not only heal all diseases, but he also raised the dead,
cast out Devils gave sight to the blind, rebuked and stilled the winds, turned
water into wine, walked on the Sea, fed thousands with a few Loaves, and it
cannot be said of Christ, he was only exc^llent and eminent in some one thing,
but he was mighty in every thing; the variety of his miracles is a very clear
demonstration of his mightiness.

Fourthly, In the celerity and speediness of them; he did them swiftly,
suddenly, he healed diseases immediately, when he bad them arise, they arose
presently; the Evangelists have observed and recorded it, as that which adds
glory to Christ's miracles of healing, and other works, that he did them so
quickly; many being healed the same Hour that he undertook their cure in, as is
evident, Math. 8.13. Math. 9.22. Math. 17.18. The blind immediately received
sight, the lame immediately rose up and walked, the crooked were immedately
made straight, Devils came immediately out of those that were possessed, he
stilled the winds on a sudden, he cursed the fig tree, and it presently
withered away; yea, it is said, In the same Hour he cured many of their
infirmities, plagues, and of evil spirits, and unto many that were blind, he
gave sight, Luke 7.21. Christ did not take a week, month, or half a years time
to heal in, (as others do and yet famous) but what he did, he did quickly, and
how mighty an One must he needs be, who works miracles so speedily?

Fifthly, In the facility of them, they were easy.

First, In respect of the Agent, Christ himself, his mighty works were not hard
nor grievous, but easy to him, he did them without pain, or toil to himself,
for he did ordinarily heal and work other miracles by speaking a word or two,
by touching of persons, difficulties were not difficulties to him, but were his
pastime and pleasure; for it was his delight, and his meat to do the will of
him that sent him; he is a mighty One who does such mighty things so easily.

Thirdly, In respect of the subject upon whom he wrought any wonderful works,
when he healed others, he did not (as the manner of other eminent ones is) put
them to great, nor yet to any pain in order to their cure, but forthwith freed
them from their present pains, yea, their very healing was without pain, which
sets up his mightiness above man's.

Sixthly, In his constant fitness and readiness to do them, when ever he had
any call, however he did seem to be distracted with much business, he was
always ready and prepared for the work he was called to; he never sent any
away uncured, unhealed, never excused himself, saying, I am now busy, come
some other time; he did not so much as make any delay to do for them, according
to their desire (only he sometimes took occasion to try, and commend the faith
of some) no time was untimous to him, when people came to him. After he had
been teaching his Disciples upon the Mount (without question some considerable
space of time) when he was come down great multitudes followed him, and he
healed the Leper, the Centurians servant, and Peter's wives mother, and having
spent the day in working, when the Evening was come, they brought unto him many
that were possessed with Devils, and he did not so much as defer it till the
morning, but he then cast out the spirits with his Word, and healed all that
were sick, Matthew. 8.16.

Seventhly, In the visibility and publicknesse of them, many of his works being
wrought before multitudes, he was not of a cowardly and fearful spirit, he did
not choose to work them in a corner, or in some private place (though he
wrought some privately as he had occasion) but openly in the chief public
places, in Cities, as Corazin, Bethsaida, yea in Jerusalem, that great and
famous City, in the Synagogues, and in the Temple, whether the Jews always
resorted, see Matthew. 21.14. In the presence of the Scribes and Pharisees, Luke
5.21, 25. Even when the Scribes and Pharisees were watching him, Looking round
about them all, he said unto the man which had the withered hand, Stretch out
thy hand, and he did so, and his hand was restored whole as the other, Luke
6.6, 10. He often healed and cast out Devils in the presence of the multitude, he
turned water into wine publicly at a marriage feast in Cana of Galilee. And to
this agrees Peter's description of him to the Jews in his exhortation to them,
Acts 2.22. Ye men of Israel hear these words, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved
of God among you by Miracles, wonders, and signs, which God did by him in the
midst of you, as ye your selves also know.

Eighthly, In the opportuneness and seasonableness of them, being always
suitable to occasions offered, as may be seen in some instances; in the miracle
of feeding five thousand and more with five loaves and two fishes, it was when
they were hungry, for they had continued with Christ three days, when they had
nothing to eat, and when they were in the Wilderness, and could not tell how
to get any, and it was when it was evening, and the time to return past, then
Christ works a miracle, Math. 14.15, 16, etc. Math. 15.32, 33. He rebuked the
winds and the sea, it was when there was a great tempest in the sea, insomuch
that the ship was covered with waves, yea, the waves did beat into the ship, so
that it was now full, and the Disciples were in jeopardy, Math. 8.24. Mark
4.37. Luke 8.23. He raised Lazarus, it was when some of the Jews said, Could
not this man which opened the eyes of the blind, have caused that even this man
should not have dyed? and after Lazarus had been dead four days he turned
water into wine, it was when they wanted wine, when the mother of Jesus said
unto him, They have no wine, John 2.3.

Ninthly, In the subjects of them.

First, In the largeness and unlimittedness of them; he wrought his miracles
almost upon all sorts and kinds of Creatures, as Devils, Men, Beasts, Fishes,
Sun, Earth, Air, Water, Stones, Trees, as might be showed, which plainly
manifest that all Creatures were in his power. And Christ Jesus was (if I may
so say) indifferent upon what Creature he wrought his miracles, whether upon
Man, Beast, or Devil, Sea, or Land, strongest or weakest, it was all one to
Christ, his power was not bound to this or that particular subject, but did
extend it self to all the Creatures, to the living as well as the dead; to the
mightiest, resisting, raging Devils, as well as to the most feeble, fearful,
and submitting men and women.

Secondly, In their unrulinesse in themselves, and toward others, as the
Winds, the Seas yielded to him, which made the men marvel, saying, What manner
of man is this, that even the Wind and Sea obey him? Math. 8.27. Yea, Legions,
many fierce unruly Devils submitted themselves to him, such as no man could
bind, no not with Chains, neither could any man tame; though they were unruly
in r^spect of others, yet not unruly when Christ came to deal with them, which
shows Christ to be a Mighty One.

Thirdly, In their utter indisposition unto his works; he wrought his miracles
of healing upon persons that had their diseases a long time; he healed a woman
that had an issue of blood twelve years; he healed another woman that had a
spirit of infirmity eighteeen years; as also a man that had an infirmity thirty
eight years; these by the long continuance of their diseases were the more
unfitted for healing; he gave sight to a man that was born blind, greatly
ind^sposed to the receiving of fight; he cured a man that had Devils a long
time, Luke 8.27. He raised Lazarus when he had been dead four days, altogether
indisposed to live again; and the greater indisposition is in the subject unto
the work, the greater is the power of the Agent that performs it.

Tenthly, In the perfection and compleatnesse of them, what he did, he did
perfectly; The man sick of the Palsy, arose, took up his Bed and went before
them all, insomuch that they were all amazed, Mark 2.12. As many as touched the
hem of his garment were made perfectly whole, Math. 14.36. He rebuked the Winds
and the Sea, and there was a great calm, Matthew. 8.26. He restored the man's
withered hand whole as the other, Matthew. 12.13. He filled five thousand men,
besides women and children, with five Loaves and two Fishes, and they took up
of the fragments that remained, twelve Baskets full, Matthew. 14.19, 20, 21. He
healed the man that had an impediment in his speech, and he spoke plain, Mark
7.35. The woman that was bowed together was made straight, Luke 13.13. He
turned water not only into wine, but into good wine, John 2.10. The perfection
of the work speaks forth the might and excelency of the Agent.

Eleventhly, In the constancy of success; he ever brought to pass what he
undertook, he was no foolish builder who began, and was not able to finish: The
hands of other m^ghty ones have not been able sometimes to perform their
enterprise; the Disciples sometimes could not cure the diseased, but Christ
healed all that were brought; we never heard of any thing too hard for him, but
whatsoever he did, prospered; and indeed Christ never doubted of success in his
undertakings; he says to the Leper crying to him, Lord, if thou will thou
can make me clean, I will, be thou clean. Christ did not tell them that came
to him, That he would do the best he could, or the like, but he forthwith
healed them all; surely he is a Mighty One who is constantly successeful in
great undertakings.

Twelfthly, In the faith of those upon whom, and for whose sake he wrought his
works, they did believe that he was able to do them for them, and so they
magnified him by believing. If thou will, thou can make me clean, says the
Leper, Matthew. 8.2. But speak the word only, and my servant shall be healed,
says the Centurion, at which Christ marvelled, saying, I have not found so
great faith, no not in Israel, Matthew. 8.10. The woman with the issue of blood
said within her self, If I may but touch the hem of his garment, I shall be
whole, Math. 9.21. The men of Genesaret besought him, That their diseased might
only touch the hem of his Garment. Christ says to the wom^n of Canaan, O
woman, Great is thy faith. They had such faith as put them upon the use of any
means to bring their sick to him; sometimes that unusall way of coming in at
the top of the house, so they brought the man sick of the Palsy, Luke 5.18,
19, 20. When Jesus saw their faith, he said unto him, Man thy sins are forgiven
thee.

Thirteenthly, In the time of their performance, it was the time of his
humiliation, when he was in his lowest estate, when he was (if I may so say) at
the weakest; before he was glorified, he wrought Miracles, some when he was
apprehended, some when he was on the Cross, some when he died: when he was
weak he was strong, and if he were so Mighty in his abasement, in the day of
small Things? how mighty is he now he is in glory?

Fourteenthly, In his soleness, and helplesness in the effecting of them, he
did them by his own hand, and power, he did them alone, and of the people there
was none with him to help him, and indeed he needed not the help of any man,
for though they were great, and mighty works which he undertook, yet his own
Arm was sufficient for the performance of them; so mighty was he as to effect
that alone, and of himself, which others with all their helpers could not.

Fifteenthly, In the meaneness of the means by which he wrought them, as by a
word of his mouth, as God did his works in the beginning so Christ did his; God
said, Let there be light, and there was light; let there be a Firmament in the
midst of the waters, and there was so; so Christ to the sick, Take up thy bed,
and walk, and he did so; he said to the Seas be still, and they were so: to
the Devils, come out, and they came out; to the dead, come forth, and they came
forth; sometimes by a touch of his hand, sometime by the patients touching but
the Hem of his Garment; he made the blind man to see by anointing his eyes with
clay, Joh. 9. And with such like inconsiderable means he wrought wonders. The
meanness of the means speak forth the mightiness of the Agent.

Sixteenthly, In the Effects, in General, the good of them upon whom they were
wrought; the miracles of some tended to the hurt of others, as those of Moses
upon the Egyptians; Elijahs, 2 Kings 1. Peter's, Acts 5. It is a very
considerable difference between the miracles wrought by Christ, and those
wrought by others, that Christ never hurted, nor destroyed others by his
works; he came not to destroy men's lives, but to save them; And it is a
greater thing to save than to destroy.

More particularly; we find that many marvelled; Many believed on him when
they saw the miracles which he did, Joh. 2.23. When he had raised Lazarus, many
of the Jews which had seen the things which Jesus did, Believed on him, Joh.
11.45. When Christ came into the Ship, and the wind ceased, they that were in
the Ship, came and worshipped him, saying, Of a Truth, thou art the Son of God,
Math. 14.32, 33. So when the Centurion, and those that were with him, watching
Jesus, saw the Earthquake and those things that were done, said, Truly this
was the Son of God, Math, 27.54. In a word, God was glorified, Math. 9.8. Math.
15.31. Luke 7.16. Luke 23.47. And Christ was glorified of all, Luke 4.15. And
this was the End of God in sending his Son to work miracles, that his Son
might be glorified; according to the words of Christ, when he heard that
Lazarus was sick, Joh. 11.4. This sickness is not unto death, but for the
glory of God: That the Son of God might be glorified thereby.

Seventeenthly, In his self-denial, and humility in his mightiest works; for
the weak to be humble is not much as for the mighty to be humble, such as
heal all diseases, cast out Devils, and do many wonderful works; to be
humble in these things is to be mighty, such are mightier in this, then in all
the rest of their mighty acts; some who have been mighty to work miracles,
have not attained to be humble, and self-denying in their greatest
performances; And herein was the excellency, and mightines of Christ to be
seen, that he did more, and greater works than any, and yet was more humble,
and self denying than any; which does further appear.

First, In that he did not seek his own honor and Glory, Joh. 8.50. When he
had wrought a miracle, and the people would have taken him by force to have
made him a King, he departed into a Mountain himself alone, Joh. 6.15. Yea he
did rather obscure, than seek his own Glory, in that he charged diverse whom he
healed, that they should tell no man, Math. 8.4. Mark 7.36. Mark. 8.26. Luke
8.56. What ever other ends Christ might have in this prohibition, it plainly
speaks that he was not desirous of vainglory.

Secondly, In that he sought not his own profit, he did none of his mighty
works for money, he had no design to enrich himself by his works, he sought
not Theirs, but them, he did not ask them, what they would give him, and he
would heal them; he did not say for so much I will heal thee of thy Leprosy;
for so much I will cast out the unclean Spirit, etc. Christ had an heart free
from the desire and love of money, and we never read that ever he received any
from any man for any thing he did; This Mighty One was above gifts, and Rewards
from men.

Twentithly, Mighty in his Victories, he had many Adversaries, and met with
much opposition, yet he overcame All, so he says of himself, Rev. 3.21. To
him that overcomes, will I grant to sit with me in my throne, even as I also
Overcame, and am set down with my Father on his Throne.

First, Over the World, the world was an enemy to him, and hated him because he
did testify of it, that the works thereof are evil, and did all manner of
evil against him, they would feign have destroyed him, that he might have been
no more, and to that end they condemned, killed, and buried him, and then they
thought they had overcome him, but he was not destroyed, for he rose again,
and now lives, being set down at the right hand of the throne of God, and so
he became victorious over all their hatred, malice, and persecution; so much he
told his Disciples to comfort them in their Tribulation in the world, Joh.
16.33. In the world ye shall have tribulation; but be of good cheer, I have
overcome the World.

Secondly, Over sin, not his (for he was without sin) but ours; sin was an
enemy to him, and came against him in its strength, viz. the Law, for the
strength of sin is the Law, and did condemn him, so that he died for our sins,
sin did its worst, but could not destroy him, for he endured, and overcame it,
according to that in 1 Pet. 3.18. For Christ has once suffered for sins, the
Just for the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the
flesh, but Quickened by the Spirit; Sin indeed was in the world, and reigned
like a Mighty King over all unto Death; but Christ came, and cast down sin
from its Throne, and brought it into Captivity, yea by his death he overcame
it; he put away sin by the sacrifice of himself, Heb. 9.26. And as for sin in
respect of himself, he kept it at a great distance from him, and would not let
it come near him; he stood like a Mighty One far above it, keeping it under;
for the Law of his God was in his heart, and none of his steps did slide; he
was holy, harmless, undefiled, and separate from Sinners, Heb. 7.26.

Thirdly, Over Death, that Mighty Adversary, by death he overcame Death, like a
Mighty victorious one he brake through Death, it being not possible that he
should be holden of it, Act. 2.24. And being raised from the Dead, dies no
more; Death has no more Dominion over him, Romans 6.9. So that according to what
is prophesied of him, He has swallowed up Death in Victory, so that now we may
say, O death, where is thy sting? O grave, where is thy victory? 1 Cor. 15.54,
55.

Fourthly, Over the Devil, that Mighty One, whose principal aim, and design
was against Christ; But he overcame that Wicked one, and that through Death,
Heb. 2.14. For as much as the children are partakers of flesh and blood, he
also himself likewise took part of the same, that through Death he might
destroy him that had the power of death, that is the Devil; yea he triumphed
over him, according to that of the Apostle, Col. 2.15. speaking before of his
blotting out the handwriting of ordinances that was against us, and nailing it
to his Cross, says, Having spoiled principalities and powers, he made a show
of them Openly, triumphing over them in it.

Further, Christ is not only Mighty in the victories which his right hand have
gotten over these Mighty Lords, who have devoured so many, but also in the
victories which he will get over them hereafter, for these his enemies are up
again against him, and he will be victorious over them. The Psalmist sings of
him prophetically, Psalm. 45.3, 4, 5. Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most
mighty; with thy glory and thy Majesty; and in thy Majesty ride prosperously,
because of truth, and meekness, and righteousness, and thy right hand shall
teach thee terrible things; Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings
enemies; whereby the people fall under thee. And in this posture John saw him,
Rev. 6.2. And I saw, and behold a white horse, and he that sat on him had a
bow, and a Crown was given unto him, and he went forth Conquering, and to
Conquer.

The world is up, and Christ will never leave till he has overcome it, till he
has brought in the Generality of men, viz. Jews and Gentiles to be subject to
him, to be one sheepfold under him the Great Shepherd and Prince, whom the
Lord has set over them; according to the prophecies of him, Ezekiel 34. and 37
Chapters, And as for his deadly enemies that will not that he should reign
over them, he will slay them with the breath of his lips, Rev. 19. from the 11
verse to the end, John saw him in a warring posture with the Beast, and the
Kings of the earth, and their Armies, which were gathered together to make
war against him, and the issue was, The Beast was taken, and with him the
false Prophet that wrought Miracles before him, these both were cast alive into
a Lake of fire burning with Brimstone, and the Remnant were slain with the
sword of him that sat upon the horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth.

Sin is up against him, now he is in heaven; Idolatry is up in the Nations of
the world, Antichristianisme is up, profaneness is up, ungodliness, and
unrighteousness is up in the earth, and the Lord Christ will not cease working
till he has rooted out sin, till he has destroyed all the works of the
Devil; And according to what is prophesied of him, Isaiah 42.4. He shall not
fail nor be discouraged, till he has set Judgment in the Earth.

The Devil is up also, and has great wrath against him, and all his, and
however he may for a time prevail to the deceiving of the Nations, yet he
shall be overcome in the end, Rev. 20.9, 10. Fire came down from God out of
heaven, and devoured the Nations, and the Devil that deceived them was cast
into the Lake of fire and brimstone, where the Beast, and the false Prophet
are, shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever.

Secondly, Mighty in his Offices, which are three, King, Priest, Prophet.

First, He is a King, and that is an office which speaks might and power; a
King notes Supremacy in respect of others, 1 Pet. 2.13. but Christ is not
only a King, and mighty in that regard, but also a Mighty King, a King above
all other Kings, he is a King higher than the Kings of the earth, Psalm. 89.27.
The Prince of the Kings of the Earth, Rev. 1.5. Lord of Lords, and King of
Kings, Rev. 17.14. He is a mighty King.

First, In himself, and that especially in two things.

First, In majesty, and glory, excellent majesty is upon him; The Psalmist
singing of him, and his kingdom, says, Gird thy sword upon thy thigh, O most
mighty, with thy glory, and thy majesty, and in thy majesty ride prosperously,
etc. Psalm* 45.3, 4. See a ^lymspe of his glory in his Type So^^mon. The Lord
magnified Solomon exceedingly in the sight of all Israel* and bestowed upon him
such Royal majesty, as had not been on any King before him in Israel; yet
behold a Greater than Solomon is here; for Solomon in all his Glory was not
arrayed like unto Christ; of this Glory the Apostles had a sight, according to
the words of Peter, We were eyewitnesses of his Majesty, for he received from
God the Father, honor, and Glory, when there came such a voice to him from the
excellent Glory, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am well pleased, and this
voice which came from Heaven we heard, when we were with him in the holy Mount,
2 Pet. 1.16, 17, 18. And Paul styles him, even him that was crucified, The Lord
of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.8.

Secondly, In wisdom, and understanding, he was and is greater, and above all
others, both men, and Angels in understanding; There was excellent Wisdom
found in Daniel, but there was more, and more excellent in Christ. God gave
Solomon wisdom and understanding, exceeding much, and largeness of heart, even
as the sand that is on the Seashore; and Solomon's wisdom excelled the wisdom
of all the children of the East Country, and all the wisdom of Egypt; for he
was wiser than all men, and all the Earth sought to him to hear his wisdom
which God had put in his heart, 1 Kings 4.29, 30, 31. and 1 Kings 10.33. But
behold a Greater than Solomon is here in this respect, Math. 12.42. Even he in
whom are hid all the Treasures of wisdom, and knowledge, Col. 2.3. The very
wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24.

Secondly, He is Mighty in his Subjects; two things considerable in his
Subjects which speak forth his Mightiness.

First, Their Mightiness, his Subjects are Saints, and Nations, and both sorts
are mighty, his Saints are excellent ones, Subjects of the highest rank, they
are Kings, and Priests, (being advanced to that Dignity by himself) Rev. 1.6.
Men of other spirits, redeemed from among men, who have all Earthly things
under their feet, such as regard not Silver, nor yet delight in Gold, (The Law
of the mouth of their King being better to them than thousands of Gold, and
Silver; as also men of valiant and courageous spirits for the honor of their
King upon Earth, not loving their lives unto the Death, Rev. 12.11.

The Nations of the Earth also are full of Mighty Ones, men of high degree, and
all the Kings, Princes, Potentates, Rulers, chief Captains, Great Lords, all
the Mighty men of Valor, all the Worthies, and men of Renown, and all the
wise and Honorable ones of the Earth are his Subjects; the excellency, and
mightiness of the Subjects speak forth the mightiness of the King, how mighty
must he needs be, who have all the mighty Kings and Princes of the world under
him?

Secondly, Their multitude, he has more Subjects than any, if Solomon's
Subjects were so great a people that could not be numbered, nor counted for
multitude, how great and numerous, or rather innumerable are Christ's Subjects,
who are all people, Nations, and Languages, Dan. 7.14. And these are not only
his Subjects in respect of the Right, and extent of his Dominion, but also in
respect of their submission and obedience to him, for all Dominions shall
serve, and obey him, Dan. 7.14, 27. Yea all kingdoms shall resolve into his
kingdom: The joyful sound of the Seventh Angel, and the great voices in
Heaven, which John heard, proclaimed the largeness and amplitude of the
kingdom of this King, saying, The kingdoms of this World are become the
kingdoms of our Lord, and of his Christ, and he shall reign for ever, and
ever; and if in the multitude of people is the Kings Honor, Pro. 14.28. then
surely he is a mighty and honorable one that has such multitudes under him.

Thirdly, He is mighty in his Rule, and Administration, both toward his loyal
Subjects, and desperate Enemies; The Administration of Christ toward his
faithful ones is chiefly in two things, in both which he appears to be Mighty.

First, Preservation; for he preserves the faithful, even all them that love
him: he is mighty to save, and defend them against all the mighty ones that
rise up against them, he has been, and is a strength to the poor, a strength
to the needy in distress, a refuge from the storm, a shadow from the heat,
when the blast of the terrible ones is as a storm against the wall. The
Psalmist singing of him, and his kingdom, says, He shall deliver the needy
when he cries, the poor also, and him that has no helper; he shall save the
souls of the needy, he shall redeem their souls from deceit and violence,
Psalm. 72.12, 13, 14. And for this reason the Prophet Zephany calls upon Zion to
sing and rejoice; The King of Israel even the Lord, is in the midst of thee,
thou shall not see evil any more; The Lord thy God in the midst of thee is
Mighty, he will save, Zeph. 3.14, 15, 17. And this is the confidence of his
Subjects, The Lord is our Judge, the Lord is our Lawgiver, the Lord is our
King, he will save us, Isa. 33.22. And he is not only mighty to save their
bodies from destruction, but to save their souls from sin, and death; for that
was the reason which the Angel gave Joseph before Christ was borne, why he
should be called Jesus, Math. 1.21. Thou shall call his Name Jesus; for he
shall save his people from their sins: And in this he is mightier than all
other Kings, who cannot deliver any of their Subjects souls, none of them can
by any means redeem their Subjects, nor yet their own souls, but stand in
need of this Mighty One to save them.

Secondly, Remuneration; he is not unrighteous to forget the work, and labor
of love, which any of his Subjects do show toward his Name, but will give
reward unto his servants the Prophets, and to the S^ints, and them that fear
his Name, small and great; and his Reward is great, becoming such a Mighty King
to bestow, he will plentifully reward all his faithful constant Followers, and
his reward is.

First, Everlasting life; This Christ promised to his self-denying Disciples,
Mat. 19.29. My sheep hear my voice, says Christ, and follow me, and I Give
unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, Joh. 10.27, 28. And for
this end his father gave him power over all flesh, that he should give eternal
life to as many as he has given him, Joh. 17.2. Eternal life is a rich
reward, but here is not all the reward of the righteous, they might have
everlasting life, though with trouble, and distraction, and therefore he gives
them together with everlasting life.

Secondly, Everlasting joy, and rest, for though they have sorrow and trouble
here, and for a season be in heaviness through manifold Temptations, yet their
sorrow shall be turned into joy, into everlasting joy, which none shall take
from them; Their trouble shall be turned into rest, and quietness, and
assurance for ever; for the Lord Christ will recompense Tribulation to them
that trouble his servants, and to them that are troubled, rest, when he shall
be revealed from Heaven with all his mighty. Angels, in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, 2 These. 1.6, 7, 8. And that his reward may
be full, together with everlasting life, and rest, he gives

Thirdly, Everlasting honor and glory, they shall not have life and peace in a
low estate, but they shall be exalted to honor, they shall not rest upon the
Dunghill but upon the Throne; for this is his promise, Rev: 3.21. To him that
overcomes will I grant to set with me in my Throne, even as I also overcame,
and am set down with my Father in his Throne. Christ shall be King over Israel,
and they shall be next unto him; at that great day when all Nations shall be
gathered before him, he shall separate them one from another, he shall set the
Sheep on his right hand, but the Goats on the left, Then shall the King say to
them on the right hand, Come ye blessed of my Father, inherit the Kingdom
prepared for you from the foundation of the world, Mat. 25.32, 33, 34. His
reward is a Kingdom, a Kingdom which cannot be moved, and thus Christ is a
mighty King in his rule, and administration toward his servants.

Secondly, Christ is mighty in his rule and administration toward his enemies,
which does principally consist in two things both manifesting his mightiness.

First, Cohibition and restraint, for when his enemies come forth full of fury
and rage, with full purpose of heart to destroy his people, he put his hook in
their Nose, and his Bridle in their Lips, so that they cannot act all the evil
that is in their hearts, though they do exert and put forth some hatred and
wrath, yet not all; For the remainder of wrath he restrains. So that no more
of their malice, wrath, and cruelty do, or shall break forth, then what he sees
in his wisdom and faithfulness to be expedient and profitable for his servants
to endure; and this his administration do not extend only to the meaner sort of
people, but the high and mighty to the Kings of the Earth, For he cuts off the
Spirit of Princes, so that their hands cannot perform their enterprise. The
Psalmist speaking of the beauty and glory of Sion, says, Lo, the Kings were
assembled, they passed by together, they saw it, and so they marvelled, they
were troubled and hasted away, fear took hold upon them there, and pain as of a
woman in travel, Psalm. 48.4, 5, 6. The King of Sion took away their spirit and
courage; yea, this extends to the very Devils, whom (when he was in the flesh)
he restrained from hurting and tormenting, and it is because of this part of
the blessed rule and administration of Christ in Heaven, that men and Devils
(whose hearts are fully set in them to do evil) have not torn and devoured the
whole flock of Christ upon Earth.

Secondly, Destruction; for as his hand shall be known toward his servants, so
his indignation toward his Enemies, whom he will destroy though never so many
and mighty: The Psalmist prophesying of him, and his administration toward his
enemies, says, Thou shall break them with a rod of iron, thou shall dash them
in pieces like a Potters vessel, Psalm. 2.9. And Isaiah says, He shall smite
the earth with the rod of his mouth, and with the breath of his lips shall he
slay the wicked, Isa. 11.4. Paul tells us, That he shall be revealed from
Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God? etc. Yea, the mightiness and severity of Christ in this respect
is notably set forth by himself in the close of the Parable of the Nobleman,
Luke 19.27. But those mine enemies which would not that I should Re^gn over
them, bring hither and slay them before me. And the one and greatest part of
the Book of the Revelation, do but acquaint us with the woes, plagues, and
vials of wrath which he will pour forth upon his enemies, the sum of all is,
Babylon the Great is fallen, is fallen; and the Beast was taken, and with him
the false Prophet, these both were cast alive into a lake of fire burning with
Brimstone, and the Remnant were slain with the sword of him that sat upon the
Horse, which sword proceeded out of his mouth, and at last the Devil was cast
into the Lake of Fire and Brimstone where the Beast and the false Prophet are,
and shall be tormented day and night for ever and ever, Rev: 18.2. and 19, 20,
21. and 20.10. So mighty and terrible will Christ be in the destruction of his
enemies; and thus he appears to be a mighty King.

Secondly, Christ is a Mighty Priest, far above all other Priests, his
mightiness is manifest in this respect, in several particulars.

First, In the Dignity of his Person, which I consider only with relation to
his Priesthood, for the Apostle being about to treat of Christ as a Priest,
first, sets down the mightiness and excellency of his person, and the manner
of his expressing particulars (as who being the brightness of his glory, etc.
and upholding all things by the word of his power) do plainly show that they
have relation to what follow, namely his Priesthood, therefore the Apostle to
give evidence of his sufficiency for that great function, does first declare
his power and greatness, and speaking of his mightiness afterward* as a Priest
he lays much of it on the Dignity of his person, Heb: 4.14. Seeing then that
we have a great High Priest that is passed into the Heavens, Jesus the Son of
God; he is a mighty Priest, in that he is the Son of God: The same Apostle
magnifies Christ the High Priest above those that the Law made, upon this
account, Heb: 7.28. The Law makes men High Priests which have infirmity, but
the word of the Oath which was since the Law, makes the Son. And he is the
more excellent High Priest, in that it is the Son who is made.

Secondly, In the peculiarity of his Title; he is not only called an High
Priest frequently, and once Heb: 10.21. (...), A Great Priest, but he is also
styled A Great High Priest, Heb: 4.14. Though under the Law there was an High
Priest, yet never was any called Great High Priest, but Christ, and though the
Pope assume to himself the Title of Pontifex Maximus, the greatest High
Priest, yet it does of right belong to Christ.

Thirdly, In the perfection of his Nature, an High Priest without sin, without
infirmity, whereby he is by the Apostle distinguished from, and exalted above
all other Priests, Heb: 7.26, 27, 28. Such an High Priest became us, who is
holy, harmless, undefiled, separate from sinners, and made higher than the
Heavens, who needs not daily, as those High Priests to offer up sacrifice,
first for his own sins, then for the peoples; the Law makes men High Priests
which have infirmity, but the word of the Oath which was made since the Law,
the Son, who is consecrated for evermore. He is a merciful, faithful, tender,
sympathizing High Priest, Who can have compassion on the ignorant, and on them
that are out of the way, and is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb:
2.17, 18.

Fourthly, In the eminency of his order, he is a Priest not after that common
way that others were, the order of Aaron, and so but such an one as they, but
after a special and more excellent order, peculiar to him alone, the order of
Melchisedec, that great and mighty man, King of Salem, unto whom even the
Patriarch Abraham (that Mighty One) gave the tenth of the spoil, even he that
met Abraham returning from the slaughter of the Kings and blessed him, which
speaks him greater than our father Abraham, for as it is said Heb. 7.7. Without
all contradiction the less is blessed of the better: or more exc^llent; this
the Spirit of God (advancing Christ above all others) mentions both in that
famous prophecy of his Kingdom and Power, Psalm. 110.4. saying, The Lord has
sworn, and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of
Melchisedec: As also six several times in the 5, 6, and 7. Chapters of the
Epistle to the Hebrews, as it were delighting it self in the rehearsal of the
exaltation, and excellency of Christ in this respect.

Fifthly, In the solemnity of his Ordination, different from the Ordination of
other Priests, which was without so much ado, for they were made without an
Oath, but he with an Oath, and that of God himself, according to that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 110 4. Minded also by the Apostle, Heb: 7.21. The Lord swear,
and will not repent, Thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melcbisedec;
and surely it is some great and weighty matter which causes the Most High to
swear.

Sixthly, In the performance of his work, which did consist chiefly in four
things.

First, To make satisfaction, and reconciliation for the sins of the people,
and this Christ did, and he so did this mavelous work, as showed his
mightiness therein.

First, He did it to the uttermost, and that in respect

First, Of the nature and measure of it in it self, it was a full, perfect
satisfaction, wanting nothing, Heb. 10.14. By one offering he has perfected
for ever them that are sanctified: So that there needs none of the works, nor
sufferings of any other to contribute any thing to it; and if God at any time
Visit the transgression of his children with the rod, and their iniquity with
stripes. It is not in reference to any further satisfaction of his justice, but
in order to their Sanctification.

Secondly, Of the extent and largeness of it, as to the subjects that partake
of this grace, and they are not a few, but many, For he gave his life a Ransom
for many, Math. 20.28. Mark 10.45. Not the Jews only, but the Gentiles also, he
reconciled both unto God in one body by the Cross, and came and preached peace
to them that were afar off, and to them that were nigh, Ephesians. 2.16, 17. And
thus the world partake of it according to that of Paul, 2 Cor. 5.19. That God
was in Christ reconciling the world unto himself; yea, The whole world, 1 John
2.2. He is the propitiation for our sins, and not for ours only, but also for
the sins of the whole world; yea, it extends unto All things, for so it is
written, Col. 1.20. And (having made peace through the blood of his Cross) by
him to reconcile all things unto himself, By him, I say, whether they be things
in Earth, or things in Heaven.

Secondly, He did at once, not by many, but by one offering, and this speaks
him a Mighty One, upon this very account the Apostle prefers him and his
sacrifice before all the Levitical Priests and their sacrifices, of their
sacrifices he says, The Law can never with those sacrifices which they offered
year by year, continually make the comers thereunto perfect, but in those
sacrifices there is a Remembrance again made of sins every year; for it is not
possible that the blood of Bulls and Goats should take away sin, Heb. 10.1, 3,
4. And again, verse. 11. Every Priest stands daily ministering, and offe^ing
oftentimes the same sacrifices which can never take away sin; but of Christ he
speaks otherwise, not as of one weak, but mighty, a sufficient Priest and
Sacrifice; For by one Offering he has perfected for ever them that are
sanctified. He offered but one offering, and that was enough.

Thirdly, He did it in no ordinary way; not by killing of others, but by dying
himself, by making and offering himself a sacrifice for sin, according to that
in Heb: 9.26. Now once in the end of the world has he appeared to put away sin
by the sacrifice of himself? Other Priests to make atonement for sins, offered
other things in sacrifice, he himself, he was the Priest and sacrifice too; he
the just, suffered for the unjust, that he might bring us to God; this is
wonderful, no more need to be added to manifest Christ's mightiness in the
performance of this part of his Priestly work.

Secondly, To pray and intercede for the people, and this Christ does, for he
being come an High Priest of good things to come by a greater and more perfect
Tabernacle, did not by the blood of Bulls and Goats, and Calves (as other
Priests did but by his own blood) he entered in once into the holy place, into
Heaven it self, now to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb: 9.11, 12, 24.
And this he does to purpose, and with eminent success, obtaining eternal
redemption for his faithful ones; for his blood being of such great merit and
virtue, and he having such great interest and favor in Heaven, his prayers and
intercessions are very prevalent, as a Prince he has power with God, (his
Father always hearing him, John 11.42.) Neither is he so much a Petitioner to
beg blessings for Believers upon the account of mere mercy, but (having merited
and purchased them by his blood) as a mighty Advocate he plead for them in a
way of Justice. And upon this, the servants of God may, and do bear themselves
in case of sin, according to that heart-unholding word, 1 John 2.1. My little
chil^^^n, these things write I unto you, that ye sin not, and if any man sin we
have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous. Upon this did
that good woman (that we read of in History) bear her self, who (being charged
and accused, and much put to it by the Devil) said, Though I cannot answer
thee, my Advocate can: meaning Christ. And the Apostle did apprehend so much of
the mightiness of Christ in his performance of this part of his Priestly work,
as that he lays the stress of his peoples eternal salvation upon it, Heb.
7.25. Wherefore he is able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by
him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them.

Thirdly, To offer up the gifts and services of the people, Heb: 5.1. and 8.3.
And this Christ does also, and that powerfully and effectually, for he does not
take the prayers, praises, and spiritual services of his people, and barely
offer them up to the Lord, but by and through him presenting them, they are
acceptable to God, 1 Pet. 2.5. His very presenting the persons and performances
of his people (unworthy and imperfect in themselves) is sufficient to make them
acceptable to God; and therefore he is mighty in that part also of the work
(...) a Priest.

Fou^^^ly, To bless the people, Numb: 6.23, 24, 25. This also Christ does, and
in this he is migh^ier than all other Priests which were before him, which is
evident in that

First, He blesses more than they; they blessed but a few in comparison of
those he bless, they but the Nation of the Jews at the most, they but one
Nation, he all the Nations of the world, both the Jews and the Gentiles also,
according to the promise of God of old to Abraham so often repeated, That all
the Nations of the Earth should be blessed in him. And for this end did God
send him according to the words of Peter to the Jews Acts 3.25.26. Ye are the
children of the Prophets, and of the Covenant which God made wite our Fathers,
saying unto Abraham, and in thy seed shall all the kindreds of the earth be
blessed: Unto you first, God having raised up his Son Jesus, sent him to bless
you, in turning away every one of you from your iniquities. And Paul tells the
Galatians, That Christ has redeemed them from the curse of the Law, being made
a curse for them, that the blessing of Abraham might come on the Gentiles
through Jesus Christ, Gal. 3.13, 14.

Secondly, He blesses with more and more choice blessings than any other
Priest; he blesses not only with bodily, but with spiritual, and with all
spiritual blessings, with blessings for this life, and all estates and
conditions therein, and with blessings for the life to come.

Thirdly, He blesses more eminently than they; he does not only wish blessed,
but make blessed; he does not only pray for a blessing for his people, but he
does authoritatively pronounce them blessed.

Seventhly, In the unchangeableness and everlastingness of his Office, when the
Lord made him a Priest, it was for ever; The Lord has sworn, and will not
repent; thou art a Priest for ever after the order of Melchisedec. And by this
also does the Apostle exalt Christ above all other Priests, Heb: 7.22, 23, 24.
They truly were many Priests because they were not suffered to continue by
reason of death, but this man because he continues ever, has an unchangeable
Priesthood, wherefore he is able to save, etc.

Thirdly, Christ is a mighty Prophet; this plainly appears by the words of the
Disciples to himself, inquiring about the things which came to pass in those
days, Lu^e 24.19. which they said to be, concerning Jesus of Nazareth, which
was a Prophet mighty in deed and word before God and all the people. His
mightiness in this respect is manifest.

First, In his Original; for though all other true Prophets be of Gods raising
up, and sending, yet he more especially; it is peculiarly prophesied of him,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. The Lord thy God will raise up unto thee a Prophet from the midst
of thee. He is a Prophet of Gods special sending, he sent him in a more eminent
way than he did others, he sent him immediately from himself; Nicodemus
exalting him above others, says, John 3.2. We know thou art a teacher come
from God. He came from God otherwise than other Prophets did; it is said of him
alone, That he came out from God, even from the bosom of the Father, where he
was.

Secondly, In his Qualification; he came out from God, and he came thoroughly
furnished for the discharge of this Office, even with the whole mind of God,
and with a sufficiency of power to make it known; the Lord speaking of him
says, Isa: 42.1. Behold my servant, etc. I have put my spirit upon him, he
shall bring forth judgment to the Gentiles; and himself says. Isa. 61.1, 2.
The Spirit of the Lord God is upon me, he has anointed me to preach good
tidings unto the meek; he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, etc. He was full of the Spirit, and of power
by the Spirit of the Lord.

Thirdly, In his Commission, and his Commission is answerable to his
Qualification, God gave him largely of his Spirit, and he gave him a large
Commission, abundance of teaching-power, and abundance of teaching-work; See
both his Qualification and his Commission, Isa. 42.1.6, 7. I have put my Spirit
upon him, -- I will keep thee, and give thee for a Covenant of the people, for
a Light of the Gentiles, to open the blind eyes, to bring out the Prisoners
from the Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of the prisonhouse. As
also Isa. 49.6. He is not only Gods servant to raise up the Tribes of Jacob and
to restore the preserved of Israel, but says God, I will also give thee for a
light to the Gentiles, that thou may be my salvation unto the end of the
earth. He is the great Prophet, he has the grand Commission, the whole work of
teaching and saving souls is committed unto him alone, and he has undertook
it; he is the Lord of the Harvest, and all other faithful Teachers they are
but his servants and laborers; he is the chief Shepherd, all others are
inferior to him, being appointed by him to feed the Flock of God; in a word,
the Father sent him, and gave him all power both in Heaven and Earth; and he
sends others, even all that are sent; Mat: 28.18, 19, 20. Jesus came and
spoke unto them, saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven, and in Earth, Go
ye therefore and teach all Nations, baptizing them in the name of the Father,
etc.

Fourthly, In his Execution and exercise of this Office; his teaching was, and
is with power and authority upon the consciences of men wonderfully convincing
of sin and righteousness, he is a teacher that opens both the Scriptures and
understandings too, Luke 24.32, 45. He does not only propound truth to men as
others do, but he makes them stoop to it, which none else can do: his
Ministration is with such power and efficacy as that he puts the Law of God
into the minds of his people, and write it in their hearts, and this is the
sole prerogative of him who is both King, Priest, and Prophet as has been
shown.

Fifthly, In the Command of God concerning him, viz. to hear him; God at
sundry times and in diverse manners spoke in time past unto the Fathers by the
Prophets, and his Command to the people was to hear them, but God has in
these last days spoken unto us by his Son, that Great Prophet, who is greater
than all the Prophets which were before him (he being the substance of all
their Testimony) and he has commanded, that we should hear him. This the
Voice out of the cloud uttered, saying, This is my beloved Son, in whom I am
well pleased; Hear ye him; yea, this is the special and strict command of
God, Act. 3.22. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
brethren, like unto me, Him shall ye hear in all things, whatsoever he shall
say unto you; and not only so, but the severity of God is, and will be toward
all those that reject, and despise his words; for every soul that will not
hear that Prophet shall be destroyed from among the people, Act. 3.23.
Therefore he says, See that ye refused not him that speaks; for if they
escaped not, who refused him that spoke on Earth, much more shall not we
escape, if we turn away from him that speaks from heaven, Heb. 12.25. This
is his commandment, that we should believe on the Name of his Son Jesus
Christ, 1 John 3.23. Surely he is a mighty Prophet, whom the Lord does so
strictly charge the people to hear. I thought to have enlarged upon this
subject, by inserting some of the special predictions, precepts, ptomises, and
instructions of this Prophet, but what has been already mentioned is
sufficient for the present design, viz. to demonstrate his mightiness in th^s
office also.

Twenty-secondly, In the Carriage of others toward him.

First, In the carriage of the generality of the people as

First, Their recourse to him; we read not that any of the Patriarchs, Judges,
Kings, Prophets, or Apostles were so followed, and flockt to as he was; As
soon as he was borne, we read of wise men who came a great journey, from the
East to Jerusalem to worship him; and as soon as he began to teach, and work
miracles, such multitudes followed him, that he was fain to go up into a
Mountain to teach his Disciples, Math. 5.1. and as soon as he was come down
Great multitudes followed him, Math. 8.1. He was seldom without multitudes who
attended to see his miracles, and to hear his wisdom, and the gracious words
which proceeded out of his mouth; sometimes there was such an innumerable
multitude of people gathered together, that they trod one upon another, Luke
12.1. When he was in Capernaum, in Simons house healing, all the City was
gathered together at the door; And rising up early a great while before day,
he went into a solitary place, and Simon having found him, said unto him, All
men seek for thee, Mark. 1.33, 37. Sometimes he was so thong'd, that they could
not bring the sick nigh unto him in an ordinary way, that neither his mother,
nor brethren could come at him, Luke 8.19. When the Apostles gathered
themselves together unto him, to give him an account of some matters, he called
them into a desert place to rest a while, for there were many coming, and
going, and they had no leisure so much as to eat; And though they departed
into a desert place by Ship privately, the people saw them departing, and many
knew him, and ran a foot thither out of all Cities, and out-went them, and came
together unto him; And when he came into the Land of Genesareth, and came out
of the Ship, straightway they knew him, and ran through that whole Region round
about, and began to carry about in beds those that were sick, where they heard
he was, and whither soever he entered, into Villages, or Cities, or Countries,
they laid the sick in the streets, and besought him that they might touch, if
it were but the border of his garment, Mark 6.30, 31, 32, 33, 53, 54, 55, 56.
This carriage of the people speak him forth to be o^e from whom they expected
great things.

Secondly, Their marvelling, and wondering at his Doctrine, and Works, and that
not seldom, once or twice only but often, they often marvelled, they often
wondered, they were often amazed, they were often astonished, as might be
shown, and as it was often in respect of time, so it was much, and great in
respect of measure. It is said, Mark 6.51. when Christ went up unto his
Disciples into the Ship, the wind ceased, and they were sore amazed in
themselves beyond measure, and wondered; when the Damsel which was dead arose
and walked, they which beheld it were astonished with a great astonishment,
Mark 5.42. (...), they were in an ecstasy, in a great ecstasy, they were not
themselves for the time; so when he healed the man which was deaf and dumb,
they that saw it were beyond measure astonished.

Thirdly, Their Rejoycings, and Acclamations; As he did ride into Jerusalem, a
very great multitude spread their garments in the way, others cut down
branches from the trees, and strawed them in the way, and the multitudes that
went before, and that followed, cried, saying, Hosanna to the Son of David,
blessed is he that comes in the name of the Lord; Hosanna in the highest,
Math. 21.8, 9. So likewise when he had answered the Ruler of the Synagogue,
cavilling at him for healing on the Sabbath day, it is said, All the people
Rejoiced for all the Glorious things that were done by him, Luke 13.17.

Fourthly, Their beseechings, the great and mighty ones besought him, Jairus
one of the Rulers of the Synagogue, fell at his feet, and besought him greatly
to come and lay his hands on his little daughter, Mark 5.22, 23. The Centurion
came beseeching him on behalf of his servant, Math. 8.5, 6. Yea a certain
Noble man, (...), Joh. 4.46, 47. Some Princely mighty one went unto him, and
besought him that he would heal his Son, for he was at the point of death; yea
this was the carriage of the very Devils toward him, Math. 8.31. Mark 5.12.

Fifthly, Their worshipping; Many of those that came to him, fell down at his
feet, and worshipped him, the Ruler of the Synagogue, and others, both good and
bad worshipped him all along, In his Infancy, Math. 2.11. In his Man-age often,
After his Resurtection, Math. 28.9. In the time of his Ascension, Luke 24.52.
These carriages of the Generality of the people declare his mightiness.

Secondly, In the carriage of his Enemies, even in their worst carriages, viz.

First, Their persecutions; for that he was so persecuted of the Mighty Ones of
the world, was because they looked upon him, as a Mighty One, and were afraid of
him, lest he should become mightier then they, and indeed persecution of any
person or party, do usually arise from fear in the persecutors, lest such a
person or party should prevail against them; It was evidently so in the
persecutions of Christ, as soon as he was borne, he was persecuted by Herod
that Mighty One, he sought to destroy him, and it was from fear, for hearing
of one born King of the Jewe^, and some coming from far to worship him, (being
led to him in an extraordinary way) he was troubled (...), very much terrified,
and all Jerusalem with him. It is also said, Mark 11.18. The Scribes and the
chief Priests sought how they might destroy him, For they feared him, because
all the people were astonished at his doctrine. And when some told the
Pharisees what things Jesus had done, Then gathered the chief Priests and the
Pharisees a Council, and said, what do we? for this man does miracles; if we
let him thus alone, all men will believe on him, and the Romans shall come,
and take away both our place, and Nation; and from that day forth they took
council together for to put him to death, Joh. 11.46, 47, 48, 53. And History
tells us of some Emperors, who have been so troubled with the Fear of one
King Jesus taking away their Crowns, as they have sought the destruction of
the whole lineage of David; so that it is apparent that the very persecutions
of his enemies spoke him to be a Mighty One, one whom they durst not let live.

Secondly, Their Combinations and confederacies against him, there were, and
are combinations of the mighty against him, yea strong Combinations against him.

First, A Combination of all Interests, both civil, eccl^siasticall, and
military, as is evident in the words of Peter and John, recorded Acts 4.25, 26,
27. Lord thou art God which have made Heave and Earth, etc. who by the mouth of
thy servant David have said, Why did the Heathen rage, and the people imagine
vain things; The Kings of the Earth stood up, and the Rulers were gathered
together against the Lord, and against his Christ. For of a truth against thy
holy child Jesus, whom thou have anointed, both Herod, and Pontius Pilate, with
the Gentiles and the people of Israel were gathered together; with Luke 19.47.
The chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the chief of the people sought to
destroy him; thus all sorts of Interests were engaged against Christ.

Secondly, A Combination of all they have, which may be reduced to three heads.

First, A Combination of powers, and strength; For both Herod, and Pontius
Pilate, and the chief Priests, and others joined their several powers, and
Authorities against him; and as it was then, so it was to be afterward, as is
manifest by the Angels explanation of John's Vision to him, Rev. 17.12, 13, 14.
The ten Horns which thou saw are ten Kings which have received no kingdom
as yet, but receive power as Kings one hour with the Beast; These have one
mind, and shall give their power and strength unto the Beast; These shall make
war with the Lamb: And this John saw yet more fully, Rev. 19.19. I saw the
Beast, and the Kings of the Earth, and their Armies gathered together to make
war against him that sat on the Horse, and against his Army; Thus the powers
and forces of the world combine against Christ.

Secondly, A Combination of policy, and Council; The Enemies of Christ
consulted together with one Consent, and were confederate against him; They
consulted together how to entangle him in his talk, how to apprehend him, how
to put him to death, how to conceal his Resurrection, Math. 22.15. Math. 26.3,
4. Math. 27.1. Math. 28.12. Of this the Psalmist speaks, The Kings of the Earth
set themselves, and the Rulers take Council together against the Lord, and
against his Anointed, Psalm. 2.2.

Thirdly, A Combination of purses, they had all one purse against him; this is
evident in his Apprehension, for the chief Priests and Captains covenanted to
give Judas money, Luke 22, 4, 5. As also in his Resurrection (being apparent to
the Soldiers, who also declared it to the chief Priests) they spared no cost
to prevail with the Soldiers to conceal the same; They gave large money to
them to stop their mouths from publishing the Truth, and to open them to tell a
lie, Math. 28.11, 12, 13.

Thirdly, A Combination against him, and all of him; They combined against his
person to put him to death as a Malefactor; against his Doctrine, to keep, or
cast it out as error; against his servants to root them out of the Earth, as
evil doers; against his Kingdom, to suppress that as some hurtful, dangerous
thing; As their hatred was of the whole kind, viz. Christ, and those that were
Christ's, so they combined against him, and all of him, both persons, and
things, that the name of Christ might be no more in Remembrance. And that they
durst not deal with him singly, but thus combined together against him, is a
plain demonstration of his mightiness.

Thirdly, In the carriage of his servants toward him, as

First, Their confidence in him; In all their difficulties, dangers, and
distresses, relating both to soul and body, he is their confidence for
supplies, succors, and salvation; neither is he the confidence of some only,
but of all his servants, not of the Jews only (for many, yea many thousands of
them have believed on him, Acts 20.21.) but also, and especially of the
Gentiles; according to the prophecy of him, Isa. 11.10. He shall stand for an
Ensign of the people, to it shall the Gentiles seek; which the Apostle
explaines, and calls a Trusting in him, Romans 15.12. In him shall the Gentiles
trust; and thus he is the Confidence of all the ends of the Earth, and of them
that are a far off upon the Sea, and how mighty must he needs be that is the
sole trust, and confidence of all the truly wise, holy, and faithful ones
among men?

Secondly, Their Confession of him; As the Lord requires confession with the
mouth, as well as faith in the heart, Romans 10.9, 10. so the servants of Christ
are not satisfied that they believe on him only (in secret) as their Prince,
and Savior, but by their profession proclaim him to be so on the housetop
(being neither ashamed, nor afraid to confess him before men) that others
might also know, and acknowledge him with them. And as Confession of him is (as
Luther says) Virtus virtutum, et summum, ac difficillium opus, the most
excellent, and difficult work, and that which some beleeevers have not been
able to do, Joh. 12.42. So it attributes power to Christ, and speaks him forth
to be a Savior, and a great One.

Thirdly, Their sufferings for him, which follow their confession of him; how
have they been reproached, persecuted, and hated of all men for his Name sake,
They have had trials of cruel mockings, scourgings, of bonds, imprisonments,
have been stoned, sawen asunder, slain with the sword, have wandered about in
sheepskins, and goat skins, in deserts, mountains, and in dens, and caves of
the earth, Heb. 11.36, 38, 38. And not only those that first trusted in
Christ, but all the faithful in their several Generations have been ready to
be bound and to dye, yea many have died for Jesus sake: we read not of such
sufferers for any cause, either for number, constancy or cheerfulness, as the
Martyrs of Jesus, nor yet of any sufferings greater than what they endured for
Jesus sake; Surely he is some Mighty One for whose sake such an innumerable
company of Saints have suffered such grievous things with joyfulness.

Twenty-thirdly, He is Mighty in his own sufferings, that he who was God should
suffer at all, was a mavelous thing, and a wonder, which was and could be
only by assuming a nature to whom it was possible to suffer; his Mightiness in
his sufferings is manifest.

F^rst, In the kinds of his sufferings, his sufferings were of all sorts, the
Cup which he drank of had all kind of bitterness in it, disgrace, poverty,
pain, temptations, and whatsoever is hard to be endured.

Secondly, In the subject of his sufferings, he suffered in every part.

First, In his soul, as himself said, Math. 26.38. My soul is exceeding
sorrowful, even unto death.

Secondly, In his body, in every part thereof, in all the senses thereof.

In his hearing, by their reproaches, and crying, crucify him.

In his sight, by their scoffing, and scorning gestures.

In his smell, by his being in that noisome place Golgotha, Math. 27.33.

In his taste, by his tasting of vinegar mingled with gall, which they gave him
to drink, Math. 27.34.

In his feeling, by the thorns on his head, blows on his cheeks, spittle on
his face, the spear in his side, and the nails in his hands.

Thirdly, In his Name, by reproach, and ignominy.

Fourthly, In his estate, and goods, they crucified him, and parted his
garments, casting lots, Math. 27.35.

Thirdly, In the measure of his sufferings, it was good measure, heaped up,
pressed down, and running over, he suffered a great deal of every kind.

Much disgrace, and shame; when he was teaching the Pharisees derided him, when
he was discoursing the people said, thou have a Devil.

When they apprehended him, it was with disgrace, they came with swords, and
staves, as against a thief.

When they did condemn him, it was to be crucified, a shameful death; and
they preferred a murderer before him, when they had condemned him, they
stripped him, and put on him a Scarlet robe, they put a Crown of thorns upon
his head, and a reed in his right hand, and they bowed the knee before him, and
mocked him, saying, Hail King of the Jews, Math. 27.28, 29.

When they crucified him, it was between two thieves, esteeming him the chief,
and worst of malefactors. And when he was on the Cross, they that passed by,
reviled him, wagging their heads, saying, thou that destroyest the Temple, and
buildest it in three days, save thy self. Likewise the chief Priests mocking
him, with the Scribes, and Elders, said, he saved others, himself he cannot
save, etc. Math. 27.39, 40, 41, 42.

And when he was dead, they called him, that Deceiver.

Great poverty, as soon as he was borne, he was laid in a Manger, Luke 2.7.
Himself said, Math. 8.20. The Son of man has not where to lay his head.

Great pain; It is said, Being in an Agony, he prayed more earnestly, and his
sweat was as it were Great Drops of blood falling down to the Ground, Luke
22.44. And himself says, My soul is exceeding sorrowful, even unto death;
he was scourged, smitten, buffetted, and at last crucified, (that lingering,
painful death) the large measure of his sufferings, as well as the several
kinds, are mentioned, Isa. 53.

Fourthly, In the efficient Causes of his sufferings, both principal, and
Isntrumental, he suffered from the Mighty.

First, From his Father, the Almighty God, he spared him not, it pleased the
Lord to bruise him, he has put him to grief, Isaiah 53.10.

Secondly, From his foes, and they are Mighty Ones; he suffered from the Devil
that Mighty One.

From men, and that of all sorts and ranks, both people, and Rulers, both
mean, and mighty, especially the Mighty Ones of the Earth; from Pontius Pilate
the Governor, that Mighty One; from Herod, that Great one, Tetrarch of
Galilee, and his men of war, and from the chief Priests, Scribes, and
Pharisees, and all the Elders of the people, as well as from the people
themselves, see Acts 4.26, 27.

Thirdly, From his Friends, from his own Countrymen, the Jews, they would have
him crucified, therefore says Pilate to him, Joh. 18.35. Thine own Nation, and
the chief Priests have delivered thee unto me; yea from his nearest friends,
Peter shamefully denied him; Judas his own servant, one of the Twelve, a
Disciple in Ordinary, betrayed him, and all his Disciples forsook him, and
fled, Math. 26.56.

Fifthly, In the persons for whom he suffered, Messiah was wounded, bruised,
and cut off, but not for himself, it was for others, and they strangers,
sinners, enemies, Christ said when he was taken of the Soldiers, If ye seek
me, let these go their way. Christ was willing that the hurt which sinners had
done to God, and the debt which they owed to him should be set upon his score,
and put upon his account, and ^he Apostle m^ntions it as a remarkable thing,
That Christ dyed for the ungodly, Rom: 5.6. The just for the unjust, 1 Pet.
3.18.

Sixthly, In his willingness and readiness to suffer; he was free and willing
to undertake the wo^k of man's Redemption; when he comes into the world he
says, Sacrifice and Offerings thou would not, but a body have thou prepared
me; then said I, Lo, I come to do thy will O God, Heb: 20.5, 7. Its the
expression of one breaking out with joy to do the thing; he was free also in
the carrying of it on, as appears by his own words, Luke 12.50. I have a
B^ptisme to be baptized with, and how am I straightened till it be accomplished.
The Cup which my Father has given me, shall I not drink it? John 18.11.

Seventhly, In the end of his suffering; which was matter of greatest weight
and concernment, as the averting of Gods wrath the procuring of his favor, the
freeing from all evil, and bringing souls to God for life and salvation; now
how mighty an One must he needs be that endured such a large measure of all
kinds of sufferings in all parts, from all sorts of persons? and that freely
and willingly to procure mercy and favor for sinners, and enemies to himself.

Particular sufferings wherein Christ's Mightiness is to be seen.
First, His Apprehension and taking, they came forth as to a Mighty One that
would not have been apprehended; Judas came, and with him a great multitude
with swords and staves, from the chief Priests, and the Scribes, and the
Elders, Mark 14.43. And at that time the mightiness of Christ was seen, for
when one that was about him smote the servant of the High Priest, and cut off
his right ear, he did but touch his ear and healed him, Luke 22.50, 51. And
which is more they that went about to take him, were smitten down with one soft
word of his mouth; for as soon as he had said unto them, I am he, they went
backward and fell to the ground, John 18.6.

Secondly, His Trial; his Accusation and charge was, That he was a perverter of
the Nation, and forbad to give Tribute to Caesar, saying, That he himself is
Christ, a King, Luke 23.2. And the questions which the Governor and others put
to him were according to it, Art thou the Son of God? Art thou the King of the
Jews? Art thou a King? his Charge was as of a Mighty One, and his Answer was as
of a Mighty One: For when the High Priest asked him, and said unto him; Art
thou the Christ, the Son of the blessed? he said, I am; that is, the Son of
God, not by Adoption as others, but by Nature; for unless this had been the
meaning of his answer, they could not have condemned him of blasphemy, but they
took it as granted, nor did he deny it, that he made himself such a Son of God,
as was equal with God; so there was God standing in the Congregation of the
Mighty, those earthly gods did judge him, and he (which shows that he was a
Mighty One) judges them, or at least declares himself to be that Judge which
was to judge them and all men too; for to that purpose was his Answer, Jesus
said, I am, and ye shall see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of power,
and coming in the Clouds of Heaven, Mark 14.62. And when he was asked, Whether
he was a King, he denied it not, but confessed it in these words, My Kingdom
is not of this world, John 18.36,

Thirdly, His Condemnation; he was condemned as a Mighty One, his Accusation,
and the cause of his Condemnation was set up over his head, written, This is
Jesus the King of the Jews, Math. 27.37. Mark says, The King of the Jews, Mark
15.26. Luke, This is the King of the Jews, Luke 22.38. John, Jesus of Nazareth
the King of the Jews, John 19.19. The main thing regarded was, That he took
upon him to be King of the Jews: And it is to be observed, that God did so
overruled the heart and hand of Pilate, that instead of noting some Crime, he
sets down a most glorious and worthy Title; and this Superscription was wrought
in three Languages, viz: Hebrew, Greek and Latin, The end of which was, (as
Mr. Perk^ns notes) that the Passion of Christ, and also the publishing of his
Kingdom and Gospel might spread all over the world, and Pilate would not be
prevailed with by the chief Priests, to change the Title to that he said, I am
King of the Jews, but said, What I have written, I have written, John 19.21, 22.

Fourthly, His Death, in which his mightiness shines forth.

First, In the Concomitants of it; as the conversion of the Thief, the darkning
of the Sun over all the Land, from the sixth, to the ninth hour, the rending of
the Vail of the Temple in twain, the Earthquake, the rending of the Rocks, the
opening of the Graves, the rising of many bodies of Saints which slept, the
conviction and confession of the Centurion with his Soldiers, That he was the
Son of God, some great and mighty One that fell that day, Math: 27.51, 52, 54.
Mark 15.33.

Secondly, In the virtue and efficacy of it; which I shall briefly hint in
three particulars,

First, It is of a purchasing virtue; for by and through it he purchased a
people, Acts 20.28. And an inheritance for them, Ephesians. 1.7, 11. Which no
cerruptible thing as Silver and Gold could obtain, 1 Pet. 1.18.

Secondly, It is of a pacifying virtue; For by it he has made an Atonement,
and Reconciliation for sin, Rom: 5.10. Heb. 2.17. Which the blood of Bulls and
Goats could never do, Heb: 10.4, 11.

Thirdly, It is of a purifying virtue; It purges the Conscience from dead
works to serve the living God, Heb: 9.14. Yea, It cleanses from all sin, 1
John 1.7. which no Soap nor Nitre can effect, Jer. 2.22.

Twenty-fourthly, He is mighty in his Burial; some degree of glory did break
forth in Christ's Burial, he had an honorable Burial; He made his Grave with
the rich in his death, Isa: 53.9. Joseph of Arimathea, not only a good man and
a just, but also an honorable Counselor, together with Nicodemus a Ruler of
the Jews, who brought a mixture of Myrrh and Aloes, about an hundred pound
weight, took the body of Jesus and wound it in Linen Clothes with the Spices
and laid it in a Sepulcher hewn out of the Rock, a new Sepulcher where never
man was laid before; that which was wonderful in his Burial was, that they who
were fearful to confess him when living, were bold to own him when dead, and
to be buried; for Joseph of Arimathea, who was a Disciple, but secretly for
fear of the Jews, John 19.38. yet went in boldly unto Pilate and craved the
body of Jesus, Mark 15.43. And Nicodemus which at the first came to him by
night, had courage to appear at his Burial, though he was condemned and
crucified as a great Malefactor; this the Evangelist John notes, John 19.39.

Twenty-fifthly, He is mighty in his Resurrection; which does appear in that

First, He rose at all, and it is a wonderful thing for the dead to rise.

Secondly, He rose soon, he did not lie many years in the Grave, he did not as
Mahomet, who promised the Sarazins after eight hundred years to re-visit them,
but within three days, for he said unto the Jews, Destroy this Temple
(speaking of the Temple of his body) and in three days I will raise it up, and
accordingly he rose the third day, which was as short a time as might be, for
had he not been dead some such like distance of time, some would not have
believed that he was dead at all.

Thirdly, He rose against utmost humane opposition, though his enemies did
whatever they could to hinder it; the chief Priests and the Pharisees make an
Address to Pilate about this, saying, Sir, We remember that that Deceiver said
while he was yet alive After three days I will rise again; command therefore
that the Sepulcher be made sure until the third day: And Pilate answered their
desire, for he said unto them, ye have a watch, go your way, make it as sure as
you can; so they went and made the Sepulcher sure, sealing the stone, and
setting a watch, Math. 27.62, 63, 64, 65.66. Yet Christ rose notwithstanding
their great watch of Soldiers, and great stone which they rolled to the door
of the Sepulcher; so that by his Resurrection from the dead, he is declared to
be the Son of God with power, Romans 1.4. And that he has satisfied the Justice
of God, and discharged the debt which he undertook to pay to the full, being
taken from prison, the Grave, in which the strength of sin, and Gods wrath did
for a time as Cords hold him; and therefore the Apostle proclaims a mighty
victory at Christ's Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57. And indeed then
Christ appeared victorious, his Resurrection being the beginning of his
Exaltation.

Twenty-sixthly, He is mighty in his Ascension, not only in that he ascended
on high, into heaven; upon which account the Apostle magnifies him, Heb: 4.14.
Seeing we have a Great High Priest that is passed inro the Heavens, Jesus the
Son of God; but he ascended as a Mighty One; Blessing the Disciples as he
parted with them, and they worshipping him, Luke 24.50, 51, 52. The Angels also
apppeared and attended, Acts 1.10.

Twenty-seventhly, He is mighty in his Session; he is set down on the right
hand of God. The Apostle speaks of him as of a Mighty One in this respect, Heb:
8, 1. We have such an High Priest, who is set on the right hand of the Throne
of the Majesty in the Heavens: And in this respect he is far above any of the
Angels, for God never said to any of the Angels, Sit on my right hand, Heb:
1.13. And thus he is far above all Principality and Power, and Might, and
Dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but also in
that which is to come, Ephesians. 1.20, 21. To which agrees the words of Peter, 1
Pet 3.22. Who is gone into Heaven, and is on the right hand of God, Angels, and
Authorities, and Powers, being made subject to him.

Twenty-eightly, He is mighty in his coming again, and that in three things
especially.

First, In the signs of his coming, the Lord will give notice to the world of
his coming, by strange, terrible and dreadful signs, public signs, such as
all shall see and observe, for there shall be signs in the Sun, and in the
Moon, and in the Stars, and in the Earth, and in the Sea: The Sun shall be
darkened, and the Moon shall not give her light, the Stars shall fall from
heaven, and the powers of the heavens shall be shaken, the Sea and the waves
shall roar, the Nations shall be distressed and perplexed, men's hearts failing
them for fear, etc. Math. 24.29. with Luke 21.25, 26. And then shall they see
the Son of man coming in a cloud with power and great glory.

Secondly, In the manner of his coming; he shall not come then as he did at
first, not as a sheep to the slaughter, as a Sufferer, but as a Conqueror, and
Deliverer from all sin and punishment; he shall not come in meannesse and
weakness, but in Majesty and Power, triumphing over Sin, Death and Devil; He
shall come in glory, in his own glory, and in his Fathers, and of the holy
Angels, Luke 9.26. He shall come with all his holy Ange^s and Saints attending
on him, Matthew. 25.31. 1 Thessalonians: 3.13.

Thirdly, In the end of his coming, viz: to show his might and greatness more
than ever he did, to take his kingdom, and to reign before his Ancients and
all others gloriously, to judge the quick and the dead, 2 Timothy 4.1. Utterly to
destroy wicked and ungodly men, according to that of Paul, 2 Thessalonians: 1.7, 8. He
shall be revealed from heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking
vengeance on them that know not God, and that obey not the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus Christ; Fully and eminently to save his faithful servants, For he was
once offered to bear the sins of many, and unto them that look for him, shall
he appear the second time, without sin unto salvation, Heb: 9.28. Then shall he
sit on his own Throne, and all overcomers with him, Rev: 3.21.

Thus have I demonstrated the mightiness of Christ in many particulars; I shall
add a few more to show the super-excellency of this Mighty One, the Lord Christ.

First, He is mighty, and righteous; he is no Tyrant, showing forth his
mightiness in barbarous and unjust actions, like the worlds Mighty Ones, whose
course is usually evil, and their force not right, Jerem: 23.10. He does not
by his might overthrow right, but he always works, yea, he loves
righteousness, Psalm. 45.7. Though he may in some great and strange works go
besides the ordinary path and course of providence, yet he never goes out of
the way of righteousness; the most terrible things which he will do, shall be
in righteousness; true and righteous are, and shall be all his judgments, for
a Scepter of Righteousness is the Scepter of his Kingdom, Heb: 1.8. And being
thus clothed with righteousness, he excels the Mighty Ones of the Earth.

Secondly, He is mighty and merciful: The mighty ones of the world are
commonly cruel and fierce, but for one to be mighty and merciful is rare; such
an one is Christ, might and mercy dwell together in him; he has a mighty* yet
a tender heart, and though he be well able to cut off his strongest, stoutest
Adversaries, yet he is ready to forgive and receive them graciously. It is
observable all the mighty works of Christ were merciful works, not wrought in
malice and revenge, but in love and good will to men, not for their hurt, but
for their good, and therefore it is said, He went about doing good, Acts 10.38.

Thirdly, He is mighty and meek, mild and humble, not like the Mighty Ones of
this world, who are for the most part of proud and scornful spirits, and of
fierce countenances; but he is meek and lowly in heart, Math: 11.29. Yea,
though he be very high and mighty, yet has he respect to the lowly, and unto
that man will this Mighty One look, that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and
trembles at his word; yea, with him will he dwell that is of an humble spirit.
It was the excellency of Moses, that he was mighty and yet meek, none on earth
so meek as he in his day; but Christ is both mightier and meeker too. I shall
conclude this with that rarity and wonder which Zachary mentions, Zach. 9.9.
Rejoice greatly, O daughter of Zion: Shout, O Daughter of Jerusalem; behold,
thy King comes unto thee; he is just, and having salvation, lowly, and riding
upon an Ass, and upon a Colt the Foale of an Ass.

Fourthly, He is mighty and wise; some who are great in power, are not eminent
in wisdom; but Christ is great in wisdom, as well as in strength, and
therefore he is said to be by the Apostle, The Power of God, and the Wisdom of
God, 1 Cor. 1.24.

Fifthly, He is mighty and patient, longsuffering, and slow to anger; it is not
so much for the mean and weak to be patient, as for the mighty, such as are
able to revenge all wrongs done unto them, Posse, et nolle nobile; The Mighty
Ones of the world are usually hasty, soon angry, and presently set upon those
that offend them; but it is the glory and excellency of Christ, that he is
great in power, and yet slow to anger, and bears long with sinners and enemies;
he does (at this very day) with much longsuffering endure the manifold
indignities, contradictions and rebellions of sinners against himself, in which
respect he excels other Mighty Ones.

Sixthly, He is Mighty and Allmighty; He is Alpha and Omega, the beginning and
the ending, The Lord which is, and which was, and which is to come, The
Allmighty, Revel: 1.8. Other Mighty Ones can do great things, but he can do all
things; others are potent, but he is the Lord God Omnipotent, Rev: 19.6. and so
higher and greater than they.

Seventhly, He is mighty, and always mighty: Other Mighty Ones they faint, and
their strength fail them, Isa: 40.30. they grow weary and weak, and cease to
be Mighty, at least so mighty as they have been: I cannot do as I have done, is
the voice of other Mighty Ones; but Christ the Lord, the Mighty One faints
not, neither is weary, his strength fails not, he is as mighty as he was when
God first put his Spirit upon him, as his strength was then, so it is now, and
so it ever shall be; He is the same yesterday, to day, and for ever, Heb: 13.8.
His Mediatorship was as powerful before, as after his exhibition in the flesh,
in which respect he is said to be a Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world, Rev: 13.8. and will be hereafter, even at the very last end of all
things, as effectual as it is now, or has been heretofore.

Eighthly, He is mighty, and the only Mighty One, he is mighty and none
besides him, (the Father always excepted, who has put all things under him;)
power is Christ's peculiar, he is Plenepotentiarius, the Proprietary of power,
and the Distributer of it; others, who are called mighty, are not so, compared
with him; for He is the one Lord over all, Zech: 14.9. and they his Subjects,
who must bow down before him, either freely or unwillingly; and therefore he is
called by the Apostle, 1 Timothy: 6.15. The blessed and only Potentate, the King
of Kings, and Lord of Lords.

9. He is the Mighty One, that is truly that, and does that, which other Mighty
Ones are said to be, and are not, and do not; that which is falsely ascribed to
others, is truly attributed to him; for though the worlds mighty ones are
accounted mightier than indeed they are, this Mighty One cannot be esteemed
mightier than indeed he is. History tell us, that Canutus King of England being
flattered by his Subjects, and called King of Kings, Most mighty, etc. went and
sat down by the Seaside, commanded the floods arising and coming nigh him,
nor to touch him nor his clothes, but the floods came and made him start back,
and he said to his Lords, Lo, ye call me such a mighty King, yet I cannot cause
this little water to stay at my command, but it is ready to drown me; but
Christ can do this, (The Sea, and the winds obey him) and whatsoever any of the
mighty ones of the earth undertake to do, and cannot accomplish: He is not
only called Mighty, but he is mighty and acts mightily; He is (without any
flattery, or Hyperbole) Most High, most Mighty, most Sacred, most Excellent;
yea, He is Excellency, Highness, Holiness, Mightiness, and Majesty it self.
Thus Christ does not only appear to be mighty, but to be mightier, and more
excellent than all others; we have heard and read of many mighty, famous Ones,
both in Sacred and Common writings, as Nimrod, Pharaoh, Moses, Joshua, Gideon,
Sampson, David, Solomon, Alexander the Great, Pompey the Great.
and others, who have done great and mighty things, but Christ excels them all,
and is greater than any, than all of them; indeed he is so mighty, that he is
above the understanding of men, he is great in power, and we know him not, we
cannot find him out, great things does he, which we cannot comprehend.

Quest: How came Christ to be such a Mighty One?

Answ. If we consider him in his Eternal Essence and Being, abstractively from
his Humane Nature, as he is one with the Father from Eternity, so his
mightiness and dignity is of himself, and not from any other, but if we
consider him as undertaking and carrying on the work of Mediatorship between
God and man in the humane Nature, which he assumed, so he is said to be made
Mighty: The Apostle Peter speaking of him as such, says, Let all the house of
Israel know assuredly, that God has made that same Jesus whom you have
crucified, both Lord and Christ, Acts 2.36. In which respect God is said to do
what he did, as appears by the words of Peter in the same speech to the men of
Israel, Jesus of Nazareth, a man approved of God among you by miracles, wonders
and signs, which God did by him in the midst of you, Acts 2.22. And thus Christ
becomes Mighty through the Father.

First, Through the Fathers mission; the Father sent him, and that is his
strength, and therefore he speaks much of it upon all occasions, nigh forty
times in John, besides several other places, he hints that the Father sent him,
and that he came not of himself, but proceeded forth, and came from God; God
cannot say of Christ, as of those Pr^phets mentioned Jer. 14.14. I sent them
not, neither have I commanded them: and as they were weak and could not profit
the people, being not sent of God, Christ being sent of God becomes mighty to
accomplish whatever he undertook: Had not God sent him, he could not have spoke
with such Power and Authority, could not have done such wonderful works, nor
have undergone and suffered such grievous torments as he did; but being sent of
the Father, and knowing that the Father sent him, he was full of might,
courage, and confidence to do and suffer what was the Will of his Father that
sent him. Gods mission makes mighty, it was that which enabled Gideon to be a
Savior to Israel, Judges 6.14. The Lord looked upon him, and said, Go in this
thy might, and thou shall save Israel from the hand of the Midianites: have not
I sent thee? He that is sent with full Authority and Power from some mighty
Prince to transact his affairs, is thereby mighty, coming and acting as one
sent by him; Christ came and acted as one sent from the absolute Monarch of all
the world, the most high ^od of Heaven and Earth, and he having given all power
and authority into his hands, he is exceeding mighty to perform the will of him
that sent him.

Secondly, Through the Fathers Unction; he was full of power and might by the
Spirit of the Lord; the Anointing of the Lord makes mighty, It was that which
made David, Solomon, Cyrus, and others mighty to do the work of God in their
several generations, and it is that which makes Christ so Mighty, for being
anointed with the holy Spirit above others, he became mightier than all others;
The Lord anointed him King, in which respect he is in a peculiar manner called
Gods Anointed, Psalm. 2.2. and thence it is that he is so mighty to rule, both
able to save and to destroy; The Lord anointed him to preach good tidings unto
the meek, and sent him to bind up the brokenhearted, Isa. 61.1. with Luke
4.18. and thence it was that his words were with such power, and efficacy; And
the Lord anointed him Priest, and so he was Mighty to offer up himself without
spot to God, and his blood also Mighty, and effectual to purge the Conscience
from dead works; according to the words of the Apostle, Heb. 9.14. How much
more shall the blood of Christ, who through the Eternal Spirit offered
himself without spot to God, purge your Conscience from dead works to serve
the living God. And Peter in his Sermon, Act. 10.38. gives this very account of
Christ's might, and mighty works, viz. That God anointed Jesus of Nazareth with
the holy Ghost, and with power, who went about doing good, and healing all that
were oppressed of the Devil, for God was with him: And himself says, Joh.
8.29. He that sent me is with me, the Father has not left me alone. And thus
through the Spirit of the Lord resting upon him, even the Spirit of might
(according to what was prophesied of him, Isa. 11.2.) he is Mighty.

Reasons why Christ is a Mighty One.
Reas. 1. For the Fathers Glory, that the Father might be glorified in the Son;
for as it had been a disparagement and dishonor unto God to have sent a weak,
insufficient one, so it is the Fathers glory that he has sent a Mighty One,
one like unto himself, able to save to the uttermost all them that come unto
God by him, Heb. 7.25. It is the Fathers glory to have such a Son, so Mighty a
one, and that not only because he himself did glorify him on earth, but
because others also did glorify him because of his Son; for when the people,
even the multitude saw the mighty works, and miracles which he did, they
marvelled, and glorified God, Math. 9.8. Math. 15.31. Mark 2.12. Luke 5.26.

Reas. 2. For the Sons glory, that Christ might be honored as well as the
Father; Christ himself gives this reason why the Father made him such a Mighty
One, Joh. 5.22, 23. The Father Judges no man, but has committed all Judgment
unto the Son, That all men should honor the Son, even as they honor the
Father; and by this the Father draws the thoughts and hearts of men to the
Son, so as they receive and entertain him as the Redeemer of the world; For
Christ being a Mighty one, and sufficiently manifesting and evidencing himself
to be The Christ, the Son of the Blessed, by doing the Works which none other
man did, neither could do, many believed on him, and became followers, and
honourers of him.

Reas. 3. Because of the work which God has sent him to do, which was hard
work, beyond the skill and strength of men and Angels to perform, for it was
to redeem a weak, captivated, cursed people from the power of Sin, World,
Death, and Devil, (those mighty Adversaries) and to raise them up unto a
participation of his holiness, and glory. It is Requisite there should be a
proportion of strength in every Agent to the work which he has to do, that if
the work be difficult, the Agent should be strong; And it has been the usual
way of the most wise God to suite persons to things, who though he has, and
does sometimes make use of weak ones for Great, and weighty, and difficult
services, yet does always make them mighty, and sufficient for the work
whereunto he calls them; he did so with Gideon, David, and others: And thus it
was, and is with Christ, for being sent to save, he was and is therefore mighty
to save; being sent to redeem, he is a strong Redeemer, that he may thoughly
plead his peoples Cause, and disquiet, and confound all their enemies. The
Spirit of God in the Prophets speaking of the great work of Christ, in the
execution of his Regal and Prophetical Offices, makes mention of his mightiness
and ability thereunto, Isa. 42.1, 4. Behold my servant whom I uphold, I have
put my Spirit upon him, he shall bring forth Judgment to the Gentiles. He
shall not fail, nor be discouraged, till he has set Judgment in the Earth,
Micah speaking of him as the Ruler in Israel, says, He shall stand, and feed
in the strength of the Lord, in the Majesty of the Name of the Lord his God,
and they shall abide; for now he shall be great unto the ends of the Earth,
Mic. 5.4. The Apostle also treating of his Priestly Office, says, That he
through the Eternal Spirit offered himself without spot to God, Heb. 9.14.

Quest. Whence is it that men despise and oppose this Mighty One?

Ans. 1. It is through that Enmity which is in their hearts against him. God
has according to his word, Genesis 3.15. put Enmity between the Serpent, and the
Woman, and their seed; and from this Enmity as from a cursed root proceeds that
evil fruit of opposition against Christ, which will not cease, till the Enmity
be abolished; This very account does Christ himself give of his enemies
opposition against him, in one of his parables, Luke 19.14. His Citizens hated
him, and sent a Message after him, saying, we will not have this man to reign
over us.

Secondly, It is through the ignorance that is in them, not knowing him whom
they persecute; It was so with Paul, when Christ spoke to him, saying, Saul,
Saul, why persecutest thou me? He said, who art thou Lord? and the Lord said, I
am Jesus; he knew not Christ, Act. 9.4, 5. And thence it is that he says
(speaking of his being a persecuter and injurious) I obtained mercy, because I
did it ignorantly in unbelief, 1 Timothy 1.13. From hence it was, even from their
ignorance, that the Princes of this World did so oppose, and persecute him in
his Person, they knew not the wisdom of God, for had they known it, they
would not have crucified the Lord of Glory, 1 Cor. 2.7, 8. And himself gives
the same reason of his suffering, and persecution in his Members, Joh. 16.2, 3.
He says to his Disciples, They shall put you out of the Synagogues, yea the
time comes that whosoever kills you, will think he does God service; and
these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the Father nor
me.

Thirdly, Through unbelief; for though they hear of his Mightiness, and
power, yet they do not believe the report thereof, (though not one half of the
greatness and power of Christ have been told them) but the words of them that
declare it, seem to them as Idle tale^ and they believe them not; and then no
wonder they despise, and reject him: They do not believe his Omnisciencie, but
say concerning their actions, How does he know? can he judge through the dark
cloud? Job 22.13. and so they become bold to speak and act against this Mighty
One; like those whom the Prophet complained of to the Lord, Psalm. 94.5, 6, 7.
They break in pieces thy people, O Lord, and afflict thy heritage; they slay
the widow, and the stranger, and murder the Fatherless; yet they say, The
Lord shall not see, neither shall the God of Jacob regard it. Or if they do
believe that he is Mighty, yet they do not believe that he will be so severe,
and terrible to his enemies, as many conceive, and speak, giving no heed to
what is written concerning him, especially Psalm. 2.9, 12. Psalm. 72.4. Psalm.
110.6. Isa. 11.4. 2 These. 1.7, 8, 9. Thus, falsely concluding in their own
spirits, that there is no great danger in opposing him, they readily venture
thereupon to their own destruction.

Fourthly, Through confidence in their own strength, thinking of themselves
more highly than they ought to think, they are carried forth to undertake more
than they are able to perform. The Mighty Ones of the Earth do conceit, and
conclude within themselves, that they have a sufficiency of counsel, and
strength, to e^^^^nter with this Mighty One. Pharaoh that mighty one was so
confident in his own strength, that he scorned, and opposed the Almighty; for
he said, Who is the Lord, that I should obey his voice, to let Israel go? I
know not the Lord, neither will I let Israel go, Exodus 5.2. Likewise
Sennacherib King of Assyria, trusting to the multitudes of his Chariots, etc.
sent a challenge to the living God, exalted, and lifted up himself on high,
even against the holy One of Israel, Isa. 36.18, 19, 20. Chap. 37.23. When men
are confident to overcome, they are bold to oppose.

Fifthly, Through their putting afar off the day of his wrath, and vengeance;
they take boldness to rebel against him: And though they hear of his
Indignation, and furious rebukes to be poured out upon them, yet they see that
through his patience, and long-suffering, there is respite; and so like
Pharaoh, they harden their hearts against him; they say, as they, Ezekiel. 12.22.
The days are prolonged, and every vision fails; and because sentence against
themselves, and other evil workers is not executed speedily, in stead of
submitting unto him against whom they have sinned, the^r hearts are fully set
in them to do more evil, Eccl: 8.11. and at length become mockers, and scoffers
at him, and his word, saying, Where is this Mighty one? where is the promise of
his coming? where is his kingdom, and power, and glory? and thus become
abusers, and persecutors of his servants upon the Earth.

Sixthly, Because they are afraid he will take away their dear enjoyments from
them, their power, pomp, pleasures, profits: If Christ would be with them as a
sojourner, and stranger, and not meddle with their matters, they would let him
alone; but they fear he will be a Prince, and a Judge amongst them, and drive
them from their stations, and pull them down from their state, Isa. 22.19. and
therefore they think it wisdom to oppose him betimes. When Tiberius the
Emperor of Rome, sent to the Senate, and required that the Image of Christ
might be set up in the Capitol; They returned Answer, that if that were set up,
all the other Images of their Gods must down. Potestas Christi non est
privativa, sed cumulativa, The power of Christ does not deprive men of any
good, but conferrs, and multiplies blessings upon the heads of all those that
submit to it, It being the readiest way for Kings, Princes, and Potentates of
the world to reign long, and safe, to set their Thrones beneath the Throne of
this Mighty One, whom God has made and exalted Lord over all. But for as much
as the high and honorable ones of the earth are afraid he should bring them
into contempt, and shame, they desperately oppose this Mighty One.

Seventhly, Because of the present seeming meanness, and contemptibleness of
this Mighty One. The Prophet Isaiah speaks of him as one despised and
rejected, upon this account, Isa. 53.2, 3. He has no form nor comeliness; and
when we shall see him, there is no beauty that we should desire him: he is
despised, and rejected of men. Though Christ's doctrine and works among his own
Countrymen, were even to astonishment; yet because he had such a mean outside,
a mean trade and kindred, he was without honor among them, Mark 6.3, 4.
Christ is without outward splendour, and worldly glory, and therefore he is both
lightly esteemed by the worlds Mighty Ones, and greatly opposed.

Use 1. Of Information.
First, It informs Gods people, what manner of Savior they have; some, yea
many who call Christ Lord, know not how great he is; I may say to such, in
honor to Christ, what Pilate said in contempt of him, to the Jews, John 19.14.
Behold your King, behold your Savior, what a great and a Mighty One he is!
your Savior is more than another Savior, he is the chief of ten thousand,
far excelling all the worlds Saviors: Among all the Gods of the Heathen, and
among all the wise and mighty Ones of the Nations, and in all their Kingdoms,
there is none like unto him.

Secondly, It informs us of the safe and happy condition of those that are
Christ's; they do indeed dwell on high, being built upon the rock which is
higher than they, and all their enemies; so that we may say to the righteous,
that it shall be well with him in the most perilous times, ( Isa. 3.10, 11.)
and though they be as sheep in the midst of wolves, yet being in the hands of
their great Shepherd, this Mighty One, they are safe, yea so safe, that none
can harm them; For, says Christ, I give unto them eternal life, and they
shall never perish, neither shall any man pluck them out of my hand; my father
which gave them me is greater than all, and no man is able to pluck them out of
my Fathers hand. I and my Father are one, Joh. 10.28, 29, 30. Paul also
speaking of their safe and blessed estate, says, Romans 8.1. There is therefore
now no Condemnation to them that are in Christ Jesus, who walk not after the
flesh, but after the Spirit. Though there be many indictments, and accusations
brought in against them, yet no condemnation; but being in him, and walking in
him, they are free, and safe, and fear no evil: Hence the blessed Apostle
sends a challenge to all the enemies of Gods Elect, saying, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods elect? it is God that justifies; Who is he that
condemns? It is Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is
even at the right hand of God, who also makes intercession for us. Nay, they
are not only safe in tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness,
peril, sword, but in all these things they are more than Conquerours through
him that loved them, Romans 8 33, 34, 35, 37. And of this privilege of the Lords
people, the Prophets have spoken eminently to be enjoyed in the Reign of this
Mighty One. David, Psalm. 72.7. says, In his days shall the righteous
flourish, and abundance of peace so long as the Moon endures. Isaiah says,
Behold a King shall reign in righteousness, and Princes shall rule in
Judgment, and a man shall be an hiding place from the wind, and a covert from
the Tempest, etc. Isa. 32.1, 2. Jeremy says, Behold, the days come, says the
Lord, that I will raise unto David a righteous branch, and a King shall reign
and prosper: In his days Judah shall be saved, and Israel shall dwell safely,
and this is the name, whereby he shall be called, The LORD our Righteousness,
Jer. 23.5, 6. And to this agrees also the Prophecy of Ezekiel, which says, I
will make with them a Covenant of peace, and will cause the evil beasts to
cease out of the Land, and they shall dwell safely in the wilderness, and
sleep in the woods; They shall be safe in their Land, and shall know that I am
the Lord, when I have broken the bands of their yoke, and delivered them out of
the hands of those that served themselves of them; and they shall no more be a
prey to the Heathen, neither shall the beasts of the Land devour them; but
they shall dwell safely, and none shall make them afraid, Ezekiel 34.25, 27, 28.

Thirdly, It shows us the aggravation of the ev^l of unbelief: were Christ a
mean, weak one, there might be some plea for unbelief; the unbeleever might
excuse himself, saying, I was afraid to trust him, I durst not commit my
soul, body, name, estate, and concernments into his hand; but when a soul
refuses to believe on him, who is declared and manifested as well by work as
word to be so m^^hty in every respect, it is inexcusable. The men of Nineveh,
who repented at the preaching of Jonas; and the Queen of the South, who came
from the uttermost parts of the Earth to hear the wisdom of Solomon, shall
rise up in the Judgment with such, and condemn them, seeing a Greater than
Jonah and Solomon is with them. The Evangelist John mentions the wonderful
works which Christ did among the Jews, as the Aggravation of their unbelief,
Joh. 12.37. Though he had done so many miracles before them, yet they believed
not on him; Thence Christ is said to Vpbraid the Cities wherein most of his
mighty works were done, because they repented not, it being a greater evil in
them not to repent, than in others amongst whom Christ did not show himself so
mighty. To hear, and not to believe on Christ, the Mighty Lord, who speaks
from heaven, is that which makes unbelief to be such a mighty sin, ( Heb.
12.25.)

Fourthly, It discovers a ground for the Saints Expectation of great things;
The Saints are in expectation of perfect Redemption, and most glorious
salvation to be wrought for them by Christ; and there is good ground for it;
for besides the promise of God, who is faithful, here is the Ability of
Christ, who is Mighty to perform the Fathers will. Great ones use to be
active. The Mighty Kings and Princes of the Earth do not always sit still,
only wait for opportunities for great and weighty undertakings. This Mighty
One, the Lord Christ, though he has done great and mavelous things, will
show himself yet more glorious than ever; for he has yet but begun to show
his servants his Greatness, and his Mighty hand; only he waits till the set
time be come, and then he will arise, and redeem Israel from all his
iniquities and troubles, ( Psalm. 130.8.)

The Disciples of Christ, who saw his might and power in the days of his
flesh, became expectants of great things to be done by him; We trusted, said
the two Disciples, (speaking of Jesus of Nazareth, a Prophet mighty in deed and
word) that it had been he which should have redeemed Israel, Luke 24.19.21. The
Apostles (when Christ was assembled together with them,) asked of him, saying,
Lord, will thou at this time restore again the kingdom to Israel, Acts 1.4,
6. His Answer was no check to their expectation, but a reprehension of their
overcurious affectation, to acquaint themselves with the particular time, in
which they should behold the glorious accomplishment of so certain a blessing.
And seeing this Mighty One is set on the right hand of the throne of the
Majesty in the Heavens, (Heb: 8.1.) his servants may expect, that he will
appear in the presence of God for them; yea that he shall appear the second
time without sin, unto their evident and everlasting salvation, (Heb: 9.28.)

Paul speaking of himself and other faithful followers of Christ, says,
Phil. 3.20, 21. Our conversation is in heaven, from whence also we look for
the Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ; who shall change our vile body, that it may
be fashioned like unto his glorious body, according to the working whereby he
is able even to subdue all things unto himself.

Fifthly, For the discovery of false Christ's; The true Lord Christ has told us
that in the last days there shall arise false Christ's, as well as false
Prophets, Math. 24.24. And this doctrine does inform us how to know them from
the true; The true Christ is thus mighty; and it follows that others, who are
not so mighty, whatsoever they may pretend, are not the true Christ. Therefore
when false Christ's shall arise, and shall come, and say, I am Christ, believe
them not, neither go after them; but labor to know their power, and not their
speech only, (1 Cor. 4.19.) (for the kingdom of God is not in word but in
power, verse. 20:) whether they be mighty, as the true Christ is. And though
they should show signs and wonders to deceive you, try whether they be equal
with this Mighty One, who thought it no robbery to be equal with God. For
though some may boast themselves, and their mouths speak great swelling words
of vanity, yet their deficiency and insufficiency for such things as he did,
speak them to be false Christ's, and deceivers. As there never did heretofore,
so there never will any one arise in every respect, so mighty as Christ, by
which he may be known to be the true Christ, from all others.

Use 2. Of conviction to false worshippers, who neglect and slight this Mighty
One.
First, To the Jews who do not believe that Jesus of Nazareth is the Christ,
the Messiah that was promised, and the main plea which they have for their
unbelief is, because he did not appear to be so mighty, as become the Savior
of the world: he came not in worldly glory, he had no stately Palace, was not
clothed in Purple, did not fare deliciously, he was not in form and fashion
like the mighty ones of the earth; and therefore they expect and look for
another that is Mightier than he. Seeing this is the stone they stumble at, how
easily might it be removed, if they did consider him from first to last? and in
every respect he would appear to them so mighty as they would not look for
another, but know and acknowledge him to be their Prince and Savior; And
indeed, the works of Christ did declare him to be the Messiah. John hearing of
his works sent two of his Disciples, and said unto him, Art thou he that should
come, or do we look for another? Christ sends an Answer to convince them; and
the Argument he uses is a Catalogue of his mighty works (being such works as
are proper to the Messiah) viz: The blind receive their sight, and the lame
walk, the Lepers are cleansed, and the deaf hear, the dead are raised up, and
the poor have the Gospel preached to them, Math. 11.2, 3.4, 5. With this
Argument Christ proved himself sent of God, in his speech to the Jews, John
5.36. The works which the Father has given me to finish, the same works that I
do, bear witness of me, that the Father has sent me. And by this the people
were convinced, John 6.14. Then these men when they had seen the miracle that
Jesus did, said, This is of a truth that Prophet that should come into the
world.

Secondly, To the TURKS, who worship Mahomet, and neglect Christ, who is far
mightier than he; if the most mighty be to be acknowledged, honored, and
adored as Lord, then Christ and not Mahomet is to be worshipped.

Thirdly, As also to the idolatrous PAGANS, and Heathens, who worship and serve
the creature more than the Creator, who is blessed for ever; as the Sun, Moon,
Stars, Birds, Beasts, creeping things, the works of the hands of this mighty
One, (Rom: 1.25. 2 Kings 17.16.) Nay images of Silver, Gold, Wood, and Stone,
the work of men's hands; what are these vanities to this mighty One, that they
should be worshipped, and he neglected? ( Psal^ 115.3, 4, 5, 9.)

Use 3. Of REPROOF, especially
First, To all Usurpers of the power and authority of this Mighty One; such as
make so bold with this mighty One, as to step up into his Throne, and to
exercise that power which is proper to him only; as to take upon them to give
pardon of sin unto men; to make Laws to bind the consciences of men in the
worship of God, contrary to the Laws of this mighty One, etc. ( Mic: 6.16. Isa.
33.39.) As it is the honor of the Kings and Princes of the Earth to be Christ's
Ministers to encourage the executing of the Laws which he has made and
established, (as of Cyrus, Ezra 1.1, 2. of Darius, Dan. 6.1. -- 7. -- 12. and
Artaxerxes, Ezra 7.23.) So it is a great indignity and affront to this mighty
One for his professed servants to disanul, alter, or change their Lords Laws,
and of their own heads to form, constitute, and impose other in their stead,
upon his Subjects; (as King Jeroboam did, 1 Kings 11.28* -- 34. King I^^ri, and
Ahab, Mic: 6.16.) This is not to be Stewards, ministering in his Name, but to be
Lords sitting upon his Throne, and to make void the Power and Authority which
he has received of his Father, (as Mat. 15.2. -- 6. -- 9. Luke 19.27.) As this
is an evil to which the mighty ones of the earth are most inclined, so it will
by this Mighty One be least endured; for though he advance some to honorable
services under him, yet he will permit none to wear his Crown; and as for those
that have assumed his Power and Authority, let them know assuredly, that he
will recover it out of their hands in due time, forasmuch as he is mighty to do
^* ( Psalm. 12.5.)

Secondly, To all Resisters of his power; Christ is undoubtedly the Highest
Power, ordained of God, to whom every soul ought to be subject; Whosoever
therefore resists this power, resists the Ordinance of God; and they that
resist shall receive to themselves Damnation, Rom: 13.1, 2. Besides, all
Opposition against this Mighty One, is in vain, and to no purpose; for the
creatures power proves weakness, when exercised against him, seeing he can do
with the strongest of his Adversaries, as the Potter with his vessel, according
to the prophecy of him, Psalm. 2.9. Thou shall dash them in pieces like a
Potters Vessel. He is mighty in strength; who has hardened himself against him,
and has prospered? (Job 9.4.) Yea, which is more, The Creatures striking
against him is the breaking of its self; For whosoever shall fall on this
stone, shall be broken; but on whomsoever it shall fall, it will grind him to
powder, Math. 21.44. In a word, to fight against this Mighty One, is to fight
against God, and do we provoke the Lord, are we stronger than he? 1 Cor. 10.22.

Thirdly, To all pretended Assisters of this Mighty One; who are so bold as to
take upon them of their own brain to make additions to him, and to add
Coadjut^rs, and Helpers to this Mighty One, (thereby imputing weakness and
insufficiency to him) who is able of himself, without the help of any other to
accomplish all his undertakings. This is the known fault of the Church of Rome,
who (as Doctor Gouge has observed in his Exposition of the Epistle to the
Hebrews) add to all the Offices of Christ; as to his Kingly Office, they add a
Viceroy, an Head, as it he were not able to govern of himself; To his
Prophetical Office, they add a Great Prophet, who coyneth new Articles of
Faiths and so to turn out those that Christ has established in his Church; To
his Priestly Office, they add other Priests, to offer up (as they say) true,
real, Propitiatory Sacrifices for thee quick and the dead; To his Mediation and
Intercession, they add the Mediation and Intercession of Angels and Saints in
Heaven; To his Ordinances they add others, as Orders, Penance, Extreme Unction,
etc. These Additions derogate from the mightiness, honor, and glory of Christ;
whereas there is no need of these, Christ being sufficient without these: That
known Phylosophycal Axiom is also true in Divinity, Frustra fit per plura,
quod fiat per pauciora, It is in vain to do that by more, which may be done by
fewer. And the Apostle Paul dehorts the Saints at Coloss, from all other things
but Christ, upon the account of his fullness, and sufficiency for them, Col:
2.8, 9, 10. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit,
after the Tradition of men, after the rudiments of the world, and not after
Christ: For in him dwells all the FVLNESSE of the Godhead bodily; and ye are
COMPLETE in him, who is the Head of all Principallity and Power. I have read
that when Augustus Caesar desired the Senate to join two Consuls with him for
the carrying on the Government of the State; the Senators answered, That they
held it a diminution to his Dignity, to join any with so incomparable a man. To
pretend to assist Christ in the work which he has undertaken to do by his own
Power, is really to dishonor him.

Fourthly, To all Despisers and Contemners of Christ: For though he is mighty,
yet he is despised and rejected of men; This was, and is the sin of the Jews;
they so far despised him, that they denied him, and desired a murderer to be
granted unto them, Acts 3.14. And they call him at this day in contempt, Talvi,
the hanged man; and his Disciples, The followers of the hanged man. And this
evil is common among the Gentiles also; yea, multitudes of those that name the
name of Christ are guilty of this iniquity: so vile and abominable are many, as
to despise him in their hearts and works, whom in words they profess to honor
as their Prince and Savior: The very Turks will condemn such Christians, for
it is said, They suffer no man to blaspheme Christ, but honor him, and speak
reverently of him, though they do exceedingly vilify Christians for being so
unlike to him. The greatness and danger of this evil the Apostle sets forth in
his Epistle to the Hebrews, Chap: 10. verse. 28, 29. He that despised Moses Law,
dyed without mercy under two or three witnesses; of how much soarer punishment
suppose ye, shall he be thought worthy, who has trodden under foot the Son of
God? Wherefore then are ye not afraid to despise, and speak against this
mighty One.

Use 4. Of TERROR to the wicked.
For if Christ be so mighty, where shall the sinner and ungodly (the Enemies of
this Mighty One) appear, (1 Pet. 4.17, 18.) Surely they shall be broken in
pieces like a Potters Vessel, ( Psalm. 2.) they shall perish, and be as the fat
of Lambs, they shall consume, into smoke shall they consume away, (Psalm.
37.20.) for they will not be able to stand before this mighty One, when he
comes to judge the earth in righteousness; it will be ill, especially with
these;

First, The Refusers of his Grace; those that now make nothing to refuse him
(and his grace) that speaks from Heaven, shall not be able to escape the
severity of this Mighty One against them, for despising the riches of his
goodness, Rom: 2.3, 4. for they that have slighted his greatest love, must
look to endure his fiercest wrath. One main end of his coming in great power
and glory, is, to punish such, 2 Thessalonians. 1.7, 8, 9. He shall be revealed from
Heaven with his mighty Angels in flaming fire, taking vengeance on them that
know not God, and obey not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; who shall be
punished with everlasting destruction from the presence of the Lord, and from
the glory of his power.

Secondly, The Opposers of his Reign: For this Mighty One will not spare,
neither will he have pity, nor have mercy on them. His fury against such is
fully set forth in the Parable recorded, Luke 19.27. where he says, But those
mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither, and
slay them before me. He speaks it not of such that gladly would, though sin
prevails: but of them that would it not.

Thirdly, The Oppressors of his servants: For though men now count it a small
matter (which God calls a mighty sin, Amos 5.12.) To afflict the just, and
oppress the poor, and say, that God regards it not; yet this Mighty One will
arise, and take vengeance for them, and that to purpose, for he shall break in
pieces the Oppressor, Psalm. 72.4. yea, he shall cut him in sunder, and appoint
him his portion with the hypocrites; there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth, Matthew. 24.49.51.

Fourthly, The Scoffers at his coming: For those that now mock and scoff,
saying, Where is the promise of his coming? (as those in 2 Pet. 3.3, 4.) they
shall find that the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ is no devised fable, (Chap.
1.16.) but a real, yea, a powerful appearance against them, to their
destruction, (as Isa. 5.28, 29.) Who may abide the day of his coming? And who
shall stand when he appears? Malachi 3.2.

This Doctrine speaks terror more especially to the great and mighty Ones of
the Earth: for against them will Christ appear with greatest indignation; He
shall strike through Kings in the day of his wrath, and he shall wound the
heads over many Countries, Psalm. 110.5, 6. Yea, he will be so terrible to them,
that they shall not know how to endure him, but seek by any means to hide
themselves from him, Revel: 6.14, 15, 16. The Kings of the Earth, and the great
men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains, and the mighty men, and every
bondman, and every freeman hid themselves in the Dens, and in the Rocks of
the Mountains; and said to the Mountains and Rocks fall on us, and hide us from
the face of him that sits on the Throne, and from the wrath of the Lamb; for
the Great day of his wrath is come, and who shall be able to stand? And CHRIST,
will be MOST TERRIBLE TO THEM;

Reas. 1. Because it is a just and righteous thing that he should be so, seeing
they are not only most of them against him, (for not many mighty, not many
noble are called, 1 Cor. 4.26.) but they are often his greatest Enemies, do
most despise and reject him, and oppose his Kingdom and Power; hence says the
Psalmist, The Kings of the Earth set themselves, and the Rulers take Council
together against the Lord, and against his ANOINTED, Psalm. 2.2. The Great men
have altogether broken the Yoke, and burst the Bonds, Jeremy 5.5. And Christ
accepts not the persons of Princes, nor regards the rich more than the
poor, but will render to every one according to his works; they that offend
most against him, must look to suffer most from him.

Reas. 2. Because it is to his honor: for by this he gets himself a great
name of strength and power; having, and exercising Dominion over the mighty, he
is the more feared and glorified of men. The Prophet Isaiah tells us Chap: 2.
That the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that is proud, end
lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be brought low, upon
all the Cedars of Lebanon that are high, upon all the Oaks of Bashan, upon all
the high mountains, and upon all the high hills that are lifted up, and upon
every high Tower, and upon every fenced Wall, upon all the Ships of Tharshish,
and upon all pleasant Pictures; and the loftiness of man shall be bowed down,
and the haughtiness of men shall be made low, and the Lord alone shall be
exalted in that day, verse. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Christ does therefore engage
with the Mighty, because he shall be exalted in their fall especially.

Quest. If Christ be such a Mighty One, why do the wicked live, become old, yea
are mighty in power, flourish, and prosper in the world, and go so long
unpunished?

Answ. Do thou not know, that the wicked are reserved to the day of
destruction? they shall be brought forth to the day of wrath, and then Christ
will repay them what they have done, according to that in 2 Pet. 2.9. The Lord
knows how to deliver the Godly out of Temptations, and to reserve the unjust
unto the day of Judgment, to be punished.

Christ does not presently destroy wicked men.
Reas. 1. That he might magnify his Justice and righteousness in their
destruction. The Judge of all the Earth will do no iniquity to the worst of
men: It shall be said of him, when he has executed his fiercest vengeance upon
rebellious Ones, he has not done without cause all that he has done to his
enemies; though he does terrible things, yet in righteousness; (Psalm. 65.5.)
Therefore he does not cut off his enemies at first, but stays his hand till
they have vented all their malice, and acted rebellion to the height, (not that
Christ desires the increase of their sin, for he calls upon them to repent,)
but that he will proportion his judgments to their iniquities.

He will not bring great destruction upon men for a little wickedness, and
therefore he deferrs it till their transgressions be multiplied; he will not
destroy men for a word, or a blow or two against his servants; but when they
have a long time reproached, scorned, abused, troubled, and persecuted his
faithful ones, then it will appear to be a righteous thing with Christ to
recompense tribulation to them that trouble them. (2 Thessalonians: 1.6.) Christ does
not at first judge the whore, but lets her alone till she has brought forth
her Abominations, till the Kings of the Earth have committed fornication with
her, and the Inhabiters of the Earth have been made drunk with the Wine of her
Fornication, till she has made her self drunken with the blood of the Saints,
and with the blood of the Martyrs of Jesus, Rev: 17.2, 4, 6. yea, till she
says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no sorrow;
and when she has done thus wickedly, then shall her plagues come in one day,
death, and mourning, and famine, and she shall be utterly burnt with fire, for
strong is the Lord God, who judges her, Rev: 18.7, 8. And after these things a
great voice of much people was heard in Heaven, saying, Alleluja, Salvation,
and Glory, and Honor, and Power unto the Lord our God; for true and righteous
are his Judgments: for he has judged the Great Whore which did corrupt the
Earth with her fornication, and has avenged the blood of his servants at her
hand, Rev: 19.1, 2.

Reas. 2. That he might magnify his patience and long-suffering toward them;
that it might appear, that he who is so great in power, is also slow to anger,
and does endure with much long-suffering the vessels of wrath, fitted to
destruction. There is not an enemy that the Lord Christ shall destroy, but
shall be forced to confess, that Christ the Great Lord, has had patience with
him.

Reas. 3. Because there are some among his Enemies which are to be brought in,
some in rebellion against him, who will submit to him; and therefore he gives a
space to them to repent, in which he waits for their return to himself. Peter
tells us that there shall come in the last days scoffers, walking after their
own lusts, saying, Where is the promise of his coming? etc. 2 Pet. ^.3, 4. They
are answered in the 9. verse. It is not his slacknesse, but his long-suffering;
it is not his unmindfullness of his promise to his people, nor yet of his
threatenings against his Enemies; but his abounding goodness to impenitent ones,
being not willing that any should perish, but that all should come to
repentance. Yea, there are some of his people among his Enemies, whom he will
call, and draw out from amongst them; and because of his favor to them, his
judgments upon his enemies are deferred; for the righteous God will not
destroy the righteous with the wicked. God did not destroy the old world with
water, till he had provided for the security of his righteous Servant Noah; he
did not destroy Sodom and Gomorrah, before he had brought forth Lot, and set
him without the City, Gen: 19. And we find, before the Lord bring his plagues
upon Babylon, he calls his people to come out of her, Rev: 18.4. Babylons
Judgments are deferred, that Gods people may depart out of her.

Reas. 4. That he might Exercise the Faith and Patience of his Saints; while
wicked men live, and are spared, they will be persecuting of Gods servants; as
was manifest in Pharaoh, and others; and that the Lords people may live in the
exercise of their Graces, especially their Faith and Patience, he lets the
wicked live, become old, and mighty. The Romans could have destroyed Carthage
when they pleased, but for the Exercise of their Soldiers they let it stand;
Christ, this Mighty One, could soon bring down, and cut off all the wicked of
the Earth, but for the Exercise of his Servants Graces he let them stand a
while. John mentions the Faith and Patience of the Saints as most conspicuous
in their soarest persecution under the Beasts Reign, Rev: 13.10. Rev: 14.12.
saying, Here is the Patience and Faith of the Saints.

Reas. 5. That he may show forth the greatness of his power in their
destruction. He let them continue to plot and design and to get as high a head
against him as may be, that so his might may be the more visible in their
Overthrow; that it may be known he can destroy them when they are at the
strongest, and bring them down when they are at the highest; according to the
word of the Lord to Edom, Obad 4. Though thou exalt thy self as the Eagle, and
though thou set thy nest among the Stars, thence will I bring thee down, says
the Lord.

Use 5. Of CAUTION.
To the Mighty Ones, yea to the greatest and mightiest on the earth, to take
heed what they do; for though they be mighty, yet they must know Christ is
mightier; therefore take heed that you oppose not this Mighty One, lest ye
perish. God made David his Mighty One, and you know what became of Saul,
Absalom, Sheba, and others, who lifted up their hands against him. Yea, take
heed what ye do against his servants; for the evil which is done against them,
is done against him, and he so accounts of it, ( Matthew. 25.35. -- 40.45.) what
though they be weak, he is mighty to avenge all wrongs done to them.

The Wiseman speaking of the fatherless, cautions others against injuring of
them, upon this account, Pro: 23.10, 11. Remove not the old Landmark, and
enter not into the Fields of the fatherless; for their Redeemer is mighty, he
shall plead their cause with thee. The Prophet Jeremy also speaking of the
oppressed condition of the children of Israel and Judah, says, Their Redeemer
is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name; he shall thoroughly plead their cause,
that he may give rest to the Land, and disquiet the Inhabitants of Babylon,
Jer. 50.33, 34.

Therefore though you be not afraid of them, yet be afraid of Christ their
King, who in the midst of them is Mighty to save them, and to destroy you. Ye
mighty ones of the world, who intend mischief against Christ's Servants, know,
that he will one day arise, and say, as that Great Prince Ahasuerus to Queen
Esther, when she had told him of the Design of wicked Haman against her and her
people, Esther 7.5. Who is he? and where is he that durst presume in his heart
to do so? and then like Haman, you will be afraid before this King and his
people, whom now you despise.

Oh that you would consider the danger you are in, which you may easily
apprehend from those precious (though dreadful) words of Christ, Matthew. 18.6.
Whosoever shall offend one of these little Ones which believe in me, it were better
for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck, and that he were drowned in
the depth of the Sea. Therefore lift not up your horn, lift not up your horn on
high (though you be never so high and mighty,) Christ, this Mighty One is now
the Judge, having all power in his hands, he puts down one, and sets up
another, (Ps. 75.5. -- 7.) and he avengeth the evil which is done unto his
Servants.

Use 6. Of EXHORTATION.
1. To Christ's Enemies. 2. To his Servants.
First, To his ENEMIES: Submit and subject your selves to him; strive not with
a Mighty man, says one; surely it cannot be safe to strive with this Mighty
One. Your security lies in submission, not in opposition; in kissing the Son,
not in kicking against him.

Therefore, O ye sinners, ye mighty ones, lay down all your weapons and your
selves at his feet. The men of this world desire peace with those that are
mightier than they, Luke 14.31. Acts 12.20. Learn of them to humble your selves
under the mighty hand of Christ, who is a King against whom there is no rising
up, as Prove: 30.31. What the Lord speaks in faithfulness, and with affection
to the Kings and Judges of the Earth, I may say to them, and all others, (...)
stand out against this Mighty One, Be wise, now therefore O ye Kings; be
instructed ye Judges of the Earth; serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice with
trembling; kiss the Son lest he be angry, and ye perish from the way; when his
wrath is kindled but a little, Blessed are all they that put their trust in
him, Psalm. 2.10.11, 12. And if you be in such danger of perishing when his
wrath is kindled but a little, what will ye do when the great day of his wrath
is come, (Rev: 6.17.) the day that shall burn as an Oven, and all the proud,
and all that do wickedly shall be stubble; and the day that comes shall burn
them up, that it shall leave them neither root nor branch, Mal. 4.1.

And whosoever thinks either to prevail against him, or to escape from him,
they imagine a vain thing; For

First, By WISDOM and POLICY shall no man prevail against him; God turns
the wisdom of the wise into foolishness; he leads Councillors away spoiled,
and makes the Judges fools, Job 12.17. What Great and deep policy did Saul
use against David (a Type of Christ) to keep him from the Kingdom? he set him
over the men of War; and when he saw that all Israel loved him, in a way of
subtilty, he proffered him his Daughter, tha^ she might be a snare unto him;
and he ^^sired no dowry, but an hundred foreskins of the Philistines; for he
thought to make David fall by the hand of the Philistines, 1 Samuel 18. and
oft-times he sought to kill him, both by open war and privately; but
notwithstanding all his policy he lost his kingdom and his life too, and David
possessed the kingdom. What deeper policy could Herod have used to destroy
Christ, when he came into the World? or the Jews to hinder his Resurrection?
yet could not prevail; verifying the words of Solomon, Pro. 21.30. There is no
wisdom, nor understanding, nor counsel against the LORD.

Secondly, And by STRENGTH shall no man prevail, 1 Samuel: 2.9. He is mighty in
strength; who has hardened himself against him, and prospered? he will lead
Princes away spoiled, and overthrow the Mighty, yea the Courageous among the
Mighty shall flee away naked in the day that he arises. You that are strong,
have you an Arm like him? or can you thunder with a voice like him? Know, that
it is altogether in vain to strengthen your selves against Christ, for by
reason of his Highness and Mightiness you shall not be able to endure.

Thirdly, Neither will RICHES profit in the day of his wrath, Pro. 11.4. For
though the rich man's wealth is his strong City, and as an high wall in his own
conceit, Pro. 18.11. yet it cannot preserve him from perishing by the hand of
this Mighty One; so that there is no way to escape, but by a hearty submission
to the Son of God. Neither let the Greatest and highest of the Earth think
themselves too Great and High to stoop to him, to whom every knee shall bow,
(Rom: 14.10, 11.) for it is no weakness, nor baseness, but true mightiness and
nobleness of spirit to be willing to be overcome by, and to him; yea the
Greatest honor attainable here consists in fullest subjection, and
serviceableness to this Mighty One; The consideration of which should cause
strangers and enemies, freely to submit themselves unto him, (as Psalm. 18.44.
Psalm. 66.3.) Besides he has power to forgive sins past, and to make Rebels
Favorites in the Court of Heaven, ( Psalm. 68.18.) and he waits that he may be
thus gracious to them, (2 Pet. 3.9.) Yea though he be a Mighty One, the King of
Glory (who could destroy the strongest in a moment,) yet he knocks, yea he
condescends to stand and knock at the door of their hearts, desiring to enter
in that he might do them good, ( Rev: 3.18, 19, 20.) Therefore Open to the King
of Glory that he may come in, ( Psalm: 24.9, 10.) and rule in you, and over you
for ever; And as you have been much in rebellion against him be much in
subjection to him.

Secondly, To CHRIST'S SERVANTS. If Christ be Mighty,

First, Fear him, O ye his Saints; fear not man, nor any of the sons of man
that shall dye, that are as grass, but fear this Mighty One, the Lord that
lives for ever, ( Isa. 51.12, 13.) He that has all power both in Heaven and
Earth, ( Math. 28.18.) let him be your fear, let him be your dread, ( Isa.
8.13.) and not the Mighty, or rather weak ones of the world, that kill the
body, and after that have no more that they can do, Luke 12.4. The Prophet
Jeremiah advancing the true and living God above all Idols, says to the house
of Israel, Be not afraid of them, for they cannot do evil, neither also is it
in them to do good, Forasmuch as there is none like unto thee, O Lord: thou art
great, and thy name is great in might, who would not fear thee, O King of
Nations? for to thee does it appertain, Jer. 10.5, 6, 7. And this is the sum
of the triumphant Song of them that get victory over the Beast, Rev. 15.3, 4.
Great and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy
ways, thou King of Saints; who shall not fear thee, O Lord, and glorify thy
Name?

Secondly, Trust in him; he is a sure foundation, all the powers of Earth and
Hell cannot move it: He is a fit object for your faith, seeing he is the LORD,
Mighty to save, and to save to the uttermost out of the deepest dangers and
troubles you can be brought into, ( Heb: 7.25.) yea he has redeemed the souls
of his servants from deceit and violence heretofore, and will for ever show
himself strong on the behalf of those whose hearts are stayed on him, (Psalm.
26.3, 4.) And therefore though ignorant worldlings slight and reject this
Mighty One, and place their confidence in Kings, Princes, Horses, Chariots,
(which do fail them often) yet do you that know his great and glorious Name,
put your trust in him, ( Psalm. 20.7, 8.) yea at what time you are afraid,
either of spiritual or temporal evils, trust in him, in whom is everlasting
strength, ( Psalm. 56.3.) you shall find him sufficient for you, and faithful
to you; He that believes on him shall never be confounded, 1 Pet. 2.6.

Thirdly, Prize him above all; Prize him according to his excellent greatness.
This was Gods design in making him mighty, Joh. 5.22, 23. Do you further it,
what in you lies, by honoring the Son, even as you honor the Father: If the
people prized David far above themselves, saying, Thou art worth ten thousand
of us, 2 Samuel 18.3. how should we value David's Lord, and our Lord, who is the
only Potentate, King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, above our selves, and all
things else, (1 Timothy: 6.15.)

Fourthly, Stand by him, stand by his cause and interest all your days; Work
and love righteousness evermore, though you be persecuted for its sake; yea
though many should forsake him through the unbelief of their hearts, as the
Disciples did of old, yet stand by him, and his work of righteousness. For, he
is Mighty to save you, (Isa. 63.1.); It was Shammah's commendation, that he
stood it out, and defended the Field alone, when all the people fled from the
Philistines, 2 Samuel 23.12. and the Lord wrought a great Victory. Stand by this
Mighty One, though alone. Though you that be faithful, be but few and weak,
and engaged against mighty Adversar^^s, The Devil, the World, and the Flesh;
yet be bold and courageous, and go on with confidence in your holy war: you
March under the Banner of a Mighty One, who is the Captain of salvation, (Heb:
2.10.) who has conquered mighty Enemies, and will not rest till he has
destroyed every evil work, and worker, (2 Timothy 4.16 -- 18.) Christ (says
Luther) has destroyed many great Kings, and laid them in the dust; For my part
I will hold with him, and on his side, rather than with the Turk, with the
Emperor, and the whole universal world. Let his Resolution be yours; its
rational to be on the strongest side.

Fifthly, Bless God, even the Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who of his rich
mercy, and by his great power, has drawn you out of the world, and separated
you from your companions and brethren in iniquity, and brought you from under
the Dominion of other Lords, who were not able to save you, to be under this
great and Mighty One. Paul's heart was wonderfully taken with this grace, as
appears by his words, Col. 1.12, 13. Giving thanks unto the Father, etc. Who
has delivered ^s from the power of darkness, and has translated us into the
kingdom of his dear Son. Bless God for this unspeakable grace.

Yea Bless God for that great grace vouchsafed to thee, that (in thy
unregenerate estate,) thou were not confounded, and destroyed for, and in thy
opposition against Christ; for he is Mighty, and could have done it: Suppose a
child should take a stick in its hand, and go into the Lions den, and there
strike the Lion, and the Lions whelps, the young Lions; and continue beating
them for some time with all its might, and yet the Lion not tear this child,
nor meddle at all with it, but the child return without any hurt done to it;
what will this child say, when it comes to man's estate? It will be filled with
amazement, and astonishment, when it shall be told what it did, and how it
escaped; surely it will cry out with wonder, what a mercy, what a providence
past finding out, that I was not devoured! I stroke the Lion, which was wont to
devour others. You that are Christ's servants, you have been the Enemies of
Christ, and his people; you have as it were struck at the face of Christ by
your opposition against him; yea peradventure you have continued some time
beating Christ and his servants, provoking Christ (the Lion of the Tribe of
Judah) against you; and yet he did not tear you in pieces, as he did others,
but you are escaped; oh study what rich mercy and grace it is, that such a bold
rebellious wretch as you have been, should be spared by this Mighty One! Surely
you cannot look back upon such delivering grace, without wondering, and being
melted by it into love and submission to Christ, who has thus loved and saved
you from perishing in, and by your iniquities.

Sixthly, Lastly, If Christ be Mighty, Labor to get much of Christ, to be
Christians indeed; not by profession of the Name only, but by participation of
the Spirit of Christ; that so receiving the Anointing, you may be Mighty also.
He was full of might, by the Spirit of the Lord, (Isa. 11.2.) Let us seek to be
mighty, not by carnal might, nor power, nor sword, but by the Spirit of the
Lord. He was mighty in Faith, let us be so, a strong mighty faith in a mighty
Christ is very suitable; he was mighty in love to us, let us be so to him, let
us love him with all the heart, with all the soul, with all our strength. He
was mighty in patience; Let us get much of that grace also, for we have need of
patience, that after we have done the will of God, we may inherit the promise,
(Heb: 10.36.) He was mighty in zeal; let us be so, even a peculiar people,
zealous of good works, ( Tit. 2.14.)

Doctr: 2. God has appointed This Mighty One, Christ, to be an help to his
people. This Doctrine has two Branches.

1. That Christ is an help to his people. 2. That God has appointed him
thereunto.
First, That CHRIST IS AN HELP, appears;

First, In the TYPES of him, both REAL, as chiefly the Passover, Mannah, the
Rock, the Brazen Serpent, which were types of Christ, and for the good and help
of the people, (1 Cor. 5.7, 8. Chapter 10.3. Joh. 2.14.) and PERSONAL, as a Moses,
b Josuah, Act. 2.29, 20. and 13.34, 35.
David, Act. 7.47. with Prove. 9.1 --
Solomon, and others, who were helps, or helpers of the people, even of Gods
people Israel, ( Heb: 3.5, 6.
Heb: 4.8.
)

Secondly, In the PROPHECIES of him; to instance but in a few, Psalm. 72.12, 13.
He shall deliver the needy when he cries; the poor also, and him that has no
helper; He shall spare the poor and needy, and shall save the souls of the
needy; He shall redeem their soul from deceit and violence. Isa. 11.4. With
righteousness shall he judge the poor, and reprove with equity for the meek
of the Earth. The same Prophet, speaking of the Administration of his Kingly
power, says, Isa: 32.2. And a man shall be an hiding place from the wind, and
a covert from the Tempest: as rivers of water in a dry place, as the shadow of
a great rock in a weary Land. And also says, Surely he has borne our grief,
and carried our sorrows; he was wounded for our transgressions, he was bruised
for our iniquities, the chastisement of our peace was upon him, and with his
stripes we are healed, Isa: 53.4, 5, 6. Hence says Mary in her song of praise
to the Lord for his goodness to her, and his people, in Christ who was yet to
be borne, Luke 1.54. He has helped his servant Israel in Remembrance of his
mercy, as he spoke to our Fathers, to Abraham, and to his seed for ever. And to
this agreeeth part of the Prophetical Song of Zachar^a^, Luke 1.68, 69.
Blessed be the Lord God of Israel, for he has visited and redeemed his people,
and has raised up an Horn of salvation for us in the house of his servant
David; even Christ an help to his people.

Much need not be added to prove that which the Scriptures do abundantly
testify, and the Saints constantly experience, yea the whole work of Christ's
Mediatourship is a large Demonstration of this thing; For what is it but his
being his peoples help? For, for this he came into the world, for this he lived
here, and suffered such grievous things; for this he dyed, for this he rose
again, for this he ascended, for this he sits at the right hand of the Father,
and for this he will come again, even unto the perfect redemption and
salvation of all them that look for, and love his appearing, (Rom: 8.33, 34.
Heb: 9.28. 2 Timothy: 4.8.) Thus it is manifest in the General, that Christ is his
peoples help.

But for the further enlightening of their minds into this truth, and the more
affecting their hearts therewith, I shall endeavor to hold it forth more
particularly, in a THREEFOLD GRADATION.

First, Christ is thoroughly furnished with what may fit and enable him to help,
as

First, KNOWLEDGE is requisite to make one fit to help, and with this Christ is
filled, he knows the whole state of all his servants perfectly; He knows all
their conditions, ways, and frames, and what is good for them; he knows all
their diseases, troubles, and Temptations, and how to deliver them out of them
all; He knows their enemies, and all the things which come into their minds,
every one of them; he knows their imaginations, which they go about: It is said
of him, Joh. 2.24, 25. He knew all men, he knew what was in man; yea he knows
the thoughts of his, and his peoples enemies, Math: 12.25. Luke 6.8. He is
omnipresent, every where; he is among the Great ones of the world; and whatever
designs they have against his servants, he takes notice of them, and strikes
in, on their behalf. Not an act, nor word, nor yet imagination can pass in
any of their Assemblies and Councels, against any of his, but he knows it
altogether. Upon this account the Psalmist exhorts the Judges of the Earth to
defend, and deliver the poor, Psalm: 82.1, 3, 4. God stands in the
Congregation of the Mighty; he Judges among the Gods. Defend the poor, and
fatherless; do Justice to the poor and needy, deliver the poor and needy, rid
them out of the hand of the wicked.

Secondly, POWER is requisite to help; And Christ has enough of that, for he
has all power, as has been showed at large, ( Math. 28.18.) Power contains

First, Authority; and he has Authority, power of rule and Government over
all, both persons and things; for he is gone into heaven, and is on the right
hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and Powers being made subject to him, 1
Pet: 3.22. With this he encouraged his Disciples when he sent them into the
world about his work, Math: 28.18, 19, 20. Jesus came, and spoke unto them,
saying, All power is given unto me in Heaven, and in Earth; Go ye therefore,
and teach all Nations, Baptizing them, etc. and lo, I am with you always, even
unto the end of the world; as if Christ should say, I that have received such
great Authority from my Father, whereby I am sufficiently able to help you,
will continually stand by you, in all the work and dangers whereunto I call you.

Secondly, Strength and ability to perform his purposes toward his people;
and Christ is great in power in this respect; he is so strong and mighty, that
whatsoever things the Father does, those things he does likewise, for as the
Father raises up the dead, and quickneth them, even so the Son quickneth whom
he will, John 5.19, 21. Yea, all things are possible with him; He is the Lord
God Omnipotent. The Apostle Paul did make such a reckoning of the sufficiency
of Christ to help in this particular, as he said, I can do all things through
Christ which strengthens me, Phil: 4.13.

Thirdly, WISDOM and COUNCIL is requisite to help; yea, most requisite.
Solomon makes wisdom more requisite than strength, for he says, Eccles. 7.19.
Wisdom strengthens the wise more than the ten mighty men which are in the
City; and wisdom is better than strength, and better than weapons of war,
Eccles. 9.16, 18. Hence it was said of old, One Nestor will do more service
than ten Ajaxes: And Christ is rich in this grace also, Council is his, and
sound wisdom; he is called Councellor, (Isa. 9 6.) and as his Name is, so is he
to his Servants; when they are in straits and perplexities, and know not which
way to turn them, then does he guide them with his Counsel, Ps 32.8. Yea, In
him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Col: 2.3.

Secondly, Christ is furnished with what may incline him to help.

I shall instance only in three things.

First, A Participation of the same Nature. Even Nature it self teaches, and
promps creatures to help their fellow creatures, especially those that partake
of the same nature with them; as beasts, beasts; men, men; so Christ having
assumed the Humane Nature, so that his people are of his flesh, and his bone
(Ephesians. 5.30.) He is thereby strongly inclined to extend relief and help to
them in that Nature. The Apostle makes use of this Argument in his Exhortation
to men to love their wives; and shows also how upon this very account Christ
loves and nourishes his Church, Ephesians. 5.28, 29, 30. So ought men to love
their wives as their own bodies; he that loves his wife, loves himself: For
no man ever yet hated his own flesh, but loves and cherishes it, even as the
Lord the Church; For we are members of his body, of his flesh, and of his Bones.

The Scriptures speaking of Christ as Mediator, and Helper of his people, do
frequently style him Man, Son of man. A man shall be as an hiding place from
the wind, etc. There is one Mediator between God and men, the MAN Christ Jesus,
as being in the same Nature with his people, (1 Timothy: 2.5.)

Secondly, A Communication in the same conditions and sufferings of his people
in the same Nature; and this inclines him to help those that are exercised with
the same afflictions, which he himself endured: the Apostle does insist much
upon this, Heb: 2.16, 17, 18. Verily, he took not on him the Nature of Angels,
but he took on him the seed of Abraham; wherefore in all things it beh^ved him
to be made like unto his Brethren, that he might be a merciful, and faithful
High Priest, etc. For in that he himself has suffered being tempted, he is
able to succor them that are tempted; Christ has been compassed about with
troubles, he has been in all conditions that his servants have been, or are
in, except sin; he has been reproached, hated, persecuted, tempted, etc. and
so knows how to have Compassion on such as are so used, (Heb: 4.15, 16.)

Thirdly, Pity and Compassion. A spirit of compassion inclines those in whom
it is, to help such as are in trouble. It is said of the Lord concerning his
People, Isa. 63.9. In his love, and in his pity he redeemed them, and bare
them, and carried them all the days of old. Gods pity inclined him to such
gracious actings toward them: Christ's heart being full of pity and
compassion, is greatly enlarged toward his suffering servants; His pity
toward them, sets his power and wisdom a work for them. It was Christ's
compassion toward the multitude which moved him to put forth his power, and
work a miracle to feed them, ( Mat. 16.32.) And according to this method, the
man whose son had the dumb spirit prayed, Mark. 9.22. If thou can do any
thing, have compassion on us, and help us. This is very clearly set forth by
Christ himself in the Parable of the wounded man, whom the Priest and Levite
passed by, and helped not; but the Samaritane when he saw him, and had
compassion on him, Went to him, and bound up his wounds, pouring in Oil and
Wine, and set him on his own beast, and brought him to an Inn, and took care
on him, Luke 10.30, 31, 32, 33, 34. Compassion inclines to Action, and Christ
being of greatest Compassion toward afflicted ones, is most inclined to help
them.

Thirdly, Christ is greatly engaged to help his Servants.

Several things engage Christ to help; As

First, The interest that Christ has in them. They are Christ's portion and
inheritance, yea, his peculiar treasure, which he most loves and prizeth, and
therefore cannot but help them in their difficulties and straits. Upon this
account God promised to help Jac^b, Isa: 43.1, 2. Fear not, O Jacob, thou art
Mine; God challenges Jacob to be his, and then he promises his helping
presence, saying, When thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee;
and through the Rivers, they shall not overflow thee, etc. The Physician
peradventure will help a stranger, but much more the Patient in whom he has an
interest. The chosen ones are Christ's own, his Father has given him them; and
therefore he cares for them, and keeps them, John 17.6, 12. Neither are they
(...) his goods, but (...) he has a very near propriety in them; they are a
piece of himself, and thereupon he is engaged to help them.

The Evangelist John takes notice of the love, and the continuance of the love
of Christ toward those in whom he had an interest, toward his own, Having
loved his own which were in the world (he speaks not of things, but of persons)
he loved them unto the end, John 13.1.

Secondly, The Relations that Christ stands in toward them engage him to help.
He is a Friend, and one Friend is engaged to help another; He is a Brother, and
Brethren are engaged to help one another, (Prove: 17.17.) He is a Shepherd, and
the Shepherd is engaged to help the Flock; He is an Husband, and the Husband is
engaged to help the Wife; He is a Father, and the Father is engaged to help the
Child, Jer: 31.8, 9. He is a Lord and Master, and the Lord and Master stands
engaged to help and save his Servants. The Disciples when they were in danger
of being drowned, they begged his help upon the account of that Relation he
stood in toward them, saying, Master, carest thou not that we perish? and like
one engaged to help by virtue of that Relation, he presently arose, and rebuked
the wind, Mark 4.38, 39.

Thirdly, The Promise of Christ is engaging Christ to help; and he has
promised to be with his people, and to carry them through all services and
sufferings: So much he promised to his Disciples, Mat. 28.19, 20. as also Mat.
18.20. Where two or three are gathered together in my Name, there am I in the
midst of them; and Christ will not be idle in the midst of his people; he will
not barely behold them, but graciously help and assist them in their several
conditions: And what a large promise of help does Christ make to his Sheep,
John 10.28. I give unto them eternal life, and they shall never perish, neither
shall any man pluck them out of my hand: As if Christ should say, I will stand
by them, and lay out my power for their help and preservation in every duty and
danger which they may be called unto. And though men little regard their
promises; yet Christ is faithful, and will perform every good thing which he
has promised unto his Servants to do for them, (1 Thessalonians. 5.24.)

Fourthly, The honor that Christ shall receive from his Servants whom he
saves, does engage him to help, and save them out of their troubles, for he
shall deliver them, and they shall glorify him, (Psalm. 50.15.) When he has
been their strength and help, he shall be their Song; according to that in
Isaiah 12.3. The Lord, (Hebr: JAH) JEHOVAH is my strength and my song; when the
Lord has helped his people, they shall praise him, and rejoice in his
salvation. The Church makes this an Argument to engage God to help her in her
low estate, Psalm. 85.6, 7. Will thou not revive us again, that thy people may
rejoice in thee? Show us thy mercy O LORD, and grant us thy Salvation. And that
Christ shall be glorified in his Saints, as well as they in him, is a strong
engagement upon Christ to help them.

For the further opening and clearing of this first Branch of the Doctrine,
namely, Christ being a Help to his People. I shall only set before you 1. WHAT
MANNER of Help Christ is. 2. HOW Christ does help his people.


First, What manner of Help is Christ?

First, He is a SUFFICIENT Help; What ever the work, strait, or condition be he
can carry through it. Gods children of themselves are not sufficient for what
they are called to, according to that of Paul, 2 Cor. 3.5. where he says, Not
that we (including himself with the Saints at Corinth) are sufficient of our
selves, to think any thing as of our selves; neither yet are others (though
willing, and sufficient in some measure to help) a sufficient help for them;
but it is Christ's peculiar to be a sufficient help; His hand is not only
sufficient for himself, but also for the help of all his Servants. Moses seeing
and considering the vast difference between the Enemies, and Isreal's Rock,
says triumphantly in his song, Deuteronomy. 32.31. Their Rock is not as our Rock,
even our enemies themselves being Judges. And with this did Hezekiah encourage
the people against the King of Assyria, and all the Multitude that was with
him; With him is an arm of flesh, but with us is the LORD our God to help us, 2 Chronicles: 32.7, 8. The Unbelievers help is but an Arm of flesh, which will fail
in time of need; but the Believers help is Christ Jesus, the Mighty God, that
faints not, neither can be weary, who also gives power to the faint, and to
them that have no might he increases strength, (Isa. 40. 10, 11, 29.) This
Paul experienced in his weakness, and gloryed in his infirmities, that the
power of Christ might rest upon him, 2 Cor: 12.9. And of this, viz: The
sufficiency of Christ's help, he had such a clear apprehension and strong
persuasion, as that he said, I can do all things through Christ which
strengthens me, Phil: 4.13.

Secondly, He is a SEASONABLE help: as he is Mighty, and knows how to help; so
he is Wise, and knows when to help. He that requires that his Servants should
bring forth fruit in season, does give forth strength and help to them in
season also, he helps in the needful time, (Heb: 4.16.) when it makes most for
his glory to help, and for his peoples good to be helped. He dyed in season,
according to that of the Apostle, Rom: 5.6. In due time Christ dyed for the
ungodly. He comfort them that are cast down in season (2 Cor. 7.6.) He
succoureth the tempted in season; when the soul is ready to faint, and fall by
the strength of the temptation, he comes in to its help; He has the tongue of
the Learned, and knows how to speak a word in season to him that is weary,
(Isa. 50.4.) All the Miracles and wonders which he wrought, were a seasonable
help to them, upon and for whom he wrought them: and in this respect he is an
excellent help, every thing being beautiful and excellent in its season,
(Eccles: 3.11.)

Thirdly, He is a SUITABLE help; a meet help, suitable to the several estates
of those whom he is to help.

This appears from those famous prophecies of him, Isa. 32.2, 3. A man shall be
as an hiding place from the wind, a covert from the Tempest; as Rivers of
waters in a dry place, as the shadow of a great Rock in a weary Land. So
likewise Isa: 61.1, 3. The LORD has anointed me to preach good tidings unto
the meek, he has sent me to bind up the brokenhearted, to proclaim liberty to
the Captives, and the opening of the Prison to them that are bound; to appoint
unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes, the oil of
joy for mourning; the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, etc. He
is for a spirit of Judgment to him that sits in Judgment, and for strength
to them that turn the battle to the gate, (Isa: 28.6.) Therefore Christ is set
forth under various Titles and Appellations, suitable to the various conditions
that his people are in, and the several Relations he stands in toward them, as
a Father, Husband, Shepherd, King, Priest, Prophet, Meat, Drink, Wisdom,
Righteousness. He gives rest to the weary, Mat. 11.28. and Water, Wine, Milk
to the thirsty, Isa. 55.1. Revel: 22.17.

Fourthly, He is a CONSTANT help; he does not only help at first, but at last
also; he helps his own to the end, he will be with them, and not fail them, nor
forsake them, until they have finished all the work, and passed through all
the troubles which he shall call them to; He is a finishing, and perfecting
help, as well as a beginning help; he is Alpha and Omega, the Beginning, and
the ending, Rev: 1.8, 10. The Author and Finisher of Faith, Heb: 12.2.

Fifthly, He is an ONLY help; Christ is not a joint help, or helper, an help
in conjunction with others; but he helps and saves alone; he is the LORD, and
besides him there is no Savior, no helper. Indeed none can help but he; if we
should go to the mightiest Creatures they would say, help is not in us; the
Valiant man would say, it is not in me; the Wise man would say, it is not in
me; the Rich man would say, it is not in me: Yea all the Creatures must say to
them that come to them for help, as that King of Israel to the Woman of
Samaria, when she cried to him, Help my Lord, O King; (he said) If the LORD do
not help thee, whence shall I help thee? It is Christ, and Christ alone that
helps, neither is there any other that can save in all the Cities, nor among
all the Judges of the earth; according to the words of Peter, Acts 4.12.
Neither is there salvation in any other: there is none other name under Heaven
given among men, whereby we must be saved.

Sixthly, He is an Ancient, OLD help, and helper; Not to consider him in
respect of Gods appointing him, which was from everlasting; but of man's need of
him, which was as soon as he had sinned: for he thereby became liable to the
curse and wrath of God, and man being a guilty, weak creature, could not
deliver himself out of this danger; neither could any of the Creatures help
him, nor yet God himself (being just as well as merciful) would free this
offender from his threatened punishment, (any other way:) then Christ, who was
given forth in the promise, became an help to him, and saved him out of that
deep pit into which he was fallen; and thus Christ was an help of old.

Seventhly, Christ is a FREE, UNDESERVED HELP. As there was nothing in the
children of Israel to cause God to raise them up Saviors and Deliverers, such
as Moses and Joshua, and others, Types of Christ; (for they were a stubborn and
rebellious people,) so there was nothing of good in us, or done by us, to move
God to send Christ to be an help; nor to incline Christ to be an help to us,
but he was freely sent, and he freely came to the help of sinners: Christ
himself gives this account of his Fathers giving him to help and save; John
3.16. God so loved the world, that he gave his only begotten Son; that
whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting life. It
was Gods love, not the worlds, not his peoples desert, that prevailed with him
to give his Son. And the Apostle Paul gives the same account of Christ's giving
himself for his Church, Ephesians. 5.25. Christ also loved the Church, and gave
himself for it; so that Christ is both in respect of his Father, and himself
also, a free help.

Eighthly, He is a TRIED, EXPERIMENTED HELP: There has been proof made of him,
and all the faithful in their several Generations have found Christ an help to
them in their various conditions; so that they can set to their Seal that he is
an Help. And Christ has abundantly manifested himself an Helper and Savior of
his people in the time of their trouble; he has saved many a sinner, he has
succored many a tempted One, he has healed many a wounded One, he has set
free many a Captive, he has comforted many a mourner, he has strengthened many
a weak One, he has given rest to many a weary soul, he has carried many
through manifold temptations, and preserved them unto his Heavenly Kingdom. Yea
all the Saints in glory can testify, and say, we were weak, faint, and
insufficient ones for the work whereunto we were called; we were tempted,
reproached, afflicted, hated, persecuted; but Christ helped us to do all our
work, and he delivered us out of all our troubles

Ninthly, He is a GENERAL, uNIVERSAL HELP, an help in all cases, in cases
wherein others cannot help; for there is nothing too hard for Christ, (Jer.
32.17.27.)

Gods servants stand in need of help.

First, In respect of service, and work which they have to do; Christ is an
help in that regard; he works all their works in them, and for them; yea, He
works in them both to will and to do, (Phil: 2.13. John 15.5.) By him it is,
not only in respect of Acceptance, but Assistance also, that they offer up
their spiritual sacrifices to God. Would any pray? it is not only through his
merit that they have access with confidence, ( Ephesians. 2.13, 18.) but it is his
Spirit that helps their infirmities, when they know not what they should pray
for as they ought, Rom: 8.26. Would any one praise the Lord? that sacrifice
also is to be offered up by him, Heb: 13.15. By him let us offer the sacrifice
of praise to God continually; Yea, whatever the Saints do, must be through his
help, and so they can do all things, Phil. 4.13.

Secondly, In respect of trouble and sufferings; For Gods Servants of
themselves neither know how to suffer, nor yet to free themselves from
sufferings; but Christ is an help in both cases; for though his succouring them
in Temptation, his comforting them in Tribulation, and supporting them in
Affliction, they are able to bear their Burdens; and by, and through him
helping them, they know how to be abased, how to be hungry, and suffer need,
how to be persecuted, and hated of all men for his names sake, (2 Cor: 4.10,
11.) yea, they can suffer, as well as do All things, through Christ which
strengthens them, (Phil: 4.12, 13.)

Neither is he an help only in trouble, but also a Deliverer out of Trouble;
for he takes away reproach from his people, he wipes away tears from their
eyes, he breaks yokes from off their necks, he removes burdens from off their
shoulders, and banisheth fears from their hearts; in a word, he rebukes Satan,
and reproves Kings for their sakes; (Psalm. 105.14.) and sets them in safety
from every one that puffs at them, (Psalm. 12.5.) They that write the stories
of Egypt, report, that there is no Country in which there are so many venomous
Creatures, and no Country has so many Antidotes against poison as are there:
there is no people that have so many Troubles as faithful Christians; and none
have so much help, both in, and from trouble, as they have; And that HELP is
CHRIST.

Quest. How is Christ an help?

Answ. Chiefly FIVE Ways.

First, By the virtue and efficacy of his DEATH. For though the Death of others
speak forth their inability, and incapacity to help any longer; yet Christ's
death is so far from being his weakness, and his ceasing to help any further,
that it is of wonderful power and efficacy, and a standing abiding help to his
weak Servants. The Apostle Paul in his Triumphant challenge to the enemies of
Gods elect, lays much weight upon the help of Christ in this respect, Rom:
8.33, 34. Who shall lay any thing to the charge of Gods Elect? it is God that
Justifies; who is he that condemns? it is Christ that dyed. Yea, the Death
of Christ is of such great power and efficacy, as that the Gracious soul from
thence (as from a Fountain of all good) receives daily supplies of strength,
and help in every time of need; to the making it victorious over all evils and
enemies whatsoever: It is of such virtue, as that it appeaseth Rom: 3.25.
the wrath of God, it weakneth and wastes the body Rom: 6.6.
of sin, it 2 Timothy: 1.10.
abolisheth death, and destroys him Heb: 2.14.
that had the power of death, that is, the Devil.

Neither is the death of Christ the price only of our Redemption from manifold
deserved evils; but the purchase also of our glorious, heavenly inheritance;
For hereby he has procured eternal life for all those, who by patient
continuance in well doing, seek for glory, and honor, and immortality, ( Rom:
2.7.) Hereby also he confirms the Testament and Covenant of Grace to his
people: For where a Testament is, there must also of necessity be the death of
the Testator. For a Testament is of force after men are dead; otherwise it is
of no strength at all, whilst the Testator lives, Heb: 9.16, 17. And thus
Christ is an help by the virtue of his Death.

Secondly, By the Excellency of his EXAMPLE. An Example, a Copy, or a President
is an help, and for an help, and in that Christ has given us his Example, he
thereby helps us; the more excellent also the Example is, the greater is its
help; and there is an excellency in Christ's example, whereby he helps them
much that follow him.

It is the Prime, Chief, and absolute Example; not regulated by any other, but
all other to be conformed to it; and therefore we are to be followers of
others, only as they are of him. The Apostle Paul would not press his own
Example upon the Corinthians, but with this limitation, 1 Cor. 11.1. Be ye
followers of me, even as I also am of Christ: But the Example of Christ affords
a certainty to the soul what to follow, and hold to, and so becomes a choice
help, and furtherance to a Christian in his walk, above the Example of any
other, which he is to examine, and try, and follow, and refuse as it agrees,
or disagreeth with this.

Besides, there are no blots, defects, nor imperfections; but contrariwise a
wonderful exactness, plainness, beauty, and glory in the Example of Christ,
whereby it is of singular use and advantage to his followers, their way being
thereby made plain before them.

Neither is it a scant, but a full, and large Example, both of obedience, (For
He that says he abides in him, ought himself also so to walk, even as he
walked, 1 John 2.6.) and the several parts thereof; he has given us an example
of faith, love, patience, self-denial, meekness, diligence, etc. And of
suffering also, (that he might help in that needful time;) To encourage us to
it, he has given us an example of readiness, and willingness to suffer; he
willingly laid down his life for his sheep, (Joh. 10.15.18.) and to guide us
in it, he has given us an example of meekness, and patience, for he was led as
a sheep to the slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he
not his mouth, Acts 8.32. And when he was reviled, reviled not again; when he
suffered, he threatened not, 1 Pet. 2.23. And thus Christ is an Help by the
excellency of his example.

Thirdly, By the powerfulness of his Spirit. The Spirit of Christ, is a Spirit
of life and power, which he gives forth into the hearts of his servants for
their help, in their various services and conditions; and therefore the Spirit
is said to help their Infirmities, Rom: 8.26. Yea Christ does so usually help
by his Spirit, that most acts of help are frequently attributed, in Scripture,
to the Spirit; as to Quicken, uphold, strengthen, comfort, teach, lead, bear
witness, bring to remembrance, give utterance, cause to do, John 6.63. Romans
8.11. Psalm. 51.12. Ephesians. 3.16. John 14.16. John 14.26. Gal. 5.18. Romans 8.16.
Acts 2.4. Ezekiel. 36.27. By this did Christ eminently help his servants in the
work whereunto he called them in the primitive times; By this he enabled them
to be his witnesses, not only in Jerusalem, and in all Judea, and in Samaria,
but unto the uttermost part of the earth, Acts 1.8. By this they evercame the
mightiest Adversaries of Truth; For they were not able to resist the wisdom
and spirit by which they spoke, (Luke 21.15. Acts 6.10.) And by this he helped
them to do many wonderful things, to the great advantage and furtherance of the
Gospel, ( Act. 11.19-21.) By the same Spirit he has helped others also in
later Generations to testify for him against Antichrist, and his Adherents,
and by their Testimony exceedingly to prevail; as Wickliffe, Hus, Luther, and
others. And this is that which Luther in an Epistle to some amongst whom his
doctrine was successful, would have them to observe; Consider (says he) with
what sword I have conquered sin, and overcome Errors, and subdued policy; I
have never touched you with a finger, but with the Spirit of Christ's mouth,
viz. the Sword of his Gospel. And several of the Martyrs, though mean, and
unlearned, yet by the help of the Spirit of Christ, have put to silence their
learned Adversaries: Among the rest, History tells us of one Alice Driver, that
she non-plust the Doctors that Examined her, and then said, God be honored,
you be not able to resist the Spirit of God in a poor woman; And as it was
then, even so it is now, for Christ by the same Spirit, helps his servants
both to will, and to do, and to suffer, of his good pleasure, ( Phil: 1.29.
Phil. 2.13.)

Fourthly, By the Admirableness of his RVLE, and Administration; For he so
orders, and disposes of all things, that they work together for good, to
them that love God, Romans 8.28. so that those things which men contrive, and
design to be most hurtful, (through his power and wisdom) become helpful to
his servants, yea he sometimes makes his Enemies intended Destruction, his
peoples glorious salvation. And indeed the Rule and Reign of Christ, does much
consist in his helping and relieving his oppressed servants, in his pleading
their cause, and executing judgment for them; in his breaking the bands of
their yoke, and delivering them out of the hand of those that serve themselves
of them, that they may be no more a prey to the Heathen; yea the maine design
of Christ, next to his own Glory, is the salvation, and safety of his flock,
Jer. 23.5, 6. Ezekiel. 37. And he does many admirable things in order to this end;
as he makes the weak to conquer, and the mighty to be overthrown; he makes
the Counsel of the simple to stand, and the devices of the crafty to be
disappointed; he does that mavelous work, and a wonder, spoken of Isa. 29.14.
He causes the wisdom of wise men to perish, and the understanding of the
prudent to be hid: And he judges the poor of the people, and saves the
children of the needy; and breaks in pieces the Oppressor, Psalm. 72.4.

Sometimes he sets enemies one against another; The Mighty against the Mighty,
Ruler against Ruler, Jer: 46.12. Jer. 51.46. so that they fight, Brother
against Brother, Neighbor against Neighbor, City against City, Kingdom
against Kingdom, and so help to destroy one another, Isa: 19.2. 2 Chronicles:
20.23. Sometimes he wonderfully restraines the rage of Enemies, so that they do
not hurt, nor destroy in his holy Mountain, but the Wolf dwells with the
Lamb, and the Leopard lies down with the Kid; and the Calfe, and the young
Lion, and the fatling together, and a little child shall lead them; according
to that famous prophecy of his Kingdom, Isa. 11.6, 7, 8, 9.

Sometimes he causes them to favor his people, Psalm. 106.46. and sometimes he
makes them helpful and serviceable to them; according to that precious
promise of God to his Church, Isa. 60.10. The sons of strangers shall build up
thy walls, and their Kings shall minister unto thee. Thus God turned the heart
of the King of (Persia that was now over) Assyria unto his people, to
strengthen their hands in the work of the house of God, of the God of Israel,
Ezra 6.22. And put it also into the heart of Artaxerxes to help Ezra to
beautify the house of the Lord which was at Jerusalem, Ezra 7.27. And thus
Christ helps by the Admirableness of his RVLE and Administration.

Fifthly, By the prevalency of his Intercession; by this he helps them much
who believe through grace. Christ perfecteth by his Intercession that good
work of the salvation of his people which he begun by his Passion; for though
Christ help exceedingly by the virtue and efficacy of his death, as has been
shown, yet there is need of his Intercession also, and therefore he is entered
into heaven to appear in the presence of God for us, Heb: 9.24. And this is of
such great benefit, and advantage to the Saints, that the Apostle lays the
weight of their salvation upon it, Rom: 5.10. If when we were enemies, we were
reconciled to God by the death of his Son, much more being reconciled, we shall
be saved by his life; and indeed, it is now sufficient for salvation; and
therefore Christ is said to be able to save them to the uttermost that come
unto God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb:
7.25. And as the Intercession of Christ is of great use and help to a Christian
in all cases, so especially in these THREE CASES.

First, In case of sin; to that purpose are the words of John, 1 John 2.1. If
any man sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

Secondly, In case of Satan's Temptations and designs against his servants; so
much may be gathered from the words of Christ, Luke ^2.31, 32. The Lord said,
Simon, Simon, beho^^, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as
wheat; but I have prayed for thee, that thy faith fail not.

Thirdly, In case of sufferings; It is through the help of Christ by his
Intercession, that the Elect are made Conquerours, and more (...) Conquerours
in all their afflictions. Faith felcheth its chief matter of Triumph over
Tribulation, distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, sword, etc. from
the Intercession of Christ, Rom: 8.34. etc. Who is he that condemns? it is
Christ that died, yea rather that is risen again, who is even at the right
hand of God, who also makes Intercession for us; Who shall separate us from
the love of Christ? shall tribulation? etc. And thus Christ helps by the
prevalency of his Intercession.

Branch 2. God has Appointed Christ, this Mighty One, to be an help to his
people. God, not man, nor yet Christ, He has laid in Zion this useful Corner
Stone, Isa. 28.16. Behold, I lay in Zion for a Foundation, a Stone, a tried
Stone, a precious corner Stone, a sure foundation. God has laid him, and laid
him for an help, so that he that believes on him shall not be confounded, 1
Pet. 2.6. The Lord has given him to be an help to the people: so much the Lord
says by his Prophet, Isa. 42.6, 7. I the LORD have called thee in
Righteousness, and will hold thy hand, and will keep thee, and give thee for a
Covenant of the people, for a light of the Gentiles; To open the blind eyes, to
bring out the Prisoners from the Prison, and them that sit in darkness out of
the Prisonhouse. Yea he was foreordained before the Foundation of the world,
to be an help to Gods people, though manifested in the last days for them, (1
Pet. 1.21. 2 Timothy 1.9, 10.)

Reasons why God has appointed Christ, this Mighty One, to be an help to his
people.
Reas. 1. Because the Lord saw there would be need of a Mighty One; and that in
several regards; as

First, The weakness of his people; they being a feeble flock, of a very little
strength, and the Lord loves to strengthen the weak hands; Fear not thou
Worm Jacob (says God) I will help thee, Isa: 41.10, 14. Chap. 35.3.)

Secondly, The Difficulty of their work; It is not only hard, but impossible
to flesh and blood to perform; Every part of it is hard; it is hard to
believe, hard to pray, hard to deny a man's self, hard to forsake father and
mother, wife, children, brethren and sisters, houses and lands, and a man's life
too for Christ's sake ( Luke 9.23, 24. Luke 14.26.) It is hard to keep the
Commandments of God, and the Faith of Jesus, ( Rev: 12.11, 17. and 14.12.) And
therefore God sent a Mighty One from heaven, even his own Son to help his weak
servants in all their difficult services.

Thirdly, The Mightiness of their Adversaries, who daily seek to hinder, and
trouble them in their work. The Jews that built the Temple at Jerusalem, had
mighty Adversaries, who hindered them all that ever they could; and the Lord put
it into the hearts of Darius and Artaxerxes to help th^^ (Ezra 6.1, 7. Ezra
7.12, 13.) All the people of God may complain with David; That their
persecutors are too strong for them, neither do they wrestle only against
flesh and blood, but against Principalities, against powers, against the Rulers
of the darkness of this world, against spiritual wickedness in high places,
Ephe: 6.12. And therefore the Lord sees it needful to send them a Savior, and
a Great one, and he shall help and deliver them.

Fourthly, Also the promised exaltation, and establishment of his people; For
God has promised that in the last days, the Mountain of the Lords house
shall be established in the Top of the Mountains, and shall be exalted above
the hills, and all Nations shall flow unto it, Isa. 2.2. Mic. 4.1. That
Jerusalem shall be a quiet habitation, a Tabernacle that shall not be taken
down, not one of the stakes thereof shall ever be removed, neither shall any
of the Cords thereof be broken, Isa. 33.20. Yea the Lord has said of Zion, I
will make thee an eternal excellency, a joy of many Generations, Isa. 60.15.
But as yet the people of God are low, Zion sits in the dust, and is afflicted,
and tossed with Tempest, as yet she is a Reproach, and a taunt and a byword
among the Nations; so that great things are yet to be done before she be
clothed with her promis^^ glory. But seeing the Lord has loved her, and
purposed, and promised that she shall be exalted, and established for ever;
therefore has he laid help upon one that is Mighty to do it for her, even
Christ.

Reas. 2. For the honor and exaltation of Christ; That he who has borne so
much shame, and endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, might
be seen and known to be the Help, Deliverer, and Savior of his people: And
therefore the Father is said to exalt him in this respect; Him has God exalted
with his Right hand, to be a Prince, and a Savior, for to give repentance to
Israel, and forgiveness of sins, Acts 5.31. And by this Christ shall have,

First, The HONOR of the Saints faith, and confidence; For in him they shall
trust for help in their several conditions; According to what was prophesied of
him, Isa. 11.10. To him shall the Gentiles seek; or in him shall the Gentiles
trust, as the Apostle explaines it, Rom: 15.12. Its honor to Christ that the
Saints are looking to him for deliverance and salvation, in their straits and
Troubles.

Secondly, The HONOR of the Saints praises; When they have found him to be
their strength, and help, they will make him their Song, and exalt him in their
praises, (Isa. 2.3, 4.) Their souls will be joyful in him, and rejoice i^ ^^s
salvation: All their bones shall say, LORD, who is like unto thee, which
deliverest the poor from him that is too strong for him; yea the poor and the
needy from him that spoileth him? All Christ's saved and delivered ones, will
cry with a loud voice, Worthy is the Lamb that was slain, and has helped us,
and Redeemed us to God by his blood, out of every kindred, and tongue, and
people, and Nation, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and glory, and blessing, Rev: 5.9-12.

Object. Some may say, as Gideon to the Angel, Judge. 6.13. Oh my Lord, if the
Lord be with us, why then is all this befallen us? If God has appointed
Christ, That Mighty One, to be a^ help to his people, why are they in so much
trouble and distress?

Answ. 1. As the Lord has appointed Christ to be an help, so he has also
appointed a time for his people to suffer in; For as Christ, this Mighty One,
had a suffering time in respect of HIS PERSON, in which he was set at naught,
and derided, and persecuted both by people, and Rulers, (before he entered into
his Glory, Luke 24.26.) so he shall have in respect of his mystical body the
Saints, before they enter into the promised rest and Glory. Thus much God told
Abraham, when he appeared to him, Genesis 15.13, 14. saying, Know of a surety,
that thy seed shall be a stranger in a land that is not theirs, and shall serve
them; and they shall afflict them four hundred years; And also that Nation
whom they shall serve, will I Judge; and afterward shall they come out with
Great substance. So likewise there was a time when the Lord said to Zedekiah
King of Judah; Bring your necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon, and
serve him, and his people, Jer: 27.12. And they were to be quiet in that estate
till seventy years were accomplished. And there was a time wherein God would
break his yoke from off his peoples neck, and burst their bonds, that strangers
might no more serve themselves of them, Jer: 30.8, There is a day of Jacobs
trouble, and there is a time, when he shall be saved out of it, (verse. 7.) And
when the time to favor Zion, yea the set time be come, God will arise and have
mercy upon her, Psalm: 102.13. But the day of the Lords patience, and his
peoples sufferings, must precede the day of his vengeance, and his peoples
salvation. The servant, as well as his Lord, must suffer, before he enter into
Glory, ( Rom: 8.17.)

Secondly, The Lord has several ways of helping his servants; his help does
not consist only in freeing them from sufferings, but also in upholding, and
supporting them under sufferings, so that they faint not in the evil day. Thus
the Lord promised to help Jacob, Isa: 41.10. Fear thou not, For I am with
thee; be not dismayed, for I am thy God. I will strengthen thee, yea I will
help thee, yea I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness. With
this way of help from the Lord, the Apostle labors to encourage the Saints at
Corinth in their Temptations, 1 Cor: 10.13. God is faithful, who will not
suffer you to be Tempted above that you are able; but will with the Temptation
also make a way to escape, that you may be able to bear it. Christ does as
well help his servants by keeping them from falling by Temptation, as by
delivering them out of temptation; Thus Christ has been, is, and will be the
help of his people in their suffering day.

Thirdly, Though Christ be Mighty to help, and save to the uttermost all his
^^rvants out of all their Troubles; yet he sees it meet in his infinite
wisdom to help them sometimes but with a LITTLE help. God granted Rehoboam,
and the Princes of Israel some Deliverance, but not a full Deliverance; a
Deliverance from destruction, but not from servitude and spoil, 2 Chronicles: 12.7,
8, 9. And thus God helped his people Israel in Ezra's days, which he
thankfully took notice of in his Confession and Prayer, Ezra 9.7, 8, 9. For our
iniquities have we, our Kings, and our Priests been delivered into the hand of
the Kings of the Lands, to the sword, to captivity, and to a spoil, and to
confusion of face, as it is this day; and now for a little space grace has
been showed from the LORD our God, to leave us a Remnant to escape, and to give
us a Nail in his holy place, that our God may lighten our eyes, and give us a
little reviving in our bondage; For we were bond men, yet our God has not
forsaken us in our bondage, but has extended mercy unto us in the sight of the
Kings of Persia, to give us a reviving, etc. It was the gracious Promise of God
to his People, whom he cast far off among the Heathen, and scattered among the
Countries, That he would be to them as a little Sanctuary in the Countries
where they should come, Ezekiel: 11.16. It is also said of those persecuted,
oppressed ones b^ those Mighty Kings mentioned Dan: 11.34. They shall be helped
with a little help. And therefore though Christ does not help so eminently and
fully, as he will hereafter; yet let us not undervalue his present help; let us
not say he helps not at all, because he helps us but with a little help, in
comparison of what he will do: He sees a little help is best for us at present,
and it is more than we deserve at his hands.

Fourthly, The Deliverances and Salvation of Gods people are commonly carried
on in a Mystery; Not by might, nor by power, but by the Spirit of God. Gods
Providence toward his Servants, is as a Wheel in the midst of a Wheel, (as
Ezekiel: ^.16.) whose motion and work, and end in working, is not discerned by a
common eye. Christ does sometimes walk in the dark, when he is helping his
People, as the loving father is contriving good for his child, though the child
perceives it not; to this agrees that of the Prophet Isaiah, Ch: 45. verse.
15. Verily, thou art a God that hidest thy self, O God of Israel, the Savior:
Yea, God is sometimes in a way of deliverance with his People, and their
deliverance near, when he seems to engage them to greater sufferings. There is
so much contained in that promise of God to Zion, Micah 4.10. Be in pain, and
labor to bring forth O Daughter of Zion, like a woman in travel; for now shall
thou go forth out of the City, and thou shall dwell in the field, and thou
shall go even to Babylon; there shall thou be delivered; there the LORD shall
redeem thee from the hand of thine enemies. We must not conclude that Christ
does not help us, because we see not his hand lifted up.

Fifthly, There is SOMETHING IN CHRIST'S SERVANTS because of which he does not
sometimes help them; as sometimes CHRIST DOES NOT HELP: sometimes

First, When his people do not believe, do not trust nor stay upon him for
help; for he is an help to all them that trust in him; for any one to distrust
the Power and Faithfulness of Christ, is to exclude himself from partaking of
the benefit thereof. When the children of Israel believed not the word of God,
the Lord did not help them, but lifted up his hand against them to overthrow
them in the wilderness, Psa. 106.24, 26. Christ did not many mighty works in
his own Country, because of their unbelief, Math. 13.58. If thou do not
believe that he can, and will help, thou can not expect he should help.

Secondly, When they set about any work without his call; The Lord has been
wont to help in those things he has called his Servants to, as might easily be
made manifest in Moses, Josuah, Gideon, David, and others; but when his People
have run, and he sent them not, they have been without his help in such
undertakings. When the children of Israel would invade the Land of Canaan
without Gods call, they were smitten, and discomfited, Numb: 14.44, 45. And
though Josiah was a good man, yet going to fight against Pharaoh Necho,
contrary to the mind of God, he dyed for it, 2 Chronicles 35.20, 21, 22, 23. They
that act without Christ's call, are like to act without his help.

Thirdly, When they undertake any work, though never so good and excellent in
at self, in their own strength, without engaging him to their help, he helps
them not; as in the case of Peter, it was a good work, and much conducing to
the honor of Christ, which Peter undertook; but trusting to his own strength,
Christ left him to miscarry in it (John 13.37, 38.)

Fourthly, When the eyes of his people are upon some other besides him, or when
they join some other with him to help, then he usually leaves both him that
helps, and him that is helped to fall together, Isa. 31.3. The Lord was
Isreal's help when he was their God alone, and none other with him, Deuteronomy: 32.12.
The LORD alone did lead them, and there was no strange God with him. When the
Spouse shall lean upon Christ her Beloved, and upon other Lovers also, then
Christ withholdeth his help from her.

Fifthly, When they have any sinister ends and aims in what they do; for though
the work be good, yet if a man's end be bad, Christ does not usually further him
in it; as when a man in Preaching, Praying, or any part of Religion, seeks not
so much Christ's honor, as his own praise and profit, he cannot expect, neither
does he ordinarily receive such help from the Spirit of Christ therein; They
that seek not Christ's things, but their own, shall not prosper, Jer: 10.21.
Haggai 1.4, 6, 9.

Sixthly, When they refuse to be helped by him; Christ's Servants are sometimes
more especially in great dangers and straits, and stand in need of his help:
and though Christ show himself willing and ready to save, and deliver them, yet
such is the folly and untowardnesse of their spirits, that they will none of
his help, but rather choose to suffer through walking in the ways and
imaginations of their own hearts, than to be delivered in their harkening to
his counsel, and submitting to his will; and then no wonder Christ helps not;
this was the frame of spirit, and sad condition of Jerusalem, which Christ
lamented over, Jerusalem was in danger, Christ would have helped her, but she
would not, Christ lets her alone, and the issue is sad, Matthew. 23.37, 38. O
Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that killest the Prophets, and stonest them that are
sent unto thee, how often would I have gathered thy children together, even as
an Hen gathers her Chickens under her wings, and ye would not? behold your
house is left unto you desolate.

Quest. What shall Gods people do when Christ helps not?

First, Seriously consider, and lay it to heart, as a matter of greatest
concernment, and trouble to us. So did Joshua when the Lord withheld his help
from Israel, Joshua 7.6, 8. Josuah rent his clothes, and fell to the earth
upon his face, before the Ark of the LORD, until the even-tide, he and the
Elders of Israel, and put dust upon their heads; and Joshua said, Alas, O Lord
God, wherefore have thou at all brought this people over Jordan to deliver us
into the hand of the Amorites to destroy us? would to God, (Hebr: O that) we
had been content, and dwelt on the other side Jordan. Oh LORD, what shall I
say, when Israel turns their backs before their enemies? We should look upon
it as that wherein both God and his People suffer. God suffers in his name,
when he does not help his people; His, and their enemies blaspheme his name.
Sometimes they cast dirt upon his power, saying, The Lord cannot help, nor
save; sometimes upon his goodness, and mercy, The Lord will not help;
sometimes upon his Truth and Faithfulness, The Lord has forgotten his people:
Hence says Joshua, What will thou do for thy great name? And his people they
must needs suffer when he with-draws his hand; they are endangered, and
trampled upon by their enemies: and the suffering of Gods Name, and the
distresses of his Servants, must not seem a light thing in our eyes. Nehemiah's
frame and carriage under such a dispensation, is worthy of imitation. When he
heard that the Remnant that were left of the Captivity were in great
affliction, and reproach, that the wall of Jerusalem was broken down, and the
gates thereof burnt with fire, he sat down and wept, and mourned certain days,
and fasted, and prayed before the God of Heaven, Neh: 1.3, 4. And this is that
which Jerusalem lamented with much bitterness of spirit, Lament: 1.15, 16. The
Lord has trodden under foot all my mighty men, in the midst of me; he has
called an Assembly against me to crush my young men, the Lord has trodden the
Virgin, the Daughter of Judah, as a Wine Press; For these things I weep, mine
eye, mine eye runs down with water, because the Comforter that should
relieve my soul is far from me. It Is just matter of mourning and lamentation
when the appointed helper and Savior does not help nor save.

Secondly, They should diligently search out the cause and reason why Christ
helps not: For if the Lord cease to help his People, there is some cause for
such a dealing, as there is for what evil soever the Lord bring upon them,
Ezekiel. 14.23. And when the Lord slacks his hand concerning the help of his
Servants, its their present work and duty to look narrowly about them, and in
them, to find out the cause thereof. When the Lord denied Israel his help
against the men of Ai, he told them the cause of it, There is an accursed thing
in the midst of thee, O Israel; and commanded, and directed them to seek, and
they found it out, Achan was taken, and the Silver, and the Garment, and the
wedge of Gold, his Sons, Daughters, Asses, Sheep, Tent, and all that he had,
and they stoned him, and burned them with fire, Joshua 7. This was part of Jobs
work in his affliction, to find out the cause of it, and that he might know it,
he begs of God to show him wherefore he contended with him, Job 10.2. Thus did
David also in his distress, Psa. 22.1. My God, my God, why have thou forsaken
me? why art thou so far from helping me: And we find the Faithful in their low
and helpless estate calling upon one another to this very thing, Lament: 3.40.
Let us search, and try our ways, and turn again to the Lord.

Thirdly, They should humbly acknowledge, and really forsake those evils
wherewith they have provoked Christ to withold his help from them in time of
need. The Faithful do not only complain of their misery and troubles, but they
confess, and forsake their iniquities; when Nehemiah considered the afflicted
condition of the People, he does not only put them upon fasting and
confession, but upon reformation also, Neh: 13. This is that which the Lord so
frequently calls for at the hands of his people, Turn, turn your selves from
all your transgressions; And they also call upon God for this, Lam: 5.21. Turn
thou us unto thee, O Lord.

Fourthly, They should earnestly cry to the Lord for help; This has been the
course of the servants of God of old, whereby they have prevailed with God to
lift up his hand to their help in time of trouble. The Church lifted up her
voice in affliction, saying, Awake, why sleep thou, O Lord? Arise, cast us
not off for ever (Psalm. 44.23.) Wherefore hidest thou thy face, and forgettest
our affliction and oppression? For our soul is bowed down to the dust, our
belly cleaves to the earth; arise for our help, and redeem us for thy mercy
sake, This is a tried means; says David, This poor man cried, and the Lord
heard him, and saved him ou^ ^f all his troubles, Psalm. 34.6. When the men of
Gibeon were in great distress and danger by reason of five Kings coming
against them, and needed help, they sent to Joshua, saying, Slack not thy hand
from thy servants, come up to us quickly, and save us, and help us, Joshua
10.6. So should all the servants of the Lord cry to their Joshua, the Lord
Christ, whom God has made so strong for them, to come and help, and save them
out of all their troubles When the Disciples were in danger on the Sea, and
wanted help, they cried to Christ to save them, they awaked him, and said unto
him, Master, carest thou not that we perish? and he arose, and rebuked the
wind, Mark 4.38, 39. O ye Saints, cry to Christ; and the more he seems to
neglect you, cry so much the more earnestly and constantly, and give him no
rest till he hear and help, and redeem you from all evils.

Fifthly, They should patiently wait upon Christ for help; Though Christ do not
help presently, yet wait upon him, for he will help in due time; Do as Beggars
that have but one door to go to for bread, if none hear, nor help them
presently, they lay them down at the door, saying within themselves, we will
wait here, may be their compassions will move them as they pass by to help us:
God forbid that any of Christ's Servants should say, either with heart or mouth,
as that person, 2 Kings 6.33. What should I wait for the Lord any longer? but
rather to follow the counsel of the man after Gods own heart, mentioned Psalm.
37.7. Rest in the LORD, and wait patiently for him, and for his help; though it
tarry, wait for it, because it will surely come, it will not tarry; and in the
mean time know, It is a good thing that a man should both hope and quietly wait
for the salvation of the LORD, Lament: 3.26. Such only shall say, and sing in
the day that the Lord arise for the help of his people, Lo, this is our God, we
have waited for him, and he will save us; This is the LORD, we have waited for
him; we will be glad, and rejoice in his salvation, Isa. 25.9.

Quest. When may Gods people groundedly expect that Christ will help them?

Answ.

First, When they are afflicted greatly; when their burdens are so heavy, that
they know not how to bear them, then the Lord has been wont to help them. The
Egyptians made the children of Israel to serve with rigor, so that they sighed
and groaned by reason of their bondage; and the LORD saw the affliction of his
people, and delivered them out of the hand of the Egyptians, Exodus 1.13. and
2.23. and 3. -- 7, -- 8. And at another time, when God saw the affliction of
the children of Israel that it was bitter, he saved them by the hand of
Jeroboam, 2 Kings 14.26, 27. This David experienced, and acknowledges to the
praise of God, Psalm. 116.6. -- 10. -- 16. saying, I was brought low, and he
helped me; I was greatly afflicted, O LORD, thou have loosed my bonds: And he
professes faith in God for the same toward others, Psalm. 18.27. Psalm. 140.12.
Thou will save the afflicted soul: I know that the Lord will maintain the cause
of the afflicted, and the right of the poor. The Church in her complaint and
prayer to God for help, spreads the greatness of her affliction before him,
Lament: per totum, (throughout the Book) and concludes saying, Remember, O
Lord, what is come upon us; consider, and behold our reproach, Lament: 5.1.

Secondly, When they are forsaken utterly, when all creature help fails and
ceases. The LORD will judge his people, and repent himself for his servants,
when he sees that their power is gone, and there is none shut up, nor left,
Deuteronomy: 32.36. And according to this word did the Lord do for Israel; for when
there was not any shut up, nor any left, nor any helper for Israel, he saved
them by the hand of Jeroboam, the son of Joash, 2 Kings 14.26, 27. And the
efore God is said to be the helper of the Fatherless, Psalm. 10.14. And to
regard the prayer of the destitute, Psalm. 102.17. Jehoshaphat seeking help of
God, urges him with their weak and destitute condition, 2 Chronicles: 20.12.
saying, O our God, will thou not judge them? for we have no might against this
great company that comes against us; neither know we what to do, but our eyes
are upon thee. And to raise Gods Servants expectation of help from Christ in
their lowest estate, it is prophesied of him, Psalm. 72.4.12, 13. That he shall
judge the poor of the people, he shall save the children of the needy; he shall
deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also, and him that has no helper.

Thirdly, When they cry mightily to the LORD for help. When Israel was
oppressed time after time, they cried to the Lord, and he delivered them; when
the Lord has a purpose to help his servants, he usually poures forth a Spirit
of Prayer upon them. When the Decree of release from Babylon was ready to issue
forth, God put a mighty Spirit of Prayer upon Daniel, Chap: 9. And immediately,
before God will work, deliverance and salvation for Jerusalem, he will spirit
his servants to cry mightily unto him to do it for them, Isa: 62.6, 7. I have
set Watchmen upon thy walls, O Jerusalem, which shall never hold their peace,
day, nor night: ye that make mention of the Lord, keep not silence, and g^ve
him no rest till he establish, and till he make Jerusalem a praise in the
earth; so that when a M^ghty Spirit of Prayer goes forth to engage Christ to
help, he is not far from the help of his People.

Fourthly, When they believe on him strongly: when Gods servants have reached
out an hand of faith toward him, he has lifted up his hand to help them.
Abraham believed strongly, and the Lord did help him greatly; Jehoshaphat, Asa,
David, and others, relied on the Lord, and were helped in the time of their
troubles; the three servants of God, mentioned Dan: 3. were of great faith, and
Christ helped them, so that the fire burnt them not, neither could the flame
kindle upon them; yea, as many as ever came to Christ for help, either for body
or soul, (especially all such, as were of great faith) received it: and surely
when the People of God stagger not at the Promise of help, but are strong in
faith, notwithstanding many difficulties, and natural impossibilities before
them, the Performance thereof is at hand. (Romans 4.20.)

Fifthly, When they walk before him fa^thfully; nor doing their own, nor
others, but his will. When the Servants of God of old did walk in their
integrity, serving their Generations according to the will of God, he helped
them and made their ways prosperous; but when they did put forth their hands
unto iniquity, the LORD was not with them: There is none can expect that God
should meet them in a way of mercy and help, but such as work righteousness,
and all such may, Isa. 64.5. they can confidently pray for help in time of
need, as David did, Psalm. 119.173. Let thine hand help me, for I have chosen
thy precepts. Christ promised and gave forth his help to his servants, when
they were working his work in the simplicity and sincerity of their souls; see
his promise, Math. 28.19, 20. Go ye, teach all Nations, bapt^zing them in (or
unto) the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost; teaching
them to observe all things, whatsoever I have commanded you; And lo, I am with
you always, even unto the end of the world. So also Luke 21.12, 13, 14, 15. See
likewise his performance of his good word to them in their Preaching,
Disputing, Writing, Gal: 2.8. Acts 6.10. Acts 11.21. 2 Cor. 10.10. And
certainly, as many as shall be faithful to him in the work whereunto he calls
them, shall receive a sufficiency of help to carry them through it.

Sixthly, When they use appointed means dil gently; doing neither more, nor
less, nor any other thing than what God requires of them. When the Lord of
old had a urpose to help and save his People in an eminent way, he was wont to
set them about doing something; and sometimes that which was very unlikely (as
to outward appearance) to further his intended work; yet when they were
diligent in it, they were wonderfully helped, as might be shown at large; so
when Christ is in the way of the help and salvation of his people, he requires
something that might seem a weak, foolish thing for them to do, which may seem
in their eyes to be rather to their hurt, than help; yet they ought to be found
using of it, and therein may expect Assistance from him. When there was want of
wine at the Marriage in Cana of Galilee, the Mother of Jesus said unto the
servants, Whatsoever he says unto you, do it; which then they did, they were
helped by him. (John 2.) When the Disciples despairing of success (having
toiled all the night, and taken nothing) had given over fishing for that time,
and were washing their Nets; he said to Simon, Lanch out into the deep, and let
down your Nets for a draught; at his word they did so; and when they had this
done, they enclosed a great multitude of fishes. (Luke 5.4, 5.)

Seventhly, When enemies speak proudly, act highly, and seem to bear down all
before them, being most secure and confident in their ways; then Christ is not
far from the help of his People. The Lord has said by the mouth of his
Prophet, Isa: 59.19, When the enemy shall come in like a flood, the Spirit of
the LORD shall lift up a Standard against him. It was so of old, when Pharaoh
was most proud and confident, and said, I will pursue, I will overtake, I will
divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them, I will draw the sword,
my hand shall destroy them; then the Lord appeared for the help of his People
against Pharaoh, and all his Host, (Exodus 15.8.) as he did in Jehoshaphats
time, when multitudes came against them, 2 Chronicles: 20. as also in Nehemiah's
days, when the Adversaries said, They shall not know, neither see, till we
come in the midst among them, and slay them, and cause the work to cease, Neh:
4.11, 12, 15. And as it was heretofore, so it shall be hereafter; For when
Babylon says in her heart, I sit a Queen, and am no widow, and shall see no
sorrow, Then shall Christ the King of Sion, throw her down with violence, like
a great Millstone into the Sea, never to rise again, (destroying her in a day,
Rev: 18.7, 8.21.) and so free his Servants from all their oppressions; when men
and Devils are raging, Christ will be helping.

Thus I have answered the Question by these seven Particulars, which I desire
may be considered jointly; for when these things concur, when both the case
and carriage of Gods People, as also of their Enemies, is or shall be as has
been mentioned, help is at hand; they may then look up, and Lift up their
heads, for their Redemption draws nigh. (as Luke 21.28.)

Quest. What USE should we make of this?

Answ: I. It is for Our INSTRVCTION, in Four Things.

First, It shows the Original, and first cause of Gods Servants help, namely,
the LORD: For as their affliction, so their help comes not forth out of the
dust, but from above, from the most High God: And as it is the choice
privilege of Gods People to find help in time of need; so it is their duty,
and great advantage to know, and consider from whence it comes: And this
Doctrine is an help to them therein; this did David, Psalm. 121.1, 2. I will
lift up mine eyes unto the hills, from whence comes my help. My help comes
from the Lord which made Heaven and Earth; whosoever be the Instruments,
whatsoever be the means, help is from God alone; all Saviors and Salvations
are from him. To this agrees part of the Levites confession of Gods goodness
to Israel, Nehem: 9.27. According to thy manifold mercies thou gave them
Saviors, who saved them out of the hand of their Enemies.

Secondly, It shows a sufficient ground and reason of the faith and hope that
is in the Saints for help from Christ in time of need; He is mighty to help;
but that is not all, it is the will and ordination of God that he should help,
He was both anointed and appointed thereunto, Isa: 42.1, 6, 7. and 61.1, 2, 3.
Not only anointed and enabled, but appointed also; and what God has anointed
and appointed Christ to do, the Saints may believe, and hope for.

Thirdly, It shows the righteousness, faithfulness, and goodness of God in
his commands to, and dealings with his people: He is no hard Master, looking to
reap where he has not sown, nor to gather where he has not strawed; but as he
has appointed work for his people to do, and afflictions for them to endure,
so he has appointed and provided help for every employment and condition.

Fourthly, It shows whence it is that the people of God have been, and are able
to do such great things; it is not of, nor from themselves, but from Christ
their helper and help. It was the Lords b^ing with, and helping his Servants of
old, which made them do so valiantly and worthily; It was not by the Apostles
own power and holiness, but by the name of the Holy Child Jesus (Gods appointed
help and helper) that so many signs and wonders were done by them, Acts 3.12.
and 4.30. Hence says Paul, Phil: 4.13. I can do all things through Christ
which strengthens me. I labored more abundantly then they all; yet not I,
but the grace of God which was with me, 1 Cor: 15.10.

II. USE of REPROOF.
First, To the profane ones of the world, who insult and triumph over Gods
people, as if they were altogether helpless, and utterly forsaken; yea, they
say concerning the Righteous, There is no help in God for him, Psalm: 3.2. God
has forsaken him; persecute and take him, for there is none to deliver him,
Psalm: 71.11. This Doctrine tells such, that they lie, and speak not the truth;
and which is worse, they make God a liar; for God has sworn it by his
holiness, that he will not lie herein, Psalm. 89.35, 19. and says, I have laid
help (and help enough, help) upon one that is mighty; and they say, there is no
help for him. And thus do many contradict the Lord himself; but they shall one
day find that God is true, and they are liars, ( Jer: 44.28.) for God will
perform every Good word which he has spoken concerning the help* deliverance,
and salvation of his people, (as Jos: 21.45. Jos: 23. 14.) I shall only say to
such, speak no more so foolishly.

Secondly, To the proud ones of the earth, who trust in themselves, and in
their own works for salvation, saying in their hearts, (though not with their
tongues) that there is no need of the help of Christ, no need of his being made
to them Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption, (1 Cor: 1.30.)
hereby frustrating the grace of God, and making the death of Christ of none
effect, Gal: 2.21. Such will one day find, (though now they say, they are
rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing,) that they are
wretched, and miserable, and poor, and blind, and naked; and stand in need of
his gold, that they may be rich, and of his white raiment, that they may be
clothed, that the shame of their nakedness may not appear, Rev. 3.17, 8. Let
such hear, and consider what God speaks to them, Isa: 50.11. Behold, all ye
that kindle a fire, that compass your selves about with sparks; walk in the
light of your fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled: this shall ye have
of mine hand, ye shall lie down in sorrow. As also what Christ says in his
parable, Luke 18.9, 10, 11, 12, 13, 14. Two men went up into the Temple to
pray, the one a Pharisee, and the other a Publican; The Pharisee stood, and
prayed thus with himself, God, I thank thee that I am not as other men are,
extortioners, unjust, Adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the
week, I give tithes of all that I possess. And the Publican standing a far
off, would not lift up so much as his eyes unto heaven; but smote upon his
breast, saying, God be merciful to me a sinner; I tell you, this man went
down to his house, justified rather than the other.

Thirdly, This also reproves those that trust in their own strength for
preservation and deliverance from danger, that say in their hearts, We will
deliver our selves, our own swords shall save us; as also those that conceit
their own hands sufficient for their designs. How proudly did Pharaoh speak,
Exodus: 15.9. I will pursue, I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust
shall be satisfied upon them, my hand shall destroy them; And yet he was so far
from being able to perform his enterprise, that he and all his host miserably
perished in the mighty waters. Sennacherib likewise was so confident of
prevailing against Jerusalem, that he made a scorn at all opposition which
should be made against him: And yet was not able so much as to come before it
with Shields, nor to cast a bank against it. And the Angel of the Lord smote in
his Camp an hundred, and fourscore, and five thousand in one night, Isa: 37.
Neither have they only been frustrated in, and punished for, their confident
boasting in themselves, but other Mighty Ones also; and as many as shall yet
glory in their might, shall faint, and be weary, and utterly fall in the end, (
Isa: 40.30, 31.)

Fourthly, This also reproves DESPAIRING ONES.

First, Those that despair of eternal salvation; and they are

Either GREAT SINNERS, such as have sinned so long, so much, and so grievously,
that they conclude their iniquity is greater than can be forgive^; and their
filthiness is such as cannot be washed away, and that there is no hope that
ever they should be saved: To such I say, though you have exceedingly provoked
the Lord by your Rebelling against him; Why should you further dishonor him,
and endanger your selves, by distrusting, and despairing of that help, which
God has laid upon Christ for you? And know, if you have abundantly sinned, he
can AND WILL abundantly pardon the Returning sinner, (Isa: 55.7. Jer: 3.1, 12,
13. Hos: 14.1, 2, 3.) Why should any despair of help from him, who is not
only able to save them to the uttermost that come unto God by him, (Heb:
7.25.) but is also appointed of God thereunto, ( John 3.16, 17.)

Or WEAK SAINTS, such have sometimes said, that there is no help in Christ for
them; but that they shall perish in their Transgressions, and fall, at last, by
the hand of some Temptation or other. But how injurious are such to the grace
of God, and their own souls; not considering, that God laid help upon his
servant David for all Israel, especially for the weak of the flock; yea,
because his people are weak, and that they might not trust in themselves, but
in Christ, he has appointed him to be an help for them, (1 Timothy: 1.15. Rom:
4.5.)

Secondly, Those that despair of deliverance, or any promised prosperous
condition; And this is when Gods people have prayed much, and waited long in a
low and suffering estate, and the mercy seems as far off at last, as it was at
first; and the providence of God seems to run cross to his promise. Thus it
was with the children of Israel, Ezekiel: 37.11. Behold, they say, our bones are
dried, and our hope is lost, we are cut off for our parts. But why should Gods
people despair in this respect, God can open their graves, and cause them to
come up out of their graves, (verse: 12.) He has appointed a Mighty one to be
an help to them, a Mighty Savior and deliverer, who can deliver them when they
are at the lowest.

Fifthly, Those that seek and look to others for help in time of trouble, as
the manner of most is, and neglect Christ; that cry to the Mighty, and wise
ones of the Earth, help us, save us; To such I say,

First, It Is in vain to go to the Creature for help, for help is not to be
found in it; The wisest, mightiest, richest, and honourablest, man on earth
must say, as the King of Israel to the Woman of Samaria, crying to him for
help, saying, Help my Lord, O King: If the LORD do not help thee, whence shall
I help thee? 2 Kings 6.26, 27. The Psalmist cries out once, and again, Vain
is the help of man, (Psalm: 60.11. and 108.12.) The Children of Israel went
down to Egypt for help, but they were a people that could not profit them, nor
be an help, but a shame and reproach, Isa: 30.2, 5. If the Cities of Judah, and
Inhabitants of Jerusalem, go and cry unto the Gods, unto whom they offered
Incense, they shall not save them at all in time of their trouble, Jer: 11.12.
Populous No was situate among the rivers, and had the waters round about her,
the Sea was her Rampart, and her wall was from the Sea; Ethiopia and Egypt were
her strength, Put and Lubim were her helpers, yet she was carried away, she
went into Captivity, Nah: 3.8, 9, 10. The Church acknowledges, and bewaileth
her fault and condition in this respect, Lament: 4.17. saying, As for us, our
eyes as yet failed for our vain help, in our watching we have watched for a
Nation that could not save us. And what is more common and ordinary, than for
those that conceit, and look to receive help from Creatures, to meet with
disappointments, and to find by experience that they imagine a vain thing. I
shall conclude this particular with that serious Affirmation, Jer: 3.23. Truly
in vain is salvation hoped for from the hills, and from the multitude of
Mountains; truly in the Lord our God is the salvation of Israel.

Secondly; It is not only in vain, but dangerous also; greatly to the hurt
and loss of those that flee to the Creature for help: For the Lord will not
only not help, but he is thereby provoked to come against such, and their
helpers too, to cause them all to fall; And therefore there is a Woe pronounced
against such, Isa: 30.1. and 31.1. Woe to them that go down to Egypt for help,
to strengthen themselves in the strength of Pharaoh: Israel sought for help
from Egypt, but received hurt; hence God tells the Inhabitants of Egypt, that
they have been a staff of reed to the house of Israel. When they took hold of
thee by thy hand, thou did break, and rent all their shoulder; and when they
leaned upon thee, thou brakest, and made all their loins to be at a stand,
Ezekiel: 29.6, 7. If Ahaziah neglect the God of Israel in his sickness, and seek
help from Baalzebub, the God of Ekron, God will meet with him for it, And he
shall not come down from the bed on which he went up, but shall surely die, 2
King, 1.2, 4. Ahaz in his straits sent to the King of Assyria to help him; but
he received harm, in stead of help; for, it is said, he came unto him, and
distressed him, but strengthened him not. And Ahaz took away a portion out of
the house of the Lord, and out of the house of the King, and of the Princes,
and gave it unto the King of Assyria; but he helped him not; and missing of
help from him, he betook himself to false Gods, he sacrificed to the Gods of
Damascus, which smote him, and said, because the Gods of the Kings of Syria
help them, therefore will I sacrifice to them, that they may help me; but they
also were far from helping him, For they were the ruin of him, and of all
Israel, 2 Chronicles: 28.16, 20, 21, 23. And thus will it fare with the man, that
(neglecting the help of Christ) trusts in man, and makes flesh his Arm,
(Jer: 17.5.)

Thirdly, It is sinful, VERY SINFVLL; Such (like to the children of Israel, of
whom God greatly complains, Jer: 2.12, 13.) commit two great evils at once,
they forsake the Lord Christ, the Savior, and the Great one, whom God has
appointed for their help, and chose to themselves Creatures, weak Creatures,
that can afford no help. The greatness of this evil consists chiefly in THREE
THINGS.

First, It is a despising the riches of Gods goodness; In this was manifested
the greatness of the love, and the riches of the goodness of God to his people,
that he appointed his only begotten Son to be an help for them; and now for
them to refuse his help, and to seek to others for help, is a despising of the
riches of Gods goodness, and that is no little evil, ( Rom: 2.4, 5.)

Secondly, It is also a slighting of Christ; yea it is highly dishonorable to
Christ, whom God has appointed to help. It is not only a preferring others
before him, but it is a setting by this Mighty One, as needless, and a making
use of others as sufficient to help; This was Isreal's sin, in asking a King to
reign over them, when God was their King; They slighted the Lord: Hence said
the Lord to Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but they have rejected me,
that I should not reign over them, 1 Samuel: 8.7. And Samuel charged it home upon
them, 1 Samuel: 10.19. Ye have this day rejected your God, who himself saved you
out of all your adversities, and your tribulations, and ye have said unto him,
nay but set a King over us. It is no little sin to tread underfoot the Son of
God, Heb: 10.29.

Thirdly, Further, it is a walking contrary to profession. Upon this account
Ezra would not seek to the Creature for help against the enemy, which did lie
in wait by the way, Ezra 8.21, 22. He betook himself to the Lord, to seek of
him a right way for him, and his companions, and their little ones, and all
their substance. For (says he) I was ashamed to require of the King a band of
Soldiers, and Horsemen to help us against the Enemy in the way; because we had
spoken unto the King, saying, The hand of our God is upon all them for good
that seek him. Because it was contrary to his profession, he sought not help
from the King. For men to call Christ LORD, and acknowledge him to be King, the
Savior, helper, redeemer, and deliverer of all those that trust in him; and
yet to look to the hills, and the mountains for help and salvation, is to walk
contrary to their profession; and that is a great evil also.

Use III. From hence flow forth several streams of COMFORT to the people of
the Lord, in their various conditions, and employments in this World.
It holds forth comfort to them;

First, Against mightiest Adversaries. They that hate the faithful without a
Cause are many; they that would destroy them, being their enemies, wrongfully,
are mighty, their persecutors are stronger than they, Psalm: 142.6. But here is
the Comfort of the Righteous, they are not left alone to encounter with these
Giants; Christ, the Captain of salvation stands at their right hand to help
them, ( Psalm: 109.31.) If the Devil stir up Mighty Ones to hate, and
persecute Gods servants; God (answerable thereunto) has appointed a Mighty
One, yea a Mightier than they, to be an help to his people. When the Devil
himself like a Roaring Lion shall in any special manner seek to devour them,
(1 Pet: 1.8.) Christ the Lion of the Tribe of Judah, is at hand to help and
deliver them, ( Zac: 3.1, 2. Rev: 5.5.) It is the high privilege of the Church
of the living God, that Christ, the appointed helper thereof, is mightier to
save, than the Devil, and all enemies are to destroy, Isa: 63.1. Yea, the very
weakness of their Mighty helper and Savior is stronger than their Adversaries,
(1 Cor: 1.25, 27.) They may boldly say, the Lord is our Helper, we will not
fear what man shall do unto us, Heb: 13.6. With this, Luther comforted, and
encouraged himself, against many and Mighty Adversaries, saying, Ego habeo qui
causam defendat, etiamsi totus mundus in me solum insaniat, I have one that can
defend my Cause, although the Whole World should be in a rage against me alone.

Secondly, Comfort against greatest difficulties: When the people of God
consider what great and hard things, even impossible to flesh and blood, the
Lord has required at their hands; [as to Deny themselves, to forsake all for
Christ's sake, to confess him before men, and so to walk, even as he walked in
this world,] And also compare their great work with their own little strength;
they are sometimes much discouraged, and ready to faint in their work, and to
say, almost despairing, Who is s^fficient for these things? Indeed the
strongest are not sufficient of themselves, as of themselves to perform the
least part of the Lords will as they ought; yet the least and weakest of the
Saints (through Christ that Mighty One helping) are well able to overcome all
difficulties. According to this the Apostle Paul speaks, Phil: 4.13. I can do
all things through Christ which strengthens me; Surely it must needs be
matter of great joy and comfort to Gods fearing and trembling servants, because
of difficulties, to hear of, and experience such an alsufficiency of help, as
is in Christ for them.

Thirdly, Comfort against deepest troubles; Sometimes God shows his people hard
things, and make them to drink the wine of Astonishment, Psalm: 60.3. They are
sometimes troubled on every side, innumerable evils compassing them about, (
Psalm: 40.12.) so that they know not what to do, nor how to escape. But the
Father of mercies will not leave his children to perish in the deep waters of
Affliction; but has provided help for them in that estate, a Savior in time
of trouble. Jacob must have a time of trouble; but he shall be saved out of it,
Jer: 30.7. This was David's faith in his low estate, Psalm: 71.20, 21. Thou which
have showed me great and sore troubles, shall quicken me again, and shall
bring me up again from the depths of the Earth; thou shall increase my
greatness, and comfort me on every side. And let all the faithful servants of
the Lord, who are this day in the deep, even overwhelmed with troubles, lift up
their heads, and rejoice in this grace of God in laying help upon one that is
Mighty, to redeem Israel out of all his Troubles, (Psalm: 130.8.)

Fourthly, Comfort against weakest Instruments of help. He gives power to the
faint, and to them that have no might, he increases strength, (Isa: 40. at the
end.) If the Instruments he intend to use in his work be dull, he can sharpen
them; He can make the Worm Jacob, a new sharp threshing Instrument having
teeth, to thresh the Mountains, and beat them small, Isa: 41.14, 15. And if
the iron be blunt, and he do whet the edge, he has so much strength to put to,
as he can make it do execution, to cut asunder, what he will have cut asunder;
It is nothing with him to help, whether with many, or with few, or with them
that have no power, (2 Chronicles: 14.11.) Therefore let the servants of Christ be
comforted and encouraged in the Mightiness of their Lord to help, though they
see nothing but foolish, weak, base, and despised things in his hand to make
use of for their deliverance. Its the manner of Christ (and he gets honor
thereby) to help by such things; he has chosen the foolish things of the
world, to confound the wise; and the weak things of the world, to confound the
things that are mighty; and base things of the world, and things which are
despised, yea things which are not, to bring to naught, things that are, (1
Cor: 1.27.) The Mightiness of the Agent, is an encouragement against the
weakness of the means.

Object. But many put away from themselves this breast of consolation, and
object against this Doctrine.

First, Some saying, they are not worthy that Christ should help them; And
though God has appointed him to be an help to his people, yet he will not
arise to the help of such obstinate and rebellious ones as they have been, and
are.

Answ. Christ is a free, undeserved help, and none of those whose help he has
been, were ever worthy of it; But he has remembered his people in their low
estate; and redeemed them from many enemies, and evils; not because of their
merits, but because his mercy endures for ever. The children of Israel were a
rebellious, and stiffnecked people, and yet the Lord saved, and delivered them
many a time. And the Lords hand is not shortened that it cannot save; nor his
goodness abated, that he should not still help his people, notwithstanding
their unworthiness.

Secondly, Some say, that they are of froward, discontented, and peevish
spirits under troubles, and Afflictions; and Christ will not help such.

Answ. Such a frame and carriage of any of the servants of Christ, must needs
be a grief, and trouble to his soul; but yet their hope of help from him in
time of need, is not hereby cut off. The children of Israel were a froward,
murmuring generation, and yet the most high God was their help from time to
time; The tenderhearted mother is as ready to succor, and help her froward,
discontented child, that cries night and day, as the rest of her children: And
surely Christ's succor and help extends as far as any mothers on earth.

Thirdly, Some say, That Christ has helped us often, we have wearied him, he
will help no more.

Answ. It proves often so in respect of men; but in respect of Christ it is not
so: He is an helper that faints not, neither can he be weary, (Isa: 40.28.)
And though men think when they have done a little for their followers, that
they have done enough, and they must not trouble them too often; yet the
Servants of Christ may go as often as they will to him for help, and be always
welcome, so they do not abuse his grace toward them.

Besides, Christ's former, frequent helping of his People in their several
straits, is so far from containing any thing against his helping them for the
future, that it is an Argument to prove, that he will continue his help to
them; and according to this David argued, 1 Samuel: 17.37. The Lord that delivered
me out of the paw of the Lion, and out of the paw of the Bear, he will deliver
me out of the hand of this Philistim. He did not say, God has d^livered me
several times, he will deliver me no more; but the contrary, he will deliver
me. The Apostle Paul uses the same Argument, 2 Cor. 1.10. 2 Timothy: 4.17.

Fourthly, Some, That Christ indeed did help when on earth, but he is NOW IN
HEAVEN, HE WILL HELP NO MORE.

Answ. Though Christ be in Heaven, yet he is as near to help his Servants, as
when he was on Earth; there is nothing in his being in Heaven, whereby they
should fear he will not help: For by HIS BEING in Heaven, consider

First, He is not disenabled to help; for there Angels and Authorities are made
subject unto him, 1 Pet. 3.22. If Christ were so mighty to help when in a state
of Humiliation; how mighty to help and save must he needs be now he is set on
the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the Heavens? (Heb: 8.1.) He can
help them against all enemies, he can rain down fire and brimstone, storm and
tempest upon them; he can help them against all outward wants, for from on high
he can send down showers of blessings, as rain upon his Inheritance; he can
help them also against all spiritual wants, he can send the Comforter, the
Spirit of Truth which shall guide them into all Truth.

Secondly, By his Being in Heaven, He is not disaffected toward them: his
heart turned not from them by his going to Heaven; but though he be clothed
with glory, yet he is full of bowels; the same Spirit that acted him here
below, rests upon him, and abides with him for ever. Though there be a great
alteration in his condition, being passed from Earth to Heaven, from shame to
glory; yet there is no change in his disposition, he is as pitiful and merciful
to his People as ever, (Heb: 2.17, 18, and 4.15. with 5.2.) and therefore his
Servants may now, as well as heretofore, expect help from him in time of need.

Thirdly, By his being in Heaven, He is not disengaged from helping them. The
Lord God appointed him to be an help to his People now he is in Heaven, as well
as when he was on Earth. And as Christ did on Earth what was to be done for
them here, so now he is in Heaven, he is there to do what is yet to be done for
them; what he begun to work here, he is to finish there, (John 14.2. John 16.7.
-- 15.) God made him a Priest for ever and that for the help of his People, and
therefore it is said, He is able to save them to the uttermost, that come unto
God by him, seeing he ever lives to make intercession for them, Heb: 7.25. The
same Apostle tells us, That he is entered into Heaven it self, now to appear in
the presence of God for us, Heb: 9.24.

Fourthly, He is not thereby dis-interested in them, nor they in him. Christ's
being in Heaven does not destroy those near Relations that are between Christ
and his People; he is still a Shepherd, and they his sheep; still an Husband,
and they his Spouse; he is still their Head, and they his Members; he is still
their Brother, Friend, Father, neither are these Relations only abiding, but
are in their full vigor and glory in Heaven; he being a more glorious Head,
Husband, Friend, than when on earth; the abiding of these Relations speak forth
his helping of his People.

Fifthly, He is not disregardful of them by his being in Heaven. Some may be
ready to say, he is at Gods right hand, he is in glory; and though he be not
disaffected toward us, yet he being so far above us, may forget, and disregard
us in our low estate; but it is not with Christ, as with corrupt man; his
honor and advancement does not puff him, nor make him proud; but though he be
in his high estate, at the right hand of God, Angels, and Authorities, and
Powers being made subject unto him, yet he does regard, and help his Servants
in their low estate. All things are delivered unto me of my Father, says
Christ, yet he was then mindful and careful of weak helpless souls, earnestly
inviting them to himself, saying, Come unto me all ye that labor, and are
heavy laden, and I will give you rest, Math. 11.27, 28. with 28.18, 19, 20.

Sixthly, He is not dissuaded from helping them, being in Heaven. There is none
there against his Servants, that should seek to take him off from helping them;
the Father who has committed all things into his hands, is well pleased with
it, being also full of compassion toward those that are in distress. The
Angels also, those ministering Spirits rejoice at it, and are ready at his word
to go forth to minister for the Heirs of salvation. (Heb. 1.14.)

Seventhly, Neither is he (being in Heaven) any way damnified, nor
disadvantaged by helping his Servants on Earth; he has not the less by what
he gives to them; he is not the weaker by what he does for them, but he
gains by his layings out upon them; the more he sows, the more he reapeth;
the more he gives forth of grace and help to them, the more he receives of love
and honor from them.

Thus it appears, that there is no cause why the Saints should doubt of the
help of Christ because he is in Heaven, but that they should the more
confidently expect it, because he lives there to help them.

IV. Use. EXHORTATION.
Commit all to him. When others are committing themselves and their
concernments to the wise and mighty, and honorable ones of the earth, to be
kept, ordered, and disposed of by them, do you commit your selves, and things
into the hands of Christ, unto whom the Father has committed all Judgment,
and made mighty to help, and keep whatsoever is committed to him. He is in
Heaven, and what Treasures you lay up for your selves there, are safe; there
neither Moth, not Rust does corrupt, and there Thieves do not break through nor
steal, (Mat. 6.20.) He is the strong man, stronger than all others, into whose
house none can enter to spoil his goods, Luke 11.21, 22. therefore COMMIT ALL
TO HIM.

I. Commit your SOULS to him. They are your most precious Treasure, therefore
it does greatly concern you to look well to them, especially in perilous times,
that they may be safe; commit therefore the keeping of your souls to this
Mighty One, (1 Pet. 4.19.) who alone is able to keep you from falling by the
hand of any temptation, persecution, corruption, or whatsoever may annoy, or
endanger you in the way to his Heavenly Kingdom; he is the Great Shepherd, and
Bishop of souls, who can preserve, feed, and nourish them unto eternal life, (1
Pet. 2.25.) Luther was wont to say, Let him that dyed for my soul, see to the
salvation of it.

II. Commit your BODIES to him, for he is mighty to help and save them, also he
is ABLE TO HELP, AND SAVE THEM.

First, In case of service; When the Lord Christ calls his People to his work,
they often neglect it with this pretense, their bodies are so weak, that they
cannot do what is required; this is sometimes the Ministers Plea for his
negligence, he is so weak, that he cannot Preach much, nor often; the Peoples
Plea for not hearing, we cannot go so far, or we cannot sit so long; we cannon
visit the sick at a distance, our bodies will not away with journeying; This
has been many a Believers Plea, for not being baptized, their bodies cannot
bear it, surely (say they) God does not call us thus to afflict and endanger
our bodies; he will have mercy, and not sacrifice: But let such know that the
Lord Jesus Christ, who has bough^ the Body, as well as the Spirit, does
requir^ to be glorified in, with, and by the bodies o^ his People; and seeing
he is mighty to help in this respect, namely to fit and strengthen the weak
bodies of his Servants in his work, (as they have often found by experience,) it
should greatly encourage and engage them, to giv^ them up to watching, fasting,
laboring, sacrifice, or whatever service the Lord shall call them to do. (Rom:
12.1.)

Secondly, In case of sickness and diseases. This the Lord commands by his
Servant James, and encourages to by a gracious promise of help in that
respect, James 5.14, 15. Is any sick among you? let him call for the Elders of
the Church, and let them pray over him, anointing him with oil the Name of the
Lord. And the prayer of faith shall save the sick, and the Lord shall raise him
up. And this was the Primitive Practice, both Saints and People committed their
bodies to him, and were helped, he healed them all, yea, many were healed, and
many signs and wonders were done by the Name of Gods holy Child Jesus, in the
Apostles days, (Acts 4.30. Acts 8.5, 7. and 3.6.) and therefore let us commit
our bodies to this Mighty One; let us make him our Physician, he is able to
help and heal.

Thirdly, In case of sufferings. When you be called to suffer in your bodies,
whether stripes, buffetings, imprisonments, hunger, thirst, cold, nakedness,
or death for the sake of Christ; be not fearful nor careful, but commit your
bodies (and every part thereof) to him, who is mighty to help in this respect
also; both to prepare, fit, and strengthen the body for the enduring these, and
the like afflictions, and also to keep it that it shall not be lost, nor perish
in any of its sufferings, (no, not a hair or bone thereof, ( Phil: 3.21. Luke
21.18. Psalm. 34.20.) but though it dye, it shall live again, he will raise it
in power and glory, (1 Cor. 15.43.) and therefore men are said only to kill the
body, not utterly to destroy it. (Mat. 10.28.

III. Commit your Estates to him. He is able, and he will either keep your
estates for you, (as some of his Servants who have been willing to part with
them, have experienced, whilst others distrusting, and not committing them
into his hands, but seeking to save them, have lost them,) or if you part with
them for his sake, he will help you to live of a little, yea, to live more
comfortably of a little, than you did of a great deal; he will make your little
that you have in a way of righteousness, better than great Revenues without
right, Pro: 16.8. And this Gods People have often experienced, and found that
saying of Christ verified, Luke 12.15. viz: That a man's life consists not in
the abundance of the things which he possesses: and at last he will restore
them with increase, no less than an hundred fold, according to those
encouraging words of his, to his self-denying Disciples, Math. 19.29. Mark
10.29, 30. Neither shall they only have more, but better things than they
lose; for Brass they shall have Gold, and for Iron they shall have Silver, and
for Wood Brass, and for Stones Iron; for carnal things they shall have
spiritual, and for temporal things they shall have eternal, 2 Cor. 4.16, 17,
18. Thus will Christ bless the latter end of his faithful followers, more
than their beginning.

IV. Commit your NAMES to him; he is mighty to help his Servants in that
respect also; And either he will keep up your Names and Reputations among men,
that your very enemies shall be forced to speak well of you, and to
acknowledge, that you are more righteous than they: Or if your Names be covered
and buried under reproach and disgrace, yet he will raise them up again; He
will bring forth your righteousness as the light, and your Judgment as the
noonday, Psalm. 37.2. Yea, the time is a coming, when he will take away the
reproach and rebuke of his people from off all the earth, and make them a name
and a praise among all people, Isa. 25.8. Zeph: 3.20.

V. Commit his CAUSE to him. His Cause is the best cause in all the world, it
is no other thing than truth and righteousness it self, and it becomes his
Servants to do what they can to help it forward; but yet not to be so
solicitous and careful for it, as if the promoting of it depended only upon
them; but when they have done what they can, to leave it to him who is able to
plead, and maintain his own Cause against all the enemies thereof. What though
Truth and Righteousness be fallen in the streets, and seem to lie dead and
buried, and almost forgotten by many? yea, what though instead of Truth there
be Error, instead of holiness there be profaneness, instead of judgment
there be oppression, and instead of righteousness a cry; yet he is able to
raise up his own Cause, and will do it; For he shall not fail, nor be
discouraged, till he have set judgment; yea, till he have established Truth
and Righteousness in the Earth, Isa. 42.4. Therefore let none of the followers
of Christ be discouraged, if at any time the Cause of their Lord do not prosper
in their hands, according to the desires of their hearts, but commit it to him
to manage, who is wonderful in counsel, and excellent in working, (Isa.
28.29.) This did David, Psalm. 74.22. saying, Arise O God, plead thy own cause.
As also Luther, who was wont to say when the Cause of God was low in his hand,
It is Gods Cause, let him look to it.

Sixthly, Commit YOUR OWN CAUSE to him. Other Mighty ones may be neglect and
condemn your Righteous Cause; this Mighty One, the Lord Christ, who is higher
than the highest, regards, and pleads the Cause of his People, yea, he will
thoroughly plead their cause. In confidence of this grace of God, the Church of
old resolving to be quiet under the present dispensation, committed her cause
to the Lord, as appears from those words recorded Micah 7.8, 9. I will bear the
indignation of the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my
Cause, and execute judgment for me; he will bring me forth to the light, and I
shall behold his righteousness; then she that is mine enemy shall see it, and
shame shall cover her which said unto me, Where is the Lord thy God? When
David's enemies dug pits for his soul, and rejoiced over him wrongfully, and
devised deceitful matters against them that were quiet in the Land, and opened
their mouth wide against him, saying, Aha, aha, our eye has seen it. He
committed his cause to the Lord, Psalm. 35.22, 23. This thou have seen, O Lord,
keep not silence; O Lord, be not far from me, stir up thy self, and awake to
my judgment, even unto my cause, my God, and my Lord. Thus did Jeremy also
when his enemies devised devices against him, Jeremy. 11.20. and 20.10, 11, 12.
Let then the upright Ones of the earth, when they are oppressed and wronged by
the wicked of the world, be of good cheer, and not faint in their minds, but
commit all to the Lord Jesus Christ, who is Mighty to clear and justify them,
and to take vengeance for them.

Seventhly, Commit your WORK to him. All your work and way, especially your
difficult work wherein you most need his help, look for it, God has appointed
him to be an help, and he is free to help, yea to work all your works in you,
and FOR you. (Isa: 26.12.)

Eighthly, Commit your CONDITIONS to him; Yea, let all, both the Wicked and the
Righteous, both Sinners and Saints, commit their conditions to him.

I. SINNERS, Commit your Conditions to him, that you may not perish in your
iniquities; he only can help you.

First, There is no other name under Heaven given among men, whereby you can be
saved, (Acts 4.12.) Neither is there need of any other, forasmuch as he is able
to save them to the uttermost, that come unto God by him. (Heb. 6.7.) And
therefore hasten away from the Devil, world, and your own selves, and all
vanities, lest they be your ruin; and commit your Conditions to him, and you
shall find help and healing of all your wounds, and in the end everlasting
life, Acts 13.38, 39.

Secondly, Are you laden with sin? so that you cannot look up with any
confidence or cheerfulness of spirit, ( Psalm. 40.12.) Despair not, do not say,
There is hope: (as Jer: 2.25.) Christ has both power to forgive, and destroy
sin; his blood can cleanse from all sin, Mat. 11.28. 1 John 1.7, 9. His Spirit
can crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts, Romans 8.11, 13.

Thirdly, Are you ignorant of the way of salvation? Do you sit in great
darkness? God has given him to be a Light to the Gentiles, to open the blind
eyes, (Isa. 42.6, 7.) and he can make you that are darkness, light in the
Lord, (as those in Ephesians: 5.8.) him self has said, That he is the light of the
world, and he that follows him shall not walk in darkness, but shall have
the light of Life, John 8.12.

Fourthly, Are you the Devils Captives and Slaves to do his will? Jesus Christ
can deliver you from that servitude also, he can turn you (as he has others)
from the power of Satan unto God, (Acts 26.18.) to be his Servants, and Sons,
blessed for ever: Yea, however it is with you, he can help you; therefore to
day while it is called to day, while he tenders his help and salvation, do not
neglect it, lest hereafter when you call, and cry to him for it, he refuse to
hear you at all, ( Heb: 2.3. and 3.7. -- 11. Prove: 1.22, 23, 24.)

II. SAINTS, Commit your Conditions to him also; your most afflictive
Conditions, Cast all your burdens upon him, according to that word, Psalm.
5.22. Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee.

I. Commit your OVTWARD CONDITIONS to him, all your bodily concernments and
troubles; As

First, Your Reproach; he is mighty to roll it away, Jos. 5.9. And he will
assuredly bring forth the righteousness of his people as the light, and their
judgment as the noon day. (Psalm. 37.6.)

Secondly, Your Poverty, and low estate, as it is said Psalm. 10.14. The poor
commits himself to thee, thou art the helper of the fatherless. It is the
work of this Mighty One to deliver the needy when he cries, the poor also, and
him that has no helper, (Psalm. 72.12.)

Thirdly, Your oppressions and persecutions, he can deliver from them, he can
and will burst every band, and take off every yoke, and also break in pieces
the oppressor, Psalm. 72.4.

II. Commit your INWARD SPIRITVAL Conditions to him.

First, All the troubles and burdens of your spirits, which are most heavy,
and hard to bear, as it is written, A wounded spirit who can bear? Prove: 18.14.
Make use of the arm of Christ, which he stretches out for your help, your
souls support, and salvation; and come to him (according to his gracious
invitation) all you that are weary and heavy laden, and he will give you rest,
(Mat. 11. at the end) and you shall find help in every time of need. (Heb: 4.)

Secondly, Are you such as the Devil tempts, and thrusts sore against, that
you might fall? Commit that condition to Christ, that he may be your helper
therein, forasmuch as he is appointed of God; and in that himself has
suffered, being tempted is able to succor them that are tempted, Heb: 2.18.
And to keep you from falling. (Jude 24.)

Thirdly, Have you been overcome by the Tempter? Still look unto Christ who is
mighty to recover you out of the snare of the Devil, and to raise you up again,
(1 John 3.8.)

Fourthly, Are you men and women of sorrowful spirits, and full of heaviness?
Lie at the feet of him whom God has sent to comfort all that mourn, to appoint
unto them that mourn in Zion, to give unto them beauty for ashes* the oil of
joy for mourning, the garment of praise for the spirit of heaviness, Isa.
61.2, 3.

Fifthly, Do you find a Combat within you, the flesh lusting against the
spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, so that you are hindered from doing
the good you would, Gal. 5.17. and sometimes brought into captivity to the Law
of sin, that you even cry out like wretched undone men, Who shall deliver us
from the body of this death? Rom: 7.19, 23, 24. Commit this condition to Christ
also, who is able to subdue your corruptions, and to set your souls above your
lusts, and to make you (as he did Paul) victorious over all evil; so that you
shall say with him in the like condition, We thank God through Jesus Christ our
Lord. Thanks be to God which gives us the victory through our Lord Jesus
Christ, Rom: 7.25. 1 Cor: 15.57.

USE. Put your selves into Christ's service.

There are TWO THINGS usually discourage souls from Christ's work; the
Mightiness of Christ to help, does encourage against both.

First, DIFFICVLTY: Christ's service is apprehended to be hard and difficult;
and the soul that is sometimes somewhat inclined to it, does ordinarily put it
off with these or the like arguings, I cannot perform it, if I should undertake
it; if I should profess Christ, I shall not hold fast my profession, but
dishonor him by apostasy; if I should name his Name, and not depart from
iniquity, I had better make no mention of him: I know I shall never be able to
pray as others do, nor so to learn, nor understand the Mysteries of the
Kingdom, nor to deny my self, and forsake all for Christ; and therefore I had
as good abide a^ I am, and not mind things that are TOO high and HARD for me.

You know what Answer Christ made to his Disciples in the like case, Math.
19.26. With men this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. And
though of your selves, as of your selves you are not sufficient for the least
of those things, (2 Cor. 3.6.) yet through the help of Christ, you may perform
them all, he can make the dullest to understand, and the weakest mighty to do
his will, and it is his work to strengthen the weak hands, and confirm the
feeble knees, and to make them that are of a fearful heart, bold and strong;
yea, he performs all things for his Servants: And thus through Christ
strengthening of them, they experience his burden to be light, and his yoke
easy, Mat. 11.29. Therefore let not the thoughts, nor fears of difficulty hold
any off from Christ's service, seeing he is so able to help.

Secondly, The other Discouragement DANGER: He that engages in Christ's work
heartily and thoroughly, exposes himself to danger, (as some men count danger)
his Name, Liberty, Estate, and Life it self is in danger of being lost; and the
consideration of these things keeps off many from professing and serving Christ
according to his pure, and glorious Gospel.

But to Answer. But what though dangers be many, and great, it is enough to
encourage to his work, that Jesus Christ is a Great One, and a Savior, mighty
to help, and deliver in, and out of dangers: it was dangerous in the eyes of
men for Shadrach, Meshach, and Abednego, not to worship the Golden Image which
Nebuchadnezzar the King sat up, as the generality of the people did, for they
were cast into the midst of the burning fiery furnace, and yet they were safe
there, having the Son of God with them, who did so keep them that they had no
hurt, Dan: 3. It was dangerous for Daniel contrary to the Kings Decree, to pray
three times a day, his Windows being open in his Chamber toward Jerusalem, for
he was cast into the Lions den, and yet he was safe there; God sent his Angel
and shut the Lions mouths, so that no manner of hurt was found upon him, Dan:
6.10. It was dangerous also for Esther to go in to the King, contrary to Law;
And yet it made way both for her own, and her peoples preservation, and safety.
It was dangerous likewise for the Apostles and primitive Saints, to preach, and
practice, contrary to the commands of the Rulers, and customs of the people:
And yet Jesus Christ being with them, according to his promise to help and
strengthen them in their work, they did wonderfully prevail, and prosper, as
in Acts 4.18, 19, 20, 29. Acts 5.17, 18, 19, 20-28, 29-38, 40, 41, 42.

Therefore let not fear of danger hinder any from yielding up themselves to
the service of Christ. And you that are so careful to avoid danger, consider
that you bring your selves into the greatest danger, by declining his work.
While you seek to save your selves, you loose your souls and selves; While you
study to escape the danger of man's hatred and wrath, you fall into danger of
the displeasure of the most high God, yea into danger of eternal Damnation, (
Math: 16.25, 26. Mark 8.34-38.)

USE of CAVTION. Take heed you do not abuse this Doctrine of the help of Christ.
First, That you be not idle, and negligent. It was never the purpose of the
Father in his Appointment of Christ to help; nor yet of Christ, in his
willingness and readiness thereunto, to exempt his people from any duty; but to
strengthen, and encourage them against every difficulty therein. Christ's help
is not to indulge the flesh, but to quicken the dull spirits of his servants.
Yea the Doctrine of the help of Christ, is so far from being a principle of
looseness, and slothfulness, as that it engages, and works up the souls of
those that do understand it aright, unto a faithful, vigorous, and cheerful
performance of the will of God. And indeed, Christ's help does suppose, as his
peoples weakness, so their willingness, and diligence. The help of another,
does imply, that he that is helped, is exercised, and doing what he can in his
business. And therefore, when Christ is helping, be you a working, lest you
provoke him to anger through your slothfulness; for the same Lord Jesus Christ,
who helps the weak, and willing; will condemn the slothful servant, Math:
25.26. (This is not spoken to deject those that are grieved, and would grieve
more for their own slothfulness.)

Secondly, That you do not l^mit Christ: It was the Jews fault of old, for
which God was so angry with them, They limited the holy one of Israel, Psalm.
78. therefore do not limit this Mighty one, and his help at all.

First, Not to MEANS, that either he must help by this, or that means, by this,
or that person, or persons, or else not at all. This is too usual among men.
Naaman will prescribe means, and limit Elisha to them to accomplish the cure
of his Leprosy. He was wroth, and said, Behold, I thought, he will surely come
out to me, and stand, and call upon the Name of the Lord his God, and stroke
his hand over the place, and recover the Leper. Are not Abana, and Pharpar,
rivers of Damascus, better than all the Rivers of Israel? may I not wash in
them and be clean? 2 Kings 5.11, 12. This was also Moses's fault, God bade him
speak to the Rock, and he neglected that, and instead thereof, he smote it
twice, Numb: 20.8, 11. And surely i^ is very dishonorable to Christ, and
unbecoming Saints, to limit him to means, that can help by what he pleases;
and has usually helped, and saved his people by weak, and foolish things, and
things that are not; that no flesh might glory in his presence, 1 Cor: 1.26,
27-29, 31.

Secondly, (Limit not the Lord Jesus) to time, your own time; Christ must help
now, or never, (say some,) If not now, we are undone; as if Christ knew not
when to help, or could not help at one time, as well as at another. Indeed
there is a set and appointed time when Christ will more eminently appear for
the deliverance and salvation of Zion, yet he is an help to her at all times.

Thirdly, Limit him not to particular straits and conditions; As if Christ
could help in some cases and conditions only; thence says some Christian in
his heart sometimes; Christ helped, and delivered me out of such, and such a
temptation; but he cannot deliver me out of my present strong temptation; He
has mortified such and such a lust, but he cannot subdue this unruly lust; he
has wiped away my reproach, but he cannot break my bonds; he has provided for
me in such and such a condition, but he cannot furnish a Table for me in the
Wilderness (as those said, Psalm: 78.19.) What is this but to Eclipse the glory
of this Mighty One, who is an help in all cases, and conditions, as has been
showed?

Fourthly, Limit him not to particular persons, to some of Israel; Let none
say, as some (even of Israel) have sometimes spoken, there is help in Christ
for such, and such; but not for me; I am excluded, and cut off from partaking
of it. But soul, take heed thou do not exclude thy self from a
participation of Christ's help, which extends to all Zion, to the whole flock,
to the weak and sick, as well as to the strong, and sound; yea especially to
the weak; according to that good word of the Lord, Ezekiel: 34.15, 16. I will feed
my flock, and I will cause them to lie down, says the Lord God, I will seek
that which was lost, and bring again that which was driven away, and will bind
up that which was broken, and will strengthen that which was sick; yea, it is
said of him, He shall gather the lambs with his Arm, and carry them in his
bosom, and shall gently lead those that are with young, Isa: 40.11. Therefore
do not limit this holy One in any wise.

Use. Seek to Christ for help in every time of need; whilst others are looking
and seeking to Creatures like to themselves, for help, and can find none,
their eyes failing for their vain help; do you look to him who is both Mighty,
and ordained of God to help, and then you shall be sure to find; when you seek
with your whole heart, (Jer: 29.13. Psalm: 20.7, 8.) He is the great helper, and
Savior, and there is none can help like him.

None so Authoritatively, he, having all power both in heaven and earth, he
commands deliverances for Jacob, Psalm: 44.4.)

None so tenderly, and compassionately; In his love, and in his pity, he
redeemeth, and saves his people, ( Isa: 63.9.)

None so seasonably; he is a very present help in time of trouble, ( Psalm.
46.5.)

None so constantly; he is an help for ever, ( Psalm: 12.7.) therefore seek to
him above all others.

And having found help from him in time of need, be sure you carry it well
toward him, let your Conversation to him-ward be as becomes this grace; be
especially careful,

First, To SERVE HIM THE MORE FREELY; he both deserves, and expects it at your
hands; had you found him, either unwilling, or unable to aid you, you might
have had some plea for your backwardness to serve him, but seeing he has been
ready to assist you in every business, how ought you to be ready to answer when
he calls, to go when he bids you go, and to do what he bids you do, and that
with a willing, and cheerful spirit? Let your experience of his help, make you
forward to his work, so shall you find, that he that has helped, will help,
and he that has saved, is still mighty to save.

Secondly, To CLEAVE TO HIM CONSTANTLY; It will be your wisdom, and greatest
safety to stick to him whom you know to be both mighty, and faithful; oh,
forsake not him in any condition, whom you have found an help in every
condition.

Thirdly, To PRAISE HIM CONTINVALLY; make him evermore your song, who has been
always your strength, ( Isa: 12.3. Isa: 38.20.) This did David, as appears,
Psalm: 71.6. By thee have I been holden up from the womb, thou art he that took
me out of my mothers bowels; my praise shall be continually of thee: Yea, give
him all the glory of all your works, which are indeed rather his than yours,
being wrought by his strength and help. The Apostles carriage, as in other
things, so in this, is worthy of imitation, who when they had wrought miracles
by Christ's power, were careful to give all the glory to his Name, (as Acts
3.12, 13. Acts 14.13, 14-18, etc.) The like we read of Charles the fifth, who
after he had obtained a great Victory, said, I have Conquered in the Name of
Christ Jesus; I shall only say, Go you, and do likewise; for Worthy is the
Lamb that was slain, to receive power, and riches, and wisdom, and strength,
and honor, and Glory, and blessing, for ever, and ever. AMEN.

PSALM. 35.10. (...)

(...) He: Jehovah quis sicut tu? eripiens afflictu^ a forti prae ill^.

APOCAL: 15.3. (...),

Contant -- Magna et mirabilia illa opera tui,

(...),

Domine qui Deus omnipotens: justae et verae

(...).

Illae viae tua, O Rex Sanctorum.

4 (...).

4 Quis non timebit te Domino?


THE END.
THE CONTENTS OF SERMONS On PSALM. 89.19.
I. THE Scope of the Psalm, and Coherence of verse. 19. Page 1. -- 7. I. Observe:
from verse. 19. I. In General. 1. The condition of Gods people here needs help.
Page 8. 2. The Lord himself provides help therein. Page 10. 3. He lays in
sufficiency of help several ways. Three Reasons of this. Page 11, 12.

II. In Particular. Two Observations. I. That Jesus Christ is a Mighty One.
Page 14 I. Explaining the word Mighty, Page 15. 1. In General: 2. In
Particular, its put for 1. Rich: 2. Powerful: Page 16. 3. Valiant: 4. One that
Rules. Page 17.


So Jesus Christ considered, 1. In his Essence. Page 19. II. In his
Mediatorship, wherein four things speak Christ's Mightiness. Page 20.
Demonstrations of his Mightiness.
1. In his Original. 2. In the first promise of him. Page 21. 3. In the Types,
in the multitude, mightiness. Page 23. 4. In Prophesies of him. Page 24. 5. In
the expectation of his people. Page 29. 6. In his Forerunner. Page 31. 7.
Incarnation; where 1. Conception: 2. Birth, Further in Page 32. Its 1. Subject:
2. Time. 3. Concomitants. Page 34. As 1. Angels Message: 2. Host prising: 3.
Homage of the Wise men (...), Page 35. Of whose persons, pains, -- direction.
Page 36.
4. The dread of the Mighty, ( Herod, etc. Page 37.
8. In his Descent, in respect of 1. his stock in General. Page 38. 2. His
Tribe, Judah.
9. Christ is Mighty in his Name. Page 39. 10. Titles. 11. Presentation. Page
40. 12. Baptism: 13. Fasting. Page 41. 14. Transfiguration. Page 42. 15. In
the testimony given of Christ. 1. Of himself: 2. Of the Father. Page 43. 3. Of
the Spirit: 4. Of faithful men. Page 44. 5. Of Angels: 6. Of Enemies. Page 45.
16. In his Fame. 17. His Attendants. Page 47. 18. In Holiness and
Righteousness. Page 49. Which appears Generally.
1. In his Obedience to Gods will: so 2. Particularly, In the graces of the
Spirit that were in him, Faith, Love, etc. Page 52.
19. In Christ's Works of two sorts. Page 59.
1. Spiritual and Heavenly preaching, praying, baptizing, conference. Page 60.
2. Respecting men's bodies. Page 63. 1. Wrought Miracles: 2. Many: Page 64. 3.
Various: 4. Speedily: 5. Easily: 6. Readily: Page 66. 7. Visibly: 8.
Seasonably: Page 70. 9. The subjects on whom Where 1. The largeness on all
sorts: 2. Vnruliness in themselves. Page 71. 3. Indisposition to his works.
10. The perfection of Christ's works. Page 73. 11. Constancy of the success.
Page 74. 12. In the faith of those on whom, and for whose sake he wrought them.
Page 74. 13. In the time of their performance. Page 75. 14. In his effecting
all alone, without others help. 15. In the meannesse of the means to work them.
16. In the effects, General and Particular. Page 76. 17. In his self-denial,
and humility. Page 77. 1. Not seeking his own honor: 2. profit. Page 78. 20.
Mighty in Victories over 1. the World: Page 79. 2. Sin: 3. Death: 4. Satan.
Page 81.

II. Christ is Mighty in his Offices. Page 83. I. A Mighty King. 1. In himself.
Page 84. ( 1. In Majesty: 2. Wisdom) 2. In his Subjects. Two things show
Christ's Mightiness: 1. Their Mightiness: Page 85. 2. Their Multitude. 3. In
his Rule, toward both 1. His Friends. 1. Preserving: 2. Remunerating
everlasting Life, Joy, Honor. Page 88 2. Enemies, in 1. Restraint: 2.
Destruction. Page 90.

II. A Mighty Priest in Dignity. Page 93. 1. Of his Person: 2. Title: 3.
Nature: 4. Order. 5. In solemnity of his being ordained a Priest by an Oath.
Page 96. 6. Performance of his work, consisting 1. In making Satisfaction for
sin. 1. To the uttermost. 2. At once. 3. By his Dying. Page 97.
2. In his Intercession. 3. Offering up the Peoples services. Page 100. 4.
Blessing the People better than other Priests. 1. More than they: 2. With
choicer blessings: 3. More eminently. Page 102.
7. In the unchangeablenesse of Christ's Office. Page 102.

III. Christ is a Mighty Prophet 1. In his Original: 2. Qualifications. Page
103. 3. Commission: 4. Its Execution. Page 105. 5. In Gods command concerning
him.
22. In the carriage of others toward Christ. Page 106. I. Of the Generality
of the People: As 1. Their recourse to him. 2. Their Marvelling at his Doctrine
and Works. Page 108. 3. Their rejoycings, acclamations. Page 109. 4. Their
beseechings, their worshippings. Page 110.
II. In regard of his Enemies carriage. 1. Their Persecutions: 2.
Confederacies. Page 111. 1. Of all interests. 2. Of all they have. Page 113.
III. In the carriage of Christ's Servants to him. Page 114. 1. Their confidence
in him: 2. Confession of him: 3. Suffering for. Page 116.
23. Christ is Mighty in his own sufferings. Page 116. Manifested 1. In the
kinds of them: Page 2. Subject of them: 1. In his soul. Page 117. 2. In his
body, in all parts, etc. 3. In his Name, by Reproach. 4. In his Estate and
Goods.
3. In the Measure of his sufferings. 4. In Efficient Cause of them. Page 119.
1. From his Father. 2. From his Foes. 3. From his Friends. Page 120.
5. In the Persons for whom he suffered. 6. In his willingness to suffer. 7.
In the End of his suffering. Page 121.

II. Christ's mightiness seen in his PARTICULAR sufferings. 1. In his
apprehension. 2. his trial. Page 122 3. His Condemnation. 4. his Death. Page
124 His mightiness showed in his Death. 1. Concomitants. 2. its virtue.

24. Mighty in his Burial. Page 125 In his Resurrection. Page 126
25. Which appears: 1. In that he rose at all. 2. That he rose seen. 3. Against
utmost humane Opposition.
26. In his Ascension. Page 127 27. In his Session, on Gods right hand. Page
128 29. In his Coming again in three things. 1. In the signs thereof. 2. In
the manner of it. Page 129 3. In the end of it. Somewhat more to show the
Superexcellencie of this Mighty One. Page 130
1. He is Mighty and Righteous. Page 130 2. And Merciful. 3. And Meek. Page 131
4. And Wise. 5. And Patient. 6. And Almighty. Page 132 7. And always Mighty.
8. And only Mighty. Page 134 9. Really so, and not so appearing only. Page 134
Qu: How came Christ to be so Mighty? Page 135 Ans: 1. In his Essence: 2. As
Mediator. Page 136 And thus Christ is Mighty by the Fathers, 1. Mission: 2. his
Unction. Page 138
Reasons why Christ is a Mighty One. Page 139 1. For the Fathers Glory. 2. For
his own Glory. Page 140 3. Because his Work was Difficult.
Qu: Whence is it that men despise him? Page 142 Ans: 1. Through natural
enmity. 2. By Ignorance. 3. Unbelief. Page 143 4. Confidence in their own
strength. Page 144 5. Putting far off the day of his Wrath. 6. By fear he will
deprive of what is dear. Page 145 7. By his present seeming meanness. Page 146
USE I. Of Information to Gods People. 1. What manner of Savior they have.
Page 147 2. Of their safe Condition. Page 148 3. It aggravates the sin of
Unbelief. Page 149 4. Ground of expecting great things. Page 150 5. For
Discovery of False Christ's. Page 152
II. Of Conviction to false Worshippers that slight him. Page 153 1. To Jews,
that believe not Jesus is the Christ. Page 153 2. To Turks, that Worship
Mahomet. Page 155 3. To Pagans and Heathens.
III. Of Reproof. 1. To all Usurpers of his Power and Authority. 2. To all
Resisters of his Power. Page 156 3. To all pretended assisters of him. Page 157
4. To all despisers of Christ. Page 159
IV. Of Terror to the Wicked in General. Page 160. 1. To Refusers of his
Grace. 2. Opposers of his Reign. 3. Servants. Page 161 4. Scoffers at his
coming. Page 162
II. More especially, to the Great ones in Earth. R. 1. Because its just Christ
should terrify them. Page 163 2. Its to his Honor. Qu: Why do the Wicked
prosper? Page 164 Ans: They are reserved to destruction. 1. To magnify his
Justice therein. Page 165 2. To magnify his patience toward them. Page 166 3.
Because some of them must be brought in. Page 167 4. To exercise his Saints
faith and patience. Page 168 5. To magnify his Power in their Destruction.
Page 168
V. Of Caution to the Mighty Ones, to take heed what they do. Page 169 VI. Of
Exhortation. I. To Christ's Enemies: submit to him, Page 171 There being no
prevailing against him; 1. Not, by Wisdom. 2. Nor strength. Page 173 3. Nor
Riches.
II. To Christ's servants. 1. Fear him. Page 175. 2. Trust in him. 3. Prize him
highly. Page 176 4. Stand by him, and his interest. Page 177 5. Bless God that
drew you out of the world. Page 178 6. Labor to get much of Christ. Page 179
II. Doctrine, God has appointed this Mighty One (Christ,) to be a help to his
people here. Page 180 1. Christ is an Help to his people, appears. 1. By Types
of him, Passover, Manna, Moses, David, Solomon, etc. Page 180 2. By the
Prophesies of him, Ps: 72. Is. 11. Page 181 In a threefold Gradation. Page 182
1. Christ is furnished with ability to help. 1. Knowledge: 2. power: where 3.
things. Page 184 2. With what may incline him to help. Page 185 As 1.
Participating of our Nature. 2. Participating of his peoples sufferings. Page
186 3. Pity and Compassion. Page 187
3. Christ is engaged to help them. Page 188 1. By his interest in them. 2. By
his Relations to them. Page 189 3. By his Promise to help them. Page 190 4. The
honor he Receives from helped ones. Page 191 For further opening the first
Branch, show, I. What Manner of help Christ is. Page 191 1. Sufficient help.
Page 192 2. A seasonable help. 3. Suitable. Page 193 4. Constant. 5. Only
help. Page 195 6. Old help. 7. Free, undeserved. Page 196 8. A tried
experimental help. Page 197 9. Universal help. Page 198 GODS servants need
help: 1. In regard of service they must do. 2. In regard of sufferings. Page 199



II. How is Christ an help? Page 200 Ans: Chiefly five ways. 1. By efficacy of
his death. 2. By excellency of his example. Page 201 3. By powerfulnes of his
Spirit. Page 203 4. By the admirableness of his Rule. Page 205 5. By the
prevalency of his Intercession. Page 207
Especially in three Cases. Page 208 1. Of sin. 2. Of Satan's Temptings. 3. Of
sufferings.

II Branch: God has appointed Christ this Mighty One, to be a help to his
people. Page 209 I Reasons. 1. In their regard he saw there would be need of
such. 2. The difficulty of their work. Page 210 3. The Mightiness of their
Enemies. 4. The promised exalting of his people. Page 211
For the Honor of Christ, in 1. the Saints Faith. 2. Honor of their Praises.
Page 212 Obj. Why then are his people in so much distress? Page 213 Ans: I. As
the Lord appointed their help, so a time to suffer. Page 213 2. The Lord has
several ways of helping them. Page 214 3. Yet he sees good to help sometimes
but a little. Page 215 4. Their salvations are often carried on in a Mystery.
Page 216 5. Some things in them may delay present help. Page 217 1. When they
believe not. 2. When they act without his call. Page 218 3. When they act in
their own strength. Page 219 4. When they eye some other besides him. 5. When
they have sinister ends in actings. 6. When they refuse to be helped by him.
Page 220

Qu: 1. What shall they do when he helps not? Ans: 1. Seriously lay it to
heart, as a trouble. Page 221 2. Search diligently the cause of it. Page 222 3.
Forsake those evils that so provoke him. Page 223 4. Earnestly cry to him for
his help. Page 224 5. Patiently wait on Christ for help. Page 225 Qu: 2. When
may Gods people expect his helping them? Page 226 Ans: 1. When they are
afflicted greatly. 2. When they are forsaken utterly. Page 227 3. When they cry
mightily for Gods help. Page 228 4. When they believe on him strongly. Page 229
5. When they walk before him faithfully. 6. When they use appointed means
diligently. Page 230 7. When enemies speak proudly, act highly, most secure.
Page 231 Qu: 3. What Use should we make of this? Ans: I. Its for our
Instruction in 4. things. Page 233 1. It shows the first Cause of Gods peoples
help, the Lord. 2. A sufficient Reason of the Saints hope of help in need. Page
234 3. The righteousness of God in his dealings with his. Page 234 4. Whence
Gods People can do so great things. Page 234
II. USE of Reproof. 1. To profane ones that insult against Gods People as
helpless. Page 235 2. To proud ones that trust to their works for salvation.
Page 236 3. To trusters in their strength for help in danger. Page 237 4. To
despairing ones 1. Of Eternal Salvation. Page 238 1. Great Sinners. 2. Weak
Saints. 2. Of deliverance, or promised help. Page 239 5. To seekers for other
help in trouble. 1. As being in vain, help is not there. Page 240 2. Its
dangerous, to the hurt of the seekers. Page 241 3. Its sinful; Chiefly in
three things. Page 242 1. Its a despising the riches of Gods goodness. Page
243 2. Its a slighting of Christ. 3. Its a walking contrary to profession. Page
244


III. USE. Streams of COMFORT to Gods people. Page 244 1. Against mighty
adversaries. Page 245 2. Against greatest difficulties. Page 246 3. Against
deepest troubles. 4. Against weakest instruments of help. Page 247
Object. 1. We are not worthy Christ should help. Page 248 Answ. Christ is a
free undeserved help. Page 249 Object. 2. We are froward under troubles. Answ.
Though this provokes, yet God helps such. Page 249 Object. 3. We have wearied
Christ, he will help no more. Page 250 Answ. Though so with men; he is not weary.
Object. 4. Christ helped on earth, but will not now. Page 251 Answ. Christ is
as near to help in Heaven. 1. Not thereby disenabled to help. 2. Not
disaffected toward them. Page 252 3. Not disengaged from helping them. Page
252 4. Not disinterested in them, nor they in him. 5. Not disregardful of them
thereby. Page 253 6. Not dissuaded from helping them. Page 254 7. Not
disadvantaged by helping them.
IV. USE of Exhortation. Commit all to him. Page 255 1. Your Souls: 2. Bodies.
Page 256 1. In case of service. Page 256 2. In case of sickness. Page 257 3.
In case of sufferings.
3. Commit your Estates to him. Page 258 4. Your Names: 5. His Cause. Page 260
6. Your own Cause: 7. Your Work. Page 261 8. Your Conditions: 1. Ye Sinners;
Page 262 1. There Is help in no other. 2. Are you laden with sin? 3. ignorant?
Page 263
2. Ye Saints: 1. Your outward State, Page 264 Reproach, Poverty, Oppressions.
2. Your inward, in Spirit, tempted flesh lusting. Page 265
USE. Serve Christ. Page 266 Here Helps against two Lets: 1. Difficulty: Page
267 2. Danger. Page 268 USE of CAUTION. Abuse not this Doctrine. Page 270 1. Be
not idle, or negligent. Page 271 2. Limit not Christ to your Time. Page 272 3.
Not to particular straits. 4. Nor to particular Persons. Page 272
USE of EXHORTATION: 1. Seek to Christ for help in every time of need. Page 273
2. Having found help in need, carry it well. 1. Serve him more freely. Page 274
2. Cleave to him constantly: 3. Praise him continually. Page 275



ERRATA. (The Author being distant from the Press.)
PAge 1. Line 8. read contains. Page 83. Secondly, read XXIly. IIly.

Books printed, and are to be sold by Henry Cripps at the first shop in
Popes-head-Alley, next Lombard Street.
DR. Sibbs Saints Cordials, being several Sermons on diverse subjects. Mr.
Buroughs Exposition on the three first Chapters of Hosea. Mr. Cradocks
Gospel-holinesse. His Gospel-liberty. Mr. John Goodwin his Treatise of the
Divine Authority of the Scriptures. Bishop Reynolds his Exposition on the 4.
Chapter of Hosea. Mr. Cotton on the seven Vials, being an Exposition of some
part of the Revelations. Mr. Norton his Orthodox Evangelist. Mr. Brooks his
Crown of Christianity, or Holiness the way of Happiness. Mr. Lie his Sermon
at the Funeral of Mris. Nichols. Mr. Douglasses Mystery of Godliness, in
several Sermons. Mr. Armitages Son of God, walking in the fire with the
servants of God, in several Sermons on the 3. of Daniel. His Trial of Faith,
or the Woman of Canaan, in several Sermons. Mr. Baxters three Treatises, Viz:
1. A Sermon of Judgment. 2. Danger of slighting Christ. 3. True Christianity;
or Christ's absolute Dominion, and man's necessary self-resignation to him. Mr.
Eaton on the Godhead of Christ. Mris. Sarah Wight, or Grace advanced in a
nothing creature. Mr. Dingley's Vox Coeli, or a Discourse of Thunder. His
Divine Optics, or a Treatise of the Eye. Mr. Trenchfields Christian Chemistry,
or History improved. Mr. Hubberts Pill to purge Formallity. Mr. Brooks his Ark
for all Gods Noah's in a stormy day. Mr. Lies method of using the Assemblies
Catechism. Mr. Cottons Milk for Babes in Christ. A Catechism. An Epitomie of
History, containing the lives of the Roman Emperors, wherein is also contained
an Epitomie of English Chronicle. Mr. Wards Nature and Grace. Mr. Byfields
Signs of a Godly man. His Touchstone of Assurance. The Mirror of Martyrs.
Mr. Wells Anchor of hope. Mr. Warner Gain of Loss, or temporal losses
spiritually improved. Mr. Huits Anatomy of Conscience. Dr. Sibbs Bruised Reed.
Mr. Sarrocolds Supplications of Saints, a Book of Prayers and Praises. Mr.
Hookers Souls preparation for Christ. Mr. Dikes right receiving Christ. Mr.
Sam: Clarks Saints Nosegay, or 741 Scripture Flowers or Meditations. Mr. Powels
Experiences. An Answer to Fiat Lux a Popish Author. To be sold by Henry Cripps
in Popes-head-Alley.
FINIS.

