REPORTS OF THAT GRAVE and LEARNED JUDGE, Sir JOHN BRIDGMAN, KNIGHT; Sergeant
at LAW, SOMETIME CHIEF JUSTICE OF CHESTER.

To which are added Two Exact Tables, the one of the Cases, and the other of
the Principal Matters therein contained.

LONDON, Printed by Tho. Roycroft for H. Twyford, Tho. Dring, and Jo. Place,
and are to be sold at their Shops in Vine Court Middle Temple, the George in
Fleetstreet, and at Furnivals Inn Gate in Holborn. 1659.

TO THE STUDENTS OF THE COMMON LAWS OF ENGLAND.
Gentlemen,
THese Ensuing Reports, being brought to me in Manuscript (in the peculiar
Dialect of our Common Law) I discovered the same to be the Handwriting of that
late Judicious and Honorable Person, Sir John Bridgman Knight, deceased,
Sergeant at Law, heretofore Chief Justice of Chester (the memory of whose great
Learning, and profoundnesse in the Knowledge of the Laws of England still
lives, although himself be dead) and thereupon bestowed some pains in the
perusal thereof; wherein I found many things (in my weak apprehension) worthy
of observation, which induced me to encourage the Translation thereof into our
Native Idiome (the Language enjoined by the present Authority only to be Used
in things of this Nature) whereby the same might become of public Use; if any,
well acquainted with the Authors Character, shall doubt the Credit of this
Copy; they may have the sight of the Original (the better to satisfy
themselves) by the help of the Stationer. The Cases are not placed in time as
the same were adjudged, but Printed in that order as they were found under the
Authors own Hand; For this Defect, it is hoped, that the Table may make amends,
which you will find to be a perfect Repertory as to each material thing
contained in this Book;) What faults have escaped the Press, will lie in the
power of the judicious Reader to correct. Mr. Bracton in his first Book, Cap.
2. says, Si aliqua nova and inconsueta emerserint, and quae prius usitata non
fuerint in Regno; Si tamen similia evenerint, per simile judicentur; cum bona
sit occasio a similibus procedere ad similia. Let this serve to Apologize for
such encouragement as has been given by me for the publishing of these
Reports; I having no other aim herein, then the Public good; Farewell.

J. H.
Middle Temple, 5 Nov. 1658.
THE NAMES of the CASES.
A
ALlens case, 13 Iac. 39 Ashfields case, 14 Iac. 99 Adams case, 15 Jac. 107
Agards case, 15 Jac. 130
B
Bassets case. 8 Bishop of Chichesters case, 1 Car. 29
C
Crockers case, 27 Coopers case. 60 Crawleys case, 13 Jac. 64
D
Dawtrees case, 18 Jac. 4 Davisons case. 5
E
Evans case, 16 Jac. 118
F
Frossets case, 14 Jac. 49
G
Garths case. 22 Gouges case, 12 Jac. 52
H
Harris and Lewess case. 56 Hollands case. 69
K
The King against Sir John Byron. 23 The King and Allen against Newton, 15 Jac.
113 The King and Parker against Webb, 14 Jac. 120
L
Loyds case. 56 Lightfoots case, 14 Iac. 88 Lees case, 15 Jac. 116 Lingens
case, 15 Jac. 128
M
Moors case. 6 Meskins case. 16 Mills case. 63 Masons case, 14 Jac. 87 Mandes
case, 13 Jac. 92 Mittons case. 123 Muschamp and Lock against Blewit, Sampson;
and Jenny, etc. 132
N
Norris case, 13 Iac. 47 Newshams case, 14 Iac. 100
P
Pets case, 17 Iac. fo. 1 Ponesleys case, 18 Iac. 12 Perimans case, 14 Sir
Thomas Palmers case, 11 Iac. 46 Pensons case, 66 Parkers case, 14 Iac. 89
Perryns case, 12 Iac. 90
R
Robinsons case, 13 Iac. 79 Robinson against Greves, 12 Iac. 81
S
Samborns case, 19 Iac. 9 Smalmans case, 13 Iac. 42 Smith for the King against
Boynton, 13 Iac. 48 Smiths case, 13 Iac. 59 Standishes case, 14 Iac. 103
Southerns case, 13 Iac. 125
T
Townleys case, 35
U
Vanlores case, 14 Iac. 58
W
Whittons case, 32 Weals case, 14 Iac. 60 Webbs case, 13 Iac. 84 Webb and lucks
case, 14 Iac. 110 Woods case, 16 Iac. 139
THE REPORTS OF Sergeant BRIDGMAN.
Hill. 17 Jac. Rotulo 170. Petts against Brown.
A Man is seized of Land in Fee, and, having two Sons, does devise his Land to
his younger Son and his Heirs, and if he dye without Issue (living the eldest
Son) then the elder shall have the Land to him and his Heirs: the Devisor dies,
the younger Son had issue a Daughter, that dyed without issue: then the younger
Son suffers a common recovery with Voucher, to the use of him and his Heirs,
and after devises to another and his heirs, and then dies without issue,
living the elder Son.

Whether the Devisee or the elder Son should have the Land? was the question.

And the Counsel for the Devisee raised three points.

1. Admitting that these words in the Devise were omitted, viz. (living the
eldest Son) whether the younger Son had an Estate-taile, or not?

2. Whether these words do make such alteration of the Estate, as to make the
Estate a Fee-simple determinable upon this contingency, viz. (if he die without
issue, living the elder Son?)

3. Admitting that there were such a Fee in the younger Son, yet whether this
Estate devised to the eldest Son, be not destroyed by the recovery?

And as to the first point it was argued; that if these words of limitation
(living the elder Son) had been omitted, the younger son had had an Estate-tail
by this Devise, the remainder in fee to the eldest Son.

For although the Devise to the younger Son was to him and his heirs, which (in
case the Devise had stayed there) had made a very good Fee-simple to the
younger Son; yet when the Devisor goes and declares further, and devises, that
if he dye without issue, that the elder son shall have the Land, this last
limitation (if he dye without issue) does restrain the generality of these
words (his heirs) to the heirs of the body of the younger Son only, so that the
last Devise to the eldest Son does declare and exemplify wh^t kind of heirs
the Devisor intended in the first Devise to the youngest Son: and in the 5 H.
6. and the 5. where Land was given to R. and K. his Wife, and their heirs, and
to the heirs of the said R. if the heirs of the said R. and K. his wife issuing
should dye, and this was adjudged a good Estate in tail. And there it was said
by Hall, that if Land be given to a man and his Heirs for ever, Et si contingit
ipsum Obire sine haeredibus de corpore suo, this is a good estate in tail: and
in the 19 H. 6. 74. by Vampage, If I give land to another and his heirs for
ever in the beginning of the Deed, and then after I say Quod si contingat, that
if he die without heirs of his body, that it shall remain to another, in this
case the Law intends by the Si contingat, that it is but an Estate-tail. And in
the Book of Assizes 14. Land was given to B. and his heirs, to have and to hold
to him and his heirs for ever, if B. shall have issue of his body, and if he
die without heirs of his body, that the Land shall revert to the Donor and his
heirs. B. had issue which died without issue, and it was adjudged that B. had
but an Estate in tail, and because he died without heirs of his body, it was
adjudged that the Donor should recover against the collateral heir of B. And
if the Law be so in Deeds or Grants executed in the life of the Donor, a
fortiori in a Devise, which is to be taken more favorably then an estate made
by Deed, and therefore it is sufficient in a Devise to have the intention of
the Devisor understood, either to make an estate in fee or in tail, although
proper words to make such an estate be not used, and the intent of the Devisor
cannot be more manifest to have an estate in tail then in this case.

(living the elder Son) shall be referred, viz. Whether to the Estate made to
the younger Son, or to the Estate given to the elder, for if they be referred
to the Estate made to the younger, there is no question but these words do
abridge and restrain the estate, but if to the elder, then they make no
restraint or restriction as to the estate of the younger Son, but only limit
the remainder to the elder Son on this contingency only, viz. (If he be alive
at the time of the death of the youngest Son without issue.) And to prove that
these words shall be referred to the estate devised to the elder brother; They
said, That if the land had been devised to the younger Son and the heirs of his
body, and if he dyed without issue, living the elder, that the elder should
have the estate to him and his heirs; it is clear that the younger has an
absolute estate tail, and that then the remainder to the elder shall be on this
contingency, viz. (If he be living when the younger dies without issue.) And so
is Frenchmans Case, 1, and 2. Eliz. who demised land to his wife for life, the
remainder to Charles Frenchman, and the heirs males of his body, and, if he
died without heirs males of his body, the remainder to Arthur Frenchman and the
heirs males of his body. Charles had issue a Daughter, and died without issue
male, and it was adjudged that the Daughter should not have the land, for this
contingency does not alter the Estatetail that was first limited to Charles,
and, although the Devise in the case at Bar be to the youngest Son and his
Heirs without any limitation of his body, yet, the limitation afterward, to
wit (if he die without issue) does explain well enough, that the heirs of his
body are intended, and then the subsequent words (living the Eldest Son) cannot
alter the estate first given to the younger Son. And Hill. 40. Eliz. in the
Kings Bench by Walmesly, If one devises land to his Son and his heirs, and
further devises that if he die without issue, that the land shall be sold, yet
the Son shall have an estate in fee and not in tail, but otherwise, if he
devised that if he died without issue, that the lands should remain over, for
in the first case, he disposes of no more of the estate by the last words,
then he did at the first, but in the last case he disposes of the estate it
self in remainder. And this was agreed by Owen, 18, and 19. Eliz. Rot. 354. and
15. and 16. Eliz. Rot. 330. where the case was, That one Edward Clark, being
seized in fee of two houses, had issue Henry, and two Daughters, Alice and
Thomasin: Henry dyed before the two daughters, living the Father, the Father
devised one house to his daughter Alice and her heirs for ever, and the other
to Thomasin (who was at that time but eight years of age) and her heirs for
ever, and if she died before the age of sixteen years ( Alice then living)
Alice should have it to her and heirs, and if Alice should die having no issue
(living Thomasin) Thomasin should have the house of Alice to her and her heirs,
and if both of them died without issue, he devised the two houses to the two
Daughters of his Son Henry and their heirs, and if they died without issue, he
devised the remainder to a stranger. Proviso, That if Alice should marry I. S.
that Thomasin should have her part to her and her heirs, and if Thomasin should
dye having no Child, that the daughters of Henry should have all, and if they
died having no Child, the remainder to a stranger as aforesaid. The Devisor
dies, then Alice marries N. but not I. S. and enters into her house, Thomasin
after sixteen years of age dies without issue: And if Alice or the daughters of
Henry should have the estate of Thomasin was the question. And it was holden by
three Justices, that the daughters of Henry should have it, because that
Thomasin did not die within the age of sixteen years, and that, it being
objected that there was no estate tail to any of the daughters but a fee simple
conditional upon a contingent, it was at last adjudged 14. Eliz. Rot. 340.
that they were Tenants in tail by this Devise, in Mich. 37, and 38. Eliz. 42.
and Mich. 14, and 15. Eliz.

And Michaelmas 18. Jacobi. Judgment.
This Case was argued by Montague chief Justice, Doderidge, Haughton and
Chamberlain, who all agreed, that by this Devise the youngest Son had not an
Estate-tail, but a limited see, so that by his dying without issue, living the
elder Son, his estate was quite determined; and all except Doderidge agreed,
that the Recovery could not hurt the future Devise. But Doderidge was much
against this opinion by reason of great mischief that might ensue by making of
Perpetuities in Devises, and cited Archers Case, and Capels Case, but
notwithstanding Judgment was affirmed as aforesaid.

De Termin. Trinitat. 18 Jacob. Rot. 1198. Dawtree against Dee, and others.
IN an Action on the Case, wherein the Plaintiff Declared, That he the fifth of
July, 16 Jacobi, was and is seized in Fee of a Capital Message called
Moor-place, with the appurtenances, and of 600 Acres of Land, meadow and
pasture, in Petworth, with the said Message used, of the annual value of 100
l. which Message he and those whose Estate he has in the said Message and
Tenements, therein Farmors and Tenants, have time out of mind used to keep
good hospitality for the relieving of the Poor in Petworth aforesaid, and that
in the Church of Petworth aforesaid, on the said fifth of July and also time
out of mind, there has been and is a little Chancel, on the North part of the
Parsons Chancel in the said Church; and also whereas on the said day, and time
out of mind, there were diverse Seats in the said little Chancel, and that the
Plaintiff and those whose Estate he has, time out of mind have repaired at
their charges the said little Chancel, and the Seats from time to time, as
often as was needful: and by reason thereof, the Plaintiff, and all those whose
Estate he has, have for all the said time aforesaid, only power, liberty, and
privilege to sit in any of the said Seats in the said little Chancel, to hear
Divine Service in the said Church, and also to bury the dead bodies of any
person whatsoever in the said Chancel, at the pleasure of the Plaintiff, and
those whose Estate he has; and for all the said time have made convenient
Graves in the said Chancel, for the said bodies, at their will and pleasure:
And that no other person, from any time since the memory of man, have used to
sit in any of the said Seats, or to bury any dead bodies in the said Chancel,
without License of the Plaintiff, or those whose Estate he has. Nevertheless
the Defendants, intending to dis-inherit the Plaintiff, and to hinder and
deprive him of the said liberty, the said day, and from thence until the first
of May, 18 Jacobi, at Petworth aforesaid: Praedictum Henricum ad sedendum in
sedibus in Cancellula praedicta tunc existentem, and ad intrandum in
Cancellulam praedictam ad Divina Servitia in praedicta Ecclesia de Petworth
celebrata, audiendum, fraudulenter and malitiose impediverunt, per quod idem
Henricus Dawtrey in Cancellula praedicta intrare, vel in eisdem sedibus ad
Divina Servitia in eadem Ecclesia durante tempore illo celebrata audiendum per
totum idem tempus sedere non potuit, ad damnum 40 l.

The Defendants plead, That Henry Earl of Northumberland, the fifth of July,
and long before, and always after until now, has been, and yet is seized in
fee of the Honor of Petworth, and of the said little Chancel, as parcel of the
said Honor: and that the Defendants, as servants to the said Earl, lived in the
said Honor; and by the said Earls command, the said fifth day of July, and for
diverse other days and times between the said fifth day of July and the first of
May, as often as Divine Service was celebrated in the said Church, did sit in
the said seats at the celebration of Divine Service, which are the Impediments
the Plaintiff did complain of.

To which the Plaintiff demurred.

1. In this case it was argued for the Defendants, That the Declaration was not
good, because that the Plaintiff did not set forth the manner of the
Disturbance, whereupon issue might be taken thereupon, but only declares that
the Defendants did hinder him from sitting in the Seats, or to enter into the
Chancel, which allegation is too general, to take any certain issue upon: And
so in the 10 Ed 3. 39 A and B. where one lets Land for twelve years, and for
security of the term, makes a Charter of Feoffment, upon condition, that if the
Lessee was disturbed within the term, that he should hold the Estate to him and
his heirs. And all this matter was found by the Recognitors in an Assise upon
the general issue, and that the Lessee was disturbed: And this Verdict was
adjudged insufficient, because they did not find how the disturbance was made.
Vid. 8 Rep. Francis Case, and the Commentaries 84. Stranges Case. That every
Declaration ought to have such certainty as the Defendant may know what matter
to make answer unto. Vid. Comment. 202. ad 3 H. 7. 12. Return of a Rescous
ought to be certain to every intent, for that is in nature of a Declaration:
And in the 22 Ed. 4. 47. Trespass for diverse trespasses is not good, because of
the incertainty.

2. Admitting the Declaration is good; It seems that the Plea in Bar is good,
because the Defendants have made a good Justification, viz. That the Chancel is
the Earls Inheritance, and that they did sit there by his commandment: for
although it might be true, that a Liberty to sit and to bury there, yet he
cannot restrain the owner of the soil from the usage of it: As, if one has
Common in the Land of another, or a Way, or other Easment, yet he cannot for
these things, restrain the owner of the Land from making use of it. 21 H. 7.
39. If the Defendant in a Trespass Quare clausum fregit the first of May, does
justify the second of May, which was the same Trespass, this is a good Plea,
because it may be the same Trespass, because the day is not material: And 3 H.
6. 12. in a Trespass for entry into his Warren, the Defendant pleaded that it
was his Franktenement, and adjudged a good Plea as to the entry, because he
cannot enter into his own Land vi and armis: but he was put to plead further as
to the Chasing. 21 H. 6. 26. In a Trespass for Battery in L, the Defendant
justified for keeping his possession in S, which is the same Trespass, and
adjudged a good Plea without Travers, because it is Transitory.

But the Court agreed the Declaration was good and particular enough, as in a
Quare Impedit. Judicium.
The Plaintiff did alledg generally that the Defendant hindered him to present,
and that was good. And all the Judges agreed, that the Plea in Bar was utterly
insufficient; for one cannot have the Freehold of a Church, or any part
thereof. And Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Davison against Culier. In the City of Norwich.
THe Plaintiff at the Sessions of Peace held at Norwich, 16 Jacobi, did inform
for the King and himself, That the Defendant, being a Grocer, the first of
September then last past, at Norwich, did Ingross and get into his hands, by
buying, contract, or promise, of diverse persons unknown, 400 Quarters of Wheat,
each Quarter at the price of 40 s. to the intent to sell the same again,
contrary to the form of the said Statute: Wherefore he prayed, that the
Defendant might forfeit the value of the Corn, and that he might have half the
value, etc.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty.

The Jury find, that 5 Ed. 6. it was Enacted, That every person, who, after
the first of May thence next ensuing, shall get into their hands, by buying,
contract, or promise, etc. otherwise then by Devise, Grant, or Lease of Land or
Title, any Corn growing in fields, or any other grain, butter, etc. or dead
victuals, to the intent to sell them again, shall be taken to be an Ingrosser;
and for the first offense shall be imprisoned two months without Bayl, and
shall forfeit the value of the things engrossed. And as to 380 Quarters of the
said Wheat, they found the Defendant not guilty; and as to the twenty Quarters
residue, they found that the Defendant the first of September 10 Jacobi, and
continuing after till the tenth of August next following, at the said City did
use the art and trade of Starch-making; and that he the 21 of September 15
Jacobi, did get into his hands by buying, and not by Devise, Grant, or Lease,
twenty Quarters of Wheat, residue of the said 400 Quarters, to the intent to
convert the same into Starch; and the 20 October, in the same year, did convert
the same into Starch; and the 26 of October, did sell the same to several
persons; and that every one of the said Quarters at the 21 of September was of
price 36 s. But whether the Defendant were guilty of the Engrossing aforesaid,
according to the form of the Statute, the Jury knew not, and therefore desired
the Opinion of the Court, but if otherwise, etc. And this Record was removed
into the King's Bench by a Certiorare. Judicium.
And Judgment was given against the King and the Informer.

Moor against Sir George Reynel, Marshal of the Marshalsee.
IN an Action of the Case; wherein the Plaintiff declares, That he, the 15
Jacobi, did recover in the Common Pleas 240 l. Debt against one Gilbert Alsop,
and 20 l. damages, and that the Plaintiff, in execution of the said Debt, did
prosecute the said Gilbert by several Judicial Writs issuing out of the said
Court. And that he, by a Writ of Exigi Facias, issuing out of the said Court,
the next Term after the said Judgment, directed to the Sheriff of the City of
Exceter, and Returnable before the said Justices Quindena Martini, that the
said Gilbert the 28 October. 15 Jacobi, was Outlawed in the said City at the
Suit of the Plaintiff in the Plea of Debt aforesaid, unde tunc convictus fuit,
etc. That Michaelmas 15 Jacobi, the Plaintiff took out of the said Court a
Capias ut lagatum against the Defendant, then to the said Sheriff directed,
returnable Octabis Purificationis. That the 8 October. 15 Jacobi, the said Writ
was delivered to the said Sheriff. That the 20 January, 15 Jacobi, the Sheriff
took the said Gilbert, and held him in his Custody. That the 23 Januarii, 15
Jacobi, a Habeas Corpus was awarded to have the D^^^nd^nt cum causa, etc. Lunae
proxim. post crastinam purificationis. At which day he came to the said Court
in the Custody of the said Sheriff, who returned the said Writ, That the
twelfth of February the Defendant was committed by the said Court to the
Marshalsey (the Defendant then, and yet being Marshall) nevertheless the
Defendant the thirteenth of April, 18. Jacobi, at Westminster, did suffer the
said Gilbert to escape against the will of the Plaintiff, he being unsatisfied
his said Debt and damages, whereupon the said Plaintiff has lost his said Debt
and damages, ad damnum 300 l.

The Defendant pleaded that the said Gilbert was committed to him by virtue of
the said Writ, but said further, that he remained in his Custody from the
aforesaid twelfth of Febr. until the twenty seventh of Febr. the 16. Jac.
during all which time the Plaintiff never prayed to have the said Gilbert in
execution, neither was the said Gilbert ever committed at the request of the
Plaintiff to the Marshalsey, in execution for the said debt and damages. And
pleaded further, that the twenty seventh of Febr. 16. Jac. the said Gilbert did
escape against the will of the Defendant, which is the same escape, whereon the
Plaintiff does declare. Upon which Plea the Plaintiff did demur.

Bridgman for the Plaintiff. I conceive Judgment ought to be given for the
Plaintiff, for, when the Defendant Alsop in the first Action was taken by the
Capias utlagatum after Judgment, he was in execution for the Plaintiff. Vide
Cokes Rep. Vernons Case: for in as much as the King, by the original Suit of
the party, is entitled to have all the Goods and Chattels, and the Profits of
the Land with his body also, by reason of the Outlawry, it is good reason that
if the Defendant be taken at the Suit of the King, that as the King shall have
benefit by the suit of the party, so the party should have some benefit by the
suit of the King.

Resolved by the Court, that when he was taken by the Capias utlagatum issuing
out of the Kings Bench, he shall be in execution for the Plaintiff presently
after the Arrest, if the Plaintiff will, although his body was never brought
into the Court, and although the Court did not commit him in execution for the
party.

Note, that in all Cases when the Defendant may have a Capias ad
satisfaciendum, and the party Defendant is taken by a Capias pro fine, there
the Defendant is in execution presently, if the Plaintiff will without any
Prayer of the party, but when the Plaintiff has Judgment, and lets pass his
time, so that he cannot presently neither by Capias nor by Fieri facias, but is
driven to his Scire facias, there if the Defendant be taken by a Capias pro
fine, the Plaintiff must pray that he may remain in execution for him, but this
cannot be done without such Prayer. Vide 5. Rep. Frosts Case, 22. Assise 74. If
one condemned for a Disseisin, with force, or fees be taken for the Fine, yet
he shall not go at large if the party prays that he may remain for his
execution: and in 11. H. 7. 15 when the party may have execution without a
Scire facias, the execution for the King shall be prayed for the party, and it
is not material whether there were a Capias in the Original, but otherwise if
it be after a year. 2. Rich. 3. If one be taken for a fine to the King within
the year, and the King pardons him, yet he may remain for the party. And so in
this Case I conceive, that Gilbert was in execution for the party, and if he
was not, yet the Plaintiff has proved him in execution, from whence he escaped
by the default of the Defendant, so this Action does well lie. Also the
Plaintiff does charge the Defendant with an escape, 13. April, 18. Jacobi, and
the Defendant pleads an escape the 27. Febr. 16. Jacobi, which was a year and
two days before the escape alleged by the Plaintiff, to which the Defendant
has made no answer, and although he concludes that it was the same escape,
which makes the plea good, where the time is not material, yet it is not in
this case, for here it is admitted by the Defendant that the Plaintiff might
have prayed him in execution so long as he remained in prison, but it may be he
made his prayer afterward, viz. between the 27. Febr. 16. Jac. and the 13.
April. 18. Jac. as it may very well be in this case, and then the averment of
the Defendant is nothing to the purpose. Also the Defendant says, that he
remained in Prison from the twelfth of February, 15. until the seven and
twentieth of February, 16. Jacobi. during which time the Plaintiff did not pray
him in execution, in which case the day is excluded by this word Quousque.

Crook contra, Who said, that the Declaration was insufficient, for it ought to
have been Tam pro Domino Rege quam pro seipso, because here is a contempt to
the King: But upon full debate of the Case, and upon showing a President to the
Court which was Plt. Jacobi Rot. 308. in the Common Pleas, between King and
Monlenax, where the Declaration was for the party only, and all the
Prothonotaries did certify the Court, that the greater part of Presidents of
such Actions brought in the Common Pleas, were for the party only, and not Tam
pro Domino Rege quam seipso, whereupon it was adjudged that it was good either
way; Judicium.
and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. And note that in this case the
Judgment was Quod Defendans sit in misericordia, and not Quod capiatur, vide
27. Assise 11. 42. Assise, 17. Dyer 238. 40, and 41. Eliz. New Book of Entries,
44, and 45.

Bassett against Jefiock and Johnson.
IN an Ejectione, the Jury gave a special Verdict to this effect: That Queen
Elizabeth was seized in fee in Jure coronae of the Manor of Watton in the
County of York, and that King James the 15. Martii. 2. Jac. did grant the same
to William Brown and Robert Knight, and their Heirs, who the twenty seventh of
April, 3. Jac. did bargain and sell the same to Michael Feilding and his
heirs, who entered and died seized, and after whose death the same descended to
Basil Feilding as his Brother, who made a Lease to the Plaintiff.

Bridgman, It seems to me that the Plaintiff has made a good Title: But it
was objected, that there was no good Title, for that it is not found that the
Queen died seized, or that the Lands descended to the King.

But it was answered, that when the Queen was seized in Fee in Jure Coronae,
that shall be intended to continue, until the contrary be showed: for when an
Estate of Inheritance is once alleged, it shall be intended still to continue
till the contrary be shown. Plow. Com. 193. 43 1. and 202.

Judicium.
And afterward, viz. 19. Jacobi, Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, without
any argument at the Bench.

Trin. 19. Jac. Samborne against Harilo.
IN an Action of Trespass, for that the Defendant 10. October. 44. Eliz. the
Plaintiffs free Warren at Mouldford, in certain places there called Harecombe,
Harcombe Coppice, and the Down, did break and enter, and did therein hunt
without the license of the Plaintiff, and three Hares and three hundred Conies
did take and carry away. Continuando, as to the said Hunting and taking and
carrying away the said Hares and Conies from the said tenth day of October, to
the first of November.

And further declared, that the tenth of April, 1. Jac. the Defendant the said
Warren in the said places did break and enter, and therein, (without the
license of the Plaintiff) did hunt, and twenty Hares did take and carry away,
continuing the said hunting until the first of March next after, etc.

And further declared, that the tenth of April, 2. Jac. the said Defendant the
said Warren in the said places did break and enter, and therein without the
license of the Plaintiff did hunt, and forty Hares and four hundred Conies did
take and carry away, continuing the said hunting until the first of March
following, contra pacem, etc. and ad damnum, etc.

The Defendant as to the Vi and armis, and to the first Trespass, (except the
entering and hunting in the said place called the Down, and the taking and
carrying away the three hundred Conies) pleaded not guilty. And as to the
entry, hunting and carrying away the said Conies, he says, that the said place
called the Down, is and has been time out of mind Communis fundus, containing
by estimation two hundred acres of Land and Pasture, and that before the said
tenth day of September, and before the said Trespass, and at the said time,
the Defendant was seized of a Message and six Yard Land, containing a hundred
and sixty acres called the Manor of Southbery, in Mulford aforesaid, and that
the Defendant and all those whose estate he has in the premises, time out of
mind have had Common of Pasture in the said Down for 200. and 40. Sheep, Levant
and Couchant upon the said Message and six Yard Land, and that the Defendant
and all those whose Estate, etc. have used for preservation of the said Common,
as often as the said Common has been oppressed and troubled with Conies, have
used of custom to have liberty to hunt and to take the Conies: wherefore the
Defendant the aforesaid time of the aforesaid first Trespass, and for
preservation of the said Common from such oppression and diminution aforesaid,
into the said Down did enter, and there hunted, and the said Conies did take
and carry away according to the said custom, and continuing the said hunting
all the said time.

And as to the second Trespass, besides the entry and hunting in the said
places called Harecombe, and Harecombe Coppice and the Down, and the taking and
carrying away two hundred Conies, he pleaded not guilty. And as to the entry
and hunting in the said places, etc. he says, that the said places called
Harecombe, and Harecombe Coppice, are Woodland, containing by estimation ten
acres, and that he was seized in Fee of the said Message and six Yard Land,
and made the same prescription as aforesaid, for all his Horses, Cowes,
Heifers, Bullocks, and two hundred and forty Sheep levant and couchant upon the
said Tenements, viz. for the Horses, Cowes, etc. at the Feast of S. George, and
from that time, until the Corn growing in the Feilds of Moulford were carried
away, and after the Corn carried away for the Sheep, until the fourth of
March next after, and made the former prescription for the Sheep in the Down;
And the same prescription also for hunting and taking away the Conies as
abovesaid, and so did justify the taking of the said two hundred Conies.

And as to the third Trespass (besides the entry and hunting in the said
places, and the taking and carrying away of the said four hundred Conies) he
pleaded not guilty, and as to this plea he made the same prescription as
before, upon which plea the Plaintiff demurred in Law.

And if this matter pleaded in Bar was sufficient to bar the plaintiff of his
Action was the question. And it seems to me that there is nothing in the
Defendants plea to hinder the Plaintiff from having Judgment. And the better to
argue upon this matter I will first endeavor to show what interest a Commoner
has in the Soil, and what things he may do upon the Soil, for preservation
of the said Common.

2. Whether this be a good usage and custom to enable the Defendant to hunt
and kill Conies in the Plaintiffs free Warren.

And as to the first, I conceive that he that has Common in another land,
has nothing at all to do with the Land any more then a mere stranger, but only
to put therein his Cattle, and to let them feed there with their mouths, and it
is not his own Common until his Cattle have fed there. 14 H. 8. 10. The Owner
of a Common cannot grant the Common to another use? Et 27 H. 8. 12. A Praecipe
does not lie of a Common, for it is not my Common until my Cattle have eaten
of it, and therefore that which another has is not mine, therefore I cannot
have a Praecipe against him who has not that which I demand: and in the 22.
Assise 48. and 12. H. 8. 2. If a man has Common in another man's Soil, and a
stranger puts in his Cattle, there the Commoner shall not have an Action of
Trespass, for although he has Common, yet the Herbage does not belong to him,
neither can a Commoner do any thing upon the Soil which tends to the
melioration or improving of the Common, as to cut Bushes, Fern, or such things
which do much impair the Common, neither can he make a Fence or Ditch to let
out the water which spoils the Common: But if he be utterly disturbed of his
Common, he may have an Assise, or a Quod permittat; and if any damage or
annoyance be made upon the Land whereby he loses his Common, he may have an
Assise.

And as the Commoner may not meddle with the Soil, so cannot he meddle with
any thing arising out of the Land, or that does grow, or is nourished by the
same, otherwise then to have his Cattle to feed there, and therefore it is
adjudged Mich. 5. Jac. that a Commoner cannot kill Conies there, but may bring
his Action on the Case.

But I agree that a Commoner may distrain Cattle Damage feasant, because their
being there is a damage not only to the Owner, but also to the Commoner, and a
Commoner may abate a Hedge or a Gate that hinders him from coming to his
Common: wherefore I conclude this first matter that the plea, as to that, is
utterly insufficient by the Law, if there were not a special custom alleged
by the Defendant. And therefore it is to be considered, whether this
prescription alleged by the Defendant to hunt and kill Conies there for
preservation of his Common, be good or no.

And I conceive it is unreasonable and not good, because it is to the prejudice
of the Owner of the Soil without any consideration.

And it is unreasonable for two causes, first, because it is too general, for
the Defendant may hunt and kill as many Conies as he will, for he does not
claim to kill a certain number that do surcharge the Common, but generally (the
Conies there.) Secondly, as this plea is, the Defendant makes himself his own
Judge to kill the Conies as often and when he pleases.

Also it is against Law, for it is to the destruction of the Inheritance of
another, which no person can justify by custom or prescription, unless for
the benefit of the Commonweal 13 H. 8. 16. It is Law to pull down a House if
the next house to it be on fire, and so the Suburbs of a Town may be pulled
down in time of War, and if Enemies be on the Coast, it is good Law to come
upon another man's Land, and make Bulwarks there; for the public good is
preferred before any man's private benefit.

But when it is only for the private benefit of a man it is otherwise, 43. Ed.
3. a. The Abbot said, that he was Lord of the Town of A. and did prescribe that
when the Tenant ceased for two years, that he might enter until he be
satisfied his arreares. And it was held by the Court to be an ill custom to
put a man out of his Inheritance, yet is that more reasonable then this case,
for the time when the Lord shall enter is certain, and the time that he shall
hold the Land is also certain: and 19. Elizab. Dyer 357. A custom that all
Tithes let or granted for more then six years of Land in such a Town, was
held void by the Court, because it is contrary to reason and to the liberty of
the estate of him that has a Fee. And 9 H. 6. 44. B. Custom in a Leet, that
if the petit Jury do make a false Presentment, and this found by the grand
Inquest, they shall be amended: and it was held by the Court to be no good
custom, and against common right, but if the custom were, that if the petit
Jury concealed any thing, they ought to present them to be amerced, this may be
a custom.

And to prove that Conies are part of the Inheritance, see Coke Rep. 7. in the
case of Swans. But it may be objected that this usage may have a legal
beginning, viz. That it was so agreed at the time of the grant, or creation of
the Common.

I answer, That then it ought to have been specially pleaded, for else it shall
not be so intended as it is proved in the 35 H. 6. 28. Simon Eyres case, where
a Custom was pleaded in London, that if the goods of any man be pawned to a
Citizen for a debt due to him, that he may detain them until he be paid his
debt; and it was urged because that it may be good to bind the Debtor, because
it may be intended it began by his own grant, but it was ruled that it shall
not be so intended, unless it be specially alleged.

And that a man shall not be Judge in his own case, is proved by 22. Edw. 5.
13. B. The Defendant pleaded that at another time he accounted to the Plaintiff
in the presence of A. B. and was found in arrear, wherefore he was committed to
prison, and there it was adjudged that the party himself could not commit him
to Prison, and that an Action of false Imprisonment did lie against the
Plaintiff. And Cook R. 8. Dr. Bonhams Case. And in the 5 H. 7. 9. B. If one
prescribes, that if any Cattle be taken upon his Land damage feasant, that he
may distreyn them, and put them into the Pownd, until amends be made according
to his own will: this was held not good, because then he should be his own
Judge, which is against reason. And in the 19 Edw. 2. guard. 127. A Custom was
alleged in Ipswich, that when an Infant could count and measure, that he
should be out of Ward, and holden to be void. 13 Edw. the 3. where a Custom was
alleged, that when one could count 12 d. and measure a yard of cloth, he may
alien his Land: and did aver, that the Demandant was of such age; but because
he did not alledg the age in certain, it was adjudged against the Demandant.
And Dyer 91. a. One grants to another all his Trees which may be reasonably
spared, agreed that this was a void Grant for the incertainty. And in the 20 H.
7, 8. B. If Cestuy que use of a Manor does bargain and sell 10 l. Land, parcel
of the Manor, no use is changed, for the incertainty.

Trinit. 18 Jacob. Ponesley against Blackman.
IN an Ejectment upon a Lease made by Richard Perriam the 19 of May 18 Jacobi,
of a Message and Land in Thacham and Colthrop in the Parish of Thacham:
Habendum from the Annunciation last past for three years, whereupon the
Plaintiff entered and was possessed, until the Defendant the 20 of May in the
same year, did Eject him, ad dampnum, etc.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty.

The Jury gave an Especial Verdict, viz. That before the Ejectment, John Curre
was seized in fee of the said Lands, and the seventh of January 10 Jac. for 300
l. did bargain and sell the same to William Perriam and his Heirs, upon
Condition that if the said John Curre, his Heirs, Executors, or Assigns,
should pay to the said William, his Heirs or Assigns, at the house of C. B. in
Westminster, 300 l. in manner following, viz. 10 l. the 9 of July then next
coming, 10 l. the 9 of January next after, which shall be in the year 1613. 10
l. the 9 of July 1614 10 l. the 9 of January next after, 10 l. the 9 of July
1615. 10 l. the ninth of January next after, 10 l. the ninth of July 1616. 10
l. the 9 of January next after, 10 l. the 9 of July 1617. and 210 l. the 9 of
January next after: that then the Indenture should be void. Proviso semper, And
it was agreed by the said Indenture, and the said parties, that the said
William Perriam, his Heirs and Assigns, shall not take and intermeddle with the
actual possession of the said Tenements, or with the receipt of the Rents,
issues, or profits thereof, until default were made of the payment of the said
300 l. or any part thereof, contrary to the limitation in the said Indenture.

And they found likewise, that the said William Perriam did not enter into the
said Tenements.

And that afterward, and before the first day of the payment, the said Curre
did demise the said Tenements to William Dibley and Richard Carter by two
several Demises, habendum for six years and an half, rendering Rent.

That the said Dibley and Carter, by virtue of the said several Demises, did
enter and take the profits during the said term, claiming nothing but by the
said several Demises, and that they paid the Rents during, all that time to
Curre, and that at the end of the said term they surrendered the Estate to
Curre.

That 11 October. 16 Jacobi, William Perriam made his Will in writing, and
thereby did Demise the said Tenements, etc. to Richard Perriam, and dyed.

That the said Richard Perriam the 19 Maii 18 Jac. did enter, and made the
Lease to the Plaintiff, who entered and was possessed, until the Defendant did
Eject him.

That the said Richard Perriam was yet living.

But whether the Defendant were guilty or not, they prayed the advice of the
Court, and if it seemed to the Court that he was guilty, then, etc.

It was argued on behalf of the Plaintiff.

That this agreement by Indenture, that the Bargainee shall not

Admitting it to be no Lease for years, yet is the Bargainor Tenant

And as to the first point, to make a Lease, the Law does require but the
agreement of the parties, that the Lessee shall enjoy the Land and take the
profits, and it is not necessary to have any precise words of a Demise or
Grant, as in 5 H. 7.1. by Frieux. If I make one Bailiff of my Manor for
certain years, and that he shall have the profits without interruption, this is
a Lease for years.

But it was objected, that there is no express words, that the Bargainor

But it was answered, that the words did amount to so much; Respons.
for when the Land is sold to the Bargainee, by the Law he ought to have the
possession and profits: but when by the same Deed it is agreed, that he shall
not intermeddle with the Land, it follows that the Bargainor shall have it, for
he had it before, and there was nothing to exclude him but only this Deed: and
although by the Deed the Land is conveyed to the Bargainee, yet when by the
same Deed it is agreed that he shall not have the possession, it follows that
the possession shall remain in the Bargainor, in whom it was before the making
of the said Deed, for no alteration is made thereof as to the possession. As in
the 8 Assis. 34. one made a Feoffment, on condition that if such an act were
not done, that the Land should return, etc. and the Feoffor re-entered for the
condition broken: and there it was objected, that his entry was not congeable,
because he must recover the Land by Action: but it was adjudged that his entry
was good, and the same Law, if the words were, that for not performing, the
Feoffor should retake the Land.

But it was objected, That it could be no Lease for the intertainty

It was answered, that notwithstanding it was a good Lease: Respons.
for first, it is certain to continue until the time limited for the first
payment, and if that be done, then it is a good Lease until the second payment;
and is like to the Case where one lets Land for a year, and so from year to
year, as long as both parties shall please: this is a good Lease for one year,
and for every year after, when he has entered before any disagreement.

And, as to the second Point, it is clear that the Bargainor is in at the will
of the Bargainee, because he enters by his agreement; and then when the Tenant
at will makes a Lease for years, and the Lessee enters, he is the only
Disseisor; but if the Tenant at will infeoffs a stranger, then both are
Disseisors by the Statute of Westminster. 2. Cap. 25.

And in the 12 Ed. 4. 12 B. If Tenant at will makes a Lease for years, this is
a Disseisin.

And the reason hereof is apparent; for the Tenant at will has no Estate in
the Land, and therefore he has nothing to transfer to another. And in the 23
H. 8. B. If I let another Land for years, and the Lessee enters, he is a
Disseisor: And 21 H. 7. 26. a. If Tenant at will makes a Lease for years, and
the Lessee enters, this is a Disseisin to the first Lessor.

And if the Tenant at will be outed by the Disseisor, and reenters, he has
reduced the Estate to the Lessor: as in the Lord Abergevenies Case, reported
briefly by the Lord Dyer 173.

Judicium.
And after many arguments in this Case, Hillar. 20 Jacob. the Court agreed that
the Demise was good; and Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Periman against Pierce and Margaret his Wife.
TEnant in Socage had issue by his first Wife, Joan, Elizabeth, and Agnes, and
Alice and Elizabeth by his second Wife, Katherine, Mary, William, and Joan by
his third Wife; and by his Will did Devise his Land to Joan the younger for her
life, rendering 13 s. 4 d. Rent to William, the remainder to William in Tail,
the remainder to Elizabeth and Mary for life, the remainder propinquo
sanguinitatis of the Devisor for ever. William dies without issue, Joan the
younger dies without issue, Elizabeth had issue William Stokes, and dies; Mary
had issue William Pierce, and dies; Joan the elder dies, having issue John
Periman and William Periman; Agnes and Alice dye without issue: John Periman
had issue, John Periman the Lessor, and dies; Elizabeth and Mary dye, Katherine
dies without issue, Elizabeth had issue George Dean and John Dean; Elizabeth
devises her Land to John Dean and his Heirs, and dies: John Dean has issue
John Dean, and dies: the Lessor enters, and makes a Lease to the Plaintiff, who
enters and is ejected by the Defendants, by commandment of the said John Dean
the son, upon which the Plaintiff brought an Ejectment.

And it seems to me that judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff for all
the Land, or at least for part thereof.

And therefore in the first place I conceive, that when William the son dyed
without issue, the remainder in fee did vest in John Perriman, who was the
eldest son of Joan the elder, who was the eldest daughter of the Devisor: for
although the Devisor had many daughters, yet his intent appeared in the Will to
a single person, and not to diverse: also it appears, that he does not intend
that this remainder should vest in William his son, for he devises to him a
Rent during the life of Joan the younger, and afterward an Estate. Tail cannot
be in Joan the younger, or any of her issues, because that an express Estate
for life is limited to her; nor in Elizabeth or Mary, for he devises a
remainder to them for life; nor in any other of his daughters, for then he
would have named them either by their proper names, or as his daughters, and
not by such circumlocution as is pretended in this Case.

Also, the words of Remainder in fee cannot extend to those daughters, for they
are proximae consanguinitatis, which does clearly exclude his own sons and
daughters, for they cannot properly be termed to be of consanguinity of the
blood of the father; as it is said in Sir William Herberts Case, Cooks Rep. 3.
that filius est pars patris, and this is proved by the usual pleading of a
Descent; for if the Plea be by any, except son or daughter, the form is to say,
That the Land descends to him as Cousin and Heir, and shall show how; but if by
the son or daughter, then to plead as before. And 30 Assis. 47. Land was
devised to one for life, the remainder to another for life, the remainder
propinquioribus haeredibus de sanguine puerorum of the Devisor: there it is
agreed that the sons and daughters are excluded by that Devise.

And so here in this Case, neither William the son, nor any of the daughters of
the Devisor, can take any thing by this Devise; for they cannot be said, de
Consanguinitate de sanguine of the Devisor, but the Issues of the Children of
the Devisor are comprised within these words. And then I conceive that the
limitation being in the singular number, viz. proximo consanguinitat. all the
issues of those Children shall not take, but one only, and that as I conceive
shall be the eldest son of the eldest daughter of the Devisor, which was John
Periman, father of the Lessor of the Plaintiff; as in the 20 H. 6. 23. In an
Account, supposing the Defendant to be his Receivor from the Feast of St.
Michael, it shall be taken to be the principal Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel, and not the Feast of St. Michael in Monte Teneb. And 13 H 4. 4. 21
H. 68. 37 H. 6. 29. If father and son be of one name, scil. of J. S. If J. S.
be named generally in a Writ, Recovery, or Deed, it shall be intended the
father, for that he is most worthy. And so Pladwels Case in this Court, Mich.
38 and 39 Eliz. If a woman has a Bastard and two legal issues, and Land be
given to one for life, the remainder to the eldest issue of the woman, the
eldest legal issue shall take, and not the bastard, although he be the eldest
issue, for general words shall always be taken in the most worthy sense.

And so here, the Devisor did dispose of his Estate to Joan the younger,
rendering Rent to William his son, the remainder to William in Tail, the
remainder to two of his daughters, scil. to Elizabeth and Mary for life, the
remainder proxim. consanguin. etc. in fee: By which words it is apparent, that
the Devisor intended, that for the default of the issues of William, and after
the death of Elizabeth and Mary, the Estate should remain to one who was next
of blood to him, and that is John Periman the eldest son of his eldest daughter.

But admitting that all the issues of the daughters shall be in equal degree to
take by this remainder, as well as the eldest son of Joan the eldest daughter;
yet I conceive that those daughters, who had an Estate devised to them by Will,
are excluded. Cooks 8 Rep. 95. B. Always the intention of the Devisor expressed
in his Will, is the best Expositor and Director of his words: and therefore if
Land be devised to one in perpetuum, this shall pass a fee, although it be
otherwise in a Grant: So if one devises Land to another, to dispose of, or
sell at his pleasure, this is a fee to the Devisee. Litt. 133. 19 H. 8, 9. B.
And so in our Case, the intent of the Devisor appears, to dispose of his Land
among his Children and their issues: as in Trin. 38 Eliz. Ewre and Heydons
Case. Heydon was seized of a Message in D, and of three houses and certain
Land in Watford, did devise his Message in D, and all his Land in Watford; it
was judged the houses in Watford did not pass, in regard of the express
mentioning the houses in D. and this was affirmed in a Writ of Error.

Edmund Meskin against John Hickford, Administrator of Henry Machin.
IN an Audita Querela; because that the 11 Ed. 1. it was Enacted, That in
regard that Merchants, which heretofore had lent their goods to diverse persons,
were fallen into poverty, because they had not such speedy remedy provided for
them, for the Recovery of their Debts: Ac ratione inde multi Mercatores
desistebant venire in hanc terram cum Merchandizis suis, ad damnum tam
Mercatorum quam totius Regni, quod Mercator qui volet esse securus de debito
suo, causaret debitorem suum venire coram Majore Londin. vel Eborae. sive
Bristol. vel coram Majore and uno Clerico quem Rex appunctuaret pro eodem ad
cognoscendum debitum and diem solutionis, and recognitio irrotulat. foret in
Rotulo cum manu dicti Clerici qui esset Notarius. Et ulterius quod dictus
Clericus faceret de manu sua propria scriptum obligatorium, ad quod sigillum
debitoris apponetur cum sigillo Regis quod foret praemissis pro eo proposito,
quod quidem sigillum remaneret in Custodia Majoris and Clerici supradict. Et si
debtor non solveret ad diem ei limitat^m, Creditores venirent coram dictis
Majore and Clerico, cum scripto suo obligatorio, and si compertum foret per
Rotulam and scriptum obligatorium quod debitum cognitum fuisset, and quod dies
solutionis esset expirat. Major immediate causaret bona mobilia ( Anglice, the
movables) debitoris, vendi in tantum ( Anglice, as far) quantum debitum in se
attingat ad appreciationem proborum hominum secundum modum bonorum municipalium
( Anglice, Borrough-goods) devisabilium, quousque plena summa debi^i and
monetae foret creditori plenarie persoluta, prout per eundem actum inter alia
before apparet, cumque etiam per quendam alium Actum in Parliamento praedict.
quondam Regis Edvardi primi apud Westminster. in Comitat. Midd. post festum Paschae
anno regni sui tertio decimo, tent. edit. inter alia pro declaratione quorundam
articulorum in praedicto Statut. de Acton Burnel mentionat. ordinat. and
stabiliter existat, quod Mercator propter assurantiam debiti sui causaret
debitorem suum venire coram Majore Londini, vel coram alio Capitali Guardiano
ejusdem civitatis, aut ullius bonae villae ubi Rex appunctuaret; aut coram
Magistro aut Capitali Guardiano, seu alio probo homine abinde electo and
jurato, quando Major vel Capitalis Guardianus ad illud non potuisset attendere,
and coram uno Clericorum quos Rex inde assignaret quando ambo non potuissent
esse attendentes cognoscere debitum and diem solutionis, and Recognitio
irrotulat, foret de manu unius Clericorum praedict. qui esset notarius; ac
Rotulus foret duplex, unde una pars remaneret cum Majore vel Capitali
Guardiano, and altera pars cum Clerico, qui inde primus foret nominat. and
ulterius unus dictorum Clericorum scriberet de manu sua propria scriptum
obligatorium, ad quod sigillum debitoris apponeretur cum sigillo Domini Regis,
quod quidem sigillum foret de duabus preciis quarum una precia remaneret in
custodia Majoris vel Capitalis Guardiani and altera precia in manu Clerici
praedict. Et si debtor non redderet debitum ad diem ei inde limitat. tunc
Mercator veniret coram Majore and Clerico cum scripto suo obligatorio, and si
compertum foret per rotulum vel scriptum obligatorium quod debitum cognitum
fuisset, and dies solutionis inde limitat. foret expirat. Major vel Capitalis
Guardianus causaret corpus debitoris (si laicus esset) capi, quandocunque
contingeret in potestatem suam venire, and eundem debitorem Prisonae villae
committere, si aliqua Prisona esset in eadem villa, and ibidem remaneret ad
ejus propria custagia quousque pro debito aggreasset, and mandatum fuit quod
Custos Prisonae villae, retineret illum super deliberationem Majoris sive
Capitalis Guardiani; and si Custos non reciperet eum, tunc pro debito foret
responsibilis, si unde haberet. Et si unde nihil haberet, tunc ille qui
commisit Prisonae ad ejus custodiam, responderet. Quodque si debtor per
Majorem vel Capitalem Guardianum non potuisset invenire, tunc illi, seu eorum
alterius in Cancellario sub sigillo Regis recognitionem ejusdem debiti
returnarent, and Cancellarius diriget ( Anglice, shall award) Breve Vicecom. in
cujus Comitat. debtor fore contigerit, ad corpus ejus (si laicus esset)
capiend. and eum in Prisona salvum custodiend. quousque pro debito aggreasset.
Et infra quarterium unius anni postquam captus foret, terrae ejus ei
deliberarentur sic quod pro profima inde debita, levaret and solveret, quodque
ei licitum foret durant. eodem quarterio, terras and tenementa sua vendere
exoneratione debitorum suorum, and venditio sua foret bona and effectualis,
quodque si intra quarterium primum post quarterium illud expirat. non agrearet,
tunc tota terra and bona debitoris Mercatori pro rationabil. extent.
deliberarentur eodem tenendum quousque debitum foret Plenarie levatum, and
nihilominus corpus remaneret in Prisona ut supradictum est, and Mercator eodem
debitori panem and aquam inveniret, idemque Mercator seisinam in terris and
tenementis illis ei deliberat. haberet, quod Breve Novae disseisinae si
extraponeretur manutener. ac etiam Redisseisina de libero tenemento, tenendum
sibi and assignatis suis quousque debitum foret persolutum; quodque tam cito
quam debitum foret levat. corpus debitoris cum terris suis, deliberat. foret,
quodque in talis brevibus quos Cancellarius dirigeret ( Anglice, shall award)
mentio fieret quod Vicecomes Justiciariis de utroque Banco certificaret ad
certum diem quamlibet, mandatum Domini Regis performasset, ad quem diem
Mercator foret coram eisdem Justiciariis si factum non foret agreamentum, and
si Vicecomes non returnavit Breve, vel returnavit quod Breve tarde venit, aut
quod ille Ballivis alicujus franchisae direxisset, Justiciarii facerent prout
in Statut. de Westminster. continetur, quodque si Vicecomes returnaret quod debtor
invenire non potuisset, vel quod Clericus esset, Mercatores haberent brevia
omnibus Vicecomitibus ubi terras haberet, and quod omnia bona and terras
debitoris pro rationabili extent. deliberarent tenendum sibi and assignatis
suis in forma praedicta, and haberet Breve cuicunque Vicecomiti quem voluisset
ad corpus ejus (si laicus esset) capiendum, and in forma praedict. retinend.
and Custos Prisonae caveat quod pro corpore responderet vel pro debito, quodque
postquam terrae debitoris Mercatori deliberarentur debtor licite potuisset
vendere terras, and pro eo quod Mercator nullum dampnum approvationum (
Anglice, approvements) habuit, and Mercatores semper allocarentur pro damnis
suis and omnibus Custagiis, laboribus, sectis, dilationibus and expensis
rationabilibus, and quod si Debtor inveniret fidemsores post diem, ordinatum
foret in omnibus sicut dictum est de principali debitore quoad arrestationem
corporis, deliberationem terrarum, and alias res; quodque cum terrae debitorum
Mercatori deliberarentur idem Mercator haberet seisinam terrarum quae fuerunt
in manubus debitoris die recognitionis facti in quorumcunque manubus postea
devenirent, sive per Feoffamentum vel aliter, and quod post debitum persolutum
terrae debitoris and exit. inde per Feoffamentum returnarent tam Feoffatus (
Anglice, the Feoffee) quam aliae terrae debitoris, quodque insuper si debtor
vel fidemsores ejus obierent, Mercator nullam haberet authoritatem ad corpus
haeredis capiendum, sed terras suas haberet, si aetatis foret, aut quando erit
plenae aetatis quosque quantitatem, Anglice the quantity, and valorem debiti de
terris levasset prout per eundem actum (inter alia) before apparet. Cumque
etiam quidam Richardus Davies de Mitton infra parochiam de Breeden in Com.
Wigorn. generosus post editiones seperalium actuum praedictorum, scil. ultimo
die Junii anno Regni Dominae Elizabeth nuper Reginae Angliae quadragesimo
tertio apud Civitatem Glocestriae in Comitat. Civitatis Glocestriae, per
quendam Henricum Machen generosum nuper defunct. in vita sua, ductus fuisset
coram Johanne Thorn and Gulielmo Hill tunc Vicecomitibus and Balivis ejusdem
Civitat. custodibus Majoris precii sigilli Mercatoris intra eandem Civitatem,
and Thoma Atkins Armigero, tunc Clerico ad recognitiones debitorum intra
Civitatem illam accipiend. deputat. Custodit. minoris precii ejusdem sigilli
and ad tunc and ibidem coram eisdem Vicecomitibus Ballivis and Clerico per
quoddam scriptum suum obligatorium tunc and ibidem recognitum, sed secundum
formam Statutarum praedictarum non confect. neque format. gerens dat. eodem die
and anno devenisset tent. and obligat. praefato Henrico in quingentis libris
legalis monetae Angliae, quod quidem scriptum sequitur in haec verba.

Noverint universi per praesentes me Richardum Davis de Mitton in parochia de
Breeden in Comitatu Wigorn. generos. teneri and per hoc praesens scriptum de
Statuto Mercatorium firmiter obligari Henrico Machen de Crickley in Comitat.
Civitatis Glocestriae generos. in quingentis libris bonae and legalis monetae
Angliae, solvend. eidem Henrico Machen, aut suo certo Attornato, Executoribus,
and Assignatis suis: Et si non fecero, volo and concedo quod current supra me,
Haeredes, Executores, and Administrator. meos, districtiones and poenae
praemissae in Statut. edit. in Parliamento Domini Edwardi primi quondam. Regis
Angliae apud Acton-Burnel, Westminst. pro d^bitis Mercatorum recuperand. Et
facta fuit haec recognitio in Civitate Glocestriae coram Johanne Thorn and
Gulielmo Hill Vicecomitibus and Ballivis Civitat. Glocest. praedict. custodibus
Majoris precii sigilli recogn. Statut. Mercatorum, ac Thoma Atkins, Armigero,
Clerico Dominae Reginae and custode minoris precii sigilli Recogn. Statut.
praedict. ad Recognitiones debitorum apud Civitatem Glocest. praedict. secundum
formam Statuti capiend. deputat. In cujus rei testimonium huic praesenti
scripto ego praefatus Richardus Davis sigillum meum apposui, and sigillum
praedictum ad Recognitiones secundum formam Statuti praedict. ordinat. pro
Majore securitate inde praesentibus apponi procuravi. Dat. apud Glocest.
praedict. ultimo die Julii anno Regni Dominae Reginae Elizabethae, Dei gratia
Angliae, Franciae, and Hilerniae Reginae, Fidei Defensoris quadragesimo tertio,
ac Anno Domini 1601.

The Case.
RIchard Davis, being seized of Land in fee, did acknowledge a Statute Merchant
of 500 l. to Richard Machin, to be paid to the Conusee, etc. without expressing
any day of payment; the Conusor made a Lease of the Lands to E for years, who
grants his Estate to B; the Conusee dies intestate, and his Administrator
extends the Land, whereupon the Assignee of the Term brings his Audita Querela.
And whether the Audita Querela will lie or not? was the Question.

And I conceive that it will not lie: In which the Question is only, Whether
this Statute, being without an express day of payment, be good or not, and
warranted by the Statutes of Acton-Burnel, and de Mercatoribus, or not?

And I conceive this is a good Statute, and well warranted by the said Statutes.

And first, the intention, scope, and purpose of this Statute is to be
considered; and that was, as I conceive, to provide speedy remedy for
Merchants, as well Foreigners as Natives, to receive their Debts: and this is
grounded on very good reason; for Merchants are necessary members of the
public good; for by them and their Trade, the King has profit by his
Customs: 2. The King and his Subjects have Foreign Commodities for their
necessary use: 3. They are the means of uttering the Commodities of this Land
in Foreign parts: 4. The Subjects of the King are educated and instructed in
Navigation. And the necessity of Merchants, and their good usage, appears in
Magna Charta 30. Omnes autem Mercatores nisi public antea prohibiti fuerunt,
habuerunt salvum and securum conductum exire de Anglia, and venire in Angliam,
and morare, and ire per Angliam tam per terram, quam per aquam, ad emendum vel
vendendum, etc. And because their repair into this Land was so necessary, these
Statutes were made to give them security and remedy for their Debts arising for
the sale of their Merchandises: and this is the whole scope and purpose of the
Statute.

And to examine the parts of these Statutes, I conceive that some parts of this
Statute are substantial and material, and therefore ought precisely to be
observed: and some are not so substantial; and this of the day is such a one.

And first, the Debtor ought to come before the Major or other Officer

He must there acknowledge the Debt.

The Recognizance must be enrolled.

The Clerk ought to make a Writing obligatory.

It ought to be sealed with the Seal of the Debtor, and the Seal

There ought to be a time of payment, and this ought to be so certain,

And as to the other parts not substantial:

Although the Statutes appoint the taking of the Statute before the





But all the first six matters being of substance, ought to be observed, as in
Trinit. 37 Eliz. in this Court, between Worsly and Charnock, a Statute
acknowledged which had but one piece of the Seal, adjudged void; and the same
adjudged in the Case of Ascue and Hollingworth, Trin. 37 Eliz. Rot. 343. and
this is upon very good reason: for when the King has committed the Custody of
the Seal to two, scil. to the Major and the Clerk, and to each a part, the part
committed to one is not sufficient. And all the other aforesaid substantial
parts are material parts of the said Statute, except the writing of the Statute
with the proper hand of the Clerk.

Then the Question in this Case is no more, then if there be a sufficient time
limited for the payment, and such a time as the Major may certify to be
incurred, in case it be so required: And I conceive there is; for when he
acknowledges the Debt to be due, and no time is expressed, the Law appoints
the payment to be immediately, and that is such a time as the Major by his
Certificate may take notice of. 44 Ed. 3. 9. a. If a Bond be made, and no day
of payment therein limited, it is due presently, 4 Ed. 4 49. B. 9 Ed. 4. 22.
but he shall not recover damages without demand. 14 H. 8. 29. 6. If one be
bound in a Bond, and no day of payment be limited, and then the Obligor is
bound in another Obligation to pay the money at a day certain, if the money be
not paid at the day, he forfeits his second Bond, and yet by the first Bond it
was not payable before request: But that request is, because, as I conceive,
that he shall recover no damages before request, but the money is due presently:
and when the Law appoints a time certain, that is as good as if it had been
expressed in the Bond it self: As in the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap. 38. where it
is ordained, that in a Writ of Mortdancester, the Demandant shall count of the
seisin of his Ancestor from the time of the Coronation of King Henry the third:
Yet if an Infant brings a Mortdancester of the seisin of his Father or Mother,
he need not alledg this in his Writ, because it appears to the Court. 16 Ed.
4.47. In an Action on the Case, for disturbing the Plaintiff of holding a Fair,
and the Plaintiff prescribed to have a Fair in C. for three days, scil. ab hora
nona in vigilia sancti Petri ad vincul. and for two days and a half next
following: and this was held to be good, because two days and two half days
make 3 days.

And if the Statute had been in the hundred hour, or the thousand hour, after
the making thereof, here is no day limited; and yet I conceive, that no body
will doubt, but that this is a good Statute. Cook. Rep. Signior Montjoyes Case.
If one having authority to make Leases, reserving the usual Rent, does let
Land, whereof the ancient Rent was a Quarter of Corn, reserving eight Bushels,
this is a good Lease: for the Law respects not the forms of words, but the
substance and effect of the matter.



I answer, Respons.
that the Statute intends only to provide assurance to the Merchant for his
debt, and not to give any day of payment to the Debtor, but to leave that to
the agreement of the parties, and when the Merchant has delivered his Goods,
there is reason he should have present security, and not present payment for
them, unless it be otherwise agreed amongst themselves, but if they agree upon
a day of payment, that may be put into the Statute, or else to have a
Defeasance, but this is not of necessity. There is a Rule in Law, that every
Lease ought to have a certain time of beginning, and also of ending, yet if one
makes a Lease for twenty years and does not say when it shall commence, this is
a good Lease, for the Law will suppose the Lease to begin presently.

And it is ordered by the Statute, that the Writing obligatory shall be written
with the proper hand of the Clark, yet it is a good Statute although it be
written by his Servant, but otherwise in case of Authority to revoke, as in
Coke Rep. Scroopes case, he who has power under his hand to revoke cannot do
it otherwise, Mich. 18. Jac. Their against Their, and Trin. 42. Eliz. Bird
against Stride.

Furthermore these Statutes being taken for assurance of Merchants shall be
expounded favorably for them, so far as the variance (if any be) of the
Letter, shall not impeach it, 5. Rep. 77. a, 21. Edw. 3. 18. 10 Rep. 67. 27 H.
8. 10. 4 Rep. Vernons case.

And the form of the Statutes in Gloucester, Hereford, and Bristoll, and many
other Towns, is to mention no day of payment, but some are made Sine ulteria
dilatione, some Immediate, but the most usual do run as in our case, and the
forms of Presidents are much to be regarded.

As in the Comment. 163. Frogmorton against Tracy, Two Justices held that an
Avowry by the Defendant was not good without averment, as ought to be in every
Plea, but when all the Presidents were shown without averment, they were
satisfied. And the same case is put in the Comment. 320. B. for a Rule that the
Records of every Court are the most effectual proofs of the Law of things
treated in that Court: and in the 39. H. 6. 30. In a Writ of Mesne, the Tenant
showed the Tenure only between the Mesne and the Tenant, and not the Tenancy,
between the Mesne and the Lord Paramount, wherefore the Judges held the Plea
naught: but when they had seen the Book of Presidents, wherein it was usual to
omit this, they changed their opinions, and said that they would not alter the
Presidents. And in the 5. Ed. 4.19. B. Babintons case. The custom and course
in a Court, and the Presidents in a Court, do make a Law. Vide Rawlins case,
Coke Rep. 14.

And the Statute provides only for Merchants for their debts, and yet none will
deny, that if such a Statute be acknowledged to one who is not a Merchant, or
never used Merchandises, yet it is good.

And Trin. 22. Judicium.
Jac. This case was argued by the Judges on the Bench, and Jones held the
Statute good, but Hutton contra, and Winch and Hubbert held the Statute good.
Wherefore Judgment was given, Quod querens nihil Capiat per breve.

Garth against Ersfeild Knight in Cancellar. In a Scire facias to have
Execution of a Recognizance of eight hundred pounds acknowledged in the
Chancery by Sir Thomas Ersfeild the Father of the Defendant the third of May,
14. Jac.
THE CASE.
SIr Thomas Ersfeild the Defendants Father was seized in Fee of diverse Lands,
and made a Feoffment to the use of himself for life, the remainder to the
Defendant his Son in Tail, with diverse remainders over, with power of
revocation by writing under his hand and Seal, and published in the presence of
three Witnesses. And then (for the consideration of four hundred pounds) did
enter into this Recognizance to the Plaintiff, and dies.

And whether this Land were extendable or not against the Son? was the question.

And I conceive that by the Statute of the 27. Eliz. this Recognizance may be
extended against the Son, the words of which Statute are; And be it further
enacted by the Authority aforesaid, that if any person or persons have
heretofore, sithence the beginning of the Queens Majesty's Reign that now is,
made, or hereafter shall make any conveyance, Gift, Grant, or Demise, Charge,
Limitation of Use or Uses, or Assurance of, in or out of any Lands, Tenements,
or Hereditaments, with any Clause, Provision, Article, or Condition of
Revocation, Determination or alteration, at his or their will or pleasure, of
such Conveyance, Assurance, Grants, Limitation of Uses or Estates, of, in or
out of the said Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or of, in, or out of any
part or parcel of them, contained or mentioned in any Writing, Deed, or
Indenture of such Assurance, Conveyance, Grant, or Gift, and after such
Conveyance, Grant, Gift, Devise, Charge, limitation of Use or Assurance so made
or had, shall or do bargain, sell, demise, grant, convey, sell, or charge, the
same Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments, or any part or parcel thereof, to any
person or persons, bodies Politic, or Corporate, for money or other good
consideration paid or given, the said first Conveyance or Assurance, Gift,
Grant, Demise, Charge, or Limitation not by him or them revoked, made void, or
altered, according to the power and authority reserved or expressed unto him or
them, in and by the said secret Conveyance, Assurance, Gift, or Grant. That
then the said former Conveyance, Assurance, Gift, Grant, or Demise, as touching
the said Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, so after sold, bargained,
conveyed, demised, or charged, against the said Bargainees, Vendees, Lessees,
Grantees, and every of them, their Heirs, Successors, Executors,
Administrators, and Assigns, and against all and every person and persons which
have, shall or may lawfully claim any thing by from or under them or any of
them, shall be deemed, taken, and adjudged to be void, frustrate, and of none
effect, by virtue and force of this present Act.

So that this Statute does not only aid Purchasors of the Lands, but those who
for a valuable consideration have any charge out of the Land, or upon the Land.

But it may be objected that the Statute does make the revokable Conveyance
void only against the Bargainees, Vendees, Grantees,

But I answer, that it appears by the foregoing words, Respons.
that the Statute intends to aid not only Bargainees, etc. but also all that
have any charge out of the Land or upon the Land, and although the last words
of the Statute do not speak expressly of Conuzees, yet the Statute shall be
expounded to extend to them: and the Statute of West. 2. cap. 1. Quod illi
quibus tenementa data sunt in Tail potestatem alienandi, etc. which words seem
only to restrain the D^nee in Tail, yet in the 5. Edw. 2. Form. 52. the issue
is thereby restrained, and 3. Edw. 3. Formedon, 46. that Tenant in tail cannot
charge the Land no more then alien can forfeit the Land, so that if he grant a
Rent or acknowledge a Statute or Recognizance, or commit Felony or Treason, and
dies, the Issue shall have the Land discharged.

And this Statute has always been taken as to the equity thereof to relieve
Purch sors, and those who have: and therefore in Coke R. 3. 82. B. Standen and
Bullocks case, Mich. 42. and 43. Eliz. where a man had conveyed his Land to the
use of himself for life, and then to the use of diverse others of his blood,
with future power of revocation, as after such a Feast, or after the death of
such a one, and after, and before the power of revocation commenced, he (for a
valuable consideration) did bargain and sell the Land to another and his Heirs;
this bargain and sale is within the remedy of the Statute: for although the
Statute says (the said first Conveyance not by him revoked according to the
power by him reserved) which seems by the literal sense to be intended of a
present power of revocation; for no revocation may be made by force of a future
power until it comes in esse; yet it was holden that the intention of the Act
was, that such a voluntary Conveyance which was originally subject to the power
of revocation, be it in present or in future, shall not be good against a
Purchasor bona fide upon valuable consideration, and if other construction be
made, the Act will signify very little, and it will be easy to evade such an
Act. And so if A. has reserved to him a power of revocation by the assent of
B. and then A. bargains and sells the Land to another, this bargain and sale is
good, and within the remedy of the said Act.

The King against Sir John Byron Knight.
IN a Quo Warranto, for that the Defendant for a year past, has used and yet
does use without any Warrant, within the Manor of Colswick in the County of
Nottingham, within the bounds of the Kings Forest of Sherwood, and within the
reguards of the said Forest; to have a Park within the said Manor, with a
Pale, Hedge, and Ditch enclosed, being two hundred acres of Pasture, and a
hundred acres of Wood within the said Park, Et ad venandum, capiendum,
occidendum and apportandum in the said Park, and two hundred acres of Pasture,
and a hundred acres of Wood omnes and omnimodas damas Domini Regis Forrestae
suae praedict. in parcum praedict. and praedict. 200. acr. pasturae and 100.
acr. Bosci aliquo tempore venand. and occidend. Ita quod Forrestini Domini
Regis forestae pra^dict. nec aliquae aliae personae quaecunque intromittantur
ad venandum and fugandum intra parcum praedictum and 200. acr. pasturae and
100. acr. Bosci sine licentia defendentis.

The Defendant pleaded that John Biron Knight, the Defendants Grandfather was
seized in Fee of a Message of a hundred acres of land, two hundred acres of
Meadow, three hundred acres of pasture, and a hundred acres of wood in Colwick,
in the County aforesaid, now and time out of mind called the Manor of Colwick,
within the meets and bounds of the For^st aforesaid. And that the said John
Byron the Grandfather, and all those whos^ Estate the said John Byron has in
the aforesaid house, and a hundred acres of land, two hundred of Meadow, and
three hundred of Pasture, and a hundred of Wood in Colwick aforesaid, have had,
held, and have accustomed to have in the aforesaid two hundred acres of
pasture, and a hundred of wood, parcel of the aforesaid Tenements called the
Manor of Colwick, belonging to the said Manor of Colwick, enclosing,
ditching, and hedging at their will and pleasure, with all liberties,
privileges, and Franchises to the said Park belonging, and in the said Park
from the time aforesaid have used to have and to keep Deer, and from time to
time to constitute and appoint a Keeper of the said Deer in the said Park, who
from the aforesaid time have used to keep the same, ac ad venandum, fugandum,
occidendum, capiendum and asportandum omnes and omnimodas damas in eodem parco
de tempore in tempus existentes ita quod nullus forestarius Domini Regis,
Forestae praedictae nec aliquae aliae personae quaecunque intromittantur ad
venandum and fugandum in parco praedicto sine licentia praedicti Johannis avi.
And set forth that the said John the Grandfather died seized, whereby the said
Manor, etc. descended to Sir John Byron his Son. And that Hillary 3. Jacobi, a
Fine was levied between Sir Peter Leigh and other Plaintiffs, and Sir John
Byron the son Defendant of the said Tenements, to the use of the said Sir John
for life, the remainder to the Defendant in tail.

And that the seventeenth of December, 10. Jac. did let the Premises to the
Defendant for eighty years, if the Lessee should so long live, whereby the
Defendant the 26. Mar, 11. Jac, was and is thereof possessed, and did aver that
the Manor of Colwick in the information, and the said Message, a hundred
acres of Land, two hundred of Meadow, three hundred of Pasture, and a hundred
of Wood to be the same, and did also aver the life of the Lessor.

The Attorney General for the King did reply, that before the information sc.
9 Octobr. 19. Jacobi, and long before, and continuing after until the
exhibiting of this information, the Defendant, the Park and Tenements
aforesaid, with Ditches, Hedges, and Fences had so slightly enclosed, that the
Kings Deer of the aforesaid Forest for defect of sufficient enclosing of the
Park and Tenements aforesaid, through the default of the Defendant did enter,
and the Deer of the King into the said Park and Tenements aforesaid, for the
cause aforesaid, entering, the Defendant did very unjustly kill the said Deer in
the said Park and Tenements aforesaid.

The Defendant did maintain his Bar, and traversed without that, that the
Defendant the Park and Tenements aforesaid with such slight Fences, Hedges,
and Ditches enclosed did keep the same, Quod Damae Regis de forresta praedicta
de tempore in tempus intra tempus praedictum in parcum and tenementa praedicta
pro defectu sufficientis inclusurae parci and tenementorum praedictorum in
defectu defen. intraverunt, absque hoc quod Defendens Damas Regis de forresta
praedicta in parco and tenementis praedictis pro defectu sufficientis
inclusurae parci and tenementorum praedictorum, in defectu defendentis minus,
just interfecit modo and forma, prout, etc.

Whereupon the Attorney demurred.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the King. First, Because
the plea in Bar and the Rejoinder made by the Defendant is altogether
insufficient for diverse causes. Secondly, As to matter in Law.

And as to the first, The Quo Warranto does suppose that the Defendant did use
the liberties there mentioned within the Manor of Colwick, being within the
meets and bounds of the Forest of Sherwood, and within the Reguards of the said
Forest, and the Defendant did know this to be within the meets and bounds of
the said Forest, but does not answer whether it be within the Reguards or not,
for it may be within the meets and bounds of the said Forest, and yet not
within the Reguards: as if the Manor were disforested by Carta forestae,
because it was a Subjects Manor and not the Kings, yet it remains within the
meets and bounds of the said Forest, but not within the Reguards, for now by
the disforesting it is made purlue, and not subject to the Reguards and Laws
of the Forest, as to the Owner of the Manor. Vide Carta Foresta fol. 1. and
yet notwithstanding this Statute, if the King had granted this Manor to be
free of the Reguards, or out of the Reguards, yet is it still within the meets
and bounds of the said Forest.

Secondly, The Dendant makes Title to the liberties whereof Sir John Byron his
Grandfather was seized in Fee, viz. of a Message, a hundred acres of land, two
hundred of Meadow, three hundred of Pasture, and a hundred of Wood in Colwick,
now and time out of mind called the Manor of Colwick, Quodque ille and omnes
illi Quorum statum idem Johannes habuit in tenementis praedictis, habuerunt,
tenuerunt, and habere consueverunt in praedictis 200. acris pasturae and 100.
acris bosci parcellis praedictorum tenementorum, vocat. mannerium de Colwick,
praedictum parcum, tenementa praedicta, vocat. mannerium de Colwcik, spectant.
and pertinent. etc.

So that the Defendant does not prescribe, but does allege only that Sir John
Byron, and those whose estate he has, have used to have a Park, the which is
no Title to the Park, for that ought to be time out of mind.

Thirdly, The Defendant does claim to have a Park in the aforesaid two hundred
acres of pasture, and a hundred acres of wood, whereas there is no speaking of
two hundred acres of pasture before, and therefore he ought to have said, in
two hundred acres of pasture parcel of the said three hundred acres.

Fourthly, The Defendant does not answer to the killing of the Kings Deer of
the Forest, but does only justify the killing of all Deer time out of mind
being in the said Park.

Fifthly, The Rejoinder is a manifest departure from the Bar, for in the Bar he
claims to have a Park ditched and hedged, Per voluntatem eorum inclusum, so
that by this pretense he may keep the Park with such low Hedges as he will, and
yet in his Rejoinder he does traverse, absque hoc, that he kept the Park adeo
parvis sepibus and Fossatis, quod Damae Regis de foresta praedicta in parcum
praedictum pro defectu inclusurae intraverunt, and absque hoc, etc. So that the
Defendant by his Rejoinder does make an Issue upon that which he does justify
in his Bar, and does, upon the matter, deny in his Rejoinder, the matter
alleged by him in his Bar.

And, as to the matter in Law, I conceive that the Defendant cannot prescribe
to have a Park in such manner as he pretends, for that such prescription is
quite contrary to the nature of his Royal Franchise of his Forest, and is to
the destruction of it, for a Forest is a Royal Franchise, so that regularly
none can have it but the King, as it was adjudged in this Court in a Quo
Warranto against Humphrey Bigges. And Manwood fol. 1. A Forest is a certain
Territory of Ground privileged for wild Beasts and Fowls of the Forest to
rest and abide in the safe protection of the King, for his Princely delight and
pleasure, and does consist of four things. 1. Vert. 2. Venison. 3. Particular
Laws and Privileges, 4. Certain Officers.

But by this pretense of the Defendant, the Forest of the King is privileged
for wild Beasts to rest in protection of the King, but they are subject to
being destroyed by the Defendant; for by such pretense none can enter there but
he or his Keepers. And I conceive that no body can pretend to have any profit
or pleasure in the Forest, which tends to the destruction of the Forest, and
that is the reason that one cannot prescribe to have Common in a Forest, for
Sheep, Geese, Goats, or Hoggs, for to suffer them to Common there, is Ad magnum
nocumentum ferarum forestae: and such a prescription the Defendant makes,
which is not only Ad magnum nocumentum, but to the utter destruction of the
Forest: And if it be objected, that this Park claimed by the Defendant is but a
little part of the Forest, this is no answer; for as in the Case of a Common,
no man may prescribe to have Sheep, etc. in the Forest, so cannot he in any
part of the Forest, and if the Defendant may prescribe to have such an
irregular Park in part of the Forest, so may others claim such like
prescriptions in other parts of the Forest, and so the King shall lose all the
Franchise of his Forest, and the Defendant may make his Fence or Ditch so low
without-side, and so high within, that the Kings Deer cannot get out again when
they are come in, and so this Park shall be in the nature of a Trap to catch
the Kings Deer.

And further, he that will prescribe to have any common profit or pleasure in
the Freehold or Inheritance of another, ought to make his prescription in such
manner, so that he must leave the residue of the profits to the Owner, and
cannot utterly exclude the Owner, and therefore if one does prescribe to have
all the Herbage, Pannage, and Profits of the Land of I. S. no man can conceive
that this prescription is good. Neither can a Commoner prescribe that the Lord
of the Soil cannot put in any Cattle into the Land. But in our case the very
Franchise of the Kings Forest does consist of Vert, Venison, Lands, and
Officers of the Forest, for the King may have a Forest, although he has no
Land there.

And in the Commentaries 332. If a Manor within the Forest of Waltham do
escheat to the King, and the King grants the Manor to one in fee, yet shall
not he have the liberty of the Forest. And the same Law is where the King
grants all the Land which he has in the Forest.

But notwithstanding I agree that one may have a Park within a Forest by
prescription or by grant, but then the same ought to be kept so enclosed, that
the Beasts of the Forest cannot enter into the Park, which if not done, it is a
forfeiture of the liberty of the Park, and so it is if he have a Salterie, or
Deer-leap, for the nature of a Park is to be enclosed: and in the 10. H. 7. 6.
it is said, that a Park consists of Soil, Enclosure, and Game, and in the 15.
Ed. 3.

closure and game. And in the 15 Edw. the 3. Thomas Earl of Lancaster, Lord of
a Forest, did grant leave to one John Harrington to make a Park within the said
Forest, and there it is adjudged, that if the Grantee does so slightly enclose
the Park, so that the Forest-beasts may get in there, that it is a forfeiture,
and the Lord of the Forest may enter and take the Deer.

But by the pretense of the Defendant, the King shall not have so much power in
this Land, being in the midst of the Forest, as he has in the Lands of any of
his Subjects which do lie without the Forest: for if Forest Beasts stray or
wander into the Land of a Subject, out of the Forest, the Foresters may enter
into this Land, and rechase them into the Forest again.

Crocker against Kelsey.
Husband and Wife, Tenants in Tail of the Gift of the Husband, the remainder to
the Husband in fee: The Husband dies, the Son and Heir of the Husband and Wife
does levy a Fine with proclamations, to the use of him and his Heirs; the Wife
does let a Lease of the Land for 21 years, and dies; the Son devises his Land
to E and his Heirs, and dies.

And, Whether this Lease made by the Wife were good to bind the Devisee? was
the Question.

And I conceive that the Lease is good: For, although that by the Fine the
Estate-tail is barred, as to the Conusor and all his issues, yet does the Wife
remain Tenant in Tail, as before: and therefore this Lease made by her is a
good Estate, derived out of her Estate-tail, and shall bind all except the
issues in Tail, who may claim per formam Doni: And so is it in the 33 H. 8.
Dyer 51. B. Tenant in Tail, before the Statute of the 27 H. 8. does make a
Feoffment to the use of himself in fee, and then he and his Feoffees make a
Lease for years, rendering Rent, and then is the Statute made; the Tenant in
Tail dies, and then the issue aliens by Fine before any entry or receipt of the
Rent, and holden by all the Justices, except Sanders, that the Alienee shall
not avoid this: but otherwise of a Rent granted. And, suppose the Fine had not
been levied by the issue, he shall not avoid the Lease without entry; and if he
had aliened after the death of his Mother, and before entry, the Alienee should
never avoid the Lease. And in the 29 Assis. 51. and the Comment. 557. Tenant in
Tail acknowledges a Statute-Merchant, the issue is attaint of Felony, and
pardoned; the Tenant in Tail dies, the issue enters, and the Conusee sues out
Execution: And because the issue was disabled to inherit the Estate-tail,
therefore he had it as an Occupant, and so it was subject to the Execution.
And, although the remainder in Fee does pass by way of interest by the Fine,
yet that cannot come in possession so long as any issue in Tail is living: and
therefore if a stranger had entered after the death of the Wife, the Son could
not have had a Formedon in the remainder, for that must suppose the death of
the Donees in Tail without issue, the which cannot be in our Case. Comment.
560. Austens Case. Sir Thomas Wyat, Tenant in Tail of the Gift of the King,
made a Lease for years rendering Rent, and dyed; Sir Thomas his son accepts the
Rent, and after was attaint of Treason, and executed, having issue, and
adjudged that the King should have the Land in point of Reverter discharged of
the Lease. But in our Case, the act being done by the issue in Tail himself,
shall not enable him to make void the Lease made by his Mother, no more then if
a Tenant in Tail makes a Lease for years, and levies a Fine with proclamations
to the Donor, and dies having issue, yet the Donor shall not avoid the Lease.
Vid. Lord Aberganies Case, Cook. 6 Rep.

And although that the Wife were a Ioyntress within the Statute of 11 H. 7. yet
is this Lease clearly out of the Statute, because that it is no bar or
discontinuance to the Estate in Tail, as it is in Sir George Browns Case, Cook.
3 Rep. for this Lease was voydable by the issue, unless he had barred himself by
his own Fine.

And I conceive this Lease is also good against the Devisee: for when a Tenant
in Tail makes a Lease for years, or grants a Rent common, etc. or acknowledges
a Statute, or does in some other manner charge the Land, this is a good Lease,
Grant, or Charge to bind the Tenant in Tail, and all other, except the issues
in Tail, and those in Reversion. And the reason of this is, because the Statute
of Westminster 2. cap. 1. that was made to avoid such charges, does not aid any
persons except the issues in Tail, and those in Remainder and Reversion. And
therefore if Tenant in Tail grant a Rent, or acknowledge a Statute, and dies,
the issue shall not be charged with it, and so shall his Feoffee; but if the
Tenant in Tail himself, after such charge, infeoffs another, and dies, the
Feoffee shall hold the Land charged: and if a Tenant in Tail makes a Lease for
years, and dies, and the issue does accept the Rent, the Lease is made good,
and is absolute: but if he dies seized of the Estate-Tail, the issue has his
election, either to make the Estate good by his acceptance of the Rent, or to
avoid the Lease by his entry; and if he infeoff a stranger before entry, the
Feoffee shall never avoid the Lease; and if the issue does accept the Rent, he
makes the Lease good for his time: and as the Feoffee of the Tenant in Tail,
and all those who come to the Land by any assurance made be the Tenant in Tail,
whereby the Estate in Tail is barred or discontinued, shall hold the Estate
charged with the Leases and charges made by the Tenant in Tail; so shall all
those in like manner who come to the Land under the said Tenant in Tail,
although the Estate-tail does remain not barred or discontinued (saving the
issues in Tail, who are aided by the Statute of Westminster the 2.) And
therefore, if Tenant in Tail grants a Rent in fee, and takes a Wife, and dies,
the Wife shall hold charged with the Rent: and so if a woman Tenant in Tail
grants a Rent, and marries, and has issue, and dies, the Husband, being Tenant
by the courtesy, shall hold the Land charged, for they are not aided by the
said Statute; and so if Tenant in Tail grants a Rent in Fee, and makes a Lease
for three lives, warranted by the Statute of the 32 of Hen. the 8. and dies,
the Lessee shall hold the Land charged, Cooks Rep. 9. Count. Bedfords Case. And
in the said Case of the Lord Abergeveny, it is said, that the surviving
Ioyntenant by acceptance of the Lease, has deprived himself of the way and
means of avoiding the charge; for vis accrescendi was the only means of
avoiding it, and the right of survivor is gone by the Release.

And so in our Case, the issue in Tail might have avoided this Lease by his
entry, but he has quite barred himself by his Fine.

And as to the Statute of the 11 H. 7. cap. 20. I conceive that nothing is
prohibited by this Statute, but only such Acts as are a bar of the
Estate-tail, or a discontinuance thereof; for so are the words of the Stature,
viz. If any woman shall discontinue, alien, release, or confirm, with Warranty,
etc.

And in Sir George Browns Case, in Cooks Repor. fol. 350. it is there argued,
Whether a Discontinuance without Warranty be within that Statute? but it was
resolved, that these words, with Warranty, do refer only to Releases and
Confirmations, which make not discontinuance without Warranty: for the
intention of the Statute was not only to prohibit every bar, but also every
discontinuance: but here in this case there is no bar or discontinuance; for
the woman has made a Lease for years, rendering Rent, by which the Estate-tail
is neither bound nor discontinued, but she remains Tenant in Tail as she was
before, and so dyed seized of such Estate; and therefore if it had not been for
the Fine levied by the issue in Tail himself, she might have entered, and have
avoided the Lease: and this is not like the Case there put by Anderson; where
Feme Tenant in Tail in Ioynture within the Statute, does accept a Fine sur
conusans de droit come ceo, etc. and therefore does grant and render the Estate
for 1000 years; for though this be no discontinuance of the Estate-tail, yet is
it a bar of the Estate during the time.

And Hillar. 22 Jacob. I argued this Case again: and all the Court, viz.
Doderidge, Jones, and Whitlock, did agree, That the issue in Tail was barred by
the Fine to avoid this Lease; and that although the Estate-tail was barred, yet
is it not extinguished, but remains in esse to support the Lease, so long as
any issue in Tail does remain alive; and so they agreed the Lease to be good.
Wherefore,

Judgment was given for the Plaintiff. Judicium.


George, Bishop of Chichester, Plaintiff; John Freeland Defendant, 1 Caroli.
Rot. 607.
THe Case was; That a Bishop was seized in fee of a Park, to which there was
the office of a Keeper belonging, with a fee of five marks with a Livery,
granted from time to time by the Bishop. And the Bishop does grant the said
Office together with the fees, necnon cum pastura pro duobus equis in eodem
Parco, which Grant was confirmed by the Dean and Chapter. The Bishop dies, and
another is made Bishop: And whether this Grant was good to bind the Successor?
was the Question.

And I conceive that this is a good Grant against the Successor, and will bind
him.

And first, I conceive it will not be denied, but that if a Bishop has a Park,
he by the Common Law may grant the Office of the Keeper of that Park to whom he
will, with such fees and wages, and for such an esta^e as he will: and this
being confirmed by the Dean and Chapter, is good to bind the Successor: and
therefore it is to be considered, Whether any alteration of the Law be made in
this point by reason of any Statute?

In the Bishop of Salisburies Case, Cooks 10 Rep. it is there resolved, that by
the Statute of the first of Elizabeth, Bishops are thereby generally restrained
from making any estate or interest of any Lands, Tenements, or Hereditaments,
parcel of their Bishoprics, or any charge or encumbrance out of the same, or
of any other thing in their disposition to bind their Successors; except only
Leases for 21 years, or three lives, of such Lands, Tenements, and
Hereditaments, which have been usually demised, or whereupon the usual Rents
have been reserved, according to the said Act. And, although such Lease be made
of such Lands usually demised, reserving the usual Rent according to the said
Statute; yet, unless all the limitations prescribed by the Statute of the 32 of
Hen. 8. be not pursued; as, if it be not all in possession, or, that the old
Lease be not expired or surrendered within one year (which is not prohibited by
the first of Eliz. as it was adjudged in Foxes Case) then such Lease will not
bind the Successor, unless it be confirmed by the Dean and Chapter. And such
construction as aforesaid has been made to disable a Bishop to make any
Estate, except Leases for 21 years, or for three lives, as is aforesaid, as
concerning the binding of the Successor, as the Grant of the next avoydance by
a Bishop to another, although it be confirmed by the Dean and Chapter, is
restrained by the said Statute of Elizabeth to bind the Successor, as it has
often been judged: and the reason is, because it is such an Hereditament
whereon no Rent may be reserved; for all in the Statute, that is not permitted
in the Exception, is restrained as to the Successor by the general purview of
the said Act: but yet such Grant will bind the Bishop himself, although the
Statute says, that it shall be void against all intents and purposes: for the
makers of the said Act did intend, not only the advancement of Religion, but
also increase of good Hospitality, and avoiding dilapidations and ruin of the
Church; which the Successor, if the Acts of his Predecessor should bind him,
were not able to remedy; and therefore the makers of that Act did rather regard
the Successor. And these words in the Act, viz. Parcel of the possessions of
his Archbishopric or Bishopric, or united, belonging, or appertaining to the
said Archbishopric or Bishopric, may be very aptly construed, That the Gift
of this Office, and all other such like things that are belonging to the
Archbishopric or Bishopric: for although the Bishop cannot exercise this
Office himself, yet has he an inheritance in the gift and disposing thereof:
and so it is adjudged in Cooks 8 Rep. Earl of Rutlands Case. And these words,
Belonging to the Archbishopric or Bishopric, shall be expounded for,
Concerning the Archbishopric or Bishopric. And therefore if a Writ of Annuity
be brought against a Bishop, upon a title of prescription, or otherwise, and
Judgment be given against him upon Verdict or confession, this is restrained by
this Act, because the Bishop is charged with this Annuity in respect of his
Bishopric; and therefore the Successor shall be charged with the arrears
incurred in the life of the Predecessor, 21 H. 7. 4. 48 Ed. 3.26. 33 H. 6. 44.
and yet is not the Annuity issuing out of the Bishopric, as appears in the 10
H. 6. 10. and 10 Ed. 4. 10. But because this does concern the Bishopric, and
does tend to the diminution of the revenues, and the impoverishing of the
revenues, this is restrained by the said Act of the first of Eliz. And
therefore to answer to the Objection, Wherefore such an Office should be
granted to one solely? I answer (and it was also agreed to by all the Court)
That if the Office be ancient and necessary, the Grant thereof, with the
ancient fee, is no diminution of the Revenue, or dispoverishing the Successor;
and therefore of necessity such Grants are exempted out of the general
restraint of the said Act of Elizabeth: For, as Bracton says, Illud quod alias
licitum non est, necessitas facit licitum, and necessitas inducit privilegium
quod jure privatur. And if Bishops have not power to grant such Offices of
service and necessity for the life of the Grantees, but that their estates
shall depend on incertainties, as on the death or transmutation of the Bishop,
then no able or sufficient persons will be willing to serve them in such
Offices, or at least will not discharge their Office with any cheerfulness or
alacrity, if they may not have such estate in certain for the term of their
lives, as their Predecessors had: but when an ancient Office is granted to one,
it is not of necessity to grant the same to two; and therefore such Grant is
not exempted out of the general restraint of the Statute, no more then if the
Bishop should grant an Office with the ancient fee to one, and then he grants
the Reversion to another; this is restrained by the Statute, because it is not
of necessity: and if the Bishop may grant such Offices to two, he may grant
them without any limitation of lives, and by consequence ad infinitum: and so,
if he may grant a Reversion to one, so he may to others also without any
limitation: and by the same reason he may grant them in Tail or in Fee, which
is quite contrary to the intention of the said Act. And of such opinion was
Popham, Chief Justice, Michaelm. 44 and 45 Eliz. in Stumblers Case, and Dyer 23
Eliz. 370. where Horn, Bishop of Winchester, did grant to Dr. Dale during his
life a Rent out of the Manor of Waltham, pro concilio impendendo: the Bishop
dyed, and because the Rent was arrear, Dr. Dale brought an Action of Debt, for
the arrears incurred in his life, against the Executors: In which two points
are to be observed; 1. That the Grant was not void against the Bishop himself:
The other, That although the Rent was issuing out of the possessions, and not
parcel, this was void by his death. And Trin. 30 Eliz. Rot. 346. in this Court:
The Bishop of Chester, after the Statute of 1 Eliz. did grant to George Boulton
an Annuity of five marks per annum, pro concilio impenso and impendendo, which
was confirmed by the Dean and Chapter: and then the Bishop dyed, and Boulton
brought a Writ of Annuity against the Successor, and in his Count did aver,
that the Predecessors of the said Bishop had granted reasonable Fees (but did
not aver, that this Fee had been granted before) and did aver, that he was homo
consiliarius, and in lege peritus; and the Opinion of the Court was against the
Plaintiff. But there it was resolved, that although the said Bishopric was
founded but of late times, to wit, in the time of Hen. the eight; yet a Grant
of an Office of necessity to one in possession with reasonable fees (the
reasonableness whereof is to be decided by the Court of Justice wherein the
same does depend) is good, and is restrained out of the general words of the
said Act.

And in our Case the avowant has averred this Office to be an ancient Office,
and which has been granted with a fee of five marks from time to time, by the
Bishop grantor and his Predecessors, to whom they pleased. Cooks 9 Rep. Earl of
Shrewsburies Case. The Earl of Rutland was made Steward of a Manor for life,
without any words to make a Deputy; yet it was resolved that he might make a
Deputy, because it was not convenient for him to exercise such an Office: So if
an Office does descend to an Infant, he must of necessity make a Deputy. And so
if a Bishop be seized of a Manor, he may ordain a Steward of the said Manor,
and may grant to the Steward a fee for the execution of the said Office,
according to the resolution in the said Case of the Bishop of Chester.

viz. Pasture for two Horses, and therefore the Grant is not good to bind the
Successor.

Respons.
And I do agree that the Grant of the said Pasture is void, yet that shall not
at all prejudice the Grant of the said Office with the ancient Fee, for they
are several and distinct Grants, so that the one, viz. The Grant of the Office
with the ancient Fee is good by the Law against the Successor, and the other
void against the Successor, but it cannot hurt the grant of the Office and
ancient Fee, no more then if a Bishop should grant an old Office with an
ancient fee, and also a new Office which was never granted before, and all this
by one Deed of Grant, and this is duly confirmed, although this be void
against the Successor as to the new Office, yet it is good for the ancient
Office and the ancient see: for although these fees are contained in one Deed,
yet are they several and distinct, so that one may be good and the other void,
33. H. 8. Dyer 48. One seized of a Manor to which a Villain was reguardant,
did grant one acre, and also the Villain, the Villain did pass in gross and the
reason there given is, because there be several Gifts contained in one Deed.

Also the Averment of the Plaintiff is insufficient, viz. That the pasture was
never granted by any of the Predecessors of the Grantor, so that it may be that
they were granted by himself, being Bishop, many times before the said Statute,
and then the Successor may well grant it: and in the said case of the Bishop of
Salisbury, it is averred that the Grant was not by the Bishop, Grantor, nor any
of his Predecessors.

William Whitton Clerk, Plaintiff, Sir Richard Weston Defendant, in an Action
of Debt.
The Case.
THe Pryor of S. John's of Jerusalem, did hold certain Lands discharged of
Tithes by reason of their order, Quandiu propriis manibus excolebant, the
Statute of 31. of H. 8. for discharging of Tithes is made, the 32. of H. 8. it
was enacted that the King should have to him his Heirs and Successors, all the
Lands, Privileges, and Hereditaments of the said Pryory, the King dies, and
the Lands by Mesne descents do come to Queen Elizabeth, who grants the Land to
Sir Henry Weston Grandfather to the Defendant, who died seized, and the same
descended to Sir Richard Weston Father to the Defendant, and so from him to the
Defendant: And, If the Land should be held discharged of Tithes as the Pryor
held it? was the question.

And I conceive that the Defendant shall hold the land discharged of Tithes in
the same manner as the Pryor held the same.

For the argument of which, two things are to be considered.

1. Whether the King or his Patentee shall have the same privilege which the
Pryor had by the Statute of the 32. H. 8. or not?

2. Admitting that they shall not have this privilege by general words of
this Statute, then, Whether they be discharged by the clause of the Statute of
31. of H. 8. of Monasteries, or not?

And I conceive that by each of these Statutes, or at least by one of them, the
King and his Patentees shall hold this Land discharged of Tithes, Quamdiu
propriis manibus, etc.

And as to the first point I conceive that the Statute of the 32. of H. 8. has
sufficient words to give this privilege to the King, for it gives to the King
not only all their Manors, Lands, and Tenements, but also all their
Privileges belonging to them or to their Religion or Order, and this discharge
of Tithes is a Privilege belonging to their Religion or Order; for whereas
Pope Pascall did order that no Monk or religious Order should pay Tithes,
afterward Pope Adrian did grant this privilege, Solis Hierosolimariis and
Hospitulariis, Cistersiensibus and Templaribus, and did take away that
privilege from all other Orders: And I conceive it will not be denied, but
that the Pryor himself has this privilege, and if he had it, then it will
follow that the King and his Patentee has it also, for all their privileges
are given to the King.

But it may be objected,

I do agree that all personal privileges concerning their Order are gone by
reason of their dissolution, Respons.
but such privileges as concern the Land, and will make the Land most
profitable to the King are remaining, and are given to the King for the intent
of the Statute was to give it to the King in as ample and beneficial manner,
and with all such privileges concerning the Land, as they themselves had. And
although Tithes are not issuing out of the Land, nor shall be extended for
unity of possession of the land (as in the 42. Ed. 3.13. Where a Pryor having
Tithes did purchase the Land and made a Feoffment, yet shall he have the
Tithes, and so if a Parson makes a Lease for years of his Glebe-land, yet he
shall have Tithes thereof) yet the privilege to hold the Land discharged of
Tithes is a privilege concerning the land, and is not like to the case of the
appropriation of a Rectory to the Templars which was disappropriate by the
dissolution of their Order, for the reason there is, because the appropriation
was made to a body corporate, which body being dissolved, it is impossible they
should retain the same, and no body else can have it without a new
appropriation or an Act of Parliament: and for Appropriations to Abbeys, etc.
the clause in the 31. of H. 8. was necessary, for otherwise the Patentees of
the King being Lay People, and not capable of an Appropriation, they cannot
have it but by special provision by Act of Parliament, but any man may hold
Land discharged of Tithes.

But it may be again objected, that in the same Parliament an Act was made to
revive temporal Liberties, Privileges, and Franchises

The reason of making of this Act was, Bona and Catalla Fellonum, etc. were
extinct by the accession to the Crown, and therefore it was necessary to revive
them, but if the Statute had not been made yet shall the King have all those
Privileges which were not extinct, as Parks, Chases, Warrens, Markets, Fairs,
etc.

And that this privilege is given to the King may be proved by a Proviso in
the Statute, whereby it is provided, that all privileges of Sanctuaries before
used or claimed in houses, or other places commonly called S. John's Hold, and
all other Sanctuaries before used and appertaining to the said Hospital shall
be void and of none effect, whereby it appears, that if that Proviso had not
been made the privilege of Sanctuaries had been in the King and his Patentees,
in the same Manor as had been used before the dissolution, and that by force
of this word Privilege, and yet this privilege of Sanctuary does not concern
the Land as discharge of payment of Tithes does.

H. 8. has an express clause for discharge of the payment of Tithes, which
needed not to have been if the general words would have served.

Coke. Rep. 2. Bishop of Canterburies Case; but in our Case the means is very
well known, and therefore such clause was not necessary.

And as to the second point, I conceive that the clause for discharge of the
payment of Tithes does extend to the possession of this Pryory, and yet I do
agree that their Lands are given to the King not by the Statute of 31. of H. 8.
but by the 32. of H. 8. And to prove this, the Statute of 31. H. 8. does extend
to all Abbeys, Pryories, Hospitalls, and other Religious and Ecclesiastical
houses, and this Pryory was Religions and Ecclesiastical, for they vowed
Obedience and Chastity; and the case in the 27. H. 8. 16. in the case of Martin
Dockwray, where it is holden that Friars are dead persons in the Law, be they
of an Abbey or any other Pryory, and that appears by the Statute of 32. of H.
8. of their dissolution, by which it is enacted that the Friars shall sue and
be sued by their proper names, and that they shall have such capacities,
liberties, and freedoms as were given to other Religious persons in an A^^ at
the first Session of this Parliament.

And in further proof hereof, diverse Rectories were appropriate to them, and
Tithes given to them, and they enjoyed them, and the Statute gives them to the
King; by which it does appear that they were Religious and Ecclesiastical.

H. 8. does not discharge Chanteries, or College lands given to King Edward
the sixth, of Tithes.

Coke 2. Rep. 48. B. but the Friars of S. John of Jerusalem were
Ecclesiastical and Regular.

And it is not inconvenient that the King and his Patentees should have the
benefit of the clause of the Statute of 31. of H. 8. in those lands given to
the King by the Statute of the 32. of H. 8. as the Statute of Acton Burnell
does provide, that if the Extender upon a Statute Merchant does extend the
Lands too high, they shall answer this to the Conusee, and the Statute of 23.
H. 8. does order a new form of Recognizance to be taken before any of the chief
Justices, yet the Conusee shall have the said benefit of the Statute of Acton
Burnell, although it was made two hundred years before the other Statute. And
for Authority in this point, Dyer 277. The Pryor of S John's of Jerusalem, with
the Friars two or three years before the dissolution did make a Lease of a
Manor for years, which Lessee did pay Tithes to the Church of Rochester
proprietary, and after the dissolution the King did grant the reversion of the
Manor to one Stathome and to his Heirs, in such ample manner as the Pryor had
the same, etc. the Lease does expire, If he and his heirs having the Manor in
their own possession shall be discharged of Tithes? or not, was the question in
Chancery, and on consideration had of the Statute of the 31. of H. 8. cap. 13.
it seemed by the Lord Keeper Sanders, Southcott, and Dyer, that they be
discharged until they let the same out to others to Farm.

And Pascha 11. Jac. in the Common Pleas, in the case of Weney, this case did
come into question, and argued by Coke, Warburton, Winch, and Nicholls, and
they were divided in their Opinions.

Saturday the sixth day of June, in the ninth year of the Reign of King
Charles: Between Francis Townley Esquire Plaintiff, Edward Sherborne, Executor
of Richard Mountford deceased, Executor of Thomas Challoner deceased, Defendant.
Upon hearing and debating of the matter, as well on the fifteenth as the
eighteenth of June last, the Court being assisted with Mr. Justice Hutton, and
Mr. Justice Jones, upon the Plaintiffs Bill of Review for the reviving and
reversall of a Decree made in a Cause wherein the said Richard Mountford
deceased, Executor of Thomas Challoner was Plaintiff against the now Plaintiff,
and Thomas Foster Esquire, concerning the sum of one thousand seven hundred
pounds, raised out of the Rents and Profits of certain Lands and Tenements in
Linsted, Ardingley, and Worth in the County of Sussex, in trust for the said
Thomas Challoner during his Minority, and which the now Plaintiff by the Decree
of this Court was to pay in case the said Foster should fail to pay the same:
several matters were offered by the Plaintiffs Council for the reversall of
the said Decree, as namely, that the now Plaintiff was decreed to pay the sum
of one thousand seven hundred pounds as raised out of the profits of the
Infants Lands settled upon an account made up by the said Forster, with the
said Thomas Challoner the Infant, after he came to age, whereto the Plaintiff
Townley was neither party nor privy, nor ever consented nor ought to be bound
thereby. And secondly, that the said Plaintiff is by the said Decree made
liable to the payment of all the profits raised out of the said Infants Estate,
whereas he never received any profits at all, and although he gave some
Acquittances, yet the same were only for the three first half years, and no
more, and were but to balance an account, the moneys disbursed amounting to as
much as the Receipts, and there being three other Cotrustees with him, the
Plaintiffs Council conceived that he ought not to be charged with more then he
himself received, especially for that the other parties trusted, and who
received the profits were, or were reputed to be, men of ability, and
responsible. Touching which last point, being that where on the Plaintiffs
Council chiefly insisted for the reversall of the said Decree as against the
now Plaintiff; It appeared unto this Court, that Challoner Father of Thomas the
Infant, did heretofore make a Lease of the said Lands to one Weeks for five and
thirty years, and afterward conveyed away the Reversion to Thomas Challoner
his Brother, and after the death of Francis (according to an Award made between
the said Weeks and Thomas Challoner the Brother, who was Uncle to Thomas the
Infant) the Lease of five and thirty years, and the Reversion in Fee-simple
were to be assigned to parties trusted by the said Weeks, and one Barbara
Challoner, Mother of the said Infant, and by the said Thomas the Uncle, the
Lease to be entrust for Weeks for life, the remainder to Barbara for life, the
remainder to Thomas the Infant, and the reversion in fee to be in trust for the
said Thomas the Infant. But upon the limitation or Condition that the said
Thomas the Infant when he came of age should make some assurance to Thomas the
Uncle according to the Award, wherein if he failed, then the trust limited to
him should cease, and the Trustees should be seized for Thomas the Uncle. In
pursuance whereof the now Plaintiff and the said Forster were trusted together
with one Langworth and Lovell to take the Estate in the Lease, and did take an
Assignment thereof from Weeks the 12th. of June, 9. Jacobi: And all the
Trustees sealed the Counterpart, and the same day the now Plaintiff and Forster
assigned their moyity in the said Lease to one Mr. Peacock and Robert Forster,
who were not privy nor acquainted therewith, and on the thirteenth of June, the
ninth of King James, the said Thomas Challoner the Uncle passed over the
Inheritance to the now Plaintiff and Thomas Forster, whereby it was probable
that the said Assignment made by the now Plaintiff and Thomas Forster, of their
interest in the moyity of the Lease, was to keep the same from being
extinguished. After which assurance so made, Weeks, during his life, and
Barbara after him during her life received the profits of the said Lands, and
Barbara in the year of our Lord 1614. dyed. And it appeared that soon after the
death of the said Barbara, viz. 23. of March, 12. Jacobi, Langworth one of the
Trustees of the Lease being dead, whereby his interest in the moiety survived
in Lovell, that Thomas Challoner the Uncle procured the said Lovell to assign
over his interest in the said Lease, to the said Thomas Challoner the Uncle,
liable to the said trust, as by a Copy of the Assignment now read appeared. And
it appeared by the confession of the now Plaintiff, and by his answer to the
former Bill, and by the Acquittances now produced that the now Plaintiff joined
with the said Thomas Forster in giving acquittances for the three first half
years Rents, but it did not appear that he ever received any after, or gave any
more Acquittances, but it does appear by the proofs, that the said Thomas
Challoner the Uncle, who had the Assignment from Lovell, did receive the Rents
of the Tenants, and paid the same over to the said Thomas Forster, and that
when the Infant came of age, he called the said Thomas Forster, and Thomas the
Uncle to an account, and that they did account: And that the said Thomas
Forster did then deliver him a Book of account, which the Defendant now
produced in Court, by which it did appear, that for the three first half years
the Rents were received by the said Thomas the Uncle, and by him paid to the
now Plaintiff, and the said Thomas Forster for the use of the Infant, but for
all the subsequent time the same were received by the said Thomas Challoner the
Uncle, and by him paid to the said Thomas Forster alone, who (as was not now
denied) was at the time of such receipts generally taken to be of great ability
and responsable, as it also appeared by the proofs, that the said Infant after
he came of age, had declared the said Thomas Forster to be his Debtor, and did
by his Will read in Court, give the said sum of one thousand seven hundred
pounds to the said Mountford as a Debt owing by the said Thomas Forster solely,
not mentioning the now Plaintiff. Upon all which this Court was fully
satisfied, that the now Plaintiff received no penny of profits after the three
first half years: but whether he ought to be charged with all that the said
Thomas Forster received, being a Co-trustee with him, in respect the said
Forster is now declined in his Estate (as is conceived) this Court somewhat
doubted: and although a president was produced, wherein this Court had charged
parties trusted but only according to their several and respective receipts,
and not one for the other; yet in respect the Defendants Council opposed the
same, alleging many presidents to be on the other side, and the Lord Keeper
conceived the case to be of great consequence, and thought not fit to determine
the same suddenly, but to advise thereof, and desired the Lords the Judges
assistance to take the same into their serious considerations, and to assist
him with their advice therein, whereby some course might be settled that
parties trusted might not be too much punished, lest it should dishearten men
to take any trust, which would be inconvenient on the one side; nor that too
much liberty should be given to parties trusted, lest they should be emboldened
to break the trust imposed on them, and so be as much prejudicial on the other
side. And the Lord Keeper, and the Lords the Judges assistants afterward
conferring together, and upon mature deliberation concerning the case, to be of
great importance, his Lordship was pleased to call unto him also Mr. Justice
Crook, Mr. Justice Barcley, and Mr. Justice Crawley, for their assistance also
in the same; and appointed presidents to be looked over, as well in this, as in
other Courts, if any could be found touching the point in question; whereupon
several presidents were produced before them, some in this Court, and some in
the Court of Wards, where parties trusted were chargeable only according to
their several and respective receipts, and not one to answer for the other; but
no president on the contrary was produced to them. Whereupon his Lordship,
after long and mature deliberation on the case, and serious advice with all the
said Judges, did this day in open Court declare the resolution of his Lordship
and the said Judges: That where Lands or Leases were conveyed to two or more
upon trust, and one of them receives all or the most part of the profits, and
after dies or decays in his Estate, his Co-trustees shall not be charged, or
be compelled in this Court, to answer for the receipts of him so dying or
decayed, unless some purchase, fraud or evil dealing appear to have been in
them to prejudice their trust; for they being by Law Ioyntenants or Tenants in
common, every one by Law may receive either all or as much of the profits as he
can come by: And it being the case of most men in these days, that their
personal Estates do not suffice to pay their debts, prefer their children, and
perform their Wills, they are enforced to trust their friends with some part of
their real Estate, to make up the same, either by the sale, or perception of
profits: and if such of these friends, who carry themselves without fraud,
should be chargeable out of their own Estates for the faults and deficiencies
of their Cotrustees, who were not nominated by them, few men would undertake
any such trust. And if two Executors be, and one of them waste all, or any part
of the Estate, the Devastavit shall by Law charge him only, and not his
Co-executor: and in that case, Equitas sequitur Legem, there having been many
presidents resolved in this Court, that one Executor shall not answer nor be
charged for the act or default of his companion. And it is no breach of trust,
to permit one of the trustees to receive all or the most part of the profits,
it falling out many times that some of the Trustees live far from the Lands,
and are put in trust out of other respects then to be troubled with the receipt
of the profits. But his Lordship and the said Judges were of opinion, that if
two Trustees were, and one of them without warrant of the party that trusts
him, or of a Court of Equity, assigns his Estate, and the Assignee does
receive the profits, and becomes non-solvent, he that made the Assignment
shall answer it for him, but the other original Trustee shall answer for no
more then what he receives himself, because the Assign comes not in by him,
or his assent or appointment: and that in case, if the original Trustee, that
did not make the Assignment, receive the whole profits, and become non-solvent,
neither the Assignor nor the Assignee shall be answerable for them: and if an
Obligation be made to two in trust, and one of them release the whole debt, as
by law he may, this shall not charge his companion for any part: and albeit in
all presumption this case has often happened; yet no president has been
produced to his Lordship or the Judges, that in any such Case the Co-trustee
has been charged for the act or fault of his companion: and therefore it is to
be presumed, that the current and clear opinion has gone, that he is not to be
charged (it having not till of late been brought in question) in a case that by
all likelihood has frequently happened. But his Lordship and the said Judges
did resolve, that if upon the proofs or circumstances the Court be satisfied,
that there be Dolus malus, or any evil practice, fraud or ill intent in him
that permitted his companion to receive the whole profits, he may be charged
though he received nothing. And his Lordship and the said Judges did declare,
that in this particular Case, they did not find any material proof against Mr.
Townley, to make his case worse then the general case aforesaid, but rather
better (except only for the three half years Rent, which he joined in
acquittance with Mr. Forster; for the receipt of the profits alone by Mr.
Forster is no breach of trust in Mr. Townley: and Mr. Challoner, when he came
of full age, took Mr. Forster for his Debtor. And therefore it is ordered and
decreed, That so much of the said Decree as charge Mr. Townley with any more
of the profits then the three half years, for which he joined in acquittance,
shall be reversed: but as for those three half years profits, if the same were
not disbursed or employed for the use of Mr. Challoner, then for so much
thereof as has not been so disbursed or employed, the said Complainant Mr.
Townley ought to be answerable, and the Defendant may call the Plaintiff before
Mr. Page, one of the Masters of this Court, to audite the account touching
these three half years, if any difference be thereabouts. And lastly, it is
ordered, that the Recognizances given on the Plaintiffs part, to perform the
Order of this Court, be discharged.

Trinit. 13 Jacob. Allen against Wedgwood.
IN an Action of Debt on a Bond of 100 l. made the 23 of April 1610. The
Defendant demands Oyer of the Obligation and Condition, which was, That if the
Defendant did perform all and every such Article and Articles of Agreement, and
every parcel and particular point thereof, being dated the day of this
Obligation taken between the Defendant and Plaintiff, with the consent of both
parties, concluded and agreed upon, and sealed with the seal of the Defendant,
that then the Oligation to be void. And he demanded also Oyer of the Articles,
which were as follows.

Memorandum, It is agreed between the Defendant of the one part, and the
Plaintiff of the other part; and the Defendant does condescend and agree for
him, his Heirs, Executors, Administ. etc. with the Plaintiff, his Heirs,
Executors, etc. in manner and form following.

Impr. The Defendant, for him, his Heirs, etc. does demise, set, and Sowdley
Hall, with all the Lands which were sometimes in the Tenure of Reynold Sowdley,
with all the appurtenances thereunto belonging, being in great Sowdley in the
Parish of Chosendine in the County of Salop.

Item, The Defendant is to make a Lease of the said Manor for term John
Sowdley, if any be.

Item, If there be any Lease or lawful bargain made thereof, that then

Item, If there be none made thereof, that then the Plaintiff is to

Item, The Plaintiff is to have and enjoy the same, paying yearly, John Sowdley.

Item, The Plaintiff is to pay the Defendant, when the said Plaintiff

Item, The Defendant may at any time, so long as he is unmarryed, resort

Item, The Defendant is to deliver the said house to the Plaintiff, with

Item, The Defendant is to make as good a Lease, as can be devised by

And the Defendant pleaded performance of these Articles. Plea. Replication.


The Plaintiff did reply, that the said 23 of April, 1610. there was not any
Demise made by the said John Sowdley of the said Mannor-house, and of the
houses called Sowdley Hall, and of the Land lately in the Tenure of the
aforesaid Reynold Sowdley: and that the Plaintiff, since the making of the said
Articles, viz. 9 Maii 10 Jacob. at great Sowdley aforesaid, did require the
Defendant to make a Lease of the said Mannor-house and houses, with the
aforesaid Land, late in the Tenure of the said Reynold Sowdley, situate in
great Sowdley aforesaid, in the Parish aforesaid, and in the County aforesaid,
to one Walter Welden, Thomas Welden, and John Welden, for their lives,
according to the effect of the said Articles: and that the said Walter, Thomas,
and John, were there and then ready to accept of the said Demise of the
premises of the Defendant, and yet the Defendant did refuse to make the said
Demise of the premises to the said Walter, Thomas, and John.

Demurrer.
Upon which the Defendant demurred in Law.

And I conceive that the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment.

And fist, to answer the Objections that are made against the Plaintiff upon
the Articles.



Comment. fol. 288. Chapman against Dalton: where a man did let Land to
another, and did covenant at the end of the term, to make such another Lease to
the Lessee and his Assigns; the Lessee made his Executor, and dies; and the
Executor does make his Executor, and dies: and there it was adjudged, that the
Lease ought to be made to the Executor of the Executor, for he is the Assignee
in Law to the first Testator: and the word [and] shall be taken for the word
[or] and there it is clearly agreed, that if the Lessee had named any in his
lifetime to take the said Lease, it ought to be made to him: and so (as it is
there said) if I be obliged to make a feoffment to you or your Assigns, such as
you name to take the feoffment, are your Assigns indeed: and so in our Case,
these three persons named by the Plaintiff are his Assigns, to whom the Lease
ought to be made, 21 Ed. 3. 29.



27 H. 8. 6. B. and the same Law of a feoffment upon condition to re-infeoff
him, 44 Ed. 3. 9. 14 H. 8. 21. 18 Assis. 18. 17 Assis. 20. but yet the Obligor
at his peril ought to do it during his life, otherwise the condition is broken.

So in our Case, the Plaintiff ought first to require the Defendant to make the
Lease, and this of necessity ought to be done where he can find the Defendant,
for it is impossible to do it on the Land, unless the Defendant be there, and
the Plaintiff cannot compel him to be there: But when the Plaintiff has made
his request, the next action is then to be done by the Defendant; and therefore
he ought to go to the Land, and to be ready there to make the Lease. And in the
22 Ed. 4. 43. A. is bound to B. on condition that C. shall infeoff B. by such a
day, and did show that C. was there ready on the Land, and B was not there to
receive the Feoffment: and there it was argued, whether the issue should be,
upon the being of C. upon the Land who ought to make the Lease, or of B. who
was to take the Lease; and in fine it was adjudged, that the issue should be,
whether C. were there or not? for he ought to be there, or else the Bond was
forfeit. So that the Defendant upon request ought to go to the Land, and there
to attend a convenient time to make the Estate; and then if the persons named
do not come thither, he is excused; but when he goes not to the Land, but does
utterly refuse to make the Estate, it is to no purpose for the Assigns to come
to the Land: and admitting the Law would enforce them to attend there, then I
demand how long they ought to attend? for in all places where the attendance of
one is required in a place certain by the Law, the time of his attendance is
limited, 18 and 19 Eliz. Dyer 354.

The third Objection is, that the Article for making of the Lease, Randolph
Sowdley.

To this I answer, That the Demise in the first Article, Randolph Sowdley, with
all the appurtenances thereto belonging; then when he agrees to make a Lease of
the said Manor, it shall be intended the Manor mentioned before: and although
it be not in verity a Manor, yet in reputation it may be a Manor, and that is
enough to make it to be put in the agreement. 22 H. 6. 39. a. where one pleaded
a Feoffment of eight Acres of Land by the name of the Manor of D. and adjudged
by the Court to be a good Feoffment, although the acres were not set forth: and
in the 27 of H. 6. 2. a Plough-land may pass by the name of a Manor.

The request is made too late, for the time limited to enter is the
Anunciation, 1612. and the request is not until the ninth of June next after,
and that is too late; for the Lessor ought to have 20 l. fine upon the entry
and making of the Lease, and therefore the request ought to be made at the time
that the entry was to be made: and for that purpose Andrews Case, and the Lord
Cromwels Case in L. Cooks Rep. were cited. To which Objection Cook and all the
Court did seem to incline.

But I conceive that the request is made in good time enough,

The Estate here is to be made by the Defendant; and although he be

And therefore the rule is given in the Lord Cromwels Case aforesaid, that when
a woman or a Grantee upon condition is to make an Estate to the Grantor, and no
time is limited, he has time for his life, unless the party who is to have the
Estate do hasten it by request: but if an advowson be granted on such
condition, the Regrant ought to to be before the Church becomes void: so, if
the condition be to grant Rent payable at certain days, the Grant ought to be
before any day of payment; for otherwise he shall lose the Presentation, and
the Rent which will incur before the Grant made. And in the 14 Ed. 3. Debt.
138. In a Debt upon a Bond, the Defendant pleaded the Condition, viz. That if
he granted twelve marks Rent, the Bond should be void, and demanded Judgment,
etc. because no time was limited, so that he might do it when he would; and
said, that he was always ready to grant the twelve marks Rent: and because he
demurred not, issue was joined, etc.

20 l. although no Estate be made, as he should have had if the Estate had been
made; for by the fourth Article it is agreed, that if there be no Estate made
of the Land, the Plaintiff shall enter at the Anunciation, 1612. And I conceive
that this payment ought to be made at the time limited for the entry; for it is
a mutual agreement that does bind both parties: and therefore it lies not in
the power of the Plaintiff, for his want of entry, to defeat the Defendant of
his 20 l. agreed to be paid to him: but when he enters, it shall be intended
that he entered when it was agreed he should enter, viz. at the Anunciation,
1612. And if he paid it not then, the Defendant might have had his Action of
Covenant, whether any Lease were made or not. And in Sir Andrew Corbets Case,
Cook. Rep. 4. 81. certain Land is devised to A. B. until 800 l. pound be
levied, that is until it may be levied: and so in case of a Lease or limitation
of a use; for otherwise it should be in their power to hold out the Lessor for
ever: and so in case of an Elegit, upon the Statute of Westminster. the 2d. cap. 18.
and of Retinue for the double value of a Marriage by the Statute of Merton,
cap. 6.

Opinion of the Court.
And the whole Court was of Opinion, that the request came too late: whereupon
they were of Opinion to give Judgment against the Plaintiff: but I prayed, that
the Plaintiff might discontinue his Suit, which was granted.

Rot. 609.
Michaelmas, 13 Jacob. Smalman, Plaintiff, against John Agborrow and Edmund
Agborrow, Defendants.
IN an Action of Trespass; for that the Defendants, the 13 Maii, 13 Jacob. six
Heifers of the Plaintiff of the price of 20 l. at Dodenham, in a place called
Well-Marsh, did take, chase, and drive away, to the damage of 10 l. etc.

The Defendants to all, except the chasing, did plead Not guilty.

And as to the chasing, they said that the place where, etc. is, and at the
time wherein, etc. was the Freehold of one Francis Agborrow, and so did
justify as his servants, for damage feasant, etc.

Replication.
The Plaintiff replied, that before the said Francis Agborrow had any thing,
etc. the Dean and Chapter of the Cathedral of St. Mary the Virgin, in
Worcester, were seized in fee of the Manor of Aukerden and Dodenham, whereof
the place where, etc. is, and at the time whereof, etc. was parcel, etc. And
that the 25 of November, 10 Elizab. the said Dean and Chapter, by their
Indenture, did Demise the said Manor to William Agborrow, and Jane his Wife,
and to the said Francis Agborrow for their lives: And that the 20 Febru. 39
Elizab. William Agborrow dyed seized: and that the 21. of December. 39. Eliz.
Jane did marry with Robert Hawkins? And that the 25. Febr. 40. Eliz. Robert
Hawkins,, and the said Jane by their Indenture did demise the said Manor to
William Hawkins and William Heaven for sixty years from the date, etc. if the
said Jane and Francis Agborrow or either of them should so long live, rendering
twenty pounds rent, and that the 25. of Mar. 13. Jac. William Hawkins and
William Heaven did grant their Estate to the Plaintiff, whereby he was
possessed and put in his Cattle there to grase, which were there until the
Defendant took them away, etc. And did aver the life of Francis Agborrow.

The Defendants rejoyn and say, that the said Jane did die the 14. Rejoinder,
of Mar. 12. Jac. and that Francis Agborrow did hold himself in, etc. Per jus
accresendi.

Upon which the Plaintiff demurred in Law.

A man and a woman are Ioynt-tenants for life, the woman marries, The Case.
the Husband and Wife by Indenture do let their moiety for years, rendering
Rent, and after the woman dies.

And the question was, whether the surviving Ioynt-tenant could avoid this
Lease.

And I conceive he cannot.

And for the Argument of this Case, I shall observe these two things thereof.

That if the woman who made this Lease had been sole at the time of

That this Lease being made by the Husband and Wife, is not void,

And as to the first Point, Littleton fol. 63. and 64. says, that if two Hales
Case in the Comment, If two Ioynt-tenants be for years, and one of them does
grant to I.S. that if he pays twenty pounds at Michaelmas, he shall have his
moiety, and the Grantor dies, and I. S. does pay the money, yet shall not he
have the Land, because the Condition precedes the Estate, but if he make a
Lease for years to commence at a day to come, and dies before the day, yet is
the Lease good against the Survivor: and so in Trin. 37. Eli. Harbury and
Bartons Case. Two Ioynt-tenants are for life, and one lets his moiety for years
to commence after his death, and dies, and agreed to be a good Lease against
the Survivor: for as Litton says, every Ioynt-tenant is seized Per my and per
tout, and has an Estate in one moiety not only for his own life, or his own
time, but also for the time and life of his Companion, and therefore every
Estate made by him is good for a moiety so long as the Estate of himself and
his Companion continues, but a Rentcharge shall not bind his Companion,
because he claims by the first Conveyance which is above his Companions Estate.

And as to the second point, it is clear that when Husband and Wife H. 8. 2.
the case of the Feoffment is agreed, and if a Woman after the death of her
Husband does accept the Rent, she shall be barred in a Cui in vita, 11. H. 7.
13. 15. Ed. 4. 17. and Dyer 91. B. Husband and Wife make a Lease for years by
Indenture, and the Husband dies, and she accepts the Rent, she shall be bound
thereby and shall not avoid the Lease.

Upon which two things being (as I conceive) unquestionable, it follows that
this Lease at the time of the making thereof, is not void but voidable. And
therefore the sole question will be, how this Lease is voidable, and if it may
be avoided by the surviving Ioynt-tenant, or not?

And I conceive that it is avoidable by the Wife only, if she survive her
Husband, and not by the other Ioynt-tenant, and that for two reasons.

First, Because the Survivor comes in above the Lease, and therefore cannot
take advantage of any imperfection or defect to avoid the Lease, 14. Ed. 4. 1.
B. If a Feoffment or a Lease for life be made to two, and one dies, the other
may plead the Estate to be made to him only, for he is not in by him that is
dead, but by the Feoffor or Lessor,: and Dyer 187. a. Two Ioynt-tenants for
life, one makes a Lease for years rendering Rent, and dies, the Survivor shall
not have the Rent. And if Tenant for life makes a Lease for years rendering
Rent, and surrenders to the Lessor, the Lessor shall not have the Rent, for he
is in by his Reversion which is above the Lease for years: and 28. H. 8. 96. a.
An Executor had Judgment to r^cover a Debt, and died intestate, whereupon
Administration is committed to another, he shall not have a Scire facias upon
this Judgment, because that he being Administrator immediately to the Testator
is above the recovery.

Secondly, There is no privity between the surviving Ioynt-tenant and the
Lessor, to make him avoid the Lease which is voidable, as in 8. Rep.
Whittinghams case, Privies in blood, as Heir general or special shall avoid a
voidable estate made by the Ancestor, as if an Infant make a Feoffment in Fee,
his Heir may well enter and avoid the Feoffment: but Privies in Law, as Lord by
escheat, Lord of a Villain, or Lord who enters for Mortmain, shall never take
benefit of the Infancy, because they are but strangers. And therefore if an
Infant make a Feoffment in Fee, and dies without Heir, the Feoffment is
unavoidable, 49. Ed. 3. 13. 6. H. 4. 3 7. H. 5. 9. 39. H. 6. 42. And as to
Privies in Estate, as Ioynt-tenants, Husband and Wife, Donor, in Tail, and
Donee, Lessor and Lessee, it is there also resolved, that they shall not take
advantage of Infancy, unle^^e it be in some special cases. And therefore if
Tenant in Tail within age makes a Feoffment in Fee, and dies without Issue, the
Donor shall not enter, contrary to the opinion of Rick and Frisby, 6. H. 4. and
3. because that here is only a Privity in Estate between them, and no right
does accrue to the Donor by the death of the Donee: So if two Ioynt-tenants in
Fee be, and one of them being within age makes a Feoffment in Fee, and dies,
the Survivor shall not enter; but if two Ioynt-tenants within age do make a
Feoffment, one joint Right remains in them, and therefore if one dies, the
Right will survive, and the Survivor may enter in all, and the same Law of
Covertue, or non sanae memoriae, as it is said also in Whittinghams case: and
in Fitzherb. N. B. 192. K. If two Ioynt-tenants within age do alien in Fee,
they must sue several Writs of Dum fuit infra aetatem, because that the cause
of their Action is their nonage, which is several, for the nonage of the one
is not the nonage of the other. But if Husband and Wife within age, do make a
Feoffment of the Wifes land, and the Husband dye, the Wife shall have a Dum
fuit infra aetatem, 14. Ed. 3. Dum fuit infra aetatem, 6. and 12. H. 7. 18. B.
Kelloway: In a Formedon by the Lord Brook against the Lord Latimer, if an
Infant does make a Feoffment, none shall avoid this but the Infant himself and
his Heirs, and no stranger, and the same Law of a Feme Covert.

And as to the case of Harvey and Thomas, 33. Eliz. cited in the Lord Cromwells
case, Where the Husband made a Lease of his Wifes Land for years, and then he
and his Wife aliened by Fine, and the Husband dies, the Conusee shall avoid
this Lease, which I agree to: for the Lease being made by the Husband only, is
utterly void against the Wife, and cannot be made good by any Act done by the
Wife, and the Land passes all from the woman by the Fine, and therefore the
Lease cannot bind the Conusee.

The Survivor in one case cannot make the Lease good by the acceptance Not. B.
138. B. the Heir shall not have a Cessavit for ceasing in the time of his
Ancestor, for he shall not have the Rent or the arrearages incurred in the life
of his Ancestors, and the reason is as I conceive, because that the Law does
give this benefit to the Tenant for the saving of his Tenancy for the tender of
arrearages, the which cannot be to the Lord, because that the Rent is not due
to him, and therefore the Lord shall lose his action rather then the Tenant
shall be deprived of his advantage of saving the land by his tender: And by
this case also, the Aunt and the Neice shall not join in a Cessavit, for a
ceasing made before the Title of the Neice accrued, but in Not. F.B. 139. it is
otherwise there of joynt-tenants, as I conceive, the reason whereof is,
because, as I conceive, the Survivor shall have all the Rent, and therefore the
tender may be made to him, 13. H. 4. 17. B. If one makes a Feoffment in Fee
rendering Rent upon condition to re-enter for non-payment, and dies, the Rent
being arrear, the Heir cannot demand the Rent or enter for non-payment, because
that the Rent is not due to him, and as he cannot dispense with the Condition
for acceptance of the Rent, so cannot he enter for non-payment thereof.

And I argued this Case again on Friday, being the first day of Trinity Term,
14. Jac. 31. Maii, at which day, Daston did also argue for the Defendant, but
the Court did not then give any direct Opinion, but seemed to incline very much
for the Plaintiff. And Hill. 14. Jac. the case was argued by Chilborne Sergeant,
for the Plaintiff, and Davenport for the Defendant; at which time all did
agree, that the Lease continued: But Davenp. took exceptions to the
replication, For he said, that the marriage of Jane with Rob. Hawkins is
alleged to be 21. of No. 39. Eli. and the death of William Agborrow her first
Husband, the 20. of Febr. 39. Eliz. which is after the marriage; but that was
held not material, for it is said, that William Agborrow died the twentieth of
Febr. 39. Elizab. and that atferwards, viz. the one and twentieth of November.
39. Eliz. Jane did marry Thomas Hawkins, so that the [afterward] is sufficient,
Trin. 37. Eliz. Rot. 206. Butler against Wallis: In a Trespass the Defendant
justified by virtue of an Extent upon a Statute, and did show the Extent, and
that the 28. of Febr. a Liberate was awarded by virtue whereof the Sheriff the
27. of October. delivered the land to him, etc. yet adjudged sufficient, for when
he said Virtute brevis, the mistake of the day afterward is not material.

And at last in the said Term of S. Hillary, Judgment.
all the Court agreed that the Lease continued good against the Survivor, and
cannot be avoided by him, and that the acception to the pleading was not
material: And thereupon Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Rot. 668.
Pasch. 11. Jacob. Between Thomas Palmer Knight, Plaintiff, Richard Greenwill,
and Edward Greenwill, Executors of John Greenwill Defendants.
IN an Action of Debt on a Bond of fifty pound, entered into by the Testators
the 20. of November. 5. Jac. The Defendant demanded Oyer of the Bond and
Condition, which was, that if the Testator his Heirs Executors and Assigns,
did perform all the Covenants comprised in certain Indentures, bearing date
with the Obligation made between the Plaintiff on the one part, and the
Testator of the other part, that the Obligation shall be void. And the
Defendant pleaded, that the Plaintiff by the said Indenture did let to the
Testator a House and the moiety of his land, amounting to about thirty Rods of
land in Pollicote to have, etc. from Michaelmas last past, for seven years,
rendering twenty pounds Rent, and showed that the Testator did covenant by the
same Indenture for him, his Executors and Assigns, with the Plaintiff his
Heirs and Assigns, within two years after the beginning of the said Lease, to
deliver or cause to be delivered to the Plaintiff or his Assigns, a Map or Plot
made in distinct manner by men of skill, as well of all the land in little
Pollicot, as was then in his occupation, and in the occupation of Thomas Cocker
and John Crook, parcel of the Demise of the Plaintiff in Pollicot aforesaid,
as of all the land in the occupation of the Testator by a lease of Lincoln
College in Pollicot aforesaid, which are all the Covenants, etc. And pleaded
that the Testator in his life time, and the Defendants after his death had
performed all the Covenants, etc.

Replication.
The Plaintiff replied, that the Testator within two years after the beginning
of the Lease, did not deliver or cause to be delivered to the Plaintiff or his
Assigns, a Map or Plot made in distinct manner by Surveyors and men of skill,
of all the land in little Pollicot aforesaid, in his occupation, and in the
occupation of the said Thomas Cocker and John Crook parcel of the aforesaid
Demise of the Plaintiff in Pollicot aforesaid, Secundum formam and effectum
Indenturae praedict.

Upon which Replication the Defendants demurred in Law.

And I conceive Judgment ought to be given for them against the Plaintiff.

First, the Plaintiff replies, that the Testator did not deliver the Plot, and
it may be that it was delivered by the Defendants who were his Executors, which
is a good performance of the Covenant, and if so, then the Plaintiff has no
cause of action, and where the matter is left doubtful in the Replication, it
shall be taken most strongly by the Plaintiff who pleads it. And in the
Comment. 104. a. Fulmerstone against Steward. If a man be bound to pay twenty
pounds about Christmas, it is no plea for him to say he has paid it, but he
must show when, or otherwise it shall be intended that he paid it after the
Feast and before the Suit. And so in a Dum fuit infra aetatem if the Tenant do
plead a Release of the Demandant, it is no plea without saying that he was of
full age, for the plea shall be taken most strong against himself, and that is,
that it was made when he was within age: and 3. H. 7. 2. If the Defendant in a
Trespass does plead a release, it is not sufficient without showing that it
was made after the Trespass, for otherwise it shall be taken to be done before.

And 26. H. 8. Pleading 147. If in a Praecipe quod reddat, the Tenant does
plead Warranty collateral of the Ancestor of the Demandant, and he replies
that he entered, and so does avoid the Warranty, it is not good without saying
that he entered in the life of the Ancestor, for otherwise it shall be intended
that he entered after the descent of the Warranty, and in Dyer 89. and 96. The
Plaintiff in an Ejectment declared on a Lease for years to begin at Michaelmas
after the death of Thomas Boydon and M. his Wife, and set forth, that they
died, and he entered, and adjudged insufficient, for it might be that he entered
after this death, and before Michaelmas, and Dyer 28. H 8. 27. A Covenant that
the Lessee and his Assigns shall pay all Rents, pleading that the Lessee has
paid them is not sufficient, because the Assigns are omitted.

(In his Occupation) are words uncertain, sc. whether they shall be referred H.
7. and 7. Ed. 6. Dyer 84 a. In a Trespass brought by the Husband and Wife, for
breaking their Close and bona sua capt. and pleaded of a Trespass made to the
Woman Dum sola fuit, for which the Writ abated.

The Plaintiff ought to show that ^ome land was in the possession of Kocker and
Crook, for otherwise it is impossible that a Map should be made thereof, 12.
H. 7. 8. a. and 6. H. 7. 6. a. If I am bound to infeoff another of all the
Lands whereof my Father died seized in an Action against me, I ought to set
forth the certainty of the Land whereof he died seized. And although the
Executor does represent the person of the Testator, yet the Act of the Executor
is not the Act of the Testator; not like to the Case of an Attorney, 32. Ed. 3.
Bar 264. If one be bound to enfeoff another, it is sufficient if the Attorney
be ready to make the Feoffment: and so in the 19. H. 6. the same Law to
confess an Action: but when an Executor does an A^^ for the Test^tor it is
otherwise, as if the Executor sell Land, it must be so pleaded, for a dead
person cannot sell Land.

And afterward the Plaintiff discontinued his Suit.

Hillar. 13. Jac. Norris Plaintiff, against Henry Baker and Elizabeth Baker
Defendants.
IN an Action of Trespass for that the Defendants the 28. October. 13. Jac. by
force and arms, etc. upon one Thomas Davis and Nicholas James Servants and
Workmen of the Plaintiff, did make an assa^^t, and them there laboring in the
service of the Plaintiff did wound, etc. whereby the Plaintiffs lost their
Service, to his damage of forty pounds etc.

The Defendants as to the form and according did plead not guilty, whereupon
issue was joined: And as to the residue of the Trespass, they say, that at the
time of the Trespass the said Henry was and yet is possessed of an ancient
House with the appurtenances in Worcester, for diverse years to come, the which
house does join to a void piece of land in Worcester against the South, and
that at the time wherein, etc. and also time out of mind, there were ancient
Windows or Lights in and upon the South Side of the aforesaid house against the
said piece of land, through which the light did enter into the said house, and
the said Henry did enjoy great and necessary Easements and Commodities by
reason of the open Air and light shining and entering into the said house, by
reason of the said Windows and Lights aforesaid: and the said Thomas Davis and
Nicholas Jones, maliciously plotting and intending to deprive the said Henry of
all the Easement and commodity of the aforesaid Windows and Lights, Et
Messuagium illud horrida tenebritate obscurare: the said day and year did
intend to build a house upon the said piece of land, and did there then erect
diverse pieces of Timber for the building of the said house, which house if it
had been built, the said Henry should have lost the said easements and
commodities, wherefore the said Henry and the other Defendant who was his
Servant by his commandment the said time wherein, etc. being in the said house,
did hinder the said Thomas Davis and Nicholas Jones from building the said
house, and the Defendants with a Staff did thrust down the said pieces of
Timber, wherewith the said Thomas Davis and Nicholas Jones would have built the
said house, and did thrust and put away the said Thomas Davis and Nicholas
Jones, least they should build the said new house. Prout eis been licuit, which
is the same Assault and Battery of the said Thomas Davis and Nicholas Jones,
whereof the Plaintiffs complain.

Upon which Plea the Plaintiffs demurred in Law.

And I conceive the Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

Davis and Jones did make the building as Servants to the Plaintiff, or by his
commandment: and 2. H. 6. 13. In a Trespass for cutting of Trees where the
Defendant pleaded, that the place where, etc. was the Freehold of I. S. who let
the same to the Defendant at Will, and adjudged no plea by the Court, unless
he had said by which he entered and cut the Trees, and so justified the Action,
3. H. 6. 54. In a Trespass for beating of his Tenant, the Defendant said he
was his Servant, and the Issue was whether he was his Servant or not? 31. H. 6.
12. B. 5. H. 7. 3. 20. H. 7. 4. and 20. H. 7. 5. A Master shall not have an
Action for beating of his Servant, unless he says, Per quod servitium amisit.





etc. and then they allege that the new house was built, for the word, (if) is
wanting, and 33. H. 6. 26. In an Action on the Case the Writ was good, Cum ipse
habeat quoddam Cheminum ratione tenurae, etc. the Defendant levavit murum per
quod querens Cheminum habere non potest, etc. It was holden by Prisoit that the
Writ was not good by reason of the Repugnancy.

And this Case was argued again by Barcley, for the Defendant, and by me for
the Plaintiff, Judgment.
Tr. 14. Jac. And all the Court held the Plea in Bar to be insufficient, for
which Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Rot. 256.
Hillar. 13. Jacob. Edward Smith for the King and himself, against Stephen
Bointon.
IN an Information because, the Defendant between the twentieth of June, 12.
Jac. and the fourth of July next after at Westminster in the County of
Middlesex, did buy, ingrosse, and obtain into his hands by buying and
contracting of diverse persons unknown, three hundred quarters of Barley, of the
value each quarter of twenty pounds, a hundred quarters of Beans of the value
of twenty pounds every quarter, Ad revendendum contra formam statuti, etc.
whereupon an Action accrued to the King and the Informer to have of the
Defendant four hundred pounds, viz. the value of the Barley and Beans, whereof
the Informer prayed a moiety, etc.

The Defendant as to the Ingrosment between the twenty second of May, 13. Jac.
and the said fourth of July next after, pleaded not guilty.

And as to the Ingrosment between the said twentieth day of July, 12. Jac. and
the said twenty second of May next after, The Defendant says, that before the
exhibiting of the said Information, sc. the twenty second of May, 13. Jac. one
Robert Beadow did exhibit an Information in the Exchequer for the King and
himself against the Defendant, because the Defendant between the first of June
last, and the day of the said Information, did ingrosse five hundred quarters
of Wheat, of price every quarter thirty pounds, five hundred quarters of
Barley, of price every quarter twenty pounds, five hundred quarters of Oats,
of price every quarter twenty shillings, and five hundred quarters of Beans and
Pease, of price every quarter twenty shillings, Ad revendendum contra formam
statuti, etc. And did aver that Stephen Bointon named in the first Information,
and Stephen Bointon named in the last Information are one person and not
diverse, and that the said three hundred quarters of Barley, and a hundred
quarters of Beans specified in the last Information, are parcel of the
aforesaid Barley and Beans in the first Information, Unde petit judicium, of the
said last Information, the said first Information depending determinable.

Upon which Plea Mr. Attorney demurred in Law.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the King and the Informer,
for two reasons.

The offense in the first Information is alleged to be between the June, 12.
Jac. and the two and twentieth of May, 13. Jac. so that for any thing appears
to the contrary, this may be done between the first of June, 12. Jac. and
twentieth of July next, which is not any part of the time contained in the last
Information, and then, that is no answer to the engrossing between the
twentieth of July, 12. Jac. and the two and twentieth of May next, unless he
had averred in fact that it was within the time contained in the last
information.

The twenty second of May, 13. Jac. is not answered to at all, and it may be
that the Ingrosment was on that day, for the plea of Not guilty goes only
between the two and twentieth of May, 13. Jac. and the fourth of July next, and
the last information is between the first of June, 12. Jac. and the twenty
second of May, so that the twenty second of May is utterly excluded, and that
is part of the time contained in the last information.

The first Information is for engrossing of Beans and Pease, being a mixed
Grain, and the last Information is for Beans only, and Beans by themselves
cannot be parcel of Beans and Pease, being a mixed Grain.

And after Judgment was given for the King and the Informer, Judgment.
and that principally for the second exception.

Michalm. 14. Jacob. Frosett against Walshe.
IN an Ejectment of one Message, ten acres of Land, six of Meadow, and thirty
of Pasture in Mansell Lacy upon a Lease made by Hen Hering the younger, the
twenty fourth of October, 13. Jac. to have from the twenty third of October
last past, unto the twenty second of October next, etc.

The Defendant pleaded not guilty.

And the Jury found, that the said Tenements were Copyhold, parcel of the
Manor of Mansell Lacy, devisable in Fee, and that there is a Custom within
the said Manor, that every customary Tenant of the said Manor of any
Inheritance may surrender the said Tenements out of Court into the hands of two
customary Tenants of the aforesaid Manor, to the use of any person or persons
and their Heirs, and that the said surrender by the Custom of the said Manor
ought to be presented at the next Court to be holden within the said Manor,
otherwise the surrender to be void. And they found that one Thomas Herring was
seized in Fee at the will of the Lord, according to the custom of the Manor,
of the said Tenements, and that he and Anne his Wife, the twenty second of
December. the 28. of Eliz. at Mansell aforesaid, did surrender the said Tenements
out of Court, into the hands of William Garrows and Hugh Ireland then being two
customary Tenants of the said Manor, to the use of Rowland Whittington, George
Whittington, and Robert Whittington, and their Heirs, and that the said
Rowland, George, and Robert, by virtue of the said surrender, did enter into
the said Tenements and held the same, and paid the Rents thereof that were due
to the Lord, and that the said Thomas Herring before the Ejectment died, and
that no Court was holden within the said Manor during his life, nor ever
since, and that the said Rowland Whittington afterward and before the
Ejectment died, and the said William Garnar and Hugh Ireton also died before
the Ejectment, and that the said Henry Herring is the Son and Heir of the said
Thomas Herring, and that the said Henry the twenty fourth of October, the 13.
Jac. did enter and made the Lease to the Plaintiff, who did enter and was
possessed, until the Defendant, as Servant of the said Rowland and Robert
Whittington, the twenty sixth of October the same year, did enter and oust the
Plaintiff.

And, if it seemed to the Court that the Defendant was guilty, the Jury found
for the Plaintiff, and if otherwise, for the Defendant.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

viz. That the surrender shall be good if it be presented at the next Court.



Herring who made the surrender is dead.

And as to that I conceive that the surrender is good, notwithstanding; for
every Copyholder of Inheritance has as good power to dispose of his land
according to the Custom as a Tenant in Fee-sipmple has by the Rules of the
Common Law: for although he that comes in by surrender, ought to be admitted by
the Lord, yet all the Estate passes from the Copyholder who surrenders, and
the Lord is but an instrument to make the admittance, and he gives not the
Estate; and therefore it follows, that the Estate is given by the Copyholder
himself. Cooks Rep. 4. Charles Pennifathers Case, That Copyholders derive not
their Estates from the Estate of the Lord, and therefore if a Disseisor or
Tenant at sufferance do make an admittance upon a surrender, or upon a descent,
this shall bind the Disseisee: and if Tenant for years of a Manor, or a
Tenant at will, does make a voluntary Grant according to the custom, this shall
bind him in the Reversion: and the same Law of a Feoffee upon Condition. Dyer
342. And so if there be Lord of a Manor wherein are Copyholds for life, and
the Lord marries, and grants Copies, the Wife shall not avoid this. 9 Rep.
Swans Case, and 4 Rep. Taverners Case: The Lord is but an instrument to make
admittance, and he that is admitted shall not be subject to the charge of the
Lord. And 4 Rep. Buntings Case, who surrendered out of Court, and dyed before
the surrender was presented; yet it was resolved and adjudged, that the
surrender was good, and that it may be presented after his death: but if it be
not presented according to the custom, then it becomes void. And so in Kite and
Queintons Case: If he to whom the surrender was made dies before the
admittance, yet his Heirs shall be admitted. And Periams Case: The Feoffment is
not good, unless it be presented in Court according to the custom: yet if the
Feoffor or Feoffee dye, and after it is presented, this is good, as in case of
a Deed delivered as an Escroul upon condition

The second is, that the two Tenants to whom the surrender was

But this will not avoid it: for nothing at all does pass from them, H. 7. 9.
If a Justice takes a note of a fine, although he dies before it be certified,
yet may it be certified by his Executors, and the Fine shall be good: and it is
also resolved in Buntings Case, that their death shall not hurt the surrender,
but upon good proof it may be surrendered after their deaths: as in 27 H. 6. 7.
If a Feme sole does make an Obligation, and delivers it as an Escroul to a
stranger to be delivered upon condition, and she marries or dies, and then the
Condition is performed, and the Bond delivered, it is a good Bond: and so it is
resolved in Brags Case, and Butlers Case also: and it is not like to a
Feoffment with warranty of Attorney to make Livery, or the Grant of a
Reversion, and the Feoffor dies, or takes husband before Livery or Attornment;
for there nothing passes until the Livery or Attornment, according to
Littleton: and the Feoffee, if he enter, is but Tenant at will, and it lies in
the power of the Grantor to countermand it, but so cannot he that makes a
surrender out of Court.

Note, Perimans Case was here objected, That if the Tenant would not present
the Feoffment, the Feoffee should have his Action on the Case; and the same
Law, if the Lord will not hold his Court within the time: but there is no such
matter in the Book. But in our Case, no Action can be against the two Tenants,
to whom the surrender was made, having done no wrong, for they can make no
presentment before a Court be held: neither can any Action be brought against
the Lord, for the not holding his Court, because he is not limited to a certain
time to hold his Court; neither does the custom refer the presentment to any
time, but only to the next Court: and admitting he may have an Action on the
Case, yet is not that any reason that he should lose his customary Inheritance,
and be contented only with a personal Action, wherein he shall only receive
damages; and it may be also, that the party is insufficient, or may dye,
whereby the Action will become fruitless. And it shall be a very great
inconvenience, if the not keeping of a Court by the Lord shall hinder the
surrender, when no time is limited when the surrender shall be, but only at
the next Court: for then those who argue against this surrender, ought to limit
another time then the custom does limit to make this presentment: and what time
will he limit? peradventure he that made the surrender will say, that the next
Court ought to be holden the next day, or within a month; but this lies not in
his power: for when the Custom, which is the very being and life of a
Copyholder, has limited the next Court, no man can shorten that time, and the
length of time cannot be material, and no time is material until the time be
past that is limited by the Custom. And although it has been said, that
Customs shall be taken strictly, yet not so strictly, but they shall have a
reasonable time of exposition according to the reason of the Common Law: as in
the 9 Rep. Sir Richard Lerchfords Case, where the custom was, that if the Heir
of the Copyholder did not come to any of the three Courts upon proclamation, to
claim his Copy, it should be forfeit: And Thomas Copley did dye the 27 of
Elizabeth, William his son being then beyond the Seas, and the three Courts
were holden, and the proclamations made, and he came not into England until the
first of King James. But in our case, we are within the Custom: and although
the surrender here is not perfect, until the presentment made in Court; yet the
Plaintiff, being Heir to him who made the surrender, is bound as his Ancestor
was; for he cannot countermand or avoid the surrender, and therefore his entry
was illegal. And therefore Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff.

And upon the Argument of this Case, Michaelm. 14 Jacob. Crook, Doderidge, and
Haughton, did agree, that the Estate did remain in him who made the surrender,
until he to whose use the surrender was made be admitted by the Lord: and this
they agreed the Lord might do out of Court: and Haughton said, that the
acceptance of the Rent by the Lord, that was found by the Jury, does amount to
an admittance: but the other on the contrary.

Judgment.
Wherefore Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Rot. 832.
Trinit. 12 Jacob. John Gouge Plaintiff, Nicholas Hayward, and Jane his wife
Defendants.
IN an Action of Trespass, wherein the Plaintiff declared, that Stephen, Bishop
of Winchester, the 13 of March, 24 H. 8. did demise to Thomas Windham two
houses, one now in the tenure of the Plaintiff, and the other in the tenure of
the Defendant, in the parish of St. Saviors in Southwark, Habendum from
Michaelmas last p^st, for the term of 99 years. And that the 16 of March, the
24 H. 8. the Prior and Chapter of the Cathedral Church of St. Swithin in
Winchester, in the life of the Bishop, did confirm the said Lease, that the 10
of May, 10 Eliz. Thomas Windley assigned over to Francis Westby, who assigned
to William Fryth, who assigned to John Butler, who the last of September, the
first of King James, by his Will did Devise to Ellinor his Wife, all his Lands
and Tenements in the said Parish, and all Rents arising out of the premises to
come, from the day of the date of the said Will, for 28 years (if she shall so
long live unmarryed) and after devised it to Thomas Butler his Nephew, to have
to him and his Children, from the day of the death of the said Ellinor during
the whole term. And further devised, that in case his Wife Ellinor should
marry, then during the residue of the said 28 years, not expired at the time of
her marriage, she should have the Message then in his tenure, being his
Mansion House (which house now is in the tenure of the Plaintiff, and an
Annuity of 20 l. out of all his other Lands, Tenements, and Houses of the
Devisor in the said Parish, with a clause of distress, and to detain the same
until the said Annuity were paid to the said Ellinor: and if Ellinor did marry,
he did devise all his said Lands (except the said Mansion House) to the said
Thomas Butler and his Children, and made the said Ellinor his Executrix, and
dyed possessed. And the said Ellinor entered, claiming the Devise, and the 16
of January 1606. married the Plaintiff: and the 30 of April 1606. the Plaintiff
and his Wife did agree to have the said Mansion House, and the said Annuity,
and Thomas Butler by their assent did enter into the residue.

And the 12 Jan. 1606. Elianor dyed.

And at our Lady Day, 12 Jacob. 10 l. of the said Annuity was behind:
wherefore the Plaintiff, the 26 of May 12 Jacob. did enter and take certain
goods for the said 10 l. and would have detained them in the name of a
Distress, and the Defendants rescued them ad damnum 40 l.

The Defendants pleaded Not guilty.

The Jury found the Lease made by the Bishop, and the confirmation with the
several Assignments, and the Devise as in the Declaration is set forth (saving
the Devise to the said Thomas Butler, from the day of the death of the said
Ellinor) which clause was not found: and they found also, that John Butler, the
3 November. 3 Jacob. dyed, and that Ellinor did enter, claiming by the Devise,
and that she married the Plaintiff: and also their agreement to have the
Mansion House and Rent as a Legacy, and the entry of Thomas Butler in the
residue by the assent of the Executor, and the death of Ellinor, and that the
10 l. was behind, and that the Plaintiff took the goods, and would have
detained them as a Distress, and that the Defendants rescued them. And if the
Defendants were guilty, they found for the Plaintiff, if not, they found for
the Defendant, etc.

And I conceive Judgment ought to be given for the Defendants.

For first, I conceive that the Wife of John Butler had not any Rent

If she had any Rent, yet it is determined by her death.

And I conceive the Case to be thus:

Lessee for years of two houses, does devise them to his Wife for 28 years
(which is all the term) if she live so long unmarryed, and after her death to
Thomas Butler: and if the woman marries, that she shall have one Message for
the residue of the term, and 20 l. Rent ex omnibus aliis terris suis, with a
clause of Distress; and then Thomas Butler shall have the other Message. The
Devisor makes his Wife Executrix, and dies; and the Wife enters, claiming by
the Devise, and then marries the Plaintiff, and then they agree to have the
house that was devised to her after her marriage, with the Rent; and Thomas
Butler by their assent does enter into the residue: the Wife dies, and the
Plaintiff distrains for Rent behind after her death, and the Defendants rescue
the Distress, whereupon the Plaintiff brings his Action.

And as to the first, I conceive that the Wife can have no Rent by this Devise,
and that for three Reasons.

I. S. and makes him his Executor, and dies, I. S. shall have no Rent, for in
as much as he has the term as Executor, he shall have no Rent as Legated, for
it is extinct in the term; and although he has one in his own right, and the
other as Executor, yet cannot he have both together. 4 Ed. 6. B. Surrend. 52.
If one has a term as Executor, and purchase the Reversion, the Lease is
extinct. And although the term in our case is devised to a stranger, yet by the
Law it does first vest in the Executor, and the Devisee cannot have it without
the delivery or consent of the Executor. And if a Devisee does enter into a
term, or takes goods without the delivery of the Executor, the Executor may
have an Action of Trespass against him. 20 Ed. 49. 2 H. 6. 16. 11 H. 4. 84. 37
H. 6. 30. although in the 27 of Henry the 6. 8. a. diversity is taken between a
thing certain and uncertain; for it is there said, that if the thing devised be
certain, and a stranger takes it, the Executor shall have an Action of
Trespass: but in old Not. Bre. 87. there is no diversity.

So that it is clear, that the term first vesteth in the Executor, and so the
Rent which the Executor had is extinguished by unity of possession.



Cook. 6 Rep. Sanders Case: where if an Executor commits waste before he assent
to the Legacy, an Action of waste lies against him, which proves, that the
Executor has the term. And although the Devisee, after his assent, is in by
relation by the Devisor, yet this will not aid the Rent, no more then if a Son
having Rent out of his Fathers Land, and the Father dies, and the Son endows
his Wife, this shall not revive the Rent which was extinct before, yet is the
Wife in, as of the Estate of her Husband, and the Estate and possession of the
Son is utterly defeated.

But admit that the Rent be not extinct, yet here is no agreement to have the
Rent: for here are two Devises; 1. Of the Land to the Wife, if she continue
unmarryed, the remainder to Thomas Butler: and the other of twenty pounds Rent
to commence after her marriage, wherefore the assent of the Executrix to the
Devise of the Land, is no execution of the Devise of the Rent, Comment. 5. 21.
B. Welden and Elkingtons Case; If a Termor devises a Rent or a Common t^ ^ne,
and the Term to another, and dies, and the Executor pays the Rent, or suffers
the Devisee of the Common to put in his Cattle, this is no assent as to the
Term, for the Term is one thing, and the profit out of it is another thing: but
there in the principal Case the assent of the Executor of the Devise to occupy
the Land, was a sufficient assent to the Remainder of the Term, because the
occupation of the Land and the Land it self is all one: and Comment. 541. the
same agreed, and that the first assent does go to all. And it is no assent to
the Term, neither can it be taken by Implication to be any assent to the Devise
of the Rent; for every Act that does enure to another Act by Implication, ought
to be such as of necessity ought to enure to the other Act which cannot be
taken to be otherwise, and therefore 2 R. 2. Attornment the 8th. A Woman grants
a Reversion to which a Rent was incident, and afterward marries the Grantee,
to whom the Tenant pays the Rent, this is no Attornment, for it is indifferent
whether he pays the Rent to him as Grantee, or in right of his Wife, Dyer 302.
Vivors Case, que recover. Rents of several Tenants, as Bailey, and then they be
granted to him, and after the Grant they be paid to him, this is no Attornment,
for they may be paid to him as he is Baily, as well as he is Grantee. But if
the Lessee do surrender to him in the Reversion, then it is a good Attornment,
for a Surrender cannot be to any but to him that has the Reversion. And so in
our Case it is clear, that the assent to the Legacy of the Land it self, is not
any express assent to the Rent, nor any employed assent, for there may be an
assent to the one and not to the other, and where the Wife had assented to the
Devise of the Term, she has utterly dismissed her self of the Term as Executor,
notwithstanding the assent to the Rent, but having once assented to the Devise
of the Term, she has no more to do with it, and therefore in such Case the
Legatee of the Rent ought to sue in the Court Christian for his remedy against
the Executor in the same manner, as if a Term were devised to one, and the
Executor will not assent to it, but sells the Term to another. And in this case
if the Testator were indebted after this assent to the Devisee of the Term, the
Term cannot be put in execution for this Debt, but the assent of the Wife is in
her a Devastavit, 21 Ed. 4. 21. 37 H. 6. 30 2 H 6. 16.

Also here is no Rent devised out of this house, for the Devise is, Ex omnibus
aliis terris suis, which word (all) excludes all the Lands whereof any mention
was made before.

And Coke Rep 1. Mildmayes Case: There Sir H.S. did covenant for a Ioynture for
his life, and for the advancement of his Issue Male if he had any, and for
advancement of his three Daughters, and for continuance of his Land in his
blood, to be seized to the use of himself for life, and then of part to the use
of his Wife for her life, with other remainders to his Issues Males and
Females; Proviso, that it should be lawful for him to limit any part to any
person for life or years, for payment of Debts or Legacies, preferment of his
Servants, or other reasonable considerations. And then he did limit the part of
one of his Daughters to another for the term of a thousand years, and this was
adjudged a void limitation, and one principal reason was, because that the
word (other) cannot comprehend any consideration mentioned in the Indenture
before the Proviso, and the advancement of his Daughter was mentioned before.



(other considerations) shall be other then what are mentioned in the said
Proviso, but it was resolved that (other) shall exclude all considerations
mentioned before the said Indenture, and so he excludes in this case all
mention before in this Writ.

And this Case was argued at the Bench, Pasch. 14. Jac. And all the Justices
did agree that all the exceptions taken by the Counsel of the Defendant, as
well to the matter as to the pleading to be of no force, saving the principal
point, sc. If the Rent shall be determined by the death of the Wife or not, and
herein the Court was divided, viz. Haughton and Crook held that it was
determined, but Coke and Doderidge on the contrary. Et sic pendet, etc.

Hillar. 12. Iac. John Harry and Lewis Howell, against Grace Harry.
IN a Writ of Error brought to reverse a Judgment given in a Writ of Dower
brought by the said Grace, of the endowment of Richard Harry her Husband: And
the Error assigned was, because the demand amongst other things was, De tertia
part de uno Horreo and uno pomario, and the Tenants pleaded, Ne unques
accouple in legal matrimony, which was certified against them, whereupon
Judgment was given against them; whereupon the Demandant did surmise that her
husband died seized, and so prayed her Dower with damages, Et petit breve tam
de habere facias seisinam quam de inquirendo de damnis, and the Writ of Error
was purchased before the return of the said Writ, or any Judgment given
thereupon.

And I conceive that it is Error, for the Demand ought to be as certain and
formal as a Writ, for the Writ of Dower being general, De libero tenemento,
the Demand ought to make it certain, and therefore it is of the same nature as
the Writ is, 8. Ass. 29. 13. Ass. 2. 13. Ed. 3. br. 265. A Chapel or an
Hospital shall not be named but by the name of a Message; and 8 H. 6. 3.
Praecipe quod reddat does not lie of a Cottage, and Cokes 11. Rep. Serbes Case,
in an Ejectione firmae of a Close called Dumote Close, containing three acres,
adjudged insufficient, for the name and quantity will not serve without the
quality, and certainty ought to be comprised in the Court, because the
possession is to be recovered.

And it was adjudged that the Error would not lie.

Loyde against Bethell.
HUmphrey Loyde brought a Writ of Error in the Kings Bench against Bechell and
others to reverse a Recovery had at Cardiff in the County of Flynt, by
Nicholas, John, ap Robert Loyde, to whom the Defendants are Heirs, against
John ap De ap Robert Loyde, for the now Plaintiff of Land in the County of
Flynt, which Assise did begin in the time of Queen Mary, and did continue
until the Reign of Queen Elizabeth the third year; and Judgment was given
therein, whereupon the Tenant to the Assise brought a Writ of Error the 5.
Eliz. in Easter Term, which did abate by reason of his death, and after in the
time of King James the new Plaintiff brought a Writ of Error in Recordo quod
coram nobis refidet, which did also abate by reason of variety between the
Record and the second Writ of Error, whereupon Mich. 13. Jac. the said
Plaintiff did purchase this new Writ of Error.

And the Defendants did plead in abatement of the said Writ of Error, that the
now Plaintiff before the purchasing of the said last Writ of Error, and since
the purchasing of the second Writ of Error, viz. the 19th. of September, the
10. Jacob. did enter into the said Land, and the same day and year at the place
aforesaid did devise the said Tenements to one Thomas Alport. Habendum from the
Feast of S. John Baptist then last past for four years next ensuing, by virtue
of which Demise the said Thomas Alport into the said Tenements did enter, and
was and yet is possessed.

Upon which Plea the Plaintiff demurred, and the Defendants joined.

And I conceive that the Plea is insufficient.

Yet I do agree that if he who has cause to have a Writ of Error to reverse a
Judgment of Land, does make a good Lease for years, he has suspended his Writ
of Error for the Term; as he does quite extinguish it by his Feoffment.

But here it appears that there is no Lease made, for it is pleaded only that
the Plaintiff did enter into the Land, and it appears by the recovery that his
entry was taken away by the Judgment in the Assise, whereby he gains nothing by
his Entry but the Freehold and possession, does remain always to the
Defendants being Heirs to the Recovery, as appears by Litt. Warrant. 158. If
one be seized of Land, and another who has no right does enter into the Land
and continues possession, yet does he gain nothing thereby, but the possession
does always continue in him that has right, and so in the 3. Ed. 4. and 2.
Woolocks Case, and in the Comment. 233. Barkleys Case: Execution is taken to be
no plea in Bar to an Ejectment, because it was showed that the Lord Barkley did
enter as in his Remainder, and was seized in Fee until the Lessor of the
Plaintiff did eject him, and did demise to the Plaintiff, which is not good,
because it is not alleged that he disseised the Lord Barkley, for otherwise he
had no Estate to make the Lease, and the Entry does not imply any disseisin, or
does gain any possession, and 11 Edw. 4. 9. B. 12 H. 6. 43. B.

And the Court did agree that the plea was insufficient.

But then it was moved that the Writ of Error was naught, for the Writ was,
that Quidem Recordum and processus Dom. Regina Elizabeth. nuper Regina Angliae
(causa erroris interven.) venire sec. and it appears by the Record, that
although the Recovery was removed by Writ of Error the 5. Eliz. at the Suit of
the Father of the Plaintiff, yet the Plaintiff did purchase a new Writ of
Error, Mich. 9 Jacob. and had a Scire facias against the Heirs of the Recover
or who appeared, Mich. 10. Jacob. and also the Writs of Habeas Corpus, tales
and Distringas, wherefore the Writ is naught, for all the Recovery was not in
the time of the Queen, but part in her time, and part in the Kings time.

But I conceive that it is good enough, for first the Recovery and Process is
satisfied by transmitting the body of the Recovery, as it is proved by the
usual form of all Writs of Error, which is to certify the Record and
Process, and yet they do certify only the Declaration and the Pleas omitting
the Writs.

Also the Record shall be intended the principal Record, and not the Writ and
Process, Coke Rep. 11. Metcalfes Case, the words of the Writ of Error, Si
judicium inde redditum sit, this shall be taken to be the principal Judgment,
39 Ed. 5. 1. In a Scire facias brought by John Duke of Lancaster, and Blanch
his Wife. to execute a Fine levied to them in the time of Ed. 2. and the Writ
did recite the Fine to be levied, Tenendum de nobis, etc. but it was adjudged
good by Judgment of Parliament, and 2 R. 3. 4. Bough brought an Action of Debt
against Collins, who pleaded a foreign Attachment in L. by custom, and did
mistake the Custom, and it was traversed that there was no such Custom, and
the major certified it so, and all this was in the time of King Edw. the first,
and it was adjourned over to another Term, before which time the King died and
resumed in the time of King Richard the third, and Judgment given, whereupon
Collins did bring a Writ of Error, which was, Rex Dei gratia, etc. quia in
Recordo and processu and in redditione Judicii loquela quae fuit coram nobis
per breve nuper inter B. etc. error, etc. And the question was, if it was good.
And some said that there was no Warrant for such a Writ, and some said, that
the Writ ought to have been special, reciting how, etc. But the Masters of the
Office said, that in a Writ of Error before the Justices of the Bench, there is
but a general form in the Writ.

And after it was adjudged that the Writ of Error was good.

John Vandlore Plaintiff, Cornelius Dribble Defendant, Trinit. 14 Jacob. Rot.
1062.
IN an Action of Debt on a Bond of two hundred pounds made the eleventh of
Febr. the 12th. of King James, upon condition that the Defendant shall perform
the agreement of William Holliday, Thomas Moulson, Robert de la Bar, and
Humphrey Burlemacke, Arbitrators elected, etc. to arbitrate of and for all
Actions, Suits, Accounts, and Demands, had, moving, or depending in variance
between the parties before the date of the said Obligation, so that the
agreement of the premises be made and put into writing before the twentieth of
March next.

The Defendant pleaded that there was no such Arbitrament.

The Plaintiff replied that the eighteenth of March, 12 Jacob. they did make an
Arbitrament, etc. of and concerning the Premises, that the Defendant should
pay the Plaintiff fifty pounds, viz. twenty pounds at April next and twenty
five pounds at (...) and the twentieth of July next twenty five pounds in full
satisfaction and discharge of all such moneys as the Plaintiff did claim or
demand of the Defendant, by reason of the administration of the Goods, etc. of
John Stadsell, or by any other means whatsoever. And that each of the parties
upon payment of the said fifty pounds, shall make general Acquittances one to
the other of all Actions, Debts, and Demands, unto the day of the making of the
said Acquittances: And alleged breach to be made in the payment of the said
twenty five pounds the twentieth of April.

And whereupon the Defendant demurred in Law.

And I conceive that the Action will not lie: for the Arbitrament is bond,
because the Arbitrators have exceeded their authority: First, because they have
no power to discharge any action or duty accrued to any of the parties as
Administrators: Secondly, because that by the Release, the Obligation it self
to stand to the Arbitrament is discharged Cook. 10 Rep. 131. where Moor brought
an Action against Bedell upon a promise to stand to the Arbitrament of A. and
B. concerning all matters then in difference between them, and that was the
last day of November. 24 Elizab. And the 10 of December. the 24 of Eliz. they did
agree that Moor should pay to Bedell certain moneys, and that Bedell should
release all demands until the 15 of June 24 Eliz. and the Defendant, in
consideration of this submission, did assume, that he would not sue any
Execution upon a Judgment. And the Plaintiff there assigned two Breaches; one,
that he did not Release; the other, that he sued Execution. And this was found
for the Plaintiff upon a non assumpsit, and entire damages given; and then
after it was reverst by Error, because that the agreement as to the Release was
void; and therefore the damages being entire, the Judgment was erroneous.

And Michaelm. 11 Jacob. Rot. 155. Stairs against Wild, wherein an Action of
Debt upon an Obligation to perform an award of and concerning all matters, etc.
And they made an Award, that one should pay to the other 3 l. and that each
should release all Actions and Demands, and the breach was assigned in not
paying the 3 l. adjudged to be a void Arbitrament in all, because it was to
release all Actions at the time of the Release, which is not within the
submission. And Pasch. 42 Eliz. Rot. 211. Knap against M^w, where the condition
was to perform an Award of certain things, etc. who did award that one should
pay 20 l. to the other, and that each should release all Actions and Demands;
and the breach was assigned in non-payment of the money; and it was adjudged
that the Award was void.

And at last all the Court agreed, that the Award was good, as to all that was
submitted to, and void for the others, and that the breach being assigned in a
matter submitted to, does give a sufficient cause of Action to the Plaintiff.
Wherefore it was adjudged that the Plaintiff should recover, etc.

Hillar. 13 Jacob. Smith against Whitbrook.
IN an Action on the Case for words, viz. for saying to the Plaintiff the 4
September. 12 Jacob. Thou (meaning the Plaintiff) art a Traitor, and an
Arch-traytor, and I (meaning the Defendant) will hang thee, or be hanged for
thee: and after the 15 September. 12 Jac. the Defendant did procure the Plaintiff
to be brought before Sir Robert Cotton, Knight, and Robert Castle, Esquire; two
Justices of Peace of the said County for Oyer and Terminer, etc. and did
complain to the said Justices, that the Plaintiff had said and published diverse
Traytorous words of the King, by reason whereof the Plaintiff was committed to
the Goal of the said County by the said Justices, and there was imprisoned, and
did so remain until the next Sessions of Peace of the said County, holden the 4
of October. 12 Jacob. before Robert Bell, Knight, Robert Pain, Knight, and other
Justices, etc. and the Plaintiff was compelled to find Sureties for his
appearance against the next Sessions, to answer to such things as should be
objected against him on the behalf of the King, and in the mean time to be of
good behavior, etc. At which next Sessions, holden the 10 Janu. 12 Jac. before
the said Justices, and other Justices, the Plaintiff did appear; upon which,
the Defendant the same day and year, in the public Sessions, did say of the
Plaintiff, I (meaning the Defendant) do accuse Robert Smith, meanining the
Plaintiff, absolutely whereupon the Plaintiff was committed to the Gaol by the
said Justices, and there remained in prison for the space of a month: whereas
the Plaintiff did never speak and Traytorous words against the King, nor had
committed any Treason against the King; and this he laid to his damage of 1000
l.

The Defendant pleaded, that before the time wherein the said words are
supposed to be spoken, viz. the third of September. the 12 Jacob. the Plaintiff
having speech of the King, did speak of him these Traytorous words; The King
(meaning our Lord the King) is a scupry King: and so justified the several
words, and also the procurement of the Plaintiff to be brought before the said
Justices.

The Plaintiff by Protestation says, that he did not speak the said words of
the King, and for plea did demur in Law, and the Defendant joined.

Judicium.
And after Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, without reading the Record, or
having any argument, because that the justification was insufficient; and the
Record was not read, because it imported Scandal to the King.

Cooper against Smith.
IN an Action on the Case for words, scil. Thou and Waterman did kill thy
Masters Cook ( meaning one Yarnton late Servant of Francis Dingley, Esquire;) and
thou wast never tried for it, and I will bring thee to thy Trial for it. The
Defendant pleaded Nor guilty, and it was found for the Plaintiff; and it was
moved in Arrest of Judgment, that it was not averred that the Plaintiff had a
Master, and that Francis Dingley was his Master; but resolved that it need not
be ave^^^d: for if he had no Master, yet it is a Scandal: as if one should say.
Thou have stolen the Horse of I. S. there is no need to aver that I. S. had a
Horse; and if everment be necessary, it is averred here, when he said, Thy
Masters Cook: and there it is averred, that the Cook was servant to Francis
Dingley: and it follows also, that Francis Dingley was Master to the Plaintiff.
Judgment.
Wherefore Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Trinit. 14 Jacob. Weal against Wells.
IN an Action on the Case, for that the Defendant the 22 of November. the 13 of
King James, crimen Felony querenti false and malitiose imposuit: and did cause
him to be arrested and taken for the Felonious taking and stealing of five
Heifers of the Defendant, and caused him to be brought before Sir Thomas
Bennet, one of the Justices of Peace, etc. and out of malice also, at the
Sessions of Peace at the Guild Hall, London, before the Major and other the
Justices of Peace, etc. did cause him to be indicted maliciously and falsely for
the Felony of stealing of five Steers the 23 October. 13 Jacob. and did cause him
to be detained in the Gaol of Newgate, until he was legally acquitted at the
Gaol delivery the first of December the 13 Jacob. to his damage, etc. 100 l.
and did aver the matter in the indictment to be false.

The Defendant said, that the 18 November. 13 Jacob. he was possessed of five
Steers, and that certain Malefactors unknown to him did steal them from him at
Broughton in the County of Bucks: and that the 22 of November. 13 Jacob. the
Defendant pursued them to London, and there did search for the Steers, and
found them in the possession of the Plaintiff, and did require the Plaintiff to
show them unto him, and how they came into his possession: and because that the
Plaintiff did deny to deliver them unto him, and did refuse to permit him to
see them, and to show how he came by them, and that the Plaintiff gave him such
uncertain answers, that the Defendant did suspect the Plaintiff had committed
the Felony: and the Defendant, for better examination of the promises, and
restitution of the said Cattle, did inform the said Sir Thomas Bennet of the
premises, and did procure a Warrant from him to bring the Plaintiff before him
to be examined concerning the said Cattle: whereupon the Plaintiff was brought
before him, and examined; and because he could not make it appear how he came
by them, and for that he gave very uncertain answers, and for that the said Sir
Thomas did suspect him, he did therefore bind him in a Recognizance of 50 l.
to appear at the next Goal delivery, and did bind the Defendant in a
Recognizance of 20 l. to prosecute, whereupon the 29 November. 13 Jacob. the
Defendant did exhibit a Bill of Indictment, and did give evidence to the Jury
that the Cattle were stolen from him, and that he found them in the Plaintiffs
possession, and that he denied the Defendant the view of them, or to show how
they came to his hands: whereupon the Jury found the Bill, and thereupon the
Plaintiff did appear at the next Jail-delivery the first October. 13 Jacob. and
was there imprisoned until he was legally acquitted; which is the same
imprisonment for Felony, and procurement to be indicted, and detainment in
prison, whereof the Plaintiff complains.

The Plaintiff confessed the Felony, Replication.
but says that the 23 October. 13 Jacob. Thomas Burley was possessed of the said
five Steers at Barnet in the County of Hertford, and did then and there sell
the said Cattle in open Market to the Plaintiff for 17 l. being a Butcher; and
that the said sale was entered in the Toll-book, and the Toll paid: wherefore
the Plaintiff was possessed of them, and did drive them to his house in London
the 24 October. 13 Jacob. and that the 21 November. 13 Jac. he killed four of the
said Cattle: and then the said 22 of November the Defendant came to his house
to search for the said Cattle, and the Plaintiff did acknowledge to him that he
had the said Cattle, and that he had killed four of them, and that he had
bought them as aforesaid, and did then also show unto him the Steer that was
then living, and that the Defendant had sufficient notice that the Plaintiff
had bought the Cattle in the Market; and that although the Defendant did know
that the Plaintiff had bought them, and was not guilty of the Felony, yet the
Defendant out of malice, and against his knowledge, did charge the Plaintiff
with Felony, etc. as he has declared, absque hoc, that the Plaintiff did
refuse to permit the Defendant habere visum of the said five Steers, or to show
how he came by them.

Whereupon the Defendant demurred in Law, Demur.
and showed that the matter of Inducement to the Travers was insufficient, and
that the Travers was insufficient, and the matter not traversable.

And I conceive that the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment.

For in the 7 Ed. 4.20. In a false Imprisonment: The Defendant said, that
before the imprisonment one B was killed by certain persons, in whose company
the Plaintiff was; and the report of the County was, that the Plaintiff was
party to the Felony; whereupon he arrested the Plaintiff for suspicion, and did
commit him to the Sheriff. And Bryan did Travers the Indictment without that,
that the Plaintiff was in their company, and without that, that the report was
so, etc. And Nidkam said there, that issue could not be taken upon the report,
but upon the matter in fact. For if men say in the Country, that I am a Thief,
that is no cause to arrest me, but matter in fact ought to be showed which is
Traversable: whereupon issue was taken upon the first matter only; and in the
ninth of Ed. 4. it is holden that a man ought to show some matter in fact to
prove that the Plaintiff is suspected. And 11 Ed. 4. 46. in a false
Imprisonment; The Defendant who justifies upon a false imprisonment for Felony,
ought to show some matter in fact to induce his suspicion, or that his goods
were in his possession, of which the Country may take notice. And in the 17 Ed.
4. 5. in a false imprisonment, the Defendant justified, because that A. and B.
did rob another, and did go to the house of the Plaintiff; whereupon the
Constable did suspect him, and did require the Defendant to assist him in
arresting him, etc. and holden there, that they ought to surmise some cause of
suspicion, or otherwise the plea was not good. 7 H. 35. Suspicion cannot be
tried, because it is but the imagination of a man, which lies in his own
conceit. 5 H. 7. 4. In a false Imprisonment, the Defendant justified, because
that A. was poisoned, and the common voice and fame was that it was done by the
Plaintiff, whereupon he was taken; and there it was argued, if this were
sufficient cause; some said that he ought to show some special cause, but it
was agreed in conclusion that it was: but all agreeo, that suspicion only is
not enough, without alleging cause of suspicion: and says, 2 H. 7. 16. and 7
Elizab. Dyer 236. In an action on the Case for calling one Thief, the Defendant
justified for common voice and fame, and adjudged insufficient; but this with
suspicion had been sufficient cause to arrest one, and carry him to the Goal.
And Michaelm. 38 and 39 Elizab. In the Common Pleas, in an Action on the Case
by Damport against Symson, for giving a false testimony, adjudged that the
intent of the swearers cannot be put in issue or tried. 2 H. 4. 12. B. 46 Ed.
3. 4.

2 H. 7. 3. In a Trespass, the Defendant justified that he was robbed in the
County of B. and did suspect the Plaintiff in the County of Stafford: The
Plaintiff pleaded, De son tort demesne, etc. and it was there agreed, that all
the case was in issue. And Tow said, that it should be tried by both Counties,
if they could join; but he doubted if they could join: but in the 16 of H. 7.
3. B. this case is reported to be adjudged, that if the Counties could not
join, it was no plea, because it ought to be tried by both: And so de son tort
demesne shall be full of multiplicity, and therefore it is no plea, as in
Crogates Case.

Also the Bar is not good, because the Defendant says, he was possessed of five
Steers, and does not say, of the aforesaid. 9 H. 6. 16. In a Quare Impedit
brought by the King of a Chantery in the Chapel of St. Thomas in D. and made
title to it, and the Defendant pleaded that there was a Chantery in the said
Chapel, and made title to it, and traversed the title of the King, and
adjudged to be no plea, because he did not answer to the Chantry whereof the
King had declared. And Pasch. 14 Elizab. Downing against Hayward: In a false
imprisonment in Suffolk, the Defendant did justify as servant to A. to whom a
Commission of Rebellion of Chancery was directed, and the Plaintiff pleaded De
son tort Demesne, and found for the Plaintiff, and reversed again by Error in
the Star Chamber, because that when the matter of justification, is upon matter
of Record and matter in fact, or of matters done in two Counties that cannot
join, the Issue ought to be upon one only.

And Pasch. 15 Jac. Judgment was given against the Plaintiff by the opinion of
Mountague, Crook, and Doderidge, because that all that was done after Sir
Thomas Buriets Warrant was illegal, but they agreed that the Plaintiff might
have an Action for the charging of Felony, and for all that was done before the
said Warrant. But Haughton disagreed, who conceived that Judgment should be
given for the Plaintiff, because the Plea of the Defendant was no justification
for what was done before the warrant: but at last Judgment was given for the
Defendant. Judgment.


Mills against Marshall.
IN a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given for the now Defend^nt against
the Plaintiff in the Common Pleas, upon an Action of Debt on a Bond of twenty
pounds, Hill. 11 Jac. Ror. 1109. And the Bond was made the twentieth of Jan. in
the sixth year of King James, and it was on Condition to stand to the Award of
George Cockrell, Edward Sureton, and William Wasse, to arbitrate of and
concerning all matters then depending between them, so that the said Award be
made and delivered to the parties, under the hands and Seals of the said
Arbitrators before the twenty ninth of January next. The Defendant pleaded that
the Arbitrators the twenty fourth of January, in the sixth year of King James,
did make their Award of the Premises by Indenture under their hands and Seals.
1. That all Controversies and Suits between them unto the date of the written
Arbitrament should cease, and that the Plaintiff should have liberty to drive
his Cattle to the River E^ke, etc. and that the Plaintiff and Defendant should
work and maintain at all times from thence forward, a sufficient Hedge by the
top of the Scar, Sicut terrae praedicti Querentis and Defendentis extendunt
(Anglice) as their own Ground goes, for security of the Cattle and Sheep,
which said Hill does extend to the Land of Henry Facherly, unto the Pale which
then was between the Land of the Defendant, and if any Trees or Woods growing
in or near the Woods of either party, shall fall in controversy at any time,
that it shall be arbitrated by the said Arbitrators, three or two of them,
which Arbitrament was delivered to the parties the same day, and the Defendant
pleaded that he had performed etc. The Plaintiff replied, that the Defendant
did not make a sufficient Hedge upon the top of the Scarr, Prout terra sua
extendit, the Defendant said that before the Writ purchased, viz. the fourth of
April, 12 Jacob. at Eshdayle in the County aforesaid, he did make a sufficient
Hedge upon the top of the Hill aforesaid, prout terra sua extendit, and so they
were at Issue, and found for the Plaintiff, and Judgment given, and the
Defendant brought this Writ of Error.

And I conceive Judgment ought to be affirmed.

Coke 5 Rep. Slingsbles Case. If one let white Acro to I.S. and B. Acre to I.
D. and covenant with them, Et quemlibet eorum, that he is Owner, each of them
may have an Action, and Coke 5. Rep. Hurgots Case, Submission to an Award, so
as it be delivered to either of the parties, ought to be delivered to each of
them, 39 H. 6. 7.

And all the Court did agree that each of them ought to enclose against his own
Land only, and so the breach was well assigned, wherefore the Judgment was well
assigned: wherefore Judgment was affirmed.

Hilar. 13 Jac. Crawley against Marrow.
IN an Ejectment upon a Lease by Robert Faldoc, dated the one and thirtieth day
of August, the thirteenth year of King James, of two Houses, two Orchards,
forty acres of Land, ten of Meadow, and fifty of Pasture, in Bridgenorth,
Habendum from the tenth day of the said month for three years, whereupon the
Plaintiff was possessed until the Defendant the eighth of October in the same
year did enter and eject him, ad damnum, etc.

Upon not guilty pleaded.

The Jury found the Defendant not guilty, for all except one House and five
acres of Land, and found further, that before the said time, the twentieth day
of December. 11 Eliz. Rowland Hayward Knight, was seized in Fee of the said one
house and five acres of Land, and ten of Meadow, and being so seized thereof,
did enfeoff John Day and Robert Marshall in Fee, to the use of John Whitbrooke
and Margaret his Wife in Tail, the remainder to the right Heirs of John
Whitbrooke, and that the last of January, 12 Eliz. John Whitbrooke did enter
into a Recognizance of a thousand pounds in the Chancery to Richard Faldoe,
which money was not paid to Richard in his life time.

That John Whitbrooke and Margaret had issue John Whitbrooke Knight, and after
and before the fourteenth of January, 8. Jacob. died, and before the said day
Richard Faldoe made his Will, and did make Amphillis his Wife, his Executor and
died, and Amphillis did make Robert Faldoe Esquire, and Thomas Shepherd
Knight, her Executors and died, who undertook the Executorship, 14. Jan. 8.
Jac. Robert Shepeard and Faldoe had a Scire facias to the Sheriff of Middlesex,
to have execution of the Recognizance, whereupon John Whitbrook was returned
dead, whereupon they had a Scire facias against the Heir and the Tertenant,
whereupon John Whitbrook was returned Heir and Ter-tenant, who pleaded that he
had no Land that was the Conusors at the time of the Recognizance, or ever
since by hereditary descent from the Conuzor in Fee, and said that he ought not
to be charged as Ter-tenant, because he has no Freehold that was the Conusors.

The Plaintiff replied, that the said John Whitbrook had diverse lands by
descent from the said Conuzor, viz. A house called the Hospital, thirty seven
Tenements or Messuages, five Cottages, one Tossed, one Dove-house, thirty nine
Gardens, six Barns, fifty four acres of Land, thirty nine of Meadow, and thirty
six of Pasture in Bridgnorth, and that the said John Whitbrook was Tenant of
the Premises as of his Freehold; whereupon Issue was joined, and found for the
Plaintiffs, and adjudged that they should have execution against Sir John
Whitbrook, whereupon the Sheriff was commanded to deliver the said lands to the
Plaintiffs in execution, and the sixteenth of June, 12 Jacob. the said
Tenements were found to the value of eighty shillings, and were delivered to
the said Executors in execution.

The twenty seventh of March, 11 Jacob. Hanging the Writ of Scire facias, the
said Sir John Whitbrook did demise to the Defendant one Message and ten acres
of Meadow, parcel of the premises Habendum from the said twenty seventh day
for the term of three years, by force whereof he entered and was possessed.

The sixteenth of June, 12 Jacob. the said Executors did enter into the
Tenements in the Inquisition mentioned, whereof the said Message, five acres
of Land, and ten of Meadow are parcel, and did out the Defendant.

The one and thirtieth of August, 13 Jacob. Robert Faldoe made the Lease to the
Plaintiff, and they found the Ejectment, and prayed the advice of the Court.

And I conceive Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff.

For that a Tenant in Tail cannot charge the Land no more then he can alien, 3
Ed. 3. 46. so in the 18 Ed. 4. 5. 21. If Tenant in Tail do sell the Trees and
dye, the Vendee cannot have them, and the 17 Ass. 21. Tenant in Tail
acknowledges a Statute and dies, the Issue enters, and the Conusee does sue
execution and enters, and the Issue brings an Assise and recovers, because this
is a Disseisin to him, and 11 H. 7. 21. 31 Ed. 3. 22. 14 Ass. 3. Tenant in Tail
grants a Rent and dies, and the Issue enfeoffs a stranger, adjudged that he
shall hold the Land discharged, for it was discharged by the entry of the
Issue, and 26 Ass 38. If Tenant in Tail does charge the Land and dye, and the
Issue enters and p^yes the Rent, and then after confirms the Rent, this is
good: But in Brook Grants 73. contrary, for the charge was avoided by the entry
of the Issue.

But admit that this Recognizance shall bind the Issue in Tail, yet it shall
not bind the Termer, but he shall avoid it, 1 H 7. 9 7 H. 7. 11. and in the 30
Assise 10. the Tenant pleads recovery by Action tried against a stranger, and
did aver the Estate of the Ancestor of the Demandant to be between his Title
and the Recovery, the Demandant said, that the stranger was enfeoffed with
Warranty, and did not plead this, and so did Fauxesie, and Judgment was awarded
for him.

And although that this Lease was made after the Test of the Scieri facias, it
is not material, because the Lessor had good power to make a Lease, and the
Land was not subject to the execution, and therefore the Lease here is good and
cannot be avoided, but only by the default of the Lessor in not pleading the
Estate-tail, and that is especially aided by the Statute, because the Statute
does aid the Lessee against such f^igned Recoveries against the Lessor, and it
is no Recovery until the Judgment had, at which time the Lessee had a good
Lease not subject to the execution, 21. H. 6. 13. and 14. He who comes to the
Reversion, hanging the Praecipe quod reddat against the Tenant for life, shall
be received by the Statute of Westminster. 2. cap. 3. and 16 H 7. 5. In a Writ of
Entry or Disseisin, he in the remai^der does pray to be received, the Demandant
traverseth that he has nothing in Reversion at the time of the Writ purchased,
and could not, for if he purchased the Remainder hanging the Writ, he shall be
received.

And Hill. 14 Jacob. All the Court did agree, Judgment.
that the Lessee for the Lease made after the Verdict against the Issue in
Tail, could not falsify, wherefore Judgment was given for the Plaintiff.

Penson against Mootham.
IN an Action of Covenant, for that by Indenture Tripartite, dated the fifth
December. 12. Jacob. It was between Abraham Baker by the name of Abraham Baker
Owner of the moiety of a Ship called the Grissell of L. and of the Ship called
the Peregrine of L. and of a Pinnace called the Hopewell of L. on the first
part, and the Plaintiff by the name of H. P. Ow^er of the other moiety of the
said Ships and Pinnace on the second part, and the Defendant by the name of Ja.
Mortham Nautestrategi dicti Itineris (Anglice) general of the said Voyage. N.
N. B. W. and D. E. by the names of N.G. Naute magister dictae navis vocat le
Peregrine. B. W. Naute magister dict. navis vocat the Grissell, and D. E. Naute
Magister of the said Pinnace, and several persons named in a Schedule annexed
to the said Indenture on the third part; It is testified and does appear, that
the said Owners had furnished and set forth, and the said Victualer had
victualed the said Ships as well for Trade as for Discovery, and had delivered
them to the said General, Masters, and Officers pro itinere faciend. in such
manner, and to such an Island in the West Indies, or otherwise, as it should be
most profitable to the said parties, at the discretion of the said Generals,
and according to certain Articles of the Commissioners, bearing date with the
said Indenture, and after their Voyage to return to the Port of London: And
that the said Generals, and each of the said Masters and Officers severally,
for each ones proper and several part, and not the one for the other, did
Covenant for themselves, their Executors and Administrators, with the said
Owners severally, and their several Executors, etc. in manner, etc. and that
they the said Generals, or the several Masters and Officers, their Executors
or Assigns, at any time during the said Voyage should go beyond the Cape of
Good hope, nor should do or commit any spoil or loss to any of the Subjects
of our Lord the King, nor to any other person or persons, being subject or in
subjection to any Prince or Principality being in league or amity with our
King, nor shall do any thing whereby any detriment, prejudice, trouble, or
damage may come to the said Ships or Pinnace, or any of them, or to the said
Owners or any of them respectively.

etc. yet the said D.E. and the Commissioners aforesaid, in the said Ship
called the Hope-well, during the said Voyage, to wit, the eighth day of March,
upon the high Sea near the Isle of Saint Jago, by force and arms did take and
spoil one Spanish Frigot laden with Rice, etc. which Sip and Goods were the
Ship and Goods of diverse persons who were Subjects to the King of Spain, the
which King then was and yet is in amity and league with the King, and the
Defendant and the other Commissioners coming to the said Island, did divide
the said Goods amongst themselves.

Viz. the ninteenth day of June, 13 Jacob. at a Port called Cape Corants beyond
the Seas, one Matthew Navale did join with the Defendant, and the said
Commissioners and they together did sail to the Coast of Champeach in the
West Indies, and did there put a shore the said Hope-well, and three other
Ships, and there then upon the high Sea, by force and arms, did take and spoil
another Spanish Frigot laden with 100 Hides, which Ship, and the goods in her,
was the Ship and goods of diverse persons subject to the King of Spain, then and
yet in league with the King.

And that after, to wit, the 20 Junii, 13 Jacob. at the Town of River in the
West Indies, the said Defendant and the others, etc. by force and arms did take
and spoil another Spanish Frigot, laden with 150 Hides, which Ship and goods
were the Ship and goods of diverse persons subject to the King of Spain, then
and yet in league with the King.

And that also then the said persons, by force and arms, did take and Spain,
and then and yet in league with our King.

And also there by force and arms did take and spoil another Spanish Spain,
then and yet in league with our King.

And that the Defendants did not come to the Port of London after their return,
etc.

And concluded that the Defendant did not keep his Covenant to make no spoil,
or to do any act, whereby any detriment should come, etc. ad damnum 3000 l. etc.

The Defendant, as to the said five first Breaches did demur in Law, because
they were not alleged in such manner as any issue or trial may be had.

And as to the other, he pleaded that the Plaintiff did prohibit him from
coming to London.

And it seems that Judgment ought to be given upon the demur against the
Plaintiff.

For first, there is no covenant to bind the Defendant, for the words and
praedictus State-General does covenant, and there is no other name in the
Covenant given to the Defendant, and that is not sufficient to bind him: 1.
Because he is not named State-General before, but Naute Stratageneral. 2. This
is no parcel of his name before, or addition, but is as his title, or is a
pronomen, and that is not sufficient, for the pronomen is but as an alius
dictus. 5 Ed. 4. 141. Alexander Cock, Clericus, alius dictus A. C. nuper de D.
in Comitatu, etc. Clerico is no good addition, because there is no addition but
in the alius dictus. And Dyer 119. Robert Thrower brought an Action of Debt
upon a Bond by the name of Robert Thrower, otherwise called Robert Throner,
Keeper of the Kings Gaol at Ludgate, and the Defendant pleaded the Statute of
23 H. 6. 1. And it was adjudged, that it shall not be presumed that he was
Jailer, for it may be false. As a Bond of I. S. Son and Heir of I. S. yet he
may be a Bastard, and a Bond by A. the Wife of I. S. who is sole, is good
notwithstanding. And Dyer 304. B. in an Ejectment the Plaintiff declared of a
Lease of 100 acres of Land, by the name of the Manor of D. habendum the Manor
and the premises, etc. whereupon he entered into the Manor and premises.
Quaere. If it be good, and agreed to be sufficient by the word premises.

There is no breach assigned, for as to the first breach, that is only D. E.
and his company did take, etc. a Spanish Frigot, and that is no breach of
covenant in the Defendant, for that the covenant is not several: as in the 5
Rep. Slingsbies Case: If a Lease be made of W. acre to I. S. and a Lease of B.
acre to I. D. and the Lessor covenants with them, and either of them, that he
is owner, etc. each of them shall have an Action of Covenant according to their
several interests: so in case of a warranty, but otherwise where the interest
is joint. Vide 5 Rep. Mathewsons Case. And so here, the Covenant of the
Defendant does extend only to himself and his Ship, and not to D. E. and his
company: and the allegation, that the Defendant and his company did come to the
said Island, and divided the goods, is nothing to the purpose; for it may be
they bought a moiety thereof, or any part of them, and so they might l^wfully
divide them. 27 Assis. 69. In an Appeal, for that one did receive stolen goods,
knowing of the Felony, adjudged not good.

And as to the second breach, it is not alleged that the spoil was made during
the Voyage, and if it were not during the Voyage, it is no breach: and in as
much as the Plaintiff has not set forth that it was done during the Voyage, it
shall be taken most strongly against himself. 26 H. 8. Pleadings 6. 3 H. 7. 2.
Dyer 89. And so in all the other three breaches it is not alleged that it was
done during the Voyage.

Spain at the time of the taking of them, but only quod fuerunt bona: which
does denote a time past, and does not import any present property; and it may
be very probable that they were their goods, and that they were bought of them
by some persons under the obedience of a King, not in amity with our King, and
then it is no breach; for [fuerunt] is so uncertain, that it may be 20 or 40
years past.

Quod fuerunt bona diversarum personarum existentium subditorum Regis
Hispaniae: the which word [existens] does refer to the time of the Declaration,
and not to the time of the taking; for although in the 27 of H. 8. 15. and 28.
that the word [existens] in Deeds may, in respect of the subject matter, be
applied to the future time, yet in all course of pleading it shall be taken for
the present time; as in an Indictment upon the Statute of 8 H. 6. for forcible
entry into Land, Existens liberum Tenementum I. S. is not good, because it does
refer to the time of the Indictment, and not of the entry.

And so in the 21 H. 7. 30. A condition to discharge one of all Escapes of all
Prisoners in the Goal, this shall extend only to Prisoners at the time of the
Oligation made. And it may very well be, that they were the Subjects of one who
was not in league with the King at the time of the taking, and yet may be at
the time of the Declaration the Subjects of the King of Spain.



Spain, and not to leave it so uncertain to the Jury, as to have them charged
to enquire of all his Subjects, for the Plaintiff takes notice of the persons,
that they were the Subjects of the King of Spain, and therefore he may as well
know their names. Dyer. 99. and 285. An Indictment of Murder of one unknown, or
stealing the goods of one unknown, is good, because he may be discovered.

And after the Plaintiff discontinued his Suit.

Holland and others against Jackson and others.
RIchard Holland and Margaret his wife, one of the daughters and heirs of the
body of Sir Robert Langley, Knight, and William Dausey and Ann his wife, the
other daughter of the said Sir Robert, brought a Writ of Error to reverse a
common Recovery had at Lancaster, die Lunae, 13 Elizab. In a Writ of Entry sur
Disseisin in the Post, between the said Francis Jackson and Henry Oyden
Plaintiffs, and Robert Leigh and James Hay, Tenants of 22 Messuages, 10
Cottages, 20 Tofts, 22 Gardens, 20 Orchards, 300 acres of Land, 200 of Pasture,
40 of Wood, 500 of Furze, 100 of Turbary, etc. with the appurtenance, in
Alkerington and Prestnitch, wherein the Tenants did vouch Thomas Leigh and
Katherin his wife, who did appear by George Butler their Attorney, who entered
into warranty, and did vouch William Forster present in Court, who did warrant,
etc. ad damnum, etc. for that before the purchase of the said Writ of Entry,
and since the 27 H 8. Sir Robert Langley was seized in see of the said
Tenements, and thereof did infeoff Thurston, Tilsley, Fitton, and Hopwood in
fee, to the use of himself for life, and after to the use of the said Katherin
in T. the remainder to the use of the right heirs of the body of the said Sir
Robert, the remainder to the use of his heirs.

Sir Robert was seized for life, with remainders over, etc. and then Sir Robert
dyed seized, after whose death the said Tenements did remain to Katherin in
Tail, the remainder to Katherin and the Plaintiffs, Margaret and Ann, and one
Dorothy, as daughters and heirs of the body of Sir Robert; the Reversion to the
said daughters and their heirs: whereupon Katherin did enter, and was seized in
Tail with Remainders as aforesaid, and did marry Thomas Leigh, whereupon the
said Recovery was had in manner and form as aforesaid, after which Recovery
Thomas Leigh and Katherin did dye, without issue of the body of Katherin, and
Dorothy dyed also without issue, whereby the right of the said Tenements did
remain to the said Margaret and Ann, as daughters and heirs of the body of the
said Sir Robert.

The Writ of Recovery was certified, and the Plaintiffs assigned Error; for
that Katherin was within age at the time of the appearance of her and her
Husband by the said Attorney, and was within the age of 21 years at the time of
the Judgment (to wit) of the age of eighteen years, and no more.

Hereupon a Scire facias was awarded against the Recoverors, who being returned
dead, a Scire facias was awarded against the heirs and Ter-tenants, whereupon
Ambrose Jackson was returned son and heir of the said Jackson; and Thomas Hulm,
and Margaret his wife, and Isabel Ogden, daughters and heirs of the said Ogden,
and William Ogden and others were returned Ter-tenants; and the heirs and
Tertenants did appear, and pleaded several Pleas, some to the Writ, and some in
Bar, and after, the Writ of Error was discontinued.

Hillar. 11 Jacob. The Plaintiffs purchased a new Writ of Error of the said
Tenements (omitting the Rent) and assigned the said Error: whereupon a Scire
facias was awarded against the Heirs and Ter-tenants, which was returned, (to
wit) that Margaret Hulm was dead without issue, and thereupon a Scire facias
was directed to the said Jackson and Ogden, the Heirs, etc. and Katherin Leigh,
and Robert Leigh, and forty other Ter-tenants, who did appear, and thereupon:
Whereupon the said Error was assigned.

The Ter-tenants did plead, that John Chatterton was Tenant of a Cottage, etc.
in A. aforesaid, parcel of the said Tenements.

The Heirs pleaded in null. est errat.

The Plaintiff did acknowledge the Plea of the Ter-tenants, and thereupon a
Scire facias was awarded against John Chatterton, who did appear, and the
Plaintiff did assign the said Error: whereupon Jane Jackson one of the
Ter-tenants did plead, that Katherin was of full age, etc. whereupon issue was
joined.

And George Chatterton and ten others of the Ter-tenants did plead non-tenure.

And the Heirs of the Recoverors did plead in null. est errat.

And Mary Tailor did plead, that before the Recovery, a Fine was levied the 4
September. 13 Elizab. between the said Robert Leigh and James Hay Plaintiffs,
and Thomas Leigh and Katherin his Wife, Deforceators of the said Tenements:
whereupon the said Thomas and Katherin did acknowledge the said Tenements to be
the right of the said Robert, etc. with warranty against them and the Heirs of
Katherin; which Fine was proclaimed, etc. and was to the use of the Conusees
and their Heirs, until the Recovery should be perfected: and then the seventh
of March, the 13 Eliz. the Writ of Entry was pursued, which was to the use of
Thomas and Katherin his Wife in Tail, the Remainder to Thomas and his Heir^.

Thomas and Katherin did demise to the said Mary a Cottage and three acres of
Land, parcel of the said Tenements, for life, etc. wherefore she did demand
Judgment of the Writ against the Fine with proclamations.

Robert Leigh and 28 others of the Ter-tenants did plead the said Fine with
warranty, and that Katherin dyed without issue, and that Thomas was seized in
fee, whose estate they have, and that Thomas dyed, and that after the death of
Katherin, the said warranty did descend to Margaret and Ann as sisters and
heirs of Katherin, and did demand Judgment if they should maintain this Writ
against the said Fine, and against the warranty.

The Plaintiffs, as to the said several pleas of non-tenure, in null. errat.
the fine with proclamations, and the warranty, did severally demur in Law, to
which the Defendants did severally join.

And I conceive that the Writ of Error does well lie, and that the Recovery is
erroneous, and therefore ought to be reverst.

And for the Argument of the Case, I shall divide it into three parts:

Chatterton and ten others of the Ter-tenants.



Mary Tailor, and the warranty pleaded by Robert Leigh and 28 others of the
Ter-tenants, or by any of these pleas, or not?

And as to the first, If he in remainder, depending upon an estate in Tail, may
maintain a Writ of Error to reverse a Recovery against the first Tenant in
Tail, after his death, without issue. And I conceive clearly, that he in the
remainder shall have a Writ of Error; for the Writ of Error does always pursue
the nature of the Land, and not the privity of the blood.

And therefore 5 H. 8. the Writ of Error shall go with the Land, and therefore
the Heir in special tail shall have it, although there be another Heir at the
Common Law. And so in Fitz Herb. N. B. 21 K. He who is Heir to the Land that is
lost, shall have a Writ of Error, and not the Heir at Common Law: as if Land in
Borough-English be lost by erroneous Judgment, the younger Son shall have a
Writ of Error: and 3 H. 4. 19. The Heir in special tail shall have the Writ of
Error, although there be another Heir at the Common Law. And 1 Mariae, Dyer 90.
Verneys Case: The Writ of Error shall be brought by him who had the thing
whereon erroneous Judgment was given.

And as the especial Heir shall have the Writ of Error, so shall he also in
remainder or reversion upon an Estate for life, after the death of the Tenant
for life. 4 H. 8. 21 H. 6. 29.

But the sole Objection, that has any coulor against this was, Rich. 2. and
then there can be no remainder upon an Estate tail at the Common Law, and
therefore he in such remainder cannot have any Writ of Error.

But this is easily answered, for the Common Law being, Westminster. 2. he in the
remainder shall have the same remedy. And this is proved by the case of the
Tenant in Tail, for although that his Estate was not at the Common Law, yet now
he shall have all Actions which the Common Law gives to a Tenant in fee, which
may stand with his Estate; and therefore he shall have a Writ of Escheat, a
Quod permittat: Not. B. 124. 4 Ed. 5. 48. Not. B. 212. and so he shall have an
Assize, and many other Writs, which lie for a Tenant in fee at the Common Law.

And for Authorities in this point, Dyer 188. That he in the remainder after
the Estate-tail spent, shall have a Writ of Error, and so is it in Dyer 40. in
Verneys Case. And in the 3 Rep. fol. 3. B. if is resolved, that he who has a
remainder expectant upon an Estate in Tail, shall have a Writ of Error upon a
Judgment given against the Tenant in Tail, although there were no such
remainder at the Common Law; for when the Statute de Donis Conditionalibus does
enable the Donor to limit a remainder upon the Estate-tail, all actions which
the Common Law does give to the privies in Estate, are by the same act as
incidents tacitly given also according to the rule of the Common Law: and
therefore as he in Reversion or Remainder upon an Estate for life, shall have a
Writ of Error by the Common Law upon a Judgment given against a Tenant for
life, although that they were not parties by Hyde, Pryer, Voucher, etc. so
since the Statute de Donis conditionalibus shall he have, who has a Reversion
or Remainder expectant upon an Estate in Tail. And therefore I conceive the
Writ of Error is good, notwithstanding that Objection.

But now it is to be considered, if this Plea of non-tenure shall avoid the
Writ of Error? and I conceive it will not, for three Reasons: 1. I conceive
that it is no plea to abate the Writ, for the Plaintiffs might have reversed
the Recovery against the Lessors of the Reversion only, without having made
the Ter-tenants parties; for the Writ of Error being grounded upon the
Recovery, does always lie against the parties to the Judgment, and their Heirs,
and may be reversed against them, although they have nothing in the Land: and
this is clear by Not. Brev. 107. and 26 Assis. 12. A Writ of Error does lie
against him who recovers, and after the Error found, a Scire facias shall issue
against the Tenant: and 42 Assis. 22. and 44 Ed. 3. and 10 Ed. 4. 13.
Non-tenure is no plea in a Writ of Error, for the party to the Judgment or his
Heir. And here in this case, if those who have pleaded Non-tenure are not
Tenants, they are at no loss, for they can lose nothing; but this plea does
discharge themselves only, and the Scire facias remains good against the
Heirs, and the other Ter-tenants.

2. If Non-tenure could be a good Plea for the Ter-tenants in a Scire facias,
yet at the least it ought to be in such a Scire facias wherein the Ter-tenants
are named, and not in such a general Writ as this is. For here the Plaintiffs
have pursued their Scire facias in as good a form as may be, viz. generally
against the Heirs and the Ter-tenants; and if there be any default, it is in
the Sheriff who has returned those to be Tenants who indeed are not so, and it
shall be very hard if the Writ should abate for default of the Sheriff. 20 Ed.
3. Scir. facias 121. In a Scire facias on a Recognizance against the
Ter-tenants, it was said that one of them that ware warned had but a Lease for
years of such a one who had the Freehold. Judgment of the Writ, etc. And there
Birton said, That the Sheriff had a general command to warn the Ter-tenants,
wherefore this is no Plea to the Writ. And Hill and Wilby answered that it was
otherwise, for that the Plaintiffs at their peril should name the Ter-tenants
in their Writ: whereupon there was a new Writ.

Whereupon I observe that if the Writ be special, naming the Ter-tenants, as it
was anciently, then it ought to be so: but of late such course has been
changed, as appears by the 8 of H. 4. 18. and the Writ awarded generally, and
therefore such special Non-tenure shall be a good Plea, for it is the default
of the Plaintiff to pursue his Writ against one who is not Tenant, but when the
Writ is general, Non-tenure is no Plea to the abatement of the Writ. 48 Ed. 3
15. 8 H. 18. 48 Assis. 2. and the 2 H. 4. 18. B. In a Writ of Account against
the Sheriff of Northumberland of a Receipt in Newcastle upon Tine; and it was
pleaded that Newcastle was a County of it self: but because it was made a
County since the Test of the Writ, the Writ was adjudged to be good.

3. These Ter-tenants are estopped to plead Non-tenure, because that they with
the residue, at first did plead that John Chatterton was Tenant of parcel of
the Land, by which Plea they have taken upon themselves to be Tenants of the
Land, and therefore they cannot afterward plead Non-tenure. 41 Ed. 3. 4. In a
Praecipe quod reddat against I. S. who pleaded to the Writ, and the Writ
abated, whereupon the Writ did abate, and a new Writ brought for Jornies
Accounts against I. S. he shall not plead Ioyntenancy with the other, because
he has admitted himself sole Tenant by the first Writ. 33 H. 6. 3. In a
Formedon against the Husband, who pleaded Ioyntenancy with his wife, for which
the writ a bated, and a new writ was purchased against the husband and wife,
who pleaded non-tenure, and adjudged a good plea for the benefit of the wife,
but if the last writ had been against the husband only, he could not have
pleaded non-tenure.

22 H. 6. 54. B. In a Praecipe quod reddat, the Tenant pleaded Non-tenure, the
Demandant said, that before he brought another Writ against the Tenant, and I.
S. who made default, for which a Grand Cape was awarded, upon which I. S. made
default, and the now Tenant said, that he was sole Tenant, and waged his Law of
Non-summons, which the Demandant did acknowledge, whereupon the writ abated,
and this Writ purchased by Jornies Accounts, and there it is argued if he shall
have advantage of this, because the first Writ did abate by his own default,
but it was agreed, that if he could have such advantage, the Tenant shall be
estopped to plead Non-tenure, and adjudged that the Tenant shall answer.

42 Ed. 3. 16. In a Praecipe quod reddat, one took the several Tenancy on his
part, and the other of the other part, and they were estopped because that a
former process was against them and others, and they took the entire Tenancy
upon them, without that, that the others had any thing, and did gage their Law
of Non-summons, wherefore the first writ did abate, and this writ purchased by
Journies Accounts.

And so in our Case, when all the Tenants have pleaded that I. C. was Tenant of
parcel not named in the return, they have taken the Tenancy upon them, and
therefore they cannot afterward plead Non-tenure.

And now (the Writ being maintainable notwithstanding these exceptions)

And I conceive clearly that the appearance of the Wife within age by Attorney,
is Error; for by the Rule of the Common Law, in every Praecipe quod reddat,
whereby Land is demanded, if the Tenant appear he ought to appear either in
person, or by one lawfully authorized by him, and that is the reason that if
Judgment be given against one upon an appearance by the Attorney, where the
Attorney had no Warrant to appear, that this is Error, until it be remedied in
case where a Verdict is past by the Statute of 32 of H. 8. of Repleader, but if
the Judgment be given upon default or demurrer, or upon a Verdict, and no
Warranty by him who recovered, this is not Warranted by the Statute, Dyer 93.
20 Eliz. Dyer 363. and the reason is, because that the Land or thing in demand
is lost or gained by one who had no Warranty, and then the Rule of Law is, that
an Infant shall not appear by Attorney, and 1 H. 5. 6. adjudged that an Infant
cannot be Attorney for another, and so therefore it is there said, that he
cannot appear by an Attorney, 22 H. 6. 31. b. There by Newton, if an Infant sue
by an Attorney it is Error: And the Law in this case stands with great reason,
for the Warrant of Attorney is made by the Infant, which although it be
sufficient when it is of full age, yet it shall be dangerous to permit Infants
to lose their Land by their Attorney, while they have not discretion enough to
choose such who shall be faithful to them, and therefore the Law has made
better provision for them (to wit) that they shall appear by their Guardian
admitted and allowed by the Court, so that in regard of the imbecility of the
Infant, the Court makes choice of a sufficient and trusty person to plead and
defend their cause, Not. Br. 27 H. 1. an Infant shall sue by his next friend,
but if he be Defendant in any Action, he shall make defense by his Guardian,
and not by his next of kin, and the Court does assign a Guardian for an Infant
who is Defendant, and that is commonly one of the Officers of the Court: and in
22 H. 6. 31. where Hungerford and his Wife brought an Action of Trespass for
taking of their Villain being in their Service: The Defendant pleaded that he
was free, etc. and as to the losing of the Service that he was not retained,
and found for the Plaintiff, and several damages, viz. for the taking of nine
and twenty pounds, and for the losing of the Service twenty shillings. And it
was argued neither Judgment should be entered, because the Retainer was not
found; And after Markham moved that the Plaintiffs being within age did appear
by their Attorney, and did declare, that all the process continued by the
Attorney, whereas it ought to have been by their Guardian, so that all was
Error. And Newton said, that if it were so, there was good reason to have a
Writ of Error, and after the Plaintiffs released the twenty shillings, and had
Judgment of the other.

So that an Attorney being always made by the party, ought to be therefore
made by one of ability to give such Authority, which ability cannot be in an
Infant, for all Authorities made by an Infant ^re utterly void.

And that the appearance of an Infant by Attorney in any Action, is Error, does
appear by the said Book if the 22 H. 6. 31. 9 Eliz. Dyer 262. b.



Ed. 3. Age 88. In a Cessavit against the Husband and Wife, the Husband did
appear by an Attorney, and the Wife by her Guardian, and upon suggestion that
she was of full age, the Guardian was hidden to bring her into Court, to see
whether she were of age or not.

29 Assise 67. In an Assise against Husband and Wife, the Husband did answer as
Tenant, and the Wife would not, but the Husband said that his Wife was within
age, and that she was taken away, but did not say by whom, and he did appear
for himself and his Wife as her Guardian, and pleaded in Bar: and one of the
Counsel said, that the Wife had made default which is the default of the
Husband, and because that he answered as Guardian without Warranty by Record in
this Court to do the same, Judgment, etc. And there Tho^^ said, that he ought
to have a Warranty in such case; wherefore the Assise was awarded.

35 H. 8. 56. In a Writ of Right by the Husband and Wife (the wife being within
age) and she appeared by her next of Kin, and was admitted by the Court.

New Book of Entries 256. In a writ of Error to reverse a Fine by Maurice
Pierce, and Joane his wife, and John Pierce and Elizab. his wife, the three
first appeared in person, and Elizabeth being within age, by one Laurence
Gibson her Guardian, and admitted by the Court.

And so in this Case, forasmuch as the Land is the Inheritance of the wife
which is demanded, which she will lose by this Recovery, she ought to appear by
her Guardian, notwithstanding the full age of the husband who is joined only
for form sake with his wife.

30, and 31 Eli. Morseby against Charnock, The husband and wife levied a Fine,
and after this was reversed by Error, because that the wife was within age, the
husband shall not have the Land, for all the Estate passes from the wife, and
the husband joined only for conformity, Coke 2. Rep. Cromwels and Beckwiths
Case.

But it may be objected also,

I conceive not so,

22 H. 6. 31. The Plaintiffs within age did sue by an Attorney, and there it
was ruled that the Defendants might have a Writ of Error, and placit. 37. Eliz.
Rot. 253. Bartholomew brought a Writ of Error against Dighton, for that Dighton
recovered against him in an Action of false Imprisonment, in which he being
within age did sue by an Attorney, and adjudged that Judgment should be
reversed.

And this Case is not to be resembled to the Case of a Fine levied by an Infant
which cannot be reversed by any but by the Infant himself, and the same Law is
of a Recognizance by an Infant, and the reason of these Cases is, because it is
the Act of the Court, to admit him to levy a Fine, or to acknowledge a
Recognizance, and therefore this ought to be reformed by the Court, and that
must be by inspection of the Infant, and therefore it ought to be done during
nonage.

But the nonage in this Case ought to be tried per pais, as it was adjudged in
the said cases of Bartholomew and Dighton, and the case of Hobbs, in which case
the Infant was brought to the Bar to be inspected, but adjudged by the Court
that it should not be so, because the matter was tryable per pais: and 10. Rep
Mary Portingtons case, A common Recovery against an Infant, although he appears
by his Guardian shall not bind him, for an Infant has not such a disposing
power of his Land, as the Husbands and wife have, but is utterly disabled by
the Law to transfer or convey his Inheritance or Freehold to others during his
minority: And of late days, a common Recovery does appear to be a common
conveyance and assurance of Land.

The third part of the Case is, If the two matters pleaded in Bar of

And first, as to the Fine, with Proclamations levied before the Recovery had,
which is the Plea of Mary Tailor, one of the Ter-tenants, I conceive that it is
utterly insufficient, as well for the manner as the matter of the Plea; for she
has disabled her self to plead this Plea, for she sets forth that the
twentieth of May, 31 Eliz. Thomas Leigh and Katherine his wife, did let to the
said Mary a Cottage and three acres of Land (parcel of the Tenements expressed
in the Fine and Recovery) for life, but does not show in what Town the said
Cottage and three acres do lie, wherefore the Plea is altogether uncertain and
insufficient, for the Tenements in the Recovery do lie in two Towns, viz. In
Alkington and Prestwick, and it does not appear by this Plea, in which of these
the Cottage and three acres do lie.

5 Ed. 4. 116. b. In a Formedon in Discender of a house and forty acres of
Land, and six of Wood in three Towns, and the Issue being to be tried, the
Tenant said, that the Demandant had entered into the house and thirty acres of
Land, and three of wood: And by the Court the Plea was naught, because it did
not appear in which Town the Entry was.

And in Moore and Hoskins case in the Exchequer, 8 Jacob. In an Ejectment of
Land in Overkiddington and Netherkiddington, the Defendant pleaded not guilty,
and when the Issue came to be tried by Nisi prius, in the County of Oxon, the
Defendant pleaded an Entry of the Plaintiff in three acres of the Land,
contained in the Declaration since the last Declaration; whereupon the
Plaintiff demurred and adjudged that the Plea was insufficient, and thereupon
the Plaintiff had Judgment to recover.

Secondly for the matter, this Fine being precedent to the Recovery whereby the
cause of this Action is given, cannot extinguish it: for it is a Rule in Law,
that one cannot give or grant that which one has not, 22 H. 7. Kelway 84. If
the eldest Son in the lifetime of his Father infeoffs another, it is void as
to bind the Land: and Littleton, Releases 106. These words in a Release ( Quae
quo vis modo in futuro habere potero, are void in Law, for no Right does pass
but only the Right which the Releasor had at the time of the Release, as if the
Son release to the Disseisor of his Father all the right which he has or may
have, and the Father dye, the Son may enter because that he had no right in the
life of his Father, but only a descent to him after the Release by the death of
his Father, 13 Ed. 1. 10 Ed. 2. and 4 H. 7. cap. 24. It is enacted that Fines
with Proclamations shall conclude as well Privies as Strangers, saving to the
strangers such right, claim, and interest as they had at the time engrossed, so
as they pursue their claim by entry or action within five years next after the
Proclamations and saving such Action, Right, Title, Claim, and Interest, as
first, Shall grow, remain, descend, or come after the Fine and proclamations,
by force of any Gift in Tail, or by any other course and matter had and made
before the said Fine levied, so as they pursue within five years, etc. By which
it appears that nothing is saved to the strangers but rights, actions, and
interests, arising by force of any cause or matter before the Fine, and
therefore nothing is barred by the Statute but former rights, for what ever
right is barred as to the Privies, is saved to the strangers, so as they pursue
their claim within, etc.

Sir Richard Shuttleworths Case between Barton and Lever, 37 Eliz. Tenant in
Tail levied an erroneous Fine with Proclamations, and then as Vouchee did
suffer an erroneous Recovery and died, the Issue brought a writ of Error to
reverse the Fine, the Defendant pleaded the recovery afterward, and the
Plaintiff to maintain the writ did allege a default in the Recovery, whereby
he conceived the same to be void, but resolved that it was but voidable by a
writ of Error, and therefore so long as it was in force the Issue was barred to
reverse the Fine: And therefore it was agreed there, that the Issue ought first
to reverse the Recovery by writ of Error, and then he may reverse the Fine.

And so in our Case if the Plaintiffs should be barred in the writ of Error by
the Fine, they shall be without remedy, although that the Fine be erroneous, as
I conceive it to be, for if they bring a writ of Error to reverse the Fine
first, the Recovery although it be erroneous will be a clear Bar to them as it
is adjudged in the said Case of Burton and Lever.

7 H. 4. 40. a. One brought a writ of Error to reverse an Outlawry, the
Attorney said he was outlawed at the Suit of another. Hulls said there, that he
could not be received, for when one is to adnull an Outlawry, he shall not be
disabled by another Outlawry, although he be twenty ^imes outlawed, for then it
will follow that there shall be delay infinite, 26 Ed. 3. 66. Tenant in ancient
Demesne levies a Fine at the Common Law, and after does levy another, and the
Queen being seignioresse of the Manor, did bring a Writ of deceit to reverse
one of them, she shall not be barred by the other, especially by the first to
reverse the second.

And as to the Warranty, 2. Matter of the Bar.
I conceive that it is no Bar for many reasons;

1. Because Warranties do bind only Rights and Actions which are in esse at the
time of the warranty made, and not Rights and Actions which do accrue after the
Warranty created, but this Writ of Error is given to the Plaintiffs in respect
of the erroneous Recovery, which was suffered after the creation of the
warranty, and therefore the warranty is no Bar to the Plaintiffs to have this
writ of Error, 30 H. 8. Dyer 42. B. All the Justices did agree, that when a man
does bind him and his Heirs to warranty, they are not bound to warrant new
Titles of any Actions accrued since the warranty, but only such Actions as are
in esse at the time of the warranty made, 12 Assise 41. The Tenant in a
Praecipe quod reddat made a Feoffment hanging the writ, and after the Demandant
had recovered by erroneous Judgment, notwithstanding that the Feoffment had
excluded the Tenant from his Right to the Land, yet this shall not exclude him
from his writ of Error which is accrued to him since the Judgment given after
the Feoffment, Vide, 18, and 19 Eliz. Dyer 353.

But it may be objected that this warranty shall bind the Right of the
Plaintiffs to the Land, for although the Recovery be reversed, Formedon to
recover this Land, in which they shall be b^rred by this warranty, and so it
shall be in vain for them to reverse the recovery, for by the warranty they
shall be barred to have the Land.

I answer, That notwithstanding the Collateral warranty, Ed. 3. Droit. 29. If
the Tenant in a writ of Right has collateral warranty of the Ancestor of the
Demandant, he ought to plead it, and not to conclude upon the Right, for if he
conclude upon the Right, it shall be found against him, because the warranty
does not give or extinguish the Right, but only binds it.

43 Assise 44. A collateral warranty may be defeated by a Deed of Defeasance
made after the creation of the warranty, by which it appears that the Right is
not extinguished, for if so, it could not be revived by the Defeasance, and
with this agrees 43 Ed. 3. 20. Earl of Staffords Case.

19 H. 6 59. B. Fortescue. A collateral warranty does not give Right, for if
Land be given to one and the Heirs Males of his body, and he has two Sons, and
does alien, and the collateral Ancestor to the Son does release with warranty
to the Alinee, and dies, and the Donee dies, now is the eldest Son barred, but
if he die without Issue Male, leaving Issue a Daughter, the younger Son shall
not be barred by the warranty.

24 H. 8. B. Formedon 18. If Tenant in Tail has two Sons by several venters,
and dies, and the Ancestor collateral of the elder Son does release with
warranty, and dies without Issue, and the elder Son dies without Issue, the
younger Son shall recover by a Formedon, because he is not Heir to the
warranty: And Littleton 160. B. Tenant in Tail has three Sons and
discontinues, the second Son Releases to the Discontinuee with warranty, the
Tenant in Tail, and the second Son dies, now is the eldest Son barred because
the warranty is collateral to him, but if he die without Issue, the younger
may have a Formedon and shall not be barred by the warranty, because that the
warranty as to him is lineall, and to this purpose is the 8. of Rich. 2.
Warranties 101. By which Book it does appear that the Estate-tail is not
extinct by the warranty, for if it could be so it can never be revived again.

Thomas Lea and Katherine his wife who made this warranty, and thereupon they
have recovered in value, wherefore this Warranty is utterly determined.

23 Edw. 3. Recover. in value 12. If one upon a warranty vouch and recover in
value, and then is impleaded of the Land recovered in value, he shall not vouch
again, because the warranty was once executed.

Katherine died, Thomas Lea was to warrant the Land to the Conusees, and after
his death he had the Entire Fee-simple of the Land: 22 of Edward the third, 1.
In Dower by Nicholas Powes and his wife, the Tenant vouched A. who was ready in
Court, and demanded what he had to bind him to warranty, who said, that the
said A. and B. his wife had rendered to him the said Tenements by Fine, and
obliged them and the Heirs of the wife to warranty, and said that the wife was
dead, and had a Son and Heir who was liable to the warranty before him;
Judgment of the Voucher, and the Court held the Vouchment good.

Whereby it appears, that after the death of Katherine, Thomas was bound to
this warranty, and by his death he had a Fee-simple, whereby the warranty is
destroyed. Littleton 169. If Tenant in Tail enfeoffs his Uncle who enfeoffs A.
with warranty, A. re-enfeoffs the Uncle in Fee, who enfeoffs a stranger in Fee,
and dies without Issue, the Tenant in Tail dies, the Issue shall not be barred
by the warranty of the Uncle, because he does re-take to him as great an Estate
of his first Feoffee to whom the warranty was made, as the said Feoffee had
from him, and the cause why the warranty is defeated in this Case is, because
if the Warranty be in force, then the Uncle shall warrant it to himself, which
cannot be.

And in one Case the Ter-tenants do claim the Estate which Thomas Lea had, and
therefore they cannot have a greater advantage by the warranty then he had.
Not. B. 135. If one enfeoffs another with warranty, and the Feoffee enfeoffs
another, and re-takes the Estate in Fee, the warranty is determined, and the 22
H. 6 22. b. accords with this, because he is in of another Estate.

And depending the Writ of Error (Viz.) Trinit. and Michaelm. 14 Jacob. One of
the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error did dye, which was pleaded by the
Defendants Michaelm. 14 Jacob. whereupon the Writ of Error was abated.

Hillar. 13 Jacob. Robinson against Matthew Francis Administrator of Alban
Francis. Rot. 542.

IN an Action of Debt on a Bond of 100 l. made the first of August, 10 Jacob.

The Defendant pleaded, that the Intestate 20 November, Plea.
the 11 Jac. was bound to Elizabeth Francis in 100 l. which was unpayd at the
death of the Intestate, and that Elizabeth married John Pennial, John and
Elizabeth brought a plea of Debt against the Defendant before the Major of
London for the said 100 l. and recovered by default, and had Execution of 55 l.
8 s. 5 d. and so acknowledged satisfaction, etc. and did further plead, that
the Intestate the 12 Janua. 7 Jacob. did acknowledge in Chancery, that he owed
to the Lord Chancellor and to the Master of the Rolls 500 l. which Recovery and
Recogni^^nce did amount to 600 l. 8 s. 6 d.

And that the Defendant for the said Execution, and for payment of diverse Debts
of the Intestate before this Action, plene administravit omnia bona
Intestatoris praeterquam bona ad valentiam 100 l. which were liable for the
residue of the said Recovery, and for 100 l. parcel of the said 500 l. and that
he has not, nor had, at the day of the Writ, purchased any other goods, etc.
saving to the value of the said 55 l. 8 s. 5 d. and the said 100 l. and did
aver, that the Debt recovered before the Major, etc. was a true and a just
Debt, and that the said Recovery as to 45 l. and 1 d. residue of the said 100
l. 8 s. 6 d. and the said Recovery did remain in force.

The Plaintiff as to the Recovery said, That the said Obligation, Replication.
upon which the said Recovery was had, was made for security of the payment of
55 l. and that the said John Pennial and Elizabeth did accept the said 55 l. 8
s. 5 d. in full satisfaction of the said Judgment, and were content therewith,
and offered therefore to make a Release, or to acknowledge satisfaction: but the
Defendant, to defraud the Plaintiff of his just Debt, did defer to have
satisfaction acknowledged, or to have a Release of the residue of the Judgment,
and suffered the Judgment to remain in force by fraud and covin to the intent
aforesaid, etc.

The Defendant, as to the residue of the Debt, Rejoinder.
and the acceptance of the said 55 l 8 s. 5 d. in satisfaction of the Judgment,
and to the offer of Release and acknowledgment of satisfaction, did demur in
Law. And as to the Recognizance he said, that a Condition was annexed to it,
scil. That if the Intestate, his Executors, or Assigns, should pay 100 l. with
the increase thereof, to William Francis an Infant, when he shall come to the
age of 21 years, and in the mean time shall employ it to the benefit of the
Infant, according to the Will of William Francis, that then the Recognizance
shall be void: and did aver, that William Francis was alive, and within age,
and that the said 100 l. was not yet paid.

And the Plaintiff to this did join in Demurrer.

And to the other Plea did demur in Law, and the Defendant did join.

And I conceive, that as to the first Demur, the Plaintiff ought to have
Judgment; for now it is acknowledged by the Defendant, that he has 100 l. in
his hands, besides the 55 l. 8 s. 5 d. delivered in Execution, and he has not
showed any sufficient cause for retaining it: for when those, who recovered 100
l. upon the Bond, did accept 55 l. 8 s. 5 d. in full satisfaction of the
Judgment, and did offer to release and acknowledge satisfaction, this Judgment
in truth is discharged, and cannot charge the Executor: and therefore he cannot
return (riens en ses maines) to satisfy, because he is not bound to pay it.
Cook. 8 Rep. Turners Case: who brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond of 100 l.
against Laurence and others, Administrators of Booker. The Defendants pleaded
in Bar diverse former Recoveries against them in Debt had, that they had not
Assets, praeterquam bona and catalla quae non attingunt ad valorem, of the said
Debts recovered.

The Plaintiff replied, that the Defendants since the Recoveries did pay part
of the Debts in full satisfaction, wherewith they held themselves content, and
offered to acknowledge satisfaction, but the Defendants did refuse to agree to
that, to the defrauding of the Plaintiff. And adjudged that the Plaintiff
should recover: for an Executor ought to execute his office truly.



Turner. And 42 Ed. 3. 14. Conspiracy shall be brought where it was done, and
not where the Indictment was. And 44 Ed. 3. 31. Attachment upon a Prohibition
lies where the summons is, although the Plea be held in another County. 1 H. 7.
15. B. Payment with Acquittance, pleaded in an Action of Debt upon a Bond, is
not double, because that acquittance only is issuable, and the payment is but
evidence.

Then the Recognizance is no cause of the retaining the 100 l. as in Cook. R.
5. Harrisons Case: Green brought an Action of Debt upon a Bond of 40 l. against
H. Administrator of Thomas Sydney, the Defendant pleaded that the Intestate was
bound in a Statute, besides which he had no goods, etc. The Plaintiff replied,
that there was an Indenture of Defeasance for performance of Covenants, which
hitherto were performed; whereupon the Defendant demurred, and it was adjudged
against him; for a Debt upon a Bond shall be paid before a Statute to perform
Covenants, when none of them then were, nor perhaps ever shall be broken, but
are future and contingent things; and therefore such possibilities, which
peradventure shall never happen, shall not bar present and due Debts upon a
Bond.

And although the Condition of the Recognizance be to pay money, yet is it to be
paid to a stranger, and therefore it is not any Debt, but the Debt is only by
the Recognizance.

Also it is not to be paid but upon a contingency (to wit) if the Infant comes
to full age, but if he dye before, it shall never be paid. 36 H. 8. Dyer 59.
One devised 20 l. to his Daughter to be paid at her marriage, or 21 years of
age, and she dyed before marriage, yet it shall be paid. 7 Ed. 4. 3. and 18. 36
H. 6. 9. Cook. 9 Rep. fol. 108. In an Action of Debt against an Administratrix
who pleaded Statutes, and further that she had not sufficient, etc. The
Plaintiff replied, that for one of the Statutes a lesser sum was accepted in
satisfaction; and as to the other, that it was for performance of Covenants,
and that none was broken: and the Defendant demurred, and adjudged for the
Plaintiff; and that the general averment of payment and acceptance, and that
the Statute was for performance of Covenants, was good, because the Plaintiff
was a stranger thereto.

And this case was argued again by me for the Plaintiff, and by Crook for the
Defendant, Saturday the 24 of May, Pasch. 15 Jacob. at which day Mountague,
Doderidge, and Haughton did agree, that for the first matter Judgment ought to
be given for the Plaintiff; but as to the last Mountague held for the
Defendant, but the other two on the contrary. And Doderidge and Haughton agreed
that the Plea of the Defendant was naught, because he said, that a Condition
was annexed to the Recognizance, and did not say, that it was upon condition;
and Mountague replied not. Vide Com. Browning and Beestons Case, 21 Ed. 4. 49.
28 H. 6. 3.

Hillar. 12 Jacob. Robinson against Greves. Rot. 744.

IN an Action of Trespass, for that the Defendant the 6 of May, 12 Jac. the
House and several Closes of the Plaintiff did break and enter, etc. ad damnum,
etc.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty.

The Jury found, that the said Tenements were Copyhold, parcel of the Manor of
Ecclesfield, grantable (time out of mind) by the Lord or his Steward by Copy,
in Fee, in Tail, or for life or years, according to the Will of the Lord, and
according to the Custom of the Manor: And that before the Trespass Thomas
Shercliff was seized in fee at the will of the Lord, according to the custom,
etc.

And that the first of January, 14 Elizab. by the hands of Nicolas Shercliff
and Thomas Jepson, two of the Customary Tenants, Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury,
then and yet being Lord of the said Manor, out of Court, and according to the
Custom of the said Manor, did surrender to the use of Nicolas Stanniland and
his Heirs: which Surrender at the next Court, 11 Janua. 40 Elizab. by the hands
of the said N. S. and Tho. J. was delivered into the said Court, and there by
the homage of the said Court was presented; and by William West then Steward,
was accepted, and entered in the Rolls of the said Court; and that a Copy of
the Surrender, under the hand of the said Steward, was delivered to the said
Nicolas Stanniland, which Copy was found verbatim: viz. Ad hanc curiam
compertum est per homagium quod Tho. S. sursum reddidit ad usum N. St. and
haeredibus suis: but they said, that the said N. St. was no otherwise admitted.

By force of which the said Nicolas entered, and the 6 December. 1 Jac. out of
Court, by the hands of Thomas Jepson and Richard Shercliff, did surrender
according to the custom of the Manor, to the use of the said N. St. for life,
the remainder to William Stanniland and his Heirs: which Surrender, at the
Court of the Manor held the 17 May, 14 Jac. was delivered into Court by the
hands of the said Thomas Jepson and Robert Shercliff, and was presented by the
homage at the said Court, and was there accepted, and entered in the Roll by
the Sheriff, and that a Copy of the said Surrender, under the hand of the
Steward, was delivered to the said N. St. which Copy was found verbatim in the
said words with the former; and found that there was no other admittance.

The sixth of November, 2 Jacob. Nicolas St. dyed.

Thomas Shercliff entered at the Court 6 Maii, 12 Jacob. did surrender to the
use of the Plaintiff for ten years, and paid his Fine, and was admitted, etc.
whereby the Plaintiff did enter; upon whom the Defendant by the commandment of
William Stanniland did enter, and made the Trespass, etc. And so prayed the
Opinion of the Court.

And I conceive that the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment.

And in this case, are two matters considerable: First, if this Presentment of
the Lord, and the entry into the Roll, and the delivery of a Copy entered by the
Steward, be any admittance or not.

And I conceive that it is no admittance: For an admittance is a ceremony
requisite to make a Copyhold Estate, and is so necessary, that before
admittance, he to whose use the Surrender is made, has no Estate: as in
Bracton 2. cap. 8. Si ipse ad alium transfer voluerit prius illud restituet
domino, vel servienti, si dominus praesens non fuerit, and de manibus illorum
fiat translatio ad alium, etc. And before admittance, this is no perfect
assurance, but only begins then, as in Peryams Case: Cook. 5 R. If the Tenant
makes a Feoffment, and is not present within the year at the Court, and there
enters it, it shall be void: There the Feoffment is but opus inchoatum, as it
is there resolved, and is not perfected until it be presented and entered. And
I conceive that this admittance of a Copyholder is like to a Freehold at Law,
in which case nothing passes by the Deed till the Livery be made.

And now it is to be considered, whether there be any thing here to make the
admittance? for first, there is no express admittance, but if there be any
admittance, it ought to be implied: and I agree that if there be any act to
imply the consent of the Lord to this Surrender, it shall be a good admittance:
but here is no such thing. For the matter to make an employed admittance ought
to be taken and collected out of these four things contained in the Verdict.







Cestuy que use.

And I conceive that none of these do imply an admittance.

For first, no act by the homage can make an admittance; for they cannot make
an actual admittance, and therefore they cannot by any employed act make an
admittance. Then here is not any act made by the Lord himself amounting to an
admittance, for there is nothing ^ound to be done by him.

And as to the acts made by the Steward they are three: First, the acceptance
of the presentment which is no admittance, for he being Judge of the Court is
bound by the Law to receive the Presentiments offered to him by the homage.
Secondly, The Entry in the Roll, and this is also his duty to do for the
evidence of the Lord, and of him to whose use the Surrender is made. Thirdly,
The delivery of the Copy of the Presentment, which also ought to be done,
because that serves for Cestuy que use for his evidence when he was admitted.

But none of these things do imply the consent or will of the Lord, that Cestuy
que use shall be admitted, or that he shall have the Land according to the
Surrender; for when the Law implies any act out of the act of the party, the
act of the party ought to be such, as does necessarily such a thing to be
employed by the Law, and that to be so necessary, as the act of the party cannot
be, unless the Act to be employed be also done. 14 H. 7. If Tenant for life does
surrender to the Grantee of the Reversion, this is first an Attornment employed
by the Law, for otherwise the surrender can take no effect. And 5 Rep. fol. 15.
If a Parson makes a Lease for years to the Patron who grants over the Lease,
this does imply a confirmation of the Lease, for otherwise the Grant of the
Patron shall be avoided. And so in our Case, if the second Surrender had been
made to the Lord in Court, I do agree that it shall be an employed admittance of
Cestuy que use upon the first Surrender. But when the act of the party may be
without any such implication, and the matter to be employed rests indifferent,
then it is quite contrary. 2 R. 2. Attornment 8. Feme sole grants a Reversion,
to which a Rent is incident, and names the Grantee, to whom the Tenant pays the
Rent, this is no Attornment; for it is indifferent whether he pays this to the
Grantee as Grantee, or in right of his Wife. Vide 13 Elizab. Dyer 302.

Then in our Case, The acception of the Surrender, the Entry in the Roll, and
the delivery of the Copy of the presentment are things indifferent, and are not
such acts as necessarily imply any admittance, for all of them may be done,
although no admittance be made.

46 Ed. 3. Forfeiture. A Bishop made a Gift of Land in Tail, rendering Rent,
the Dean and Chapter did release part of the Rent, this is a confirmation of
the Gift, for it is necessarily employed, for otherwise the residue of the Rent
cannot be. But if they had only entered the Gift of the Bishop in their
Register, or in an Instrument under their seal, I conceive this shall be no
confirmation; for it may be that they made this, that the successor should be
the better able to avoid it.

And so in the case of the Patron aforesaid, if the Patron had entered the
Lease in one of his Evidences, or in an Instrument under his seal, this is not
any confirmation; for it may be that he did it for his better remembrance of
the Estate granted, and to the intent to instruct the successor to avoid it.

Secondly, I conceive until the admittance of him to whose use the Surrender is
made, the Estate of the Copyholder does remain in Thomas Shercliff who made the
Surrender: for it cannot be in Staniland, to whom the Surrender was made,
because the Surrender does make no Estate until admittance: for the Heir of the
Copyhold has the Estate of the Copyhold in him before any admittance, because
that he has an Estate descended to him from his Ancestor; for if it were
otherwise, the Estate shall be in abeyance, which shall be inconvenient; but
Cestuy que use has nothing until admittance. And in the 5 Rep. Periams Case: A
Feoffment by Franktenant of the Manor of Portchester shall be void, if it be
not presented at the next Court, where it is resolved that the custom is good,
and that the Feoffment is not fall and perfect until the presentment in Court
according to the custom, but it is as opus inchoatum and non perfectum.

And so in our case, the Surrender is no perfect assurance to pass the Estate,
until there be an admittance thereupon: and therefore it follows, that until
admittance, the Estate does remain in him who made the Surrender.

And in the Case of Frosell and Walsh, adjudged in this Court the last Term,
where Thomas Herring a Copyholder in Fee of the Manor of Mansel-Lacy, the 28
Elizab. according to the custom did surrender into the hands of two Tenants out
of the Court, to the use of George Whittington and others under whom the
Defendant claimed, and it was found by the custom that such Surrender ought to
be presented at the next Court, or that otherwise it should be void. Thomas
Herring dyed, Henry Herring being his Son and Heir, and before any Court
holden, or any admittance of George Whittington, Henry Whittington did enter,
and made the Lease to the Plaintiff, who brought an Ejectment, and it was
adjudged for him: for it was resolved, that until admittance the Estate
remained in him who made the Surrender, which by his death descended to Henry
his Heir.

Hillar. 13 Jacob. Webb against Herring.
IN an Ejectment upon a Lease made by Henry Person the 26 October. the 13 of King
James, of a house in the Parish of St. Mary Abchurch in the Ward of
Candlewick-street: Habendum from Michaelm. last past for three years, and laid
the Ejectment to be the 28 October. in the same year.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty.

And the Jury found, that William Say was seized in Fee of the said Message,
and of two other Messuages in the Parish of St. John's in Walbrook, London, and
held them in Socage. And that the 8 October. 1562. the said William having issue
Francis his Son, and Margaret, Agnes, and Alice, by his Will in writing did
devise the said Message in these words: I bequeath to Francis my Son all my
three Houses, after the death of my Wife Barbara, and his Mother: and if
Margaret, Agnes, and Alice, and either of them, do outlive their Mother and
their Brother Francis and his Heirs, then they to enjoy the three Houses for
their lives: and the three Houses then I give freely to my Sisters Sons, John
Wittinbury and Roger Wittinbury, and they to pay unto the Wardens of the
Batchelors Company of the Merchant-Taylors 6 l. 10 s. yearly to be given to the
poor and needy Brethren of the same Company for ever: and if the said John and
Roger and their Successors do deny the said payment of 6 l. 10 s. it shall be
lawful that the said Wardens to enter into the three Houses, and to discharge
them for ever.

William Say the Devisor dies.

Barbara enters.

Francis, Agnes, and Alice dye without issue.

Barbara dies.

Margaret enters.

John Wittinbury dies without issue.

Roger Wittinbury dies without issue, and the Lessor is Cousin and Heir to him,
viz. Son of Margaret Pierson, Sister of the said Roger.

The 18 of August, 13 Jacob. Margaret dyed seized, having issue John Savage her
Son and Heir, who entered: which Son, the 17 February, 13 Jacob. did infeoff
Edward Jackson in Fee, who the second of September, 13 Jacob did infeoff
Richard Slydhurst in Fee, who the third of September, 13 Jacob. did make the
Lease to the Defendant for four years, who entered; upon whom the Lessor did
enter, and made the Lease to the Plaintiff, upon whom the Defendant did enter.

And prayed the Opinion of the Court, etc.

And I conceive Judgment ought to be given for the Defendant.

But first, as to the Question that has been made, scil. What Estate John and
Roger Wittingbury shall take (if they shall take any Estate at all) by this
Will? I shall not argue: for I agree, that if they have any Estate, it is a
Fee-simple, in respect of the continual and perpetual charge imposed upon them
for the payment of 6 l. 10 s. to the Wardens, etc. for that is to have a
perpetual continuance in respect of the persons to whom it is to be paid, scil.
the Poor. And also the persons to pay are the two Wittingburies and their
successors, who in the Exposition of the Will shall be taken for their Heirs
and Assigns: and also in respect of the limitation of the payment, scil. [for
ever] which in a Will makes a Fee-simple: and ^^^^s much as the charge is to
continue for ever, it follows also that the Estate ought to continue, for
without the Estate the charge cannot be.

But I conceive that John and Roger shall take nothing by this will, or at
least that they shall take but a future Estate to begin after the death of
Francis without Heir, and then their time will never come, for John Savage
under whom the Defendant does derive his Estate, is Heir to Francis, and
therefore the Plaintiff nor his Lessor, being Heir to Robert Wittingb. the
Survivor cannot have this house.

And to prove this, here is an Estate limited by express words to Francis and
his Heirs, and no apparent intent by the Devisor, that the word (Heirs) shall
be restrained to the Heirs of his body, unless by reason of the limitation of
the Remainders afterward, which cannot be (as has been said) if Francis had a
Fee-simple. But as to this I say, that the same reason may be given, when a man
devises Land to A. and his Heirs, and if he die without Heir, that it shall
remain to B. and his Heirs, in which case if the Devise to A. shall be
restrained to an Estate in Tail, the Remainder to be is good, but no such
intent can be collected against express words, and therefore the Remainder is
utterly void, as in 19 H. 8. 8. B. where the Rule is given, that when the
intent of the Testator does not agree with the Law, his intent shall be void,
and this is a certain Rule. And West. 2. cap. 1. where it is provided, Quod
voluntas donatoris observetur, yet it ought always to agree with the Rules of
Law, as is proved by the 8. Assise 33. where was a Gift in Tail to two, and if
one dies, that the Survivor shall have all to him and the heirs of his body,
now does the Law say that they have several Inheritances, but the will of the
Donor was, that the Survivor should have all, which being repugnant to the Rule
of Law, was adjudged to be a void Clause, 35 H. 8. 6. Estates 75. Estates given
to the husband and wife for their lives, the Remainder to the heirs of their
bodies is an Estate-taile executed, notwithstanding the express will of the
Donor, because an Estate for life and of Inheritance cannot be distinct in one
and the same person without a mean Estate in another. So that in Wills, if the
intent be against Law, they are void: And so is it if the intent be ambiguous
and not manifestly to be collected out of the words of the Will. And in our
Case no manifest intent does appear to make the Estate of Francis an Estate in
Tail, C^ke 6. Rep. Wilds Case; One devised land to A. for life, the Remainder
to B. in Tail, the Remainder to R. and his wife, and after their deaths to
their Children, who then had two Children, the Devisor dies, and A. dies, and
B. dies without Issue, and and it was adjudged that the Children of R. and his
wife should have only an Estate for life, because that by Judgment of Law they
have but an Estate for life, and if R. and his wife should have an Estate in
Tail, it ought to be by the intent of the Devisor, which intent ought to be
manifest and certain, and so expressed in the Will, and in this case no such
intent does appear, for perhaps his intent was to accord with the Rule of Law,
15, and 16 Eliz. 9. a. A. having three Houses and having three Sons and a
Daughter, did devise to B. his first Son a House, paying ten pounds to his
Sister, and he to enter after the death of the wife of the Devisor, and did
devise to his second Son another Houses, paying to the Daughter ten pounds, and
he to enter at the age of one and twenty years, and did devise the third House
to the third Son paying ten pounds to his Sister, and he to enter at the age of
one and twenty years, and if any of his Sons died before the age of one and
twenty years, his part should be divided amongst the S^^vivors, and so every
one should be heir to the other, and all of them came of age, and paid the
money, and it was holden that each of them had an Estate in Fee and not in
Tail: and Dyer 357. Chick did devise the Fee-simple of a Message to A. his
wife, and after her death to W. his Son, which W. was his Heir apparent. A. did
enter and married again, and dyed, having Issue by him, and adjudged that A.
had an Estate for life, the Reversion to W. for life, the Remainder to A. in
Fee: and 14 Eliz. a. One seized of Lands in Fee devised them to B. and the
heirs of his body, and if he died, that it should remain to A. in fee, yet B.
shall have an Estate in Tail by the first words, and shall not be restrained
by the last words. And Trinit. 37 Eliz. Rot. 382. Bacon against Hill, and
having three Tenements did devise them to his wife for life, and then one of
them to each of his three Sons, and if any did die, his part should remain to
the Survivors, and if any had Issue and died before he entered, his Issue should
have it, and R. one of the Sons had Issue, the wife died, and R. died, and
adjudged that his Issue should have nothing.

Francis cannot die without heir so long and his Sisters are living, and
therefore it shall be construed that the Devisor did intend only the heirs of
his body.

Francis, so that they may be heirs to him; for although where a Brother or
Sister is spoken of in pleading, it shall be intended of the whole blood,
because a Brother of the half blood is but half a Brother, yet here when the
Father only does call them his Sons and Daughters, and is so found by the Jury
that they were his Sons and Daughters, yet this is no proof that they were of
the whole blood, for they are daughters to the Father by what ever wife they
were had.

And so I conceive upon the whole matter, that the wife does take an Estate for
life by the devise, and that the Son shall have a Fee-simple, but yet subject
to this future devise, sc. if he die without heir that the Wittingb. shall
have it, and so all the Will shall be good, except the limitation to the
Daughters for their lives, and it cannot be intended that the Devisor did
intend to prefer the Wittingb. being his collateral Cosins before the Issue of
his Daughters which Issues are of his own body.

Judgment.
And before that I argued again, Hillar. 14 Jacob. Judgment was given for the
Plaintiff, for they all agreed, that Francis had but an Estate-tail by these
words of the Will, viz. If M. A. and A. do out live their Mother and their
brother Francis and his heirs, and Francis cannot die without heir, so long
as his Sisters are living, and therefore the word (Heirs) shall not be intended
Heirs general, but heirs of his body, wherefore Judgment was entered ut
supra, etc.

Mich. 14 Jac. Mason against Manning.
IN an Ejectment upon a Lease made by John Crooker and Christopher Crooker, the
two and twentieth of May, 14 Jac. of two houses, forty acres of Land, forty of
Meadow, and forty of Pasture in S. Needs, Habendum from the Annunciation last
past, for three years: The Ejectment was the twenty third of May in the same
year.

The Defendant as to the force and arms, etc. pleaded not guilty, and as to
the residue he said, that Queen Elizabeth was seized in Fee of the Manor of S.
Needs, whereof the said Tenements are, and time out of mind were parcel, and
that the Queen the ninth of March, in the one and thirtieth year of her Reign,
by her Letters Patents, showed here under the Exchequer Seal, did devise the
said Tenements to Robert Croker for life, the Remainder to Edward Bett for
life, the Remainder to Edward Adams for life, the Queen dies, whereby the
Reversion does descend to the King, Robert Croker dies, and the thirtieth of
March, 14 Jacob. Edward Bet does devise the said Tenements to the Defendant
from the Annunciation last past, for three years, whereby he entered and was
possessed, until the said John and Christopher Croker did oust him, and did
disseise the said Edward Bet, whereby they were seized in fee by disseisin, and
made the Lease to the Plaintiff, upon which the Defendant claiming his term,
did enter, and did out him, and the Defendant was and yet is possessed of the
said Tenements, the Reversion to Edward Bet for life, the remainder to Edward
Adams for life, the Reversion to the King: unde non intendit quod curia (domino
Rege inconsulto) ulterius procedere vellet aut debeat; and prayed aid of the
King, and did aver the life of Edward Bet.

And I conceive that aid is not grantable in this case.

1. Because that it is but an Action of Trespass: 4 H. 6. 10. Tenant for life
of a Lease from the King shall not have aid of the King, for that no Freehold
is to be recovered, and he is able to plead to all matters in a Trespass.

2. The Defendant shall not have aid of the King, because he is not his
immediate Tenant, but he may pray in aid of Edward Bet his Lessor, and he of
the King. 1 H. 4. 18. In a Scire facias to execute a Fine, the Tenant said,
that the Land was given to him for life, the remainder to N. in Tail, the
remainder to W. in fee, who was attaint of Treason, whereby his remainder came
to the King, and he prayed aid, etc. And the Court said, that he ought to pray
aid of N. and he of the King: and after he said that W. was also attaint of
Treason, whereby he had aid of the King. 33 H. 6. 29. In a Trespass, where the
Defendant justified as Baily of a Hundred to distrain for amercements, and
prayed aid of the King, and by Prisot, he could not have it, for the Sheriff is
the immediate Officer to the King: and to this agrees 11 H. 6. 39. where such
justification was for taking of Toll: and 9 H. 6. 26. In a Replevin, the
Defendant made Conusance as Baily of I. who held of the King for life, and
prayed aid of the King, and adjudged he should not have it, for there is no
privity betwixt the King and him, because he is not immediate: and 28 H. 6. 13.
A man shall not have aid of the King and Queen, or of the King and his Tenant
for life, but first of the Queen or Tenant for life, and they of the King; and
a man shall not have aid of the King, but where he is Baily or Servant
immediately to the King.

Judgment.
And for these Reasons the Defendant was outed of his aid by Judgment of the
Court.

Michaelm. 14 Jacob. Lightfoot against Lerret and others.
IN an Action of Trespass, for that the Defendants, 20 November. 13 Jacob. two
Heifers of the Plaintiff of price 6 l. at Bentley and Sprodburgh, did take,
chase, and drive away, etc.

Richard Lerret did plead not guilty, and the other Defendants, viz. William
Lerret and Edward Tailor, as to one of the Steers did plead Not guilty, and for
the other, that the King was seized in Fee of the Manors of Doncaster, Arkse,
and Sprodburgh, whereof the Bridges called Wilcomb-Bridg and St. Mary-Bridg,
are, and time out of mind, etc. were within the said Manors.

That the 14 of January, 13 Jacob. the King did grant to Edmund Duffield and
John Babington, and their Heirs, Tolnetum omnium and singulorum pecudum, that
did pass and repass upon the Water and River of Dun in the County aforesaid, at
and by the said Bridges, to have and receive for the same, as there the Kings
of this Realm were used for such Toll or passage, rendering 10 s. Rent to the
King. And they said, that before and at the time of the making of the Grant,
the Toll was used to be taken at a Bridge called Burrow-Bridg, in the County
aforesaid, for every twenty Cattle that past by that Bridge 6 d.

That the 28 Junii, 13 Jacob. Duffield and Babington by Deed enrolled, and for
a sum of money, did bargain and sell the said Toll to John Richardson and his
Heirs.

That the third of June in the said year, John Richardson did bargain and sell
the Toll to the said William Lerret and his Heirs.

And the Plaintiff before the Trespass was possessed as well of the said Steer as
of thirty nine others, and that the said Plaintiff at the time aforesaid did
drive the said Cattle by the said Willow-Bridg and St. Mary-Bridg, whereupon
the said William Lerret did demand of the Plaintiff 12 d. for Toll of the said
forty Cattle, which the Plaintiff did refuse; whereupon the said William in
his own right, and the other as his servant, did take the said Steer by
distress for the said 12 d. And prayed aid of the King, etc.

The Plaintiff replied, that the said Willow-Bridg and St. Mary-Bridg were
common Bridges for passage for all the Kings Subjects of the City of York, and
other Cities and Towns in the North parts to Doncaster, and from thence to
London, and to the Cities and Towns in the South parts, at their pleasure with
Carts, etc. and that neither at the making of the Letters Patents, nor at any
time before, any Toll was taken or received for any passages over the Bridges
aforesaid.

Whereupon the Defendants demurred in Law, and the Plaintiffs joined.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

Dun by the said Bridges, and it is not alleged that the Cattle did pass over
the said River.

It is alleged that the two hedges are within the Manor, but it is

No certainty is granted, but only to take and receive, etc. and it
Burrowbridg.

No Town is alleged in which Burrow-Bridg is.

And Pasch. 15 Jacob. It was agreed by all the Court, that the Grant was
utterly void for the ^ncertainty, viz. to take such toll as was taken there and
otherwhere within the Realm of England, etc. And also that the Plea of the
Defendant was utterly insufficient for the other causes aforesaid: wherefore it
was adjudged that the Defendants should be outed of their aid, and that they
should plead in chief, etc.

Pasch. 14 Jacob. Parker against Sanders.
IN an Information upon the Statute of 39 Eliz. cap. the 2d. as well for the
King as for himself, for that one hundred acres of Land in Nether-Winchenden in
the County of Bucks, 17 November. 1 Eliz. and before the 24 of October. 29 Eliz.
were converted from tillage to sheep-pasture, and grasing of Cattle, which 100
acres were arable Land, such as were used in tillage for twelve years together
next before the said conversion, according to the nature of the soil and course
of tillage in that part of the Country: and that the said 100 acres were not
restored to tillage, nor laid for tillage before the first of May, 1599. nor
ever since: And that the Defendant the 26 of March, the 13 of King James, was
occupier of the said hundred acres, and did so continue until the 27 Martii, 14
Jacob. and that the Defendant the 27 of March did not restore nor lay to
tillage the said hundred acres, but for the said time converted them into
pasture, contrary to the form of the Statute, etc.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty.

And the Jury for the fifty acres of Land did find the conversion after the 17
of November, 1 Elizab. and before the 24 of October, the 39 of Elizabeth, and
that they were used in tillage for twelve years together before the said
conversion, and that they were not restored to tillage before the first of May,
1599. nor ever since: and that the Defendant the 26 Martii, 13 Jacob. was
occupier of the said fifty acres from that time unto the 27 Martii, 14 Jacob.
continuing his occupation thereof, and was not occupier thereof before the 26
Martii, 13 of King James: And that the Defendant, nor any other, before the 27
Martii, 14 Jacob. restored or laid the said fifty acres to tillage, but
continued them in Pasture during the said time: And prayed the advice of the
Court.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the King and the Informer
for 50 l. (viz.) twenty shillings for every one of the said fifty acres.

And to this purpose the Statute has two clauses, the first is a commandment,
and this does consist of two parts: 1. That all Land converted from tillage to
pasture since the 7 of November. and before the 24 of October. 39 Eliz. being
before used in tillage for twelve years together, shall be restored to tillage
before 1599. so as the whole according to the nature of that soil, and course
of husbandry uses within that part of the Country, be within three years at the
least turned to tillage by the occupiers and possessors thereof. 2. And so shall
be continued for ever.

The second clause does contain the forfeiture, (viz.) That if any shall offend
against the premises, every such person shall forfeit for every acre not
restored, or not continued as is aforesaid, 20 s. for every year that he so
offends.

And Judgment Judgment.
was given for the King and the Informer, for otherwise the Statute shall be
utterly defrauded: for if no information be for the conversion within one year
after, or if the Convertor pay the penalty of 20 s. for the converting, he may
let it out to another: And by pretense of the Defendants Council, he shall not
be subject to penalty for the continuance: But the Court agreed, that he who
made the conversion should be punished, and so should every other occupyer of
the Land who does not keep the Land in tillage.

Rot. 386.
Michaelm. 12 Jacob. Perryn against Audrey Barry.
IN a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in the Kings Bench for the said
Audrey against the said Perryn, in Debt upon a Bond of 100 l. made the 28 of
April, 5 Jacob. In which Action the said Perryn demanded Oyer of the said Bond,
and of the Condition, which was, That if the Defendant John Perryn, his
Executors, and Administrators, should perform the Award of Thomas Clyff, Roger
Glover, Robert Goodwin, and Thomas Piborn, Arbitrators as well for the said
Perryn as the said Audrey Barry, elected to Arbitrate of, for, and upon all and
all manner of Actions, cause and causes of Actions, Suits, Trespasses, Debts,
Duties, etc. and all other demands whatsoever, which between the said parties
at any time, until the date of the Obligation, have been had, moved, or now
depending: so that the same Award, etc. of the said Arbitrators, or any three
of them, of the premises, be made and given up in writing, indented under
their hands and seals, on or before the last of May next, that then the
Obligation shall be void. And the Defendant did plead, that the said
Arbitrators did not make any Award.

The Plaintiff did reply, that the said Roger Glover, Robert Goodwin, and
Thomas Piborn, three of the said Arbitrators, the 30 of May. fifth of King
James, did make their Award by writing indented, That the Defendant should pay
to the Plaintiff 57 l. (viz.) upon or before the 16 of June next 10 l. and the
29 of September next 17 l. and the 25 of November. next 20 l. and the 25 of March
next 10 l. And whereas the Defendant and Stephen Perryn were bound to the
Plaintiff in 12 l. upon condition to pay 6 l. at certain days, that the said
Obligation should be to the Plaintiff in force as then it was, and that she
should have such benefit thereby as she might have had before, and that the
Plaintiff should acquit and save indemnified the Defendant from all Debts,
Duties, and money, for which the Defendant with the Plaintiff was indebted or
bound to Dingley, Numan, Clark, Cater, or any of them. And that all Actions
depending between the parties in any of the Kings Courts, and all other Actions
and causes of Action for any matter between them, except the matters contained
in the Arbitrament, and the Obligation to perform the Award, should cease, etc.
And that if any controversy or doubt should happen between the parties, for or
about any word, sentence, or thing in the Arbitrament, or of or touching the
Award, or any thing contained therein, that the parties and their Executors
shall perform such explanation and construction thereof, as the said three
Arbitrators should make in writing under their hands concerning the same. And
that the Plaintiff shall pay to George Write for drawing and engrossing the
said Arbitrament 6 s. 8 d. which Agreement the said three Arbitrators shall
deliver to the parties the same day.

And although the Plaintiff did perform all, yet the Defendant did not pay the
10 l. the 16 of June next.

And hereupon the Defendant demurred in Law, and the Plaintiff joined, and
Judgment given for the Plaintiff: whereupon the Defendant brought this Writ of
Error.

And assigned the first Error, because the submission was to four, and

But all the Justices and Barons did hold, that the Agreement was well made
notwithstanding; for it shall be taken now to be a submission to four, or any
three of them: and so was it agreed in the Kings Bench, where this point has
been argued at the Bar oftentimes.

The second was, that the Arbitrators did not make any Award for l. in which
the said Plaintiff and St. Perryn were bound to the now Defendant, upon
condition to pay 6 l. at certain days: and the submission is conditional, sc.
That the Award be made of all things, etc. and therefore they ought to have
determined these matters. For it may be that this was the principal cause why
the Plaintiff did submit himself to the Award, sc. to be discharged of this
Bond, which perhaps was forfeited for not performing the condition, with the
penalty whereof he shall be now charged. And although the Bond was made by the
Plaintiff and another, yet was it a cause of action depending between the
Plaintiff and Defendant, for she may sue him. 2 R. 3. 18. b. If three men and
another do refer themselves to an Arbitrament of all demands between them, the
Arbitrators may make an Award of all matters which the three had against the
other jointly, and of each matter which every one of the three has against the
fourth, and may award that every one of the three shall pay money to the fourth.
Vide Comment. 389. Chapmans Case.

21 H. 7. 296. In debt by a woman as Executrix, the Defendant said, that I. S.
her husband and the Defendant did refer themselves to Arbitrament, who made an
agreement, and the husband dyed, and the Court held, that the debt of the woman
as Executrix was extinct by this Arbitrament.

The clause, that the now Defendant should acquit the Plaintiff of Dingley,
etc. is insufficient, because there is no Christian name.

The breach is assigned, for that the Defendant did not pay the 10 l. June,
whereas the Award was, that it should be paid upon or before the 16 day of
June. But all did agree, that this was well assigned, because that when it is
alleged, that it was not paid upon the 16 day, it was not paid before the day.

The Arbitrators have awarded, that the parties shall stand to their May.

They award 6 s. 8 d. to be paid by Audrey to George Write, for engrossing
Write is a stranger: 2. Because it is a thing agreed on after the submission.

Judgment.
And Hill. 14 Jac. The Judgment was affirmed, and they agreed the last agreement
to be void, but that was not material, for the Award was void only for that,
and good for the residue.

Rot. 100.
Hillar. 13 Jacob. Mande against French.
IN an Action of Debt for forty pounds upon the Statute of 2 Edw. 6. For that
the Plaintiff is and was for two years past Rector of Bifeild, and the
Defendant the first of October, 12 Jacob. was Occupier of eighteen acres of
Land, and thirty of Pasture in Bifeild aforesaid, and did continue the
occupation thereof for a year after, and the first of September. the 13 Jacob.
did mow and reap the Hay growing upon the Meadow, and the Grain (viz.) Barley,
Wheat, Pease, Beans, and Oats growing upon the Land, and the same day did take
and carry them away without setting out the Tithes, or agreeing with the
Plaintiff for them, and did aver the value of the Tithes to be thirteen pounds,
six shillings, eight pence.

The Defendant pleaded Non debet.

The Jury found that King Henry the eighth, was seized in Fee of the Advowson
of Bifeild, and the five and twentieth of April; 34 H. 8. the King granted the
same to Sir Edward Knightly, and Ursula his wife, and to the Heirs Males of the
body of Sir Edmund, the remainder to Valentine Knightley his brother, and the
heirs males of his body, the Remainder to the right heirs of Sir Richard
Knightley then dead, Father of the said Sir Edmund.

Sir Edmund died seized without Issue,

Ursula did surrender to Valentine, and the fifth of September 4, and 5 Phil.
and Mar. Valentine did give and grant the Advowson to Sir John Spencer, and
others, and their heirs, to the use of himself for the life of Ursula, and
after the decease of which of them should first die, to the use of Richard
Knightley his Son, and Mary his wife, and the heirs males of the body of
Richard, the Remainder to the right heirs of Sir Richard Father of Valentine.

That the twentieth of Febr. 6 Eliz. William Briggs Rector of Bifeild, by
Indenture did let the Rectory to the said Richard Knightley, habendum from the
next Annunciation for sixty one years, rendering 28. pounds Rent. And that the
twenty fourth of Febr. 6 Eliz. Valentine Knightley did confirm the Lease: and
the last day of February in the same year, the Bishop of Peterborow being
ordinary did confirm it.

That the thirtieth of July, in the same year, Richard Knightley did grant the
Lease to Edward Knightley his second Son, and afterward recovered the profits,
to the use of Edward being within age.

That the eighth of May, 8 Eliz. Valentine died seized of the Advowson, having
Issue the said Richard his eldest Son.

William Briggs did recover the Rent during his life and dies, whereby Richard
Knightley does present William Reynolds who was admitted, instituted, and
inducted, Reynolds did resign, whereupon Richard Knightley did present Richard
Burdsale, who was admitted, etc. and Burdsale did resign, wherefore Richard
Knightley did present Simon Rogers who was admitted, etc.

And they found that all these persons did accept the Rent.

And that the first of September. 21 Eliz. Richard Knightley did take the profits
to the use of Edward, and did devise the Rectory to Rogers the Parson for forty
years, if he should be so long Parson there.

That the thirteenth of November. 27 Eliz. Sir Richard Knightley did grant the
Advowson to Valentine his Son in Fee.

That the 34 of Eliz. A Fine was levied between Bartholomew Tate and Henry
Yelverton Esquires, Plaintiffs, and Valentine Knightley Esquire, Deforceator of
the said Advowson, Sur conusans de droit come ceo, with Warranty to the use of
the Conusees and their heirs.

Rogers did resign, whereupon the said Valentine did present Jonas Challoner,
who afterward died, and the Ordinary did present the Plaintiff by Laps, who
did accept the Rent for diverse years.

And they found the carrying away of the Tithes, and to the value of ten pounds.

And prayed the opinion of the Court upon the whole matter, whether the
Defendant owed the thirty pound to the Plaintiff, or not.

Upon which Verdict, the case is this.

Valentine Knightley seized of an Advowson in Tail to him and the Heirs males
of his body, the Remainder to the right Heirs of Sir Richard Knightley his
Father then dead, the 4, and 5 of Philip and Mary, did give and grant the
Advowson in Fee to the use of himself for the life of Ursula Knightley, the
Remainder to Richard his Son and Mary his wife, and the heirs males of the body
of Richard, the Remainder to the right heirs of the said Sir Richard the
Father. The twentieth of February, 6 Eliz. William Briggs the Incumbent does
make a Lease of the Rectory by Indenture, to Richard the Son for sixty one
years, from the Annunciation next, etc. rendering twenty eight pounds Rent.

And the twenty fourth of Febr. 6 Eliz. Valentine Knightley does confirm the
Lease; and the last of February in the same year, the Ordinary confirms it.

The thirtieth of July in the same year, Richard the Lessee grants the Term to
Edward Knightley his second Son within age, and takes the profits to his use.
And the 8. of Eliz. Valentine dies, Richard being his eldest Son: William
Briggs dies, whereby Sir Richard does present William Reynolds who was
admitted, etc. And he did resign, whereby Sir Richard did present Burdsale,
etc. who did resign, etc. whereby he presented Rogers, and all these persons
did receive the Rent. And the 21 Eliz. Sir Richard did make a Lease of the
Rectory to Rogers the Parson for forty years, if he shall be there Parson so
long. 27 Eliz. Sir Richard grants the Advowson to Valentine his Son in fee: and
34 Eliz. A Fine was levied of the Advowson between Bartholomew Tate, and Henry
Yelverton Plaintiffs, and Valentine Knightley Deforceator, to the use of the
Conusees and their heirs; Rogers did resign, whereby the said Valentine did
present John Challoner, etc. who died, and the Ordinary collated the Plaintiff
by Laps, who for many years accepted the Rent, and the Defendant did take and
carry the Tithes to the value of ten pounds.

And whether this Lease be good to bind the Plaintiff, or not, is the question,
and I conceive it is not.

And for the arguing of this Case I will consider these three things.

The Validity of the Lease without any confirmation.

If here be any confirmation of this Lease, and if it continues in force

Admitting here be not any sufficient confirmation of it self, if the Valentine
Knightley has given any force and strength to it.

And as to the first I conceive without any doubt that this Lease without any
confirmation is determined by the death of the person who made it, and is so
determined as no acceptance of Rent by the Successor can make it good, and
therefore the difference is between a Lease for life, and a Lease for years
made by a person rendering Rent, for the Lease for life is only voidable, and
not void by the death of the Lessor, so that if the Successor does accept the
Rent and Fealty, he shall be bound for his time, as in 11 Ed. 3. and 8 H. 5.
10. and 2 H. 4. 2. The Successor shall maintain an Action of Waste against such
Lessee for life, but a Lease for years is merely determined by the death of the
Lessor, 38 H. 8. 6. Leases 18. and 24 H. 8. 6. There a diversity is taken and
agreed between a Lease for life made by a Parson in which case the acceptance
of the Rent or fealty by the Successor shall make it good, for his time, and a
Lease for years which is merely determined by the death of the Lessor, so that
no acceptance of the Rent or fealty can make it good, and therefore the
acceptance of the Rent in our case, which is found to be made by the Lessor
himself, and all the succeeding persons, and also by the Rule of these Books,
is nothing to the purpose, and therefore I shall speak no more of that, Vide 2
Ed. 6. 33. Dyer 239.

sc. If here be any sufficient confirmation of the Lease against the Plaintiff,
or not; The Defendant has endeavored to have many things to be found by the
Jury to make a confirmation. 1. The express confirmation by Valentine
Knightley the Father of Sir Richard. 2. The Grant of the Lease by Sir Richard
to Edward Knightley his Son. 3. The taking of the Profits by Sir Richard, to
the use of his Son being within age. 4. The Lease made by Sir Richard, the 21.
of Eliz. to Rogers the Incumbent: for I cannot conceive for what cause any of
these things are found, unless it be to opperate as to a confirmation.

And as to the first, third, and fourth, I do conceive, that they nor none of
them can make this Lease good, for by the first it is found that Valentine at
the making of his confirmation had but an Estate for life of Ursula Knightley,
the which is merely determined by the death of Valentine, and although Ursula
be not found dead, yet is not that material, for this Advowson being a thing
that lies only in Grant and not in Law, cannot go to any Occupant. And
therefore the death of Valentine has determined this as fully, as if Ursula
had been dead. And therefore the diversity is when a rent or other thing which
lies in grant is granted to one and his heirs for the life of another, and the
Grantee dies; I agree that the heir by special limitation shall have this: as
Littleton 169. 19 Ed. 3. Account 56. but no Estranger can have it, and the
reason is, because that the sole means that the Law does give to one to gain an
Estate of Occupancy is by Entry, but no Entry can be in an Advowson, Rent. or
any other thing that lies in Grant, and therefore here can be no Occupancy, 26.
Assise 38. and 12 H. 7. 16. If he in Reversion does enter after the Occupant,
and brings an Action against him, the Occupant ought to plead the Lease for
Cestuy que use, whose Estate he has, but for a Rent or an Estate that lies in
Grant, none can plead a que Estate, but ought to entitle himself by the Grant,
and that cannot any one do in this Case. And as to the third matter of
confirmation, which is the taking of the Profits by Sir Richard Knightley, this
cannot be any confirmation of the Lease, for although the assent of the Patron
be sufficient, yet it ought to be by Deed, otherwise it cannot be good. And as
to the fourth, which is the Lease made by Sir Richard by Rogers the Incumbent,
that is not any confirmation. 1. Because this Lease does not concern the Lease
made by Briggs, but is an absolute and original Lease made by Sir Richard
himself as Owner of the Rectory. 2. Because that at the making of this, Sir
Richard had nothing in the Rectory, for he had granted all his term before to
Edward Knightley, and therefore his Lease to Rogers is void, unless it be by
way of Estoppell.

Then as to the second matter of confirmation, sc. whether the Grant of the
Term by Sir Richard to Edward Knightley, I will not agree to it at all, but
according to the resolution in Hodges case, that this is a confirmation as good
as Sir Richard could make it. But this confirmation being in the nature of a
charge upon the Advowson, ought to be directed by the Estate which Sir Richard
then had, and being derived out of that Estate, it cannot endure longer then
the Estate; as in Littleton 122. a. If a Parson does charge the Glebe, and the
Patron and Ordinary confirm it, the Grant shall be in force, but in such case
the Patron ought to have an Estate in fee, for if he has an Estate but for
life or in Tail, the Grant is good but during his life, and the life of the
Parson who grants it, 31 Ed. 3. Grants 61. A Parson grants an Annuity to a
Pryor which is confirmed by the Tenant in Dower of the Advowson. this is not
good after the death of the Tenant in Dower, and Dyer 252. A Chantry Priest
made a Lease for ninety nine years, which was confirmed by the Patron who was
Tenant in Tail, and after the Chantry is dissolved by the 1. of Ed. 6. it is a
question if the King shall avoid the Lease, but it was agreed clearly, that if
the Chantry had continued, that the Lease should be void against the Incumbent,
who comes in upon the presentation of the Tenant in Tail.

And this Rule being clear (as I conceive it is) that the confirmation shall
not bind according to the Estate of the Patron, the Estate which Sir Richard
had in the Advowson at the time of his assignment, which does imply a
confirmation is to be considered.

And as to that, the Case is, That Valentine being Tenant in Tail of the
Advowson, by Deed did give and grant the Advowson to one in fee to the use of
himself, during the life of Ursula, the Remainder to the use of Sir Richard,
being his Issue in Tail, and thereupon it follows that Sir Richard had an
Advowson in Remainder in Fee-taile, depending on an Estate for another life,
but this fee was determinable upon the death of Valentine the Tenant in Tail.

But objection was made in the Argument against one, Valentine, shall be
intended to pass by Livery (for it was said that an Advowson might pass by
Livery) and then here is a discontinuance.

But I deny first that an Advowson can pass by Livery, Ed. 3. 5. 11 H. 6. 4.
and 20 Ed. 4. and 5. yet are there many Authorities against it, and so is the
true reason of the Law. 18 Ed. 3. 16. Shard, It was never heard that one could
enter into an Advowson, therefore no Livery can be made: and 11 H. 4. 3. 6. An
Advowson in gross cannot pass without Deed, 9 Ed. 4. 47. a. One cannot grant
Proximam advocationem without Deed, Dyer 323. Advowson of the Vicaridge of D.
does pass by the Grant of all hereditaments in D. although it lies not in
Livery, nor is visible, and Coke 9. Rep. 96. An Advowson is not manual, but is
Haereditas incorporata; and so Littleton 3. of things which do not lie in
manual occupation or possession, as an Advowson, he shall not plead as seized
in his Demesne as of fee, but as of fee: and so Littleton 139. If Tenant in
Tail grants the Advowson it is no discontinuance.

And the reason is apparent, because that nothing can pass by Livery, but that
whereof possession may be taken by the Feoffor or Donor, and given to him by
the Feoffee or Donee. And it is more colorable to say that he in Reversion
upon an Estate for life may make Livery, for although a Reversion be not
visible or mannuall, yet Terra revertens which the Grantee shall have after the
Estate determined is manual, and yet I conceive that none will hold that such
a Reversion so long as it continues a Reversion may pass by Livery.

Valentine did grant it by Deed, and there is no doubt but it may pass by Deed
without Livery, and therefore no Livery being found, Livery shall not be
intended, for it shall not be intended to be a discontinuance whereby the
Tenant in Tail shall do wrong, when the Advowson may well pass by Deed which
is no wrong. And therefore I conceive, that notwithstanding this objection that
here is no discontinuance but only a grant of an Advowson, which is
determinable by the death of the Tenant in Tail who made it, from whence it
follows, that Sir Richard at the time of his grant of the Lease, had only a
Remainder in fee in the Advowson determinable on the death of Valentine his
Father, which Estate is only charged by his confirmation, for as Issue in Tail
he cannot make any confirmation, because he had nothing in him at that time, 10
Ed. 3. 2. Confirmation 22. If the Son confirms the Estate of the Disseisor in
the life of his Father, and the Father dies, the Son shall not be barred by his
confirmation without Warranty.

13 Ed. 1. Confirmation 19. If one does quit Claim for him and his heirs, all
his Right before that his Right does happen, the quite claim is nothing, and so
is Littleton 106. Releases, and the reason of these Cases is upon the Rule of
the Common Law, which is, that one cannot grant or charge that which one has
not.

By which it plainly appears that this employed Confirmation made by Sir
Richard, does make the Lease good only for so long time, as he has Estate in
the Advowson, which is determinable by the death of Valentine. And to prove
that it is so determinable, it is a certain Rule, that all Grants and Charges
made by Tenant in tail are determined with his life: and so is Littleton,
Discontinuance 139. If Tenant in tail of an Advowson or Common does grant this
in fee, it is no Discontinuance, for the Grantee has no Estate but for life of
the Tenant in tail who made the Grant, 22 H. 3. Discontinuance 52. If a Rent
be granted to husband and wife in fee, and the husband grants this in fee and
dies, yet the wife may distrain, and shall not be put to her Action, 36. Assise
8. Tenant in tail of a Reversion grants the same in fee with Warranty, and
dies leaving Assets, the Tenant for life dies, and the Issue enters, and his
entry congeable, for the Grant is merely determined by his death, so that the
Warranty cannot work, 38 H. 8. b. Discontinuance 35. If the King Tenant in
tail grants the Land for lif^ it is no discontinuance, for a Grant without
Livery makes no discontinuance, but this shall not bind but during the life of
the Grantor, 26 H. 7. 4. Fineaux, Tenant in tail of Services is like Tenant
for life, and by his Grant nothing does pass but for his life, and after his
death the Issue may distrain, but if he brings a Formedon he shall be barred by
the Warranty, for then he admits it to be a Discontinuance. And Hill. 39 Eliz.
Rot. 941. In the Common Pleas between Keen and Cox, Thomas Jennings Tenant in
tail, the Remainder to John his Brother, made a Lease for three lives,
according to the Statute of 32 H. 8. with Warranty, and dies without Issue,
John being his heir who entered, and agreed good, for the Estate of the Lessee
was determined by the death of the Lessor without Issue, wherefore the Warranty
could be no bar to the Remainder: And although the Issue in case of Grant of a
Rent by his Ancestor, may have a Formedon, yet that is no proof that the Grant
is not determined, for although it be determined, yet may he admit himself out
of possession if he will, and is like to the Case where one takes my Rent, yet
he gains no possession by this, but that I may distrain notwithstanding, yet if
I will I may admit the possession to be out of me, and so maintain an Assise
against the Pernor.

And as to the opinion in the case of Fines in the 3. Rep. That if there be
Tenant in tail of a Rent, or a thing which lies in Grant, who grants the same
by Fine, and dies before the Proclamations made, that the Grant is not
determined, but that the Proclamations may be made is grounded upon the
reasonable construction of the Statute of the 4 H. 7. of Fines, for otherwise
the provision of the Statute that the fine shall be a bar cannot be, for that
is the reason there given.

But it has been objected, Richard Knightley was dead, it shall be intended
that he is alive, and then his confirmation remains in force.

To which I answer, 1. That his being alive cannot be presumed, Ed. 3. Tenant
in Tail of a Rent grants the Rent over, the Grantee when he makes Title there,
ought to aver the life of the Tenant in Tail for by his death the Grant is
determined; vide Dyer 73. 19 H. 6. 73. 5 H. 7. 39. 15 Ed. 4. 6.

And although there is a special Verdict in our Case, which shall be taken
more favorably then a Plea, yet is it all one, for I agree that a Verdict need
not be so formal as a Plea, but if it wants substance either on the one party
or the other, this shall prejudice the party as much as if there had been a
pleading, for the Court cannot give Judgment without some matter found, and
therefore for as much as in our Case the life of Sir Richard makes for the
Defendant, and all the validity of his Lease depends thereon, he ought to prove
by evidence that Sir Richard was alive, so that the Jury might have found it,
and because it was not so found, the Court will not intend that he is alive,
and therefore he shall be taken to be dead, and so his confirmation is finished.

But admitting it shall be intended that he is alive, yet I conceive that
immediately upon the death of Valentine, his Estate which he had by the
limitation of the use is determined and vanished, and he is remitted to his
Estate-taile, and then his confirmation (as I have already proved) which does
charge the Estate which he has by limitation of the use cannot endure.

Yet I will agree, that if Tenant in Tail makes a Feoffment to the use of
himself for life, and after to the use of his Issue being within age, and dies,
that his Issue shall not be remitted, as it is resolved in the Comment. 111.
Townsends Case, and 207. Standbridge and Morgans Case. But the diversity is
when the Estate-taile is discontinued whereby the Entry of the Issue is taken
away, and he is put to his Formedon, there he shall not be admitted for the
limitation of a use to him, for if he will take the Estate according to the use
he ought to take it in the same manner as he had the use, but when no
discontinuance is made of the Estate-taile it is otherwise, as in Townsends
Case Comment. 111. Where Amy the wife of- Roger Townsend was Tenant in Tail,
and the Husband the 29. of H. 8. made a Feoffment to the use of himself and his
wife for life, the Remainder to the use of their eldest Son for life, with
diverse Remainders over, the husband and wife died, and resolved that neither
the wife nor the Son are remitted, and the reason there was, because that the
Feoffment being made before the Statute of 32. of H. 8. was a Discontinuance,
to the purging of which, the wife was driven to her Cui in vita, and cannot
avoid this by Entry, as she might after the Statute of 32 H. 8. and therefore
it is there agreed that if a Disseisor make a Feoffment to the use of the
Disseisee, and he enters, he is remitted, because his Entry was congeable: And
so Dyer 191. 2, and 3 Eliz. Land is given to the husband and wife, and to the
Heirs of the body of the husband, the husband after the Statute of 32 H. 8.
makes a Feoffment to the use of himself and his wife for life, the Remainder to
the first Son for life, the Remainder to the right heirs of the husband, the
husband dies, and it was resolved in the Court of Wards, that the wife should
be remitted, notwithstanding the Statute of Uses, because that her Entry was
congeable: and so 11 H. 7. 12. a. If the son disseiseth the Disseisor of his
Father, and the Father dies, now forasmuch as that a right of Entry was in the
Father, which by his death does descend to the Son, he shall be remitted,
notwithstanding that he came to the possession by his own proper and wrongful
Act, which is as strong against a Remitter, as an Agreement is to a Use. And so
if the Son and another does disseise the Father, and the Father dies, the Son
is remitted, and shall put out his companion.

And then Sir Richard being remitted, the Confirmation (as I have showed
before) being but a charge upon the Advowson, is merely determined; and so
Littleton 148. B. If Tenant in Tail enfeoffs his Issue within age, who at full
age does grant a Rentcharge, or a Common, and the Father dies, the Issue shall
hold discharged: and 40 Ed. 3. 448. If Tenant enfeoff a stranger who grants a
Rent, and enfeoffs his Son within age, and the Tenant in Tail dies, the Issue
shall hold the Land discharged: and the same Law by Catesby, in 12 Ed. 4. 13.
b. If Tenant in Tail after Discontinuance does repurchase the Land, and dies,
and the reason is, because the Statute that was charged is vanished. And
although that the opinion of Bromley, 33 H. 8. Dyer 51. b. be that the Issue in
such case shall not avoid a Lease for years made by him before his Remitter,
yet the case of a Rent is there also agreed that it is determined by the
Remitter, and the same Law is in Ioynt-tenancy, if one does make a Lease for
years, so that he does dispose of the possession, this shall bind the Survivor,
but otherwise if he charges the Land with a Rent or other thing, and so is it
where a husband has a term in right of his wife, as in 7 H. 9. 2. 3.

And as to the last part of the Case so: If the Fine levied by Valentine the
Son and Heir of Sir Richard Knightley does give any force or strength to the
confirmation, or not, and I conceive that it does not for three causes.

First, the Fine is not with any Proclamations, so that it is no bar to the
Intail, and therefore it is no more then a bare Grant of a Tenant in Tail.

Secondly, As this Fine is found, it cannot be intended to be levied by
Valentine Knightley the Son of Sir Richard, but by a stranger of that name: for
it is first found, that the 27 Eliz. Sir Richard did grant the Advowson to
Valentine Knightley then his Son and Heir apparent, and that the 36 Eliz. a
Fine was levied between B. T. and H. Y. Plaintiffs, and Valentine Knightley
Esquire Deforceator, wihout saying (the aforesaid) and therefore I conceive,
that Valentine Knightley Esquire, who levied the Fine, cannot be intended to be
Valentine Knightley Son and Heir of Sir Richard, and yet I agree the Case of 21
H. 7. 30. That when Westminster is put into a Plea, and then a matter is
alleged apud Westmonasterium, without (praedict.) it shall be intended the
same place, but when another addition is given to the person or place, it is
otherwise, and therefore in the second place if it be said apud Westmonasterium
super Thamesin, it shall not be taken for one place, 5 Ed. 6. Dyer.

New Book of Entries 650. 35, and 36 Eliz, In the Kings Bench, Upon a Trespass
for breaking his Close, and breaking and spoiling two Gates and three perches
of Hedge, the Defendants prescribed to go there in perambulation, upon which
there was a demur, etc. and adjudged for the Plaintiff. 1. Because that he
ought to allege this by custom and not by prescription. 2. Because the Bar
was, that the Plaintiff had obstructed the way, Cum sepibus and Januis, and did
not say praedict. so that it might not be of the same Gates in the Declaration,
and that is there said to be a fault incurable. And although we are not in the
nature of a Plea in our case but of a special Verdict, yet as I have showed
before, that is all one where it wants matter of substance. Thirdly, the
Confirmation is utterly defeated and avoided by the Remitter to Sir Richard
Knightley, and therefore the Fine cannot revive it, 14. Assise 3. Tenant in
Tail does charge the Land and dies, and the Issue does enfeoff a stranger, he
shall hold the Land discharged, because the Land was once discharged by his
Entry, and so shall the Issue do that re-purchaseth the Land, 19 Ed. 3. Resceit
112. Tenant in tail acknowledges a Statute and dies, and the Issue enfeoffs a
stranger, against whom the Conusee sues out execution, and adjudged there good,
but yet it was denied in 11 H. 6. 26. b. by Paston; and Comment. 437. Smith and
Stappletons case. And Trin. 15 Jac. This Case was argued by Sir Tho. Coventry
the Kings Solicitor, for the Plaintiff, and by Sir Hen. Yelverton the Kings
Attorney for the Defendant. And Hill. 15. Jac. by Sergeant Chidborn for the
Plaintiff, and by Sergeant Harvy for the Defendant. And Pasch. 16. Jac. without
any argument by the Judges agreed for the Plaintiff; and thereupon Judgment
Judgment.
was given that the Plaintiff should recover.

Mich. 14 Jac. Ashfeild against Wrendford.
IN a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in the Common Pleas for the now
Defendant against the Plaintiff, in an Action of Debt upon a Bond of two
hundred Marks made the first of October, 9 Jac. In which the now Plaintiff,
then Defendant, did plead that Gregory Havard was possessed of five Cowes,
thirteen Sheep, and of certain Hay, Wheat, Rye, Pease, Barley, Oats, and
Fetches, not Threshed. And some speech being had between the said Gregory and
one John Ashfeild, for the buying thereof, whereupon the said Gregory did
affirm the same to be twenty Loads of Hay, thirty of Wheat, a hundred of Rye,
etc. whereupon before the making of the Bond, viz. the last of September, the 9
Jacob. It was agreed between the said Gregory, and the said John, that the said
John should pay for the said goods seventy five pounds, and that a Bond should
be made, in which should be contained that the said now Plaintiff, with the
said John Sturet, were bound to Cuidam Edward Wrensford in two hundred Marks
upon condition for the payment of the said seventy five pounds, which writing
was to be delivered to the said Gregory, as a Schedule to be kept, upon
condition that the said Gregory before the said day of payment should go to the
house of the said John in Pixley, to account with him for the said Goods, and
if thereupon any of the said Goods should be wanting, if the said Gregory shall
be content to make the same up, that then the Writing should be delivered to
the said Edmund, otherwise it should remain as a Schedule, whereupon the said
Writing mentioned in the Declaration was made and sealed, and delivered to the
said Gregory upon condition aforesaid. And after the measuring of the Hay,
there wanted eight Loads, etc. and the said Gregory did not come to the House
of the said John, etc. And so pleaded it was not his Deed. And found for the
Defendant, etc.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be reversed.

For Cuidam Edward Wrensford cannot be intended the Plaintiff in the first
Action, but a stranger of that name, as in Dyer 5 Ed. 6. Case of Isham and
Wither: And then the aforesaid Edward to whom the Obligation is made and who
joined Issue, and appeared at the trial, and at the return of the Postea, and
for whom Judgment was given ought to be referred to Cuidam Edward Wrensford,
whereof mention is last made in the Plea, and not to the Plaintiff in the
Action, and so Issue is joined by a stranger, and Judgment given for him, and
not for the Plaintiff.

Judgment confirmed.
But all the Court held that the Issue shall be intended to be joined by the
Plaintiff himself, and upon the Bond whereon the Declaration is made, wherefore
Judgment was affirmed, etc.

Hill. 14 Jac. Newsham against Carew Knight; In the Exchequer.
IN an Ejectment, the Case was this. A Bishop makes a Lease of a Rectory to
I.S. for 21. years, and dies, the Successor before the Statute 1 Eliz makes a
Lease of this to I. N. habend. from the 20. December. 1. Eliz. (being the day of
the date for 56. years from thence next ensuing, the end of the Lease to I, S.
and dies, and the 56. years are expired from the 20. of December. 1 Eliz.

And if this second Lease be ended or not, is the Question?

And I conceive that the Lease shall begin from the 20 of December, and so it
is ended before the Lease made to I. S.

For the argument of which case, the true sense and meaning of this ill penned
Habendum is to be considered, for thereupon all the difficulty of this case
does depend: and as to that I conceive there are but four ways to expound this
Habendum: and if it be taken in any of these constructions, this Lease shall
begin by computation from the 20 of December, 1 Elizab. and so shall end the 20
of December, 12 Jacob. which is before the Lease made to the Lessor of the
Plaintiff.

And the first way is to observe the first part of the Habendum, (scil.) from
the 20 day of December then next following, to be only material and good; and
the last part, being repugnant thereto, is void.

The second way is to take the first words of the limitation of the beginning of
the Estate to be void, and the last words (scil.) next following the
determination and end of the term of I. S. etc. to be good.

The third way is to construe as well the first as the last words of the
Commencement to be void, by reason of the direct repugnancy in them.

And the fourth and last construction is, to make such construction, as all
these words by a reasonable exposition may agree together.

And according to any three of these constructions, (viz.) the first, the
third, or the fourth, it is apparent, that the Lease to I. N. under whom the
Defendant claims, did end the 20 of December, 12 Jacob. which was before the
entry of Anthony Rudd the last Bishop, and the Lease made to the Lessor of the
Plaintiff, and then this Lease is good: and therefore my endeavor is to prove,
that this Habendum ought to be taken in any of these three ways, viz. the
first, third, or fourth, and to disprove that it cannot be taken in the second
way.

For the argument whereof, I shall speak to the first and second together: for
that that I will speak of the first, will be a manifest disproof of the second.

And as to this, I conceive that it is a Rule infallible in the exposition of
Deeds, that when two clauses are contained in a Deed, the one contradicting the
other, the first shall be good, and the last void. 2 Ed. 2. Feoffments and
Deeds 94. One gave Land to R. with A. his daughter in Frank-marriage, habendum
to R. and his Heirs, with warranty to him and his Heirs, they dyed, and their
Son brought a Mortdancestor: and because the first clause was in
Frank-marriage, and the other in Fee, the Justices doubted to which of them
they should have regard: and at last adjudged, that when there were several or
two clauses in a Deed repugnant, or of diverse natures, that more regard ought
to be taken to the first, then to the last. But otherwise in Wills, for there
the last part of a Will shall control the first; as if one first does devise
Land to A. and after devise this to another, and it is to both in fee, yet the
last devise shall stand. 19 Ed. 3. Tail 1. In a Writ of Ad Terminum qui
praeteriit, the Tenant pleaded a Gift in Frank-marriage to his Father and
Mother by Deed, which was thus, that is to say, habendum to them for their
lives, and resolved, that the Gift in Frank-marriage being first, that it is
good, and the Habendum being contrary, is void: and there the same rule is
given, where two clauses are contained in a Deed, and the one is contrary to
the other.

And in Tracy and Throgmortons Case, Comment. 153. It is a ground in Law, that
if the Habendum in a Deed be contrary to the Estate given by the premises, the
Habendum shall be void: as if a Grant be made to one and to his Heirs, Habendum
for life, the Habendum is void. 13 H. 7. 23. and 24. and Dyer 272. A Termor
does grant his term to another, Habendum after the death of the Grantor,
adjudged that the Habendum is void. And 2 Ed. 4. If one release all his right
in B. acre, which he purchased of I. S. and in truth he did not purchase it of
I. S. but of another, or else had it by descent, yet is the release good, for
the first clause shall stand, and the other shall be void. And Dyer 292. b. One
having a Close called Callis, lying in Hurst in the County of Wilts, does make
a Lease of his Close called Callis in the County of Berks, and adjudged that it
shall pass, for the first words shall be, and the other shall be void. And Dyer
32 H. 847. 6. a Lease was made for life without impeachment of waste, and if it
happen him to make waste, that then it shall be lawful for the Lessor to enter.
Shelley conceived there, that the condition was void, because it was repugnant
to the former Grant; but some conceived, that the Grant shall be intended, that
he shall not be punished by action. Whereupon I collect, that if the condition
in the last clause cannot agree with the first, the last is void: and so Dyer
56. 6. If I release to A. all actions which I. S. has against him, the Release
is good; and the words (viz.) which I. S. has against him, are void: for by
words subsequent, a Deed may be qualified and abridged, but not destroyed.

And as to the third manner of exposition (viz.) to construe all the words of
the limitation, as well the first as the last, to be void. There is a Rule in
Law, that when words in a Deed, Plea, or Record, are so repugnant, that the
true sense thereof cannot be known to the Court, what is to be judged or
construed upon them, that all shall be taken to be void, as appears by diverse
Books: 33 H. 6. 26. In an action on the Case, wherein the Writ was, that
whereas the Plaintiff had a way by reason of his tenure, the Defendant had
levied a Wall, whereby his way was stopped; and there Prisot said, that the
Writ was not good for the repugnancy: and 9 H. 7. 3. a. One pleaded Null tiel
Record and hoc paratus est verificare per idem Recordum; this was adjudged
insufficient, because the Plea is repugnant, viz. the first part which is not a
Record, and the last that there is such a Record: and Dyer 70. 5 Edw. 6.

And so here, if these two limitations in the beginning of this Lease are so
repugnant one to the other, that they cannot consist together, then both shall
be adjudged void: and then there being no certain time put for the beginning of
the Lease, the Lease shall begin presently; as in 3 Ed. 6. 6. A man made a
Lease for years to commence after the end of a Lease made to I. S. and in truth
I. S. had no Lease, the Lease shall begin presently.

And as to the fourth manner of exposition, I conceive that these ambiguous
words shall be construed [if it may be] that all may be good as to a reasonable
exposition: and that is, that the 56 years shall begin from the 20 December. 1
Eliz. but the Lease does not take effect in possession until the end of the
other Lease; for terminus annorum has two significations, scil. one the time
or number of the years, and the other the Estate or interest of the term; and
therefore if one does grant his term, the Estate does pass thereby: and this
diversity is taken and explained the 35 H. 8. 6. and in Cooks 1 Rep.
Cheddingtons Case. So that I conceive that the first words in the Habendum here
ought to be applied and referred to the time or number of years, according to
the first definition of the term; and the last shall be applied to the last
definition, and shall be taken only as words explanatory put in for better
caution by the Bishop to avoid contention between the Lessees, viz. That the
last Lessee shall not meddle with the possession until the end of the first
term: and by this construction, and no other, may all the words agree together:
Dyer 9 Eliz. 261. 6. Abbot and Covent did make two Leases of two parcels of
Land to two persons, 1531. for 31 years, and after the successor 1535. reciting
both the Leases, did make a new Lease to the other in these words: Noveritis
nos praedict. Abb. etc. dictis 31 annis finitis and complet concessise to the
Lessee the said Land, holden from the day of the making of these presents
(termin. praedict. finitis) until the end and term of 31 years from thence next
following. And the Justices of the Common Bench held, that it shall commence to
take effect in possession at the end of the former term, and not before: and
[from the day of the making of these presents] is but a declaring of the first
sentence, which is obscure to some intents; and if it were not so expressed, the
Lessee shall have but a Lease for four years, which was not the intent of the
parties, as it should seem; but the Court of the Kings Bench was on the
contrary: But afterward the case was resolved upon another point, viz. That
the Lease was void, because that the words [a die confectionis, etc.] were
razed by the Lessee himself. But admitting that in this case the Lease should
not begin until the end of the first Lease, yet that is no proof, that in our
case the Lease shall not begin presently: for in this case of the 9 of Elizab.
the true Grant in the premises does show the intent of the parties to make a
Lease in Reversion, and that shall control the words in the Habendum [a die
confectionis:] also these words are qualified by other words in the Habendum,
viz. termino praedict finito. Thirdly, the former Lease is recited as a good
Lease without doubt, but in our case the first Lease is not received as a Lease
in truth, but is termed a pretended Lease: and yet in this case there were
diversities of Opinions, if the Lease shall commence presently or not. And
Mich. 10 Jacob. Thomas Moor brought an Ejectment against John Musgrave upon a
Lease made to him by William Moor the fifth of May, 10 Jac. of a Message, etc.
in C. in the County of Cumberland, habendum from the Feast of the Anunciation
last past for 21 years, whereby he entered and was possessed until the Defendant
the same day did eject him: To which the Defendant pleaded Not guilty. And the
Jury found, that William Moor was seized in Fee, and made a Lease to the
Plaintiff, habendum from the Anunciation of the Virgin Mary last past, for the
term of 21 years next ensuing the date hereof, etc. And Judgment was given for
the Plaintiff, whereby it appears that the term shall begin from the first
limitation.

And after the Case was argued on the Bench by all the Judges, Judgment.
and Denham, Bromley, and Tanfield were of Opinion for the Defendant: wherefore
Judgment was given against the Plaintiff.

Michaelm. 14 Jacob. Standish against Short in the Exchequer.
IN an Ejectment on a Lease made by George Walker Parson of the parish of S.
John Evangelist in London, 14 Junii, 14 Jac. of a Message called the Swan in
the said Parish, habendum from the Anunciation last past for three years,
whereupon the Plaintiff was possessed, until he was ejected by the Defendant the
15 Junii in the same year: And upon Not guilty pleaded, the Jury found,

That the said Message did lie within the City of London, and that it was an
ancient City, and that by the Custom every Citizen being a Freeman of London,
by his Will in writing may devise all his houses and Lands, and any part
thereof in the said City, as well in Mortmain without license, as in any other
manner in Fee, in Tail, for life, or for years, etc. and that the said Custom,
and all other Customs of the said City, the 7 of Richard the second were
confirmed by Act of Parliament. And they found that William Daringre, Citizen
and Freeman of London, the tenth of May, 34 of Ed. the third, was seized in
Fee, as well of the said Messuages, as of other Lands in London in Fee; and the
tenth of May, 1360. and in the 34 of Ed. 3. made his Will in writing, and
thereby did devise the said Messuages by the name of his Tenements in these
words following. And first he devised a Quit Rent of 40 s. a year to the Parson
of St. John Evangelist, and his successors, to pray for Souls: and he did
devise to the said Parson and his successors, a Chamber with two Cellars
thereupon lying on the Northside of his Tenement, to pray for Souls: And then
followed this clause: Item, lego and ordino quod unus capellanus celebret in
Ecclesia Sancti Johannis praedict. statim post decessum meum, pro anima mea and
animabus praedictis, and quod idem capellanus percipiet annuatim de Tenemento
meo 8 Marks pro stipendio; and volo quod idem capellanus ad matutinas missas
and omnibus aliis horis Canonicis in Ecclesia praedict. intersit per
dispositionem Rectoris ejusdem qui pro tempore fuerit, and de residuo si quod
clarum fuerit ultra solutionem dict. tenementi. Volo quod Richardus filius
Elizabethae uxoris meae scolatizando adjuvetur quousque ad legitimam aetatem
pervenit ad ordines Sacerdotales percipiend. and cum Sacerdos fuerit, volo quod
idem Richardus dictum cantarium occupet pro termino vitae suae si voluit, and
si non de residuo praedicti tenementi neque de cantario nihil percipiet, sed
Rector antedictus qui pro tempore fuerit, and 4 magistri sufficient. Parochiam
praesentent and invenient unum capellanum ad dictum Cantarium occupandum in
perpetuum de tenementis meis in dominica Parochia non legatis, salvo quod lego
de dictis tenement. meis Rectoribus and Successor. suis illam mansionem quam
Johannes Sherman modo tenet reddend. inde annuatim tot. quiet. reddit. de
omnibus tenementis meis exeunt. Item, volo quod si dominica Cantuaria pro
defectu dicti Rectoris vel Successor. suorum retardavit, and ultra 40 dies
inoccupat. fuerit, quod dict. camer. solarii and mansiones erunt Gardianis de
ponte. Et id quod clarum fuerit, and residuum ultra solutionem and reparationem
praedict. volo quod ponatur sub custode Rectoris and 4 Parochianorum ad
providend. ornamentum and libros dominicae Ecclesiae.

And the Devisor dyed the same day seized of the said Tenements.

And they further found, that the Messuages wherein, etc. is parcel of one of
the Tenements in the Will, out of which the Testator did ordain, that the said
Chaplain should have eight Marks for his stipend, and that Henry Tyting was
Parson of the said Church at the time of the death of the Devisor, and that the
Church was void by his death, and that the Lessor was presented, admitted,
instituted and inducted: and that he entered into the said Messuages upon the
Defendant, and did expel him, and made the Lease to the Plaintiff, who entered
and was possessed until the Defendant ejected him. And whether the Defendant was
guilty or not, they prayed the Opinion of the Court.

And I conceive that the Plaintiff ought to have Judgment.

And the Question is, Whether the Parson by this Devise shall have the houses,
the said eight Marks are limited to be paid to the Chaplain or not? And I
conceive that the Parson shall have it.

In the Comment. 4136. It is taken for a Rule, that in expounding of Wills, the
Law shall interpret the words of the Devisor, and shall direct their operation
according to the intent of the Devisor: so that to the matter, form, and order
limited in last Wills, the Law does submit to them, and wills that they should
be observed. And although that in Conveyances or Deeds executed by men in their
life-times, the Law does require apt words to make Estates, yet in Wills the
intent of the Devisor is sufficient, either to limit the Estate, or to describe
the person that shall have it.

And therefore if Land be given to one in perpetuum, if it be by Grant or
Feoffment, yet there passes but an Estate for life; but if it be given by
Will, it is an Estate in Fee: and 4 Ed. 6. Estates 78. If one devises his Land
to another, paying 10 l. to his Executors or any other person, the Devisee has
an Estate in Fee: so if one devises his Land to give or dispose of, or sell at
his will, this is a Fee-simple. 19 H. 8. 96. 7 Ed. 6. Devise 38. And the reason
in all these cases is, because that by these words the intent of the Devisor
does appear that a Fee shall pass, and therefore the defect of words shall not
defeat his intent. And as the intent is sufficient without apt words to make an
Estate, so is it also to describe the person who shall take the Devise,
although he be not formally named according to the precise rule in Grants: as
in 21 R. 2. Devise 17. where one devised Land to one for life, the remainder to
another for life, the remainder to the Church of St. Andrews in Holborn: and it
was adjudged, that after the death of the Devisees for life, the Parson of the
Church shall have the Land, for in as much as the Church was not capable, it
shall be taken, that the intent of the Devisor was, that the Parson, who is as
it were the Father of the Church, and so the Head of it, should have the
Estate. And in the 13 H. 7. 17. In every Devise the intent of the Devisor shall
be taken: for if a man devises all his goods to his Wife, and that after his
decease his Son and Heir shall have his House, although that no Devise of the
House be made to the Wife by express words, but by implication, because the
Heir is not to have the House during the Wifes life, yet because the intent of
the Devisor was, that the Son should not have it during the life of his Wife,
she shall have the House for her life: To which all agreed.

Then in our case, 1. The Devisor wills, that a Chaplain shall celebrate for
his Soul, and that he shall have eight Marks out of his Tenements yearly for
his stipend, but if he had stayed there, the Devise should have been void, for
the Chaplain is not such a person as may take these eight Marks as a Rent: and
therefore he goes further, and first he limits what service the Priest shall
do, and this he appoints to be done by the disposition of the Parson.

2. He does dispose of the residue of the profits of the Tenement for such a
time, (viz.) until R. shall be 24 years of age, and be a Priest; and does
devise, that he shall be preferred to the Chantery before any other, if he will
accept it, and if not, that he shall have nothing.

3. He makes provision for the perpetual continuance of the Chaplain, in these
words, (scil.) That the Parson and four of the best of the Parishioners shall
present and find a Chaplain to perform the said Chantery for ever, de
tenementis meis superius non legate. which is the said Tenement out of which the
said eight Marks are limited to be paid.

4. He does inflict a penalty upon the Parson, if the Chantery should be void,
(scil.) That the other Land devised by him to the Parson, shall go to the
Wardens of L. Bridge, for the reparation thereof.

5. He makes a perpetual disposition for the residue of the profits of the
Tenement, (viz.) That they shall be put into a Chest under the custody of the
Parson and four of the Parishioners, to buy ornaments and Books for the Church.

And these parts of the Will being well considered (as I conceive) it will be
clear, that the intent of the Devisor was, that the Parson should have this
Tenement; for here the main scope of his Will is, that a Chaplain shall be
maintained perpetually, and that he shall have eight Marks stipend out of that
Tenement, and that it shall be provided and found by the Parson and four of the
Parishioners, and that the residue of the profits shall be bestowed by them to
buy ornaments and Books for the Church: so that a perpetual charge is imposed
upon the Parson, (scil.) to find the Priest, and to buy ornaments, etc. and
this charge is to be defrayed with the profits of the Tenement, and that can be
done by none but by him that shall be owner of the Tenement: and therefore it
follows that the Parson shall have the Tenement.

And that such implication in a Will is sufficient to make an Estate, is proved
by the 15 H. 7. 126. If one devises his Land to be sold for payment of his
Debts, the Executor shall sell the Land, for because the charge to pay Debts
lies upon the Executors, his intent shall be taken to have them sell the Land:
and 22 and 23 Elizab. Dyer 171. A man seized in Fee of diverse Manors, does
devise them to his Sister in Fee ( except my Manor of D. which I do appoint to
pay my Debts) and makes two Executors, and dies; and one Executor dies, and the
other sells the Manor, and adjudged good, for so his intent shall be taken,
and not to relinquish it to his Sister: and 19 H. 6. 24 and 25. and 1 Edw. 6.
Devise 36. If one devise that his Executor shall sell his Land, this is no
devise of the Land to them, but an authority; for they may perform the Devisor
to sell the Land, although they have no Estate therein, and the Vendee shall be
in by the Devisor: but if one devise that his Executors shall grant a
Rentcharge out of his Land, or that they shall give the Land in Fee or in Tail
to I. S. this is an employed Devise to them, for otherwise they cannot perform
the intent of the Devisor. Trin. 9 Eliz. 516. and so in the 40 Assis. 26. One
did devise his Land in L. to A. and his Heirs to find twelve Marks for two
Chaplains, and grants that the Parson and the Parish may distrein for this if
it be behind: and there it is debated whether the King shall have the twelve
Marks or not? and it is agreed there, that the Chaplains have no Estate in it,
because they are removable at the will of A. but because the Distress is given
to the Parson who is perpetual, it was adjudged that the King shall have the
twelve Marks: whereupon I do observe, that by this Distress limited to the
Parson and the Parishioners, the twelve Marks were vested as a Rent in the
Parson, and so made it a Mortmain.



Id quod clarum fuerit ultra solutionem and reparationem, etc. which are the
very words in the clause used for the disposing of the residue to R. for the
time, and cannot be referred to the Devise of the Wardens of the Bridge,
because that the things devised to them are apparently to be for the reparation
only, and no payment is limited out of it, but the Tenement out of which the
Stipend is to be paid, is first charged with this payment, and then with the
reparation of the Tenement, and then with the Ornaments and Books for the
Church.

And afterward this Case was argued by Coventrey the Kings Solicitor for the
Plaintiff, and by S. Chibborne for the Defendant. And Mich. 16. Jac. The Barons
(viz.) Tanfeild, Bromley, and Denham did openly declare their opinion, that the
Land was not demised to the Parson by this Will, and thereupon they commanded
Judgment to be entered for the Defendant which was entered accordingly.

Trinit. 15 Jacob. John Adams against Roger James Knight, and others.
IN a Replevin for taking of twelve Cowes and two Calves, the twenty fourth of
May, the 14. of King James, at Upminster, in a place called Nelfeild, alias
Newfeild, ad damnum 10 l.

The Defendants did justify the taking, etc. as Bailiffs of Thomas James, and
Moily Deal, for that the place contained twen^^ acres of Pasture: And that
William Latham was seized in Fee of the Manor of Upminster, whereof the said
twenty acres are parcel, and the twenty fifth Maii, 13 Eliz. devised the same
to George Wiseman, excepting one Close of Land or Pasture called Crouckfeild,
containing by estimation fifty acres, and a parcel of a Close called
Ecrowchfeild, containing by estimation sixty acres, and all Woods, and Frees,
and Profits of Court Leets, Waifes, Estrayes, Escheats, Hermots, Reliefs,
Goods, and Chattels of Felons and Fugitives, Deodands and Treasure Trove.
Habendum from Michaelm. 1576. for sixty one years, rendering forty pounds Rent
at the Annunciation and Michaelmas.

The first of October. 1576. George Wiseman entered.

The twentieth of August, 35 Eliz. William Latham by Deed inroled for the
consideration of two thousand pounds, did bargain and sell the Manor to Roger
James Father of the Defendant Roger in Fee: and the 15 December. 39 Eliz. Roger
James the Bargains did devise the third part of the Manor to John his Son,
after whose death John was seized of the third part in Fee.

The seventh of August, 11 Jacob. John James by Indenture for a thousand pounds
paid by Thomas Fryth, did bargain and sell to the said Thomas Fryth and Moyle
Deal, the said Reversion of the said third part. Habendum from the said
seventh of August, for a hundred years, (ex intention) that they should grant
or assign the said term, to Thomas Fryth, or his Assigns, upon condition that
he should pay a thousand pounds to the said Roger James, viz. five hundred
pounds the seventeenth of August, 1614. and five hundred pounds the seventeenth
of Febr. next after. And because sixty pounds thirteen shillings four pence
was behind to the said Thomas James, and Moyle Deal for half a year, ending
at Mich. 12 Jac. they did well justify the taking, etc.

The Plaintiff said, that after the seventh of August, Bar.
11 Jac. and before the said Mich. 12 Jac. viz. the ninth of August, the 11
Jac. the said Thomas James and Moyle Deal did bargain and sell to the said
Thomas Fryth all their Estate in the said third part, whereby he was and yet is
possessed.

Replication
The Avowants replied that the Bargain and Sale was upon Condition to pay the
said thousand pounds to the said Roger James at the said days of payment, and
that Thomas Fryth did not pay the said five hundred pounds the seventeenth of
August, 1614.

Rejoinder.
The Plaintiff rejoyned, that after the said ninth of August, 11 Jac. (scil.)
10. August, 11 Jac. the said John James was seized in Fee of the Reversion of
the third part expectant upon the estate of the said George Wiseman.

And that the tenth of August, 11 Jacob. John James by Indenture inroled did
bargain and sell the said Reversion to the said Thomas Fryth and his heirs.

That the seventeenth of August, 11 Jac. John James by Indenture dated the
aforesaid seventh of August, 11 Jac. f^r a thousand pounds, did bargain and
sell the said third part to the said Thomas James, and Moyle Deal, Habendum
from the said seventh of August, 11 Jac. for a hundred years, and that they
after (scil.) the aforesaid seventeenth of August, 11 Jac. did bargain and sell
to the said Thomas Fryth upon condition before expressed. Absque hoc, that the
said John James did bargain and sell to the said Thomas James, and Moyle Deal,
the said Reversion before the said tenth of August, 11 Jac. and absque hoc that
the said Thomas James and Moyle Deal, before the said tenth of August, 11 Jac.
did bargain and grant the said Reversion to the said Thomas Fryth, on condition
as aforesaid.

Upon which the Avowants demurred, and showed for cause, that this is a
departure from the Bar, and that the said Rejoinder is in it self repugnant.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff in the
Replevin, for that the Conusance is utterly insufficient for three causes.

1. The Defendants make Conusance as Bailiffs to Thomas James, and Moyle Deal,
and do endeavor to entitle themselves to a third part of the Reversion and
Rent upon the Lease to Wiseman, by the Devise of Roger James, and it does not
appear in all the Conusance that Roger James was dead before the Grant made by
John James to the said Thomas James and Deal; for it is not set forth that he
died, but only by implication (scil.) the bargain and sale by Latham is pleaded
to Roger James lately dead, which does refer to the time of the plea which was
long after the Grant to Thomas James, and Deal, and after the Rent due and the
taking of the Distress, then it is alleged, that after the death of Roger
James the Devisor John James entered, which is not sufficient, because it is not
alleged in fact that he dyed, or when he di^ dye.

And all the Court agreed the Avowry insufficient as to this exception.

Secondly, the bargain and sale of the Reversion by John James to the said
Thomas James, and Moyle Deal is pleaded to be made the seventh of August, 11
Jac. Habendum from the aforesaid seventh of August, for a hundred years,
whereby the day it self is excluded, and so the Grant is to take effect in the
future, which cannot be by the Rules of Law: as in Bucklers Case, 2. Rep. where
Buckler Tenant for life in Mich. Term, 20 Eliz. made a Lease for four years,
the Lessee entered, and the Lessor did grant the Land, habendum from Midsomer
next for life, the Lesses after Midsomer did attorn, and adjudged that the
Grant was void, and in Barkwicks Case, 5: Rep. the reason thereof is given,
because that if the Grant should be good, the Grantor should have a particular
Estate (scil.) during the first day of the date, or in the mean time until the
Grant did begin to take effect, without any Donor or Lessor which is against
the Rules of Law.

And although this Grant of the Reversion be but for years, yet is it all one,
for the diversity is between a Lease for years, made Tenant in Fee or for life
to commence in future, and a grant of a Reversion, for in the first Case it is
but a future Charge upon the Land, so that the Lessor has his former Estate
until the Lease does begin, and the Lessee has no Term but only interesse
termin. and therefore Hill. 38. Eliz. in the Common Pleas, between Row and
White, it was agreed, that if the Lessor be disseised before the Lease begins,
the Lessee after the day of the Commencement may grant the term, otherwise
where a Lessee for years in possession is outed by an estranger, for there his
Term is turned into a Right, but in the first Case he has not any Term in
esse, and therefore it cannot be turned into a Right, nor any wrong done
thereunto.

And for direct Authorities in this Case, 29 Eliz. in the Common Pleas, the
Countess of Kents Case; Where one having a Reversion in Fee does grant this,
Habendum after the death of I. S. for years, and it was adjudged a void Grant:
And Trin. 39 Eliz. Johnson and Somerset in the Common Pleas, Lessee for life
grants the Reversion, Habendum a die dat. for ten years, and adjudged a void
Grant. And in the Comment. 155. by Brown, If one having a Reversion does grant
it habendum after a day to come for years, this is a void Grant, for if it may
be granted from a day to come, the Grantor shall have a particular Estate in
the mean time by his own making, which cannot be, that one may be Lessor to
himself, or diminish his own Estate, and there it is taken for a Rule, that
when there is a Rent in Esse, or a Reversion, etc. a man cannot make this to be
in esse for a time, and to cease for another time, or to grant it to another
after the death of any, or from a day to come, relinquishing to himself an
Estate in the mean time: And in the Comment. 197. b. Adams against Wortesbey,
agreed there, that a Reversion cannot pass as a Reversion, according to the
common understanding thereof from a day to come.

But Haughton conceived, that this Case being a bargain and sale whereby the
use does pass first, this may well pass from a day to come. Quod nullus
dedixit.

Thirdly, It is not averred that the twenty acres in which the Distress was
taken, was not part of the Closes excepted, so that it may be part of them, and
then no Distress for the Rent can be taken there.

And although it may be gathered by some words in the Bar to the Avowry, that
the place where, etc. was parcel of the Land devised to Wiseman, yet this
shall not help the Conusans, as in Cokes 7. Rep. fol. 24, and 25. where one
having Land in Fee, and another Land for years, did grant a Rent for life out
of both, the Grantee distrained for the Rent, and avowed that the Rent was
granted out of the Lease land amongst other lands, whereas he ought to have
alleged the Rent to be granted out of the Land in Fee only, and although the
Plaintiff in his Bar to the Avowry has showed the truth of the Case, yet this
will not make the Avowry which wants substance to be good.

Judgment.
And all the Court did agree the Avowry to be naught for this exception.
Wherefore Judgment was given for the Plaintiff in the Replevin.

Mich. 14 Jac. Webb and Jucks Case against Worfeild. Rot. 266.

IN a Writ of Error to reverse a Judgment given in the Common Pleas, for the
now Defendant against the now Plaintiffs.

In which the Plaintiff did declare, that the Defendants the fourteenth of
Febr. 9 Jac. at Ponick in a place called Brancefords Court, did take an Ox
from the Plaintiff, ad damnum forty pounds.

The Defendants did acknowledge the taking of the said Ox as Bailiffs to
Elizabeth Ligon Widow, for that the place where, etc. contained two acres of
Land, and that one Anne Ligon was seized in Fee of the Site of the Manor of
Bransford, and of seven Messuages, three Gardens, and a hundred and fifty acres
of Land, forty two of Meadow, sixty six of Pasture, five of Wood, and seventy
of Furzes and Heath, in Ponick aforesaid, Bransford Leigh, Newland, and Wick,
whereof the place where, etc. is parcel.

That the sixth of September, the twenty fourth of H 8. Anne Ligon did devise
this to John Parsons and Anne his Daughter for seventy years, after the death
of Elizabeth his wife, if they, or either of them shall so long live, rendering
five pounds, four shillings, eight pence Rent, at the Annunciation, Christmas,
Midsummer, and Michaelmas.

That the eleventh of August, 1554. Elizabeth Parsons died, whereupon John and
Anne Parsons entered.

And Ligon dies, whereby the Reversion descended to Sir Rich. Ligon her Son and
Heir, and Sir Richard died, whereby the same descended to William Ligon his Son
and Heir, who died also, whereby the same descended to Richard Ligon his Son
and Heir, who died also, and the same descended to Sir Richard Ligon his Son
and heir, who Hill. 33 Eliz. did levy a Fine Sur Conusans de droit come ceo,
etc. to the use of himself for life, the Remainder to the said Elizabeth Ligon,
then his Wife for life, the Remainder to the Heirs of the body of Sir William,
the Remainder to the right Heirs of Sir William.

10 May 4. Jac. John Parsons died.

Pasch. 6 Jac. Sir William Ligon and Elizabeth his wife did levy a Fine to the
Plaintiff, to the use of the Plaintiff for the life of Sir William, the
Remainder to the said Elizabeth for her life, the Remainder to the Plaintiff in
Fee.

Sir William dies, whereby the Reversion does remain to Elizabeth his Wife.

And for seventy eight pounds, six pence of the said Rent for three quarters of
a year, ending at Christmas, 9 Jacob. they did acknowledge, etc. and they
averred the lives of the said Elizabeth Ligon, and the said Anne Parsons.

Bar.
The Plaintiff said, that the Fine levied by Sir William and Elizabeth his wife,
was to the use of the Plaintiff and his Heirs, and justified the putting in of
the said Ox by the license of the said Anne Parsons. Absque hoc, that the said
Fine was to the use of the Plaintiff for the life of Sir William, the Remainder
to the said Elizabeth for life, the Remainder to the Plaintiff in Fee, as the
Defendants alleged, and so they were at Issue.

And the Jury found the Lease and the descent of the Reversion, and the Fine,
33 Eliz. and the use, and the death of John Parsons, ut supra.

And that the one and twentieth of September, 5 Jac. Sir William Ligon and
Elizabeth his wife did make a Deed of Indenture of the said Tenements in these
words:

This Indenture made, etc. between them of the one part, and the Plaintiff on
the other part, whereby Sir William for seven hundred pounds before the
ensealing and delivery paid to Sir William by the Plaintiff, did covenant that
he and Sir William before Christmas next, should levy to the Plaintiff a Fine
with Proclamations of the said Tenements, which Fine and all Fines and
Assurances to be had within seven years, should be to the use of the Plaintiff
and his Heirs, upon Condition that if Sir William and Elizabeth, or any of
them, or the Heirs or Assigns of Sir William should pay to the Plaintiff or his
Assigns nine hundred forty three pounds at the Annunciation 1611. that the
Estate of the Plaintiff should cease, and that Sir William and Elizabeth and
his Heirs should enter, and the Fine should be to the use of Sir William and
Elizabeth, and the heirs of Sir William: And Sir William covenanted with the
Plaintiff that he and his Heirs until the nine hundred forty three pounds be
to be paid, should have and enjoy to their use, under the said Condition, and
according to the meaning of the said Indenture, and if default of payment
should be made, then after such default, the Premises and the Rents and
Profits thereof if such default should be, shall be taken and enjoyed to their
use, without any interruption of Sir William and Elizabeth, etc. and discharged
and saved harmless of all Encumbrances, etc. made by Sir William, etc. (except
the said Lease) and Sir William covenanted, that if the nine hundred forty
three pounds should be paid, to pay to the Plaintiff the charge of the
assurance.

Pasch. 5 Jac. The Fine was levied by Sir William and his wife to the
Plaintiff, and they found that the sixteenth of April, 6 Jac. the Conusance of
the Fine was made at M. in the County of Wilts, and that after the said
Conusance, and before the said fifth of September, Pasch. 20. Martii. 5 Jac.
the said Sir William made another Indenture between him and his wife of the one
part, and the Plaintiff of the other part, whereby Sir William and Elizabeth
for seven hundred pounds before paid to them by the Plaintiff, Sir William and
Elizabeth did bargain sell, and grant to the Plaintiff and his heirs, the said
Tenements upon the like Condition as aforesaid, and Sir William did covenant
that he and his wife should make a further assurance by Fine, etc. and that all
such assurances should be to the Plaintiff and his Heirs, under the said
Condition until default of payment, and after such default to the use of the
Plaintiff and his heirs absolutely, and if payment be made to the use of Sir
William and Elizabeth, and the heirs of Sir William, and the Plaintiff did
covenant that Sir William and Elizabeth, and their heirs, until the
Annunciation, 1611. should have all the Rents and Profits of the Premises,
without interruption of the Plaintiff or his heirs.

That the eighth of December, 6 Jac. Sir William Ligon died, after whose death
(scil.) the aforesaid time quo, etc. the Defendants as Bailiffs to Elizabeth,
did take the said Ox in the said place, for the said seventy eight pounds, six
pence of the said Rent for three quarters, ending at Christmas, 9 Jac.

But whether the Distress was well or not, they prayed the advice of the
Court, etc.

And upon this Verdict it was adjudged in the Common Pleas after many
Arguments, that the Plaintiff should recover.

For all the Justices did agree, that the said Fine was to the use of the
Plaintiff, and his Heirs, whereupon the Defendant brought this Writ of Error,
and assigned the Error in the point of Judgment only.

And it was objected by the Council of the Plaintiffs in the Writ of Error
that, that it was apparent upon this assurance, that it was made for the
assurance of the payment of seven hundred pounds lent by the Plaintiff to Sir
William, and Sir William was to repay nine hundred forty three pounds which was
full Interest, according to the rate of ten in the hundred, and then by the
express Covenant in the first Indenture, the Defendant in the Writ of Error
was to have the Rents and Profits of the Land also, whereby Worfeild should
have more then ten pounds in the hundred, and then the assurance is void by the
Statute of Usury, then, although by the last Indenture it is provided that Sir
William and his wife should have the Rents and Profits, until the day of
payment, yet this shall not bind the wife, for it is found expressly that she
did disagree to this Indenture.

But I conceive that the Distress was not well taken, but that the Fine was to
the use of William Worfeild and his heirs, and so the Rent belonged to him.

And first as to the Objection, that the assurance is void by reason of the
Statute of Usury; that cannot be.

1. Because it was not found that there was any lone of money, or usurious
Contract, and therefore it may be and so it shall be intended, that the seven
hundred pounds was paid bona fide, after the purchase of this conditional
Estate made to William Worfeild.

2. The Consideration is for seven hundred pounds paid before the ensealing and
delivery of the Indenture, so that if it be admitted that the seven hundred
pounds was lent as Interest, yet it may be that this was tent so long before
the making of the Indenture, that the nine hundred forty three pounds to be
paid with the Profits of the Land, does not exceed the principal debt,
according to the rate of ten pounds in the hundred. And that Usury shall not be
intended without it be expressly found by the Jury, vide Coke 10. Rep. the Case
of the Chancellor of Oxford, fol. 56. Covin shall not be intended or presumed
in Law, unless that it be expressly averred: and so was it agreed in the Case
between Tyrer and Littleton, in the Common Pleas, for the taking of an Ox, The
Defendant pleaded Not guilty, and the Jury found that Thomas Tyrer held certain
Land of John Littleton by Rent and Herriot,: and the 42 of Eliz. did enfeoff
John Tyrer his Son and heir who made a Lease to Thomas Tyrer for forty years,
if he should so long live, to the intent that Joyce whom he intended to marry
should not have her Dower during his life; Thomas died possessed of the Ox,
and the Defendant took it for a Herriot. And they found the Statute of
Fraudulent conveyances, etc. and it was adjudged that forasmuch as the
Feoffment was not found by the Jury to be fraudulent, the Court could not
adjudge it to be fraudulent, although the Jury had found circumstances and
inducements to prove the fraud: and in the 8. Rep. Lovedays Case, In an
Information upon the Statute of Usury, the Jury found that the Defendant did
accept a certain sum above ten pounds in the hundred for forbearance of the
money, but no lone of money was found: Wherefore it was adjudged that the
Verdict was insufficient, and a new Venire was awarded.

Henden. The Fine shall be directed only by the last Indenture, for that does
control the first Indenture. Count. Rutlands Case, Cook. Rep.

But all the Court agreed, that the Count shall be directed by the first
Indenture as to the Wife, for her disagreement to the second Indenture does
prove and enforce her agreement to the first, and then the use limited by both
Indentures being all one, (scil.) to the use of William Worfield and his Heirs,
and no variance between them in the limitation of the use, it is clear that the
use shall be to the Plaintiff and his Heirs.

Wherefore it was adjudged that the Judgment given in the Common Pleas should
be affirmed.

But Haughton said, that the Verdict was not good, for that the use being
matter of fact, ought to have been found by the Jury, and not left to the
Court. To which it was answered, that the Jury did conclude, Judgment.
That if the Distress was well taken, that the Fine was to one use; but if not,
then it was to another use, which was sufficient. Whereupon he assented to the
affirming of the Judgment.

Trinit. 15 Jac. The King and William Allen against Theophilus Newton. Rot. 318.

WIlliam Allen, as well for the King as for himself, did inform against
Theophilus Newton, for that the Defendant not being assigned, named, or
appointed to keep a Tavern within the Town of Tiverton, according to the
Statute of the first of November, 13 Jacob. and for one hundred day between the
first of November, and at the day of the Exhibition of the Information, to wit,
the 26 of October. the 14 of King James, at Tiverton, did of his own authority
keep and maintain a common Tavern; and within the said time did utter and sell
Claret Wine, and White Wind, and Sack, and diverse other kinds of Wine, to
diverse subjects of the King, by retail, contrary to the form of the Statute,
whereby an Action did accrue to the King and the Informer, to have of the
Defendant 505 l. for every one of the said hundred days; whereof the Informer
prayed the moiety.

The Defendant, as to the Keeping the Tavern, and uttering of the Wines the
first of November. 13 Jacob. and all the other days between the said first of
November. 13 Jacob. and the said 26 October. 14 King James, saving forty of the
said hundred days, did plead Not guilty. And as to the said forty days he said
that the King the fourth of January the 3d Jacob. by his Letters Patents under
the great Seal, did grant License to Richard King and his Assigns, Thomas King
and his Assigns, and John King and his Assigns, that the said Richard and his
Assigns during his life, for him and themselves, their servants, deputies, and
assigns, or any of them; and that the said Thomas and his assigns, after the
death of the said Richard, for him and themselves, their servants and deputies,
or any of them, during the life of the said Thomas; and so the said John, after
the death of Richard and Thomas, etc. during the life of the said John, may
have, use, occupy, and hold a Wine-Celler within the Town of Tiverton in the
County of Devon, in domo mantionali in qua praedictus Richardus and Thomas and
Johannes ad tunc inhabitabant, vel ex tunc in posterum inhabitur. infra
praedict. Vill. de Tiverton, de tempore in tempus vendere and utterare per
retail (viz.) by the Gallon, Pottle, Quart, or Pint, or less or greater
measure, all manner of good and wholesome Wine of what kind soever, as well
within their houses, as out of their houses, at his or their pleasure, and at
and for such price, as from time to time the said Wines for reasonable gain may
be afforded, without any Impeachment, notwithstanding the Statute of 7 Ed. 6.

That the first of September, 13 Jacob. Richard King dyed.

The last of August, 14 Jacob. Thomas King, by Deed shown, did ordain the
Defendant to be his Assignee, to draw and sell all good and wholesome Wines in
the then Mansion House of the said Thomas in Tiverton, and to retail them
without the said Houses for such prices as for reasonable gain may be afforded
for one year: wherefore the Defendant after the said last of August, and before
the Exhibition of the Information, scil. within the said forty days, parcel of
the said hundred days, at Tiverton aforesaid, in the then Mansion House of the
aforesaid Thomas, as his Assignee, did hold a common Tavern, and did sell and
utter Claret, White Wind, and Sack, and other Wines by retail: And did aver,
that he sold the said Wines for such prices as he could reasonably afford, and
that they were good and wholesome Wines; and that the said Thomas is alive at
Tiverton aforesaid, and that Tiverton in the Letters Patents, and Tiverton in
the Information, is all one Town.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the King and the Informer
against the Defendant.

For the License is not pursued, for it is to keep a Tavern in the Mansion
House, in which the three parties did then inhabit, or should after inhabit,
whereby the King has restrained this liberty to a certain place; and the
Defendant does justify under the License of Thomas King, or his Assignee, to
keep a Tavern in his Mansion House, which is not warranted by the Kings
License. And that every authority ought to be pursued strictly, Dyer 177. a.
Cestuy que use before the Statute of 27 of Hen. 8. did will, that A. B. and C.
should sell the Land, and dies, B. and C. cannot sell the Land, for that it was
a joint authority to them all three: and the 27 H. 8. 6. A Warrant of Attorney
to three jointly and severally to make livery, one of the three may make
livery, but not two of them, by Baldwin: and 30 Ed. 3. 17. The King does
license one to alien his Manor of D. who does alien it, excepting twelve
acres, this License will not serve: and 3 Ed. 3. 5. One by Fine does grant and
render the Manor of D. to the Abbot of G. and his successors, and showed a
Charter whereby the King gave leave to the Conusor to render to find two
Chaplains, etc. and he would have levied the Fine without mentioning of the
Chaplains; whereupon the Court did refuse it, because it was disagreeing to the
Charter of leave, and after he levied the Fine according to the Charter: and in
the 21 H. 7. 8. a. When the King grants a License, it ought to be strictly
executed; as if the King should License one to make a Feoffment by Deed, he
cannot make it without Deed, and so e converso: so that the License is always
to be pursued, or else there is no Warrant at all. Vide Comment. 68. Dive and
Manningham. If the King does license one to alien the third part of his Land,
and he aliens all, by Montague, the alienation is without warrant. And 23 H. 8.
6. Patent 76. If the King does license one to alien his Manor of D. and he
does alien it excepting one acre, the License shall not serve: and if the King
does license one to impark an hundred acres, and he does impark them, and after
adds ten acres, this is no Park. And 38 H. 6. 10. If the King grants a Leet to
one in all his Land, he shall not have it, but in the Land which he had at the
time of the Grant.

And this matter is enforced by the preamble of the Statute of the 7 Edw. 6.
and the fifth, which is, For the avoiding of many inconveniences, much evil
rule and resort of disordered persons to many Taverns newly set up, in very
great number, in Back-Lanes and suspicious places within London, and
otherwhere: whereby it is to be presumed, that the King did take notice of the
House in which the parties did then inhabit, to be a fit place, and he trusted
all of them, but would not trust any one of them.

This License cannot be granted over.

12 H. 7. 25. In a Trespass for hunting in his Park, and killing of his Deer,
the Defendant justified by a License given to I. S. his Master, under whom he
as servant to him, and by his commandment made the Trespass; and resolved, that
a License does not extend but to him to whom it is given, and cannot be granted
over: and with this accords 18 Edw. 4. 14. and Dyer 34 H. 8.

The Defendant has not answered to the greatest part of the time November. 13
Jac. and a hundred other days between the first of Novem. 13 Jac. and the 26
October. 14 Jac. and then the Defendant pleads not guilty the first of November,
and all the other days between the first of November and the 26 October. saving
forty of the said days, and for the forty days he justifies by virtue of a
License the last of August. 14 Jac. so that it may be that the forty days that
the Information mentions were before this time, for he has the benefit of all
days between the first of November. and the 26 October. and the Not guilty at the
first of November and an hundred days between that and the 26 October, and the
forty days excepted in the [Not guilty] may be as well before the last of
August as afterward; and it is at the election of the Informer to charge the
Defendant with forty days, at what time he will between the first of November.
and 26 of October. As in a Trespass for breaking a Close, the Plaintiff may after
upon a new assignment, or in evidence upon Not guilty pleaded, assign the
Trespass in what Land he will within the same Town, although he has many
Closes there: and therefore in this case, the Defendant ought to have pleaded
Not guilty for all the days, until the last of August, and then to have
justified by his License. As in a Trespass, if the Defendant do justify at
another day by License, he ought to traverse the time before and after, for
that the Plaintiff may charge him at what time he will.

The Plea is, that the Defendant did sell his Wines at such reasonable 22 Ed.
4. 40. the Lord Lisle^ Case, to show a sufficient discharge of Rent. And
although it would be tedious to show the price of every Quart and Pint, yet he
may alledg how he sells by the Quart of each kind of Wine, especially of so
short a time.

And Michaelm. 15 King James, Judgment Judgment.
was given for the Defendant against the Informer, because it was not averred
that Tiverton was a Corporate or Market Town; and the Statute gives several
penalties, one for keeping of a Tavern in such a Town without License, and
another penalty for keeping of a Tavern in other places without License.

Trinit. 15 Jacob. Lee and his wife against Wood Knight, Defendant.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond of 100 l. made by the Defendant to the
Plaintiff Elizabeth when she was sole, 7 December. 13 Jacob. upon condition to
pay 70 l. to the said Elizabeth the ninth of December, 1616.

The Defendant after Oyer of the condition said, that the 17 Februa. 13 Jacob.
the said Elizabeth by Indenture reciting, that whereas the Defendant, with John
and William Wood his sons, were bound jointly and severally to the said
Elizabeth in a Bond of 1400 l. 6 December, 13 Jacob. upon condition to pay 700
l. the eighth of October, 1616. and by an Obligation of 120 l. 7 October. 13
Jacob. on condition to pay 70 l. the ninth of December, 1616. and by five other
several Obligations the seventh of December, 13 Jacob. every one of them of 100
l. upon several conditions to pay 35 l. the tenth of June, 1617. and 35 l. the
ninth of December then next, and 35 l. the 10 of June, 1618. and 35 l. the
ninth of December then next, and 35 l. the tenth of June, 1619. and 35 l. the
ninth of December then next, and 35 l. the tenth of June, 1620. and 35 l. the
ninth of December then next, and 35 l. the tenth of June, 1621. and 35 l. the
ninth of December then next. The said Elizabeth did agree, covenant and grant
with the said Defendant, that if the Defendant should pay to Elizabeth, the
Daughter of the said Elizabeth the Plaintiff, 500 l. due to her by the Will of
Edmund Pigot her Father, in full discharge of a Legacy or Portion given to her
by the said Will; or should procure to Elizabeth the Plaintiff a sufficient
discharge for the said 500 l. of the said Elizabeth Daughter of the said
Elizabeth, and should provide and take course for fit maintenance for the said
Elizabeth during her life, and at all times upon request should save harmless
the said Elizabeth, and her Executors and Assigns, of and from the payment of
the said 500 l. and also shall pay to Susan the Daughter of Elizabeth the first
of May, 1621. if she shall then be living and not married, 400 l. if the same
shall then be due by the said Will: and if the said Susan shall live until the
first of May, 1623. and then shall he married, and her portion not paid, then
if the Defendant shall pay to the said Susan the said 400 l. within six weeks
after the said first of May, to such person to whom the said Elizabeth by the
said Will ought to pay the same, and shall procure good and sufficient
discharge to the said Elizabeth of the said sum, of and from all persons to
whom the same shall be due, that then all the said Obligations shall be void,
and delivered up to the Defendant, cancelled and made void. And the said
Elizabeth did covenant, that until manifest default was made in the premises,
and the said Elizabeth shall be thereof damnified, and upon reasonable request
no satisfaction shall be given to her, she will not take any advantage by
reason of the said Obligation, nor will prosecute any Suit against the
Defendant or any other bound in the said Obligation. And the Defendants said,
that the Plaintiffs, nor any of them, was not damnified by reason of the said
Obligation in the Declaration, or by reason of any of the said other
Obligations; and did aver the said Obligation in the Declaration, and the said
Obligation of 120 l. in the Indenture, to be all one; and that the said several
days of payment limited by the Indenture, nor any of them at the time of the
Writ purchased, were incurred.

Upon which Plea the Plaintiffs demurred, and the Defendant did join.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiffs, for the
Plea is utterly insufficient for diverse causes. And yet I do agree, that
although the Obligation be upon a condition, yet is the Indenture a Defeasance
thereof; so that it is sufficient to the Defendant to perform the one or the
other. But the Indenture is of two parts: 1. That if the Defendant shall pay to
Elizabeth the daughter 500 l. and shall perform the other things mentioned in
the Plea, that all the Obligations shall be void and delivered up. 2. The
Plaintiff Elizabeth did covenant, that until the Defendant should make default
in the premises, and she should be damnified, and upon request no satisfaction
given to her, she should not take any advantage of the Obligation, nor shall
prosecute any Suit against the Defendant or any other bound in the said
Obligation.

And as to the first part, I do agree that this is a good defeasance of the
Obligation, but the last clause is only a Covenant, and cannot be pleaded in
bar of this Action brought upon this Obligation: as in the 21 H. 7. 30. John de
Pusetoes Case: The said John and others were bound to T. who by Deed did grant
to the said John, that he should be quite discharged of the duty, and if he be
vexed or sued, that the Bond shall be void, which Case is there very largely
argued: but I conceive the better Opinion to be, that the Bond is discharged,
because that the words are in effect as the words in the first part of this
Indenture, (scil.) That if such act be made, the Obligation shall be void. But
there Fineux said, That if I grant to my Tenant for life, that he shall not be
impeachable for waste, he shall not plead this in Bar, but shall have an Action
of Covenant thereupon. And Brudnell put this case, That if I grant to one
against whom I have cause of Action, that I will not sue him within a year,
this is not any suspension of the Action: Upon which case it is to be observed,
that I may sue, and the other is put to his Action of Covenant.

And the Plea is first insufficient, because he pleads that the Plaintiffs, l.
to be paid to Elizabeth the daughter, which is the principal matter to be done
by the Defendant for the defeasance, and in truth this Portion was due, and not
paid before this Suit begun.

The Defendant did aver, that the several days of payment limited l. and the
truth was, that it is payable at the time of the marriage of Elizabeth the
daughter, but this is not limited by the Indenture, nor any time for the
payment thereof, and therefore this a verment is not good.

The Indenture of the Defeasance is, if the Defendant shall pay the l. or
procure to the Plaintiff Elizabeth sufficent discharge for the same, and shall
provide fit maintenance for Elizabeth the daughter: Whereupon I conceive that
the Defendant ought to pay 500 l. and provide maintenance for the daughter, or
otherwise that he should procure a discharge from the Plaintiff Elizabeth, and
shall also provide maintenance for the daughter, for her maintenance is as
necessary, if the money be paid, as it will be, if the discharge be procured.
And the Defendant has made no answer to the providing of maintenance.

Judgment.
And Michaelm. 15 Jacob. Judgment by all the Court was given for the Plaintiff.

Rot. 590.
Trinit. 16 Jacob. Margaret Evans against Wilkins.
IN an Action on the Case, for that the Plaintiff the 12 September, 15 Jacob.
did retain the Defendant to be her Shepherd, etc. and that the Defendant in
consideration of 6 d. to him paid by the Plaintiff, and of 33 s. 4 d. of his
Sallery to be paid to him for a year, and in consideration that the Plaintiff
did assume to pay the 33 s. 4 d. to the Defendant, and to find him meat,
drink, and lodging for the said year, and to permit the Defendant to have
Pasture for twelve Sheep with the Sheep of the Plaintiff, Did assume to serve
the Plaintiff as a Shepherd for one year from Michaelmas next, etc. and to keep
her Sheep: To which the Plaintiff giving credit, did not retain any other
Shepherd: and the Plaintiff did aver, that she was ready to pay the Defendant
the said 33 s. 4 d. and to provide him meat, etc. and to permit him to have
Pasture for twelve Sheep with the Sheep of the Plaintiff: yet the Defendant did
not feed the Sheep of the Plaintiff, although required the 4 October. 15 Jacob.
whereby many of her Sheep dyed ad damnum 40 l.

The Defendant pleaded the Statute of the 5 Elizab. whereby it is enacted, That
the Justices of Peace of every County, or the greater part of them then
resident in the County, and also the Sheriff if it may be, and every Major,
Bailey, or other chief Officer of any City or Town Corporate, in which there
shall be any Justice of Peace within the limits of the said Town, before the
tenth of June next coming and afterward, shall yearly at every general
Sessions first held and to be kept after Easter, or any convenient time after
Easter, shall meet together, and after such meeting shall call to their
assistance such discreet and grave persons of the said County or Town, and
shall have authority within the said Precincts of their several Commissions, to
rate the stipends of all Laborers and Servants, etc. And that every retainment,
promise, gift, or stipend against the intent of the said Act, shall be void.

And he pleaded the Statute of the 39 Elizab. whereby it is enacted, That after
the Rates made and engrossed in Parchment under the hands and seals of those
authorized to make Rates, it shall be lawful for the Sheriff of the said
County, or the Major of any City or Town, to cause Proclamation to be made of
the said Rates in so many places as shall be convenient, etc.

And that after the making of which Act, and before the tenth of June in the
said Act specified, (scil.) at the general Sessions for the Peace, holden for
the County of the City of Gloucester, holden at the said City on Monday next
after Easter, 15 Jacob. before M. P. Major of the said City, Toby Bullock and
Anthony Robinson Sheriffs of the said City, and John Jones, and many other
Justices of Peace; it was assigned, ordained, and ratified by them, with the
assent of diverse other discreet and grave persons called to them, That every
Shepherd, having care of forty Sheep and above, should take for his stipend,
with his meat and drink, in money per annum 3 l. and no more. And said, that the
rate for the said stipend was made and engrossed in Parchment under the hands
and seals of the Major, Sheriffs, and Justices aforesaid; and that proclamation
was made of the said Rate within the said City, before the said promise and
agreement; and that the stipend agreed to be paid by the Plaintiff, did exceed
the rate of 3 l. for a year: and so he said, that his said promise was void in
Law. Whereupon the Plaintiff demurred in Law.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff, for the Plea
is utterly insufficient for diverse causes.

It is not averred, that the Justices who did rate the wages, were the

The Plea is repugnant in it self, for the rate is alleged to be made June in
the same Act specified, (scil.) at the Sessions the 15 Jacob. which is
impossible to be so: for the tenth day of June in the Act was the fifth year of
Elizabeth; and therefore there is a manifest repugnancy: as in 21 H. 7. 34. One
was indicted of Felony done the tenth of May, and another was indicted for that
he did suffer him to escape the first of May, wherefore he was discharged.

The Justices ought to call to them some grave men of the County 1. That they
shall call such to them: 2. That they shall confer together; and consider of
the plenty and scarcity, and other circumstances necessary to be considered. 8
H. 7. 13. The Statute of the third of H. 7. does appoint, that the Chancellor,
Treasurer, and Privy Seal, or two of them, shall call to them one Lord
Spiritual and another Temporal of the Kings Council, may examine maintenance,
etc. now by this none are Judges but the said three, and the other but
assistants: and so is upon the Statute of 31 Edw. 1. 12. of Error in the
Exchequer Chamber: But agreed that it is Error, if the Chancellor does not call
the other to assist, and to act with their advisement, because the Statute does
so limit it: and the 14 Ed. 4. 1. which says, That the Chancellor, calling to
him the Justices of the one Bench or the other, has power to award a Subpoena
against such persons, etc. and the Chancellor himself did award a Subpoena, and
adjudged not good. And so the Statute of Merton, cap. the 3 d. of Redisseisin,
which ordains, that the Sheriff, taking with him the Coroners and other lawful
people, shall go to the place, and there enquire, etc. 23 Assis. 7. If he goes
with a Coroner only where there are more, it is not good; and the same Law is,
if he take not others with him: according to the 26 Ed. 3. 57.

The Rate is only for a Shepherd having care of forty Sheep and

It is alleged that the Rates were engrossed in Parchment according to the
Statute, but there is no place alleged, and therefore it is issuable.

Judgment.
And after, scil. Hillar. 16 Jacob. Judgment was given for the Plaintiff by all
the Court.

Trinit. 14 Jacob. The King and Richard Parker against Sir John Webb and
Katherin his wife.
RIchard Parker, as well for the King as himself, did inform against Sir John
Webb and Katherin his wife, the which Katherin the 18 of May, 13 Jacob. was
eighteen years of age and above, and was Wife of the said Sir John; the which
said Katherin the said 18 of May, and always after until now, being an
Inhabitant at North-Charford in the County of Southampton from the said 18 of
May until the 18 of May, 14 Jacob. viz. for the space of twelve months, did not
come to the aforesaid Parish Church, nor to any other Church, Chapel, or usual
place of Common Prayer, and did not there remain at the time of Common Prayer
and Divine Service; but for all the said time did voluntarily and obstinately,
without any reasonable cause, abstain from the same, contrary to the form of
the Statute, whereby an Action accrued to the King and the Informer, to have of
the said Sir John and Katherin 240 l. (scil.) 20 l. for every month, etc.
whereof the Informer prays a moiety, etc.

The Defendants said, that the said Statute was made the 16 of Jan. 23 of
Elizab. and that after the making thereof, viz in the Parliament held the 29
October. 28 Elizab. it was enacted, That every Offendant, in not repairing to
Divine Service contrary to the Statute of the 23 of Elizab. who thereupon shall
happen to be convicted, shall pay into the receipt of the Exchequer according to
the rate of 20 l. for every month, which shall be contained in the Indictment
whereupon such conviction was had, and also for every month after such
conviction, without any other Indictment or Conviction, shall pay into the said
Exchequer, at Easter and Michaelmas, so much as shall then remain unpayd,
according to the rate of 50 l. for every month after such conviction: and if
default shall be made in any such payment, that the Queen may by Process out of
the Exchequer, take, seize, and enjoy all the goods, and two parts as well of
the Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments, Leases and Farms of such Offender, as
of all other Lands, Tenements, and Hereditaments liable to such seisures or
penalties, leaving a third part only of the said Lands, Leases and Farms, for
the relief of such Offender, his Wife, Children, and Family. And, for the more
speedy conviction of such Offenders, it was enacted, That upon the Indictment
of such Offender, proclamation shall be made at the Assizes, or Jail-deliver,
where such Indictment shall be made, whereby it shall be commanded that the
body of such Offender shall be rendered to the Sheriff of the same County
before the next Assizes and Jail-deliver, and if such Offender does not appear
at the said next Assizes and Jail-deliver, that then upon such default
recorded, the same shall be sufficient conviction of such Offender, as if a
Trial by Verdict had been had and recorded.

And the Defendants further said, that the 19 of March, the first of King
James, the Justices of Assise and Jail-deliver at the Assizes, and the
Justices of Peace at the Quarter Sessions, have authority to enquire and
determine of all Recusants, as well for not receiving the Communion, as for not
repairing to Church according to the form of the Laws, in such manner and form
as the Justices of Assizes and Jail-deliver may do, and also shall have power
to make proclamation whereby a Precept shall be had for the rendering the body
of the Offender to the Sheriff, before the next Assizes or Jail-deliver, or
the next quarter Sessions, etc.

And they said, that before the Information, viz. at the Assizes and
Jail-deliver held at Westminster, 8. August 12 Jac. before Sir Henry Hobard
chief Justice of the Bench, and Sir Laurence Tanfeild chief Baron of the
Exchequer, Justices of Assise and Jail-deliver in the County of Southampton,
the said Katherine (by the Oath of Robert Pawlet Esquire, etc. scil. nineteen
in all) which were sworn and charged to enquire for the King and the body of
the County) was indicted, for that the said Katherine the first of April, 11
Jac. was of sixteen years of ago, and did not repair to the Parish Church of
Porthchalford, nor to any other Church, Chapel, or usual place of Common
Prayer, and was there at the Common Prayer and Divine Service, at any time
within one month next ensuing the said first of April, 11 Jac. but did abstain
from the same from the said first of April for amonth, contrary to the form of
diverse Statutes, etc. upon which Indictment at the said Assizes and
Jail-deliver, public Proclamation was made that the said Katherine should
render her body at the next Assizes and Jail-deliver, to render to the King
according to the Statute, etc. at which next Assizes and Jail-deliver, the
sixth of March, 12 Jac. before the said Justices the said Katherine did not
render her body according to the said Proclamation, nor appear upon Record,
whereupon the said Katherine of the Premises whereof she was indicted, was
lawfully convicted, and yet stands convicted according to the Statute: And the
Defendants further said, that they the aforesaid Term of Easter next after the
conviction aforesaid, the said Katherine did not pay, nor any of them did pay
into the Exchequer, according to the rate of twenty pounds for every week
contained in the said Indictment, nor did after the conviction in the said
Exchequer, so much as then did remain not paid, according to the rate of twenty
pounds for every month after such conviction, but thereof made default, which
conviction afterward, viz. in the Term of S. Michael then next after the
conviction as aforesaid, by the said Sir Henry Hubbert and Laurence Tanfeild,
Justices, etc. was extreated and certified into the Exchequer, and so there did
remain according to the form of the Statute, etc. and the said conviction yet
does remain in full force, and this they are ready to aver, with that also that
the said Katherine named in the Information, and the said Katherine named in
the Indictment, are one and the same person.

Upon which Plea Mr. Attorney demurred in Law, and the Defendants did join.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the King, and the Informer
against the Defendants.

In which, first it is to be considered, that neither the Statute of 28 Eliz.
nor the Statute 35 Eliz. which give several remedies to the King for the
monthly forfeiture of twenty pounds given by the 23 Eliz. do not restrain the
Informer, but that notwithstanding those Statutes, any one may inform against
any Recusant, for not repairing to Church, against the Statute of 23 Eliz.
unless the King has first taken his remedy against him for the same offense,
for that was adjudged by all the Court in Dr. Fosters Case, 11 Rep. And as I
believe this will be granted and by the Defendants Council, so I will agree
with them, that if the Recusant be once convicted, and punished at the suit of
the King, he shall not be punished for the same offense again, at the suit of
the Informer, or otherwise, for it is unjust to punish an Offender twice for
one Crime.

And therefore the chief matter to be considered in this Case, is the nature
and force of this conviction against the wife, and whether it be such a
conviction as will bar the Informer of his Information, or not.

And as to that, first, the woman is indicted here of Recusancy, and proclaimed
according to the Statute of 28 Eliz. and she did not render her body whereby
she is convicted by this Statute, but this conviction is not any Judgment, for
the true words of the Statute are, That if the party indicted shall not appear,
but make default after such Proclamation, that then upon such default recorded,
this shall be a sufficient conviction in Law of such Offender, as if a Trial
by Verdict had been had and recorded, so that such default of appearance is
made equivalent to a Verdict by that Statute, but not to a Judgment, so that
now it is to be understood, that the woman in this Case is convicted by Verdict
of Recusancy, but no Judgment is given. And I conceive that such conviction is
no Bar to the Informer.

For that this is a fruitless conviction and such a one, as the King can take
no advantage of, and every conviction that shall make a discharge to the person
convicted, ought to be a legal and absolute conviction, and such a one as
thereby the party convicted may suffer the penalty imposed by the Law for such
offense.

And that the King can have no benefit of this conviction is apparent, for the
remedy given to him by the 28 Eliz. for the penalty is to seize all the Goods,
and two parts of the Lands and Leases of the Recusant, but the woman here being
married has no Lands or Goods, and therefore the King cannot have any thing,
and the Goods or Lands of her Husband cannot be taken for his wifes offense,
she being convicted by Indictment only, to which the husband is no party.



I answer, that first, it may be also that the husband may survive, and then
the King shall never have any thing, Fosters Case. 2. This Objection is upon
two possibilities; 1. That the husband may first dye. 2. That the wife then
shall have Lands and Goods: And I have always taken it for a Rule, that a
possibility shall never take away a present Action or Suit as is proved by
diverse Cases, as in 5. Rep. Harisons Case, and 9. Rep. fol. 108. 109.

And as it is said in Elmers Case 5. Rep. that two possibilities cannot
maintain hospitality or repair a Church, so I say in this case, that one such
possibility to recover this penalty for the King, cannot hinder the Informer of
his Suit, nor oppose the good reformation of Recusants intended by the Statute,
for then all married women addicted to Popery will be Recusants upon
confidence, that if they be once convicted by Indictment (the which they
themselves may procure to be done) then they shall not be subject to any
penalty during the lives of their husbands, who peradventure may survive them,
and as it was well observed in Dr. Fosters Case, that married women are the
most dangerous Recusants, because that they have the education of their
Children and the government of their Servants.

But it may be objected, Eliz. or may sue the husband and wife, according to
the 35 Eliz. for these penalties, and so shall be two ways punished for the
same offense.

No such inconvenience can happen, Fosters Case, the recovery of the Informer
being legal shall bar the King, as in the 19 Ed. 2. where the Testator was
bound in a Recognizance for performing of Covenants, this was no bar in debt
upon an Obligation, but that the Plaintiff may recover, and if after such
recovery the Statute be forfeited, and execution thereupon, the Executor shall
have an Audita Querela, for that he had lawfully administered the goods before
for payment of the Bonds.

And after, viz. Mich. 17 Jac. I moved the Court that the Plea of the
Defendants was insufficient, for that the Statute did ordain that upon every
Indictment of Recusancy, proclamation should be made, and that the body of the
Offender should be rendered to the Sheriff of the County before the next Assizes
or Jail-deliver, and if such Offender so proclaimed, does not appear but makes
default, that he shall be convicted, etc. And the Defendants have pleaded, that
Proclamation was made, that the body of the said Katherine should be rendered at
the next Assizes or Jail-deliver, etc. and therefore she is not convict at
all, because she was not proclaimed according to the Statute for this
Proclamation differs in two material circumstances from the form prescribed by
the Statute; first, in omission of the Sheriff to whom the body is to be
rendered. 2. In the time for the Statute limits it to be done before the next
Assizes, etc. but this Proclamation gives a larger time (scil.) at the Assizes.

Whereupon all the Court agreed that the Plea was insufficient for the causes
aforesaid, and that now the wife was not convicted by proclamation.

Wherefore Judgment Judgment.
was given for the King and the Informer.

John Mitton Administrator of George Mitton, of Goods not Administered by Alice
Mitton, against John By.
IN an Action of Debt for twenty five pounds, for that William Marquess of
Winchester, the twentieth of October, 30 Eliz, by Indenture did devise to John
By the Father of the Defendant, three parts of the Manor of Newnham in the
County of Southampton, excepting all Fines, Reliefs, Amerciaments, Courts,
Woods, Copies, Fishings, and Royalties. Habendum from Michaelmas next for one
and twenty years, rendering six shillings ten pence Rent, at the Annunciation,
and Michaelmas.

The twentieth of January 1. Jac. John By the Father made his Will, and made
the Defendant his Executor and died possessed.

The fourteenth of November. 2 Jacob. the Defendant granted the Term to the
Intestate.

The sixteenth of November. 2 Jac. The Intestate did grant all the Term by
Indenture to the Defendant, rendering fifty nine pounds Rent at the Annunciation
and Michaelmas, whereby be entered and had possession of the Land: and twenty
five pounds of the said Rent for half a year ending at Michaelmas, 15 Jacob.
was behind to the Plaintiff after the death of the Intestate, which yet the
Defendant does not pay, ad damnum, etc.

The Defendant says, that the Intestate the twenty sixth of June, 5 Jac. did
release by Deed to the Defendant, all Actions, Suits, Debts, Duties, from the
beginning of the world until the day of the date of the said writing.

Whereupon the Plaintiff demurred in Law.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff.

For that in Littleton 118. If one does release to another all Demands, this is
the best Release that may be, and shall enure to the most advantage of him to
whom it is made: For by such Release, all Actions, Reals and Personals, and
Appeals and Executions, are gone and extinct: and if a man has title to enter
into any Land, by such Release his title is gone: and 20 Assis. 5. where in an
Assise for Rent, a Release of all Demands was pleaded, and the common Opinion
was, that it was good; wherefore the Plaintiff was nonsuited: and 5 Edw. 4.42.
by Danby: A Release of all Demands by a Lord to his Tenant is a good bar and
extinguishment of his Seigniory; for although no Rent was behind at the making
of the Release, yet is the Rent always in Demand: and 6 H. 7. 15. If the King
releaseth all Demands, yet as to him the Inheritance shall not be included: But
in case of Rent or right of Entry by a common person, and every thing therein
employed, is gone by such Release: And 14 H. 8. 9. by Pollard: By Release of all
Demands the Rent is extinct, for Rent is to be had by Demand; and if one does
determine the means he has to come by a thing, he does determine the thing it
self: And Litt. 118. If a man has a Rent-service, or Rentcharge, or Common of
Pasture, by such Release of all Demands, all is gone from the Land from whence
the Service or Rent is issuing, or the Common of Pasture: But if one lets Land
to another for a year, rendering forty shillings Rent at Michaelmas, and before
the Feast does release to the Lessee all Actions, yet after the Feast he shall
have an Action of Debt for non-payment of the forty shillings notwithstanding
the Release. And 40 of Ed. 3. 48. Hillary: By such Release to the Conusor of a
Statute-Merchant before the day of payment, the Conusee shall be barred of his
Action, because that the Duty is always in demand: yet if he release all his
right in the Land, it is no Bar: 25 Assis. 7. And Althams Case, Cokes Rep. 153.
By a Release of all Demands, not only all Demands, but also all causes of
Demands are released. And there are two manners of Demands, viz In Deed, and in
Law. In Deed: As in every Praecipe quod reddat, there is an express Demand. In
Law: As in every Entry in Land, Distress for Rent, taking and seizing of goods,
and the like acts in Pais, which may be done without words, are Demands in Law.
And as a Release of Suits is more large and beneficial then a Release of
Complaints or Actions, so a Release of Demands is more large and beneficial
then any of them, for by that is released all those things that by the others
are released, and more; for thereby all Freeholds and Inheritances are
released: as in 34 H. 8. Releases 90. 6. He who does release all Demands, does
exclude himself of all Entries, Actions, and Seisures: And Littl. 170. By the
Release of all Demands Warranty is released, and yet that is Executory, and the
reason hereof is, that by the Release of Demands, all the means, remedies, and
causes, that any has to Lands, Tenements, Goods or Chattels, are extinct, and
by consequence the right and interest in all of them. And in 40 Ed. 3. 22. It
is debated there, whether a Release of all Demands by the Lord to the Tenant,
to hold only by Rent and Fealty, shall bar the Lord to demand reasonable aid
to marry his Daughter; but it was agreed there, that such Release shall bar the
Lord of his Rent, for as it is there said, that is always in demand. And 13 R.
2. Avowry 89. One gives Land in Tail to hold by Rent, Homage and Fealty for all
Services and Demands, this does discharge the Tenant of Relief, (but 18 Ed. 3.
26. contrarium tenetur.) And 7 Ed. 2. Avowry 211. Suit at a Leet by reason of
Residency is not discharged by a Feoffment to hold by Rent for all Services and
Demands, for this service is not in respect of the Land, but of residency of
the person. And 14 H. 4. 2. Gilbert de Clare, Earl of Gloucester, before the
Statute of Quia Emptores Terrarum, did give Land, parcel of the Honor of
Gloucester, to hold of him as of the Honor, to hold by Homage, Fealty and Rent
for all Services and Demands: And after long argument it was agreed, and hereby
the Lord was excluded to have a Fine for alienation, which otherwise was due
from every Tenant of the Honor. And as the Fine was discharged there by the
Feoffment, so it might have been by Release of all Demands.

And the whole Court agreed, Judicium.
that by this Release of all Demands the Rent is released, and so the Plaintiff
ought to be barred: and so Pasch. 16 Jacob. Judgment was given accordingly.

Hillar. 13 Jacob. Southern against How.
IN an Action on the Case, for that the Defendant the first of April, 5 Jacob.
was possessed de quibusdam Jocalibus artificialibus and contrefectis, (Anglice)
artificial and counterfeit Jewels, viz. two Carcanets, one pair of Earrings,
one pair of Pendants, and one Coronet, as of his proper goods: and the
Defendant there and then knowing the said Jewels to be artificial and
counterfeit, and fraudulently intending to sell them for true and perfect
Jewels, there and then did deliver them to one William Sadock his servant, to
whom at that time the said Jewels were known to be counterfeit and artificial,
and did command the said William to transport the said Jewels beyond the Seas
into Barbary, where the Defendant well knew that the Plaintiff was residing:
and did further command the said William, that he should conceal the
counterfeitness and falsness of the said Jewels, and that after his arrival he
should repair to the Plaintiff, and show him the said Jewels for good and true
Jewels, and there require the Plaintiff to sell the said Jewels for good and
true Jewels for the Defendant, to the King of Barbary, or to any other that
would buy them, and that he should receive a price for them as if they were
good and true Jewels.

That the 20 of April, 5 Jacob. the said William did sail from London to
Barbary, and there the 22 June, 5 Jacob. arrived, and did then repair to the
Plaintiff; and knowing the said Jewels to be artificial and counterfeit, did
show them to the Plaintiff for good and true Jewels, and there and then did
require the Plaintiff to sell them for good and true Jewels to Mully Sydan then
King of Barbary, and there and then did affirm to the Plaintiff, that the said
Jewels were worth in value 14400 Dunces of Barbary Money, amounting to 810 l. of
English Money. And the Plaintiff not suspecting the said Jewels to be
counterfeit, but conceiving them to be good and true, did receive them of the
said William, and afterward (scil.) the 22 of August, 5 Jacob. did offer them
to the said King of Barbary as good and true Jewels, and there and then did
procure the said King to buy the said Jewels (not being of the value of 3000
Ounces of Barbary Money, amounting to 168 l. 15 s. English) for 14400 Ounces of
Barbary Money, amounting to 810 l. which money the Plaintiff the 22 of August, 5
Jacob. received of the said King for the said Jewels for the Defendant, and did
pay the said sum then there to the said William for the Defendant; and the said
William, immediately after the receipt thereof, did secretly withdraw himself
out of Barbary, and did return into England to the Defendant with the said sum,
and the first of October, 5 Jacob. did pay the same to the Defendant.

That the 30 of May, 6 Jac. the said King perceiving the said Jewels to be
counterfeit, caused the Plaintiff to be arrested and imprisoned for them, and
retained him in prison three months, and until the Plaintiff out of his proper
goods did repay to the said King the said 14400 Ounces of Barbary Money.

That the first of October, 6 Jac. the Plaintiff gave notice to the Defendant
of the repair of the said William to him, and of all the premises, and
requested him to pay to the Plaintiff the said sum, which yet he has not paid,
ad damnum 2000 Marks.

The Defendant pleaded Not guilty.

The Jury found that the first of April, 5 Jac. the Defendant was possessed of
the said Jewels, and knowing them to be artificial and counterfeit, and
intending fraudulently, for good and true Jewels did deliver them to the said
William Sadock, and that it was then well known to the said William that the
said Jewels were artificial and counterfeit, and that the Defendant did command
the said William that he should transport the said Jewels into Barbary, where
he knew the Plaintiff did reside; and did further give authority to the said
William to sell the said Jewels to the then King of Barbary, or to any other
person that would buy them. And the Jury found that the said William went into
Barbary, and there, knowing the said Jewels to be artificial and counterfeit,
did show them to the Plaintiff for good and true Jewels, and did request the
Plaintiff to sell and utter them to the said Mully Sydan for good and right
Jewels for the Defendant, affirming to the Plaintiff that the said Jewels were
worth 14400 Ounces of Barbary Money, amounting to 810 l. English Money, and that
the Plaintiff not suspecting the said Jewels to be artificial and counterfeit,
but conceiving them to be good and true Jewels, did receive them of the said
William, and presented them to be sold to the said King as good and true
Jewels, and procured the said King to buy them (not being of the value of 3000
Ounces of Barbary Money, amounting to 168 l. 15 s. of English Money) for 14400
Ounces of Barbary Money, amounting to 810 l. English Money; and the Plaintiff
then and there did receive the said sum of the said King for the said Jewels
for the Defendant, and paid the same to the said William, who after the receipt
thereof immediately conveyed himself out of Barbary to London, and did there
pay the said sum to the Defendant: and that afterward the said King perceiving
the said Jewels to be artificial and counterfeit, caused the Plaintiff to be
arrested and imprisoned, and detained him in prison three months, until he had
repayd to the said King the said 14400 Ounces of Barbary Money for the said
Jewels, and that the Plaintiff did give notice to the Defendant of all the said
premises, and requested him to repay him the said sum as the Plaintiff had
alleged. But they said, that the Defendant did not command the said William
that he should conceal the pravity or counterfeiting of the said Jewels, or
that he should repair to the Plaintiff and show him the said Jewels for good
and true Jewel, and to require the Plaintiff to sell or utter the said Jewels
to the said King, or other person that would buy them: and that he received the
price for them as for good and true Jewels, as by the Declaration is supposed.

And if it seem to the Court upon the whole matter, that the Defendant is
guilty, they found for the Plaintiff, and did assign 642 l. damages, and four
Marks costs; and if not, then they found for the Defendant.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff, and that
this Action does not lie against the Defendant, for four Reasons.

It does appear by the Plaintiffs own Declaration that these Jewels 168 l. 15
s. or as near that value as may be; for in as much as he averred them, not to
be of the value of 168 l. 15 s. this being his own averment, it shall be taken
most strongly against himself (scil.) that they were very near that value; and
if they were of that value, it appears to the Court that they could not be
counterfeit, although they were not of so great value as was paid for them: And
the value and estimation of Jewels is always as the Buyer will account of them
and esteem them: as Michaelm. 38 and 39 Elizab. Common Bench: where Davenport
brought an Action on the Case against Sympson, wherein the Plaintiff declared,
that he was possessed of an Ewer of silver to the value of 500 l. and did give
the same to A. to transport beyond Sea, and to sell the same there, and to give
an account thereof to him, and that A. had broken it, and converted it to his
own use: whereupon the now Plaintiff brought his Action on the Case against A.
ad damnum 500 l. whereupon they were at issue, and the Defendant did
maliciously depose, that it was worth but 180 l. whereupon the Jury gave but
200 l. damages: And adjudged that the Action would not lie, and chiefly because
that the value of such things are so uncertain, that some value them higher
then others.

Also the Verdict does vary from the Declaration in three material points: 1.
The Defendant does not direct his Servant to the Plaintiff. 2. The Defendant
did not command him to conceal the counterfeitness of the Jewels. 3. He did not
command the Servant to sell them as good Jewels.

No Action on the Case lies, although this fact had been done by the 11 Ed. 4.
6. If one sells Clothes, and does warrant them to be so long, and they are not,
an Action on the Case lies; but there ought to be an express warranty, and that
ought to be made at the time of the sale, or else no Action lies. And F. N. B.
94 C. If one does sell a Horse, and warrant him to be sound, and he is not, an
Action lies: so if one sells corrupt Wine, and warrants it to be good, an
Action lies: but unless he warrant the Horse or Wine to be good, no Action
lies; for the Buyer is at his peril, and his eyes and his taste must be his
judges in this case: and in 7 H. 4. 14. The Plaintiff declared, that the
Defendant sold corrupted Wine to him, knowing the same to be corrupted: the
Defendant said, that he gave the Plaintiff a taste of the Wine, and that he
agreed that it was good Wine, and adjudged the Action would not lie: and 13 H.
4. 1. If one sells a Horse that is blind, and warrants him to be sound, no
Action lies, because I may see whether he be blind or not; but otherwise,
where he has a disease in his body, which I cannot discern.

Montague. He ought to have showed that he was legally imprisoned, and
compelled to pay the Money, for otherwise he cannot have an Action: as in 13 H.
4. 6. A diversity in sale of things between those things that are necessary,
and not necessary, as Jewels: also the said William was authorized by the
Defendant to sell the Jewels, and he cannot authorize another; and therefore
that which the Plaintiff has done, was without any warrant from the Defendant.

The Defendant did not require his Servant to conceal the counterfeitness 9 H.
6. 53. by Rolphe: If I have a Servant who is my Merchant, and he goes to the
Fair with an unsound Horse, or other Merchandise, and sells them, the Vendee
can have no Action against me. Martin. You say true, for you do not command him
to sell the Horse to him, nor to no other person in certain. Vide Doctor and
Student 138.

Cook. 5 Rep. Noke and Anders Case: If Lessee for years be outed by a stranger
without title, he shall not have an Action of Covenant.

And this Case was argued by Crook for the Plaintiff, and by me for the
Defendant, 29 Janua. 15 Jacob. at which time the Court seemed to incline
against the Plaintiff: And Trinit. 16 Jacob. The case was argued by Davenport
for the Plaintiff, and by Coventry the Kings Solicitor for the Defendant, at
which time Montague, Doderidge, and Haughton agreed, that the Action would not
lie, and Crook was absent.

Judgment.
And afterward, Michaelm. 16 Jac. Judgment was given by all the Court: Quod
querens nihil capiat per Billam.

Trinit. 15 Jacob. Lingen against Pain.
IN an Action of Debt upon a Bond of 400 l. made the third of October, 12
Jacob. and the Defendant demanded Oyer of the Obligation, and of the Condition;
which was, That whereas the Plaintiff had devised to Robert Hawkins the Farm of
Williamsthorp in the County of Gloucester, until the Feast of St. Michael the
Archangel next, if the said Robert, upon the said Feast day, or any time after,
upon request made by the Plaintiff, his Heirs, or Assigns, should deliver the
possession of the said Farm to the said Plaintiff, his Heirs or Assigns, and
permit the said Plaintiff, his Heirs or Assigns, to have and enjoy the same
after such request; and also if the said Robert in the mean time shall not give
nor sell any Wood, nor commit any waste in the said Farm, that then the
Obligation should be void.

The Defendant said, that the Plaintiff, or his Assigns, Bar.
upon the said Feast, or at any time after, and before the Bill, did not
require the said Robert to deliver to the Plaintiff the possession of the said
Farm, and that the said Robert, from the time of the making of the said Bond,
unto the said Feast, did not give or sell any Wood, nor make any waste upon the
premises.

That the 13 of June, Replication.
12 Jacob. the said Robert being possessed of the said Farm, and the Plaintiff
being seized in Fee of the Reversion of the said Farm; the Plaintiff, together
with John Welford, by Indenture made at W. between the Plaintiff and the said
John Welford of the one part, and Richard Powle and Henry Powle of the other
part, and enrolled in this Court within six weeks, for 1700 l. paid to the
Plaintiff, did bargain and sell to the said Richard and Henry Powle the
Reversion of the said Farm, habendum to them and their Heirs: And the 30 of
September. 13 Jacob. being the next day after the said Feast, the said Richard
and Henry Powle, as the Assigns of the said Plaintiff, at the said Farm in W.
aforesaid, did request the said Robert to deliver the possession of the said
Farm to the said Richard and Henry, which he did refuse.

That the said Richard and Henry Powle did not require the said Robert to
deliver to them the possession of the said Farm the said 30 of September, the
13 Jac. upon which they were at issue. Rejoinder.


The Jury found the possession of the said Robert Hawkins, and the seisin of
the Plaintiff, and the bargain and sale, and that Henry Powle, 31 September. 13
Jac. did alone come to the capital Message of the said Farm, without any
notice given before of his coming to the said House, and there then, as
Assignee of the Plaintiff, did require the said Robert Hawkins to deliver the
possession of the said Farm according to the effect of the condition aforesaid,
and that the possession of the said Farm was not delivered according to the
tenor of the said writing; but the possession of the said Farm was kept from
the said Richard and Henry Powle. And if it seems to the Court upon this
matter, that the said Richard and Henry did require the said Robert to deliver
to them the possession of the said Farm, then they found it so, and did assess
costs and damages: and if not, they found for the Defendant.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

For in Tookers Case, 2 Report, by Popham: Every act made by one Ioynt-tenant
for the benefit of him and his companion, shall bind the other, as payment by
one discharges the other; and one may prejudice the other in the profits: as
where a Ward does happen to two Ioyn-tenants, and one distrains for the
services which is a waver of the Wardship, by 1 Ed. 3. this shall bind the
other.

And if two Ioynt-tenants be disseised, and one enters, this is in Law the
entry of both, and so it shall be pleaded; for when an act is made by one, the
Law shall adjudg this to be made by him in whose right it is made: as in 32 Ed.
3. Bar 264. If one be bound to infeoff another such a day, if he be ready by
his Attorney to do it, it is sufficient, for the Law takes the act of the
Attorney to be the act of the party: and so in the 19 H. 6. 78. to continue an
Action: and so in 10 Edw. 2. Dower 130. and 9 Ed. 3. 38. If there be two
Ioynt-tenants in Fee, and one seized in right of his Wife, of Land to which the
Wife has title of Dower, the one Ioynt-tenant or the Husband may assign the
Dower; and the reason is given, because that when the Husband or one
Ioynt-tenant does any thing out of Court that they are compellable to make, it
shall be intended to be the Deed of the one and the other.

And so, if a Lord by Fealty only does distrain for Rent, and the Tenant
brings a Trespass, and the Lord justifies, because he holds of him by Fealty
and Rent, and so justifies the Writ; and the Tenant says, that he does not hold
of him moda and forma, etc. and it is found that he holds by fealty only, yet
shall the Plaintiff be barred, for the matter of the issue is, whether the
Tenant held of him, or not? for then the Action lies.

And so here, the matter of the issue is, whether a legal request of the
delivery of the possession was made or not? and if it were made by the
Attorneys of the Bargainees, that in Law shall be taken to be the act of
themselves, and so shall be pleaded: and so was it adjudged in this Court,
Hillar. 37 Eliz. in Jordans Case: Vide Dyer 354.

Hawkins had notice of the Bargain and Sale, and therefore the Defendant shall
forfeit the Obligation, as in Mallories 5 Rep. and Francis Case, 8 Rep. 92. in
an Entry on condition.

Hawkins should deliver the possession to his Assigns, and therefore he must
take notice thereof at his peril: as in 18 Ed. 4. 24. An Obligation upon
condition that the Defendant should account before an Auditor to be assigned,
when he should be required, and to pay the Arrearages; and it was pleaded, that
he did account before such an Auditor assigned by the Plaintiff, and was ready
to pay the Arrearages, if the Auditor would give notice, etc. and it was held
insufficient, for he ought to take notice at his peril: also it is pleaded, and
found, that Henry Powle, as Assignee of the Plaintiff, did make the request:
and if notice had been material, the Defendant ought to have pleaded, that he
had no notice; but by his Plea notice is employed.

Judgment.
And after Judgment was given for the Plaintiff, by all the Court.

Rot. 459.
Michaelm. 15 Jacob. Agard against Wild and others.
IN an Action on the Case, for that the Plaintiff is and was of good name and
fame, and yet the Defendants maliciously intending to cause the Plaintiff to be
reputed a Common Barretor, the 27 of November, the 14 Jacob. did falsely and
maliciously procure the Plaintiff to be indicted in this Court, that he was a
Common Barretor, and a Disturber of the Peace at Edmonton in the County of
Middlesex, ad communem disturbationem and inquietationem omnium inhabitantium
ibidem. To which Indictment the Plaintiff, Jovis post Octab. Hillar. 14 Jac.
did plead Not guilty, whereupon issue, etc. and the now Plaintiff was acquitted
by Verdict and Judgment, to his damage of 500 l. etc.

The said John Wild said, That at the time of the Indictment he and William
Smith were impannelled in the great Inquest for the said County, and then in
this Court were sworn to inquire upon their oaths of all Felonies, Trespasses,
and misdemeanors done within the said County; and so being sworn, having
evidence upon oath of good and loyal men given to the said Defendant and the
rest of his Fellow-Iurors. The said John Wild, and the other Jurors, there and
then upon their oaths, for the Indictment mentioned in the Declaration, did
indict the Plaintiff for the said Offense mentioned in the said Declaration, as
they might very well do.

Upon which Plea the Plaintiff demurred in Law.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given against the Plaintiff, for in
as much as the Defendant was sworn of the Inquest, and he and the other Jurors
upon good evidence did indict the Plaintiff, it cannot be presumed that he did
this on malice, but it was done in zeal to Justice by reason of his oath: and
although it be true that he and the other Defendants did procure the Plaintiff
to be indicted of malice without just cause, yet now the oath of the Defendant
has discharged himself of the precedent wrong, as may be proved by many Books:
21 Edw. 3. 17. a. In a Conspiracy for indicting the Plaintiff of Felony, the
Defendant pleaded that he was sworn of the Inquest to enquire at the Leet of
the Lord Zouch, and that he and the rest of the Jury did indict the Plaintiff
upon their oath: and there Thorp said, That Conspirators are always in fault:
and when one is of the Inquest, and sworn to speak the truth, that which he
says then is upon his oath, and not of Conspiracy; and there is no reason to
accuse one of Conspiracy, where he does nothing.

7 H. 4. 31. In a Conspiracy to procure the Plaintiff to be indicted of a
Trespass, the Defendant said, That they were impannelled for the King before
the Justices of Peace in the County of Norfolk, and that which they did was
upon their oaths: Judgment, etc. The Plaintiff replied, that there was no such
Record, and because the Defendants failed of the Record for two days, Judgment
was given for the Plaintiff. 8 H. 4. 6. The Defendants pleaded that they were
indicted: the Plaintiff replied, that they procured the Sheriff to return them.
Gascoigne, There is no question but that the Jurors shall be excused of
Conspiracy, by reason of their oaths: Vide 20 H. 6. 5. and 19 H. 6. 19. 4 H. 6.
23. And Not. Brevium 115. C. and D. it is put for a rule, that a Writ of
Conspiracy will not lie against the Indictors themselves, and if Jurors be
sworn to enquire, etc. and after some of them be discharged by the Justices,
they shall not be punished for any such matter, because it was when they were
sworn; but if they conspire afterward, they may be charged with a Conspiracy.
And Stamford 173. if after the Conspiracy the Conspirators are sworn on the
Inquest to enquire, etc. and they with the others of the Jury do indict him
against whom they do conspire, no Writ of Conspiracy will lie against them,
because such thing cannot be intended false or malicious, because they do it on
their oaths, and that with others besides themselves. The same Law where after
the Conspirators are sworn and have spoken with their companions, they are
discharged by the Justices, yet by reason that they were once sworn, and the
Conspiracy therefore discharged. And Old Book of Entr. 122. a. In a Writ of
Conspiracy to procure the Plaintiff to be indicted of Felony, one of the
Defendants pleaded Not guilty, and the other that he was one of the Indictors,
in the same manner as our Plea is, without any Travers, and the Plaintiff
replied null tiel Record, upon which they were at issue, etc. and in the same
Book are four other presidents, in all which the same Bars are pleaded. And
there is also another president where the same Bar is pleaded; to which the
Plaintiff replied, that the Defendant after the conspiracy of his Covin did
procure the Sheriff to impannel and return him to be one of the Jury, to the
intent that he should indict the Plaintiff.

Also this Indictment is insufficient in other respects: 1. The conclusion is,
ad communem disturbationem and inquietatem omnium inhabitantium ibidem: the
which word [ibidem] does refer only to Edmonton, and so there is no common
nuisance, but particularly to them of that Town. 2. There is no place alleged
where he was a common Barretor. 3. The Indictment is, that he was a common
Barretor, ita quod verisimilis fuit facere homicidium, lites and discordia, and
alia gravamina inter vicinos suos apud Edmunton praedict. which is not
sufficient, for that it ought to be alleged in fact, that he made or caused
lites and discordia, and not that he was like to make them.

And if an Indictment be insufficient, although that the party does plead Not
guilty and be acquitted, yet he shall not have a Conspiracy or an Action on the
Case, for by such Indictment he cannot be in any danger: and 9 Ed. 4. 12. If
one be indicted on an insufficient Indictment, and he does not take advantage
thereof, but pleads not guilty, and is acquitted, and brings a Writ of
Conspiracy, the Defendants may show how that the Indictment was insufficient,
so that the Plaintiff was not duly arraigned, and they shall have advantage
thereof: Vide Cook. 4 Rep. Vaux Case. And 34 H. 6. 9. If the party indicted be
misnamed, and be acquitted, he shall not have a Conspiracy because the
Indictment was void as to him. And Dyer 286. If the offense in the Indictment
be pardoned by a general pardon, and yet the party pleads Not guilty, and is
acquitted, he shall not have a Conspiracy because he was in no jeopardy.

And this Case being moved by Chilborn Sergeant, and George Crook for the
Plaintiff, the fourth of February, 15 Jacob. I showed to the Court, that the
Plea was good, for the reasons and authorities before cited, and also that the
Indictment was insufficient for the Reasons before showed.

Judgment.
And therefore Judgment was given: Quod querens nihil caperet per Billam.

Michaelmas, 15 Jacob.
Thomas Muschamp Knight, and Margaret his wife, and Thomas Lock Esquire; and Jane
his wife against Colan Bluet, Michael Sampson, Edward Jenny and Elizabeth his
wife.
In the Exchequer.
IN an Action of Trespass, for that the Defendants the first of January, 14
Jacob. by force and arms the Close of the Plaintiff at Tottenham did break and
enter, and possessionem tenementorum praedict. a praedicto primo Januarii usque
diem billae (scil.) 20 Maii, 15 Jacob. habuerunt, tenuerunt and custodierunt ad
damnum 40 l. Quo minus, etc.

The Defendants pleaded Not guilty.

The Jury found, that before the Trespass Sir William Lock Knight was seized in
Fee of the said Tenements, and held them in Socage, and that he and Matthew
Lock his son were Ioynt-tenants in Fee of other Copyhold Lands in Tottenham,
and that he had issue Thomas, Matthew, John, Henry, and Michael.

That the 15 Martii, 1549. Sir William made his Will in writing, and thereby
did devise these Tenements to Henry and Michael in these words:

I give to Thomas, Matthew, John, Henry, and Michael, my five Sons, my dwelling
House in Bow-lane, and my House at the Lock in Cheap, and my House at the Bell
in Cheap, to the intent that they or some of them may dwell in them, and keep
the Retaining Shop still in my name to continue there.

Item, I give to John Lock my House that Paris dwells in.

I give to Henry Lock my House that John Edwards dwells in.

I give to Michael Lock the three Houses wherein W. B. and P. dwell.

I give to Henry Lock the House that Kew dwells in.

I give to Matthew Lock the two Houses wherein S. and T. dwell.

I give to Henry and Michael Lock all my Houses in the Poultry, Bucklersbury,
and St. John's, and a House that Goodman dwells in.

I give to Matthew Lock all my Houses at Dowgate and in the Vintry.

I give to Thomas Lock all my Houses in Cheap lying in St. Peter's Parish.

I give to Thomas Lock my Land at Martin and Wimbleton, that I may give him,
except one Farm called Martin Holts, which I give to Henry and Michael Lock.

I give to all my five Sons the half of the Leg Entry which I purchased of late.

And as touching my Lands at Tottenham, my Son Matthew is joined Purchaser with
me of the most, and the rest of all my Houses and Land there which is Freehold,
I give to Henry and Michael Lock, upon this condition, that if they shall sell
it to any man but to Matthew Lock my Son, then he to enter upon it, as of my
Gift, by this my Will.

Item, All the Houses and Lands that I have given jointly betwixt my Sons, is,
That they shall bear part and part-like, going out of all my Houses and Lands,
upon my Blessing, as well Freehold as Copyhold, to pay to my Wife Elizabeth for
Dowry 40 l. every year, during her life, out of all my Lands and Houses, as
well Copyhold as Freehold; for which Sum I am bound, as appears by certain
Indentures, etc. and which of my Sons refuses to bear his part of the
aforesaid Sum of 40 l. I will that he or they shall enjoy no part of my Bequest
by me to them given in this my Will, but my Gift given to him o^ them to go to
the rest of my well-willing Sons which be content to fulfill this my Will and
Bond that I am bound in to be performed.

Sir William Lock dyed seized, and Elizabeth his Wife did survive him.

Henry and Michael did enter into the said Tenements, and paid their parts of
the said 40 l. to the said Elizabeth: Henry dies, and Michael paid his part of
the said 40 l.

Thomas Lock was Son and Heir of the said Sir William, and had issue Matthew
Lock his Son and Heir, and dies.

Matthew, the Son of Thomas, devises the said Tenements to the Plaintiffs,
habendum from the death of the said Michael for seven years.

The 28 of July, 15 Jacob. Michael Lock dyed seized of the said Tenements.

And the said Colan Bluet, Michael Sampson, and Elizabeth Jenny the Defendants,
are the next Heirs of the said Michael; and that the said Bluet, Sampson, and
Jenny, in the right of the said Elizabeth his Wife, after the death of the said
Michael Lock, did enter, upon whom the Plaintiffs did enter, upon whom the
Defendants re-entred, and made the Trespass.

But whether the Entry of the Plaintiffs was legal or not, the Jury did doubt:
and if legal, they found for the Plaintiff, if not, for the Defendants.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiffs, for I
conceive that Henry and Michael Lo^k had but an Estate for their lives by this
Devise, which by their deaths is ended, so that nothing can descend to the
Heirs of Michael being the survivor, and by consequence the Lease made to the
Plaintiffs by Matthew Lock the Heir of the Devisor, is good, and the Entry of
the Plaintiffs is lawful.

The Case.
And the Case upon the whole matter I conceive to be this:

Sir William Lock being seized of certain Land in Fee, and being Ioynt-tenant
with Matthew Lock, one of his Sons, of Copyhold Land within the same Town, had
issue Henry, Michael, Thomas, and two other Sons, and by his Will did devise to
his Sons diverse Lands severally: And after says, Touching my Lands at T. my Son
Matthew is joined Purchaser with me already of the most, and the rest of all my
Land there, which is Freehold, I give to Henry and Michael, upon condition,
that if they sell it to any but to Matthew my Son, then he to enter as of my
Gift: and then he declares, That of all these Bequests his Sons shall bear part
and part-like, out of all his Copyhold Lands and Free, to pay to Elizabeth his
wife for her Dowry 40 l. a year during her life; and that Son which shall
refuse to bear his part, shall not enjoy any part of his Bequest, but it shall
be to the residue, etc. Sir William Lock dies, Henry and Michael enter, and pay
their parts of the 40 l. Henry dies, and then Michael dies: And now the
Question is, Whether the Defendants, being Heirs of Michael, shall have the
Land, or the Plaintiffs, who claim under the Devisor?

And for the better arguing of this Case: I will first observe, that here is
not any express words of limitation of an Estate, to make any greater Estate to
pass then an Estate for life: and then I will show, that here are no words in
any part of this Will to signify any certain intention in the Devisor to make
an Estate of Inheritance to pass by this Devise.

And as to the first, the Devise is only to his two sons: viz. The rest of all
my Houses and Lands there, which is Freehold, I give to Henry and Michael Lock:
and these are all the words of limitation of the Estate; and these, without
question, in a Deed or Feoffment, will not make a greater Estate then for life.
And so is Littleton 1. If one purchase Land in perpetuum, or to him and his
Assigns in perpetuum, this is but an Estate for life, because it wants these
words, his Heirs, which words make the Inheritance in all Feoffments and
Grants; and this is an infallible Rule in Grants, unless it be in some special
Cases, as in Frankmarriage or Frankalmoine, which being words of art, do pass
an Inheritance with these words, Heirs.

And in Cases of Grants, no intention of the Grantor, although it be apparent
in the Grant, will make an estate of Inheritance to pass: as in 19 H. 6. 73. 20
H. 6. 36. A Gift to B. and C. and haeredibus, with Warranty to them and their
Heirs, is no Fee-simple, because the words of limitation are uncertain to whom
haeredibus shall be referred, and so all one as if it were omitted: and then
the clause of Warranty, although it does declare a certain intent to give an
Estate in Fee, will not amend the matter in a Grant. And so in the 1 Rep.
Shelleys Case: if one gives Land to one, and liberis, or eitibus suis, or
semini suo, it is but an Estate for life, and not an Estate in Tail, yet there
is an apparent intent, but that will not suffice in a Grant.

But I agree, that in Case of a Devise, although the apt words to make an
Estate of Inheritance to pass are omitted, yet if the intent of the Devisor
does appear by any express matter contained in the Will, an Estate of
Inheritance shall pass, for it is sufficient to pass the Inheritance. And so
Litt. 133. 6. 19 H. 8. 9. 6. If one devises Land to another in perpetuum, the
Devise by these words shall bar an Estate in Fee: so if one devise Land to
another, to give, dispose, or sell at his pleasure, this is an Estate in
Fee-simple: 19 H. 8. 9. 6. 7 Edw. 6. B.

But yet the Law has restrained such intent.

For first, it ought to be agreeable to Law, and not repugnant to it;
Scholasticas Case, in the Comment. it is said, that a Will is like to an Act of
Parliament, yet a Will cannot alter the Law, or make a new form of an Estate,
which is not allowed by the Rules of Law, as an Act of Parliament is: and so
adjudged in the Common Bench, Hillar. 37 Eliz. between Jermin and Ascot, Cooks
1 Rep. 85. in Corbets Case: That by a Devise a man cannot give an Estate, and
determine part thereof by a condition, and make the residue to continue. And if
Land be devised to one in Tail, he cannot determine the Estate as to the
Devisee himself, and yet preserve the Estate to the issue: as was endeavored
in this Case.

And 28 and 29 H. 8. Dyer 33. If Land be devised to one in Fee, and if he does
not perform such an Act, the Land shall remain to another, the remainder is
void, for no such remainder can be limited by the Rules of Law.

This intent ought to be expressed in the Will, and collected out of Matthew
Mannings Case, 8 Rep. 95. 6. Always the intention of the Devisor, expressed in
his Will, is the best Expositor, Director, and Disposer of his words. And Lord
Cheyreys Case, 5 Rep. 68. Sir Thomas Cheyrey devised certain Land to Henry his
Son, and the Heirs males of his body, the remainder to Thomas Cheyrey of
Woodley, and the Heirs males of his body, upon condition, That he or they or
any of them shall not alien: and the Question was, whether there could be an
averment, that the intent of the Devisor was to restrain H. and his Heirs from
aliening? and resolved that no such averment could be received, for
construction of Wills ought to be collected out of the words of the Will.

The intent of the Devisor ought to be manifest and certain, and not His in the
first Devise shall be taken for the Heirs of his body; for the Law will sooner
presume him to be dead without issue, then to be dead without Heir.

And now to examine our Case with the Rules of Law: There are three clauses in
this Will, as I conceive, upon which the pretenses of the Defendants are
founded to have an Estate in Fee pass by this Devise, to which I shall make
answer severally.

And as touching my Lands at T. my Son Matthew is joined Purchaser with me of
the most, and the rest of all my Houses and Lands there, which is Freehold, I
give to Henry and Michael Lock, etc. And as to this, I conceive that here is no
color to enlarge the Estate to the Devisees, but this clause is only a
description of Land which he does not intend to devise, and which in truth he
cannot devise, because that Matthew ought to have it by survivor, and is
principally named therein, because of preventing any question between Matthew
and the two Devisees after his death; for otherwise they might perhaps have
pretended that all the Land in T. should pass to them especially, because they
were purchased as it might, very well be presumed, with the money of the
Devisor, and he was reputed owner thereof, but these words make no Declaration
as to the Estate which he intends to demise to Henry and Michael.

Upon condition, that if they sell it to any man but to Matthew Lock my Son,
then he to enter upon it as of my gift, by this my Will: and I conceive that
this clause does not show any intent of the Devisor to enlarge the Estate first
limited to Henry and Michael, or to give an Estate in Fee to them; for it is
not if they alien in Fee or in Tail, or if they or their Heirs do alien, which
words, or any words to such intent, would have declared a manifest intention
that the Devisees should have a Fee-simple: but here an alienation in general
only is restrained, which ought to be taken for a legal alienation, and such a
one as they may make by reason of the Estate devised to them.

And that it shall be so intended, first, it is to be considered, that this
condition is a restraint annexed to the Estate, and is as a Convinct to the
Estate, and therefore cannot be properly more large then the Estate it self:
for it is a Rule, that every restraint or exception in an Assurance ought to
operate upon the Estate, or the thing before granted: as in the Comment. 370.
Zouches Case: An exception is an exemption of that contained in the general
words, and if it be not contained in the generality, it can be no exception in
the specialty, and therefore if one does lease W. acre, excepting B. acre, the
exception is vain.

Littleton 84. If a Feoffment be made on condition that the Feoffee shall not
alien, the Condition is void, for the Feoffee has power to alien to whom he
will, for if that condition were good, that would take from him the power which
the Law gives him, which would be against Reason: but if the Condition be, that
he shall not alien to such a person, naming the person, or any of his Heirs or
his issues, this is a good Condition, because it take not away the power to
alien in Fee. And Vernons Case, 4 Rep. for 3. An Estate in Fee, conveyed by the
Husband or his Ancestor to a woman for her Ioynture, is not a Ioynture within
the Statute of 11 H. 7. which restrains alienations made by women: for to
restrain such an Estate as cannot be aliened, is repugnant and against the Rule
of Law, and therefore not within the intention of the Act.

But it has been objected on the other side; 1. Matthew. 2. If the condition
be void, yet it is sufficient to declare the intent of the Devisor that a Fee
should pass.

And as to the first, I conceive that the condition is void; J. S. is all one:
for then the Feoffor may restrain him from aliening to any except to himself,
or such other person by name, whom he may well know cannot, nor never will,
purchase the Land: So that this condition shall take away all his power, and
shall make a perpetuity in the Feoffee, which is quite contrary to Law, neither
is there any authority to warrant this restraint: for Littleton leaves the
Feoffee at liberty to alien to any, except to such a one in particular.

And as to the second, I do agree, That if the condition to restrain the
alienation had been expressly to restrain the Devisees and their Heirs, or to
have restrained from aliening in Fee or in Tail, or for another life, although
the condition had been void, yet had it been sufficient to have shown the
intent of the Devisor, and to have caused an Estate in Fee to have passed. And
therefore I do agree to the case in the 9 Rep. fol. 127. where one devised to
his Wife for life, and after her decease his Son William to have it, and if
William shall have issue male, that he shall have it, and if he have not issue
male, his Son S. shall have it, and if he has issue male, his Son shall have
it, with like Remainders to his other Sons; and my Will is, If any of my Sons,
or their Heirs males, issues of their bodies, alien, then the next Heir to
enter, etc. And it was resolved, That the Son should have an Estate in Tail by
this Devise: First, by reason of these words, If he have no issue male, which
is as much as to say, i^ he dye without issue male. Secondly, because he and
his Heirs males are restrained to alien: for every restraint (especially in
Wills) does imply, that the party, in case he were not restrained, had power of
the thing restrained. And so Bakers Case, Hillary 42 Eliz. Rot. 143. A Devise
to the Husband and Wife, the Remainder to their two Sons, upon condition, that
if they or their Heirs go about to alien, etc. is a Fee-simple also; for the
Heirs being restrained to alien, does show fully, that the Heir shall have the
L^nd, for otherwise he cannot alien it.

But here in our condition, there are not any words to show the intent of the
Devisor, that an Estate in Fee shall pass, but the Devisees are restrained to
alien generally, which, as already I have showed, is more agreeable to an
Estate for life, then an Estate in Fee-simple, at the least he does not show
any certain intent, that the Devisees shall have an Estate in Fee, but that
remains dubious, and therefore the safe way is to take the same according to
the Rules of Law.

The third clause to explain the intent of the Devisor in this case is the
clause of the Charge imposed upon the Land by the Devisor, viz. Item, All the
Lands I have given jointly betwixt my Sons, is, that they shall bear part and
part-like, going out of all my Lands, as well Free as Copyhold, to pay to my
Wife Elizabeth for Dowry 40 l. every year during her life out of all my Lands,
etc. And I conceive, that this clause makes nothing as to the enlargement of
the Estate; and yet I do agree, 29 H. 8. Testament 18. 4 Ed. 6. Estates 78.
That if one devise Land to another, paying 20 l. or another sum in gross, this
is a good Devise in Fee; but it is otherwise when the Land is devised to one
paying an annual Rent, or bearing an annual charge with the profits thereof: as
in Colliers Case, 6 Rep. where one devised Land to his Wife, and with the
profits that she should bring up his Daughter, and that after her death the
Estate should remain to his Brother, paying to other persons 40 s. and the
value of the Land was 3 l. per annum; and agreed there, that the Brother had a
Fee-simple: and this diversity was resolved in that case, That if the Devise
had been to the Brother, to the intent that he should maintain his Daughter
with the profits, or pay out of the profits thereof so much to one, and so much
to another, that this is but an Estate for life, for he is sure to have no
loss; so is it, if it be to pay certain sums yearly under the value of the
Land, for he may pay it out of the profits, and is sure to be no loser. And
this is in effect our very case: For first, the Charge is imposed for Dower,
which cannot be intended to exceed the annual value of the Land: Secondly, it
is to be paid out of the Land, and therefore there is no charge imposed upon
the person of the Devisee, but only upon the Land devised to him, so that he
takes the Land with this charge, and when his Estate determines in the Land,
yet the charge does always remain upon the Land, and the Devisee is discharged
thereof; and therefore this charge may as well be, if he have an Estate for
life, as if he have a Fee-simple. And as to that in Borastons Case, 3 Rep. fo.
20. b. between W. Allock and Hammond, where a Copyholder devised his Land,
paying to his Daughter and to each of his younger Sons 40 s. within two years
after his death, and surrendered accordingly, and dyed; and agreed, that the
Devisee had an Estate in Fee, although the annual profits exceeded the money
that was to be paid; and the Reason is plain, for it is not limited to be paid
out of ^^e Land or profits, but is a payment in gross, and it may happen that
the Devisee may dye before he can receive so much of the profits.

And afterward, viz. Trinit. 17 Jacob. All the Barons, (scil.) Tanfield,
Bromley, and Denham, delivered their Opinions severally, That Henry and Michael
Lock had an Estate only for their lives, because there is no express words in
the Devise to make any greater Estate to pass; and the condition or clause of
the charge imposed by the Wtill, does not necessarily imply, that they should
have a greater Estae then for life, for such Estate may satisfy both these
clauses, as well as an Estate in Fee, and the condition is more proper to be
annexed to an Estate for life, then in Fee.

Judgment.
Wherefore they resolved, That Judgment should be given for the Plaintiffs: but
because Sir Thomas Muschamp, one of the Plaintiffs, dyed, hanging the Action,
no Judgment could be entered.

Trinit. 16 Jacob. Wood against Searl and Jeo.
IN an Action of Trespass, for that the Defendants the 16 of December, 15
Jacob. ten Hides of Leather of the Plaintiffs, amounting to the value of 10 l.
at Tiverton, did take and carry away, ad damnum 20 l. etc.

The Defendants as to the force and arms pleaded Not guilty, and as to the
residue they said, that the City of Exeter is, and time out of mind was an
ancient City, and that within the said City there is, and for all the said time
was a Society of the Art of Cordwainers, incorporate, by the name of The
Master, Assistants, Wardens, and Commonalty of Cordwainers of the City of
Exeter; and that the said Master, Assistants, and Wardens, have used for all
the said time to make Bylaws for the government and profit of the said Society,
and to impose reasonable Fines and punishments upon the breakers thereof.

And that the 24 of July, 44 Elizab. the Master, Assistants and Wardens did
ordain, That no person, Burgess, or Foreigner, not being a Brother of the said
Society, should make, sell, or offer to sell, or procure to be sold within the
aforesaid City of Exon, the County or liberty thereof, any Boots, Shoes,
Pantofles, Pumps, or Startops, or any other wares belonging to the said Art,
under pain of forfeiting to the said Master and Wardens for the time being, for
every offense such sum (not exceeding 40 s.) as shall be assessed by the
Master, Wardens and Assistants, or the greater part of them: and that if any
person of the said Society, or any other exercising the said Art, or any thing
concerning the same, inhabiting within the said City, or the County or liberty
of the same, who shall break the said Order, shall refuse to pay such sum as
shall be assessed, upon true proof first thereof had of the breach of the said
Order, that it shall be lawful for the said Master, Assistants and Wardens, or
any three of them, taking with them a Constable, Bailiff, or Sergeant of the
Mace, or other fit Officer of the Kings, to enter into the House, Booth, Shop,
Warehouse, or Cellar of such person so refusing, and there, by the discretion
of the said Master, Assistants and Wardens, or the greater part of them, to
distrain any of their goods then being within the said Houses, etc. for the
said sums forfeited, so that it does not exceed the treble value of the sums
forfeited, and to detain the same: Yet nevertheless if the owner within thirty
days shall satisfy the penalty, then they shall redeliver the goods: And if he
does not satisfy, that then the said Master, Wardens and Assistants, or the
greater part of them, have power to appraise the goods taken by the oath of six
persons, and thereupon to sell them, and to restore the surplussage to the
owner.

And the Defendants said, That at the said time in which, etc. and time out of
mind, there was and ought to be a Master, two Wardens, and twelve Assistants
of the said Society within the said City, and no more; and that the said Edward
the sixth of December, and before, and ever since, was Master, and the said
William and Thomas Pain were Wardens.

That the 29 of July, 15 Jacob. the Plaintiff at the said City then being an
Inhabitant within the said City, and no Brother of the said Society, did make
diverse Shoes, and them there to sale did expose, and that the said Master and
Wardens, and one J. G. T. K. R. J. W. T. K. T. C.G. and J. G. being seven, and
the major part of the said Assistants, the thirtieth of July, the 15 Jacob. did
impose upon the Plaintiff 33 s. 4. d. for the said offense.

And they said further, that the Plaintiff committed the like offense the
seventh of October, 15 Jacob. and 33 s. 4 d. imposed by the Master, Wardens and
Assistants, and the like offense the 20 of November. 15 Jacob. and 33 s. 4 d.
imposed by the Master, Wardens, and eight of the Assistants; and the like
offense the second of December, 15 Jacob. and 33 s. 4 d. imposed the third of
December the same year, by the Master and Wardens, and nine Assistants.

All which sums do amount to 6 l. 13 s. 4 d.

That the sixth of December, the 15 Jacob. the Plaintiff had notice of the said
sums so imposed, and although he thereupon paid 19 s. parcel thereof, yet he
did refuse to pay the residue, which refusal the 16 of December was duly proved
before the said Master and Wardens: wherefore the 16 of December, 15 Jacob. the
Master, Wardens and Assistants, taking with them John Sowland a Sergeant of the
Mace, did take the said ten Hides in the said City, in the name of a Distress,
and took them away, detained them for thirty days after the said Distress: and
because the Plaintiff did not pay the residue of the said 6 l. 13 s. 4 d. nor
agreed for the same, the said Master and Wardens, and T. B. C. G. M. A. T. K.
J. G. M. B. K. J. W. T. and R. T. being the major part of the Assistants, after
the said thirty days, viz. 17 Jan. 15 Jacob. at the said City did cause the
said Hides to be appraised by the oaths of R. S. etc. six approved men of the
said City, who appraised them at 7 l. and the said Defendants, and Thomas Pain,
and the major part of the said Assistants, did sell them for 7 l. and they
said, that the surplusage amounted to 25 s. 8 d. and no more, which the said
William and Thomas Pain, with the assent of the Master and greater part of the
Assistants, before the Suit, to wit, the seventh of January in the same year,
at the said City did offer to pay to the Plaintiff, but he refused to accept
thereof. Absque hoc, that the Defendants are guilty at Tiverton, or any other
place out of the said City of Exeter.

Upon which Plea the Plaintiff demurred.

And I conceive that Judgment ought to be given for the Plaintiff.

And herein I will not stand at this time to argue, whether the Custom will
warrant this By-law, because there has been a resolution in the Case in the 8
Rep. fol. 125. for London; only I observe that the Customs of London are
confirmed by Act of Parliament, but so are not the Customs of Exeter.

But admitting that the Custom will warrant this By-law, to restrain a legal
Trade or Art within the said City, yet I conceive this By-law is utterly void
for three causes; and if it were good, yet have not the Defendants pursued the
same, in taking and selling of the goods, and that for two causes.

Exeter; and then they alledg the Custom to be, That they have used to make
Bylaws for the better Government and profit of the said City; so that all the
Custom is confirmed to the City: but the By-law does exceed this, for it is,
That none shall make, sell, or offer to sell any Shoes, etc. within the City
or the County of Exon; the which is not warranted by the Custom: as in 5 Rep.
Chamberlain of London's Case, it was ordained, That if any Citizen or stranger
should send any Cloth to sell within the City before it shall be brought to
Blackwell-Hall to be viewed and searched, this is resolved to be good, although
it do bind a stranger: but the reason thereof is given, because the offense is
committed within the City; whereupon I observe, that they can make no Order to
extend without the City.

This By-law does exceed their power in the things prohibited, and Vide Cooks 8
Rep. 129. Wagons Case: where it was resolved, That he might make Candles for
his own use; and so every one may bake and brew for their own use.

Furthermore, the Defendants have not alleged any Custom, That none shall make
any Shoes, etc. within the City, etc. except those of the Society, but only
that they may make Bylaws for the good government and profit of the Society of
the Art; and the making of Shoes for ones private use is nothing concerning
their Society: and this is proved by the resolution in the said Case, and by
the Statute of the fifth of Elizab. That none shall use any Art, in which he
has not been educated as Apprentice for seven years; yet it is lawful for any
to bake or brew, or to make any manufacture for his private use, without any
offense to the Statute. So Cooks 8 Rep. 125. Sir George Farmers Case: He as
Lord of the Manor of Torcester did prescribe to have a Bakehouse, and no other
Baker should sell bread there, this was a good Custom, but to restrain any from
baking for himself cannot be a good Custom. And the Case of the Tailors of
Ipswich, 11 Rep. fol. 55. Order, That none should use the Trade of a Tailor,
until he be presented to the Master and Wardens, and allowed by them; yet one
may make Clothes for his Master and Family, in case the said constitution were
good.

This By-law does restrain other persons to use their Arts; for it is,

The penalty imposed by this By-law, is not warranted by the Law, Wagons Case,
That the Pain ought to be reasonable, 1. In respect of the manner thereof; and
therefore it ought not to be by imprisonment, for that is against Magna Charta,
cap. 29. as it was adjudged in Clarks Case, 5 Rep. fol. 64. 2. In regard of the
quality: and therefore it is much debated in Wagons Case, if the penalty of 5
l. were reasonable or not: but here no certain penalty is set down, but left to
the discretion of any of the Shoomakers of Exeter, and that is against the
course of all Laws; for when a Law is made, it is necessary that the penalty
thereof should be known, to the end men might not offend.

But admitting this Order to be good, yet have not the Defendants pursued the
same in the taking of this Distress, and that for two Reasons:

That if any refuse to pay the sum assessed, that then upon due proof thereof
they may distrain, etc. and then they plead, that the refusal of the Plaintiff
to pay the same, was duly proved before the Master and Wardens, which is
insufficient: for when it is said, upon due proof, this is intended upon proof
by Verdict: as in 10 Ed. 4. 11. On a Bond with condition, that if the Obligor
proves that it was the will of A. that B. shall make an Estate to the Obligor,
etc. this proof must be by Verdict: but if it be to be proved before J. S.
there it is sufficient to produce witnesses that will testify the same: and so
in the fourth and fifth of Queen Mary: where Buckland was bound to the Lord
Ewers, to produce before the said Lord sufficient witnesses to discharge a
certain debt due by B. to the Lord: and he pleaded, that he produced W. and A.
before the said Lord, and that they proved, that he did not ow the said Debt;
and agreed to be no good Plea, because he did not show how the proof was made
before the said Lord.

So that this Plea is utterly insufficient, 1. Because no such proof can be
made before the Master and Wardens, as is intended by the Order. 2. Because the
Defendants have not shown how the proof was made, so that the Court might judge
whether it were sufficient or not: and so in 22 Ed. 4. 40. the Lord Lisles
Case: upon a Bond, that if the Defendant showed sufficent discharge of a Rent,
etc. who pleaded that he did offer to show a sufficient discharge, and agreed
to be no Plea, for he ought to show what discharge, that the Court might judge
thereof.

So in the ninth Report, Case of the Abbot of Strata Marcella, fol. 34. in a
Quo Warranto, the Defendant pleaded, that the Abbot had and used diverse
liberties, which he could not have without a Charter, and resolved no Plea,
unless by reason of the Statute of the 32 of H. 8. cap. 20. for reviving of
Liberties.

That upon refusal to pay the penalty, and upon proof thereof, the Master, etc.
may enter into the House, Booth, Shop, Warehouse, or Cellar of the Offender,
and there to distrain any of his goods, etc. And the Defendants have not
averred, that these goods were taken in any of the said places, but only at
the City of Exeter.

Judgment.
And at last it was adjudged that the Plea was not good.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS Contained in this BOOK.
Action, and what words bear Action.
ACtion brought by a Master for beating his servant not good, without saying
per quod servitium amisit 48 Where no particular averment need to be in a
Declaration for scandalous words. 60 Thou and Waterman did kill thy Masters
Cook, good action ib. Grant to one against whom an action lies) not to sue him
within a year, not good 117
Advowson.
The nature of it, and how, and in what manner to be granted 95, 96
Affinity and Consanguinity.
Who shall be taken to be proximus Consanguinieus in a Devise 15
Appearance.
Where to be in person, and where by Attorney 73, 74 Where the Husband shall
appear alone, and where with his Wife 74
Arbitrament.
Where the Arbitrament in part shall be a good award for that part, although the
agreement be to end all controversies 90, 91
Authority and License.
To revoke, how to be performed 21 Authorities and Licenses strictly to be
performed 114 115 License not to be assigned over ib.
Aid.
Who shall have aid of the King, 87 88 89
Baron and Feme.
WHere the Husband shall appear alone, (his Wife being within age) and where
she shall appear by her Guardian with her husband 74 75 Vid. Appearance.

Buying and selling.
Things sold and warranted by the Vendor to be good. In what cases good. 127
Diversity between things necessary and not necessary, as to the warranting of
them 128
By-Law.
How a Custom to make Bylaws to restrain a legal Trade or Art, shall be good,
and how not 140 141
Common.
WHat privilege the Owner of the soil has in a Common, and what privilege
the Commoner has. 5 and 10 Vid. Prescription.
Remedy for him that is disturbed of his Common 10 Commoner may distraine
damage feasant ib. Prescription to hunt and kill Conies in a Common, not good
11 Prescription of Common in a Forest. Vid. Prescription.

Condition and Limitation.
WHat time shall be limited in Law to make an estate upon Condition 41
Conspiracy.
Where Jurors cannot be said to be guilty of Conspiracy. Vid. Jury. Conspiracy
cannot be where the Indictment is insufficient 132
Copyhold.
What shall be taken to imply an admittance 82 Copyholder necessary to be
admitted, and what estate he has without admittance 82 83 Where the estate
surrendered remains until admittance 84
Court, and Process in Courts.
Records of a Court, the effectual proofs of the Law of things tried in that
Court 21 Presidents and Costome of a Court makes a Law in that Court ib.
Devises, Testator and Executor, etc.
WHere words of limitation coming after the estate in a Devise, shall abridge
the estate devised 1, 2, 3 Devise to a man and his heirs, quod si contingat,
etc. where those words shall make a limited fee, or estate Tail, or other
estate 3 Where the Act of the Executor shall not be said to be the Act of the
Testator. 47 Where an Executor shall not have choice to take as a Devisee 54
Where the assent of the Executor to the devise of the Land shall not be
accounted any Execution, as to the Devise of the Rent out of the same Land, and
where otherwise 55 Where a perpetual charge devised to be paid out of Land,
shall make the party that is to pay the same tenant in fee-simple 85 How far
the intent of the Devisor shall be admitted, and how largely observed 85 105
106 135
Dower.
Certainty ought to be in the demand of Dower as well as in the writ 56
Ecclesiastical Persons.
WHere the confirmation of the Patron and Ordinary of a charge made by the
Incumbent is good, and where not 95 Leases made by the Incumbent, and confirmed
by Patrons or others, where good, and where not ib. Leases made by the
Incumbent, which are void, and what are voidable, and difference in such case
between a Lease for years ib.
Entry and Claim.
Where the heir shall not enter for Rent reserved by the Ancestor 45
Error.
In Dower for not demanding in certain 56 Where the writ is suspended by making
a Lease for the term 57 What Certificate ought to be of a writ of error, and
the manor of it ib. What persons shall have a Writ of error 71, 72
Execution.
Where upon a Capias pro Fine, or ad satisfaciendum, the Defendant shall be
said to be presently in execution without prayer of the party, and where not. 7
Executors, Administrators, and Assigns.
Vid. Devises. Who shall be adjudged an Assignee in Law, to take a Lease. 40
Executor of Executor is the Assignee in Law of the first Testator to take a
Lease ib.
Felony.
IN a false imprisonment for felony, the Defendant who justifies must show some
matter in fact to induce his suspicion 62 What shall be a good suspicion to
apprehend one for felony 62
Forests, Woods, and Parks.
Definition of a Forest, and what makes a Forest 26 Subject can have no Forest
ibid. Prescription to have a Park in a Forest, how good ibid. Park in a Forest
not sufficiently enclosed, how forfeited 27 New fees to a Keeper of a Park, not
good against the Successor 31 32
Fraud, Covin, Usurious Contracts.
Fraud, Covin, or usurious Contracts, although proved, yet must be found to be
so by the Jury, or else not good 112
Habendum.
WHere void for contradiction of former words of grant 101
Infant.
WHat persons shall take advantage of Infancy to avoid the estate made by an
Infant 44 Feoffment by Infant, none shall avoid it but himself and his heirs.
44, 45 Appearance for an Infant by Attorney, not good 73 How he shall sue, and
how defend, and who shall be his Guardian 74 By whom he shall appear 75 What
things are voidable made by him, and who shall avoid them ibid.
Joyntenants, and tenants in Common.
What Act shall bind the surviving Joyntenant, and what not 43 Rent Charge on
condition preceding the estate shall not bind the survivor ibid. What Rent the
surviving Joynt-tenant shall have. Vid. Rents. Where the entry of one is the
entry of both 129 Where the Assignment of Dower by a Jointure to his wife,
shall bind his companion 130
Issue joining.
Where the Issue shall not be joined, because the Counties cannot join 62 Where
the Issue is of matter of Record, or of matters done in two Counties, the issue
shall be upon one only 63
Jury.
Jury not guilty of Conspiracy for finding any person guilty of felony, because
they be upon their oaths. 131
Leases.
WHat agreement makes a lease for years, without the word Demise and grant 13
Lease for years, no time to begin, begins presently 21 The Stat. 1 Eliz.
concerning Leases made by Bishops, expounded 29 30 License. Vid. Authority.
Limitation. Vid. Condition.

Master and Servant.
WHat things a Master shall answer for his servant 128
Obligations.
BOnd for payment of money and no day of payment, no damages without demand 20
Occupant.
WHat things shall go to an occupant, and what not 94 How the occupant shall
plead ibid. Park. Vid. Forest. Parson and Patron. Vid. Ecclesiastical persons.

Payment, satisfaction, and demand.
BOnd for payment of money, and no day appointed, no damages without demand 20
Vid. Obligation.
Where general averment of payment and satisfaction shall be good 81 Release
of all demands, how far, and the large extent of it 124
Pleading.
Where a Declaration in an Action on the case ought to be particular, and where
general 5 Matter doubtfully pleaded most strong against him that pleads it 46
Release pleaded in Dum fuit infra aetatem Vid. Releases. To what time the word
Existence shall be applied 68 Non tenure, where the tenant may plead it, and
where not 73
Prescription and limitation.
Prescription to kill and hunt Conies for preservation of Common, not good 11
Where unreasonable and void 11, 12 Of a Common in a Forest, not good 26 Of
profit or Common in land excluding the owner, not good ib. For a Park in a
Forest Vid. Forest.
Releases and Revocations.
AUthority to revoke, how strictly to be observed 21 Stat. 27. Eliz. concerning
Revocations explained 22 Pleading of a Release by the Defendant in a Dum fuit
infra aetatem 46 Release in Trespass not good without showing it was before the
trespass ibid. Where the first clause in the Release shall make the Release
good, although a subsequent sentence make it but conditional 102 Of all
Demands, the best Release, and what is thereby released 124
Rents.
Where the wives acceptance of the Rent makes the Lease made by the Husband to
be good 43 Surviving joyntenant shall not have the Rent reserved on a Lease
made by his Companion 44 Where the Devisee of a Rent shall lose the Rent by
becoming Executor 54
Reversion.
Grant of a Reversion at a day to come void, and why. 109
Statute Merchant, and of the Staple.
FOrm of the Statute Merchant 17 The scope and signification of the Statute
Merchant, and why made with explanation thereof, and the way of proceeding
therein 19, 20 No day of payment expressed, good presently 20 Release to Conusor
of a Statute of all right in the Land, no bar 124
Statutes.
27. Eliz. Concerning Revocations 22 5. Ed. 6. For Engrossing 6 11. Hen. 7. 20.
Concerning Estates Tail expounded 28 1. Eliz. Concerning Leases made by
Bishops, expounded 29 ^0 31. and 32 H. 8. Concerning dissolutions of Religious
houses explained 32, 33 39. Eliz. 2. For conversion of Tillage expounded 89 5.
and 39. Eliz. For rating Servants wages 119 23. and 28. Eliz. Concerning
Recusants expounded 122 The Statute 11. H. 7. 20 expounded 28
Tail.
WHere the heir in Tail shall be bound by a Lease made by his Father, and where
not 27, 28, 65 Where the heir of tenant in Tail shall be remitted, and where
not 103 Tenant in Common. Vid. Joyntenant.

Tenant at will
Makes a Lease and the Lessee enters, the Lessee is only Disseisor, otherwise
of a Feofment 14 Testator. Vid. Devises.

Trespass.
Where a man, for the public good, may justify a Trespass 11
Trust and Confidence.
An excellent President of a Decree in Chancery, declaring where one Trustee
shall be answerable for the other, and where not 35, 36 37 Two Trustees, and
one assigns over, the Assignor shall be answerable 38
Tithes.
Any man may hold land discharged of Tithes 33 Lease by a Parson of his Gleab,
he shall have his Tithes notwithstanding ibid. Usurious Contracts. Vid. Fraud.

Warranty.
Collateral Warranty binds the right, but only till the Warranty be defeated
77
Waste.
Grant to the Tenant, that he shall not be impeachable of Waste, he shall not
plead this in Bar, but only have an Action of Covenant thereupon 117 Wills.
Vid. Devises. Woods. Vid. Forests.

FINIS.

