The JUDGMENT of Sir Orlando Bridgman, Declared in his CHARGE to the JURY at
the Arraignment of the Twenty nine Regicides (the Murderers of King CHARLES
the First, of most Glorious Memory) began at Hicks-Hall on Tuesday the Ninth of
October 1660, and continued at the Sessions House in the Old Bailey, until
Friday the Ninteenth of the same Month.
These are the very Words of Sir Orlando Bridgman, p. 10. in the Book of the
Trials.

I Must deliver for plain and true Law. That no Authority, no Single Person, no
Community of Persons, not the People Collectively, or Representatively, have
any Coer^ve Power over the King of England; and I do not speak mine own sense,
but the words of the Laws unto you.

It was the Treason of the Spencers in King Edward the Second's time, in
Colvin's Case, in the 7th Report, The Spencers had an Opinion, That all Homage
and A legeance was due to the King by reason of the Crown, as they called it;
and thereupon (say the Books and Records) they drew out this Execrable
Inference (among others) That if the King did not demean himself according to
kight, because he could not be reformed by Law, he might per Asperte^, that is
by sh^p Imprisonment.

But this was adjudged Horrid Treason by Two Acts of Parliament. [Let me tell
you what our Law Books say, for there is the ground, out of which (and the
Sea^utes together) we mast draw all our Conclusions for Matter of Government.
How do they style the King? They call him the Lieutenant of God, and many other
Expressions. In the Book of 1 Hen. 7. says that Book there, The K^ is Immediate
from God, and has no Superior. The Statute says, That the Crown of England is
immediately subject to God and to no other Power. The King, says our Books, He
is not only Caput Populs, the Head of the People, but Caput Re^public^, the
Head of the Commonwealth, the Three Estates. And truly thus our Statutes speak
very fully. Common Experience tells you when we speak of the King, and so the
Statutes of Edward the Third, we call the King, Our Sovereign Lord the King.
Sovereign, that is, Supr^am. And when the Lords and Commons in Parliament apply
themselves to the King, they use this Expression, Your Lords and Commons, your
faithful subjects, humbly beseech. I do not speak any words of my own but the
words of the Laws. In the Statute 24 Hen. 8 cap 12. it is thus expressed, Whereas
by diverse, sundry, old, authentic Histories and Chromcles, it is manifestly
declared, That this Realm of England is an Empire, and so has been accepted in
the World, governed by one Supreme Head and K^ having the Dignity and Royal
Estate of the Impersal Crown. 25 Hen. 8. c 21 there it is the people speaking
of themselves, That they do recognize no Superior under God but only the Kings
Grace. Gentlemen, You see if the King be immediate under God, he derives his
Authority from no body else; if the King have and (...) I Power, if the King be
Head of the Commonwealth, Head of the Body Politic; if the Body Politic owe
him obedience, truly I think it is an undenied consequence, He must needs be
Superior over them. The Imperial Crown is a word that is significative, you
shall find in all Statutes, 1 Eliz. and 1 Jacobi, nay even in the Act of
Judicial Proceedings of this Parliament it is called an Impertal Crown. They
that take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, they swear, That they will to
their power, assist and defend all Jurisdictions, Privileges, Preheminencies,
and Authorities granted or belonging to the King, his Hears and Successors, or
annexed to the Imperial Crown of this Realm. What is an Imperial Crown? That,
which as to the Goersive part, Is subject to no man under God, is not subject
to any Humane Tribunal or Judicature whatsoever.

Gentlemen, Since this is so, consider the Oath of upremacy, which most men
have taken or should take. All Men that enter into the Parliament House, they
are expres^y enjoined by Statute to take the Oath of Supremacy.

What says that Oath? We swear, That the King is the only Supreme Governor
within this Realm and Dominions. He is Supreme, and the only Supreme, and truly
if he be Supreme, there is neither Major nor Superior.

I declare this, to you, to let you know that the King is immediately subject
to God, and so is not punishable by any Person. He is the Supreme Head, he is
not punishable by any Coersive Power, the Laws provide for that, The King can
do no wrong; it is a Rule of Law, it is in our Law Books very frequent. 22 Ed.
^. Lord Coke and many others. If he can do no wrong, he cannot be punished for
any wrong. The King has the infirmities and weakness of a man, but he cannot
do any injury, at least not considerable in person. He must do it by Ministers,
Agents, and Instruments. Now the Law, though it provide for the King yet if any
of his Ministers do wrong, though by his Command; they are punishable. He is
not to be touched, Touch not mine Anointed.

Thus far that great and eminent Lawyer, afterward made Lord Keeper of the
Great Seal of England by King Charles the Second of Ever blessed Memory. And if
his Judgment be false, unto which most of the Lords of England, at least of
the Privy Council, sitting with him, did assert, shall not we make Martyrs of
the King's Regicides? To be sure they had hard measure, after the Reasons that
were given by Mr. Cook and Mr. Scot for what they did, if this were not Law.


