A SERMON Preached unto the Volunteers of the City of NORWICH and also to the
Volunteers of Great YARMOVTH in NORFOLK.

By William Bridge Preacher of Gods Word.

Judges: 5.9. My heart is toward the Governors of Israel that offered
themselves willingly among the People. Bless ye the Lord.

IT is Ordered this thirtieth day of January, 1642. by the Committee of the
House of Commons in Parliament concerning Printing, That this Book entitled A
Sermon preached unto the Volunteers of the City of NORWICH etc. be Printed.

JOHN WHITE.



London, Printed by J. F. for Ben. Allen, and are to be sold at his shop in
Pope's Head Alley. 1642.

A Sermon preached unto the Volunteers of the City of Norwich, and also to the
Volunteers of great Yarmouth in Norfolk.
2 SAMUEL 10.12. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and
for the cities of our God, and the Lord do that which seems him good.


IN these words are the Speech of that brave Commander Joab, which he made at
the head of his Army, being surrounded with many enemies, as you read verse. 9.
He devides his Army into two parts, the one led up by Abishai his brother, the
rest of the forces he brings up himself, and spoke thus to Abishai, and to the
rest of his men: Be of good courage and let us play the men, etc.

In those words you have these two parts, The bravenesse of his resolution. Be
of good courage and let us play the men. The humbleness of his submission. And
the Lord do that which seems him good. Or if you will thus; An exhortation to
true noble valor in the former part, Be of good courage, etc. And secondly, an
humble resignation of himself and cause, and success into the hands of God,
And the Lord do that which seems him good. His exhortation is strengthened
with diverse arguments, It is for our people. The Ammonities and Syrians are now
about us, if you do not behave your selves valiantly, your people are pillaged,
plundered, captived, murdered, and therefore, Be of courage and let us play
the men. And for the Cities of our God. Some think that by the City of our God,
is meant that City where the Tabernacle was: but as Abulensis observes, Omnes
urbes Israel vocantur urbes Dei; quia Deus illas dederat Israelitis vel illa
erat specialiter terri Dei, Abul^^nsi in 1. Chr^ 29.
though in 1. C: 19 13. it is read City, in this place it is ^ead in the
plural number Cities, and (as he says) all their Cities were the Cities of
God, because given by God, and because God in his worship and true Religion was
in their Cities: and therefore now Joab seeing all the people were in danger;
and the Cities of God the Religion and worship of God, he breaks forth into
this exhortation. Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people,
and for the Cities of our God.

I shall not at this time reach the second part, the humbleness of his
submission, and gracious resignation: only from his exhortaiion observe thus
much.

Observation.
In times of great danger when Religion is in hazard, and the people of God are
in danger good courage is very requisite.

It is then good for good people to have good courage when the times are evil.
This is that which Joab pitcheth upon, and is the only matter of his
exhortation, Be of good courage and let us play the men. So David, when he was
begirt and berounded with many enemies; Wait on the Lord (says he) and be of
good courage. Some there are that do wait on the Lord, but are not of good
courage: some have good courage, or courage, but do not wait on the Lord. Wait
on the Lord, be of good courage both together, Psalm: 27.14. And he shall
strengthen thine heart. So Psalm: 31.24. Good courage then is very requisite in
evil times. Some think this belongs only to Soldiers; but if you look into
Hag. 2.4. You shall find this commanded to all the people. Yet now be strong o
Zerubabell says the Lord, that is, the Magistrates: and, be strong o Josuah
son of Jehosadach the high Priest: there is the Ministers; and, be strong all
ye people of the Lord: there is the people; and that you read, be strong, in
the Hebrew is all one with the word of my text, be of good courage, and if you
will you may read the words so: be of good courage o Zerubabell, etc. So that
it lies upon all in evil times, men and women to be of good courage. For my
better prosecution of this point, I shall do these three things. First give the
description of good courage, showing what it is. Secondly confirm the point.

Thirdly make application of all unto our selves.

For the description of good courage, you may take it thus: Good courage is
that gracious disposition of heart, whereby a man being called by God unto any
service, does adventure upon difficulties either in doing good, or enduring
evil, and that without fear.

Here are four or five things considerable in this description: first, good
courage is a gracious disposition. There is Job describes the horse after this
manner, he rusheth into the Battle, he laughs at the Trumpet, and his neck is
clothed with thunder, Job. 39. This bruit beasts may have, and therefore this
is not the virtue I press upon you.

Again, Fortitudo justorum est carnem vincere, propiis voluptatibus contraire
delectationem vitiae praesentis extinguere, hujusmodi aspera pro aeternis
praemiis amare, prosperitatis Blandimenta contemneie, adversitatis malum in
cord superare; Reproborum vero fortitudo est transitoria sine cessatione
diligere, contra flagella conditionis insensibiliter* perdurare, bonorum vitam
non solum verbis and moribus, sed etiam gladiis impugnare, in semetipsis spem
ponere and iniquitatem quotidie sine ullo desiderii defectu perpetrare. Greg.
moral. lib. 8.
There is a sinful desperateness whereby men are apt and ready to rush upon
all that is evil; and are sinfully bold, and they think him a fool or a
child that will not drink and be drunk, and whore, and run into all kind of
evil: this is not good courage, David he was as valiant a moan of them, as
ever the earth bare; and yet notwithstanding in the matter of sin, he was very
timorous: Surely, good courage is such a flower as grows upon a good
conscience: a man in truth has so much good courage as he has a good
conscience; and if that a man shall desperately run upon what is eviil and
sinful, his courage does degenerate into a foolish desperateness: Wait on
the Lord (says the Psalmist) and be of good courage; and again I say wait on
the Lord; good courage is hemmed in with waiting upon the Lord.

Tumor animi non est magnanimitas Sen.
which has no true courage; such a Cavalier was Rabshekah, who said, with us
is valor and courage, when he defied the Hosts and servants of the living God;
good courage is the health of the mind, this vaunting, bragging, boasting, is
the swelling of the mind, not

Leonum clementiae multa indicia sunt, prostratis parvunt, in viros potius quam
in faeminas saeviunt, infantes non nisi in magra same perimunt. Solinus.
Again, There is a fierce, angry, revengefull disposition, whereby men are ready
to run upon cruelties, this is no good courage. The righteous is as bold as a
Lion; the Lion himself is merciful, not revengefull, if a creature lies down
before him, he will spare it. I remember a Story one has concerning Malcolmus,
a King of the Scots; it seems there was one of his Nobles, who underhand
conspired his death; the King having notice of it, he chose a day to go a
hunting, and called many of his Nobles to go with him, and amongst the rest
he calls this Courtier that was working of his death; Si igitur animus tibi
sit, si valeas, si audeas, absolve quod propofuisti, read hostibus meis and
sociis tuis quod promisiffi: si me occidere stat animus, quando rectius, quando
secretius, quando virilius? venenum parasti? mulierculis id relinquito, tortulo
insidiaris? hoc and adulterae possunt? ferro ex insidiis me aggredi decrevisti?
hoc sicarii and non militis est officium, solus cum solo congredere, ut saltem
proditio tua turpitudine careat, quae perfidia carere non potest, Miles autem
haec audiens mox verbis regis quasi gravi percussus fulmine ad pedes regios cum
lachrymis and tremore cucurrit: Cui Rex noli timere (inquit) quod nihil a me
patieris; Cumque ei de caetero se fidelem amicum futurum promisisset,
reveriunter ad socios, nihil paenitus referentes, Mat. Paris page 21. Hist.
Willil. 21.
and when they were in the field, he singles him from all the rest, bids them
go on with their game, he had something to speak to him alone; says he, I hear
you are underhand working of my death; if you put poison into my cup, a woman
may do that; if you set upon me with a company of Rascals, Thieves may do
that; if you will put me to death, do it as a Soldier, I will take my sword,
take you yours, we will fight it out: the man fell down before him, and the
King pardoned him, and gained him ever after to be his own. This was true
courage, but a fiery cruel disposition is no good courage, courage is a
gracious disposition.

Secondly, It is a gracious disposition of heart; The courage quasi cor agit,
it is an action or motion of the heart. The truth is, the heart of man is the
Artillery-yard, where all the thoughts of courage train continually.

Thirdly, I say, whereby a man being called by God Rabshekahs speech, has not
the Lord sent me? and this was in truth the ground of Joshuahs courage. Be of
good courage have not I commanded thee? If a man ventures upon any design, and
Gods call does not lead him to it, when he comes to make good his standing, the
ground quakes under him, his heart trembles, his knees knock, his arms shake,
and his heels begin to run: When a man is called to do a work by God, though
the opposition and difficulty be never so great, he may encourage himself
here, but I am called by God, and he will carry me through.

Fourthly, I say; whereby a man being called by God unto a desperate venture,
but indeed a brave venture of the men of Jabish Gilead, which we read of, 1 Samuel last, which fetched away the dead body of Saul, out of the hands of the
Philistimes, there being a great fight between the Israelites and Philistimes,
the Philistimes had the best of it, kept the field, and buried the dead, and
amongst the dead they find Saul,, they cut off his head, and fastened his body
to the wall of Bethshan, and when the Inhabitants of Jabish Gilead heard of it,
all the valiant men arose, and went and took the body of Saul from the wall of
Bethshan: here was valor, here was courage, wherein was it seen? in venturing
upon difficulties in doing good, and enduring evil.

Be of good courage, fear not, neither be dismayed. The more a man's fears are
enlarged, the more his courage is lessened, and the more a man's courage is
enlarged, the more his fears are lessened. Good courage, it makes a man higher
by the head and shoulders, than the thing feared, though never so great; good
courage lifts a man up above fear: Put altogether, and you have the description
of good courage: It is that gracious disposition of heart, whereby a man being
called by God unto any service, he does adventure upon difficulties, either in
doing good, or enduring evil, and that without fear. Let us now advance to the
second thing, the confirmation of the Point.

Confirma. 1.
In evil times, in times of danger, good courage is very requisite: in times of
danger, good courage is the strength of man, it is the spirits of a man, it is
the sparkling of a man's heart, it is the life of ones life, says Solomon, The
spirit of a man shall sustain his infirmity; without strength there is no
bearing of burdens; now this is the way to be strong, to stand under burdens
in evil times: Be of good courage, and he shall strengthen thine heart.

Again, evil times are full of changes, Fortis est que^ adversa non frangunt
fortier est quem prospera non alliciunt* fortissimus est quem vicissitudo rerum
non deturbat. Senec.
and good courage Seneca has; He is a stout man whom adversity does not
quail, he is yet more stout whom prosperity does not allure; but he is most
stout of all, whom the change of things does not disturb. And in another place
(says he) he has no great mind, that can be bent by injuries; and evil
times are full of injuries, without courage, a man will easily be bent by them,
Magnus animus est quem non incurvat injuria, Senec.
bent unto sin, and bent unto what is evil. Had not the three children been
men of courage, how would they have been bent to Idolatry; but being men of
courage, say they, Our God is able to deliver us, but if not; Dan. 3 17.18.
be it known unto thee, O King, that we will not serve thy gods. Oh my beloved,
in evil times good courage keeps us from evil bending, and therefore in evil
times good courage is very requisite.

Again, evil times are very expensive, then a man shall Paul was. Thus you
see, that in evil times, good courage is very requisite.

If this be so, you see what our duty is; Applica.
to be of good courage, and play the men. You all know into what evil times we
are now fallen, better than I can speak; are we not berounded with many enemies,
the Syrians before, and the Ammonites behind, if Joab were alive he could see
the Battle before and behind. In the Prophets time he prayed that God would
open the eyes of his servant, that he might see who were with him, now we had
need to pray that God would open men's eyes to see who are against them:
certainly enemies are amongst us, within and without, at home and abroad,
before and behind, they are very many: now the people of God are in danger, now
the Cities of God, and Religion is in hazard; and therefore as Joab once, so
now I may speak unto all; Be of good courage, and let us play the men for our
People, and for the Cities of our God and the Lord do that which seems him
good. Be of good courage, that is my exhortation, notwithstanding the times be
evil, yet be of good courage: good courage now if ever is requisite, requisite
for Magistrates, requisite for Ministers, requisite for parents, and governors
of Families, requisite for these Gentlemen that have listed their names for
this great service of God and their Country, requisite for all the people.

Good courage is always in a Magistrates Commission, though times be never so
peaceable, they are to be men of courage fearing God, much more in troublous
times; good courage is a virtue annexed to their place, Aquin. Peccatum majus
ubi repugnantia major inter peccantem and peccatum.
and therefore as injustice from the hand of a Judge is worser then from any
other, because there is a special repugnancy between him and the sin, so want
of courage and neutralizing in a Magistrate is worse then in others, because it
is always annexed to his place.

Chron. 26.17, 18. who withstood Uzziah the King, and said unto him: It
pertains not unto thee Uziah to burn incense unto the Lord, etc. You may see
who they were 17. verse. Azariah the Priest went in after him, and with him
fourscore Priests of the Lord that were valiant men: wherein did their valor
appear? in that they withstood the King, in doing that which was unlawful,
these were valiant Priests indeed, and it stands upon Record, and that for
ever; in times nearer to our selves we read of Doctor Latimer, that when the
men of his order were to send New Years gifts unto the King, he sent a Bible
with this posie written on the outside thereof, Whoremongers and Adulterers God
will judge: was not Mr. Deering very bold with Queen Elizabeth, who told her,
that though she once went, tanquam ovis ad lanienam, as a sheep to the
slaughter, yet now tanquam indomita juvenca, as an untamed hiefer; in evil
times, the Ordnance, and Murdering pieces are planted against the House of the
Ministers, against them especially, and therefore in them also good courage is
very requisite.

Requisite also in the third place for Parents and Governors Granatensis makes
mention of a woman, that hearing her son run away in the Field, she got some
advantage of him, and put him to death with these words; Runaway, thou art none
of mine. And of another woman that when her son was slain in the Battle, she
being at the Funeral with diverse friends; some wept and cried o duram
fortunam, O hard fortune, she cried, o felicem fortunam, O happy fortune, that
ever I was so honored to bear a child to dye so bravely for his Country.
Parents must have courage, and there are these three things to move parents;
and Governors of families unto it: the danger that is now approaching, the
Protestation that you have taken, the speeiall opportunity that you have.

these are my plate. Beloved, you have given your plate already to the service
of your Country; what if God will have this plate also to be given unto him?

Assyrians and Ammonites, and should the Ammonites prevail (I mean that
malignant Jusuiticall party prevail) in the Kingdom, what a dark and black
day would it be upon England? the Lord be thanked we know partly what a comfort
it is, to set under our Vines and Fig Trees; but should they prevail, what
would they do, yea what would they not do? the honor and safety of our dear
Sovereign, the liberty of the Subject, the security of the Parliament, the
Peace of the three Kingdoms, the power and liberty of the Ordinances; these are
great mercies, and much to be prized by us; and me thinks every one should sit
down and think with himself, what shall I give or do, that my person should
not be enslaved? that my wife and daughters be not abused, that my poor
children be not massacred, that my house be not plundered, that my Country be
not betrayed? oh if there be any spirit, or valor and courage in any child or
servant, to serve God and his Country, go on, oh child and prosper, do
courageously.

Then again, besides this; you may remember the Protestation

But me thinks I hear some say, Object.
it is a hard thing to part with my child, my only son, my only joy; the
comfort and stay of mine age; oh it is a hard thing to part with a child.

True it is, Answ.
and would serve God and thy Country with nothing? is that child lost that
Christ gains? I remember Origin observes, that when Abraham gave up Isaac unto
God; and put the knife to his throat to offer him up as a sacrifice to him,
then the Lord found him a Ram, another sacrifice, and gave Isaac again unto
him; and (says he) that which you give unto God, you shall receive from God;
if you can give up your child, and lift up your hand with a knife to offer him
up unto him, the Lord will give you that child, and that child above others,
shall be the father of many gracious. Me thinks I hear that speech sounding in
mine ears; Happy is the man that has his quiver full of them, they shall not
be ashamed; but they shall speak with the enemies in the gate; Psalm. 127.5.
your children are the arrows that the Lord has given you into your quiver,
if they be ready upon the string, will you break these arrows, or the spirits
of them? they are made a purpose to meet your Adversary in the gate; and now
the Adversary is in the gate, will you not let the arrow fly? Oh, me thinks
there should not be a father or Master that has a child or servant, but
should say, I will send one Voluntier; what were it for such a Town as this to
have two or three hundred? but I know your readiness, the Lord bless it; only
I leave the exhortation of Joab with you, the words a little altered, Be of
good courage, and if you cannot play the men your selves, let your children and
servants play the men.

Marcus Crassus amongst the Romans, caused the cowards to be let blood, giving
this reason; that it was fit their blood should be shed in disgrace, which they
would not shed in defense of their Country; and if you look Judge. 7.3. you
shall find, that when the host of the Midianites came against the Israelites,
Gideon had gotten a good and well framed Army together, but when word came from
the Lord, that the fearful should return, how many think you did return of
them? surely, no less than two parts of three, the whole Army consisting of
32000; the divine story tells us, That 22000 of them went back, and but 10000
left, 22000 not ashamed to be called cowards and fearful: so that I say, that
I had need to speak to you, and to you is my commission, and if you please you
may read my Commission, and your own duty together, 20 Deu. 2.3. And it shall
be when ye are come nigh unto the Battle, that the Priest shall approach and
speak unto the people; not the Captain, but the Priest? what says the Priest?
Let not your hearts faint, fear not, and do not tremble, neither be you
terrified because of them: therefore you see what I am commanded to speak unto
you; well good sirs, and beloved in the Lord Jesus, be you also of good
courage; and I have three words of encouragement to speak unto you.

First, your work and service you are about, it is very Solomon built the
Temple, he did not employ the Israelites about the meaner works, carrying of
stones, and drawing of water, strangers were put to that work, but the
Israelites were employed to be a guard about him: so did the most wise man in
the world, Solomon count it an honorable thing to bear arms, and to be a
soldier: anciently soldiers were called Latrones, because they were a Latere
Regis, and now the latin word miles for a soldier, signifies a Knight: when
the children of Israel went out to Battle, some there were that went into the
Field and some that did stay at home* concerning those that stayed at home, it
is said, that she that tarryed at home divided the spoil, Psalm. 68.12. as if
they were only women, and the weaker sort that stayed at home, as if all that
were worthy to be called men went into the Field. In the triumphing Psalm of
Deborah, we read, that some are condemned, and some commended, those that were
condemned, were such as came not forth, that came not forth to help the Lord
against the mighty, Judges, 5.23. Those that were commended, were the
Volunteers that offered themselves willingly amongst the People, verse. 2. and
9. The truth is that the Volunteers of England under God, are the Bullwarks of
England, and England under God, the Bulwark of the Protestant Religion:
Wherefore, honored Brethren, be ye all of good courage, for your work and
service is very honorable.

Seneca: he that commands death commands all things, as the valiant man
does. Now Beloved, you see into what times we are fallen, of necessity things
must either go well or ill: if things go ill, the worst is death, and what
great matter is it to dye for your God, a little before your time, who would
live when Religion is dead? who would live to outlive his Religion? Cicero
tells us of some Indians that having many wives, when the husband dyed the
wifes strived to be burned with him, and she that was the strongest prevailed
to be burned, and the rest went away very sorrowful as having met with a great
loss that they might not be burned with their husband; and do you desire to
live a day after the protestant Religion, that you have bin married too now for
many years together? It is no great matter to live, the beasts, birds, and
fishes live, this is truly great to dye well, honorably freely, wisely, as
Seneca says, It is better to dye in the Field for the cause of God, then die
in ones bed, by the hand of a sickness. It is storied of one Bibulus, a great
Roman, that having obtained many victories, he came to Rome to ride in triumph,
where a Tile falling off the house, stroke him so deeply and mortally into the
head, as he dyed of it. Thus may you dye by an unworthy Tile as you walk in the
streets, or by the turning of some humor in your bodies; and is it not better
then to dye for the truth? Can you lose too much for Christ that has lost so
much for you? Death is the worst. And if things go well, I cannot but think it
will go with the popish Maligant party, as once with the Freislanders, when the
Earl of Holland had overcome them, they took up Arms to resist him again;
whereupon he ordered, Hist. Nether.
that the doors of their houses should be made so low, as they should always
stoop when they went in, noting their subjection; so though the mercy of those
that are in authority may let the houses of Malignants stand, yet I make no
question, but the doors of their houses shall be made so low, that they shall
always stoop, as a note of their subjection; whilst you that stand for the
cause, and Country, and Cities of your God, shall have the doors of your
houses enlarged; and if a good cause have any interest in Heaven, and the
prayers of Gods people has any credit there, you shall undoubtedly in the end
prevail; wherefore be of good courage, for your work is safe.

And as your work is safe, so it is also warrantable. I They take up Arms
against their King. I am persuaded there is not such a thought in the bosoms of
any of you all, and God forbid there should: but there is much difference
between taking up of Arms against the Kings Person, and taking up of Arms for
the defense of the Kingdom, without the Kings command. David though he were
Gods anointed, yet he was a subject unto Saul his King, and he took up Arms
to defend himself; he took up Arms indeed, but if you look into 1 Samuel
26.19. you shall find that David does impute that unnatural war that Saul
his King* made against him, to those wicked malignants and wicked counselors*
about him; If the Lord has stirred thee up against me, let him accept an
offering; but if they be the children of men, cursed be they before the Lord,
etc. He does not say the King had done it, but lays it upon those that were
about him, and therefore took up Arms to defend himself against the
malignants; David's example is our practice: and certainly if the Parliament
should not have a power to send for those by force of Arms which are accused
before them for their just trial, they should no longer be a Parliament; every
Court of Justice have a power to send for by force, men accused to be tried
before them* now the Parliament as King James speaks, is the highest Court of
Justice; therefore accrding to the known privilege of Parliament, they do send
Sergeant at Arms for those that are acccused, to be tried before them, and if
they have power to send out one Sergeant at Arms, then they have power also to
send forth a hundred, and so a thousand, and so ten thousand if need require;
and if the accused persons gather into an Army, how can the Parliament send for
them but by an Army? so that when you consider the Law of the Land, or the Law
of God; or the Law of nature, which is for a community to defend it self, your
way and course is very warrantable, your cause is good, for that must needs be
good that Religion makes so; your enemies are weak, for they must needs be
weak that sin makes weak; your victory is certain, which the Scripture
promises, and first or last the victory shall be to you. Put all together,
your cause is good, your enemies weak, your victory certain, your service
honorable, safe, warrantable; wherefore, Be of good courage, and play the men,
for your people, and the Cities of our God, and the Lord do with you what
seems him good.

fear not, neither be dismayed. Did the Lord do his work by halfs, when he
brought the children of Israel out of Egypt? notwithstanding for men's unbelief
some fell in the way to Canaan, yet he brought them into Canaan. Beloved, you
are now again coming out of Egypt (for the Romish superstition, and that partly
is called Egypt, Sodom, Babylon: you are now coming out of Egypt) marching up
into the promised Land, and promised Ordinances; nothing can make you fall in
the way, but unbelief: wherefore be all of good courage, and pray unto the Lord.
Be all of good courage; thereby you shall be able to set upon great things for
God, though never so great; thereby you shall endure great afflictions, though
never so heavy; thereby you shall be untired, and unwearyed in the service of
God, though the opposition be never so strong; thereby you shall honor the
Cause; thereby you shall conquer your enemies; thereby you shall encourage
others, your courage shall beget courage; your courage will have an influence
upon all the Towns round about you, and make them of good courage, as I make no
question but the courage and valor of London have had an influence upon your
hearts, to make you courageous: so your courage will have upon others; what
will they say when they come into Towns, and return home again? I will tell you
what, I was at such a Town, and there they were working; and fortifying their
Town for their Country and King, and I saw the best man's son in the Town go to
the work, and the best man's daughter in the Town carry a basket; and father,
and mother, shall we sit still? therefore put on, let the work never die for
want of money; let not such a Town as we are; be base, be poor, and low, and
want courage? when on the one side ye have the Sea, on the other side the
River, on the other side the walls, on the other side I hope friends; within
abundance of good people, and above a loving God; oh therefore put on, be all
of good courage; I do but add some directions, and so wind up all.

David was in a great straight, his enemies had broken in upon him, taken away
his wives, and then plundered all he had, his own Soldiers began to mutiny, and
thought of stoning him; what did he do? it is said, he encouraged himself in
the Lord his God: 1 Samuel 30.6.
therefore, first make sure of this, clear up this your propriety in God
himself. The sight of a great God under interest, will encourage your spirits,
though dangers be nere so great.

Joshua was a valiant man, and brave Commander, and yet we read of him, 7
Joshua, when some thirty men were slain; and others fled, he fell down upon the
earth much discouraged; why? the Lord had promised he would never leave him,
nor forsake him, his enemies should not be able to stand before him; but he
had lost the promise that God had given to him, and therefore was discouraged;
but the Lord comes to him and says, what do here? and brings him to the view
of the promise again; and then a new spirit and new life came into him; Gods
promise is your encouragement, keep that always in your eye.

otium est vivi hominis sepultura.
false courage. As for idleness (says Seneca) it is the burying of a living
man.

As for wordlinesse (says Aquinas) it does effeminate, and set a man below
himself. And false courage is a true enemy to true courage, if courage be laid
upon the sense of the second cause, when there is an ebb of the second cause,
there is an ebb of your courage.

There were two sorts of spies that went into the Land of Canaan: as for the
first, we do not read of any hard use they met withal, and yet they were much
discouraged, and discouraged the people: saying, the men of the Country are
Giants, the Cities are walled up to Heaven, and the Inhabitants ride in Charets
of iron: the other spies met with ill use, and had not Rahab hid them, they had
been every man cut off, and yet they returned with good courage, and so
encouraged the people, saying, the men shall be meat unto us, etc. what is the
reason of this? one would think rather that the first sort should be
encouraged, and the last discouraged, but it was not so, the reason is this,
the first spies that were discouraged, looked only upon the men and walls, and
iron Charets, went out in the way of sense, but as for the other spies, they
looked upon God, upon his promise, and upon his providence in delivering of
them, and thereupon returned, and said, the men of the Land are meat unto us,
etc. Would you not be discouraged, but encouraged, take heed how you raise, or
how you lay your courage upon second causes: take heed of all those things that
may debase your spirits, idleness, wordlinesse, and courage laid upon second
causes.

Again, Be sure of this that you keep your conscience the righteous are as bold
as a Lion, but the unrighteous that have any conscience left are as fearful as
a Do, be sure therefore that you keep your conscience clear.

And then again, keep and improove all the experiences of Gods delivering
mercy. Beloved, how many delivering mercies have God wrought for us the last
year, truly it may be said it has been the annus mirabilis, year of wonders;
and all the year long God has been known to England by this Name, A
wonder-working God: when any temptations arise to discourage, answer, Surely,
if the Lord had meant to destroy us, he would never have done all this:
experienced men are most courageous; only make use of your experience as a
stirrup to get up your spirits to the promise.

6. Again, Actuate, refresh, and strengthen your love. True love is very
valiant, says the Apostle, Love suffers all things, it does all things, as one
observes concerning a Sheep, though it be so feeble and fearful a creature,
that a little dog will make a whole flock run before it, yet notwithstanding
you shall see, That if a great masty comes to take away a Lamb from the Ewe,
the Ewe will stamp, and run at him; why? love puts it on: Do you therefore love
your Country? I know you do: Do you love the people of God? I presume you do:
Do you love the Cities of God? I believe you do: often actuate, refresh, and
strengthen your love, this will give courage.

7. In the last place, When ever any discouraging temptations arise, before
ever you parley with those difficulties and temptations, step in to God by
prayer: Beloved, if you first parley with difficulties before you go to prayer,
you will never have done; a thousand Objections will be created in your minds;
whereas if you first go to prayer before you parley with them, in prayer you
shall have the sight of a great God; and the sight of a great God, will make
your spirits great. In prayer your heart shall be composed; for prayer is a
soul-composing duty. In prayer you shall meet with the Captain of your
Salvation; and he will lead up your hearts that are ready to run away. In
prayer you shall bring your souls to this frame, quietly to resign up your
selves, and cause, and success unto God, and a man is never more courageous
than in that frame, as Joabs courage and resignation went together. Are you
presented with any difficulty and discouraging temptation? then say within your
selves, it is true indeed, to attain to such an event; certainly it will be
hard, notwithstanding I know that my cause is good, my work is good, the people
good; and therefore, though the difficulties and temptations be never so great,
I will give my self to prayer, and praying courage is good courage. Wherefore
my beloved, in the name of the Lord pray, in these evil times, pray, pray,
pray; and when you have done praying, then wait: wait on the Lord, and be of
good courage, and again I say wait on the Lord: and what I say unto one, I
desire to speak unto my own soul, and so unto you all in these sad and evil
times, be of good courage, and let us play the men for our people, and for the
Cities of our God, and the Lord do with us what seems him good.

FINIS.

