A Brief Account of CHARLEROY, Besieged by the FRENCH ARMY Under the Command of
the Duke of Luxemburgh.
5. Oct. 1693 Licensed according to Order.

THE Fortress of Charleroy, being Situated between the French Kings Two late
Conquests, Mons and Namure, has Intercepted their Communication, and rendered
those Places, in a Great measure Useless to the French, in their main Designs
in the Campaigne; the Confederates keeping a great Garrison in the Place, of at
least Eight Thousand Effective Men; by which means not a Convoy durst stir to
or from the said Garrisons, but they were Intercepted by the Governor of
Charleroy: Upon which Account, after the Taking of Namure 'twas generally
expected that the French King would take the First Opportunity of Besieging
this Place, but for diverse Reasons he has either been diverted from it, or
delayed the putting this Design in Execution, till the shuting up of the
Campaign. Now this place, upon the Account of the Siege, being the general
Discourse of the Town, I thought it would not be amiss to describe a Place
which most Discourse of, yet few Know.

Charleroy is a Frontier Town in the Province of Namure, it was Built by the
Spaniards in the Year 1666. (in Honor of Charles the 2d. the present King of
Spain) it was Surrendered to the French in the Year 1669. the Fort then not
being strong enough to resist a Siege. It was afterward extraordinary well
Fortified by the French, by the Model and Direction of Monfieur Vaubon (the
present Famous Engineir) by which means it became a considerable Hold; it was
restored to the King of Spain by the Treaty of Nimeguen, since which the
Spaniards have made many Additional Fortifications, and is now the strongest
Town on that side the Country: It Is Situated upon a rising Ground in the
Exterior and Western Angle made by the meeting of the Rivers Pieton and Sambre,
so that it has on the South the River Sambre, and on the West the River
Poyeton, and on the East a deep Marsh, by which means it is Attackable on one
side only, and that too is extraordinary well Fortified and Guarded with Forts;
The Chief Fortifications of this Place are thus Named: The Mons-Gate, the
Brussele-Gate, the Tourney-Gate, the Grand Horn-Worke, the Half-Moo^ of
Valonne, the Half Moon of Coffree, the Half Moon of Rec^llets, the Half Moon of
Brabanzone, the Half Moon of Tournay, the Flemish Half Moon, the Half Moon of
Mons, the Luxemburg half moon, the Hainault Bastion, the Burgundy Bastion, the
Luxemburg Bastion, etc. This Place stands Fourteen miles West of Namure, and
Twenty one East of Mons. The Town it self is no way Considerable but by its
Fortifications.

ADVERTISEMENT,
KIng William, the Darling of Heaven; Demonstrated in a Chain of wonderful
Deliverances, That have attended His Majesty's Sacred Person, from his Mothers
Womb, to this time; perticularly in the last Battle at Landen. Price one Penny.

London, Printed and Sold by J. Wallis near Fleet Street, 1693.


