A Brief Answer to three very great and concerning Questions.
There are at this day three great Questions which if they were rightly stated,
and thoroughly resolved, they would serve very much to confirm the minds of
Believers, in an active discharge of those duties which the present season
requires from them, or else quiet and compose their spirits if they are called
to suffer.

THe first question is concerning the Ministers of the Gospel (I mean such as
are otherwise rightly qualified to preach as being gifted by God, Civil
Magistrate to exercise that office, the question concerning them is whether in
obedience to the commands of the civil Magistrate they are to forbear preaching
or not.

I answer, by no means and that,

First, from the example of our Savior and his Apostles, who though they were
as subject to the Law, as we are now, and enjoined obedience to all the lawful
commands of civil Magistrates, yet when ever the civil Authority was abused to
hinder preaching they did constantly refuse to obey them.

Thus our Savior, who as man behaved himself wisely Isa. 52.13.
and commands all his followers to do so, yet in his preaching he did not walk
by those rules of secrecy and concealment which are now accounted prudential
for when he was questioned concerning his Doctrine he answered John 18.20.
I spoke openly, or freely, Mat. 10.
boldly, plainly, for so the word (...) is often rendered) to the World, I ever
taught in the Synagogue and in the Temple, whither the Jews always resort and
in secret I have said nothing, thus did our Savior really, what is
figuratively (but with respect to him) spoken concerning wisdom, Pro. 1.20.21.
wisdom cries without she utters her words in the streets and this preaching
in public our Savior makes to be one great part of doing his Fathers will
Psalm. 40. v. 9, 10.
I have says he in that Prophetical Psalm, preached righteousness in the great
congregation; Lo, I have not refrained my lips, O Lord; thou know I have not
hid thy righteousness within my heart I have declared thy faithfulness and thy
salvation, I have not concealed thy loving kindness and thy truth from the
great congregation.

In order to the fulfilling this Prophecy it is very remarkable that our
Savior began his Ministry at that very time, when, and in that very place,
where John was cast into Prison; which circumstance is observed by 2 of the
Evangelists after that John was cast into Prison, (says Mark) Mark 1. v. 14.
Jesus came into Galilee. (which was under the Jurisdiction and command of
Herod, Luke 3. v. 19.20.
who had newly imprisoned John, preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom of God, and
from that time (says Mat) Mat. 4.12.17
i. e. From the time of John's Imprisonment Jesus began to Preach, thereby
showing in his own example that no danger should discourage a Gospel-Preacher
from the discharge of his duty.

What our Savior did himself he does likewise advise his Disciples unto and
therefore in that very Chapter Man 1.10.
where he sent them forth to preach though he directs them to beware of men 4,
6.1.7.
and to be wise as Serpents, yet withal he commands them, to preach publicly,
what I say to you says he, in the dark do you speak in the light and what you
hear in the ear publish on the house top and as foreseeing that the Disciples
might raise some objections against this because of the certain danger and
hazard rhat would attend such a practice our Savior does no less then three
times expressly command them Mat. 10.26.28.31.
not to be afraid of them that only kill the body, whereby mentioning the worst
and utmost that men can do in a way of opposition, he does sufficiently arm his
ministers against lesser difficulties; and to show that he did not, leave the
duty of preaching publicly unto his Apostles liberty, as a thing they might do
or forbear as they pleased, he makes it afterward to be a part of their
confessing him v. 32
which he requires as an indespensible duty from all his followers; and
accordingly when the Apostles (after the descent of the holy Spirit, upon them)
were commanded to be silent, by the High Priests, and to Preach no more, Act.
4. v. 19.20.
in the Name of Christ.

Though the Persons which enjoined this were their lawful magistrates yet they
absolutely refused to submit unto them; and upon the account of an Argument,
which is still of equal force, if it be righteous before God, say they, to obey
you rather then God, judge ye, for we cannot but speak the things which we have
seen and heard; and afterward when they assembled together, v. 29.
they did not pray, either for the favor of the Magistrates, or for wisdom to
conceal themselves or for their own preservation; but appeal unto God to be a
righteous Judge between their rulers and them; and for themselves, do beg
nothing but courage to discharge their duty, and now, say they, v. 31.
O Lord look upon their threats and give unto thy Servants, that with all
boldness they may speak thy word; In which Prayer, is being agreeable to the
will of God, they were presently heard and answered, for they were filled with
the Holy Spirit,, and as an effect thereof they spoke the word of God with
boldness: The same Prayer and for the same ends does the Apostle Paul desire
the Ephesians, to make for him when he was in Prison Praying Ephesians. 6.19.20.
says he for me (not that I may be released from my bonds and set at liberty,
but) that utterance may be given to me by the opening of my mouth with boldness
to make known the Mystery of the Gospel, that I may be bold therein, as I ought
to speak, and in his advice to Timothy whom he instructs as a Pattern of all
following Teachers he exhorts him to stir up the gift that was in him (the
meaning of which advice is as he himself explains it in another place 2 Time v.
2
preach the word be instant in season, out of season reprove, rebuke, exhort,
with all manner of long suffering and Doctrine; for which Assiduity and
diligence in Preaching, he gives a reason which holds true and binding in all
Ages, 2 Timothy c. 1. v. 7.8.
because God has not given to us (whether we are believers or preachers) the
spirit of fear but of power, and therefore we now, as well as the Apostles
before us, are not to be ashamed of the testimony of the Lord, but to suffer
hardship with the Gospel according to the power of God 2 Timothy 2.1.2. ^. 2.
as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, another Argument may be taken from the Nature of a Gospel Ministry,
which, to whomever it is committed, is to be looked upon as an office, a
stewardship and to be managed as a trust, for a faithful discharge of which
they are to be strictly accountable Cor. 4. c. 1.2.
Let a Man. (i. e. let every one) so account of us (says the Apostle Paul,
meaning himself and other Preachers of the Gospel in his time) as Ministers of
Christ and stewards of the Mysteries of God; now as the same Apostles adds what
is required of stewards, is that they be found faithful; but to be faithful,
is not to lay up our Lords Money, but to lay it out, and to Trade with it for
our Masters advantage; thus are we all commanded to deal with spiritual gifts
Pet. 1.4. v. 10.
every one as he has received a gift Minister thereof to one another as good
stewards of the manifold grace of God; and this the Apostle Paul makes to be
his warrant and apology why he was so laborious and constant in preaching 1 C^.
c. 9. v. 16.17.
for says he if I Preach the Gospel, I have nothing to boast off, because a
necessity lies upon me; yea there is a woe unto me if I preach not the Gospel,
because I am entrusted with a stewardship. As Moses was faithful in all Gods
house, which is mentioned by God himself Nu. 12. v. 7.
and afterward repeated by the Apostle as his highest commendation; so are all
those to be, whom God has been pleased to honor with calling them to be his
Servants in that work, then not their own ease, safety or Proffit, but their
Masters honor and intrest is to be consulted by them, which none can
faithfully attend, who either sloathfully imprison their ^ight or cowardly
desert their station.

Thirdly, R. 3.
another Argument may be taken from the nature of Preaching gifts, which
increase by using; they are like the Widows Oil, which while it stood in the
Vessel had no increase, but multiplied, as it was pouring out: Grain in the
floor does not enrich the earth, but when it is Sown, it prospers to an
Harvest: as a spring if you stop its Current will presently be choked up; or a
fire when you leave off blowing goes out; so is it with spiritual gifts, which
in this respect as well as others are compared to Fire and Water, because they
must be kept up in a continual exercise or elseweare in danger of loofing them
1 Cor. 12. v. 7.
the manifestation of the Spirit, (i. e. that gift whatever it is whereby the
Spirit of God does manifest it self to act in any) is given to proffit (not our
selves principally but others) withal: and therefore we are commanded c. 14.12.
to excel that we may benefit the Church, which end when it is not religiously
designed, and attended to we may fear that our talent shall be taken away, as
it was from the evil and the sloathful servant, whereas he that uses what he
has received has the promise of a Blessing, Mat. 25. v. 28.
and shall be made to abound and so much the more as he goes through greater
difficulties in the exercise and employment of his Talent.

Lastly since our Lord Christ has called all such, R. 4.
as are truly Gospel Ministers, unto that work, and has promised to be with
them and to assist them in it, there can be nothing more dishonorable to his
power and authority then to decline any part of the Duty we owe to him, for
fear of men; for our Lord is a great King, and as he is able to defend, so he
has promised that he will amply reward all his faithful servants; he knows all
our works Rev. 2.10.
and who they are that call themselves Jews or Christians that are not such but
rather the Synagogue of Satan, it is from such as these, nominal Christians
but real Devils, that all our sufferings in the last days are to be expected,
who make use of the name and of the form of godliness with the greater
dexterity, and advantage to oppose and persecute the power of it; and yet even
these he has commanded us not to fear, though they may prevail to deliver us
into Prisons and unto death, yet we are not to fear any of these things we may
suffer, because our Lord Christ who was dead, now lives for ever, and well give
all his witnesses a Crown of Life. In expectation of which recompense we should
daily triumph and rejoice, whereas to do or forbear doing any thing, in
religious concernments, merely that we may avoid persecutions, argues a poor,
low, and ungospellike Spirit; as the Apostle observes in those Conformists in
his time, who preached up Circumcision and legal Ceremonies he says they did
it merely, Gal. 6. v. 12.14.
that they might not be persecuted with the Cross of Christ whereas were we
Christians indeed we should as he professes he did glory in nothing more then
the Cross of Christ and in our Conformity to that by which the World would be
crucified to us, and we unto the Terrors and allurements of the World: And so
much to the first Question.

The second Question is, whether believers in order to the more solemn serving
of God, and their mutual edification, are bound to continue their assembling
together, when the civil Magistrate does expressly prohibit such kind of
meetings; this question, though it may seem sufficiently decided by the answer
given unto the other, for if it be the duty of Ministers to preach, it must
necessarily follow that it is the peoples duty to hear; i^ the Shepherd, to the
utmost hazard of his Life, must go before; then certainly the sheep must follow
after, and hearken to his voice, yet because of those distinctions and shifts
which carnal fear has found out, under the notion of christian prudence I
shall speak more fully for the affirming of it.

Believers should not forsake (...) assembling or gathering together into one
place (as the Greek word properly signifies) but be daily admonishing one
another and so much the more as they saw the day* (i. e. the evil day of
persecution and distress, approaching Heb. 10. v. 25.
where he is so far from making the persecution then coming upon them (of which
he speaks and against which, he incourageth them in the following chapter) to
be a motive for the forbearing of meetings; that he uses it, as an argument to
quicken them unto greater diligence and frequency therein; and according to
this command so was the Practice of the Primitive Christians, for as soon as
ever they were converted they did not think it sufficient to keep their
Religion to themselves, and to serve God in private but Act. 2 42.
Continued constant unto the Teaching and fellowship of the Apostles, and that
not only before but after the Apostles were by public authority silenced, Act.
5. v. 12.13.
for then all (i. e. all the converts) were with one accord together in
Solomon's Porch, which congregating together is made a distinctive note and
Character of a true Disciple, for it is said of the rest, (who were not
Disciples) no man durst join himself unto them.

Secondly, By assembling themselves, thus in time of persecution our Lord
Christ is greatly honored for hereby we give an evidence that we confess and
are not ashamed of him, which is a thing he does very often expressly call for
and he takes especial notice who they are in defiling and dangerous times that
keep constantly and meet often together to serve him, the place in Malachy Mal.
3.16,
is well known and for this we find he commends the Church of Pergamus Rev.
2.13.
I know says he thy works and where thou dwell where Sathnn has his
Throne, (by which is meant the persecuting Heathen Magistrate who had there his
residence and published his Devilish Decrees) and thou hold fast my Name;
and have not denied my Faith, and because separation from all such Churches, or
Assembly's, which call themselves Jews or Christiens, and are not does
necessarily draw persecution along with it, therefore does he command in the
same Chapter all those whom he foresaw were likely ^o be thrown into Prison,
and there exercised with many trials not to fear; because he laid there
sufferings to heart; and that constancy which did so visibly redound to his
honor he would not fail fully to reward: in backsliding times the love o^ most
to the strict ways of holiness does wax cold, and proportion^bly their Hatred
against true professors and followers of it, does increase and then God seems
to say as Moses did to the rev^^^ed Israelites Ex. 32.26.
Who is on my side; let them come together and show themselves; for the Saints
are said to be the glory of Christ, Cor. 8: 2.3.
and that especially in the Church Assemblys, which is meant by the prophet
when he says upon all the Glory i. e. upon all the assemblies of Sion, Isa. 4.
v. 5.
or of the true Church shall be a defense, and all their sufferings which may
befall them, for such well doing, are ordered on purpose by Christ that in the
issue he may have glory by them, Cor. 4.11.
for we, says the Apostle Paul are always delivered up unto death, for the
sake of Jesus, that the life (i. e. the living power) of Jesuss may be
manifested in our mortal flesh and so the Apostle Peter to the same purpose 1
Pet. 1.6.7.
now if need be you are put to sorrow by diverse temptations that the trial of
your faith may be found to honor and praise and glory, at the Revelation of
Jesus Christ, c. 4. v. 13.
and again in another place in as much as ye are partakers in the suffering of
Christ rejoice that at the Revelation of his Glory, ye may joy with exceeding
gladness because then the Spirit of God, and of glory does rest upon you and on
your part is glorified.

Gal. 6.13.
that they may glory in our flesh, and triumph in our fear and cowardice; as
when the Centurion saw the Earthquake and the dreadful Eclipse at our Saviors
death, and above all when he heard his voice with so much security and
confidence committing himself to God, he presently cried out Mat. ^.44.
assuredly this man was the Son of God, so when hypocritical professors and
worldly spirited opposers do see the courage and constancy of the Saints in
keeping together, though Earthquakes and Tumults are round about them, they
will then be forced to acknowledge that they are the sincere worshippers of the
true God; as Dan. 3.28.29
Nebuchadnezzar did concerning the 3 Children who boldly disobeyed his impious
decree, and Darius concerning Daniel, who would not omit the circumstance of
having his windows open when he prayed, notwithstanding the Law against it. It
is in General the end of all Christian meetings to convince Unbelievers, and to
bring them to confess that 1 Cor. 14. v. 24.25.
God is in us of a truth, but to meet for the Worship of God, only when the men
of the World do give us leave, must needs make them think that we are in all
respects like themselves, and that our Religion stands in need of their
countenance and favor to uphold it; But Phil. c. 1. v. 2.
to hold forth (or as the word (...) signifies to hold up on high) the word of
truth, as a light, when the storm and wind is blowing in our faces; to keep out
in our ship at Sea, in the midst of a tempest without seeking for shelter in
some obscure and ignoble harbor, it will draw the eyes of Unbelievers toward
us, and make them confess that 1 John 44.6.
another Spirit acts in us then acts in them; which Spirit is the proper
principle of a Believer, not only that with constitutes and makes him one, but
which does wholy difference him from the men of the World.

Fourthly, the more dangerous and distressing the day is, the Paul though
animated by frequent visions yet Acts 28.25.
when he saw the Brethren in his Journey to Rome he took new courage. We stand
in our present frail composition of flesh and blood so related and indeared to
one another, that oftentimes the company even of those that are inferior in
Grace unto our selves, does prove a very great strengthening, and therefore
Gideon though acknowledged by God himself to be a Mighty Man of Valor, and who
had newly had 2 signal Miracles to confirm him, yet being afraid to go down
alone into the Camp of the Miaianites, he is commanded by God Jud. 1.9.10.
to take his Servant Rurah with him, and our Savior himself, when he was Mat.
26. v. 38.
in his last and greatest agony, requests his Disciples to tarry and to watch
with him, as it were to relieve him with their Society and Sympathy; Thus the
Apostle Paul after all his Revelations and Raptures, frequently desires those
unto whom he writes, Romans 15.30.31.
to be very earnest in their prayers unto God for him, and when Titus and
Timothy, came to him from Maeedonia it was such a Revival to him that it is
observed how he was upon it, Acts 18. v. 5.
straightened in Spirit, and testified to the Jews that Jesus was the Christ;
the coming of 2 such dear Friends, made the holy Apostle to recollect all his
inward powers and with a redoubled vehemence and intention to perform his
Ministry. And therefore to neglect the assistance which the seeing of one
another faces, and hearing one another words, may help to bring us in times
of distress, this is only to betray our selves, and to throw away our succors,
when we stand most in need of them.

upon the Glory, that is, upon the public assemblies of Sion, that the defense
is promised to be; the whole World, which lies in evil (or rather in the evil
one) is a kind of a wast, a wilderness, in which the Devil walks and rules; but
the Church is a Garden enclosed and God himself has promised to Water and
Fence it Isa. 26. v. 3.
and therefore whoever touch it in an Hostile and violent manner are in certain
danger of being ruined and destroyed themselves; Psalm. 105. v. 15.
when the Saints of old were out few in number and in a wandering condition God
would not then suffer even Kings to hurt them, for nor Kings as some dully
expound that text but the saints are Gods anointed ones, for whom he cares;
and if he would not suffer them to be wronged, when they were but few, much
less will he permit it when they are many and united: the Israel of God, and
such are all true worshippers, (...) be wasted without the inevitable overthrow
of all their (...), because God himself has promised to be Zach. 2.5.8.
a Wall of fire, ^^^nd about them, nay oftentimes those Wolves and Beasts of
p^^y who sought to devour them, are so far disappointed, that God has
promised to strengthen his despised people, to return their recompense upon
their heads, and to execute his Vengeance upon them; thus God threatheth Edom,
who was a fa^se and cruel Brother unto Israel Ez^. 25. v. 14.
I will lay my vengeance upon Edom, by the hand of my people Israel, and they
shall do in Edom according to my anger, and according to my fury, and they
shall know my vengeance; our Lord Christ amongst other styles of care and
affection is called the Shepherd of his people, and his Sheep are likely to
have most of his care, and eye, when they are most together; to be scattered is
a great Judgment, and is oftentimes threatened as one, for it makes us liable
to become a prey unto any that is desirous to take us; and therefore let none
by any act of theirs, in withdrawing from their Folds and proper resting
places, seem willing to put themselves into that condition; but wait on the Lord
and keep his way, Psalm 37. v. 34
and then they may comfortably expect what follows that the Lord will exalt
them to inherit the earth and when the wicked are cut off they shall see it,
nay perhaps God will honor them to be his Instruments therein; or this is
promised as an honor to all his Saints, Psalm. 149. And so much for the second
Question.

There remains a Third Question, and that is, but this is of so easy a
solution that whoever are rightly satisfied about the 2 former may easily
resolve themselves and were but undue fear, and carnal prudence a little
farther removed from us; we should scarce ever dispute whether those that have
taken a false Oath, and renounced a true one, were once to be owned by us as
Ministers of Christ, or as such ought to be attended; to our Lord Christ never
sent any to preach his Gospel, upon such wretched and unworthy terms; and if
Christ sent them not they are to be accounted of by us as strangers, who shall
pay dearly for their presumptuous and unwarrantable intrusion.

FINIS.

