Catechetical Exercises, OR QUESTIONS and ANSWERS For Youth to Learn, THAT They
may better understand THE CHVRCH CATECHISM, WITH THE CATECHISTS Enlargements
upon them.

Ps. 34.11. Come ye Children, hearken unto me: I will teach you the fear of the
Lord. By Jos. Briggs M. A. and Vic. of Kirkburton in the County of York.

CAMBRIDGE, Printed by Joh. Hayes, Printer to the University; for Edw. Hall
Bookseller there. And are to be sold by Luke Meridith, at the Star in St. Paul's
Churchyard London. 1696.

Imprimatur.

Thomas Brown, Procan.

Jo. Beaumont.

Hen. James.

modern bookplate

The Epistle DEDICATORY. TO THE Most Reverend Father in God JOHN, By Divine
Providence, Lord Archbishop of YORK, PRIMATE of ENGLAND AND METROPOLITAN.
May it please your Grace,
IT was a Mighty Veneration the first and better Ages had for their Governors,
The Guides of their Souls, agreeably to the Rules of Christianity, and even to
the common sense of Mankind; And that quite contrary now-a-dayes, the Holy
Orders are vilely esteemed by Abundance of Men, (and those sometimes pretending
a High Zeal for Religion,) is to be imputed very much to their bad Education in
their tender years, and perhaps to no one thing more.

But it is not against this Evil alone, that a good Education of our Youth
would provide an effectual Remedy, but in my opinion, against a Multitude of
Epidemical Errors and Immoralities. It is certain, True Religion thrives best
when planted betimes, having its Foundation in an early Piety. Happy are those
Children whose Lot is to be begotten of Godly Parents, careful to season their
Minds with virtuous and sober Principles, and while they are Children, to
acquaint them with the Scriptures of Truth and Godliness None start with
greater Advantages in the Christian Race, nor usually persevere with a more
vigorous Constancy therein, then they who are taught to remember their Creator
in the Days of their Youth, the first Fruits of their Time being Consecrated to
God and Religion, before corrupt affections have clapped a Bias upon their
Inclinations, and a Train of Vices has depraved, and in great measure laid a
sleep the Natural Notions of Good and Evil in them.

To this great purpose Catechizing and Diligence in teaching the Catechism is
continually and very appositely urged upon Us of the Parochial Clergy, by our
Ordinaries in their Annual Visitations, according to the Royal Injunctions. And
loath I am to say, or even to think any of my Brethren so culpable, as either to
be so ignorant as to need my Instructions, or so negligent as to want my
Excitements in so necessary and (as is Universally acknowledged) so profitable
an Office of their Ministration.

It is for the common People's sake therefore, that I expose these Specimens of
my Labors in this kind to a public View. I think it a great Blessing to them,
that they may have the Advantage of being taught by both their senses, their
Eyes as well as their Ears. What is taught by the Ear may affect and pierce
more, but the Letter written endures longer, and the Souls of men have the
Advantage of a more deliberate Consideration, and a longer continuance therein.

Having therefore a Desire to do good both ways, according to my poor
Abilities, (not so much fearing Censures, as endeavoring to Edify,) I
submissively offer these my Labors to your Graces Patronage, as justly yours,
being performed in your Charge, by one under your Fatherly Jurisdiction, who
unfeignedly prays for the Peace and Prosperity of Gods Holy Catholic Church,
and the continual dew of his Heavenly Blessing upon the Bishops and Clergy
thereof, and particularly a double Portion of his Spirit upon your Grace; that
we may be long happy in your Wise and Active Conduct; and one who earnestly
begging your Graces Prayers for him, heartily desires to approve himself upon
all Occasions.

Your Graces in all humble Duty and Observance, Jos. Briggs.

THE PREFACE.
To Every CHRISTIAN READER, Particularly to my Brethren, the Younger of the
Reverend CLERGY OF THE Church of England, etc.
Reverend Brethren,
WHAT Place and Figure the Catetechist had in the Primitive Churches is well
known: and the Diligent Discharge of this part of our Ministry, being most
strictly required by the Canons of that Holy Church, whereunto by all manner of
right we ow the most sincere Obedience; which being also so frequently urged
upon our practice by our Ordinaries at every Visitation, and there being
perhaps, nothing we do, or can do, that can be more beneficial to our Flocks;
Nothing which (if rightly performed) can more conduce to a thorough Reformation
of Christians, or to the comfort and Satisfaction of the Pastors Consciences,
It seems strange to me, That it is so much neglected, at least most cursorily
and insipidly performed in many Parishes, especially in Market Towns, where
nothing pleases, but the Minister's set and solemn Discourses on some
particular Texts in Scripture, commonly called Preaching, as if there were no
other preaching but this.

God forbid I should pass the least undecent Reflection upon those; but this I
am bold to say, Whatever good Man will take the pains (as every one ought) to
examine his Children and Servants of what they have learnt by them, and to
assist them to his utmost power to profit thereby; He will soon find it a very
slender Account they are able to give of an hours Discourse, and must, from a
constant Experience hereof, conclude an absolute Necessity of both Ministers
and Masters of Families greatest Diligence in this easy and Familiar way of
instructing them in matters of Religion, and that it is very little good, which
Sermonizing without Catechizing can do, and therefore has not the least
appearance of justice for thrusting it out of the Church.

That we ought to Catechize, I hope I need not say much to convince any
thinking Man; the stress lies in finding out such a course as wherein it may be
done to purpose, that if it be possible, We may save ourselves, and them that
hear us, even the most ignorant of them that are willing to learn. And I would
gladly be confident of your charitable construction of this my publishing my
own Method, so as by no means to interpret it a self-conceited or presumptuous
prescribing it to others. Give me leave only to show you how I fell into it,
and then be it at your own Discretion how far you will accept or reject it,
imitate, alter, or wholly decline it.

I account it to my self a great Blessing, that being by a sickly Constitution
of Body forced from the Breasts of my Mother, that Famous School of the
Prophets, the University of Cambridge, a very good Providence cast me under the
Wings and Guidance of an aged Divine, Grave, Learned and pious, a truly Loyal
Subject to, and sufferer for his Sovereign, a most Orthodox Son of the Church.

From him I had this Advice in my studies, (and it would be Envy to others Good
to conceal it) to fix my Theological Studies in the first place upon the Creed,
The Lords Prayer, and the Decalogue, with this reason to persuade it, That by
composing Sermons on these, I should be at once provided with whatever should
be useful in a Congregation in the Afternoons, and be likewise thereby enabled
for this great work of Catechizing profitably, by but extracting the
Quintessence of such Composures by way of Questions and Answers as I went
along; and also lastly have a constant storehouse to repair to, serviceable
upon all Occasions, and upon all sorts of Subjects.

I heartily thank God, that I had this Counsel given me, and that I followed
it. Catechizing one way or other, either by a continued plain and homely
discourse, or by teaching Questions and Answers, and then using these short
Descants upon them, has been my constant course in that place whither Divine
Providence cast me. In taking which, having found it all along a great drudgery
to Transcribe, I was forced when I had gone thorough the Catechism, to be at
the charge of an Impression of so many Copies as might serve my Parish, which
proving very faulty and defective, to my great dissatisfaction, I thought it
not amiss to make a new Edition thereof; and to make it more profitable to all
that would make any Use thereof, I have added the Catechist's Enlargement upon
each Question and Answer throughout the whole.

For the Questions and Answers upon the Apostles Creed, I acknowledge some
considerable part of them, and the most material, upon which the rest are
grounded, to be those Composures of the aforesaid excellent Person, and them he
gave to the Youth in his Parish to learn, and constantly examined them therein,
to their great profit and Edification. And now I beg it may not be thought
either presumption or vain glory in me, to add thereto as I saw cause, to make
it as easy as I could, to the weakest Capacities.

-- I have well weighed every word in the Creed, and every clause, and almost
every word in the whole Church-Catechism, from the beginning to the end,
proving every Observation therein by very plain Scriptures; which Course and
Method, as it sets the most Notable Texts before the younger peoples Eyes, and
may to their great profit serve to imprint them in their Memories; so does it
mightily conduce to settle and establish them in a firm belief of sound
Doctrine. And if Parents and Masters of Families would be persuaded thus to
exercise their Youth, I am morally certain, it would make them good Christians,
Good Protestants, (or which is, I think, the same thing) Good and firm Members
of the Church of England. For as here, They may be instructed in the Truth and
Certainty of the Christian Religion in Opposition to the Jews and Pagans, so
are all just Occasions taken to arm them against Fanaticism and Separation. And
if such sound Principles of Faith and Obedience be timely instilled into tender
Minds; If Men would thus teach and bring up their Children in the Nurture and
Admonition of the Lord, it will be very hard to think how they can fail of a
competent understanding of their Religion, and whatever is necessary to be
known or believed to their Salvation, or turn Apostates from it, without an
extreme Oscitancy and carelessness in remembering and considering what they have
been taught, or an incurable, wanton itch after Novelties; which latter, if
indulged, it may be expected they will through Gods just judgment fall into
damnable Errors, and all the innumerable snares of the Devil, which he shall
think fit to lay for them; and being once bewildred in them, it is rare, and in
the Nature of the thing very difficult for any to recover themselves, being
taken Captive by him at his Will.

Yours in the Lord J. B.

Catechetical Exercises.
PREFACE TO CATECHISM.
THE great end of Catechizing being to instruct little children and the younger
people, all that are ignorant and capable of learning the Fundamental
principles of their Religion, It is therefore very proper to ask the Catechized
what Religion they are of in the first place: and therefore it is no trivial or
frivolous Question with which our Catechism begins (What is your name?) for
how this leads to the other may appear by these following Inquiries.

Q. What did you receive the same time when you received your name?

A. My Religion.

Q. What Religion are you of?

A. The Christian; and therefore the name I then received is called my
Christian name.

Q. When received you both these?

A. When I was Baptized.

The Catechist's Enlargement upon the Questions and Answers.
Every person is Considerable two ways; As a man and as a Christian; As a Man,
He has the Name of his Family, called his Surname; As a Christian, He has
another name given him, to wit, when he was baptized, and by being baptized
entered into the Profession of the Christian Religion, which is therefore called
his Christian name.

Q. Who gave you this name?

A. My Godfathers and Godmothers, etc.

Q. By whose means or help did you receive them?

A. By means of my Godfathers and Godmothers.

Q. Why are they called Godfathers and Godmothers?

A. Because they were instrumental in begetting me again unto God, and bringing
me into Covenant with God, and still stand engaged as Spiritual parents for my
Godly Education.

Q. Why does the Church require the Use of Godfathers and Godmothers in Baptism?

A. Because the Jews had such in Circumcising their Children, so has Christ's
Church in all ages secured the Godly Education of her Members.

Catechist. Buxtorf (Syned. jud. l. 1. c. ^.) gives it as a certainty That the
Jews had Godfathers and Godmothers at Circumcision, and some hint of this
Custom we have Isaiah 8.24. Where we read of the Prophets calling for faithful
Witnesses, when he called the Prophetesses Son, Maher, Shalal, Hashbaz, and in
Luke 1.59. we read that Elizabeth's Neighbors and Cousins came together the
Eight day to Circumcise her child, and would have called him after the name of
his Father, Zecharias. So that by this account the Use of Godfathers and
Godmothers seems to be derived (like the many other Usages in Christianity)
from the Jewish Church. But whether so or no, it is manifest it was always
practiced in the Christian Church. And that for those great ends of propagating
Religion and preserving them from falling from it, who was already initiated
into it. For if parents, natural parents, proved ignorant and could not; or
wicked and would not teach and Educate their Children aright, or if they
chanced to die or to turn Apostates, Hereby the Church took care for the godly
Education of their Children. And this (says Mr Perkins) was a laudable Custom
above 1400 years. True (will some say) this was no more than what was Necessary
in those Times of Persecution, but not so now, in these times of the Churches
Peace. Yes, I answer, it is yet as necessary as then, Because We know not how
soon Persecutions may come, and however, the present Age we live in abounds
with many damnable Errors and Heresies, and the Profaneness and Debauchery
thereof is very great, and therefore it is as needful now as ever, That some
Persons be engaged publicly to see that children that are baptized be brought
up in the doctrine of Christ, and in the fear of God,

Q. What just exception can be made against this Custom?

A. None, but Godfathers and Godmothers neglecting their duties, now this or
the like Exceptions lie against the best and most wholesome Institutions both
of God and man.

Catechist. It is indeed a very sad thing that Godfathers and Godmothers so
generally neglect their duties; I say therefore, O that All persons would be
serious in undertaking this charge, and fulfill it more Conscientiously than
commonly men do! And then, The Benefit of this Custom would convince all
mankind, how convenient it is that it be retained, to prevent any persons
making Shipwreck of Faith and of a good Conscience when they come to years of
discretion.

Q. Why do Christians give their Children names in Baptism?

A. Because the Jews gave names to their children in Circumcision, and Baptism
succeeds in the room of it; Again, it is intended That their names should
always put them in mind of their Christianity, which they received together
with their names.

Catechist. First, That Baptism succeeds in the room of Circumcision, As it is
clear in matter of Fact, so I take it to be manifest in that one Text of St.
Paul, Coloss. 1.11. In whom also ye are Circumcised by the Circumcision made
without Hands in putting off the Body of the Sins of the flesh, by the
Circumcision of Christ, buried with him in Baptism.

2. That the Jews gave their names, when they Circumcised their Children is
plain in diverse instances. To name but two, Genesis 21.3, 4. Abraham called the
name of his Son, which Sarah bare unto him, Isaac, and Abraham circumcised his
son Isaac being Eight days old, as God commanded him. And so had John Baptist
his name given to Him at his circumcision, Luke 1.59. and so had our Savior,
Luke 2.21. When 8 days were accomplished for the circumcising of the child, his
name was called Jesus, which was so named of the Angel, before he was conceived
in the Womb.

3. As often as we mention, or think of our names we should (as much as
possible) call to mind our Baptismal Covenant, viz. To be Christ's faithful
servants to our lives end, and hereof St. Paul's text, 2 Timothy 3.19. may serve
for a good Paraphrase, Let every one that names the name of Christ (or upon
whom the name of Christ is called, in that he is called a Christian) depart
from iniquity.

Q. Seeing then you received both these in Baptism, I ask you what is Baptism,
as it is in this place offered to your Consideration?

A. It is one of the Seals of the new Covenant.

Catechist. Such was Circumcision, and therefore such is Baptism that succeeds
it, Romans 4.11. Abraham's circumcision was to Him a seal of the Righteousness of
Faith which He had being Uncircumcised.

Q. What Covenant do you mean?

A. The same which God made with Adam after his fall in those words, (The seed
of the woman shall break the Serpents head) and which he afterward renewed at
several times to Gods people by the Patriarchs and Prophets, and at last
Ratified in Christ's blood, called the Covenant of Grace.

Catechist. This Covenant as made with Adam as the common parent and
Representative of all mankind, you have in Gen 3.15. and as it was renewed to
Abraham, you have Genesis 12.3. and 22.18. In thee, in thy Seed, (i. e. in Christ
as St. Paul explains it Gal. 3.8.) shall all Families of the earth be blessed.
Which Covenant was afterward renewed or new revealed in other words to Jacob,
Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shilo come; by Moses,
Deuteronomy. 18.15. A Prophet shall the Lord God raise up unto you of your Brethren
like unto me, him shall ye hear; by David, by Isaiah, Jeremy and the rest of
the Prophets, too many to recite particularly here, and still in every age it
was more clearly revealed then the former until the Seed came, the Mediator of
this covenant, and ratified and established it by his Blood.

It will be of great Use to you (Good Children) if you can reach to understand
thus much, much more if you can attain a competent practical knowledge of the
terms of this Covenant, as your Catechism (well understood) may instruct you. I
ask you therefore

Q. How many parts are there in this Covenant?

A. Two: Gods part, and ours.

Catechist. For so it is in all Covenants, which being between parties, it
obliges them both to their respective parts, and neither of them can expect
the benefit of the Covenant without his own performance of what belongs to him.

Q. What then is Gods part, or what does God promise in the Covenant of Grace?

A. Forgiveness of Sins, Sanctifying Grace, and Eternal Life.

Q. How does your Catechism express these?

A. It shows what Benefits we receive by Baptism, to wit, that of limbs of
Satan, we are therein made members of Christ: Of Children of Wrath and of the
Devil, we are therein made Children of God; and of heirs of Hell, we become
inheritors of the Kingdom of heaven.

Catechist. These are great things (Good Children) for you to learn, and having
learnt them, I beseech you, do your best to consider them, and see how all are
grounded in the plain words of Holy Scripture.

Of Limbs of Satan, as the Head and Father of all wicked ones, we are by
Baptism made members of Christ. Members (you all know) relate to a Body, Now
the Church is the Body whereof Christ is the Head: and by Baptism we are made
members of the Church which is the Mystical Body of Christ. For Baptism is the
Sacrament of Admission into the Church, as the Lords Supper is the Sacrament of
nourishment in the Church, 1 Cor. 12.13. By one spirit we are all baptized into
one body, whether Jew or Gentile.

2. Whereas we are all by nature Children of wrath, one as well as other,
Ephesians. 2.3. By Baptism we are born anew of water and the spirit, John 3.5. and
so have the power and dignity or privilege to be called the Children of God by
Regeneration, as well as by Adoption, for John 1.12. To as many as received
him, to them gave be power to become the Sons of God, even as many as believed
in his name, and professed that belief by being Baptized. Gal. 3.26, 27. Ye are
all the children of God by Faith in Christ Jesus; For as many of you as have
been baptized into Christ, have put on Christ. And from hence they may call
God, Father, saying, Our Father which art in heaven, witness what Christ said
to his Disciples, John 20.17. I ascend to my Father and your Father, and from
hence they are brethren to Christ, for Heb. 2.11. He is not ashamed to call
them Brethren. And being thus children and sons of God, they are 3. By Baptism
made Heirs of his Kingdom. Nay Inheritors thereof, even of his Kingdom of Grace
in this life, and shall in due time be fully possessed of that Glory in the
Life to come. All which is made good by several great Texts, 1 Pet. 1.3. He
has begotten us again to a lively hope, even of an inheritance incorruptible,
undefiled and which fades not away, reserved in Heaven for us. Tit. 3.5, 7.
According to his mercy he saved us by the Laver and washing of Regeneration and
renewing of the Holy Ghost; That being justified by his Grace we should be made
heirs of eternal Life. Romans 8.16, 17. The Spirit bears witness, that we are
the children of God; and if children then heirs: Heirs with God, joint heirs
with Christ: if we suffer with him we shall also reign with him.

Q. How does the new Covenant, The Covenant of Grace made with Adam after his
fall, differ from the old Covenant, the Covenant of works made with Adam before
his fall?

A. The old Covenant of Works did not promise Forgiveness of Sins, nor accepted
of Repentance, but required perfect Unsinning Obedience: But this new Covenant
of Grace, does promise forgiveness of sins upon repentance, and only requires
sincere Obedience.

Catechist. The tenor of the old Covenant was, Do this and live, requiring
such an Obedience as not to sin. But that of the new covenant is, If thou
believe with all thy heart, Thou shall be saved, accepting of sincere, though
imperfect Obedience: Such then is Gods part of the Covenant. What Ours is you
must learn by the third question in the Church Catechism.

Q. What did your Godfathers and Godmothers then for you?

A. They did promise and vow three things in my name, etc.

Questions and Answers explaining this, follow.
Q. Are these great Benefits of the new Covenant, which is sealed in Baptism,
conferred upon all that are Baptized?

A. Yes: but not absolutely, but upon condition they perform their part of the
Covenant.

Q. What is our part of the Covenant?

A. Repentance, Faith and Obedience.

Catechist. I pray you (good children) learn this great Lesson, and always bear
it in mind, That you can make no claim to any promise of God in his covenant,
unless you be faithful in performing the condition of Gods promises. For the
Covenant and promises of God are mutual, and it cannot be imagined that God can
be bound, and we free and at liberty to live as we list. And then mark how this
explication of our part of the Covenant agrees with what the latter end of your
Catechism teaches you to be the Grace signified by Baptism, for our Baptismal
Covenant engages us to a death unto sin, as we therein promise to renounce the
devil, the world, and the flesh, by Repentance; and unto a life unto
Righteousness, as we therein promise constancy in the true faith, and
answerable obedience to Gods Holy will in our conversations. I ask you then

Q. How does your Catechism express these, Repentance, Faith and Obedience?

A. Renouncing the Devil and all his works, the pomps and vanities of this
wicked world, and all the finful lusts of the flesh: Believing all the Articles
of the Christian Faith, and Keeping Gods Holy Will and Commandments, and
walking in the same all the days of my life.

Q. What is meant by renouncing the Devil?

A. Renouncing all familiarity and making Contracts with the Devil, whereof
Witches, Conjurers, and such as resort to them for help, are guilty; and all
doing homage or worship to the Devil, as do all Idolaters.

Catechist. That there is such a sin as Witchcraft, is plain in that Gods law
forbids and condemns it, Edod. 21.18. Deuteronomy. 18.10. Thou shall not suffer a
Witch to live: and all know it was Saul's sin that he went for council to the
Witch at Ender. And were there no such sin, (as some in this age too boldly
affirm) how comes St. Paul to reckon it amongst the works of the flesh? Gal.
5.20. And that all Idolaters do really worship the Devil, is manifest by what
the same Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.20. I say, the things which the Gentiles
sacrifice, they sacrifice to Devils and not to God.

Q. What is meant by renouncing the works of the Devil? and what are these
works?

A. All sins are works of the Devil, especially pride, lying, discord, murder,
envy and malice: now in Baptism we engage to resist all the Devils Temptations
to any sin whatsoever, and especially these, and to watch against them.

Catechist. This brand the Scriptures fix upon those sins especially, for by
pride, as the Apostle hints, 1 Timothy 3.6. the Devil fell into condemnation. For
Murder, John 8.44. ^e is a Murderer from the beginning. For Lying, the same Text
tells you, When the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks it of himself, for he is a
liar and the father of lies. And how much all envy is from him, is evident, as
by what St. James says, chap. 3.14, 15. If ye have bitter envying and strife
in your hearts, such w^s^om is earthly, sensual, Devilish, so, by this being
one of his odious Titles, the envyous man.

And so is all Malice from him, and all hatred, being a degree and fountain of
Murder. For 1 John 1.15. He that hates his brother is a marderer, and
whosoever (I add) tempts and enticeth another to sin, acts the Devils part, who
is the Tempter, and does his work for Him, for that is another of his odious
Titles, Math. 4.3. and in a word, for this cause must we avoid all sin, because
all sins are works of the Devil. For so spoke our Savior to the wicked Jews,
John 8.44. ye are of your Father the Devil, because his works you do. It is
good for you (children) to mind these and the like plain texts in Scripture,
and to treasure them up in your hearts. This then is one part and a great part
of our Baptismal engagement, even in all things as St. James exhorts, chap.
4.5. to resist the Devil, and to maintain continual war against him.

Q. What is meant by renouncing the world?

A. We engage in Baptism to resist all Temptations arising from the men and
things of the world, Riches, pleasures or honours^

Q. What is meant by renouncing the pomp^ and vanities of this wicked world?

A. We promise in Baptism not to set ou^ hearts on any thing in this world, nor
to follow its sinful ways, customs or fashions^ and to avoid all wicked Company.

Catechist. All this worlds Temptations are either from the Men, or things
thereof, as the former of these Answers teaches you. And as for the men
thereof, i^ we would avoid and resist all Temptations from them. The most
general direction that can be given is this. That we take heed of all evil
company, and I believe, there is hardly any better or more useful lesson can be
instilled into young and tender minds than this. For thousands are undone by
falling into bad and loose company, and what considering person is there who
laments not this, to see how many of good natures and excellent wits, are
utterly perverted into an extreme and Atheistical wickedness hereby? Of this
therefore the Holy Scriptures warn all men, and especially the younger sort, in
innumerable Texts, Ps. 1.1. Blessed is the man that walks not in the council
of the ungodly, nor stands in the way of sinners, nor sits in the seat of
the scornful. Prove. 1.10. My, son, if sinners entice thee consent thou not. If
they say come with us, let us lay wait for blood, etc. Cast in thy lot among
us, my son, walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their
paths, see the Text at large. And chap. 2.10. etc. he tells you how great a
lesson of Wisdom this is, i.e. of Religion. When Wisdom enters into thine
heart, etc. Discretion shall preserve thee, Understanding shall keep thee, to
^eliver thee from the way of the evil man, from the man that speaks froward
things, who leave the paths of Righte^usness, to walk in the ways of darkness.
Who rejoice to ^o evil, and delight in the frowardness of the wicked. Whose
ways are wicked and they froward in their paths. To ^eliver thee from the
strange woman, even from the stranger that flattereth with her words. For her
house enclineth unto ^eath, and her paths unto the dead. None that go unto her,
return again; neither take they hold of the paths of life. And in innumerable
other places does the wise man ^nculcate and urge this, too many to repeat
here. I must content my self with St. Paul's injunctions to all that will live
Godly in Christ Jesus, 1 Cor. 5.9. not to keep com^any with fornicators, and v.
11. nor with covetous, nor with ^dolaters, nor railers, nor extortioners, nor
with any bro^her that walks disorderly, as it is 2 These. 3.6. Concerning whom
he commands, in the name of the Lord Jesus, that we withdraw ourselves from
them. And in a word he exhorts, Ephesians. 5.11. that we have no fellowship with
the unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them, which must be by
refusing all familiarity with them, as well as by verbal reprehending them. As
for the things of this world, S. John tells us 1 Ep. 2.16. they may be all
reduced to these three, the lusts of the flesh, the lusts of ^he eye, and the
pride of life, i. e. Riches, pleasures and honors. And for resisting all
Temptations from them, I shall content my self with commending to your daily
^emembrance that one Text of his, chap. 3.15. Love not ^he world nor the things
of this world, for if any man love the world, the love of the father is not in
him. And for avoiding all sinful customs or fashions, I shall only mind you of
that general precept in Gods law, Erod. 23.2. Thou shall not follow a multitude
to do evil. For thus shall ye, as St. Peter says, 2 Ep. 2.20. escape the
pollutions of this world, and to all these you are bound by your Baptismal vow
to be Christ's faithful servants and soldiers. For as our Savior says, Math.
6.24. Ye cannon both serve God and Mammon, God and the world o^ the lusts
thereof, no nor your fleshly lusts, as the nex^ Answer teaches you.

Q. What is meant by renouncing all the sinful lusts of the flesh?

A. In Baptism we promise to mortify the flesh by fasting and prayer, and not
to suffer our fleshly lusts to reign in us so as to live in Gluttony,
drunkenness or any moral uncleanness.

Catechist. As St. Paul expresses it, Gal. 5.10. We must walk in the Spirit and
not fulfill the lusts of the flesh. 1 Cor. 5.17. we must follow his example, in
keeping the body under and bringing it in subjection, that it should not rebel
against the Spirit. Gal. ^.24. if we be Christ's, (as we all profess and promise
to be in Baptism) we must thus show it, by Crucifying the flesh with the
affections and lusts. We must as St. Peter exhorts, 1 Ep. 2.20. As Strangers
and Pilgrims abstain from fleshly lusts which war against the Soul. For this (I
beseech you, young men and maids) to think of, you cannot fulfill your fleshly
lusts, falling into either drunkenness or fornication, whether simple
fornication, or that before Marriage, or by any other wretched wicked manner of
life, but you will thereby become eminently guilty of a direct Breach of your
Baptismal Vow and Covenant with God. And in short I wish you with all my heart
to bear that text of St. Paul's continually in your minds, Romans 8.13. If ye live
after the flesh ye shall die, but if ye through the Spirit do mortify the
deeds of the body, ye shall live. So here is Life and death set before you, and
put to your choice.

Q. What is the life of a Christian in respect of all these?

A. It is an holy Spiritual Warfare; for we are in Baptism listed Soldiers
under Christ's banner, continually to fight against these our spiritual enemies.

Catechist. 1 Timothy 1.18. We must war a good warfare, holding faith and a good
Conscience. 1 Timothy 6.12. We must fight the good fight of Faith whereunto we are
called, having in Baptism professed this good profession before many witnesses,
even in the presence of God and in the face of the Congregation.

Q. By what means may we fight this good fight and warfare so as to overcome?

A. By the continual use of prayer, fasting, faith and watchfulness over our
hearts and senses, and constant care to walk according to Gods word.

Catechist. To all these Gods H. Word directs us with the greatest plainness.
To prayer with fasting. 1 These. 5.17. pray without ceasing, or continually. For
this Devil of fleshly lusts, Christ says Math. 17.21. goes not out but by
fasting and prayer. By these it is that the flesh is mortified and kept under,
Gal. 5.16. This I say therefore, Walk in the spirit, and ye shall not fulfill
the lusts of the flesh. For the flesh lusts against the spirit and the spirit
against the flesh, and these are contrary the one to the other. But therefore
Gal. 24. They that are Christ's indeed, do crucify the flesh with the
affections and lusts. And to these of fasting and prayer, S. John adds Faith, 1
Ep. 5.4. Whesoever is born of God over comes the world, and this is our
victory that overcomes the world, even our Faith. And our Savior adds
Watchfulness, Matthew. 26.41. Watch and pray, that ye enter not into temptation.
Luk 21.32, 33. Take heed to yourselves, lest at any time your hearts be
overcharged with surfeting and drunkenness, and the cares of this life, and
that day come upon you unawares; and 36. Watch ye therefore and pray always,
Mark 13.37. And what I say unto you, I say unto all, watch. And lastly, O! that
young people would often Meditate upon what David directs them to, even
circumspect walking according to Gods word! Psalm. 119.9. Wherewithal shall a
young man cleanse his ways, even by taking heed thereto according to Gods word.

These particulars make up that Repentance that you promised in Baptism, now,
Q. What is that Faith that you also promised?

A. To believe all the Articles of the Christian Faith, that is, All that
Christ taught, did, and suffered for our Salvation, as they are recorded in the
Gospel, and summed up in the Creed.

Q. Is it enough to assent to the Truth of those Articles? or what farther is
required to make my Faith acceptable to God?

A. I must so believe every Article, as to live answerably to what it teaches
us; for Faith is nothing worth without good works of obedience.

Catechist. Concerning the former Answer, I shall only remark to you that
Definition St. Luke gives of his Gospel, Acts 1.1. It is a Treatise (he says)
of all that Jesus began to do and to teach, and adding only, what he suffered
for the Salvation of sinners, you have then the true object of a Christians
faith and belief. Now them must we believe, that is, assent to them from our
hearts, profess them with our lips, and walk suitably to them in our lives. And
this is that Faith S. James teaches us, Chap. 2.17. He affirms That the Faith
which has no works is dead, being alone. For ver. 21. Was not Abraham, the
great pattern of Faith, the Father of the Faithful, justified by works, when he
offered up Isaac, thereby showing the truth of his Faith by ready obedience to
Gods Commandments? Ver. 26. By works was his Faith made perfect, and he
instanceth there in Rahabs faith also, ver. 25. and requires this therefore of
all that pretend to believe, Show me thy Faith by thy works, v. 18. For they it
is that must show it to be true, or nothing can show it. Every evil worker is a
real Unbeliever. Good works are Faiths witnesses, as the tree is known by its
fruits.

Q. What then is that Obedience you promised in Baptism?

A. To keep Gods Holy Will and Commandments, and walk in the same all the days
of my Life.

Catechist. It is therefore a constant effect of true faith in whomsoever it
is, it produces an Universal Obedience of the whole man to all Gods
Commandments, and that so constant, as to continue and persevere therein to our
lives end.

Church Catechism the fourth Question.
Q. Do thou not think that thou art bound to believe and do as they promised
for thee?

A. Yes verily, etc.

Explanatory Questions and Answers.

Q. How can Godfathers and Godmothers promise such great things, as these for
Children whom they bring to Baptism?

A. They only promise them in the Childrens names, till they be of age to take
it upon themselves; so the duty promised belongs to the Children, and
Godfathers and Godmothers engage only to see they be taught what they promised
for them, and to excite them to perform it by instructions, reproofs,
exhortations and prayers.

Catechist. The scope of this Answer is to state the matter, how far Sureties
stand engaged by what is done at Baptism. But to this are children chiefly to
take heed, that the things promised do chiefly lie on them to perform, though
not themselves, but others engaged it only in their names. For they are in
equity bound thereby. For Parents usually oblige their Children in civil
contracts and Bargains, and why not much more then, to what is their Bounden
duty before, as Creatures to their Lord, their Maker and Redeemer? Or who will
say but that it is in the Parents power to devote their Children to Gods
special service, as Hannah did Samuel, 1 Samuel 1.18. or as Timothy's parents may
well be supposed to have done Him, in that they taught Him the Scriptures of a
child; and without doubt, whatsoever children they be that renounce or do not
perform this their Baptismal Vow, though but made by others, in their name,
they incur the Guilt of Perjuty, and forfeit all the promises of God made to
them in his Covenant.

To prevent this therefore, and to make children (when grown up) sensible of
their having entered such a vow, and that they may now voluntarily take it upon
themselves and that before the Congregation, and thenceforth look upon
themselves as engaged by their own Act and deed, To this end, is this Question
intended, whose answer has diverse excellent parts, all remarkable, agreeable
to sound and Orthodox Doctrine, and to the H. Scriptures. I shall reduce them
to these Questions.

Q. Art thou then willing now to take this vow and promise upon thy self?

A. Yes verily.

Catechist. Mark here (good child) what thou professest, even to stand to the
vow made in thy name, and remember the Text, Eccles. 5.4. Better never vow,
than not perform what thou have vowed.

Q. How shall thou ever be able to do those things, being by nature so prone to
all evil, and averse to all Good?

A. I shall be able to do them through Christ strengthening me, therefore I say,
(and by Gods help so I will.)

Catechist. Thus is every child taught modestly to declare his Resolution in
the words of St. Paul, Phil. 4.13. and it much concerns you and all men to be
humbly sensible of what the same Apostle says, Romans 7.18. In me, that is, in
my flesh dwells no good thing. And that our Savior says expressly, John
15.5. I am the Vine, ye are the branches: He that abides in me, and I in him,
the same brings forth much fruit: for without me ye can do nothing. And
because this help shall not be wanting to any that will sincerely endeavor it,
therefore does the Apostle, Phil. 2.12, 13. hereby enforce his exhortation,
work out your salvation with fear and trembling; for it is God that works in
you both to will and do of his good pleasure. As if he had said, take heed to
yourselves that you make use of Gods help, while you may have it, work
yourselves, while God works with, and in you.

Q. What art thou better for being baptized, more than those that never were
baptized?

A. This being Gods own Ordinance for washing away Original sin, and admitting
men into Covenant with God: I am thereby called into a state of Salvation
through Christ, for which therefore I heartily thank God my heavenly father.

Catechist. By this Answer a child is well taught to be deeply sensible, and to
declare himself to be so, that he is in a much better Condition then he was
before, or than they are who never were Baptized. For who can deny that Baptism
is Christ's own ordinance for washing away sin, and admitting him into Covenant
with God? And what is this but a state of Salvation by Christ? there being as
S. Peter says, Act. 4.12. No salvation to be had by any other, no other name
given under heaven whereby we must be saved, but only the name of our Lord
Jesus Christ. For this therefore their being brought thus into a state of
Salvation, Holy Church very laudably teaches her children to give public
thanks, according to that in Psalm. 8.2. Out of the mouths of babes and
sucklings God has ordained praise.

Q But what if you should fall off from, or renounce your Baptism as many do?

A. Then shall I be much worse for being Baptized. This Apostasy will aggravate
my Damnation.

Catechist. True: for as Matthew. 10.21. He only that endures to the end shall
be saved, so Matthew. 12.40. Woe unto them whose latter end is worse than their
beginning, who, (as the Apostle Heb. 10.30. expresses Apostasy,) draw back to
the perdition of their Souls.

Q. What means must you then use to prevent this?

A. I will pray continually that God will give me his Grace, that I may
continue in the same unto my lives end.

Catechist. And I beseech and exhort you, Good Children, learn thus to pray
betimes, and exercise your selves in prayer daily, in some or other good forms
of prayer for this great thing that you may continue in Christ's words, and so
be his Disciples indeed, John 8.29. Ask, and seek, and knock, as your Savior
teaches you, by prayer, by continual prayer, and he assures you then of the
help of his Holy Spirit to enable you to keep your Baptismal Vow, that having
entered into the way of life you shall never forsake it, and of this he assures
you by an excellent similitude which you cannot choose but understand, Luke
11.13. If your natural parents be ready to give you bread, and clothing, and
all good things you stand in need of, upon your begging them, How much more
will your Heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them that ask it?

Q. What are the General Heads of Catechism?

A. The Creed, the Decalogue, the Lords prayer, and the Doctrine of the
Sacraments.

Catechist. I would bespeak you in St. Peter's words, you and the whole
Congregation, 2 Pet. 1.2, 13. I say unto you I will not be negligent to put you
always in remembrance of these things, although I may hope many of you know
them already and are established in the Truth. For even they that know them
already, have yet great need to be put continually in remembrance of them, and
therefore I think it not only meet, but also necessary, to stir you up by
putting you in remembrance of them, as long as I am in this Tabernacle, as long
as I live, that you may be always thinking of them, and never forget them.
Credenda, Agenda, Oranda, What you must believe, what you must do and practice,
and what you must pray for, and Gods Covenant and Promises sealed to you in the
Sacraments, these are the great things in Christian Doctrine, necessary to be
known, that you may be saved, and upon these four General Heads depend all the
Questions in your Catechism.

Either by way of Introduction, showing you when, by whose means, upon what
terms and conditions you became Christians, together with the great Benefits
that belong to you as Christians, if your conversations be such as becomes the
Gospel, and the Profession of Christianity, and those things you have had and I
hope have learnt in our Explanation of the four first Questions and their
Answers: or else they serve to Connect and join together the great Doctrines
taught you in the Catechism in an orderly Method for the help of your Memories,
or to help you to a clear and full understanding of them. To come then to the
main points to be learnt by Catechism, I ask you in the first place

Q. Why is the Creed the first part of Catechism?

A Because to believe aright is the very ground work of all Religion: and then
must I show my believing heartily by my good works of Obedience.

Catechist. Yea, so it is certainly, A right belief is the Foundation of
Religion. Thereforewhen the Jailer asked Paul and Silas, Act. 16.31. Sirs, what
shall I do to be saved? To this they directed him in the first place, Believe
in the Lord Jesus, and thou shall be saved, thou and thine house. But then, it
is a lesson I would take all occasions to teach you, That there is no resting
in a dead Faith without good works of Obedience. And for this time I only offer
to you for proof hereof, the tenor of our Saviors Commission to his Apostles,
when he sent them forth to convert the world, Matthew. 28.19, 20. He bad them,
whomsoever they should by Baptism admit into the Church and the Confession of
Christianity, to teach them to observe all things whatsoever he had commanded
them. And you have an eminent instance of the necessary Conjunction of
Obedience with Faith in that grand Doctrine of Christianity, that of the
Trinity, into which we are expressly Baptized, as the next Questions and their
Answers instruct you.

Q. Which is the great Fundamental in the Faith of Christians?

A. The Doctrine of the Trinity, that is, to believe in God the Father as
Creator, in God the Son as Redeemer, and in God the Holy Ghost as Sanctifier;
This is the Grand Mystery in Christianity.

Catechist. In my mind your Church-Catechism propounds this Doctrine with a
very becoming Gravity, and no man can deny this Doctrine so propounded, but he
must withal deny and reject plain Scripture.

Q. In the first place then, Rehearse the Articles of thy Belief.

A. I Believe in God, etc.

Q. What do thou chiefly learn in these Articles of thy Belief?

A. First I learn to believe in God the F. etc.

Catechist. Whosoever will own himself a Christian, He must profess his
Christian Faith in this tenor. To believe in God first as Creator, who made me
and all the world, according to that, 1 Cor. 8.6. To us there is but one God
the Father of all things, and we in him, and one Lord Jesus Christ by whom are
all things, and we by him. (2) In God the Son our L. Jesus Christ as Redeemer,
who redeemed me and all Mankind. For 1 Timothy 1.15. This is a faithful saying and
worthy of all acceptance, that Jesus Christ came into the world to save
sinners, 1 Timothy 2.5, 6. There is one God and one Mediator between God and man,
The man Christ Jesus, who gave himself a ransom for all to be testified in due
time. (3) In God the Holy Ghost as Sanctifier, who Sanctifies me and all the
elect people of God. For 2 These. 2.13. Whosoeve are chosen to Salvation it is
through Sanctification of the spirit and belief of the Truth.

Now you are taught in your Answer to my next Question, what an influence this
Doctrine of the Trinity has to good life and obedience, if it be believed
aright, and I shall have occasion hereafter to prove every particular in it by
the Scriptures. For the present therefore I shall content my self with hearing
you rehearse it.

Q. In what manner must we believe in these persons?

A. So as to pay each person his respective Duty: for example, to love, fear
and serve God the Father, as my great Creator and most Gracious preserver; To
trust in God the Son and obey his Gospel, as my only Lord and Savior; and to
follow the motions and directions of God the Holy Ghost, and to make Use of his
Grace and Assistance, as my Guide and Sanctifier and Comforter.

Catechist. That you may well understand your Belief as a Christian, and
particularly what you profess to believe of each person in the Blessed Trinity,
and every word in it, I ask you in the first place.

Q. Why do you say, I Believe, rather than we, or they believe?

A. Because, Though the prayers of others may avail much, yet every man must be
saved by his own Faith.

Catechist. And Think not slightly of this lesson, for it levels directly
against the Papists implicit Faith. We are often taught to pray for one
another, saying, Our Father which art in Heaven, Give us, and forgive us, etc.
as S. James says, chap. 5.6. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much, i. e. for others as well as for himself, for of such prayer he
there speaks. But no man can believe for any but himself, Habak. 2.4. By his
Faith shall the just live. i.e. lead his life here according to Gods will
revealed in his word, and so be saved at last for ever. So is every one
therefore by his Creed taught to say, not we believe, for others, but I
Believe, for himself, as the man in the Gospel whose Son was dumb, Mat. 9.17,
23. Lord I believe, Lord, help mine unbelief.

Q. In whom do thou believe?

A. In God only.

Catechist. Believing in, is more then bare believing, for besides Credence or
Assent, it implies Trust and Affiance, and is a Divine Honor proper to God
only, and therefore we say in the Creed, I believe in God, we do not say alike,
I believe in the Holy Gatholick Church, but I believe the Holy Catholic
Church. For Cursed is the man that trusts in man, and makes flesh his arm,
and whose heart departs from the Lord, Jer. 17.5. And therefore Christ
avoucheth himself to be God, when he said, John 14.1. Ye believe in God,
believe also in me.

Q. What is it to believe in God?

A. To believe there is a God, and to believe that what God says, is
undoubtedly true, and to depend upon him, in Hope, for the accomplishment of
his promises.

Catechist. The First Principle in Religion (against Atheists) is that there is
a God, Heb. 11.6. He that comes to God must believe that he is, and that he is
a Rewarder of them that diligently seek him. And the next Principle is the
certainty of his Word, That it is as Gold tried seven times in the fire, Psalm.
12.6. For Numb. 23.19. He is not as man, that he should lie. Luke 16.17. It is
easier for heaven and earth to pass, than one jot or tittle of his Word to
fail. And then from these we infer the safety of trusting in him, for the
fulfilling of his promises. For Heb. 11.23. Faithful is he that has promised,
who also will perform. We may therefore take up the Prophet Micahs words, chap.
4.5. All people walk every one in the name of his God, But we will walk in the
name of the Lord our God, for ever.

Q. How many Gods are there?

A. One God only, therefore I profess to believe in God Singularly, and not in
Gods.

Catechist. You know what the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 8.4. The Heathens have Gods
many, and Lords many, but we know they are all but Idels, and an Idol is
nothing, and therefore to us Christians, There is no other God but One, Ephesians.
4.6. One God and Father of all, who is above all, and through all, and in you
all.

Q. How is this One God distinguished?

A. Into three Persons, God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost.

Catechist. These three Persons in the Godhead were apparently distinguished in
Christ's Baptism at the river Jordan. For the Father spoke from heaven, saying,
This is my Beloved Son, and the H. Ghost descended upon him like a Dove. And so
are they manifestly distinguished in our Baptism. For we are expressly Baptized
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. And S. John 1
Ep. 5.7. affirms both the distinction of the persons, and their Unity of
Essence, saying, There be three that bear record in Heaven, The Father, the
Word, and the spirit, and these three are one. More I need not to say of this
great Mysterious Doctrine at this time, whosoever would better understand it, let
him study the Creed of S. Athanasius. Let us now see what the Apostles Creed
teaches us to believe of each person in this Blessed Trinity.

Q. What do thou believe of the First person?

A. That he is God the Father Almighty, maker of Heaven and Earth.

Q. God the Father; whose Father is he?

A. The Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and ours in him.

Catechist. Christ is the only begotten Son of God, Joh. 1.14. And by this
Title is God especially owned and honored by us Christians. Romans 15.6. We are
with one mind and one mouth, to glorify God, the Father of our Lord Jesus
Christ. And then, God is our Father, and we are his Sons by Adoption in Christ.
1 John 3 1. Beh^ld, what manner of Love the Father has bestowed up n^w, that
we should be called the Sons of God. For Ephesians. 1.5. We are predestined to the
Adoption of Children, by Christ Jesus. And as to his Sons, He has appointed us
an Inheritance. For Romans 8.11. If Sons, then heirs: Heirs of God, joint heirs
with Christ.

Q. What is God?

A. A most pure Spirit, a Being absolutely perfect.

Catechist. We have this definition of God from Christ's own mouth, John 4.24.
God is a spirit, having no bodily parts, or members, or passions, and all
whatsoever perfections and excellencies, are in him, and derived from him.

Q. What is the great Attribute of God?

A. Omnipotency or Almightiness, that is, that he can do whatever pleases him.

Catechist. So speaks the Psalmist, Ps. 135.6. Whatsoever the Lord pleases,
That does he in Heaven, and in Earth, and in all deep places. And hence Job
said, chapter 42.2. I know that thou can do every thing. For in his hand says
Jehoshaphat, 1 Chronicles. 20.6. is such power and might, that none is able to
withstand.

Q. What other Essential Attributes are there of God, besides Almightiness?

A. Eternity; that he neither has beginning, nor will have an end:
Immutability, that he changes not: Omnipresence, that he is in all places:
Omniscience, that he sees all things, and knows them perfectly: And the most
perfect Goodness and Holiness, that he is neither Author nor approver of evil.

Catechist. Let these Scriptures sink into your hearts for all these. Eternity,
for so the Heavenly Congregation sing, Rev. 4.8. Holy, Holy, Holy, Lord God
Almighty, which was, and which is, and which is to come. Immutability, Jam.
1.10. He is the Father of Lights, with whom is no variableness nor shadow of
turning. Heb. 13.8. He is the same yesterday, and to day, and for ever.
Omnipresence, for Am I a God at hand (says the Lord) and not a God afar of?
Jer. 23.24. Can any hide himself in secret places, that I should not see him?
says the Lord. Do not I fill heaven and earth? says the Lord. And of this
Attribute and perfection, the sweet singer of Israel thus descants, Psalm.
139.7, 8, 9. Whither shall I go from thy Spirit? and whither shall I flee from
thy presence? If I go up unto heaven, Thou art there: If I make my bed in hell,
thou art there also, If I take the wings of the morning, and dwell in the
uttermost parts of the sea, even there shall thy hand lead me, and thy right
hand shall hold me. And he there teaches us this lesson, that all, both young
and old, have this always in their minds, to restrain them from every sinful
thing, even when they are alone and in secret places, and no eye sees them,
That yet God always sees them, ver. 12. Even the darkness hides not from thee,
but the night is as clear as the day: darkness and light are both alike to
thee. And therefore whenever we are tempted to sin, and whatsoever convenience
of secrecy we may have for it, we should always say to ourselves, as Joseph did
to his Mistress, Genesis 39.9. How can I do this wickedness, and sin against God,
and that even in his sight? For Heb. 4.13. All things are naked and open in the
sight of him, with whom we have to do.

Now these same Texts, that prove Gods Omnipresence, they also prove his fourth
Attribute, Omniscience, That He sees, and knows all things. And as for the next
Attribute, His perfect Goodness, you may remember what your Savior said,
Matthew. 19.17. There is none Good, but one, that is God, i. e. None deserving
this Title of Good, in strictness, but he, Psalm. 119.6. He is Good, and does
Good, and that continually. And who that is wise will not love, and serve, and
strive to please so Good a God?

As for the last Attribute which I named, perfect Holiness, this the Heavenly
Inhabitants, the Cherubins and Seraphins adore continually, crying, Holy, Holy,
Holy is the Lord of hosts. The whole earth is full of his glory, Isa. 6.3. Rev.
4.8. And being Holy, he cannot be the Author of any Moral evil, of any evil of
sin, Jam. 1.13. Let no man say, when he is tempted, that he is tempted of God,
for God cannot be tempted to evil, neither tempts he any man. But every man
is tempted, when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed. Nor does he
approve, nor delight in any evil, but will surely visit it, Hab. 1.13. He is a
God of purer eyes than to behold iniquity. Psalm. 2.3. Thou art not a God that
have pleasure in wickedness, neither shall any evil dwell with thee. We
therefore that profess to believe in, and worship so Holy a God, must be Holy,
as he is Holy, in all manner of conversation and Godliness, 1 Pet. 1.15, 16. we
must with David, Psalm. 139.12. hate all sin, as God hates it with a perfect
hatred. These are the chief Divine Attributes and perfections, not excluded,
but implied in what the Creed expressly mentions, Almighty; now

Q. How did God manifest Himself Almighty?

A. By making of Heaven and Earth.

Q. What mean you by heaven and earth?

A. The whole world and all things therein.

Catechist. That of the Apostle, Col. 1.10. is full to the purpose, By him were
all things Created, that are in Heaven and in the Earth, whether they be
thrones or Dominions, or principalities, or powers, All things were created by
him.

Q. What mean you by making these?

A. Not only creating them, but also his Preservation and Providence, whereby
he Governs and disposes them.

Catechist. He is not only, as Joh. 2.10. intitles him, the preserver of men,
but David says also, Ps. 36.6. Thy mercy O Lord, is in the Heavens, thy
Faithfulness reaches unto the clouds, O Lord, thou preservest man and beast.
He preserves them, and he provides for them all, Psalm. 145.15. The eyes of all
wait upon thee, and thou give them their meat in due season. Thou openest
thine hand, and satisfiest the desire of every living thing. Yea, and he
Governs all the world, and all Actions and Accidents in it, Dan. 4.35. He does
whatsoever he will, in the Army of Heaven, and among the Inhabitants of the
Earth, and none can stay his Hand, or say unto him, What do thou? Even the
most Casual and Accidental things, are ordered and overruled by him, Prove.
16.33. The Lot is cast into the lap, but the whole Disposal thereof, is of the
Lord. Such is Gods providence, preserving, providing for, and governing and
disposing of all his Creatures.

Q. Of what matter did God make the world?

A. Of nothing.

Q. By what means did God make the world?

A. By his word only.

Catechist. See Heb. 11.3. Through Faith we understand, that the worlds were
formed by the Word of God, So that things which are seen, were not made of
things which do appear. For Genesis 1.3. He said, Let there be Light, and there
was light. And so of all the rest, Ps. 33.9. He spoke the word, and all was
done, He commanded and they stood fast.

Q. For what end did God make the world?

A. For his own Glory.

Catechist. For the glory of his Wisdom, Power, and Goodness; which therefore
we should Meditate upon with Isaac, when we view his innumerable Creatures, and
consider the operations of his hands. Hence that of Solomon, Prove. 16.4. The
Lord made all things for himself, even the wicked for the day of evil, i.e. to
manifest the glory of his justice in them.

Q. Which is Gods chief work, excelling all other Creatures?

A. Next to Angels, Mankind, and he made all the rest, for the use and Benefit
of man.

Catechist. The Psalmist admires this, Psalm. 8.4, 5, 6. Lord what is man that
thou art mindful of him? Thou have made him little lower than the Angels, and
crowned him with glory and honor. Thou made him to have Dominion over the
works of thine hands, and put all things under his feet. All sheep and Oxen,
yea, and the beasts of the field, the Fowls of the air, and the Fishes of the
Sea, and whatsoever passes through the paths of the Sea.

Q. In what estate did God at first make man?

A. In a state of Innocence, Holy and Happy.

Q. How then came sin into the world?

A. By Adams fall.

Catechist. These and the following Questions and Answers, are necessary to
show you how all mankind came to stand in need of Jesus Christ, the second
person in the Blessed Trinity, coming in the flesh to be their Redeemer, Eccl.
7.29. This I have found out, says Solomon, That God made man upright, but they
sought out many inventions. The History whereof you have in the second and
third Chapters of Genesis. The sum whereof is this. God gave our first Parents
a special Commandment for the proof of their Obedience, viz. not to eat of the
Tree of Knowledge of good and evil, with this Sanction, In the day thou eatest
thereof, Thou shall die the death. But they listened to the Temptations of the
Serpent, the Devil, who hating God, and envying the happiness of man, belied
God, saying, they should not die, but only God forbad this fruit, lest they
should be as Gods knowing good and evil, and to him they hearkened, and so fell
from God, and from that state of innocence wherein he created them, by sinning
against him.

Q. How can Adams fall concern his posterity?

A. The Covenant being made with Adam, not only for himself, but also for his
posterity, therefore all Mankind descending from him by Ordinary Generation,
sinned in him and fell with him in his first Transgression.

Q. What Covenant spoke you of now?

A. The old Covenant of works made with Adam before his Fall, as a public
person, representing all mankind, that should descend of his Loins.

Q. Christ Jesus descended from Adam; Did he then fall in him?

A. No: for he descended from Adam by an extraordinary Generation, and so took
our nature, without the sinfulness and corruption of our nature.

Catechist. I pray mark that expression well, (all mankind that descended from
Adam by ordinary Generation) for this is purposely intended to except Christ,
who was conceived in the Virgins Womb in an extraordinary manner, by the power
of the Holy ghost, and born of her, being still a pure Virgin, having no
Knowledge of man, so that taking our nature in an extraordinary way of
Generation, he received our nature free from, and Untainted with the sinfulness
and corruption of our nature. But all others descending from Adam in an
ordinary way of Generation, are inwrapped in his Guilt, as their common parent,
Head, and Representative. So that Psalm. 14.2. Amongst all mankind, There is not
one Righteous, no not one: for Ps. 51.7. All are conceived in sin, and born in
iniquity. Romans 5.12. By one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin,
and so death passes upon all men, in that all have sinned, i. e. By him, in
whom, (as it is in the Margent) all have sinned. Ver. 18. By the offense of
one, judgment came upon all to Condemnation.

Q. In what estate then are all men besides Jesus Christ, that are born of Adam
since the fall?

A. Guilty of sin, and prone to all sin.

Catechist. Guilty of Sin. For Romans 5.19. By one man's Disobedience, many are
made sinners. And then (which is that corruption of nature I spoke of) they are
prone to all sin, and I add, averse to all good. For Adam begat sons and
daughters after his own Image, The Image of Corruption. A corrupt Tree will
have corrupt fruit. Hence that unanswerable question of Job 14.4. Who can bring
a clean thing out of an unclean? Not one.

Q. What Dangers are we liable to, by reason of this Original Guilt and
proneness to sin in our nature, and the actual sins of our lives?

A. To all Gods judgments in this Life, and Eternal torments in that to come.

Catechist. For Ephesians. 2.3. We are children of Wrath, one as well as the other.
And Romans 6.23. The Wages of sin is Death, Death Temporal, Death Spiritual, and
Death Eternal. And this Death (as the Apostle says in the forequoted Text,)
has passed upon all men, for that all have sinned; And as it is Romans 3.23. and
come short of the glory of God.

Q What means have we to be delivered from these sins and Dangers to which for
sin we are liable?

A. Only by our Savior and Redeemer, the second person in the Blessed Trinity.

Catechist, Thus are we orderly led to what the Creed teaches us to believe
concerning him, Ps. 89.19. God laid help upon one that is mighty, and exalted
one chosen out of the people. And this One so chosen, Mighty to save, so loved
the world, that he freely and willingly undertook it, saying, Psalm. 40.7. Lo, I
come, it is written of me, I come to do thy will, O God. And from hence is he
called, The Angel of the Covenant, Mal. 3.1. For he came to found and establish
a new Covenant betwixt God and man, and to work a reconciliation, to found a
remedying Covenant after the former was broken and abolished, and so became he
a Savior of men, The Author of Eternal Salvation to all them that obey him,
Heb. 5.9.

Q. What is the name of our Savior?

A. Jesus Christ.

Q. What do those names signify?

A. Jesus is a Hebrew name signifying as much as Savior, and Christ is Greek,
and signifies (as the word Messiah does) a person Anointed to the threefold
office of Prophet, Priest, and King.

Catechist. The Angel appointed him his Name Jesus to Joseph and Mary at the
Annunciation, Mat. 1.20. His name shall be called Jesus, for he shall save his
people from their sins. And then they, When the eight days were accomplished
for the circumcising of the child, so called him, being Sir named by the Angel
before he was conceived in the Womb, Luke 2.21. As for his other name ( Christ,
or in Hebrew, Messiah) it is equivalent to our Sirnames, and signifies his
Office, being in English, as much as The Anointed one. For God Anointed him
with the Holy ghost, the oil of gladness, above his Fellows, Ps. 45.7. And as
it was proper to three sorts of persons to be Anointed, Kings, and Priests, and
Prophets, so was he anointed King, Ps. 2.6. Yet have I set my King upon my Holy
Hill of Sion. And Priest, Heb. 6.20. He was made High Priest, after the order
of Melchizedek. And Prophet, for of him Moses spoke, Acts 2.45. A Prophet shall
the Lord your God raise up unto you of your Brethren like unto me, Him shall ye
hear. And in fullfilling these offices, of making Atonement for our sins, by
the sacrifice of himself upon the Cross, and continual intercession for us, as
a Priest; teaching us his Fathers Will for our Salvation, as a Prophet; and
ruling and protecting us as a King, consists that great Salvation, which he, as
our Jesus, wrought and workt for us, and which is offered to us in his Holy
Gospel. Now being thus set forth to us by his Names, next he is described to us
in the Creed by his Natures.

Q. What is Jesus Christ for his person, God only, or Man only, or both God and
man?

A. Both God and man: Man, that he might be capable of suffering in the same
nature wherein we had sinned: and God, that he might be able to give full
satisfaction for our sins.

Catechist. It is written, that without shedding of blood there can be no
remission, Heb. 9.22. For so had God threatened, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou
sinnest, thou shall dye the death. As therefore God would be true to his Word,
it was necessary for our Redeemer to be man, that he might be capable of
suffering death for our sins, in the same nature wherein they were committed.
And as necessary it was for him to be God, that he might be able to satisfy;
That his death and sufferings might by the Dignity of his person be of infinite
value, to satisfy the infinite debt of our sins to Gods justice. For Heb.
10.4. It was not possible, that the blood of Bulls and Goats offered in
sacrifice, should take away sins: But all the virtue they had, was as Types and
Figures of the precious Blood of Christ the Son of God, as of a Lamb without
spot and without blemish, 1 Pet. 1.18. So, God he must be, whosoever will
undertake to satisfy for our sins, by suffering for them, and God he was, who
purchased his Church with his own blood, Act. 20.28.

Q. How prove you by your Creed then, that Jesus Christ is true God?

A. I believe Him to be His, to wit, Gods only Son, our Lord.

Catechist. The Son of God must needs be God: God of God, very God of very God.
Now God owned him for his Son, by a voice from heaven at his Baptism, Matthew.
3.17. This is my beloved son, in whom I am well pleased. Now to anticipate an
Objection, the next Question and Answer shows how our being Gods Sons, differs
from His being so. And thereof the Apostle Heb. 1.1. compared with chap. 2.1,
3. gives a very remarkable application.

Q. Are not we also Sons of God, and how then is he Gods only Son, or how does
his being Gods Son, prove him to be God?

A. We are only Sons of God by Adoption in Christ: but Christ is Gods Son by
eternal Generation, He is Gods only begotten Son, very God of very God, as
really God of the substance of the Father, begotten before the World, as he was
Man of the substance of his Mother born in the World.

Catechist. 2 Timothy 1.13. Let us hold fast this form of sound words in Faith and
Love, which is in Christ Jesus, and always carry in mind the Apostles inference
from it, in the forequoted place. God who at sundry times, and in diverse
manners, spoke in times past to the Fathers by the Prophets, Has in these last
days spoken to us by his Son (as the Great Mediator between Him and us)
Therefore we ought to give the more earnest heed, to the things we hear, lest
at any time we let them slip. For if the word spoken by Angels was steadfast,
and every transgression and disobedience received a just recompense of reward,
How shall we escape if we neglect so great Salvation, which at the first began
to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed to us, by them that heard him? Let
us pass on then to the other proof of Christ's Divinity.

Q. How did Christ become our Lord?

A. He both made us, and redeemed us with his precious blood, and we have in
Baptism given up ourselves to him, to be his Servants.

Catechist. Ps. 100.3. He made us, and not we ourselves. So is he our Lord, as
we are his Creatures. For John 1.3. All things were made by him, and without
him was nothing made that was made. And being lost he also redeemed us, so that
he is our Lord by right of purchase: 1 Cor. 6.20. He bought us with a price,
therefore we are not our own, but his; therefore is he our Lord. And being so
our Lord, he is certainly God: for who but God is King of Kings, and Lord of
Lords, Rev. 1.6. and who but God can be called by that incommunicable Name of
God, Jehova, and so is Christ, Hos. 1.7. I will have mercy upon them, and will
save them by the Lord, Jehova, and not by how or shield. O what cause have we
then, to own him for our Lord, by devoting our selves to his Service! Cast we
then our eyes upon the other Nature of his.

Q. How prove you by your Creed, that Jesus Christ is true man?

A. I believe him to be Conceived in the Womb, by the Holy Ghost, born of the
Virgin Mary.

Catechist. An answer containing what the Apostle, 1 Timothy 3.16. Calls the great
Mystery of Godliness, God manifested in the flesh. Nay, John 1.14. The Word
made flesh. and thus runs the Argument to prove Christ's Manhood, He had an
Human Conception, and Human Birth; was conceived like other men, and was born
of a woman as other men are, and therefore he was Man. For further
understanding of all its particulars, I ask you,

Q. Had Christ any natural Father as Man?

A. No.

Q. By what power then was he Conceived in, and born of a woman?

A. By the power of the Holy ghost.

Catechist. Of this we are assured by the Angel which said unto Mary, Luke
1.31. Thou shall conceive and bear a Son, etc. and when she demanded How can
this be, seeing I know not a man? he answered her, ver. 35. The Holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the Highest shall overshadow thee,
Therefore that Holy thing which shall be born of thee, shall be called the Son
of God. So, by the Blessed Virgins protestation, it is evident, she knew not a
man, therefore had her Son no natural Father.

Q. What do you learn from that?

A. That taking our nature of her substance in such an extraordinary way, the
Holy Ghost purifying it, He took it without sin, being to suffer for our sins.

Catechist. For Heb. 7.26. Such must our High Priest be, Holy, harmless, and
undefiled, separate from sinners. He must have no sin of his own, who undertook
to satisfy Gods Justice for our sins.

Q. Who was this Virgin Mary?

A. She was of the tribe of Judah, of which Tribe the Messiah was to come.

Catechist. That she was of that Tribe appears by Christ's pedigree or
Genealogy, Mat. 1. and Luke 3. as also by Joseph's and Mary's going to be taxed
at Bethlehem Judah, for this very reason, because they were of that Tribe, Luke
2.3, 4.

Q. How then do you prove Christ to be the true Messiah?

A. All the Prophecies were exactly fulfilled in him, as to his Tribe, parents,
place and time of Birth, and his manner of Life, and Death, and Resurrection.

Catechist. The Messiah, the Savior of the world was foretold to come of the
Tribe of Judah, of the root of Jesse and house of David, Luke 1.27. to be
conceived of a Virgin, Isa. 7.14. Behold a Virgin shall conceive, etc. and for
the place, to be born in Bethlehem. Micah 5.2. And thou Bethlehem in the land
of Judah, art not the least of the Princes of Judah, for out of thee shall come
a Governor that shall rule my people Israel. And for the Time, to come as
Shile, when the Scepter should be departed from Judah, Gen 49.10. And after the
Seventy weeks was determined, by Daniel, ch 9.24. and while the second Temple
stood, by the Prophet Haggai, chap. 2.9. which within Forty years after
Christ, was demolished, so that not one stone was left upon another. And the
purity of his life, and the cruelty and violence offered him in his death, are
clearly spoken of by the Prophet Isaiah, chap. 53. throughout. And his
Resurrection by the Psalmist, Ps. 16.11. So that all things came to pass
according to the Prophecy. Learn this argument therefore against all Jews and
Infidels Nothing befell Christ which was not foretold, and nothing was foretold,
which was not exactly fulfilled in Christ, therefore he was certainly the true
Christ or Messiah which was to come into the world.

Thus have you what your Creed teaches you to believe, of your Saviors Names
and Natures. Now see and learn what his work of Salvation and Redemption was
which he wrought, or the manner of his working it.

Q. How did Christ effect the great work of our Redemption?

A. By his lowly Humiliation, wherein he showed the Truth of his Manhood: and
by his Glorious Exaltation, wherein did shine the bright rays of his Godhead.

Catechist. You have both these in one notable Text of St. Paul's, Phil. 2.6, 7,
8, 9. Being in the form of God, He thought it no robbery to be equal with God,
But made himself of no reputation, and took upon him the form of a servant, and
was made in the likeness of men, and being found in fashion as a man, He
humbled himself, and became obedient unto death, even the death of the Cross;
Wherefore God also has highly exalted him, andt.

Q. Wherein consists Christ's lowly Humiliation?

A. In that he suffered under Pontius Pilate, was Crucified, dead and buried,
and descended into Hell for us.

Q. Wherein consists Christ's Glorious Exaltation?

A. In that he by his own power rose again the third day from the dead,
ascended into Heaven, and sits at the right Hand of God the Father Almighty,
and from thence shall come again to judge all, both quick and dead.

Q. When did Christ suffer?

A. It was when Pontius Pilate, the Roman Emperors Deputy, was Governor of
Judea.

Catechist. Matthew. 27.1, 2. The Chief Priests and the Elders of the people,
took council together to put him to death. And when they had bound him, they
led him away, and delivered him to Pentius Pilate the Governor.

Q. Why is this expressed in the Creed?

A. To show it was now the set time foretold for the Messiah's coming, The
Scepter was now, according to Jacobs Prophecy, departed from Judah.

Catechist. The Jews had now been Sixty years subject to the Roman Emperor,
and his Governors, or Deputies, so that Jacobs Prophecy concerning the time of
the Shilo's coming, was now exactly fulfilled.

Q. Was it necessary for Christ to suffer? and to suffer death?

A. Yes: Both Types and Prophecies foretold it, and our sins deserved it, and
he must die to destroy death, and to satisfy the Justice of God for our sins.

Catechist. The killing of the Sacrifices under the Law, and the Paschal Lamb
slain, were Eminent Types of Christ's death. The Prophet Isaiah clearly foretold
His being cut off out of the land of the Living, and all the Prophets wrote,
that the Son of man should suffer many things, 1 Pet. 1.11. Our sins deserved
death, the wages of sin being death, Romans 6.23. He therefore must die for them,
as a sacrifice to Gods Justice, who undertook for us, 2 Cor. 5.21. He who knew
no sin, became sin for us, i. e. a Sacrifice for sin, and no other way but by
death, could He destroy death, and him that has the power of death, the Devil,
Heb. 2.13.

Q. What manner of Death did Christ suffer?

A. The accursed death of the Cross. To free us from the Curse, He became a
Curse for us.

Catechist. Isaac's bearing the Wood for the Sacrifice, and the Brazen Serpent
being lifted up upon the Pole, were Types of this sort of death: and not a Bone
of the Paschal Lamb to be broken when it was slain, and the Prophecies of
piercing his hands and his feet, plainly pointed at the manner how Christ was
to die, even by Crucifying, for these were circumstances usual therein. And
lastly, let us always remember that of the Apostle, Gal. 3.13. that it being an
accursed death, (for it is written, Cursed is every one that hangs on a tree,
Deuteronomy. 21.23.) He thereby redeemed us from the Curse, by being made a curse for
us.

Q. Why was Christ buried?

A. To sweeten the Grave for us, and to Conquer death in his own proper place
and Dominion.

Catechist. So was it foretold, Hos. 13.14. I will ransom them from the power
of the Grave; I will redeem them from death. O death, I will be thy plague, O
Grave, I will be thy Destruction. And hence the Apostle's Triumph, 1 Cor.
15.56, 57. O Death, where is thy sting? O Grave, where is thy Victory? The
sting of death is sin, and the strength of sin is the Law, but thanks be to
God, who has given us the victory through our Lord Jesus Christ.

Q. How did Christ descend into Hell?

A. All men grant he continued in the state of the dead for a time, both as to
his body and as to his Soul, and did so descend into Hell, as to free me and
all Believers from Hell.

Catechist. Of this the Psalmist spoke in the Spirit of Prophecy most clearly,
saying, Psalm. 16.10. Thou will not leave my Soul in Hell, and the Apostle, Act.
2.31. quotes it, and applies it to Christ, so that it is certain he descended
into Hell, but for the manner how, there have been great Controversies about
it, and the safest resolution is, to adhere to what all grant, till God shall
clearly reveal it to us.

Q. What use must we make of Christ's sufferings, and his death?

A. To hate sin, which caused Christ's death in so cruel a manner; to admire
Christ's Love in thus dying, that we may live, and to die to sin as Christ dyed
for sin.

Catechist. We must as the Prophet Zachary teaches, chap. 12.10. Look upon him
whom we have peirced, i. e. by our sins, for they were Christ's Murderers, His
enemies but the Instruments thereof. We must therefore look upon him with tears
of unfeigned repentance for them: and woe be to them who by repeating their
sins, and a continued Impenitency therein, crucify the son of God afresh! Heb.
6.6. On the contrary therefore, Let us consider and admire Christ's love in
dying for us: for John 15.13. Greater Love has no man than to lay down his
life for his friend. But Romans 5.8. God commended his love to us, that while we
were yet sinners, and so his enemies, Christ died for us. And O! therefore as
he died for sin, so let us die unto sin, and no longer live therein. Romans 6.11.
Let us reckon ourselves to be dead unto sin, but alive unto righteousness. For
1 Pet. 2.24. He his own self bare our sins in his own body on the tree, that we
being dead unto sin, should live unto righteousness. And thus by his stripes we
shall be healed. Thus have you now the doctrine of Christ's lowly Humiliation.
Now I pray consider well also the several steps of his Glorious Exaltation.

Q. Did Christ, being dead, remain under the power of Death?

A. No, he rose again from the dead.

Catechist. Psalm. 16.10. God did not suffer his Holy one to see corruption.
Romans 6.9. Death could have no Dominion over him, at least not keep it; but he
Conquered it in its proper hold the Grave, and as many eye witnesses assure us,
He rese again according to the Scriptures, 1 Cor. 15.4.

Q. When did he rise again?

A. The third day according to the Prophecy.

Catechist. Himself had expressly foretold his enemies the Jews, that after
three days he would rise again, Mark 14.12. and they were sensible of it, that
their malice would be apparent if he should do so, and his cause would be
glorious before all the world: The latter error (they said) would be worse
than the first, Matthew. 27.64. Therefore they set a watch, and did all they
could to procure it. But maugre the policy of Earth and Hell, of men and
Devils, Christ rose again indeed, and that at the precise time which he
foretold, The third day. No sooner, to show that he was really dead: No later,
lest his Body should corrupt, should see corruption.

Q. Who raised him up?

A. Himself: and this his rising by his own power proved him to be God, and
that he had fully satisfied for our sins.

Catechist. He told them beforehand that he both could and would do it, John
10.18. I have power to lay down my life, and I have power to take it again.
John 2.19. Destroy this temple, and in three days I will raise it up, Speaking
of the temple of his body. Now hereby he manifestly proved himself to be the
Son of God, and God. Romans 1.4. He was declared to be the Son of God with power,
according to the spirit of Holiness, by the Resurrection from the dead. And it
was an infallible token of Gods justice being fully satisfied for our sins.
Romans 4.25. He was delivered for our offenses, and raised again for our
Justification.

Q. How long stayed he on Earth after his Resurrection?

A. Forty days.

Q. What to do?

A. To teach his disciples the things of his Kingdom, that is, to Commission
and instruct them how to gather and fettle his Church throughout the World.

Catechist. Act. 1.3. He showed himself to his Apostles alive after his passion
by many infallible proofs, being seen of them Forty days, and speaking of the
things pertaining to the Kingdom of God; which is his Church. And for the
gathering thereof, we find Matthew. 28.19, 20. He gave them this Commission, Go,
Teach all Nations (or disciple all Nations) baptizing them in the Name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost: And for the instructing and
governing the Church so gathered, He then gave them this General direction,
teaching them to do whatsoever I have commanded you: And lo I am with you
always to the end of the world, is the gracious promise wherewith he then
encouraged them in this work. And during this time it was that he called upon
Peter in special, but doubtless therein requiring it of all the other Apostles,
Peter love thou me? seed my sheep, Love thou me? feed my lambs, John 21.15,
16, 17.

Q. Whither went he after these Forty days?

A. He ascended into Heaven.

Q. What to do there?

A. To prepare a place for us, and continually to make intercession for us.

Catechist. Heb. 9.11, 12. Our High Priest entered into the most Holy place,
having obtained Eternal Redemption for us. Act. 1.19. While they were speaking
with him. Luke 24.50. While he blessed them, the Disciples beheld, and lo he
was taken up, and a cloud received him out of their sight. Now of this speaks
St. Ambrose's Song, called Te Deum, He opened the Kingdom of heaven to all
believers. For see what he himself said, John 14.2. In my fathers house are
many Mansions; I go to prepare a place for you, and if I go to prepare a place
for you, I will come again, and receive you to my self, that, where I am, ye
may be also. Wherefore (as the Apostle, Heb. 7.25. infers hence) He is able
to save to the uttermost them that come to God by Him, seeing he ever lives to
make intercession for us.

Q. What place has Christ now in Heaven?

A. He in our nature sits at the right hand of God.

Catechist. So himself foretold his enemies, Luke 22.69. Hereafter shall ye see
the Son of man sitting at the right hand of power. And hereof many Texts assure
us, 1 Cor. 3.1, 2. If ye be risen with Christ, seek those things which are
above, where Christ sits at the Right hand of God.

Q Has God any hands, either right hand or left?

A. No: God is a Spirit, and has neither bodily parts nor passions.

Catechist. So does Christ himself define God, Joh. 4.24. God is a Spirit. And
Luke 24.19. He thus describes a Spirit, that it has no bodily parts. Handle me
and see, for a Spirit has neither flesh nor bones as ye see me have.

Q. What mean you then by Christ's sitting at Gods right hand?

A. I mean his fullness of Glory and Majesty as God-man, with infinite power to
destroy his, and his Churches enemies.

Catechist. So he told his Disciples, Matthew. 28.18. All power is given to me in
Heaven and in Earth. Such power, that Psalm. 110.1. His enemies are his
footstool. Ephesians. 1.20. He is far above all principalities, and powers, and might
and Dominion, and every name that is named, both in this world, and the world
to come. For Act. 2.34, 35. Him whom they crucified, has God thus made, both
Lord and Christ.

Q. Will Christ ever come again from Heaven?

A. Yes: with Holy Angels, in great glory at the last day.

Q. What to do?

A. To judge all men, both them that are alive at his coming, and all them that
died from the beginning of the World.

Catechist. Hereof Enoch the Seventh from Adam Prophesied, Jude 14. Behold the
Lord comes with ten thousands of his Saints, to execute judgment. And so the
Angels told his Disciples at his Ascension into Heaven, Act. 1.11. Ye men of
Galilee, why stand ye gazing up into Heaven? This same Jesus whom ye have seen
go up into Heaven, shall so come as ye have seen him go into Heaven. 1 These.
4.16. The Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, with the voice
of the Archangel, and with the trump of God. And then, 2 Cor. 5.10. we must all
appear before the judgment seat of Christ. For Act. 17.31. God has appointed
a day, wherein he will judge the world in righteousness, by that Man whom he
has ordained, whereof he has given assurance to all men, in that he raised
him up from the dead. And see the reason why he has ordained him to this great
office in the next Answer.

Q. Why will God commit this judgment unto Christ?

A. To glorify his Son, who was so much vilified upon Earth; and it is the
Comfort of true Believers, that their Savior shall be their Judge.

Q. What manner of judgment shall it be?

A. A most strict Account must be given of all men's thoughts, words and
actions, how they have agreed with, or been contrary to his word, and none can
escape, nor hide their sins from his Knowledge.

Catechist. Read often I pray you what description the Apostle gives hereof, 1
These. 2.3. That day of the Lord shall come as a thief in the night, for when
men shall say, peace and safety, then comes sudden destruction upon them, as
travel upon a woman with child, and they shall not escape. Matthew. 25.31 When
the Son of man shall come in his glory, with his Holy Angels, then shall he sit
in his Throne of Glory, and before him shall be gathered all Nations, and he
shall separate them one from another, as a Shepherd divides his sheep from the
goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, but the goats on the left,
Then shall the King say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, etc. But ver. 41. To them on his left hand, He will say, Depart from me
ye cursed, etc. And ver. 46. These shall go into Everlasting punishment, but
the Righteous into Life Eternal.

Q. What use are we to make of these several parts of Christ's Exaltation?

A. To rise again with Christ unto all newness of life, to set our affections
on things above, where Christ is, To serve him with fear, because all power is
given him, and to judge ourselves daily, and to watch over all our thoughts,
words, and actions, as they that must give account thereof at Christ's tribunal.

Catechist. All these the Scripture splainly teach us, Romans 6.4. We are buried
with Christ by Baptism, that like as Christ was raised up from the dead by the
glory of his Father; even so we also should walk in newness of life. And this
is the proper use to be made of Christ's Resurrection: for it follows there,
having been planted together in the likeness of his death, we shall be also
planted together in the likeness of his Resurrection. Col. 3.1. If ye be risen
with Christ, seek those things which are above, where Christ is set at the
Right hand of God. This is the use we are to make of Christ's Ascension and
sitting at the Right hand of God. In short, Psalm. 2.11. Serve the Lord with
fear, kiss the Son lest he be angry, and so ye perish, if his wrath be kindled,
yea but a little, blessed are all they that put their trust in him And that is
a Meditation very proper for that whole Exaltation of Christ, that is past
already: and then let what is to come be always in our minds, even his coming
to judgment; That judging ourselves, we may not be judged of the Lord, 1 Cor.
11.31. And seeing all these things shall be then dissolved, let us seriously
consider, as St. Peter 2 Ep. 3.11. admonishes us, What manner of persons we
ought to be in all manner of Conversation and Godliness.

Thus have you what the Creed teaches you concerning the two first persons in
the blessed Trinity. The Father and the Son; now

Q. What do thou believe concerning the Third Person?

A. I believe that he is God the Holy Ghost, Proceeding from the Father and the
Son, One with them, Holy in himself, and the Author of all Holiness in us.

Catechist. I shall further explain to you, and prove the several parts of this
Answer in the following Questions, and their answers. I ask you then

Q. Is not the Father a Spirit, and was not the Son also a pure Spirit, before
he took our nature upon him?

A. Yes: But the Holy Ghost is the Spirit of the Father, and of the Son,
inspired or proceeding from them both.

Catechist. True, and from hence he is called the spirit of the Father, Matthew.
10.20. And the spirit of the Son, Gal. 4.6. And as the Father sent the spirit,
John 14.26. So the Son promised his Disciples to send the spirit when he left
them to the wide world. John 15.26. When the Comforter is come, whom I will
send unto you from the Father, even the spirit of Truth, which proceeds from
the Father, He shall testify of me.

Q. Is the Holy Ghost God?

A. Yes: He is One with, and Equal to the Father and the Son.

Catechist. Being one with, and equal to them, he must necessarily be God, very
God. For being three persons, they are but one God, 1 John 5.7. There are three
that bear record in Heaven, The Father, the Word, and the Spirit, and these
three are One. Besides which plain Text to prove the Divinity of the Holy
Ghost, There is one General Argument, which is not hard to learn or remember,
for arming yourselves against all such Heretics as deny the Holy Ghost, to be
God, as well as our Savior. The name of God, the Attributes of God, the Works
of God, and the Honors which belong to God alone, are ascribed to the Holy
Ghost; Therefore the Holy Ghost is God. Particularly we are all Baptized, as in
the name of the Father, and of the Son, so in the name of the Holy Ghost. And
here in the Creed we profess to believe in the Holy Ghost, as well as as in God
the Father, and in Jesus Christ, the only Son of God. And believing in, is an
honor peculiar to God. We may not believe in any Creature, in any but God. For
it implies Trust and Affiance, and Jer. 17.5. Cursed is he, that trusts in any
Arm of flesh. To name only one Text more, Act. 5.3. When Ananias and Sapphira
lied to the Holy Ghost, concerning the price of their lands, they are expressly
said, to lie to God, and not to men. Therefore the Holy Ghost is God.

Q Why is he called the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost?

A. Being Holy in himself, he Sanctifies us, and all our Holiness is his work,
he is the Author of all Holiness in us.

Catechist. Holiness is his Essential Attribute: and Sanctification, or making
us Holy, is his proper Work. And hence we read of the Sanctification of the
Spirit, 1 These. 2.13. and of the renewing of the Holy Ghost, Tit. 3.5. And
hereby he seals us to the day of Redemption, Ephesians. 4.30.

Q. By what means does the spirit Sanctify us?

A. The Holy Scriptures were written by men inspired by the spirit, and he
daily enlightens, converts, sanctifies and comforts our souls by them in the
Ministry of the Word.

Q. What must we then do, that the spirit may Sanctify us?

A. We must highly esteem, and constantly attend Gods Holy Ordinances, and obey
all the Holy Spirit's godly motions in our hearts.

Catechist. The Spirit moves in these waters, as in the Pool of Bethesda, to
heal the diseases of our Souls, and we are therefore warned to take heed that
we do not grieve the Holy Spirit of God, Ephesians. 4.30. nor quench the spirit, 1
These. 5.19. Which is done, as by any willful gross sin, so by despising
prophesying, 1 These. 1.20. by slighting, neglecting or making light of any of
Gods Holy Ordinances.

Thus have you what the Creed teaches you to believe, concerning the Holy Ghost
also, and so concerning all the Persons in the Blessed Trinity. Proceed we then
to what it teaches concerning the Church.

Q. Who are they that shall receive any benefit by Christ's Redemption, and the
Spirit's Sanctification?

A. Only the Holy Catholic Church: that is, such as in any age or place, are
called to Faith and Repentance, and do evidence the truth of a lively Faith,
and true Repentance, by constant Obedience to Gods Will revealed in his Word.

Q. What mean you by a Church?

A. The Company of the Faithful, that is, such as are called to Faith and
Repentance.

Catechist. Neither can the Pope, nor any one particular Person upon Earth, be
truly called the Church. For it is a Company, a Body consisting of many
members. And hence Christ calls it a flock, though it be a little flock in
comparison of the whole world, that lies in wickedness, Luke 12.32. Fear not
little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure to give you the Kingdom. And
St. Peter 2 Ep. 2.9. uses these Plural and Collective words, calling the
Church a chosen generation, a Royal Priesthood, an Holy nation, a peculiar
people. Caetus Vocatorum. It is a Company of called ones: such as are called
out of the world to forsake its sinful ways and Customs, to profess Repentance
from dead works and Faith, toward our Lord Jesus Christ. Of which calling S.
Paul says, 2 Timothy 1.9. They are called with an Holy calling. Romans 1.7. Called
to be Saints. In a word, 2 These. 2.13. They are called, as well as chosen, to
salvation through sanctification of the spirit and belief of the Truth.

Q. What signifies this word ( Catholic.)

A. It is a Greek word, and is as much as Universal.

Q. What mean you by believing the Church, to be Catholic or Universal?

Q. That Gods Church is not now confined to any one place, or people, as it was
under the Old Testament, but all that are called, in any Age, or Place, are now
of the Catholic Church, being United into one Mystical body.

Catechist. Under the Old Testament, Psalm. 76.1, 2. In Judah was God known, His
name was great in Israel, Jerusalem was his Tabernacle, and his dwelling place
was in Sion. Psalm. 147.19, 10. He showed his word unto Jacob, his statutes and
his judgments unto Israel, He dealt not so with any Other nation, neither had
the Heathen knowledge of his Law. But now under the Gospel or New Testament,
The partition wall between Jew and Gentile, being by Christ's Death broken down,
Both are become one sheepfold under one Shepherd. And according to Gods promise
to Christ, Ps. 2.8. The Heathen are given to him for an Inheritance, and the
utmost parts of the Earth for a possession. So that now, Act. 10.34, 35. God is
no Accepter of persons: But in every nation, He that fears God and works
righteousness is accepted with him. And hence S. John says, Rev. 7.9. That he
in his vision beheld, and lo a great multitude which no man could number of
all nations, and kindreds, and people, and tongues, stood before the throne,
and before the Lamb, clothed with white robes, Crying with a loud voice,
Salvation to our God, that sits on the throne, and to the Lamb for ever.

Q. Who is the Head of this Mystical Body, the Catholic Church?

A. No man living but Christ only.

Catechist. It is pride and presumption in the Pope to claim this Honor which
belongs to Christ alone. For Ephesians. 5.23. He alone is Head of the Church, who is
the Savior of the Body. Col. 1.18. He is the Head of the Body, the Church, Who
is the beginning, the first born from the dead, that in all things he might
have the preeminence. For it pleases the Father, that in him all fullness
should dwell.

Q. Has God always had a Church on Earth?

A. Yes: and will have to the end of the world; it can never be destroyed
utterly.

Catechist. It was Christ's promise to his Disciples, and in them to his Church,
(All that through them should afterward believe in his name) To be with them
always to the end of the world, Matthew. 28.20. And he said, Matthew. 16.18. Upon
this Rock, (that is, the Truth confessed by St. Peter there, That he was the
Christ, the Son of the Living God) upon this rock would he build his Church,
and the Gates of Hell should not prevail against it, i. e. quite destroy or
root it out of the world.

Q. Can any one Church, as that of Rome, call it self the Catholic Church, in
opposition to other Churches?

A. No, no more than Rome can be called the whole world.

Catechist. Rome is at the best, but one Member of the Catholic Church of
Christ, and can no more properly be called the Catholic Church, than either
It, or any one Particular place can be called the whole World.

Q. Is Christ's Church always visible upon Earth?

A. That of sincere Christians is invisible; That of all Christian professors
is visible.

Catechist. The Church Visible is the Light of the world, and a City set upon
an Hill, which cannot be hid, Mat. 5.14. It is always visible, at least, to them
that are of it, and profess Christianity. But sometimes it may be so persecuted
as to flee like the woman into the Wilderness, where she has a place prepared
for her, for that time of persecution; Rev. 12.6. and then it is not so visible
as to be glorious, and to prosper and flourish in the eyes of the world.

Q. Why is Christ's Church said to be Holy, an Holy Church?

A. Because of its better part, sincere Christians in it; and because of its
Holy Ordinances, and Gods commands, and our profession of true Holiness.

Catechist. 1 Pet. 2.9. It is an Holy Nation, a peculiar people. Rev. 21.2.
It Is an Holy City, the new Jerusalem. Not but that there is a mixture of good
and bad, godly and profane in the Church: for our Savior compares the Church,
which he calls the Kingdom of heaven, Matthew. 13.24. to a field, wherein tares
grow up with the wheat. And ver. 47. to a draw-net, that incloseth both good
fish and bad, with diverse others of the like Nature. But the Church is Holy, as
for its Holy things, so because all its members do or should profess Holiness,
it is a company or Congregation of men, who are called with an holy calling, or
Vocation. 2 Timothy 1.9. For every man that names the name of Christ, or on whom
the name of Christ is called, being called Christian, is bound to depart from
Iniquity, 2 Timothy 2.19.

Q. But who then are they that are truly Holy?

A. Such as believe aright, and live answerably: such as evidence the truth of
a lively Faith, and Unfeigned Repentance, by constant Obedience to Gods Will
revealed in his Word.

Catechist. So I have often told you, for St. James 2.18. says Show me thy
Faith by thy works. And he there argues it at large, that good Works of
Obedience, are the only things, that can evidence a man's Faith to be true, and
alive and not dead, or no better than that Faith of Devils, who believe and
tremble.

Q. What duties does our believing the Holy Catholic Church oblige us all to?

A. Carefully to practice Holiness ourselves, and by all means to take heed of
Schisms, Divisions, and Separations from Gods Church; for thereby we shall lose
all visible Hopes of Salvation.

Catechist. I therefore a prisoner of the Lord, says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4.1.
beseech you, that ye walk worthy of the Vocation wherewith ye are called, with
all lowliness and meekness, endeavoring to keep the Unity of the Spirit, in the
Bond of peace, that is, Unity in Spiritual things. For (as he goes on
argumentatively) There is one Body and one Spirit, one Faith, one Lord, one
Baptism, One God and Father of all. All which (Ones) the Apostle argues,
should oblige us to be One, to keep fast the Unity, and by no means to separate
from the one Body, the Church. And indeed to divide from the one Church, and
fall into Schisms, is a sort of renouncing this Article of our Creed, I Believe
the one Catholic Church. We cannot (verily) heartily believe this, unless we
follow the Apostles Rule, Romans 16.17. I beseech you Brethren, Mark them which
cause Divisions among you, and avoid them. And need we had to do so, for there
is great Truth in the old saying. Out of the Church, no Salvation; for it is
Gods way to add to the Church, not to divide from it those that shall be saved,
Act. 2.47. Now after the Church, let us consider the privileges and promises
wherewith this Church is enriched.

Q. What are the Churches grand privileges?

A. Two in This life, and two in the life To come.

Q. Which be those two in This Life?

A. The Communion of Saints, The Forgiveness of sins.

Q. Which be those two in the Life To come?

A. The Resurrection of the Body, and the Life Everlasting.

Catechist. And surely it hugely concerns you to understand each of these
things well and distinctly. To which purpose, for the Communion of Saints in
the first place, I ask you

Q. What do you mean by Saints?

A. The members of Christ's Church, who being in part holy here, shall be
perfect Saints hereafter in heavenly glory.

Catechist. Saints is as much as Holy Ones. And all the members of the Church
called to be Saints, Romans 1.7. For they are called unto Holiness, 1 These. 4.7.
It is their duty and profession to follow Holiness, Heb. 12.14. and to go on to
perfect Holiness in the fear of God, 2 Cor. 7.1. For being redeemed by Christ,
and delivered from the hands of their enemies, it is that they may serve God
without fear, in Holiness and Righteousness before him all the days of their
lives, Luke 1.75.

Q. With whom have those Saints Communion?

A. With the Blessed Trinity, as Sons of God, by Faith and prayer; and with one
another in all Ordinances of piety, and all Offices of Charity, as Brethren.

Catechist. That which we have heard and seen, says S. John 1 Ep. 1.3. We
declare unto you, that ye may have fellowship with us; and truly Our fellowship
is with the Father, and with his Son Jesus Christ. With these, the Saints have
fellowship and Communion, by all Acts of Faith, and Love, and all Holy
affections, and in Gods Holy Ordinances, as in diverse instances, so
particularly in that God and Christ Communicates to them the riches of his
Blessings, Mercies and Consolations, through the merits of Christ, and they
acquaint him with all their wants, and troubles, and necessities, trusting in
him. And as for that fellowship, they have with one another, it consists in
diverse particulars, as (to name some) They Sympathize with, and have a fellow
feeling of one another miseries, sufferings, and afflictions, as fellow
members one of another. 1 Cor. 12.26. Whether one member suffer, all the
members suffer with it, or one member be honored, all the members rejoice with
it. Romans 12.15. They rejoice with them that rejoice, and weep with them that
weep. They pray continually, and praise God for each others welfare, saying,
Our Father, etc. And what Gifts and Blessings any one enjoys, He readily and
willingly imployes, and Communicates them for supply, relief, and helping
others that want them, whether Wisdom, Wealth or Power.

Q. What is our duty, as Believers of this Communion of Saints?

A. To hold fast this Communion, that we may receive and impart the Benefits of
Gods Mercies, and each others Gifts; and to take heed of all causeless
separations from Gods Church, or one another in matters of Faith, Worship and
Charity.

Catechist. I beseech you, (good Children) learn these lessons, and lay them up
in your hearts, that you may walk steadily, and not waver in your Holy Religion
to your lives end. If you truly believe the Communion of Saints, you must
follow the Apostles Exhortation closely, 1 Cor. 1.10. I beseech you Brethren,
by the name of our Lord Jesus Christ, That ye all speak the same things, and
that there be no Divisions amongst you, but that ye be perfectly joined
together in the same mind, and in the same judgment. Phil. 2.1, 2. If there be
any consolation in Christ, if any comfort of love, if any fellowship of the
spirit, if any bowels and mercies, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded,
having the same love, being of one accord, and of one mind. Let nothing be done
through strife, etc. Take heed of all Breaches of this Communion, and of all
that would withdraw you from it, Romans 16.17. Mark them that are for making of
Schisms, and Breaches in Christ's Body, the Church; that cause divisions amongst
us, and follow them not, but avoid them, for they that are such, serve not our
Lord Jesus Christ, (whatever they pretend) but their own bellies, and with good
words and fair speeches deceive the hearts of the simple. To the next Article
then.

Q. What is it to believe the Forgiveness of sins?

A. That Gods justice is satisfied through the Merits of Christ's blood, and
through them there is mercy, and pardon may be obtained for all our sins, if we
do but heartily repent, and forsake them.

Catechist. Psalm. 130.4. There is forgiveness with thee that thou may be
feared. How comes this to pass? through Christ, Act. 13.38. Through this man is
preached to you forgiveness of sins. Upon what account? because, Matthew. 20.28.
He gave his life a ransom for us. 1 Cor. 15.4. He died for our sins according
to the Scriptures. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin. 2 Cor. 5.21. that
is, a Sacrifice to suffer death for our sins in our stead. So has he purchased
a pardon for all sinners, that will but accept of it, upon the condition upon
which it is offered them, which I shall choose to express in the words of the
Evangelical Prophet, Isaiah 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
Unrighteous man his imaginations, and return unto the Lord, for he will have
mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon.

Q. Who then is it that forgives sins?

A. God only.

Catechist. A truth directly contrary to the Popish Priests presumption, in
taking this honor to themselves which belongs to God alone, and I shall
content my self with citing the Pharisees question only, which indeed is
unanswerable, however they mist it in the application, because they would not
believe Christ to be God or the Son of God, Mark 2.7. Who can forgive sins but
God only?

Q. How come any to be damned then, if there be such forgiveness with God?

A. It is because they go on wilfully in their sins, and will not be drawn to
repentance, but live in sin, and at last either die without any sense of their
sins, or deceive themselves with a false and feigned repentance.

Catechist. From hence it is that these two are so closely enjoined, and may
not be parted, for Luke 24.47. Through his name are repentance, and remission
of sins preached. For in order to their being forgiven he now commands all men
every where to repent, Act. 17.30. And to bring forth fruits meet for
repentance, Matthew. 3.8. And thus they must indispensibly do, that they may
receive forgiveness of sins, and an inheritance among them which are sanctified
by Faith, which is in Christ Jesus, Act. 26.18. To the next Article then, the
Resurrection of the Body. To understand which I ask you.

Q. After Death what becomes of the Souls of men?

A. They return to God to receive the sentence of Absolution, or Condemnation.

Q. And what becomes then of their Bodies?

A. Being laid up in the Grave, they shall at last be raised up to be again
inseparably United to their Souls.

Catechist. What becomes of men's Souls Solomon tells you plainly, Eccl. 12.7.
When the Dust (i.e. the Body) returns to the Earth as it was, The spirit (i.e.
the Soul) returns to God who gave it, (i.e, to be judged by him.) An instance
whereof you have in, Luke 16.22, 23. The Rich man died, and immediately went
into hell torments; and Lazarus died also, and was carried by the Angles into
Abraham's Bosom. And even so, Heb. 9.27. It is appointed to all men once to
die, and after that the judgment, i. e. the judgment of their Souls by either
Absolution or Condemnation. And then for the bodies rising from the dead at the
last day the Prophet Daniel had a clear foresight thereof, chap. 12.2. Many of
them which sleep in the dust shall rise again, some to everlasting life, and
some to shame and perpetual contempt. Nay, Christ says, All shall rise, John
5.28. The hour comes in the which all that are in the Grave, shall hear the
voice of the Son of God, and shall come forth, they that have done good to the
resurrection of life, and they that have done evil, to the resurrection of
condemnation. Now this is a great matter, and you had need have good grounds to
believe it.

Q. What is it then that assures you hereof?

A. Christ's being risen, and God being our God, the God of the Body as well as
of the Soul, the God of the whole man.

Catechist. The 15 chap. of the first Epistle to the Corinthians, discourses of
the Resurrection of the body throughout, and has diverse arguments to prove it,
and this for one, ver. 20. Christ is risen from the dead, the first fruits of
them that slept. As therefore the first fruits was a pledge of the ensuing
Harvest, so was Christ's rising from the dead, of ours. And by Gods being the
God of Believers, Christ convinced the Sadduces, who denied the Resurrection,
Luke 20.37. That the dead are raised up (says he,) even Moses showed at the
Bush, when he called him the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of
Jacob, for he is not a God of the dead, but the living. They must therefore
rise again, that God may be their God, and that for ever.

Q. What use must you make of this Doctrine of the Resurrection?

A. To reverence my Body, and not to prostitute it to be an Instrument of sin
or filthiness: and neither to fear death my self, nor to mourn immoderately for
the death of my Friends.

Catechist. Great cause have we to bear reverence to our own bodies, so as not
to abuse them to be instruments of sin or filthiness, by overcharging them with
surfeting or drunkenness, or by fulfilling our fleshly lusts, in fornication or
beastly living, seeing they are at present Temples of the Holy Ghost, which
dwells in us, 1 Cor. 6.19. And shall at last be raised up spiritual Bodies,
glerious, incorruptible, immortal, 1 Cor. 15.42, 43. And this may very much
abate all fear of death, seeing we shall rise again from the dead, and then
shall these our vile Bodies be fashioned like to Christ's glorious Body,
according to the mighty working, whereby he is able to subdue all things to
himself, Phil. 3.21. And the Apostle teaches us hence, 1 These. 4.1. not to
mourn immoderately, upon the departure of our dearest friends, like the
Heathens that are without this hope.

Q. Shall our Bodies being risen ever die again?

A. No; the life to come is Everlasting.

Catechist. After this Resurrection, There shall be no more death, nor sorrow,
nor crying, neither any more pain, for the former things are passed away, Rev.
21.4. The last enemy shall be destroyed, even death, 1 Cor. 15.26.

Q. In what estate must all men live everlastingly?

A. Some in unconceivable Bliss, others in torments intolerable. Every man
according to his works in this life, good or evil.

Catechist. You have it clear in Matthew. 25.32, 33. The sheep shall be separated
from the goats. And he shall set the sheep on his right hand, and the goats on
his left. Then will he say to them on his right hand, Come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the World.
But ver. 41. To them on his left hand will he say, Depart from me, ye cursed,
into everlasting fire prepared for the Devil and his Angels. And ver. 4.^ These
shall go into everlasting punishment, but the Righteous into Life eternal.

Q. Do the Godly Merit or deserve that Bliss, as the wicked do that punishment
and Torments?

A. No; Our best good works are due debt, and but imperfect, and Gods Gift, and
bears no proportion to the reward, and therefore though death be the wages of
sin, yet Eternal Life is the Gift of God.

Catechist. If you mark these particulars, you will easily discern the Papists
Doctrine of Good works being Meritorious to be presumptiously proud and utterly
groundless. Our best good works cannot merit any good thing of God, for they
are but due debt, as our Savior teaches, Luke 17.10. When we have done all,
we must say, we are unprofitable servants; We have but done that which was our
duty to do. And (2.) Our best good works are imperfect, tainted with many sins
and infirmities, so that they themselves, stand in need of Gods pardon, Isaiah
64.6, 7. We are all as an unclean thing, All our Righteousness is but as filthy
rags, and as a menstruous cloth, and great are the iniquities of our most Holy
things. So that if God should be extreme to mark what we do amiss in them, O
Lord, who may abide it, Psalm. 130.3. And (3) all we have and do is Gods Gift,
it is he that works in us, both to will and to do, Phil. 2.13. and we give
him but his own. Nor, be it never so good can it (4) bear any proportion to
that recompense of reward, which God promises us. Not our greatest suffering,
much less our good deeds, Romans 8.18. The sufferings of this present time, are
not worthy to be compared to the glory that shall be revealed in us. 2 Cor.
4.17. They are but light Afflictions, and but for a moment, but they work for
us a far more exceeding eternal weight of glory. Well does the Apostle
therefore conclude, Romans 6.23. The wages of sin is death, but eternal life is
the Gift, (no Merit of ours, but) the ^ree gift of God, through Jesus Christ
our Lord.

Q. What Use must we make hereof?

A. To be constant, unmovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
knowing that our labor will not be in vain in the Lord.

Catechist. This is the use that St. Paul makes of this great Doctrine of
Christianity, 1 Cor. 15.58. and elsewhere he exhorts thus upon account hereof,
2 Cor. 4.18. Let us not therefore look at the things which are seen, but at the
things which are not seen. For the things which are seen are Temporal, but the
things which are not seen are Eternal.

Q. Why do you say Amen, after the Greed, and why stand you up when it is
rehearsed?

A. To declare my steadfast believing it, and my resolution to live in, and die
for it, if God should call me to that Honor.

Catechist. Let us therefore make it our continual prayer, that God (whose Gift
Faith is) would increase and strengthen this our Faith more and more, and
enable us so to live in Faith, and so to dye in Faith, that at last we may
attain the end of our Faith, even the salvation of our Souls, through Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 1.9.

Thus have you had the Rule and Summary of the Christian Faith in the Creed.
Now having often taught you, that there is no true Faith without Obedience, I
pray

Q. What is the Great Rule of your Obedience?

A. The Moral Law contained in the Commandments.

Catechist. You remember, Brethren, I hope, that you promised in your Baptism,
as to believe all the Articles of Christian Faith, so to keep Gods Holy Will
and Commandments.

Q. How many Commandments are there?

A. Ten.

Catechist. These Ten Commandments contain that which we call the Moral Law;
and it is so called, because it orders our Manners, and our whole lives and
conversations, both toward God and toward men. Concerning which I would only
teach you, in opposition to the Antinomian Errors, that this Moral Law
contained in the Ten Commandments, is still in force to us; and as it was the
Rule of life, and manners, and Obedience to Gods ancient people the Jews; so is
it still to us Christians. For whatever moral duties God Commanded the Jews,
(being his chosen people) under the Old Testament; the same does Christ command
us Christians, under the Gospel, and that while the world lasts; for he said
expressly, Matthew. 5.17. He came not to destroy the Law, but to fulfill it; and
reciting several Commandments, He abrogated none, but (which shows their
obligation on us sufficiently) showed their true and Spiritual meaning against
the corrupt glosses the Pharisees had put upon them, thereby making them of no
effect. It was said of old time (says he,) Thou shall not kill, but I say unto
you, Whosoever is angry with his Brother without a cause, is in danger of the
judgment. Again, ver. 27. It was said of old time, Thou shall not commit
adultery, But I say unto you, Whosoever looks on a woman to lust after her in
his heart, Commits Adultery with her. And thus does He there Explain other
Commandments, but Repeals none of them: and in short, St, James says, chap.
2.8. of all the rest, If ye fulfill the Royal Law of Liberty, Thou shall love
thy neighbor as thy self, ye shall do well. Nor is the number of the
Commandments impertinent to be observed, it being so precisely noted by the
Holy Ghost, Deuteronomy. 4.13. Ten, and no more, which puzzles them of the Romish
Communion, to make them so, while they leave out the second in their Catechism;
because it so apparently condemns their Image worship, and then for a mere
shift, they would divide the last Commandment, making two of one. And now
before we close with the Commandments, we must not neglect the Preface to them,
(God spoke these words and said, I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out
of the land of Egypt, out of the house of Bondage.) which what it imports you
may learn by the next Question and Answer.

Q. What are those motives God himself used, when he gave those Commandments to
engage his people's Obedience?

A. First, His Sovereignty, For he is the Lord. (2) His near Relation to his
people; for He is the Lord Our God. (3) His delivering the Israelites from the
Egyptian Bondage, which was a Type of our Greater deliverance, even from our
spiritual Bonddage to sin and Satan.

Catechist. The like arguments to Obedience we have in other Scriptures, to
name but one to the Israelites, Deuteronomy. 27.9, 10. Take heed and hearken O Israel,
This day thou art become the people of the Lord thy God: Thou shall therefore
obey the voice of the Lord thy God, and do all his Commandments and statutes,
which I command thee this day. And that of Zacharias in his song, Luke 1.74,
75. urges the same Obedience upon us, upon account of our greater deliverance,
That being delivered from the hands of our enemies, we should serve Him without
fear, in Holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. Now I pray

Q. How many Tables are there in the Decalogue or Ten Commandments?

A. Two.

Q. How many Commandments are there in the first Table?

A. The four first Commandments.

Q. What sort of Duties does the first Table teach you?

A. My Duties toward God.

Catechist. And as the second Table teaches you your duties toward your
neighbor, so let me tell you by the way, that our Savior Himself divides the
Law after this manner, even according to the twofold Object of Love, God and
our Neighbors, Matthew. 22.37. Thou shall love the Lord thy God, with all thy
heart, and with all thy soul, and with all thy mind: This is the first and
great Commandment, and the second is like unto it; Thou shall love thy
neighbor as thy self; on these two Commandments hang all the Law and the
Prophets. For as S. Paul says, Romans 13.10. Love is the fulfilling of the Law.

Now for explaining the Questions and Answers in your Church Catechism,
concerning the duties contained in these two Tables; I conceive the chief task
is, to let you see to which Commandment each clause in them is to be referred,
and then, as requiring the Duty, forbids the sin, and forbidding any sin,
supposes a precept for the Duty contrary to that sin, so shall I teach you
both these, what are the Duties required, and what the Sins forbidden, in each
Commandment, proving their respective answers (as we go along) by the
Scriptures. First then let me ask you the Questions in your Church Catechism.

Q. What is thy Duty to God?

A. My duty toward God is to believe in Him, etc.

Now see how every Commandment is explained in this Answer.
Q. What does the first Commandment require of you, according to this Answer in
your Catechism?

A. Gods inward worship, which is to believe in him, to fear him, and to love
him, and him alone, as the only true God, with all my heart, with all my mind,
with all my soul, and with all my strength.

Catechist. This distinction of Worship, that it is either Inward of the Soul,
or Outward of the Body, is evidently the Apostles, when he tells us, 1 Cor.
6.20. That we must glorify God, with our bodies, and with our spirits, which
are his. Now the inward, that of the Spirit, is required by this Commandment,
that is, in the positive part, which is implied in the negative; for that we
are forbidden to have any other God but Him, or before him, implies that we
must have him, that is, acknowledge him, and worship him, for our God, and for
our only God, and to believe in him, and fear him, and love him; this is to
acknowledge him to be, and to have him our God; according to that Text, Deuteronomy.
10.12. What does the Lord thy God, O Israel, require of thee, but to fear the
Lord thy God, and to walk in his ways, to love and serve the Lord, thy God,
with all thy heart, and with all thy Soul?

Q. May not loving God be accounted the sum of our whole Duty to God, as Love
of our Neighbor is of our whole Duty to our Neighbor?

A. Yes: and without loving God, there can be no keeping his Commandments in
sincerity.

Catechist. Our Savior said, John 14.15. If ye love me, keep my Commandments.
No other way can we show our love to either God or Christ Jesus. On the other
hand, the Scriptures set forth obedience, or keeping Gods Commandments, as the
work of Faith and labor of love, Heb. 6.10. 1 These. 1.3. and St. Paul says,
The love of Christ constrains hereunto, 2 Cor. 5.14. And it is certain, all
other Graces abound, where, as the Apostle expresses it, Romans 5.5. The love of
God is shed abroad in the heart, by the Holy Ghost which is given unto us.

Q. What do those words (Before me) teach you: Thou shall have no other Gods
before me?

A. Always to consider that God is every where present, and beholds the
Idolatry of the heart, as well as in action.

Catechist. I know, O my God says David, 1 Chronicles. 29.17. that thou triest the
heart. Jer. 17.10. I the Lord search the heart, I try the reins, even to give
to every man according to his ways, and according to his doings.

Q. What then are the sins forbidden in this Commandment?

A. Atheism, or having no God: Polytheism, or owning more Gods than One:
Irreligion, not glorifying, not worshipping the true God, as God; and inward
Idolatry, that is, believing, fearing, or loving any lust, or Creature, as our
God; or giving Religious Worship or honor to any other Being.

Catechist. Atheism, or in the Psalmists words, Psalm. 14.1. The Fools saying in
his heart, much more speaking it out in words, That there is no God.
Polytheism, The having Lords many and Gods many, But to us says the Apostle, 1
Cor. 8.4. There is no more Gods but One. Irreligion, not Glorifying, not
worshipping God, which is all one, as if we believed and professed, There is no
God. A sin taxt by S. Paul in the Gentiles, Romans 1.21. That knowing God, they
did not glorify Him, as God. Idolatry, which is not only the worshipping idols
or images, made of silver and gold, the works of men's hands, which have eyes
and see not, which have ears and hear not, mouths and speak not, Ps. 135.15,
16. But also the immoderate love of any Creature. For Christ says, Mat. 6.24.
Ye cannot serve God and Mammon, and this do all covetous and worldly minded
men. From whence S. Paul says expressly, that covetousness is idolatry, Col.
3.5. And he speaks of some, who make their belly their God, Phil. 3.19. which
do all Epicures, gluttons and drunkards, and intemperate persons, and some (he
says,) mind earthly things. All these then are sins against this first
Commandment, which requires the Inward worship of God.

Q. What does the second Commandment require?

A. Gods Outward worship, that is, to worship God, not only with our hearts and
Spirits, which God alone sees, but also bodily, in the sight of men, and not
by Images, but as he himself appoints us in his word.

Catechist. It is a mavelous thing, that there should be any need of
convincing men, that God is to be worshipped Outwardly, as well as Inwardly,
with our Bodies as well as with our Spirits, or that any persons of
understanding, should make that foolish use of our Saviors words to the woman
of Samaria, John 4.24. God is a spirit, and is to be worshipped in Spirit, and
in truth, as if pretending to worship God in their hearts and spirits, could
excuse their utter neglect of his outward worship, or their not Kneeling in
prayer, or any other irreverent, undecent behaving themselves, in the worship
of God. But if there be any need to speak to this point, I think here is enough
in the very letter of this Commandment to stop all mouths, Thou shall not bow
down before images, and worship them. For in that, we must not do it before
images, implies that before God we must do it, we must bow down before him,
when we worship him; that as the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 6.20. We may glorify
God with our bodies as well as with our spirits, which are his. Hence the
Psalmist says, Psalm. 132.7. We will go into his Tabernacle, and fall down
before his footstool. And hereunto are we daily invited in his words, Psalm.
95.6. O come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before the Lord our maker.
This must we do: only to avoid Superstition and Will worship, we must have a
care to do it in such a manner, as God directs in his word, and not worship God
in any way invented by man, contrary to his word. See Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32.
Whatsoever I command you, that observe and do, ye shall not add to the word I
command you, neither shall ye diminish ought from it, that ye may keep the
Commandments of the Lord your God, which I command you.

Q. What are those kinds or parts of Worship which God himself has appointed
us in his word?

A. Daily Prayer, and Thanksgiving, often Reading, Hearing and Meditating upon
His word, and the due Use of the Sacraments.

Catechist, That Prayers and Thanksgivings are parts of Divine Worship,
Unquestionedly commanded by God, is evident by S. Paul's direction to Timothy,
as Provincial Bishop of Ephesus, 1 Ep. 2.1, 2. Which was to take order, that
prayers, supplications and thanksgivings be made for all men, for Kings, and
all in Authority, etc. And how God ordained the public reading of Scriptures
you may see, Deuteronomy. 31.11, 12. When all Israel is come to appear before the
Lord, in the place which he shall choose, Then shall thou read the Law before
all Israel, in their hearing, etc. And accordingly S. James, Bishop of
Jerusalem, spoke it in the Council held there, Act. 15.21. That Moses had in
every city, them that preached him, being read in the Synagogues every Sabbath
day. And if God appoints his word to be Read, it must needs be the peoples duty
to hear the Reading, and Luke 16.31. If they will not hear Moses and the
Prophets, neither would they repent, though one should rife from the dead. And
to what purpose is it either to Read or Hear, if they do not Meditate on it,
for as it is in the Parable of the Sower of the seed, Matthew. 13.8. By this it
is that the good seed takes root, and brings forth fruit. And therefore, Ps.
1.2. Blessed is the man that Meditates on Gods law day and night. As for the
Holy Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of the Lord, you may see their
Institution at large, Matthew. 28.19. and 1 Cor. 11.23.

Q. What are the sins forbidden in this Commandment?

A. Corrupting, neglecting, or hindering any Ordinance of Right Worship:
Idolatry, or Worshipping Saints, Angels or Images, or God by Images: or
Worshipping God in any way contrary to, or not directed in his word.

Catechist. If the Commandment require us to worship God, then must they
necessarily be transgressors thereof, that come not to Church to join in Gods
worship, or are negligent in attending any Ordinance of Divine worship; as many
do apparently, seldom coming to Church at all, or coming after the prayers, and
the reading of the Scriptures, as if it did not at all concern them, or that
being here, behave themselves most slovenly and irreverently in Gods Service:
and then we must be sure that we avoid all idolatry and false worship. For as
it was charged upon Gods people the Jews, Lev. 19.4. Not to turn to Idols, nor
to make any graven Images, nor to bow down to them, for this reason, I am the
Lord thy God, so is it also upon us of the Christian Church, 1 Cor. 10.14.
Dearly beloved, flee from Idolatry. 1 John 5.21. Little Children, take heed of
idols.

Q. Whom do you think guilty of such Idolatry?

A. The Papists as much as Heathens or Jews in worshipping the Molten Calf, and
Brazen Serpent; for they worship Saints, Angels and Images, and adore the Cross
and the Host, and have no better plea for so doing, but what might serve to
excuse, both Heathens and Jews from being Idolaters.

Catechist. In short let me tell you, that Popish Idols or Images, having the
like matter, and shapes, and figures, they do the same service to them, and use
the like pleas and pretenses, as the Heathens did, and as the Idolatrous Jews
did, and therefore are as truly Idolaters as they, and they that would see this
fully proved, let them read the Churches Homilies of the peril of Idolatry.

Q. How does the Lord threaten all Idolaters, and Image worshippers, and all
Transgressors of this Commandment?

A. Being jealous of his own glory, He will punish them as Haters of himself,
nay them, and their seed after them.

Catechist. How jealous God is of his Glory, you may read, Isaiah 42.8. I am
the Lord, That is my name, My Glory will I not give to another, neither my
praise to graven Images. And hence Idolatry is often in Scripture called, a
spiritual whoredom, and adultery, which you know provokes any Husband to
jealousy and rage against his Wife. And here in this Commandment, it is
express, that God looks on them, as them that hate Him, who give his Worship to
Images, or any others besides Him, and he threatens to visit their children
after them, for this sin to many generations.

Q. Are the Protestants, and particularly we of the Church of England, clear
from all Idolatry, in observing Ceremonies in Gods Worship, not expressly
required in Gods Word?

A. Yes: because God has left it in charge to Church Rulers, to appoint such
Ceremonies in his Worship, as conduce to Order, and Decency, and Edification,
and being once appointed by our lawful Governors, We ought to observe them in
Obedience to God, who requires us to obey our Governors.

Catechist. It may suffice to tell you thus much upon this head, and you can by
no means turn Dissenters upon this account, if you remember this, That it is
the Apostles direction, that all things in Gods Worship be done decently, and
in order, and so as may conduce to Edification, 1 Cor. 14.26, 40. Which being
the Duty and Province of the Churches Governors to take care of, (as they do
at this day in all the Reformed Churches, and as they apparently did in the
Primitive Churches,) it is very plain, that all private Christians are to yield
a ready Conformity, Submission, and Obedience to their Orders and Canons, by a
strict Commandment, 1 Pet. 2.13. Submit yourselves to every Ordinance of man,
for the Lords sake. Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over you, and
submit yourselves, etc. And what says our Apostle upon the matter? 1 Cor.
11.16. He brands them for contentiousness, that dissent and Conform not;
saying, If any man be Contentious, nay, seem to be Contentious, we have no such
custom, neither the Churches of God. Thus much for the second Commandment.

Q. What does the third Commandment require?

A. It requires us to perform every part of Worship Devoutly to Gods Glory, and
Reverently to use every thing relating to God, as his Name, Titles, Ordinances,
House, Revenues, Word and Works.

Catechist. Will you hear the General Rule? 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat, or
drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to the Glory of God. If all our actions,
much more then what we do in the Worship and Service of God, must be directed
to His Glory, and therefore must be performed with the greatest Reverence and
Devotion, both of body and mind; to which purpose is that in the 29. Psalm. 1,
2. very memorable, Give unto the Lord, O ye mighty, Give unto the Lord, Glory
and Strength, Give unto the Lord the glory due unto his Name, How? It follows,
Worship the Lord in the Beauty of Holiness, (in the Margent it is, in his
Glorious Sanctuary.) As for the Name of God, To which the Glory is Due, thereby
(by a Figure) is to be understood, not only God Himself, but also all that,
whereby God is Known to us, or which has a peculiar Relation to God, or which
has Gods Name upon it, or that is Gods, to all which we must in using them,
show the greatest Reverence, not only to his Names, but also his Titles,
Attributes, Ordinances, Houses, Revenues, Words and Works. For unto them all
has the Apostles exhottation Heb. 12.28. relation, Let us have grace, whereby
to serve God acceptably, with reverence and Godly fear. And the particular
Duties respecting all these you have in the next Questions and their Answers.

Q. How does your Catechism express this?

A. To give him thanks, to put my whole trust in him, to call upon him, to
honor his Holy Name, and his Word.

Q. What then are the sins forbidden in this Commandment?

A. Unthankfullness, Distrustfullness, not praying to God, or praying to any
other but God, all Abuses of, or irreverent use of, or meddling with, His Word,
Sacraments, House, Titles, or Ministers, and especially rash and vain Swearing,
Cursing and Blasphemy.

Q. What does God threaten them that thus transgress his Commandment?

A. That he will not hold them Guiltless, that is, they shall be held guilty,
and by no means escape his Vengeance.

Catechist. It cannot be expected that all duties and sins herein required and
forbidden, should be particularly named in so short an Abstract as a Catechism
is, and should be, but these are the chief. We must give God thanks for all his
Works and Benefits, Temporal and Spiritual, 1 These. 5.18. In every thing give
thanks. Psalm. 50.14. Offer unto God thanksgiving, and pay thy vows to the most
High. We must call upon God, by Solemn Religious prayer, and Invocation, as
alone able, and willing to hear, and help us, and upon no other, Ps. 50.15.
Call upon me in the day of trouble, and I will deliver thee, and thou shall
glorify me. And these two are closely joined together by the Apostle in one
precept, Phil. 4.6. Be careful for nothing, but in every thing let your
requests be made known to God, by prayer and supplication with thanksgiving. We
must put our whole trust in God, Psalm. 62.8. Trust in the Lord at all times, ye
people, pour out your hearts before Him, for God is our hope. And on the
contrary, ingratitude and unfaithfulness was the sin of the Israelites, Deuteronomy.
32.15, 18. Jesurun waxed fat, and kicked; then he forsook God that made him,
and lightly esteemed the rock of his Salvation. Of the rock that begat thee,
thou art unmindful, and have forgotten him that formed thee. Isaiah 1.2, 3. I
have nourished and brought up children, but they have rebelled against me. The
Ox knows his owner, and the Ass his Masters crib, but Israel does not know,
my people does not consider. Luke 17.18. Of the ten Lepers that were cleansed,
but one returned to give thanks. And as prayer is Our duty, so it is branded as
Atheistical, and shows that a man says in his heart, there is no God, that he
calls not upon the Lord, Psalm. 14.4. And we are not to call upon any other but
Him. Not Angels, for so the Angel forbad S. John, Rev. 22.9. See thou do it
not, I am thy fellow servant. Not Saints, for Isaiah 63.16. Abraham is ignorant
of us, and Israel acknowledges us not. And as we are to put our whole trust in
God, so distrustfulness was the Israelites sin, Psalm. 78.19. Can God prepare a
table in the wilderness? Behold, He smote the rock indeed that the waters
gushed out, and the streams overflowed; but can he give bread also? Can He
provide flesh? And therefore Our Savior cautions us against this, Matthew. 6.25.
Take no thought (no distrustful thought) for your life, what ye shall eat, or
what ye shall drink, or wherewithal ye shall be clothed? ver. 32. your
heavenly father knows that ye have need of all these things. And so are we
forbidden trusting in any other things, whether in wants or dangers. Not in
horses or chariots, Psalm. 20.7. Not in Princes, Psalm. 118.8. Not in any Son of
man. Psalm. 146.3. Not in bow or shield, Psalm. 44.6. Not in our riches, Prove.
11.28. Not in ourselves, Prove. 18.26. We are also warned to take heed of all
irreverent use of Gods word, Luke 8, 18. Take heed how you hear. Prove. 13.13.
Whosoever despises Gods word, shall be destroyed. And of his Sacraments, ^ Cor.
11.27. Whosoever eats, and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to Himself,
not discerning the Lords Body. And his House, the Church. For 1 Cor. 11.22.
What? have ye not houses to eat and drink in? or despise ye the Church of God?
And of his Titles and Revenues, what is set apart for Holy Uses, and for the
maintenance of his Ministers. For the Prophet Malachi says chap. 3.8. that to
defraud or alienate them, is to rob God: or to abuse his Ministers, or not to
hearken to and obey them, Luke 10.16. He that hears you, hears me, and he
that despises you, despises me. And then for taking Gods Name in vain, by
vain or false Swearing, Cursing or Blaspheming, the letter of the Commandment
is express, and innumerable Texts speak terribly to all that are guilty
thereof. To name but one or two, I will bring the Curse, says the Lord of
hosts by his Prophet Zechariah 5.4. and it shall enter into the house of him
that swears falsely by my Name, and shall remain in the midst thereof, and
consume it with the Timber thereof, and with the stones thereof. And one Text
in Deuteronomy. 28.58, 59. may serve instead of all other Texts, If thou will not
observe to fear this great and glorious Name, The Lord thy God, Then will the
Lord make thy plagues great, and wonderful, and the plagues of thy seed, even
great plagues, and of long continuance, and sore sicknesses, and of long
Continuance. In short our Savior explains this Commandment, to forbid, not
only perjury or false swearing, but also swearing vainly, and in our ordinary
talk and Communication, and swearing by any other but God. For an Oath is a
Divine Honor, Mat. 5.33, 34, 37. Ye have heard that it has been said by them
of old time, Thou shall not forswear thy self, But I say unto you, swear not at
all, neither by heaven, nor by the Earth, etc. But let your Communications be
yea, yea; nay, nay: for whatsoever is more than these, comes of evil: and so
much also of the third Commandment.

Q. What are the duties required by the fourth Commandment?

A. To serve him truly, as in his Solemn days of Worship, so all the days of my
life.

Q. Which are those Solemn days of Worship, wherein we are especially to serve
God?

A. The Lords day, and days set apart for Humiliation and Thanksgiving, the
Feasts and Fasts of the Church.

Q. Which is the Lords day?

A. The First day of the week, observed by Christians, because of Christ's
Resurrection upon it, as the Seventh day was by the Jews in memory of the
Creation.

Catechist. We are assured both by Scripture and the Churches Histories, that
the First day of the week was after Christ's Resurrection, and in memory
thereof, observed by the Christians for all the Holy Offices, as the Seventh
day Sabbath, was by them under the old Testament, in memory of Gods Rest from
his works of Creation, and thence was it called the Lords day, Rev. 1.10. John
in the Isle of Patmos, was in the spirit on the Lords day. Act. 20.7. Upon the
first day of the week, when the Disciples were together to eat bread, Paul
preached unto them. 1 Cor. 16.1, 2. Concerning the Collection for the Saints,
as I have given order to the Churches of Galatia, so do ye. Upon the first day
of the week, let every one lay by him in store, as God has prospered him. As
for the Churches Holy days, or Days appointed by Authority, for solemn public
prayers, and thanksgivings upon occasion of some great Calamities or
Deliverances, though they be appointed by man only, yet have they as good
Authority, as the Feast of Purim, and Dedication among the Jews, for they had
no other but Humane Appointment.

Q. How must God be served on those days?

A. By resting from all bodily labors, except them of Necessity and Mercy, to
the end we may wholly attend the public and private exercises of Religion and
Godliness.

Q. What sins then are forbidden by this Commandment?

A. Mispending these days either in sin, or idleness, or the servile works of
our callings, or in vain sports, or whatsoever may hinder our keeping them Holy.

Catechist. The Commandment expressly forbids all servile works on the Sabbath
day, and so do diverse Texts, as Exodus 31.13, 14. and 35.2. and Jer. 17.21. much
more idleness, vain sports and pastimes, and all sinful spending it in
gluttony, drunkenness, filthy Communications, and all manner of Licentiousness.
We are to rest from our worldly labors, but mark for what end? not that bodily
ease can of it self please God, but it is, that being free from all
encombrances of this world, and all earthly cares and distractions, we may
sanctify the day, keep it holy, or hallow it. Only as our Savior clears the
matter in Confutation of the Pharisees, Matthew. 12.11, 12, 13. Works of
Necessity, Mercy and Charity are allowed and lawful; for What man of you (says
he) having an Ox or an Ass fallen into a pit on the sabbath day, will not lift
it up? It is lawful therefore to do good on the Sabbath day. And therefore he
Himself scrupled not to heal the sick, cleanse the lepers, restore the blind
and lame, etc. and thus he justifies himself in so doing, against their
cavills.

Q. What must parents and Masters do in obedience to this Commandment?

A. They must exercise their children and Servants, in all Religious duties
public and private, and restrain them from all contrary sins.

Catechist. The Tenor of the Commandment runs thus, Thou and thy Son, and thy
daughter, thy man servant, thy maid servant, etc. And for an example to all
Householders, as well as Kings and Princes, Joshua said, chap. 24.15. As for me
and my house, we will serve the Lord. So let all of us say, Let other persons
be careless how their families observe the Lords day, whether they come to the
Church, or be absent, how they mispend it in vain sports or profaneness, I and
mine will do otherwise, we will serve the Lord publicly and privately with all
good care and Conscience, Ps. 42.4. We will go up together unto the house of
God, with the voice of joy and praise, with the multitude that keep holy day.
Psalm. 101.4, 6. A froward heart shall depart from me: I will not know a wicked
person. Mine eyes shall be upon the faithful, that they may dwell with me, He
that walks in a perfect way shall serve me.

Q. What Motives does God use to engage our obedience to his Commandments?

A. His allowing us six days for our own labors, and his own special property
in the Seventh, His own Example, and His having Sanctified the Sabbath day to
Holy Uses.

Catechist. Every one is able of himself to discern all these in the words of
the Commandment. Let me then leave that to you, and ask you in the next place.

Q. Is it sufficient to serve God in his Solemn days only?

A. No: We must set apart some Competent part of our time every day, and serve
him truly all the days of our lives.

Catechist. We are enjoined in Gods word, to pray always, Luke 18.1. and to
pray without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17. that is, keep a constant daily course of
prayer. And in all things to give thanks, 1 These. 5.18. and to have God always
before us, Ps. 16.8. So is every day to be so a Sabbath unto us, as therein to
rest from sin, and to allot some competent time for Gods immediate service,
from our worldly business, as well as to serve him by all diligence in labor,
and by faithful and righteous dealing in our Callings and Vocations, Luke 1.74.
Being delivered from the hands of our enemies, it is that we may serve him
without fear, in Holiness and righteousness before him all the days of our
lives.

Q. Does this fourth Commandment then oblige us Christians?

A. Yes: though not the Ceremonial part, as it requires the seventh-day
Sabbath, and the strict Jewish Rest, yet what is of Moral equity in it, to wit,
that a Competent part of our time be thus devoted to Gods Worship and Service.

Catechist. It concerns us, even us Christians to remember often Gods fearful
judgments, on diverse profaning of the Sabbath, as him that gathered sticks on
it, Number. 15.32. and them that bare burdens on the Sabbath day in Jerusalem,
Jer. 17.27. And Nehemiahs zeal to restrain from buying and selling wares on the
Sabbath day, chap. 10.31. against those that trod the winepresses, and brought
in sheaves and asses laden with wine, grapes, and figs, etc. on the Sabbath
day, chap. 13. from ver. 15. to 23. For as St. Paul says, 1 Cor. 10 11. These
examples are written for our learning or admonition, upon whom the ends of the
world are come. And as God gave Ten Commandments, so had this in special, the
same Author and Lawgiver, as the other had, even the Eternal God, the Creator
of all things, who (as the very light of nature prompts) if he be God, must be
worshipped and glorified as God; which cannot be, unless some competent portion
of time, (suppose one in seven) be set apart for it. And therefore although the
Ceremonial part of the Commandment be abrogated, yet is the Moral still
Obligatory to us Christians. And so our Holy Church believes, or else we should
not be taught by it to pray after the reading of this, as well as every other
Commandment, Lord have mercy upon us, and incline our hearts to keep this Law.

I may now hope you pretty well understand your duty toward God, taught you in
the first Table of the Decalogue, the four first Commandments. Let us go on
then to the second.

Q. How many Commandments are there in the second Table?

A. The Six last Commandments.

Q. What sort of duties does the second Table teach you?

A. My duties toward my Neighbor.

Q. What is your duty to your Neighbor. Rehearse it out of the
Church-Catechism.

A. My duty to my Neighbor, is to love him as my self, etc.

Catechist. In this Answer you have, first your whole duty to your Neighbor
summed up in a few words, and then set before you in its several branches, as
the particular precepts of Gods law require them. I pray then first,

Q. What is the sum of your duties toward your Neighbor?

A. To love my Neighbor as my self, and to show that love, by doing to all
men, as I would they should do unto me.

Q. May I not do to others, as they do unto me?

A. No: but as I would they should do unto me.

Catechist. That to love my Neighbor as my self, is the sum and substance of
the Six last Commandments, and so of all the duties we owe him, appears by,
Romans 13.9. For this, (says the Apostle) Thou shall not commit adultery, Thou
shall not kill, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall not bear false witness, Thou
shall not co^^t, and if there be any other Commandment, it is briefly
compreh^nded in this saying, Thou shall Love thy Neighbor, as thy self. For we
must manifest our loving him as our selves, by doing to all as we would they
should do unto us: And whosoever does so, he cannot do any act of injury, or
wrong, or injustice to any person, forbidden by any of these Commandments. If a
man indeed do to others, as others do unto him, This is Revenge, and he cannot
but do them wrong, as, or because they injure him. But he that does to others,
as he would have others to do to himself in the like case, This man cannot deal
unjustly, or uncharitably with any person, in any cause or matter. He will
neither fail of doing his duty to his Superiors, Inferiors, nor Equals,
against the fifth Commandment, because were he in their place and station, he
would expect such duty from them to himself. He will neither wrong any person
in his body, person, Goods, or good name, against the other Commandments,
because he would by no means have them so to wrong himself in the like case. So
this is a Comprehensive Law, containing all others in it, whether of justice or
charity, all the Six last Commandments. Let us now cast our eyes upon every of
them apart One by one.

Q. What duties does the fifth Commandment (Honor thy father and thy mother,
etc.) require of you?

A. The respective duties of all Inferiors and Superiors to each other.

Q. Show them particularly in the words of your Catechism?

A. To love, honor and succor my Father and Mother, to Honor and obey the
King, and all that are put in Authority under ^im, to submit my self to all my
Governors, Teachers, spiritual Pastors and Masters, to order my self lowly and
reverently to all my betters.

Catechist. My good children, These are great Lessons, and very proper for you
to learn, and have a special care to practice; for our Relative duties have a
most considerable place in true Religion, and no man can be said to be truly
Religious, that makes no conscience of a careful performing them. For further
understanding whereof, Let me acquaint you in the first place, That the great
thing required in this Commandment, is in other words S. Paul's precept, Romans
13.7. Render therefore to all their Dues, tribute to whom tribute is due,
custom to whom custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor, Owe no man
any thing, etc. More particularly, Children must love their parents, their
natural parents, their Father and Mother. And that this is included in the word
(honor) as belonging to parents, is evident by the Prophet Malachi, opposing
that honor which is due to fathers, to that fear which belongs to servants
toward their Masters, Mal. 1.6. A Son honors his father, and a servant his
Master, If I then be a father, where is my honor? and if I be a Master, where
is my fear? And the love children owe to their parents is not denied, but
implied in that of our Savior, when it interferes not with our duty to God,
Mat. 10.37. He that loves Father or Mother, more than me, is not worthy of me.
(2) Children must honor their parents, which you see is the letter of the
Commandment, that is, have a high and reverend esteem of them in their hearts.
(3) They must succor them, that is, in case of poverty, want, old age or
sickness, relieving their wants and helping their Infirmities, 1 Timothy 5.4. If
any widow have children or nephews, Let them learn to show piety at home, and
to requite their parents. For this is good, and acceptable to God. And in a
word, which is the result of all, they must obey them in all their lawful
commands, and fulfill them, Col. 3.20. Children obey your parents in all things,
for this is well pleasing to God. Now besides natural parents, there are civil
and political parents, the Fathers of our Country, the King, and such as are in
Authority under him; and there are Spiritual parents, Governors, Teachers,
Spiritual pastors, and Masters; and all our Betters, in Age, or quality, or
estate, have a sort of parental Relation to us, and so all these are included
in the words (Father and Mother) in the Commandment. For Subjects then, their
duty is to honor the King, and all that represent the King, in their
respective places, and offices, all that are in Authority under him; to honor
them for his sake, as bearing his Authority. And this Honoring the King is so
necessary, that God joins these two together in one precept, as if we could not
do the one aright, without the other, Prove. 24.21. My Son, fear thou the Lord,
and the King, and meddle not with them, that are given to change. 1 Pet. 2.17.
Fear God, Honor the King. And this Honoring him in our hearts, must be shown
by obeying their good Laws in our Actions, whether concerning our manners, or
concerning their tributes and prerogatives. For so Christ himself teaches,
Matthew. 22.21. Render to Caesar the things which are Caesar's, as unto God the
things which are Gods. Romans 13.1. Let every Soul be subject to the Higher
powers, etc. Ver. 4. They are the Ministers of God for Good. Ver. 6. For this
cause pay ye tribute also, they being Gods Ministers, attending continually on
this very thing. Of this therefore we that are Christ's Ministers, are to put
you always in mind, Tit. 3.1. Put them in mind to be subject to principalities
and powers, to obey Magistrates. And so S. Peter teaches, how contrary soever
his pretended Successors the Pope and Priests of Rome teach, 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every ordinance of man, for the Lords sake, whether it be
to the King, as supreme: or unto Governors, as unto them that are sent by Him,
for the punishment of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well. As
for Governors, Teachers and Spiritual pastors, to them, the Catechism says,
is due the peoples submission. One Text is sufficient to prove it, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, and submit yourselves: for they watch
for your Souls, as they that must give an account, that they may do it with
joy, and not with grief; for that is unprofitable for you. And so must servants
obey, and submit to their Masters, in all lawful commands, 1 Pet. 2.18.
Servants be subject to your Masters, without fear, not only the gentle, but
also the froward. And lastly, All men must behave themselves lowly and
reverently to all their betters, in age, estate, or quality, them that be
elder, either in higher Rank or Condition. For this it is that will preserve
order, peace and good will amongst men. And I shall only here give you the
Text, for reverencing the aged, even in Gods own Law, Lev. 19.32. Thou shall
rise up to the hoary head, and honor the old man. I am the Lord.

Many more Texts might I have cited for each duty to these Relations, but for
brevities sake, I must let these suffice, beseeching you to let them sink and
root in your hearts, for the regulating your whole conversations in this world.

Now you will much better know these your duties required in this Commandment,
if you can well learn what the particular sins contrary to those duties are,
which are forbidden by this Commandment, and those of both parties in these
several Relations; for though the one only is expressed, yet doubtless the
other are implied. First then.

Q. What are the sins of Children against this Commandment?

A. Their despising of their parents in their hearts, or their irreverence, or
disobedience to them in their behaviors, or not relieving nor helping them
when they fall into want or sickness.

Catechist. All which (God knows) are too much to be seen in diverse Children,
but for which, no doubt they must at last find the effects of Gods terrible
curse. Deuteronomy. 27.16. It is threatened expressly to all Despisers of their
parents, but doubtless extends to all irreverence, Undutifulness, and
Disobedience, Cursed be he that sets light by his father and mother, To
which all the people shall say, Amen. Prove. 1.8. My Son, hear the instructions
of thy Father, and forsake not the law of thy Mother. For chap. 15.5. A fool
despises his Fathers Instruction. And see how he threatens such a man, chap.
30.17. The eye that mocketh at his Father, and despises to obey his Mother,
The Ravens of the valley shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall eat it.
And mark it, it is one of the Abominations foretold of the last and perilous
times, Men shall be Despisers of parents. As for not succouring them, or
childrens not relieving their parents in need, when, and as they are able, you
cannot but know that it was for this, that our Savior rebuked the Pharisees
most sharply, Mar. 7.11. They taught men to neglect their parents in necessity;
so that they did but consecrate that to pious Uses, to the Corban, wherewith
they should relieve them. And so under pretense of piety, (it is said,) they
suffered no man to do ought for his parents, and thereby made the Commandment
of God of none effect, through their own Traditions.

Q. On the other hand, what are the sins of parents?

A. Not providing for their Children, or bringing them up in idleness and
ungodliness.

Catechist. You have the parents duty to provide for their childrens sustenance
in our Saviors argument, Luke 11.11. If a son ask bread of his father, will he
give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a Scorpion? And the
Apostle says, 2 Cor. 12.14. Children lay not up for their parents, but parents
for their children. All men do this by the Law, and instinct of nature. And
therefore he says, 1 Timothy 5.8. If any man provide not for his own, He is worse
than an Infidel. It is true, some men are in the other extreme, taking
immoderate care, and using unjust means, to enrich their families; yet still
all Unthrifts that piss against the walls all their earnings, and through
carelessness and profuseness, let their children and families starve and fall
into beggary, are great sinners, and so great that the Apostle censures them as
worse than Heathens or Infidels. But above all, parents had need to be
diligently taught that great duty of Godly education of their Children, and
their miscarriages shall aggravate the parents damnation, if it be for want of
bringing them up in the Nurture and admonition of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.4.

Q. What are the sins of subjects, against Kings and Magistrates?

A. Contemning, disobeying, or rebelling against the King, or those that are in
Authority under him.

Catechist. What a sin it is to despise or Contemn the King, or his
Magistrates, may be seen by the strictness of the precepts, Exodus 22.28. Thou
shall not revile the Gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people. Eccl. 10.20.
Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, for the bird of the air shall carry
the voice, and that which has wings shall tell the matter. As for disobedience
and Rebellion we have terrible examples of Gods vengeance for it in Corah and
his Company, in Absalom, and Sheba, and as terrible a Commination to all that
tread in their steps, Romans 13.2. Whosoever resists the powers, resists the
or dinance of God, and they that resist, shall receive to themselves damnation.

Q. What then are the sins of Kings, and Men in Authority?

A. Not making good Laws, or not executing them, for the punishment of evil
doers, and the encouragement of them that do well.

Catechist. For this is Gods declared end in raising up Kings and Magistrates,
1 Pet. 2.14. That they may be Ministers of God, says St. Paul. Romans 13.3. for
good, to them that are good, encouraging them in well doing: but not bearing
the sword in vain, may be a terror to evil doers. Which also is well expressed
in his Direction what to pray for in their behalf, 1 Timothy 2.2. That under them
we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all godliness and honesty, Which
thing they can never perform any other way, than by making good Laws, and
impartial putting them in execution, and therefore not doing either of these,
is their sin against this Commandment.

Q. What are the peoples sins against their Teachers, piritual Pastors and
Ministers?

A. Despising them, witholding their Dues or resisting or rejecting their
Doctrine, or Government causelessly.

Catechist. Remember I pray you, Abraham's answer to Dives in hell, interceding
for his brethren on Earth, That one might be sent to them from the dead, to
warn them, lest they should also come into those terments. They have Moses and
the Prophets, that is, such as teach their Doctrine. If they will not hear
them, neither will they believe though One should rise from the dead. As for
withholding the Ministers dues, titles or maintenance, it is enough that the
Prophet Malachi calls it, theft or robbery, and that, a robbing of God, Mal.
3.8. And that there is such a Sin as Sacrilege under the Gospel is manifest,
because else St. Paul would never have mentioned and reproved it, Romans 2.22.
Thou that abhorrest idolatry, do thou commit Sacrilege? As for rejecting
their doctrine or Government, it is apparently a breach of good order, and God
is the Father of order, and not of confusion in all the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.33.
And it is against that precept, Heb. 13.17. Obey them that have the Rule over
you. And no doubt what our Savior said to his Disciples, extends to all lawful
Pastors, in a just proportion, as being sent by Chirst, and speaking in his
name, and acting by the rules of his Gospel, Luke 10.16. He that hears you,
hears me, and he that despises you, despises me, and he that despises me,
despises him that sent me.

Q. On the other hand, what are the sins of Pastors or Ministers?

A. Neglecting to teach or guide their flocks, or misleading them by corrupt
doctrine, or by the bad example of a wicked life.

Catechist. There being none of that sacred function here present, I need say
little of it, only this, God make me and all my Brethren sensible, how sad it
will be for us, if preaching to others, we ourselves prove castaways, 1 Cor.
9.27. which we shall certainly, if we do the work of the Lord negligently. Jer.
48.10. Not feeding Christ's sheep and lambs, as we ought, John 21.15. etc. For
such Ministers are called dumb dogs, idle or idol shepherds, Unprofitable
Servants. And for all wicked Ministers, that of St. Paul is very sharp, Romans
2.1. Thou art inexcusable O man! ver. 21. Thou that teach another, teach
thou not thy self? And Psalm. 50.16. Unto the wicked God says, What have thou
to do to declare my statutes, seeing thou hate to be reformed. Yea let such
be never so commendable for their diligence in preaching, and prophesying in
the name of Christ, Himself tells them, what he will say to them at the last
day, Mat. 7.23. Depart from me, ye workers of iniquity.

Q. What are the sins of Servants against their Masters?

A. Being stubborn, or slothful, or Unfaithful in their Masters business or
trust.

Q. And what are the sins of Masters against their Servants?

A. Hard using their Servants, withholding their wages, or not providing what
is needful both for their bodies and souls.

Catechist. Not to multiply Texts, The sins of Servants are very easy to
discern in Col. 3.22. Servants obey in all things your Masters, according to
the flesh, not with eye service, as Men-pleasers, but with singleness of heart,
as fearing God, and whatsover ye do, do it heartily, as to the Lord, not as to
men; Knowing that of the Lord, ye shall receive the reward of inheritance, for
ye serve the Lord Christ. And for the sins of Masters, as we know how great
that is, of withholding the hire of the Labourer, Jam. 5.4. it is a crying sin;
so the other sins are evident in that of the same Apostle, Col. 4.1. Masters
give unto your Servants, that which is just and equal, knowing that ye also
have a Master in heaven.

Q. What are the sins of wives against their husbands?

A. Disobeying or resisting their lawful Commands, unquiet behavior, and
unfaithfulness.

Q. What are the sins of husbands against their wives.

A. Unkindness, Unfaithfulness, not providing for their Sustenance, and not
bearing with their infirmities, as weaker vessels.

Catechist. To prove which I need no more but show what the Apostle requires of
either of them, for that shows their respective transgressions, Ephesians. 5.22.
Wives submit yourselves to your husbands, as it is fit in the Lord, and mark
his reason, for the Husband is the Head of the wife, as Christ is the Head of
his Church. Ver. 33. Let the wife therefore see that she reverence her husband.
For quiet and unquiet behavior, what St. Peter speaks is excellent for this Sex
to be often thinking of, 1 Ep. 3.4. Commending to them, a meek and, quiet
spirit, as the best ornament, far to be preferred before those of gold, silver
or pearl, it being in the sight of God of great price. As for Unfaithfulness,
that is of two sorts, that in his bed, which is Adultery, and that in such
concerns as are committed to them, by their husbands. Concerning which I shall
need say no more, but offer you that description the Wiseman gives of a good
wife, and then it will follow, unfaithfulness must needs be an argument of a
bad one, Prove. 31.11. The Heart of her busband safely trusts in her, so that he
shall have no need to fear spoil, or waste.

On the other hand, there are like sins of husbands toward their wives,
unfaithfulness, and any thing contrary to true love, especially unkindness, or
bitterness of anger. For Ephesians. 5.28. They ought to love their wives, as their
own bodies, and as Christ loved the Church. Col. 3.19. Husbands love your
wives, and be not bitter against them. Not providing for their Comfortable
Sustenance. For that is a fault in many Husbands, to drink and tipple, while
their Wives and Families mourn, and starve, and have hard fare, or famine; and
to this extends the forequoted censure of the Apostle, He that provides not for
them of his own household, is worse than an Infidel. And lastly it is expressly
enjoined them, 1 Pet. 3.7. Likewise ye husbands, dwell with your wives
according to knowledge, giving honor unto the Wife, and so bearing with her
infirmities, as the weaker vessel, and as heirs together of the grace of life,
that your prayers be not hindered.

Q. What are the sins of all other Inferiors against their Betters, whether in
Age, Gifts or Estate?

A. All proud or irreverent behavior toward them, whether in word or deed.

Catechist. In all degrees of men, The Lord hates a proud look, as well as a
lying tongue, Prove. 6.17. The younger sort therefore are to be humble and sober
minded, Tit. 2.6. And it is Gods express Law, that they rise up before the
hoary head, and bonour the old man, with this reason, I am the Lord, Lev.
19.32. And as for the wiser and richer sort, their Wealth and Wisdom being the
Blessings of God, useful to the good of mankind, there is a reverence due to
them, whence Solomon, in the forequoted place forbids, as cursing the King in
our thoughts, so the rich in our bedchamber, for a bird of the air shall carry
the voice, and that which has wings, will tell the matter.

Q. What then are the sins of Betters to them below them?

A. Scornful despising them, or not using their own respective abilities for
others good, as need requires.

Catechist. For as for the Aged, it is discretion that makes the gray hairs
truly venerable. And S. Paul enjoins them to be sober and temperate, as also
the younger to follow the good councels and examples of the wise, and
experienced, Tit. 2.2. And whosoever they be that extol others in wealth,
wisdom or dignity, they must consider of them as Gods Gifts and Blessings, and
themselves as his Stewards, bound to employ their Talents for his Honor, and
others good, and always reckoning that they must at last give an account of
their Stewardship, Luke 16.2.

Q. What does God promise to them that keep, and threaten to them that
transgress this Commandment?

A. To the One he promises long life and prosperity, and threatens the other
to shorten their days upon Earth.

Catechist. It is S. Paul's observation, Ephesians. 6.2. that this is the first
Commandment with promise, that is, the first of those that show our duties
toward men, having an express promise of long life annexed to it: and in this
promise is implied a threatening to all disobedient Children, and so to all
other transgressors of this Law, of shortning their days, and cutting them off
as an ear of corn untimely, before it be ripe. And especially let the Wise man's
Comminations against all Rebellious Subjects, be in our remembrance always,
Prove. 24.21. My Son, fear thou the Lord and the King, and meddle not with them
that are given to change. For who knows the destruction of them both, both the
ringleaders and their followers? And for all other sinners against this
Commandment in special, Memorable is that in Prove. 10.27. The fear of the Lord
prolongeth days, but the years of the wicked shall be shortened. So have you a
comperent account of the duties required, and the sins forbidden in the fifth
Commandment: and let it be all our prayer always, Lord have mercy upon us, to
pardon our past transgressions, and henceforth, and for ever incline our hearts
to keep this Law.

Q. What duties does the sixth Commandment, (Thou shall not kill) require?

A. All lawful endeavors to preserve mine own life, and the lives of others.

Catechist. Therefore must we, Gal. 6.10. do good to all men, that is, toward
preserving their lives or rendering them more Comfortable. Upon which account we
must, Romans 12.18. as much as in us lies, live peaceably with all men. And our
Savior propounds the good Samaritan for our example, Luke 10.34. Who finding
the Man wounded by thieves, bound up his wounds, and poured in oil and wine
unto them, and took care of his recovery: to which purpose are the precepts of
feeding the hungry, and clothing the naked, and visiting the sick, and them in
prison, Matthew. 25.35. All which are required by this Commandment; for if any
man starve for hunger. He that knew it, and could, but would not feed him, is
guilty of his death.

Q. What sins does this Commandment forbid, according to your Catechism?

A. Hurting any body by word or deed, Bearing any Malice or Hatred in my heart.

Catechist. It is written, Romans 12.19, 20. Dearly Beloved, avenge not
yourselves, that is, by hurting even him that has hurt thee, For Vengeance is
mine, I will recompense says the Lord. And therefore our Saviors precept is
Matthew. 5.38.39. Ye have heard that it has been said, An eye for an eye, and a
tooth for a tooth; But I say unto you, that ye resist not evil, but whosoever
shall smite thee on the right cheek, turn to him the other also. And his
Apostle, Romans 12.20. teaches doing good, instead of doing evil: if thine enemy
hunger, feed him: if he thirst, give him drink, for in so doing thou shall heap
coals of fire on his head, that is, melt him into friendship and kindness. Ver.
21. Be not overcome with evil, but overcome evil with good. Nor is it only
hurting, and extreme violence, or murdering that is forbidden, whereof it is
said, Genesis 9.6. Whosoever sheddeth man's blood, by man shall his blood be shed, but
also any lesser hurt, as wounding, or maiming, or doing any thing to the
prejudice of his health and wellbeing; nay even hatred and malice, occasioning
or exciting to these in the heart, 1 John 3.15. Whosoever hates his brother is a
Murderer, and no Murderer has Eternal life abiding in him.

Q. What think you of rash or immoderate Anger, and desire of revenge?

A. They are degrees of, and provoke to Murder, and so are also sins against
this Commandment.

Catechist. It is enough to say, that this is our Saviors Doctrine in his
Sermon on the Mount, Matthew. 5.21, 22. Ye have heard that it has been said to
them of old time, Thou shall not kill, and whosoever shall kill, shall be in
danger of the judgment? But I say unto you, whosoever is angry with his brother
without a cause, shall be in danger of the judgment, and whosoever shall say
unto his brother, Racha, shall be in danger of the council, but whosoever shall
say, thou Fool, shall be in danger of hell fire. Anger causeless, and Anger
immoderate, such as breaks out into intemperate, railing speeches, both are
great fins against this Commandment, according to our Saviors exposition of
it; who therefore goes on there to enjoin a reconciling of such differences as
arise from anger to all Christians, before they offer their Holy Services to
God, if they will be accepted of God, Ver. 23.24. Therefore if you bring thy
gift to the Altar, and there remembrest that thy brother has ought against
thee, Leave there thy gift before the Altar, and go thy way; first be
reconciled to thy brother, and then come and offer thy gift. And so much for
the Sixth Commandment.

Q. What duties does the seventh Commandment require of you, according to your
Catechism? (Thou shall not commit Adultery.)

A. To keep my Body in Temperance, Soberness and Chastity.

Q. Which of these is chiefly required here?

A. Chastity: to wit, in thought, speech, and behavior; and Temperance and
Soberness in order to Chastity.

Catechist. I pray you mark; In your Catechism the Negative, the Sins forbidden
in most of the other Commandments is expressed, and the Contrary duties are
implied therein; But the duties in the Affirmative is here expressed, the
duties enjoined in this Commandment; and the Negative, the sins forbidden are
implied in them. Now learn these Scripture Texts concerning them, 1 These. 4.3,
4, 5. This is the Will of God, even your Sanctification, that ye should abstain
from Fornication, that every one of you know how to possess his Vessel, (that
is, his body) in Sanctification and Honor; not in the lust of Concupiscence,
as the Gentiles that know not God: For God has called us, not to Uncleanness,
but unto Holiness. To the contrary therefore it is threatened, 1 Cor. 3.17. If
any man defile the Temple of God, Him will God destroy.

Q What are the sins forbidden in this Commandment?

A. All gross Acts of Uncleanness, Fornication, or Adultery; nay the lest signs
or degrees thereof, as, filthy thoughts, desires, or Concupiscences, wanton
glances, or any obscene talk.

Catechist. Gal. 5.19. The works of the flesh are manifest, Adultery,
Fornication, Uncleanness, Lasciviousness; Fornication therefore and all
Uncleanness, Let it not (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 5.3.) be once named amongst
you as becomes Saints. And Col. 3.5. Mortify your Members which are upon
Earth, Fornication, Uncleanness, inordinate affection, or Concupiscence. O!
that you young people would learn these Texts, and store them up in your
hearts, which if you would do, you would not so monstrously commit that
detestable Crime of Fornication, either simple Fornication, or that before your
Marriages, as we too often see! And to the end you may avoid these, I beseech
you, consider the necessity of avoiding the least degrees thereof, much more
the gross sins. For 2 Cor. 7.1. You must Cleanse yourselves from all
filthiness, not only of the flesh, but also of the spirit. Gal. 5.24. You must
crucify the flesh, with the affections and lusts. You must take heed of even
wanton glances, with Job 31.1. Make a Covenant with your eyes not to look upon
a Maid. For your Savior says upon this Commandment, Mat. 5.28. He that
looks on a woman to lust after her, Commits Adultery with ber in his heart.
And hence you read of such as have eyes full of Adultery, 2 Pet. 2.14. And you
must likewise take heed of all wanton and obscene discourse, and corrupt
Communications, all filthiness and foolish talking, which are not Convenient,
that is, by the Figure Meiosis, are very hurtful, instaming lust, Ephesians. 4.29.

Q. What sins are forbidden, as provoking or pampering lust?

A. All excess in Meats or Drinks: Gluttony and Drunkenness.

Catechist, Temperance and Soberness therefore are enjoined you in this
Commandment, Romans 13.13. Let us therefore walk honestly as in the day, not in
rioting and drunkenness, not in chambering and wantonness. Observe how closely
these are joined together, because they most commonly follow each other. Lot
was therefore overtaken in incest with his two Daughters through drunkenness.
And it is a sad saying of a Father, I never knew a drunkard chaste. Let the time
past therefore (as S. Peter 1 Ep. 4.3. exhorts,) suffice us to have wrought the
will of the Gentiles, when we walked in all lasciviousness, lusts, excess of
wine, revellings, banquettings. For as S. Paul says, Romans 13.14. It is by
these things that men make provision for the flesh to fulfill the lusts thereof.

Q. What does the Eight Commandment require?

A. All lawful endeavors to further my Neighbors Wealth, as well as mine own.

Q. How does your Catechism express this?

A. To be true and just in all my dealings.

Catechist. This Commandment enjoins you just, and plain, and honest dealing
with all men. For Mic. 6.8. What does the Lord thy God require of thee, but to
do justly, love mercy, and walk humbly with thy God? And without this, let no
man think he can be saved, Psalm. 15.1, 2. Who shall dwell in thine Holy hill?
He that walks uprightly, and works righteousness, and does no ill to his
Neighbor. For in this says S. John, 1 Ep. 3.10. In this are the Children of
God manifest, and the Children of the Devil: He that does not righteousness is
not of God, neither he that Hates his Brother. But then I pray,

Q. In what Commandment are Alms, and works of Mercy and Charity required?

A. Both in this, and in the Sixth Commandment: In this Commandment; because
Almsgiving is a work of Justice and Righteousness, as well as of Charity: it is
the poor Man's due. And in the Sixth Commandment; for we are guilty of his
Blood, who perished for want, when we are able to relieve him.

Catechist. This is excellently illustrated in a passage of the Son of Sirach,
Ecclus. 4.1. My Son, defraud not the poor of his Living; neither make the needy
to wait long; Make not the hungry Soul sorrowful, and defer not to give to him
that is in need, chap. 34.25. The Bread of the needy is his Life, He that
defraudeth a man thereof, is a man of Blood. He that takes away his Neighbors
living, slays him; and he that defrauds his Labourer of his hire, is a
blood-shedder. This is plain, we must be charitable to relieve men in extreme
need, or else we are guilty of injustice and fraud; defrauding the poor of his
Living; and we are guilty of blood, for not relieving Him, that is ready to
starve for extreme want, we do in effect slay or kill him. And for Alms being
required by this Commandment (Thou shall not steal) Hear a greater than the Son
of Sirach, even Solomon in his Proverbs 3.27. Withhold not good from them to
whom it is due, when it is in the power of thine hand to do it. In a word, A
man cannot be Uncharitable but he is withal Unjust and Unrighteous. For the
Rich man is Gods Steward, his riches are his Talent to be employed for his
glory and others good, and his Superfluity are the poor man's Due, if need
require, what he has to spare is due unto him, to do him good by Gods
Ordinance and Commandment.

Q. What then are the sins forbidden by this Commandment?

A. All picking and stealing; that is, All acts of Fraud and Oppression, as
well as Violence and Robbery.

Q. What is required of those who have thus wronged others, in any kind or
degree, that they may be saved?

A. Restitution to their power: For he is Unjust, and a Thief in Gods account,
who witholds what is another man's, being able to restore it.

Catechist. It is not for nothing, that your Catechism thus teaches you
distinctly and expressly, both the Affirmative and Negative, both the duties
enjoined, and the sins forbidden in this Commandment, more then in the other
Commandments. It is because just and honest dealing, carry a great place and
figure in true Religion, and no Unjust man can be truly Holy and Religious
before God, whatever he pretends.

Now know that the Letter of this Commandment forbids Stealing, that is, all
acts of Violence, or Robbery; and other Scriptures manifestly extend the
prohibition to all Acts of Fraud, Falsehood, Guile and Oppression, and make them
degrees of Theft, what softer notions soever the world may have of them. Lev.
19.11. Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another. Ver. 13.
Thou shall not defraud thy Neighbor, nor rob him. And chap 25.17. Ye shall not
oppress one another (that is, by over, or undervaluing what ye Buy or Sell) I
am the Lord. 1 These. 4.6. Let no man defraud, or go beyond his brother in any
thing; for God is the Avenger of all such.

But if any one have done any of these things, then must he of necessity
restore to every one, what he has wronged him of, if ever he hopes to be
saved. The Holy Fathers of the Church, give it as a certain Canon or Rule, that
without this Restitution, there can be no Remission, no Salvation, And with
great reason, for God says in his Law expressly, Lev. 6.4. He that has sinned
and is guilty, He shall restore that which he has taken violently away, or the
thing which he has gotten deceitfully, or all that, about which, being
delivered him to keep, or being lost he found, or for whatsoever he swear
falsely, He shall restore it, even in the principal, and shall add a fifth part
more, and give it unto him to whom it appertains in the day of his trespass
offering. Examples of which Restitution we have one in the Old Testament, Neh.
5.11, 12, 13. He in his Reforming the people, caused them to restore the money,
and the corn which they had exacted of one another. And another in the New
Testament Zaccheus, Luke 19.8. who upon his Conversion promised if he had
wronged any man by false accusation, he would restore fourfold. In short, the
Apostles precept reaches this matter, Romans 13.7. Render to all their Dues. For
whatever thou have wronged any man of, it is his Due. It is his, though in thy
hands and possession, and thou art bound in justice to give, or render to every
man his Due, or what is his.

Q. Do not they also transgress this Commandment, who are idle and will not
labor in an honest Calling, or who are prodigal, and wast their Estates and
Earnings?

A. Yes: They are Thieves to their Families, who either provide not for them,
or spend all they have upon their Lusts.

Catechist. I have before told you of the Apostles most severe Censure of such
men as are careless of their Families. 1 Timothy 5.8. If any man provide not for
them of his own household, He has denied the Faith, and is worse than an
Infidel. And I appeal to every one here, if it be not the same case; for a man
vainly to wast what should maintain his wife and children, and piss that
against the walls, which should be bread and clothing to their backs and
bellies. May these things then serve to help you to Understand this Eight
Commandment.

Q. What does the Ninth Commandment (Thou shall not bear false witness) require?

A. To speak the truth on all occasions, and to endea^^ur to preserve, and
maintain, and promot^ ^^ine own, and my Neighbors Credit or good Name.

Catechist. I would have you here recollect the scope and purport of the three
last Commandments. For in the Sixth Commandment, God takes care to secure your
Neighbors life and person; in the Seventh his chastity, and the chastity of
his Relatives; in the Eight, his worldly Goods, and properties, and Estate: And
here what is (as dear to him as any of the other) his credit, good Name, and
Reputation. In General, Truth in speech is required by this Commandment, which
is one part of the Answer to that necessary Inquiry, Who shall dwell in Gods
Tabernacle? who shall inhabit his Holy Hill? Psalm. 15.1, 2. He that speaks
the truth to his Neighbor. Putting away lying therefore, says the Apostle,
Ephesians. 4.25. speak ye every man the truth, for we are members one of another. And
in special we must in all our speeches have a just care of our Neighbors good
Name and Repute. For Romans 13.10. Love works no ill to his Neighbor in any
kind, especially not in his good Name, which is the best thing he has in this
world, better than a most precious ointment, Eccl. 7.3. And to be chosen rather
than great riches, and loving favor than silver and gold, Prove. 22.1.

Q. What then are the sins forbidden by this Commandment, according to your
Catechism?

A. Evil speaking as well as false speaking, lying and standering: and also
rash judging, talebearing and wispering lies, much more bearing false witness
before a Magistrate.

Catechist. Ye shall not steal, nor deal falsely, nor lie one to another, are
the words of Gods Law, ^^v. 19.11. And therefore A righteous man hates lying,
Prove. 13.5. For A proud look, lying lips, an heart that devises abominations,
and him that sows discord amon^ ^rethren, a false witness that speaks lies;
these are those Seven things which God hates, yea they ar^ abomination to him,
Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. So that a false witness shall not be unpunished: and he
that speaks lies shall not escape. Good Children, take my Council, treasure
up these and the like Texts in your hearts and Memories. And think of what S.
John says expressly, Rev. 22.15. Without, that is, without the heavenly
Jerusalem, shall be dogs, even Sorcerers, Whoremongers, Idolaters, with whom
are ranked every one that loves and makes a lie. This is hugely aggravated,
if it be a lie upon solemn Oath, in bearing Witness or Testimony before a
Magistrate, for this perverteth public Justice and Judgment, and misleads both
Judge and Jurors to a false sentence or verdict. This is expressly forbidden in
the Letter of this Commandment. But I pray learn further, it is not only lying
and false speaking, that you must avoid by this Commandment, but also all
evilspeaking as your Catechism teaches you. Put them in mind (says the
Apostle to Titus 3.1, 2. and in him to all Ministers) to speak evil of no man,
to be no brawlers, etc. Not rendering evil for evil, or railing for railing,
says S. Peter. 1 Ep. 3.9. For Our Savior left us an example, that we should
follow his steps, chap. 2.21. Who when he was reviled, reviled not again, ver.
23. St. Paul therefore joins these together, 1 Timothy 6.4. Envy, strife,
railings, evil surmisings, as coming from pride and strife of words. So is evil
surmisings a great fault, and from thence, rash judging and censuring. For
Christ says, Mat. 7.1, 2. Judge not, that you be not judged; for with what
measure thou metest out to another, it shall be measured to thee again. And S.
James says, chap. 4.11. Speak not evil one of another (brethren) He that
speaks evil of his brother, and judges his brother, speaks evil of the
Law, and judges the Law. To this may be added talebearing, a thing expressly
forbidden by God himself in his Law, Lev. 19.16. Thou shall not go up and down
as a talebearer, among my people. A thing Solomon often declaims against, Prove.
18.8. The words of a talebearer are as wounds, and go down into the inner parts
of the belly. Chap. 11.13. A talebearer reveals secrets, but he that is of a
faithful spirit, concealeth the matter. And therefore he imputes the
Continuance of strife among men to these, chap. 26.20. Where there is no wood,
there the fire goes out: so where there is no talebearer the strife cease.
And by Consequence where such are it continues. It is therefore excellent
council which the Son of Sirach gives, Ecclus. 19.6. Whether it be to friend or
foe, talk not of other men's lives: and if thou can without offense reveal
them not, look the place at large, and also chap. 21.25, 26. In short I exhort
you Beloved, often to read what S. James says at large in his Epistle of the
Government of the tongue, that unruly member, and always to remember and carry
in your minds the Rule S. Peter 1 Ep. 3.10. gives out of the 34. Psalm ver. 12.
What man is he that desires life, and to see good days, Let him refrain his
tongue from evil, and his lips that they speak no guile. Let him eschew evil,
and do good: let him seek peace and ensue it.

Q. May we in no Case tell a lie, no not for the better?

A. No: for all lies are of the Devil, and we must not do evil that good may
come of it.

Catechist. That all lies are of the Devil, is plain by what Christ said, John
8.44. When the Devil speaks a lie, he speaks of his own, For he is a Liar, and
the Father of lies. And as for Officious lies, that is, lies for the better (as
we commonly say) S. Paul's Rule to Christians condemns them sufficiently, Romans 3
8. No man may do evil, that good may come of it. For they that do so, their
Damnation is just. Now have you but one Commandment remaining, which most
Divines expound to design chiefly the regulating the very heart, and so to have
influence upon all the rest, which restrain the hands, and tongue, and outward
man from all acts of Injustice and Unrighteousness, but let us learn what your
Catechism teaches you of it.

Q. What duties does the Tenth Commandment require of you, according to your
Catechism? ( Thou shall not covet, etc.)

A. Labor and diligence in my Calling, that I may get mine own Living; and
Contentment; doing my duty in that state of life unto which it has pleased God
to call me.

Catechist. If any man be idle, and will not labor, S. Paul censures him to
hunger, saying, neither let him eat, 1 These. 3.10. For such a man crosses Gods
Ordinance, who as it is in Job 5.27. made man to labor, as the sparks to fly
upward. Such is therefore Gods Canon Law, Ephesians. 4.28. Let him that stole, steal
no more; but rather, let him labor with his hands the thing that is good, that
he may have to give to him that needs. And as for diligence in this labor,
we know what God promises, and may daily see how God prospers it, Prove. 10.4.
He becomes poor that deals with a slack hand, But the hand of the diligent
makes rich. Chap. 13.4. The Soul of the sluggard desires, and has nothing,
but the Soul of the diligent shall be made fat. Now being diligent and
industrious in our Callings; we must be content with that Condition and State
of life, wherein God has placed us, 1 Timothy 6.6. Having food and raiment, let
us therewith be content. For Godliness with Contentment is great gain. Let your
Conversation therefore be without Covetousnes. Heb. 13.5. And be content with
such things as ye have: for he has said, I will never leave thee nor forsake
thee. And herein we have the Apostle for an excellent example, who says, Phil.
4.11. I have learnt to abound and to suffer want, and in whatsoever Estate I
am, therewith to be content.

Q. What then are the sins forbidden by this Commandment?

A. Idleness in my Calling, Discontent with my present Condition, Envying,
Coveting or inordinate desiring the Goods of others.

Catechist. Hear a little out of the Scriptures of each of these. The Prophet
Ezekiel 1.6.49. tells you what the sins of Sodom was, even fullness of bread,
and abandance of Idleness. And as Solomon often inveighs against the sluggard,
so his Censure of this vice (to name no more) methinks deserves your good
remmembrance, Eccl. 10.18. By much slothfulness the Building decays, and
through Idleness of the hands, the House droppeth through. As for
Coffeehouse in whatever Condition Gods providence places us, it is quite
contrary to Holy David's resolves, Psalm. 39.9. I will lay my hand upon my mouth,
and say nothing, because it is thy Doing. And to Jobs carriage under his
unspeakable losses and crosses. For when all was destroyed, and he fell into
most extreme poverty and misery, He sinned not, but said, chap. 1 21. The Lord
gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the name of the Lord. And to his
murmuring wife he said, chap. 2.10. Thou speak like one of the foolish
women, for shall we receive good, and not evil at the hands of the Lord? And
now, as we must not be discontent with, nor impatient under our own Condition,
so must we not envy at another man's. For Envyings are numbered amongst the works
of the flesh, Gal. 5.21. And the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 13.4. Charity envyeth
not, but rejoices in others good. The Psalmist therefore cautions every godly
man against envying, fretting at even the wicked man's prosperity in this world.
Ps. 37. throughout. And the Apostle says, Romans 13.13. Let us walk, not in
strife nor envying, no more than in gluttony and drunkenness; and St. James
makes envy the Fountain of many mischiefs, saying, chap. 3.16. Where envying is
there is Confusion, and every evil work. And lastly, as for Coveting and
inordinate desire of others goods, The letter of the Commandment expressly
forbids it, saying, Thou shall not covet thy neighbors house, etc. And
therefore I say in the words of the Prophet, Ezekiel 33.31. Let not your hearts
go after your Covetousness. So have you now all the Commandments set before
you, by which I exhort you often to examine yourselves, how your estate stands
toward God, and concerning your hopes of Salvation, and great cause have we
all to say as Holy Church directs us, after the repeating them in the Communion
Service, and that even from the bottom of our hearts, Lord have mercy to pardon
us all our Omissions and Commissions therein, and for the time to Come, write
all these Laws in our hearts. So proceed we to the next General Head in
Catechism.

The Lords Prayer: for an Introduction whereto, I ask you,
Q. My Good Child, Do thou think thou art able to do these things of thy
self, or to keep these Commandments of God, or to serve him of thy self, by any
natural power of thine own?

A. No.

Q. What then is needful to enable thee thereunto?

A. Gods special Grace.

Catechist. I have minded you before, of what our Savior said to his
Disciples, John 11.15. I am the Vine, ye are the branches, He that abides in
me, and I in him, brings forth much fruit, for without me ye can do nothing,
Joh. 15.5. it is God that works in us both to will and do that which is good.
And thence are we able to do all things, Phil. 4.13. any good thing through
Christ strengthening us.

Q. Why are you unable to keep Gods Commandments, or to serve him without this
special Grace assisting you?

A. Because my duties are Spiritual, and having many mighty Enemies, and strong
Temptations, I am by nature prone to all evil, and averse from all good.

Catechist. I have before upon the fourth Question in Catechism, and in the
Creed instructed you in this your natural Corruption, and I cannot do it too
often, S. Paul speaks much of it in Romans 7. saying, In me, that is, in my flesh
dwells no good thing. Ver. 18. For to will is present with me, but how to
perform that which is good I know not. Ver. 14. What I would, that I do not:
but what I hate, that do I. Our Enemies they are mighty, and very subtle, even
the Devil, the world and the flesh. Our duties are spiritual: for God says, My
Son, Give me thy heart, Prove. 23.26. and will be worshipped in spirit and in
truth, Joh. 4.24. But we are carnal, sold under sin, Romans 7.14. The natural man
receives not the things of the spirit of God, because they are spiritually
discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Q By what means then may you obtain Gods special Grace?

A. By diligent, that is, by daily fervent prayer.

Catechist. Of the efficacy of our prayers to obtain Gods special Grace Our
Savior assures us, and that by way of Argument, which gives us much stronger
consolation, Luk, 11.13. If ye being evil, know how to give good gifts to your
Children, how much more will your heavenly Father give his Holy Spirit to them
that ask him? But then Our asking must be thus qualified, that it may obtain:
it must be daily, we must pray continually or without ceasing, 1 These. 5.17.
and fervently, Jam. 5.16. The effectual fervent prayer of a righteous man
avails much. Ask therefore, and so ask, and it shall be given you: seek and
ye shall find: knock and it shall be opened unto you, Matthew. 7.7.

Q. In what bodily posture must you pray?

A. Kneeling, or at least with the greatest reverence possible.

Catechist. For in this posture of kneeling have Gods Saints always made their
solemn prayers, or for the most part. And as we cannot use too much reverence
in our Addresses to so great a God, so unto this are we daily invited in the
words of the Psalm. 95.6. O come let us worship and fall down, and kneel before
the Lord our maker.

Q. What things must you pray for besides Gods Grace?

A. Only for things agreeable to Gods will.

Catechist. 1 John 5.14. This is the Confidence that we have in him, that
whatever we ask according to his Will, he hears us.

Q. In whose Name and Mediation must we put up our prayers?

A. Neither of Saints nor Angels, but only that of our Lord Jesus Christ.

Catechist. So he himself directs us. For he the is one Mediator betwixt us and
the one God, 1 Timothy 2.5. Therefore he says, Joh. 14 13.14. Whatsoever ye shall
ask in my name, that will I do, that the Father may be glorified in me. If ye
shall ask any thing in my Name, I will do it. And he assures us, even with an
Oath, that his Father will do it, chap. 16.23. Verily, Verily I say unto you,
whatsoever ye shall ask the Father in my Name, he will give it you. And he
seems to solve the doubt, why he says, he will do it, and his Father will do
it too, ver. 26. Ye shall ask in my Name, and I say unto you, that I will pray
the father for you, etc. For Heb. 7.25. He is able to save to the ultermost,
seeing he lives for ever to make intercession for us. With great reason
therefore does our Holy Church conclude all her prayers with these words,
Through Jesus Christ our Lord. And praying in Christ's Name, we cannot pray
better or more acceptably than in his words too.

Q. Which is the best form of prayer, and most perfect pattern to direct you in
praying?

A. The Prayer Christ taught his Disciples, called, The Lords Prayer.

Q. Let me hear you then say the Lords prayer?

A. Our Father which art in heaven, Hallowed be thy name, etc.

Catechist. It is rightly called the Lords prayer, as the Eucharist is called
the Lords Supper, because he composed it, as he instituted and ordained this
his Supper. Now observe when Christ taught his Disciples this prayer; it is
said in Luke 11.2. When ye pray, say, plainly making it Our duty (as his
Disciples, as we will own ourselves to be Christians) to use this form of
prayer at all times; for it is a most perfect and Comprehensive prayer,
containing all that is needful to be prayed for, and therefore supplying the
defects of all other our prayers. But at another time, Matthew. 6.9. He said,
After this manner pray ye, as plainly there making it a pattern to all other
our prayers. And so doing, Our prayers cannot be other than according to Gods
will, and being so, we are sure he will hear and grant our petitions. Now tell
me what your Catechism teaches you of this.

Q. What desire thou of God in this prayer?

A. I desire my Lord God, our Heavenly Father, etc.

Catechist. This is a very solid answer, and teaches you a great deal in a
little Compass. My part is to help you to understand to what part and petition
of your Lords prayer, every clause in this answer is to be referred, and to
make these and all other needful things concerning it as plain as I can. In the
mean time, Let me give you this instruction. It will be very good and
profitable for you, (Good Children,) to get some other good and godly prayers
by heart for your daily use, out of some or other good books, such as those
sometimes annexed to your Bibles, or those in that excellent Book called, The
Whole duty of man, or the like. And till you can do that, let me tell you, you
may make a very good prayer of this your answer, and using it devoutly and with
understanding, it will be acceptable to God. Instead of saying, I desire my
Lord God, Our heavenly Father, etc. it is but altering it thus, and it will be
a very good prayer. O Lord God, Our Heavenly Father, who art the Author of all
goodness, I desire thee, I beseech thee, that thou will send thy grace to me
and to all people, that we may worship thee, serve thee, and obey thee as we
ought to do, and I pray unto thee that thou will send us all things, that be
needful both for our bodies and our Souls, and that thou will be merciful unto
us, and, forgive us our sins, and I humbly beg that it will please thee to save
us in all dangers Ghostly and bodily, and that thou will keep us from all sin
and wickedness, and from our Ghostly Enemy, and from Everlasting death. And I
trust and beg of thee, that I may always trust that thou will do this of thy
own mere mercy and goodness, through our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Say this your answer in such a form of ^^ayer upon your knees every day
morning and evening ^ith understanding, and from your hearts and Souls, and
doubt not, God who delights not in quaint words, nor in the multitude of them,
will graciously accept it, both till you have furnished yourselves with some
larger forms, and afterward.

Now for our further understanding of our Lords prayer, and of this account
your Catechism gives of it, I ask you,

Q. How many parts are there in the Lords prayer?

A. Three: a Preface, the Petitions, and the Doxology or Conclusion.

Catechist. See what you may learn by the Preface first.

Q. To whom must you pray that you may be sure to speed?

A. To our Father in Heaven only.

Catechist. A very necessary Observation, since we know the Papists practices
of making their prayers, to Saints and Angels, nay to very Images, and
especially to the Virgin Mary. Which if any Christians can lawfully do, it is
mavelous that our Lord and Savior should direct us so strictly to pray to
God, and him only, to no other whom we cannot call by this title, Our Father
which art in heaven. Religious prayer and Invocation is a Divine Honor, it is
proper to God, who says, Psalm. 50.15. Call upon me in the day of trouble, and
we cannot give Gods glory to another without the guilt of Idolatry. To pray
unto Saints or Angels, implies an adoring them, as Omnipotent, able to help us,
Omnipresent; and Omniscient, capable of hearing us wherever, and whenever we
call upon them. And can we he sure of either of these? or are they possible?
where have we any precept or direction in all the Scriptures, to make our
Addresses and Supplications unto them? or any example of any Saints that have
done it before us? or any promise of their hearing our prayers, or helping our
necessities, or of our obtaining what we ask of them, or by their Mediation?
And having none of these, how can we pray to them in duty or in Faith? But this
we can do to God, and to him only, Our Father which is in Heaven. For being Our
Father, he is gracious and of great kindness, having Fatherly bowels, ready and
willing to hear and help us, and being Our Father in Heaven. He is Almighty,
the Great giver of all goodness, and therefore able to hear and help us. And
therefore to him alone let us make our prayers and supplications saying, with
Holy David, Psalm. 25.1. Unto thee, O Lord, do I lift up my Soul. Psalm. 121.1,
2. I will lift up mine eyes to the hills, from whence comes my help. My help
comes from the Lord who made Heaven and Earth.

Q. What is the meaning then of this Preface (Our Father which art in Heaven?)

A. It teaches me to call upon God, as my Lord God, Our Heavenly Father, who is
the Giver of all Goodness, and so assures me that he both will, and can hear
and help me.

Catechist. Your Catechism here, gives you a very short but pithy explanation
of this Title of the Great God, as the Hearer of prayers, Psalm. 65.2. (Our
Father which art in Heaven.) Therein every one calls upon God in such words, as
S. Thomas expresses his faith in, Joh. 20.28. My Lord and my God. Thou, in
whom I have a special interest as my God. Yet (mark it) not so mine, but that
he is also others. (Our heavenly Father.) For I am in Charity to look upon
others as my Brethren, having a filial relation also to God, as well as my
self. Now (as I said) in that He is our Father, This assures us that he is
ready and willing to hear and help us, as any Father will do for his children,
for so Christ argues, Matthew. 7.9, 10. If a child ask bread of his father, will
he give him a stone? or if he ask a fish, will he give him a Scorpien? Will he
not give him all good things, and things needful and profitable for him? Hon
much more will God as a Father give us all good things that we ask him? For
Psalm. 103.13. As a Father pitieth his children, so does the Lord them that fear
him. And then that he is Our Heavenly Father, this assures us of his power and
ability, that he can help us. For Psalm. 99.1. The Lord is great in Sion, and he
is high above all people. Psalm. 97.1. The Lord reigns, let his Children
rejoice. For nothing then can harm them without his leave and providence, Psalm.
2.1. Even when the Heathen rage, and the Kings of the Earth bandy together,
against the Lord, and against his Anointed, he that sets in Heaven shall
laugh them to scorn. The Lord shall have them in Derision. He that dwells in
Heaven. Pray, how dwells the Lord there? Surely not so there, but that he is in
all places, Omnipresent, Jer. 23.23. Am I God at hand, and not afar of, says
the Lord? Do not I fill heaven and Earth, says the Lord? But he is in Heaven,
because there is the Habitation of His throne of Majesty, Psalm. 97.2. And there
and from thence he more especially manifests his exceeding great power and
glory. So is he Our Father in heaven in that sense, and as our Catechism adds
by way of explanation, He is therefore the Giver of all Goodness, of all good
things, Jam. 1.17. Every good and every perfect gift comes from above, even
from the Father of lights, with whom is no variableness neither shadow of
turning. So much of the Preface, now to the petitions.

Q. How many petitions are there in the Lords prayer?

A. Six: Three with relation to Gods glory, and three to our own benefit.

Q. Why are we taught to pray first for what respects Gods Glory, before we
pray for things relating to our own benefit?

A. To teach us that we ought to make Gods Glory the great end of our prayers,
as well as of all our Actions; and in all cases, to prefer it before all things
whatsoever.

Catechist. Gods glory is the great end of our Creation, and of whatever God
does, that the whole Earth may be full of his Glory, Isaiah 6.3. Solomon says,
Prove. 16.4. The Lord made all things for himself, yea, even the wicked for the
day of evil, that is, to glorify his justice in them. Now what is Gods end in
all his doings, should be Our great end and aim in all our prayers and all our
actions, 1 Cor. 10.31. Whether ye eat, or drink, or whatsoever ye do, do all to
the glory of God.

For the first Petition then, Hallowed be thy name. You may observe in the
first place, that your Catechism explains Hallowing Gods Name, to be as much as
worshipping him, which we often also express, by glorifying or honoring him,
and taking due notice thereof, I ask you first,

Q. Are we able to Worship, Honor or Glorify God, as we ought to do?

A. No.

Q. How ought we to Worship, or Honor, or Glorify God?

A. Above all Beings, in heart, word and deed.

Catechist. Do but remember the Apostle's expression to this purpose, 1 Cor.
6.20. We must glorify God with our Bodies, and with our spirits, which are
his. Now, alas! this we, sinful, corrupt, degenerate mankind, are in no wise
able to do, until he regenerate and renew us, in the words of his Covenant, his
Covenant of Grace, Ezekiel. 11.19. Put a new heart, and a new spirit within us,
take from us the stony heart, and give us an heart of flesh. In a word, till he
put his Spirit, his Spirit of Grace within us, to cause us to walk in his
Statutes and in his Judgments.

Q. What desire thou therefore in this petition, (Hallowed be thy Name?)

A. I desire God to send his Grace to me, and to all people, that we may
worship him, as we ought to do.

Q. Do thou desire this, or any other Blessing of God for thy self only?

A. No: I desire it for all people, and whatever Blessing I desire for my self,
in any petition, in Christian Charity I pray the same for others also.

Catechist. Therefore observe, as the latter petitions run not, Give me, but
give us, not Forgive me, but forgive us; so this, and the two following
petitions run in the third person, and two of them in the Passive voice. It is
here, not let me, nor yet let us only, Hallow thy name, but Hallowed be thy
name: so that as on the one hand, Our prayers should answer our duties, which
in this case, is to glorify God with our whole man, in heart, word, and deed,
so do they on the other hand answer Gods promises; and that is a full one in
the P. Malachi to this purpose, chap. 1.11. From the rising of the Sun even to
the going down of the same. Gods name shall be great among the Gentiles, and in
every place incense and a pure offering shall be given to his Name. Go on then
to the next petition, (Thy Kingdom come.)

Q. What is implied in this petition, Thy Kingdom come?

A. That we, and all men, are by nature under the bondage and Dominion of sin
and Satan, and that we are not of ourselves able to rescue ourselves from them.

Catechist. We are by nature, not only of our Father the Devil, doing his will,
as Christ told the Jews, because his works we do, Joh. 8.44. but we are also
his Subjects, nay, his Vassals and Bondslaves. For 2 Pet. 2.19. Of whom a man
is overcome, of the same he is brought in bendage. Romans 7.14. We are sold under
sin. Ephesians. 2.2. The Prince of the power of the Air is the Spirit that rules in
all the Children of disobedience. He rules in them by sin reigning in them.
For Romans 6.16. His Servants we are to whom we obey; whether of sin unto death,
or of Obedience unto righteousness.

Q. What desire thou therefore of God in this petition?

A. That God would rescue us from the Dominion of sin and Satan, and that his
Kingdom of Grace may take place in us, and that God would fit us for, and
hasten his Kingdom of Glory.

Q. How does your Catechism express this?

A. I desire God to send his Grace to me, and to all people, that we may serve
him as we ought to do.

Catechist. In respect of the former branch of your Answer, that God would
rescue us from the Dominion of sin and Satan in us, and that his Kingdom of
Grace may take place and be rooted in us, I conceive, this petition is
equivalent to what the Apostle declares to be the design of the Gospel in the
world, Act. 26.18. That God would open men's eyes and turn them, from darkness
to light, and from the power of Satan unto God, that they may receive for
giveness of Sins, and an inheritance among them that are Sanctified, by faith
that is in Christ Jesus, or it is just what Zacharias has in his Song, Luke
1.74. That God would grant unto us, and unto all men, that being delivered from
the hands of our Enemies, Our spiritual Enemies, We and they may all serve him
in Holiness and righteousness all the days of our lives. And then in respect of
the latter, Gods fittting us for, and hastening his Kingdom of Glory, this
petition may receive Light from that promise of Christ, Rev. 22.20. Surely I
come quickly, for thereunto we are directed to say, from the bottom of our
hearts, even so, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly. For that is the great thing
which we Christians should love, and look, and long for, even his appearing, as
may be seen in diverse Texts, Particularly, Titus 1.13. and 2.12, 13.

Q What is implied in the third petition, (Thy Will be done?)

A. That we are naturally apt to do the Will of the Devil, the World, and the
flesh, but to rebel against Gods Will of Commandment, and to murmur at his Will
of Providence.

Catechist. There is a twofold Will of God; what he commands in his word, and
What he orders in his Providence. And by corrupt nature we rebel against
hoth, especially the former, being prene to all evil, and averse to all good,
conceived in sin, and born in iniquity, Ps. 51.5. Having our understandings
darkened, and being alienated from the life of God, through the ignorance that
is in us, because of the blindness of our hearts.

Q. What desire thou therefore of God in this petition?

A. That we may be both able, and willing to obey his Will revealed in his
Word, and in all things submit to his Providence.

Q. How is this expressed in your Catechism?

A. I desire God to send his grace to me, and to all people, that we may obey
him as we ought to do.

Catechist. That is, that we may follow Christ's example herein, who said Ps.
40.8. I am content to do thy will, O God, yea thy law is in my heart. And for
his works of Providence, that we may with Holy David, when any evil happens to
us from the Lord, lay our hands upon our mouths, and say nothing, that is, not
repine or murmur at what God does, because it is Gods doing. For in all cross
accidents and occurrences, we should see Gods hands as Job did, chap. 1.21. The
Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Name of the Lord.

Q. How ought we to obey him?

A. As they do it in Heaven.

Q. What means that clause (in Earth as it is in Heaven?)

A. Therein I desire that we may obey Gods Will with that sincerity,
cheerfulness, and constancy, wherewith the Angels do it in Heaven, though we
cannot with the same perfection.

Catechist. You remember how the Psalmist describes those Heavenly Inhabitants,
Ps. 103.20. Bless the Lord, ye his Angels, that excel in strength, that fulfill
his Will, or Commandment, harkening to the voice of his word. And from thence
they have the name of Seraphims, from their Alacrity and Zeal in Glorifying
God, and doing his Will and pleasure. For God made them ministering spirits, to
minister to them that shall be heirs of Salvation, Heb. 1.14. And such is their
zeal and fervency herein, that they are said to be a flame of fire. That
therefore is our prayer in this petition, that God would inspire us with the
like fervency, cheerfulness and constancy in our Obedience. So much for those
petitions that relate to Gods glory. Now follow those that relate to our own
temporal, and Spiritual Benefit.

Q. What is implied in the fourth petition, (Give us this day our daily Bread?)

A. That no man can maintain himself by all his own care and labor, without
the Blessing of God upon both.

Catechist. Our Savior says, Matthew. 6.32. That Our Heavenly Father knows
that we have need of these things, that is somewhat to eat, and somewhat to
drink, and somewhat to put on, food and raiment: These bodies of ours must have
their proper aliment and cannot subsist without them. From whence Solomon
says, The bread of the needy is his life, He that withholds it from him is a
man of blood.

But these things so needful we cannot get by all our labors, without Gods
gift and Blessing, Ps. 127.2. It is in vain to rise up early, and sit up late,
and eat the bread of carefulness, if God do not bless the house and all in it.
Nor can they (could we get them) at all nourish us without that blessing of
God. For Deuteronomy. 8.3. Man lives not by bread alone, but by every word that
proceeds out of the mouth of God, that is, by his word of Blessing upon it.
So true it is, that in him we live, and move, and have our being, Act. 17.28.
this is implied in the Petition.

Q. What do thou therefore pray for in this fourth petition?

A. That God would bless all our lawful endeavors, and so send us all things
needful, both for our Bodies and our Souls.

Catechist. You may remember Agurs prayer, Prove. 30.8. which is in other words
the same with this, Give me neither poverty nor riches; feed me with food
convenient for me: lest being rich, I be full, and deny thee, and say who is
the Lord? or being poor I steal, or be tempted to do unjustly, taking the name
of God in vain. And since our souls have their proper food and nourishment as
well as Our Bodies, even the Word and Sacraments; the Church therefore teaches
you that you herein pray for the continuance of these also, even what is
needful for the nourishing our Souls to eternal life. Some of the Fathers
therefore by daily bread, understood the Holy Sacrament.

Q. What is implied in the fifth petition, Forgive us our Trespasses, etc.

A. That we are by our sins Debtors to Gods Justice, and liable to Condemnation.

Q. Can any man living satisfy Gods Justice for this debt?

A. No: nor all the world.

Catechist. Alas, We sin daily, and in many things offend all, Jam. 3.2. And by
every sin become debtors to Gods justice, and are guilty of death. For Romans
6.23. The wages of sin is death. It being said by the just God from the
Beginning, Genesis 2.17. In the day thou sinnest thou shall die the death. And as
no man can satisfy Gods Justice for sin, for his own sin, so Psalm. 49.7. None
can redeem his brother, nor pay to God a ransom for him. He that satisfies for
others sins, must have no sin of his own. How should they answer for others,
who are themselves guilty?

Q. What do thou therefore pray for in this fifth Petition?

A. I pray unto God that he will for the merits of Christ's Satisfaction be
merciful unto us, and forgive us our sins.

Catechist. What we pray for here, is just what God promises in his new
Covenant, Jer. 31.34. I will forgive their iniquites, and remember their sins
no more. Now this was a Covenant of mercy made in Christ upon his undertaking
to satisfy Gods Justice for our sins, saying, Psalm. 40.7. Lo I come to do thy
Will O God. For thus Ps. 85.10. in him, and by him Mercy and Truth met
together, Righteousness and peace kissed each other. Col. 1.20. He made peace
through the blood of his Cross. For 1 John 2.2. He became a propitiation for
our sins, and for the sins of the whole world. For his sake therefore it is
that we hope and pray for mercy and forgiveness.

Q. What mean you by forgiveness of sins?

A. A free and full acquitting us of their guilt and punishment.

Catechist. Free, therefore do we Protestants utterly disclaim all opinion of
Merit, which is indeed utterly inconsistent with the words (Mercy and
Forgiveness.) Romans 3.24. We are justified freely by his Grace through the
Redemption that is in Jesus. And its a full Forgiveness, therefore we also deny
the Papists opinion of Purgatory pains, to satisfy for our sins, by enduring a
temporal punishment for them. For when God forgives, he will not again exact
the debt in part, or whole, he says in his Covenant of Grace and Mercy, I will
so forgive their sins, as to remember them no more.

Q. Who are they that may expect such Forgiveness at the hands of God?

A. True penitents only, that are so sorry for their sins, as to forsake them;
and such as from their hearts forgive others their injuries and offenses
against themselves.

Catechist. For the former I refer you to what I taught you upon the Article of
Forgiveness in your Creed. And for forgiving of others, it is so necessary to
qualify us for Gods pardon, that Christ tells us plainly what we must look
for, Matthew. 6.14. If ye forgive men their trespasses, your Heavenly Father will
forgive you yours, but if ye forgive not men their trespasses, neither will
your Father forgive you your trespasses. So much for this petition also.

Q. What is implied in the Sixth petition, (Lead us not into temptation, but
deliver us from Evil?)

A. Our greatest Misery in this life, to wit, that Satan, the world, and the
flesh are always tempting us to sin, and we ourselves are prone to yield to,
and unable of ourselves to resist any temptation.

Catechist. We must, as the Apostle Gal. 6.1. warns us, look upon ourselves as
surrounded with temptations, Consider ourselves lest we be tempted. And
therefore as Christ exhorts, Mark 14.38. Watch and pray, lest we enter into
Temptation. And alas, in regard of them, we have no reason to be in love with,
but even to be weary of this Life, saying with David, Ps. 120.5. Woe is me, that
I sojourn in Mesech, and have my habitation in the tents of Kedar. For 1 Pet.
5.8. Our adversary the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion: seeking whom he
may devour. And he makes use of all the good and evil things of this world to
be snares to us, to entangle us in one or other sin or wickedness, and our
flesh is weak, and our own hearts treacherous, too willing to yield themselves
a prey to that Ghostly enemy, The Great Devourer.

Q. What must we in justice expect if we either yield to commit sin to which he
tempts us, or continue in it?

A. All Evils of Punishment both in this Life and the Next.

Catechist. Prove. 13.21. Evil pursues sinners. Romans 1.18. The wrath of God is
revealed from Heaven against all ungodliness and unrighteousness of men. For he
has spoken it, Romans 2.6. That he will render to every man according to his
works. Ver. 9. To them who obey not the truth, but obey unrighteousness;
indignation, and wrath, Tribulation and anguish, to every soul that does evil,
Jew or Gentile. These things are implied in the petition. Now then,

Q. What do thou pray for in this petition?

A. That God would assist us by his Holy Spirit, to resist and overcome all
Temptations, and either to keep us from being tempted to sin, or from falling
into sin, or from living impenitently in it, so that we may escape his
punishments Temporal, Spiritual, and Eternal.

Catechist. Need have we to pray, and that continually, for the Almighty
Guidance and Assistance of Gods Holy Spirit, in this our Spiritual warfare; for
we are poor, weak and frail Creatures of ourselves, The spirit being willing,
but the flesh in the best of us weak, Matthew. 26.41. For we have to wrestle not
with flesh and blood (like ourselves) but with principalities and powers,
against the Rulers of the darkness of this world, and against Spiritual
wickednesses in high places, Ephesians. 6.12. And now this Confidence we have in
putting up this petition, That it is exactly agreeable to Gods will and
promise, and therefore God will hear us. For what we here pray for is just what
the Apostle says, 1 Cor. 10.13. There has no Temptation overtaken you, but
what is common to men, but God is faithful, who will not suffer you to be
tempted above that ye are able, but will with the temptation make you a way to
escape, that ye may be able to bear it.

Q. How does your Catechism express this?

A. I pray unto God that it will please him to save and defend us in all
dangers Ghostly and bodily, and that he will keep us from all sin and
wickedness, and from our Ghostly enemy, and from Everlasting death.

Catechist. In this answer the evils we pray to be delivered from are
enumerated particularly. Dangers Ghostly, (that is Spiritual) and bodily, and
all sin and wickedness, and our Ghostly (that is Spiritual) enemy, the Devil;
and from all evils for sin, especially Everlasting death. And that which I
would further observe here, is only this to the Glory of God, that whatever the
evil or danger be, or of what sort soever our Enemies, Ghostly or Bodily,
Temporal, Spitual or Eternal, God is the only, the Great deliverer we can rely
upon, to save and deliver us from, and defend, and preserse us in them all,
Isaiah 49.26. I the Lord am thy Savior and Redeemer. Hos. 13.4. There is no
Savior besides me. Isaiah 63.1. He alone is mighty to save. 2 Pet. 2.9. The
Lord knows how to deliver the godly out of temptations, and to reserve the
unjust unto the Day of Judgment to be punished. So have you what your Catechism
teaches you concerning all the petitions in your Lords prayer, there only
remains the last part thereof, The Doxology or Conclusion. (For thine is the
Kingdom, and the power and the Glory for ever, Amen.) to lead you to understand
the true importance whereof I ask you first,

Q. Ought we not to praise God also, when we pray unto him?

A. Yes: To all our prayers we must join praises and Thanksgivings.

Catechist. The Apostle, Phil. 4.6. joins them closely, Be careful for nothing,
but in every thing, by prayer and supplications, with thanksgiving, let your
requests be made known to God. And his precept is, 1 These. 5.18. In every thing
give thanks, for this is the will of God in Christ Jesus concerning you. Ephesians.
5.20. We must give thanks always, for all things unto God. 1 Timothy 2.1. I exhort
that first of all, Supplications, Intercessions and giving thanks, be made for
all men, etc. And so Col. 4.2. we are directed to watch unto prayer with
thanksgiving. The defect whereof, I hope you remember was what Christ taxed in
the lepers, Luke 17.17. Were there not ten cleansed? but where are the nine?
for but one of them returned to give thanks.

Q. What are those Attributes and Excellencies, in God which we are especially
to praise, magnify and adore?

A. His Eternal Sovereignty, Power, and Glory.

Q. What is it that assures you (besides what you learnt in the Preface) that
God will hear, and can give you what you pray for?

A. Those, and other his Attributes, and especially his own Mercy and Goodness
for the merits of Christ.

Catechist. It is the very scope of both the Preface, and of this Doxology to
assure us hereof, and to strengthen our Faith in prayer, that he both can and
will hear and help us. For Mark. 9.23. All things are possible to him that
believes. Now, as his being our Father, and our Heavenly Father (in the
Preface) gives good assurance to our Faith in prayer, so here in the Doxology,
we are assured he takes care of us, and does not, will not utterly neglect us,
in any Condition we are in, or can be in, during this Life, no more than any
natural and Gracious King, will neglect the safety and welfare of his Subjects,
for his is the Kinddom and Supreme Sovereignty. Psalm. 95.3. He is a great King
above all Gods. Psalm. 103.19. His Kingdom rules over all. And that he can
help, relieve and deliver us, we are sure, because his is the power, Ps. 62.11.
Power belongs unto God, and nothing can be too hard for the Almighty. 1 Chronicles. 29.12. In his hand is power and might which none is able to withstand.
And lastly we are assured that he will do it, if we seek unto him, because His
is the glory. For so run his promises often. That He will do, and work for his
own names sake, and even for his own glory, Ezekiel. 36.22. And to all these I may
add his Eternity, that is, these are for ever, so that he who has delivered,
does deliver, and will deliver. For He is the same, to day, yesterday and for
ever, Heb. 13.8. For with him is no variableness, neither shadow of turning,
Jam. 1.17. I pray you then,

Q. To what end or use serves this third and last part of the Lords prayer, The
Doxology or Conclusion? (for thine is the Kingdom, etc.)

A. Both to give God the praise of these his glorious Attributes, and to
confirm my Faith to expect the things prayed for; for herein I declare that I
trust he will do it of his own mercy and goodness, through Jesus Christ our
Lord.

Catechist. I would only upon this answer observe the practice of Gods Saints
for your imitation. In all their prayers recorded in Scripture, we find they
used to recite Gods Attributes, which was both to give God the praise thereof,
and also to show upon what grounds they built their Confidence of Gods hearing
and granting their petitions, which was nothing of their own, no worthiness or
good deservings in themselves, but only Gods power, and mercy and goodness. It
would be endless to give you the particular instances hereof, you cannot miss
of observing it your selves in those prayers you read in the Scriptures. And it
is good to follow such footsteps and patterns. There is nothing remains now to
teach you, belonging to your Lords Prayer, but only the Word (Amen) and in one
of these senses is it always used, and to one of those ends it is always
intended, wherever it is used, which you have in your Answer to my next
Question.

Q. Why do thou say, Amen, after your prayers?

A. To express my steadfast Belief that God can, and will, and my Earnest desire
that he would grant them. For Amen is as much as to say, so be it.

Catechist. Come we then to the last General Head of Catechism, The Doctrine

Of the Sacraments.
Q. How many Sacraments has Christ ordained in his Church?

A. Two only as Generally necessary unto Salvation, that is to say, Baptism and
the Supper of the Lord.

Catechist. I shall reduce this Question and Answer to these that follow, for
your better understanding their importance.

Q. What are the ordinary means of Grace and Salvation?

A. The Word, Prayer, and Sacraments.

Catechist. Hence we call them Ordinances. Now for the word of God read or
preached, or the Reading and Preaching thereof by lawful Mininisters, set apart
and ordained to this Holy Function, by those that have Authority in the Church
to send forth laborers into the Vineyard, for these I say, being Gods
Ordinances, or ordinary means of men's Salvation, it is plainly proved by diverse
Texts, particularly that of the Apostle, Romans 1.16. I am not ashamed of the
Gospel of Christ, for it is the power of God to Salvation to every one that
believes, whether Jew or Gentile. Therefore he told the Jews, Act. 13.26. That
to them the word of this Salvation is sent. And by the Gospels being published
to the Gentiles, he says, Romans 11.11. That Salvation was come to the Gentiles.
And hence his charge to his Son Timothy, 1 Ep. 4.16. Take heed to thy self, and
to thy doctrine, continue in them: for in so doing, thou shall save thy self
and them that hear thee. And it is an excellent place in S. James 1.21. Lay
apart all filthiness, and superfluity os naughtiness, and receive with meekness
the ingrafted word, which is able to save your Souls. And for both the Word and
Prayer being such ordinances for men's Salvation, there seems to be no less than
a Demonstration in Romans 10.13, 14. Whosoever shall call upon the name of the
Lord shall be saved. But how shall they call on him, in whom they have not
believed? or how shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard? and
how shall they hear without a Preacher? And to show that we can have no grounds
to hope for Salvation, by hearing any but lawfully ordained Ministers, it
follows, How shall they preach, unless they be sent? Lastly, for the Sacraments
being ordinary means of men's Salvation, what can be more express than our
Saviors words for Baptism? John 3.5. Verily, verily, I say unto you, except a
man be born again of water, and of the spirit, be cannot enter into the Kingdom
of God. Mark 16.16. He that believes and is baptized shall be saved. For the
Apostle says, Gal. 3.27. As many as have been baptized into Christ, have put
on Christ. And he calls it therefore, Tit. 3.5. The Laver or washing of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And St. Peter says expressly, 1
Ep. 3.21. The like Figure whereunto (speaking of Noah's Ark, wherein he with
Eight Souls was saved in the Deluge) even Baptism does now save us; and for the
Lords Supper being an Ordinance for men's Salvation, as it is evident by the
Rule of Contraries, for if He that eats and drinks unworthily, not discerning
the Lords Body, eats and drinks his own damnation, 1 Cor. 11.29. then he that
eats and drinks worthily, discerning the Lords body, eats and drinks his
Salvation; so Our Savior spoke punctually hereof, Joh. 6.53, 54. Except ye eat
the flesh of the Son of God, and drink his Blood, ye have no Life in you. Whosoever
eats my flesh and drinks my Blood, has eternal Life, and I will raise him
up at the last day. I have been the larger in proving all these to be Gods
ordinances, to save men's Souls, that you may see (good Children) what cause you
have to abhor the Quakers Sect as damnable Heretics, who utterly reject, nay
even make a mock at them, especially both the Sacraments. Know therefore, in
doing so, they reject and despise the manifest Ordinances of God: and certain
it is, that as for us Ministers, in the Dispensation of the Word, and Prayer
and Sacraments, consists that whole Ministration which we have received of the
Lord, for the Salvation of men, so for you, the people, I speak in the Apostles
words, Heb. 2.3. How shall ye escape if ye neglect so great Salvation? which at
first began to be spoken by the Lord himself, and was confirmed to the world by
them that heard him, and by them whom they Commissioned for it, such as Timothy
and Titus, it was Committed to other faithful men, from age to age successively
able to teach others also, 2 Timothy 2.2. Let us then go on,

Q. Who ordained the Sacraments?

A. Jesus Christ.

Catechist. It is not in the Churches power to ordain new Sacraments; it
belongs only to God, and his Son Christ Jesus. For the Covenant is Gods, and
therefore it is his Prerogative to ordain Sacraments, to be Seals of the
Covenant. And who but he, can either give the Grace signified by the outward
Signs or Elements, or can punish the unworthy Receivers of them, or such as be
unfaithful to their part of the Covenant made and renewed in them?

Q. How many Sacraments then did Christ ordain?

A. Two only as generally necessary to Salvation.

Q. Why do you hold two Sacraments and no more?

A. Those other five which the Papists account Sacraments ( viz. Orders,
Confirmation, Extreme Unction, Penance and Matrimony) answer not the Definition
of a Sacrament, for they neither were all ordained by Christ, nor have they any
visible sign representing some Spiritual Grace, nor any promise to make them
Seals of Grace and pardon unto us.

Catechist. It is apparent Christ ordained two Sacraments, Matthew. 28.19. Go,
teach and baptize all nations, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and
of the Holy Ghost; and that his mind was that this should continue always in
his Church is manifest from his promise, and Lo I will be with you, (and your
Successors so teaching and baptizing) always to the end of the world. And for
the Lords Supper, Christ's Institution thereof is to be seen in the Holy Gospel,
and it is as fully recited by St. Paul, 1 Cor. 11. as by any of them, ver. 23.
What I have received of the Lord, that have I delivered unto you, that the Lord
Jesus, the same night that he was betrayed, took bread, and brake it, and gave
it to them all saying, ver. 25. This do in remembrance of me, in like manner he
took the Cup, etc. and that it was his mind that this also should be a
standing, perpetual Memorial of himself in his Church, appears ver. 26. As
often as ye eat this bread, and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lords
death till he come, that is, to Judgment, even till the end of the world.
These are plain Texts against the Anabaptists, Catabaptists, and Quakers, who
clearly abolish both these Sacraments.

But no apperance of any such Texts is there for the other five added to these
two in the Romish Church. I need but give you an abstract of what the Article
of our Church says, that for Penance, as the Papists use it, and Extreme
Unction, they are no better than cortupt imitations of the Apostles, without
any show of warrant for so-doing. And others of them, as Orders, and Matrimony,
are states of Life indeed allowed in Scripture, but have not the nature of
Sacraments, to be ordinary means of Salvation. And these altogether, with
Confirmation, have no visible signs or Ceremonies ordained of God, as Baptism,
and the Lords Supper have. Let the Adversaries show any of these, if they can,
by the Scriptures, but they can do no such thing, which therefore can by no
means be counted in the number of the Sacraments, strictly so called, ordinary
means necessary for all to receive for their Salvation, but the most that can
be said is that some of them may be esteemed Holy Rites and Ceremonies, in
their due place. For the two Sacraments then I ask you,

Q. How are these two generally necessary to Salvation?

A. They are necessary to be used, if they can be had, and whosoever slight, or
wilfully neglect them, they highly offend God, and endanger their own
Salvation.

Catechist. These two thus instituted by Christ must necessarily be used by all
Christians, all that will own their Christianity, and obey Christ, and his
Gospel. For Christ's Commandment to his Apostles was positive, that as they
should, teach or disciple, (as the word signifies) so baptize all Nations they
came to; and who can choose but see him urging a necessity of Baptism, upon all
that would become members of his Church, which he expresses by entering into
his Kingdom, in that forequoted Text, Joh. 3.5. Except a man be born again of
water, and of the Spirit, He can in no wise enter into the Kingdom of God,
(except) mark the word. And for the Lords Supper, it is to any Apprehension as
strict a Commandment, as any in the Scriptures, That his Ministers take the
bread, and cup, and give them, and that the people eat and drink thereof in
remembrance of him, and that for this end, the showing forth the Lords death,
and that for so long a continuance, till he come. Do this, is the word, and
therefore there is nothing more to be inquired, but whether it be done, or not
done, to show our Obedience or Disobedience to his plain Commandment; in short,
wilfully to neglect either of those Sacraments, (whereof too many (God knows)
are notoriously-guilty among us,) is to contemn Christ's own Ordinance and
Appointment, and what man can hope to be saved, but in the way appointed by
Christ Jesus himself the Savior of men? Now let me instruct you more
distinctly, first in the nature of a Sacrament in general, and then of the two
Sacraments apart,

Q. What meanest thou by the word, Sacrament?

A. I mean an outward visible sign of an inward spiritual Grace, given unto us,
ordained by Christ himself; as a means whereby we receive the same, and a
pledge to assure us thereof.

Q. How many parts are there in a Sacrament?

A. Two: an Outward visible sign, and an inward spiritual Grace.

Catechist. That you may understand these more clearly, I ask you,

Q. What is that you call the outward sign in a Sacrament?

A. That which we see with our Bodily eyes.

Q. What is that you call the inward Spiritual Grace?

A. That which the eye of Faith discerns in the visible signs.

Catechist. You see water in Baptism, and Bread and Wine in the Lords Supper
with your eyes. They are set before you, and you see them, and so they are
Signs both outward and visible in the Holy Sacraments. But what is signified
and conferred by these outward visible things to your Souls, this is no object
of, nor can be discerned by your bodily eyes, for it is the Soul alone that can
discern them there by the eye of Faith, upon the account of Christ's promise to
his own. Ordinance and Institution: the Grace signified and conveyed therefore
is wholly inward and spiritual. Tell me then,

Q. For what uses are these Outward Signs, or parts in the Sacraments Ordained
and Instituted?

A. To be Signs signifying, and means conveying, and pledges assuring the
Graces signified to Beleivers.

Catechist. They are Signs signifying or representing the spiritual Grace, for
Example, Water in Baptism signifies and represents The Holy Spirits cleansing
the Soul polluted by Original sin, in and through the blood of Christ. And in
the Lords Supper, The Bread broken signifies and represents Christ's Body
bruised, and torn, and crucified; and the Wine poured out signifies and
represents his blood shed upon the Cross, for Remission of sins. And thus as
the Apostle says, Gal. 3.2. Christ Crucified is set before our eyes, in
visible Types, and Signs, and Representations; and they are also means or
Instruments, or as it were Conduit pipes ordained by Christ, to convey the
Graces and Benefits signified to the worthy Receivers. Yea and pledges to
assure us thereof, Seals of the Covenant of Grace, as our Seals are of Bonds or
Evidences, or as Circumcision was to Abraham, Romans 4.11. He received the Sign
of circumcison, a Seal of the Righteousness of Faith. As sure as we receive the
One, so sure shall we receive and be made partakers of the other, if the fault
be not in ourselves. All those will be much more clear in Questions and Answers
upon each Sacrament. First then, of Baptism. And first let me hear you answer
out of the Church Catechism:

Q. What is the outward part or sign in Baptism?

A. Water, wherein the person is baptized in the Name of the Father, and Son,
and Holy Ghost.

Q. What is the inward and spiritual Grace?

A. A death unto sin, and a new birth unto Righteousness; for being by nature
children of wrath, we are hereby made the children of Grace.

Q. What is required of persons to be baptized?

A. Repentance, whereby they forsake sin, and Faith, whereby they steadfastly
believe the promises made to them in that Sacrament.

Q. Why then are Infants baptized, when by reason of their tender age they
cannot perform them?

A. Because they promise them both by their sureties, which promise when they
come to age, themselves are bound to perform.

Catechist. Let us look over these again carefully and break them into other
plain and short Inquiries.

Q. What thing did Christ ordain to be the outward Sign to be used in Baptism?

A. Water only.

Catechist. Observe, Water, and Water only. Our Wild Quakers speak most
scornfully and Contemptibly of Water Baptism. But it is plain, Our Savior
himself, was Baptized in the River Jordan. And all besides him, we read of in
the Scriptures, that were either baptized by John the Baptist, or by Christ's
Apostles, were baptized with water and Christ's promise; Matthew. 28.19, 20. Was
to be with his Ministers so baptizing to the worlds end. The Text is well known
(once, and again) before quoted, Joh. 3.5. Verily, Verily I say unto thee,
Except a man be born again of water, and of the Spirit. (mark, of water as well
as of the Spirit,) He cannot enter into the Kingdom of God. And as this is
necessary to teach you the necessity of water, to arm you (Children) against
the Quakers error, So do I express the answer thus (water only) to exclude the
Papists nasty use of Spittle, and all other their Apish Rites and Ceremonies in
Administration of this Sacrament, for which they have no show of warrant in
Gods word: if they have it, let them show it.

Q What then is the right form or manner of Baptizing?

A. Dipping or sprinkling, In the name of the Father, Son, and Holy Ghost.

Catechist. There is no question but diving or dipping was mostly used in the
first times of Christianity. And it is to be confessed, that the persons
baptized going down into the water did excellently well signify his Death unto
sin, and his coming or rising out of the water his rising from his death in sin
unto newness of life. To which Actions St. Paul alludes, Romans 6.3, 4. Know ye
not, that so many as were baptized into Jesus Christ, were baptized into his
Death. Therefore we are buried with him by Baptism into death, that like as
Christ was raised up from the dead, by the glory of his Father, even so we also
should walk in newness of life. Col. 2.12. We are buried with him in Baptism,
wherein also we are risen again with him, etc.

But yet in these cold climates, sprinkling instead of dipping has taken place
from the beginning of Christianity, and has always been thought sufficient,
and not without all warrant in Scripture; but having the expression, sprinkling
of the blood of Christ in S. Peter 1 Ep. 1.2. and the blood of sprinkling, in
Heb. 12.24. with the like to Countenance it, however Gods own declaration,
Matthew. 9.13. That he will have mercy, and not Sacrifice. But as for the form of
words in Baptizing, they are strictly prescribed in the Institution, Matthew.
28.19. In the Name of the Father, and Son, and Holy Ghost. And they signify
that what the Minister does here, it is in the Name, that is, by Commission and
Authority from the whole Trinity, and that God will certainly ratify what his
Minister does in his Name: and on the other hand, the party baptized obliges
himself to the Belief and Acknowledgment of the Doctrine of the Trinity, and to
serve and obey him. Now this thus explained briefly, I ask you in the next
place,

Q. What does Baptism suppose or imply?

A. That we are guilty of Original sin, and liable to Gods wrath as soon as we
are born.

Catechist. Which is what David confesses of himself, Ps. 51.5. Behold I was
shapen in iniquity, and in sin has my Mother conceived me. Or what the Apostle
says of himself, and other Saints, Ephesians. 2.3. We are all children of wrath, as
well as others.

Q. What benefit then have we by being baptized?

A. The pardoning that Original sin, the subduing that natural coruption, and
restoring us to Gods favor; so that thereby we are made children of Grace.

Catechist. Hence S. Paul calls Baptism, Tit. 3.5. The Laver, or washing, of
Regeneration, and renewing of the Holy Ghost. And our Savior in the forequoted
Text, John 3.5. ascribes to it the new Birth, or being born again, which
without more ado are sufficient proofs of this Answer.

Q. What is required of persons at age to fit them for Baptism?

A. Professing and promising Repentance to forsake sin, Faith in Gods promises,
and Obedience to Gods Commandments.

Catechist. You all know what S. John Baptists Sermon was to them that came to
be baptized of him. Math. 3.3. Repent ye, for the Kingdom of heaven is at hand.
And it is said upon these terms, chap. 4.4. he baptized them confessing their
sins. Accordingly, the Jews, and particularly them who had been guilty of
Crucifying Christ being pricked in their hearts by St. Peter's piercing Sermon,
Act. 3.18. when they came to that kindly pass as to say, what shall we do to be
saved? He exhorts them to repent and be baptized, every one of them, in the
name of Jesus Christ, for the Remission of sins. And from hence Baptism is
called, Luke 3.3. The Baptism of Repentance, and therefore no adult persons can
be admitted to it, but such as profess and promise Repentance, Faith, and
Obedience, (for these two latter are included in that Repentance which is
required in order to Baptism) and they jointly make up (as I showed in the
Beginning of this exercise of Catechizing) Our part of that Covenant which is
sealed in this Sacramen, betwixt God and us, Mark 16.16. He that believes, and
is baptized, shall be saved. But now I pray.

Q. What is required of young Infants to fit them for Baptism.

A. That they be presented to Baptism by such as profess and promise these
things for them, and in their names.

Catechist. Supposing them to come of Christian parents, to whom the promise is
made, and to their seed, Romans 9.8. And otherwise how could the Apostles baptize
Believers, and their Households, wherein it cannot be conceived, but there were
little children, Act. 16.15. And as Baptism succeeds Circumcision, and admits
men into the Christian Church, as that did into the Church of the Jews, so no
more was requisite to make the Jews Children capable of Circumcision, and
therefore no more than this is now necessary to make Christians Children
capable of Baptism, they being both alike Seals of the Covenant.

Q. Will others Professing and Promising these things then, in their names,
avail the Infants when they come at age?

A. Yes: if they then willingly take it upon themselves, and afterward
faithfully perform it; not else.

Catechist. We see daily that Parents and Tutors contracts and bargains do
avail their Minors and Pupils in Earthly matters, and why should it not alike
in these Spiritual, to bind to their Necessary duties to God? and how God will
accept of such Engagements, made in Childrens names, may be evident by these
passages, Deuteronomy. 29.11, 12. Moses engaged the little ones, as well as their
Fathers, to keep the words of the Covenant, and called them altogether to enter
into Covenant with the Lord and into his Oath. Jonah 3.5. The Ninevites
believed God, and the word of his Prophet, and fasted, and put on sackcloth,
from the greatest of them, even to the least of them. The good effect whereof
was chap. 4.11. God spared that great city, in which was Sixscore thousand
persons that could not discern betwixt their right hand and their left. Only
then Parents and Sureties must see that such Children be well instructed, when
they come to years, what Covenant was thus made in their names, and that it
will nothing avail them to Salvation, but rather aggravate their Condemnation,
if they disclaim it, or do not perform it; no more than any Earthly bargain can
benefit them which they refuse to stand to.

Q. What then does your being Baptized oblige you to do?

A. Not to live in any known sin, but to die unto sin, and to lead lives of
Righteousness.

Catechist. To remember and consider our Baptism should have influence upon our
whole lives. We should always bear in mind what was engaged for us in our
names, and therewith arm ourselves against all temptations to sin, that we
Covenanted against it in our Baptism, and made a fast and Solemn Vow to cease
to do evil, and learn to do good, and to live in Holiness and Righteousness all
the days of our lives.

Q. What think ye then of such men, as having been Christened or Baptized live
in Impenitency or Unbelief?

A. They forfeit all the benefits of their Baptism, and Gods Covenant of Grace
and Forgiveness, nay, it shall aggravate their Condemnation.

Catechist. This is One great Aggravation of the sins of all impenitent
sinners, even Perjury, or a breach of their Baptismal Vow and Covenant. Hear
what Solomon says, Eccl. 5.4. When thou vowest a vow, defer not to pay it, for
God has no pleasure in fools, pay that which thou have vowed. Better it is
thou should not vow, than that thou should vow and not pay. This holds
good in any sort of Religious lawful vow; much more in this. It had been much
better for us that we had never been Baptized, than if having been so, we break
our Baptismal Vow and Covenant, by a wicked and sinful course of life. With
which sad Reflection I conclude what I shall teach you of the first Sacrament,
That of Baptism. I ask you then in the next place.

Q. What is the other Seal of the Covenant of Grace besides Baptism?

A. The Lords Supper: wherein we renew our Covenant with God, which we made in
Baptism, and are nourished in, as we are by Baptism admitted into the Church.

Catechist. Christ himself calls this Sacrament, Matthew. 26.28. The blood of the
new Testament. And S. Paul, Heb. 10.29. calls it, The blood of the Covenant.
For he there speaks of their great guilt, who count the blood of the Covenant
an Unholy thing. In short, as it was the Blood of Christ shed upon the Cross,
that ratified the Covenant of Redemption, and forgiveness to mankind; so in
this Sacrament representing and exhibiting that blood of Christ for remission
of sins, to all worthy Receivers, we have God sealing His part of his Covenant,
and assuring us thereof, and we for our parts, do renew Our Vow to God,
Consecrating and devoting ourselves again here to his Service and Obedience.
Let us hear then what your Catechism teaches you of this Blessed Sacrament.

Q. For what end was the Sacrament of the Lords Supper ordained?

A. For the continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of the death of Christ, and
the benesits, which we receive thereby.

Catechist. We are not to drop one word in this answer, and to the end
therefore you may take due notice of every one, I pray you answer me these
Inquiries.

Q. What is the great and chief end of the Lords Supper?

A. To keep Christ's death in continual memory, and the benefits thereby
purchased for us.

Catechist. It is a plain Text for this, 1 Cor. 11.25, 26. At the Institution
of this Sacrament Our Savior bad his Disciples, Do this (that is, all that I
have done in your sight) in remembrance of me. For as often as ye eat this
bread, and drink this cup, ye do show forth the Lords death till he come. The
Bread broken and the Wine poured out do apparently and evidently show forth in
sensible signs, the death of Christ, how his body was broken, rent, and torn by
the thorns, and scourges, and nails, and spear, and how his blood was shed in
streams from his wounded head, and hands, and feet, and side, on the Cross,
Gal. 3.1. They evidently set forth Christ crucified before our eyes, amongst us.

Q. For what end did Christ die?

A. To be a Sacrifice of propitiation for our sins to his Father.

Catechist. Mark well those words (the Sacrifice of the death of Christ.) 2
Cor. 3.21. He was made sin for us, who knew no sin, that is, He was made a
Sacrifice for them, Isaiah 53.10. He made his Soul, (that is his life) an
offering for sin. Ephesians. 5.2. He gave himself a Sacrifice unto God for a sweet
smelling Savor, etc. 1 John 2.1. If any man sin, we have an Advocate with the
Father, Jesus Christ the Righteous, and he is the propitiation (or a
propitiatory Sacrifice) for our sins, and not for our sins only, but also for
the sins of the whole world. By all which Texts it is manifest, such is the
nature of Christ's death, It was in a full sense a Sacrifice, a Sacrifice of
propitiation or Atonement. For Col. 1.20. He made peace through the blood of
the Cross. So that, Romans 5.1. Being justified by Faith, we have peace with God
through Jesus Christ our Lord.

Q. Is Christ then offered up as a Sacrifice in the Lords Supper?

A. No: But therein is a lively Representation or Commemoration of that
Sacrifice, which Christ once for all offered for all upon the Cross.

Catechist. I would desire you to mind this well, to arm you against the
Papists abominable Mass, for therein they will have Christ to be daily offered
up as a Sacrifice for the quick and the dead. And of this they boast that it is
done daily in their Church, as if Christ's offering up himself once for all upon
the Cross was not sufficient to satisfy Gods justice for our sins. But in
opposition to this great Abomination of the Romish Church, agreeable to the
language of Holy Scripture and of the primitive Fathers, we hold the Lords
Supper to be only a Commemoration of that one Sacrifice once offered upon the
Cross, and for proof hereof we appeal to the Apostle, Heb. 9.25, 26. He was not
(our Apostle says) to offer himself often, as the High priest entered into the
most Holy place every year with the blood of others: For then must he have
often suffered since the Foundation of the world: But now once in the end of
the world, has he appeared to put away sin by the Sacrifice of himself. And
again, ver. 28. He says, Christ was once offered to bear the sins of many, and
again chap. 10.14. By one offering has he for ever perfected them that are
Sanctified.

Q. How often is the Lords Supper to be Administered and received?

A. So often that we may have Christ's death in continual remembrance.

Catechist. The Apostle says, 1 Cor. 11.28. As often as ye eat this bread, and
drink this cup, etc. plainly intimating that the Christians of Corinth did it
often. And doubtless so often ought all Christians to do it, that Christ's death
may be had in continual remembrance. Mark the words in your Answer, (for the
continual remembrance of the Sacrifice of the death of Christ.) It is hard to
conceive that they can have Christ's death in continual remembrance, who seldom
Communicate, perhaps never all the year long, but at Easter. And quite contrary
did the first Christians, whose pattern we ought to follow as near as we can,
they certainly communicated every day, or at least every first day of the week,
every Lords day. It was one part of their constant, public, and Solemn
Service, Act, 2.41. They continued steadfastly in the Apostles Doctrine, and
fellowship, and in breaking of bread and in prayers. And it is said, ver. 46.
They continued daily with one accord in the Temple, (that is, joining with Gods
people the Jews in prayers there, and in their Temple Service) and breaking
bread from house to house, (that is, in the Upper room, where they as Christian
Professors, met together and joined together in other worship proper to them as
Christians,) particularly Communicating together in this Sacrament of breaking
of bread, as it is often called in the Acts, whence that in chapter 20.7. Upon the
first day of the week the Disciples came together to break bread, (that is, the
Sacramental Bread,) which by the figure, Synecdoche, means the whole Sacrament.
So now let us consider the parts thereof.

Q. What is the Outward part or sign in the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine which the Lord has commanded to be received.

Q. What is the inward part or thing signified?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ, which are verily and indeed taken and
received by the faithful in the Lords Supper.

Catechist. Let us again reduce these Answers into more particular ones, for
your fuller knowledge of the Instructions contained in them.

Q. What is it that you see with your bodily Eyes in the Lords Supper?

A. Bread and Wine.

Catechist. Mark it well, we Protestants do in opposition to the Papists gross
Error of Transubstantiation, or the Bread and Wines being turned into the
Substance of Christ's Body and blood, hold that they remain Bread and Wine
still, as well after their Consecration as they were before, that there is no
Substantial change of them, but only a Sacramental one, as to their Use. And
enough it is to tell you here for proof hereof, that in all the Scriptures I
have cited, you may observe they are constantly called so, by the names of
bread and wine, and we know by our senses they are so.

Q. Will it avail men to look or gaze on these Elements?

A. No, unless they withal receive them, that is, eat and drink them.

Catechist. I have received of the Lord, says S. Paul, 1 Cor. 11.23. that
which I have delivered unto you, how that the Lord Jesus, the same night that
he was betrayed, (and so was shortly to dye for us) took bread, and when he had
given thanks he brake it, and he said, Take eat, etc, After the same manner,
ver. 25. He took the cup and said, drink ye all of this. Matthew. 26.27. This do
ye as often as ye drink it in remembrance of me. 1 Cor. 11.25, For as often as
ye eat this bread and drink this cup, etc. So to eat and drink are absolutely
required by Christ's Institution. So that you must learn to answer the next
question in opposition to the custom of the Romish Church, wherein many are
present, when the Lords Supper is Administered, who do not receive it, and in
their Mass the Priest alone Communicates, the people are spectators only,
gazing upon the Host.

Q. Who Commanded these then to be received?

A. Our Lord Jesus, and that the same night wherein he was betrayed.

Catechist. You have heard his express Commandment, Take, eat, and drink, Do
this. So that it can be no Sacrament which is of Christ's Institution, or
according to his Commandment, where these are not done. But being rightly
Administered, as Christ Instituted and Commanded it to be done, it should make
us in love with this Sacrament that he Instituted and ordained the celebration
thereof, just the same night wherein he was betrayed, that is, a little before
his death, when he was shortly to give his life a ransom for us, so that he
left it as a token of his dying love, and what man will not highly value his
friends gift and token when he dyed, much more if he laid down his life for his
sake?

Q. What think ye then of those that will not receive the Sacrament?

A. They reject Christ's own Commandment, and so in effect disown their being
his Disciples, or him being their Lord.

Catechist. Which are so plain by what I have said already, that I need say no
more, but only mind you of what Christ himself said, Joh. 14.15. If ye love me,
keep my Commandments. Now here you have heard Christ's positive Commandment, and
therefore by his own Rule they show they love him not, that observe it not,
Matthew. 7.21. It is in vain to say, Lord, Lord, or to pretend any love to
Christ, or yourselves to be Christians, if ye reject his Ordinance, and utterly
neglect what he himself Commanded.

Q. What do the Bread and Wine, which you see with your bodily eyes signify
and represent to the eye of Faith?

A. The Body and Blood of Christ.

Catechist. They are called Christ's very Body and Blood, Mat. 26.26. This is my
Body, and This is my Blood, that is Sacramentally so, as the Rock was Christ, 1
Cor. 10.4. because the Bread and Wine signify, and represent, and convey his
very body and blood to the worthy Receiver; and observe, every Ministerial
Action has its proper signification.

Q. What does the Consecrating or setting apart the Bread and Wine signify?

A. Christ's Separation or Consecration for the Work of our Redemption.

Catechist. That is, When God laid help upon him that is mighty, and exalted
him, as One chosen out of the people, Psalm. 89.19. And when Christ voluntarily
undertook this great work to redeem us, saying, Psalm. 40.7. Lo I come to do
thy will, O God.

Q. What do the breaking of bread and pouring out the Wine signify?

A. Breaking the Bread, represents the tearing Christ's body on the Cross, and
pouring out the Wine, shows the shedding of his Blood.

Catechist. For thus (as I have often said) we do in these signs and in using
these significant Rites, Ceremonies and Actions, show forth the Lords death
till he come, 1 Cor. 11.26.

Q. What does our eating and drinking them signify?

A. Our receiving Christ, and Union with him.

Catechist. Even as our bodily food being taken into our mouth, and chewed with
our teeth, and digested in our stomach, becomes incorporated into our bodily
Substance, flesh and blood, so are we as Members of Christ United to him by
eating him Spititually as the bread of Life, Joh. 6.35. Christ's flesh is meat
indeed, and his blood is drink indeed. Whosoever eats my flesh (said he himself,)
and drinks my blood, has Eternal Life, and I will raise him up at the last
day. ver. 55. And again he says, ver 54, 56. He that eats my flesh and
drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him. And ver. 57. He that eats me,
shall live by me. And ver. 58. that for ever. Upon such good ground and warrant
is it so expressed in the Communion Office, that hereby he becomes One with Us
and We One with Him, and we shall evermore dwell in him, and he in us. But,

Q. May not one of these Elements be sufficient for these great ends?

A. No: Both are expressly required by the Command and practice of Christ, and
his Apostles, and therefore it is presumption and Sacrilege in the Popish
Priests to take the Cup from the Laity.

Catechist. It is necessary to teach you this, to arm you against Popery. The
words of the Institution are express, Mat. 26.27. Drink ye all of this. And S.
Mark says, chap. 14.23. They all drank of it. Here is both precept and
practice against the Church of Romes presumptuous and Sacrilegious robbing the
Laity of the Cup. And I may argue with the Apostle, Gal. 3.15. Brethren, I
speak after the manner of men, though it be but a man's Testament, no man
disannulleth, or diminishes, or adds thereto, after it be confirmed by his
Death. And how then dare any mutilate this Sacrament, which is the new
Testament in Christ's blood? Now both fully to arm you against the other great
Popish Error, that of Transubstantiation, and also clearly to explain the truth
to you, I think it needful to offer you these following Questions.

Q. Is the Substance of Bread and Wine changed by Consecration into the
Substance of Christ's Body and Blood?

A. No: for we evidently see the Substance of Bread and Wine to remain after
Consecration.

Catechist. I told you this before, and I must tell you it again, that you may
take due notice of it. They are called Bread and Wine after, as well as before
Consecration in the Scriptures. And our senses tell us plainly, and assure us
they are still bread and wine, that is, We see, and feel, and smell, and taste
them to be no other but bread and wine, and therefore to say they are changed
Substantially, that is, into the Substance of Christ's body and blood, is as
well to belly our senses as the Scriptures. Know this therefore, what change
there is made of or in the Elements by Consecration, it is wholly Sacramental,
not in Substance but in their Use.

Q. But do not we then feed on Christ's body and blood in the Lords Supper?

A. Yes, as truly and really as we do on the Bread and Wine.

Catechist. So your Catechism teaches you, ( they are verily, and indeed taken
and received by the faithful in the Lords Supper,) and therefore though we
Protestants deny the corporeal, we yet do not the Real presence of Christ's Body
and Blood: Real it is, though spiritual, and not at all the less real, for its
being wholly spiritual. And for proof hereof I need but mind you of the
Apostles negative questions, which has the force of the strongest Affirmation,
1 Cor. 10.16. The Cup of Blessing which we bless, is it not the Communion of
the blood of Christ? and the bread which we break, is it not the Communion of
the Body of Christ. Is it not? that is, it certainly is so. We do here as
certainly Communicate of Christ's body and blood, as we do of the bread and
wine, if we be worthy Receivers. I say, if we be worthy Receivers, for mark the
words of your Church Catechism, and out of it answer me the next question.

Q. Do all that receive the bread and wine, feed on Christ's body and blood.

A. No: but the faithful only.

Catechist. Your Catechism so expresses it, ( they are verily, and indeed
taken and received by the faithful.) If Unbelievers and wicked men do with
Judas receive the Signs, yet do they receive them only; not the things
signified by them, either Christ's body or blood, or their saving benefits, that
is, the Remission of their sins, increase of Grace, or assurance of their
Eternal Salvation. Matthew. 16.25. It is not meet to take the childrens bread,
and cast it to the dogs. Such pearls belong not to Swine, nay alas, coming
unpreparedly, and eating and drinking unworthily, the Apostle tells them what
it is that they verily and indeed receive, 1 Cor. 11.29. They eat and drink
damnation to themselves, not discerning the Lords body. Therefore says Holy
Church in her warning to the Communicants excellently, If any of you be a
blasphemer of God, an hinderer or slanderer of his word, an Adulterer, or be in
envy or malice, or any other grievous crime, Repent ye of your sins, or else
come not to the Holy Table, lest after the taking this Holy Sacrament, The
Devil enter into you, as be entered into Judas, and fill you full of all
Iniquity, and bring you to destruction both of body and of Soul. It is then the
Faithful only that receive real benefit of this Sacrament, and really feed on
Christ's body and blood. Now I ask you,

Q. Do the faithful feed on Christ's body and blood carnally?

A. No: it is after a spiritual manner only.

Catechist. I told you this before, and now call upon you to speak it
yourselves, that it may take deeper impression on you. And I prove it by one
Text, Joh. 6.63. when the Disciples were offended at our Saviors telling them
of eating his flesh and drinking his blood, He thus explained himself, The
flesh profits nothing, it is the spirit that quickneth. The words that I
speak unto you, they are Spirit, and they are life, that is, they have a
spiritual, and not a litteral or carnal sense and meaning. And when I have
asked you one question more, I must needs think you have attained a competent
understanding of the doctrine of this Sacrament as it is thus far taught you in
your Catechism.

Q. Since we see nothing but bread and wine, and since our hands, handle and
feel, and our Taste perceives nothing but bread and wine, how can we be sure
that we do verily and indeed feed on Christ's Body and Blood?

A. By Faith in the promise of Christ, for he called the Bread his body, and
the Wine his Blood, and therefore will undoubtedly with the Signs give the
things signified.

Catechist. And this I conceive is the great thing assured us by Christ's
saying, Matthew. 26.26, 28. This is my Body, and This is my Blood, the Blood of
the New Testament, not that the Bread and Wine are at all Transubstantiated
into Christ's Body and Blood, or that the Body and Blood are corporally or
carnally in or under the Bread and Wine, which is the Lutherans
Consubstantiation, but we are here assured by our Savior, that with the one,
God will certainly give the other to all worthy Receivers. Christ's word will be
made good to us, if the fault be not in ourselves. It is Faith in his word and
promise, (who if he speak the word, can create a new world) that assures us
thereof. Of receiving and feeding upon Christ's Body and Blood and all the
benefits of the Blessed Sacrament.

Q. What then are the benefits you receive thereby?

A. The strengthening and refreshing of our Souls by the Body and Blood of
Christ, as our Bodies are by the Bread and Wine.

Catechist. Consider well this answer, and then tell me,

Q. Do we feed our bodies in the Lords Supper?

A. No, it is a spiritual feast for our Souls only.

Catechist. This is no trifling question, but needful, as experience shows. It
is our Souls we come to feed here with their spiritual food, not our Bodies
with the sensual provisions, as the Prophet Isaiah says, 25.6. The Word and
Sacraments are feasts of fat things, for our souls provided for us in Gods Holy
mountain, in the Churches or Congregations of his people. In this mountain
shall the Lord of Hosts, make unto all people a feast of fat things, a feast of
wine on the lees, fat things full of marrow, of wine on the lees well refined.

Q. How are our Souls fed in the Lords Supper?

A. They are strengthened, refreshed, or comforted with Christ's Body and Blood,
as truly and really, as our Bodies are strengthened and refreshed by Bread and
Wine.

Q. How are our souls so truly and really strengthened in the Lords Supper?

A. As it assures us of Gods love in Christ, the pardon of our sins through the
Merits of Christ's Death, the Grace and Comforts of his Holy Spirit, Peace and
Union with God, and a title to his Eternal Glory.

Catechist. Bread and Wine (you know) are two chief creatures of God provided
for our bodily sustenance; Bread to be the staff of Life, to strengthen the
body, Psalm. 104.15. And Wine to make glad the heart of man, to cheer him up, as
it is expressed, Judge. 9.19. whence that of Solomon's Mother, Prove. 31.6. Give
strong drink unto him that is weary, and wine unto those that are heavy of
heart. Now those great benefits we have in the Lords Supper in our Souls in the
inner man, if we be worthy Receivers. For from Christ's Body and Blood therein
given unto us, we have strength that fortifies our Souls against all our
spiritual enemies. How is that? Thus: Meditating on Christ's dying for us, we
must think it monstrously Ungrateful, and very abominable, if we yield
ourselves slaves to those sins, which crucified our Dear Savior. Besides we
have Gods Holy Spirit hereby as by a Conduit pipe conveyed to our Souls, and
the graces thereof quickened and increased in us, so that we shall be able to do
all things, all our Duties, through Christ strengthening us, Phil. 4.13. And
then, for Refreshment, being weary and heavy laden with, and deeply sorrowful
for our sins (as we ought always to be, when we come to the Lords Supper) Being
oppressed under their burdens, as too heavy for us to bear, Psalm. 38.4. and the
deep sense of Gods wrath and displeasure for them, we are in this Blessed
Sacrament refreshed with Gods sealing his Covenant and assuring us of their
pardon, and Remission according to those sweet words of our Savior, Matthew.
11.28. Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I will refresh
you. For certainly it is here, if any where, that we may justly hope to find
this Refreshment, This cup (as our Savior says, Matthew. 26.28.) being the
blood of the New Testament (or of the new Covenant) which was shed for many for
the Remission of sins. And besides, In this Sacrament all the promises, all the
benefits of the new Covenant are ratified and confirmed to us in Christ's Blood
here represented, all the Benefits (I say) of the Covenant of Grace,
Justification and Sanctification, Grace, and pardon, and peace, Union with God
and Christ, or with God by Christ, Mercy and Salvation, These, with whatever
benefits Christ has purchased for us by his Death and Passion, are here
conveyed and made over to all worthy Receivers, and therefore well may we say
that to partake hereof is for the strengthening and refreshing of our Souls, by
the Body and Blood of Christ, as our bodies are strengthened and refreshed by
the Bread and Wine. To the last Question then in your Catechism, there is
nothing more requisite to assure us of all these great benefits, but only our
being rightly qualified for it. I therefore ask you first in the words of your
Catechism, and then desire a more particular account from you of the several
lessons taught you in it.

Q. What is required of them that come to the Lords Supper?

A. To examine themselves, whether they truly repent them of their sins,
steadfastly purposing to lead a new life, to have a lively Faith in Gods mercy
through Christ, with a thankful remembrance of Christ's death, and to be in
charity with all men.

Q. Shall all receive those great benefits that come to the Lords Supper?

A. Only those that are duly prepared and receive it worthily.

Catechist. This is but a further explanation of what you learnt before, that
it is the faithful only that do verily and indeed receive Christ's body and
blood. Now here you learn, that no promise of Grace or Mercy, Remission or
Salvation is here made sure to any other, but prepared and worthy Receivers.
Nay to all others (as I have said) to all that are impenitent, in their sins,
there is threatened, not only temporal judgments, but also Eternal damnation:
for, for this cause says the Apostle, 1 Cor. 11.30. Many are weak and sickly
among you, and many sleep, that is, are stricken with death; for this cause,
that is, for eating and drinking unworthily, nay ver. 29. He that eats and
drinks unworthily, eats and drinks damnation to himself, not discerning the
Lords body.

Q. How then must you prepare yourselves for the Lords Supper?

A. By self examination before we come.

Catechist. St. Paul's Text is very plain, 1 Cor. 11.28. where he prescribes
this remedy to prevent Gods temporal judgments, and Eternal damnation, by
eating and drinking unworthily, Let a man examine himself, and so let him eat
of that bread, and drink of that cup. Let him prove (that is) and try himself
in what estate he ^s toward God, as a man tries gold by the touchstone.

Q. What things must we especially examine ourselves of?

A. Of the truth and sincerity of our Repentance, new Obedience, Faith,
Thankfulness and Charity.

Q. May any notorious Customary sinners come to the Lords Supper?

A. No: not without Unfeigned Repentance, answerable to their sins.

Catechist. All are invited to come, but withal, all are directed also to
prepare themselves before they come. The most wicked wretch is bidden, but it
is with this caution, that he puts on his wedding garment, Matthew. 22.12. that
is, of true repentance, and all other Graces befitting this Holy Solemnity. And
he that has not on him this Wedding garment required by God in Holy Scripture,
can expect no better entertainment than the Kings challenge of him in the
Parable there of the Marriage of his son, Friend how came thou in hither not
having a Wedding garment? and you should remember, that he being speechless,
that is, inexcusable, The King commanded his servants saying, Bind him hand and
foot, and cast him into outer darkness, there shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth.

Q. Will that then excuse men's coming to the Lords Supper, that they are not
prepared, or have not repented?

A. No: it rather aggravates, than excuses their sin of not coming, while they
never endeavor to fit and prepare themselves.

Catechist. Mind, Their not Preparing is a sin, and their not Coming is a sin,
and one sin cannot excuse another, but aggravates it when it is willful; and
here it must needs be so, because the reason of men's not preparing themselves
for the Lords Supper is most commonly because they have a desire to live on in
their sins, and therefore they have no mind to come to the Lords Supper,
because it will bind them to leave their sins, and put them upon holy purposes
and resolutions of new life, which they do not think to do. Now I pray you read
and consider the Ministers Exhortation to the Communion in the Office for it;
and at present I shall only put you in remembrance of that terrible doom that
was passed upon them who excused themselves, and refused to come to the Kings
feast, when they were invited to it, Luke 14.24. The Lord said, I say unto you,
none of those which are bidden shall taste of my Supper.

Q. What then is the unquestioned Duty of all Christians?

A. To set upon the Preparing for the Lords Supper, whenever they are invited
to it; to Receive it reverently and devoutly, and to be afterward careful of
performing their holy Vows, and good resolutions made therein.

Catechist. This evidently follows from all that has been said, and it shows
you the duties you are to perform before, and at, and after your Receiving this
Sacrament. And now all the Questions and Answers that follow here are for this
end, to explain those great duties of Repentance, New Obedience, Faith,
Thankfulness, and Charity, to the meanest capacity; which since all men know
them to be generally required in all good books that treat of this Sacrament,
and who can say but they are enjoined us in Gods Word in our whole
Conversations? How much more requisite then are they in us, when we are to make
our most solemn addresses to Gods Altar? I shall only therefore desire my Youth
to give some fair account of these duties, and spare my further pains, and time
in quoting particular Texts of Scripture for them, referring all, both elder
and younger to their good books for a more particular instruction concerning
them, especially that incomparable Book, The Whole Duty of man.

Q. What is that Repentance, and New Obedience whereof all must examine
themselves in Preparing themselves for the Lords Supper?

A. A man must compare his heart and life with every Commandment, and bewail
and confess unto God all the sins he finds himself guilty of, and steadfastly
resolve to forsake them, and ever after to endeavor a new, that is, an holy
life,

Q. What is that lively Faith required in Gods mercy through Christ?

A. Knowing his own Misery by sin, a man must both understand and believe the
sufficiency of Christ's Death, to Satisfy Gods justice for sin, and Gods
willingness to pardon sin for Christ's sake, upon Covenant terms to all
Believers.

Q. What is the Thankfulness required?

A. A serious considering of Christ's wonderful Love in dying to purchase such
great benefits, and an affectionate Commemorating this with the most hearty
Thanksgivings.

Q. What, is that Charity whereof a man must examine himself.

A. Being sorry for all injuries done to others, and ready to make satisfaction
to his power, a man must be ready to be reconciled to those that have injured
him, and heartily forgive them, and cheerfully give them that are in need, as
he is able.

Q. What think ye then of the ignorant, that do not at all nnderstand the
meaning of this Sacrament, and of all Unbelievers, or the Unthankful, or
malicious persons, or them that are out of Charity?

A. I think they will have no comfort of this Holy Feast of Charity; and being
unfit for it, can have no hope to receive the Pardon or Grace promised in the
Covenant, and Sealed in this Sacrament.

FINIS.

