A Brief and True ACCOUNT OF THE Notorious Principles and Wicked Practices OF
THAT Grand Impostor Lodowick Muggleton, Who has the Impudence to Style himself
one of the Two last Commissionated Witnesses and Prophets OF THE Most High God
Christ Jesus.

Collected out of his own VVritings, And made Public to undeceive those many
poor Souls who are drawn aside by his Damnable Heresy.

And is to take his Trial at the Sessions House in the Old-bayly.

Licensed and Entered according to Order.

London, Printed for B^H^ 1676

A Brief and True Account of the notorious Principles, and wicked Practices of
that Grand Impostor Lodowick Muggleton, etc.
TO Trace this impious Impostor from his Original, who ever takes pains but to
go into Cloak Lane, will there be informed by the Generallity of the
Inhabitants, that this Lodowick Muggleton was at first no other than a factious
Journiman- Tailor, whose Extravagances being too large for the compitent
allowance of about 10 s. p. week, began in the year 1651. to consult with one
John Reeve (a brother both in Trade and necessity) how they might betake them
to some more profitable employment, whose larded Incomes might more kindly
indulge their Lukury; to this end they made some small inspection and progress
into all sorts of Heresies (as he has since confessed to J. C. and others) but
finding those Chairs already taken up, they resolved to be beholding to no
body, but to contract such a competent measure of impudence and impiety, as
should enable them to stifle all the oppositions of Religion, or Conscience,
and set up for themselves. And that which gave them no small encouragement
hereunto was the wonderful success and almost infinite Riches, two precedent
impostors John Roubins and Joh. Tauny, had lately gained by the same damnable
practice. The prosperity of these two rendered the private conditions of Reeve
and Muggleton more unsufferable; so that the former being the more impudent,
and having with some curiosity perused the Revelations of St. John, and found
to his extreem sorrow that the Holy Ghost had never so much as dreampt of him
throughout the whole Book, he resolves by the help of a feigned Enthusiasm or
pretended Revelation, to force in the minds of Listening Ignorants, whose
Gaping curiosity lay always open for the reception of any Novelty, a certain
belief of a strange inspiration, and Commission then delivered unto him,
whereby (forsooth) he not only pretends a Sovereignty over Mankind but assumes,
a power to pass (upon the least contradiction of his wicked principles) a
sentence of everlasting Condemnation, even upon the blessed Angels themselves:
as is affirmed he has authority to do, in a book of Muggletons, called the
Quakers Neck broke, page 20.

To exact this necessary Credulity from his Gazing admirers, he calls one
Evening of Muggleton to go with him to the Tavern, from whence after they had
Gorged their Guts with an excess of Wine, and Victuals, they resolved forthwith
to go Chew the Cud both of their discourse and Viends upon their Pillows,
whereon Reeve had not long laid his shallow skul, but whether caused by fumes a
rising from an undisgested Supper, or the important pressures of his designed
greatness, I know not, but up he gets, runs to Muggleton, tells him as
Muggleton does us in his nonsensical interpretation of the 11. chap. of the
Revelation, page 158. That God spoke in the night unto him, and told him that
he had given him more understanding in the Scriptures than all other men in the
World. That he had put the two edged sword in his mouth, and in the next words
following, and I have Chosen thee Lodowick Muggleton to be thy mouth: That I
have given you power both to bless and curse, and whosoever either of you shall
bless or curse it shall be in the power of no Spirit nor Angel, No nor as
Mugleton says in page 40 in the Almighties himself to revoke from eternal
Damnation.

This falacy being blown about by some of their graceless Adherents, the greedy
Vulgarity mistake it for a Verity, and to show their obedience, as well as
Credulity, relinquish their former principles as eronious, to list themselves
under the destructive Banners of of his forgeries and impostures.

The promising superficies of this black design at first seemed to recompense
the pains of these spiritual Engineers with a favorable progression, but
Heaven who could no longer forbear to punish their impieties, sufficiently
testified its displeasure in Beckoning Reeve, to give an account in the other
World of those Damnable principles, wherewith he had tainted the minds, if not
Ruined the Souls of diverse in this; which one would have thought might have put
a stop at least to the proceedings of this Lodowick Muggleton, who now double
Gilded with Brass, pretended also to have had left him by Reeve a double
portion both of spirit, power, and commission; enlarging his Authority even
beyond the prerogative of any deceased Saint, Prophet, or Apostle, as will by a
Letter he sent R. Fransworth, and the said Book of his, entitled the Quakers
Neck-broken, most obviously appear. In the Letter page 43. he writes thus;
speaking of the power he pretends God has given him to bless, curse, etc.
Neither (says he) will God give this power to any after me, neither can any man
come to the assurance of the favor of God now in these days but in believing
that God gave this power to John Reeve and my self. For there is no coming to
know God or see God, but by the faith in this commission of the spirit, for I
having the Keys of Heaven and Hell, none can get into Heaven unless the witness
of this spirit does open the Gate. Again in his Quakers Neck-broken, page. 20.
He say. Neither does any man know the Scriptures, neither can any man interpret
them truly but my self, and in the same page he goes on. God has put the two
edged sword into my mouth, that whoso^ver I pronounce cursed, is cursed to
Eternity. For I do not only say let him be accursed, but I have power to curse
men or Angels to Eternity. And in Page 28. Speaking of his spiritual knowledge,
how he has resolved all sorts of questions in Divinity, these are his words.

Nay, some have gone so far as to ask who made God, and I have given answer to
that also. Again in his letter to S.H. and W.S. who in a former letter
condemned him for Cursing, to which Muggleton answers, page 17. As for my mouth
being full of cursing, that is my commission. Again page. 18. Full of his
Cursing I confess my mouth is, and I do rejoice in it too, I know that God is
well pleased in the damnation of those I have cursed, and I am wondrous well
satisfied in giving Judgment upon them acccording to the Tenelt of my
condition. In fine Reader, I am a weary, and it makes my hair stand an end to
Rake thus in the Naucious Dunghill of his horrid Blasphemies, his whole Volume
is nothing but a promiscuous composition of Heresy, Delusion, irreligion and
Blasphemy: Himself a person who for this 20 years and upwards has shaken hands
with Morality, Discretion, and Piety, who for that inconsiderable Pelf, Honor
and respect, he daily receives from the hands of his poor deluded, and without
sudden conversion, I fear miserable Disciples, willingly surrenders his
interest in Heaven; and as if he had too advantageous an exchange, throws the
wretched Souls of his friends and acquaintance into the Bargain

I would earnestly desire the Reader if he be not yet established in opinion,
to endeavor to seek a settlement therein, first by his prayers to almighty God
to that purpose, and after by the healing advice of some learned Divine, from
whom he will certainly find more sollid satisfaction than he can ever expect
from these Quacks and Empricks in Divinity; who handle the soul, as others do
their body, not so much for the patients good, as their own Interest. Who if
they can make a seasonable approach to a Death bed, and there by a pretended
commission wheedle the departing Disciple into a belief that they have received
the Keys of Heaven; Can turn who they will into everlasting Joys, and hurry who
they please into eternal Bliss; if by the charming Rhetoricks of a Gray head,
comely Visage, demure Countenance, and plausible tongue, he can but once
persuade them to fall out with the World, and surrender these temporial
blessings, in hopes of those spiritual ones (of which these sort of men make
such large promises) there is none of them but will gladly part with, all their
pretended Keys of Heaven, for one real one which unloks to a hundred a year
upon Earth, or that would scruple to give a man a note of their hands for the
securing his eternal bliss, provided the other would requite him with a
considerabled Lease, to bestow among his sanctified children.

Whether Muggleton and his Brethren have ever received any of these soul
feeling blessings, I leave it to his and their consciences, and did I know it
to be true I should scarcely put my self to the charges of a Tear to bemoan the
cheat, for indeed, who can seriously pity those persons who having been
Educated in the wholesome principles of the Church of England, when he shall see
them like Bastards and not Sons, forsake those Teats whereout they often have,
and still might, suck such nourishing milk; when he beholds them running after a
nonsensical Impostor, frought up with nothing but interest and Imdudence; a
kidnapper of Souls, who would sell them for less money to the Devil, than the
other do Children to Barbados; a fellow who if a man can find any connextion in
his writings, it runs directly Diamiter to those of the Holy Scriptures, a
wretch so arragant, that he dares to pretend a greater power than ever was
delivered to any of the Prophets or Apostles, that denies both the real
existance and absolute, and by all undoubted ubiquity of his Creator, page 34.
page 23. That Nulls the Vallidity of several Texts of Scripture, and
particularly denies Solomon to be endued with the Spirit of God, when he writ
the Book of Proverbs. And in short is so rediculous both in Divinity and
Philosophy, as to define God to be a corporeal assence exactly in the shape of
man, that his influence is confined within the narrow circuit of the upper
Heavens only. And lastly which is enough to give any intelligible Reader a
surfeit both of him and his Doctrine, he affirms his writings are in themselves
more excellent, and ought to be by all men more respected and regarded than the
Holy Scriptures.

Now Reader after thou have known all this of Muggleton, and yet wilt not be
persuaded, but will adher to his Damnable principles, were thou thereby cheated
into any other loss than that of thy eternal Soul it would rather cause my
derision than Pity: but since thereby thou art to forego thy everlasting
prosperity, I cannot but behold thee with extreme compassion.

FINIS.
A modest Account of the wicked Life of that Grand Impostor, Lodowick
Muggleton: Wherein are related all the remarkable Actions he did, and all the
strange Accidents that have befallen him, ever since his first Coming to
London, to this Twenty-fifth of January, 1676. Also a Particular of those
Reasons, which first drew him to these damnable Principles: With several
pleasant Stories concerning him, proving his Commission to be but counterfeit,
and himself a Cheat, from diverse Expressions which have fallen from his own
Mouth. Licensed according to Order. Quarto, containing six Pages, printed at
London for B. H. in 1676.
LOdowick Muggleton was born of poor, though honest Parents, living at
Chippenham, within fifteen Miles of Bristol: His Relations having but little
Means, and a great Charge of Children to maintain, they were forced to send
their Daughters to wait on their neighboring Gentry, and to place their Sons
to such Trades as cost little Binding them Apprentices; but, amongst all the
rest of those of this worshipful Brood, they were blessed withal, they might
have observed, even in his cunicular Days, in this Lodowick Muggleton, an
obstinate, dissentious, and opposive Spirit; which made them desirous to settle
him at some Distance from them, and also to bind him to such a Trade, and
Master, as might curb him from that Freedom, which the Moroseness of his coarse
Nature extorted from his too indulgent Parents: By which Means, as soon as he
had made some small Inspection into his Accidence, without any other
Accomplishment, besides a little Writing and Casting of Accounts, he was
hurried up to London, and there bound Apprentice to one of the cross-legged
Order, but of an indifferent Reputation in the Place where he lived, though by
Trade a Tailor. We will pass over the Parenthesis of his Youth in Silence,
therein being nothing but usual Waggeries, which generally recommend to our
Expectation something remarkable, when the useful Extravagancies shall be
seasoned with Age.

When the Time of his Apprenticeship grew near its Expiration, so that he was
admitted more Liberty, than formerly was granted him, he was observed to be a
great Haunter of Conventicles; insomuch that there could not a dissenting
Nonconformist diffuse his Sedition in any obscure Corner of the City, but this
Lodowick Muggleton would have a Part of it; by which Means, continuing in the
same idle Curiosity, and taking great Observation on that unknown Gain, many of
that canting Tribe got by their deluded Auditors, he proposed to himself a
certain and considerable Income to be got by the same Means, by which he had
observed many of those great Pretenders gull both himself and others: For a
rooked Conventicler, like a bankrupt Gamester, having, for some Time, been
cullied out of his Money, learns the Trick, sets up Hector, and trades for
himself.

Thus did Lodowick Muggleton, by sliding out of one Religion into another, so
dissatisfy his Judgment, and run himself from the solid Basis of his first
Principles; first degenerating, from the orthodox Tenets of the Church of
England, to Presbytery; from thence to Independency; thence to Anabaptism;
thence to Quakerism; and, lastly, to no Religion at all.

When Men have, thus, once fooled themselves out of Religion and a good
Conscience, it is no Wonder, that their secular Interests draw them into all
Sorts of Impiety and Profaneness, as it has done this Lodowick Muggleton; who,
though, in himself, a poor, silly, despicable Creature, yet had the Confidence
to think he had Parts enough to wheedle a Company of silly, credulous
Proselytes out of their Souls and Estates: And, indeed, he has had such
admirable Success in that wicked Enterprise, that, though we cannot absolutely
conclude, that he has cheated them of the first; yet we can prove, if Occasion
were, that he has defrauded them of the latter; as has been often told him,
since the first Day of his Stan^^ng in the Pillory.

It has been told already, how this impious Impostor lays Claim to a
counterfeit Commission, whereby he has infected the Truths of many honest,
ignorant People, with an extraordinary Power, that was delivered to him by as
infamous a Blasphemer as himself, John Reeve; who, as he formerly rivalled
Muggleton in Impiety, had he been yet living, should certainly have clubbed
with him in his deserved Punishment.

It is about twenty-one Years, since this impudent Creature began his
Impostures; who, knowing himself as defective of Reason, as of Religion, made
it one of the grand Maxims of his Policy, That his Proselytes should be fully
persuaded, contrary to all Sense, or Probability. Reason was that great Beast,
spoken of in the Revelation, and, consequently, not to be consulted withal, as
to the Examining of any fundamental Point in Religion; whereby he secured both
himself, and his shallow Disciples, from all those frequent Disputations and
Arguings, which, otherwise, must necessarily have diverted them from adhering
to his damnable, impious, and irrational Tenets; which I purposely omit, as
being too unsufferably profane for the modest Ear of any sober, well-meaning
Christian.

But we may judge a little of the Theorick by the Practick, I mean, of his
Principles by his Practices, and of the Soundness of his Doctrine by those
Duties he held himself, and his Followers, obliged to, in the Performance of
it; which, indeed, were none at all; it being his usual Custom, when they met
on the Sabbath Day, to entertain them with a Pig of their own Sow; I mean, with
Wine, strong Drink, or Victuals; which either they sent in beforehand, or
brought along with them; allowing them to be as licentious, as they pleased, in
all Things that might gratify, or indulge their Senses.

A Friend of mine was, one Sunday, walking in the Fields; and, meeting there an
old Acquaintance of his, who was lately turned Muggletonian, with a young
Baggage in his Hand, which, he did more than suspect, was light, he could not
forbear Expressing his Admiration, to this Muggletonian himself, in these, or
suchlike Terms: I cannot but wonder to see you, my old Neighbor, who have,
for these many Years, busied yourself in the Study of Religion, and was, not
long since, like to have gone mad, because you knew not which Opinion to stick
to. I say, I cannot but wonder to see you Abroad, on the Sabbath Day, in this
brisk Posture; you are altered both in Countenance, Apparel, and Manners, so
that I almost doubt, whom I speak to. Ah, answered the Muggletonian, you know,
Friend, how I have heretofore troubled myself about Religion indeed; insomuch
that it had almost cost me my Life, but all in vain, till about six Weeks
since; at which Time I met with Lodowick Muggleton, who has put me into the
easiest Way to Heaven, that ever was invented; for he gives us Liberty,
provided we do but believe in his Commission, freely to launch into all those
Pleasures, which others, less knowing, call Vices; and, after all, will assure
us of eternal Salvation. Behold, Reader, what a sweet Religion here is like to
be.

But, as Muggleton was liberal in the Freedom he gave his Adherents, so he was
always careful to avoid the Prohibitions of the Law; he generally appointed his
Bubbles to meet in the Fields, where he also permitted them to humor their
Sensualities with any Recreation, not excepting Uncleanness itself; for which
Profaning the Sabbath he was, in Oliver Cromwell's Time, committed to Newgate,
where he had like to have been so dealt withal then, that Tyburn had saved the
Pillory this Trouble now: But that perfidious Usurper, conscious to himself,
that Muggleton could not he a greater Impostor in the Church, than he was in
the State, upon the Consideration of Fratres in malis, restored him to his
Liberty.

Howbeit, a little before Oliver's Death, Muggleton, by continual Flatteries,
had got into his Books, and, amongst other Prophecies concerning him, had
declared, that Oliver should perform more wonderful Actions, than any he had
yet achieved, before he died. But, he happening to depart this Life, before he
had done any Thing else that was remarkable, Muggleton was demanded, Why his
Prophecy proved not true? He answered very wisely, and like himself, viz. That
he was sure Oliver would have performed them, had he lived long enough.

But, since his Gracious Majesty's Return, he has driven on a much more
profitable theological Cheat, having assumed the Liberty not only of infusing
what Doctrine he pleased into the Minds of his ignorant deluded Followers, but
writ several profane Books, which, to his great Advantage, he dispersed among
them; poisoning their Minds thereby with a Hodgepodge of rotten Tenets, whereby
they are become incapable of relishing the more sound, wholesome, and undoubted
Principles of the Church of England.

I shall conclude with one Story more concerning Muggleton, and so leave him to
the Censure of the ingenuous Reader. A timish Gentleman, accoutered with Sword
and Peruke, hearing the Noise this Man caused in the Town, had a great Desire
to discourse with him, whom he found alone in his Study; and, takin^ Advantage
of that Occasion, he urged Muggleton so far, that, knowing not what to say, h^
falls to a solemn Cursing of the Gentleman who was so enraged thereat, that he
drew hi^ Sword, and swore he would run him through immediately, unless he
recanted the Sentence o^ Damnation, which he had presumptuously cas^ upon him.
Muggleton, perceiving, by the Gentleman's Looks, that he really intended what
he threatened, did not only recant his Curse, but pitifully entreated him whom
he had cursed before; by which we may understand the Invalidity both of him,
and his Commission.

Thus, whoever considers the Contents of Muggleton's whole Life, will find it,
in toto, nothing but a continued Cheat of above twenty-one Years long; which,
in the Catastrophe, he may behold worthily rewarded with the modest Punishment
of a wooden Ruff, or Pillory; his gray Hairs gilded with Dirt and rotten Eggs;
and, in fine, himself brought, by Reason of his own horrid and irreligious
Actions, into the greatest Scorn and Contempt imaginable, by all the Lovers of
Piety, Discretion, or good Manners.

^^ft up your Hearts, rejoice in him,
For Work of his own Hand;
For I of happy Tidings mean,
To let you understand.
Which cheerful will be sure to all,
Of faithful English Blood;
Whose Hearts did never hate the Truth,
Nor Gospel yet withstood.
A Man there was, a quondam great
Of Might, of Pomp, and Praise;
Of English Blood, though English Love
Were small in all his Ways.
As did appeer by Roomishe Acts,
Proceeding from his Hight;
Which prooude him not an English Man,
But sure a Romain right.
For never faithful English Heart
Was Foe to native Soil;
Yet he in native Land did seek,
Christ's faithful Flock to spoil.
A^^ also then he wrought much Woe,
To England's chiefest Stays;
By seeking of their Death and Loss,
Which loved Christ's Testament.
And more then so, of worthy Wights,
Of whom bereft are we;
Which left their Wealth, their Ease, and Life,
That Christ might gained be.
And yet not so, this * Cyrus left
Much humain Blood to spil;
And so ceace his devouring Rage,
And most blasphemous Will.
But more and more he sought Outrage,
(As all his Mates were bent)
By Lies and Tales, and Popish Toys,
Gods Gospel to prevent.
As one in Place by Satan sent,
Gods Instrument of Ire;
To daunt the Pride of England then,
(Which did it much require.)
And so no dout this Bonner did,
He spared no Degree;
Ne Wise, ne Grave, ne Rich, ne Poor,
Be pitied no Man he.

