A DISSVASIVE FROM THE ERRORS Of the TIME: Wherein the Tenets of the
principal Sects, especially of the Independents, are drawn together in one
Map, for the most part, in the words of their own Authors, and their maine
principles are examined by the Touchstone of the Holy Scriptures.

By ROBERT BAYLIE Minister at Glasgow.

JER. 9.3. They are not valiant for the Truth upon the earth.

JUDE ver. 3. It was needful for me to write unto you and exhort you, that you
should earnestly contend for the faith, which was once delivered unto the
Saints; for there are certain men crept in unawares, etc.

Published by Authority.

LONDON, Printed for SAMUEL GELLIBRAND at the Brazen Serpent in Paul's
Churchyard, 1645.

FOR The Right Honorable the Earl of Lauderdaile Lord Metellane.
YOur Lordship, I trust, will not be displeased that your name is set before
these Truths which your heart does love, and whereunto in the best companies of
the whole Isle you have given at many occasions your cheerful countenance and
zealous patrociny; in the study whereof I have been often both encouraged and
assisted by your Lordships pious, wise, and learned informations.

It has been of a long time the wish of my heart to have had nothing to do with
Polemick writings; the bodies of sojours are no more subject to wounds and
manifold hardships, then the minds and names of disputant Divines do lie open
to various vexations. The weary, starved, bleeding sould^er longs no more for a
safe peace, then a spirit harassed in the toylsome labyrinth of thorny debates,
pants for that quietness which only the final overthrow and full subjugation
of error can produce. How pleasant will that day be to the sons of peace,
when the Lord shall make good that word which by the mouth of two of his
ancient witnesses he has established, when according to the Testimony of
Isaiah, Isa. 2.^
syllabically repeated by Michah, Mic. 4.3.
we shall beat our swords into plow-sheares, and our spears into pruning
hooks, that we may walk together in the light of the Lord? But so long as
Divine Dispensation besets our habitations both spiritual and temporal, the
Church no less then the State, with great numbers of daring and dangerous
adversaries, we must be content, according to the call of the Prophet Joel in
another case, Joel 3.^*
to prepare war, to beat our plow shears into swords, and our pruning hooks
into spears; in this juncture of time the faint must take courage, and the
weak say I am strong.

It seems that yet for some time the servants of God must earnestly contend for
many precious truths, which erroneous spirits do mightily impugn: for the help
and encouragement of others in that warfare, I, though among the weakest of
Christ's soldiers, do offer these my endeavors. It was my purpose to have
made a farther progress, and to have handled all I mention in my Preface; but
being called away from my present station by these who set me therein, upon the
occasion your Lordship knows, my studies in this kind are broken off; so that
this essay in Brownisme and Independency must go forth alone, or nothing at all.

My ay^ in these two is, and was in all the rest; First, in an historick way to
set down the original and progress of the error; next its complete parts
together in one table, that at one view the whole face of the way may be
represented; for I conceived it many ways advantageous and very satisfactory
in debating either a truth or an error, to be brought to see the fountain and
original whence it has sprung, the streams and issues whither the Tenet tends
of it self, or is drawn by its followers; to behold a way not in its pieces,
but the whole together from the head to the feet, the beginning, midst, and end
without any concealment or disguise. Thirdly, my purpose was to have examined
the principal parts of every error in a short, clear, and popular method,
considering the maine Scriptures that use to be alleged in the point either
pro or contra.

I believe this my method will not be displeasing to any. I know it was
acceptable enough to many of the Congregationall way when lately I did use it
against the Canterburian Faction; but possibly some of the matter of my
historick part may fall out to be fashions to the followers of the Tenets which
I labor to lay open; for it is inavoydable to make a true and a full narration
of any erroneous way, but such things must be told which will be displeasing to
some; yet I hope I have given as little offense in this kind, as any other
could have done in such a way of ^reatising; for all the passages that may be
pungent of the tenderest skin, are such, as not only I conceive to be very
true, but such also which I ever make presently good by sufficient Testimonies
set down fully at the end of every Chapter in the express words of the
Authors. Secondly, the opinions or practices I allege, are such as the parties
themselves to this day do openly avow, or else have been objected to them by
very honest men long ago in print, and to this day, so far as I know, are not
taken off by any tolerable answer; in all that is over and above, I will
undertake to give ample satisfaction wherein soever I give the least offense to
any.

I date appeal to your Lordships knowledge, and to many others who have been
acquainted with all my bygone walking, how averse I have ever been from
causing grief to any, especially good men: so far as I am conscious to my
most secret intentions, it is my hearts desire that all our present
controversies might quickly either be ended or composed by calm, meek, and
peaceable means, and these alone.

That lately renewed Committee for Accommodation, Oh if it might please the
Lord to shine upon it, however I may not stay to see its success; yet wherever
I am, my best wishes shall be poured upon it, especially when I shall hear, as
I have great reason to believe is only intended, that it abides circumscribed
within the bounds of that prudent Order whereby it is renewed.

For first, that Order is so far from holding out an Accommodation for all
the sects of the Land, that it speaks only of the differences that are among
the members of the Assembly. Liberty of Conscience, and Toleration of all or
any Religion is so prodigious an impiety, that this religious Parliament cannot
but abhor the very nameing of it. Whatever may be the opinion of Io. Goodwin,
of Mr Williams and some of their stamp, yet Mr Burrowes in his late Irenicon
upon many unanswerable arguments explodes that abomination. Likewise our
Brethren who seek to be accommodate, will be willing I hope to profess their
going along with us, without any considerable d^ssent, as in the Directory for
all the parts of divine worship, so in the confession of Faith and Catechism.

Secondly, the Order expresses only the differences in Church Government; what
other opinions we have mentioned in the following Treatise, I hope our
Brethren will either disavow and pass from them, or else be content to bury
them in their own breasts, till time and better information make them die and
vanish without more moyse.

Thirdly, the intent of the Order is to bring up the dissenting Brethren ^o
approve of the Government agreed upon in the Assembly and allowed by both
Houses of Parliament; or if that cannot be, to see how in some practices they
may be forborne. This does suppose that our Brethren shall not be permitted to
print, preach, or publish any thing against the Government established by
Parliament; also that in the practice of this Government they shall be obliged
to join so far with their Brethren as their principles may suffer. This
being, I doubt not but in many things they shall be much forborne; for whatever
be the unadvised rashness of some in their way, yet if they may be pleased,
according to their frequent offers (as I remember) to be constant members of
our Presbyteries and Synods, and there to give were it but their consultative
voice, I believe that few of them shall ever be pressed to much more; for if
they agree among themselves, and govern well their own Congregations, no
controversy that concerns them will ever come before any superior Assembly;
and if any complaint of their male administration, or any matter of ordination
or excommunication should come from them to be cognosced in a Presbytery or
Synod, the result might ever be to them as a matter of advice to be executed in
their own Congregations by their own Pastors, if they did find it right: or
if it appeared wrong, the General Assembly, or at least the Parliament, would
give them so much satisfaction, as on earth can be expected.

Albeit I am in opinion, that no case merely Ecclesiastical shall ever need to
go from a General Assembly to a Parliament; these two bodies are so friendly
and near of kin, that none who knows their nature and constitution will ever
fear their discord. I dare say, that all the jealousies which are presented to
the Parliament of England of a National Assembly, are mere Bugbeares and
childish frightments, arising alone out of misinformation and unacquaintance;
for both reason and experience will demonstrate that the Parliament of England
cannot have on earth so strong pillars and pregnant supporters of all their
Privileges, as free Protestant Assemblies established by Law, and kept in
their full freedom from the lowest to the highest, from the Congregationall
Eldership to the General Synod of the Nation. No such Bars as these are
imaginable either against Tyranny or Anarchy; they are the mightiest
impediments both to the exorbitancy of Monarchs, which has been and is our
misery; and to the extravagancy of the common multitude, attempting to correct
and subject all Parliaments to their own foolish desires, which is like to be
the matter of our next exercise and trouble.

Protestant Assemblies examined to the bottom, will be found real and cordial
friends to all the Just, Legal and reasonable Prerogatives of a Monarch, to
all the equitable and profitable Liberties of the meanest subject; but above
all to every due privilege of a Christian Parliament. Sometimes we laugh,
sometimes we grieve to see men afraid out of mere ignorance with that which we
know is their great good. I am persuaded that after a little experience,
Congregationall Sessions, Cl^ssicall Presbyteries, Provincial Synods, and
National Assemblies will be embraced and sluck to by the Parliament of England
as the greatest and most useful privileges of their great Charter.

My fourth remarke upon the Order in hand is, that it speaks alone of the
questions of Government, whereby the Assembly was retarded, but nothing of the
constitution of Congregations which never came to any considerable debate, much
less did ever retard the Assemblies proceedings: and albeit the words of the
Order might be extended beyond the Government to the constitution, yet we may
not think that the House does intend to tolerate the gathering of separate
Congregations; in this point we hope that the desired accommodation shall
satisfy our Brethren, and all tolerations shall be needless. Themselves are
witnesses of our most earnest Desires, of our very real endeavors, (and we
wish, they had been much more our helper^ and real Assistants) for purging of
all Congregations, so far as ever they have been in any time, in any place, for
making them so void of ignorance and all scandalls as Scripture or any reason
can require: In these our earnest requests we trust the Parliament at last will
show us favor. But when the Assembly and Parliament have done their uttermost,
to have the Churches purified so far as is possible, if notwithstanding of
all that can be done, our Brethren will yet separate, and peremptorily refuse
to communicate as Members, in the best ruled Congregations, either of England,
or of any other reformed Church; we confess, that by such a Declaration, our
Brethren would put us to a great deal of perplexity; for such a separation as
this, were as we conceive, the most palpable and unreasonable Schism that ever
yet was heard of in the Christian World, much contrary to the word of God, and
evidently destructive of the necessary peace of all these Churches wherein it
should be tolerated; beside its clear contradiction in terms, not only to
the Order of the House, but to the solemn League and Covenant of the three
Kingdoms. Notwiihstanding we trust that the grace and mercy of God, shall be
so richly powered out upon this revived Committee, as shall enable them to
expedit both us and our Brethren from these otherwise unextricable Labirynths.

Would to God that our Controversies with them were brought to a happy period,
that both they and we, with all our power might concur to reduce the rest of
our poor Brethren, who this day are pitifully entangled in manifold heresies
and Errors* that so all the childr^n of God being delivered from the snares
and chains of darkness, might make it their great task and only contention,
who should honor most the name of their Father, by the fragrancy of their
godly, charitable, humble, chaste, and sober conversation.

Your Lordship is conscious to the first designs of the Noble Patriots of that
your Nation, it was never their mind to have trifled so much time in jangling
with their Brethren of this Isle, about new and needless questions, but
expecting a facility of settling truth and Peace within these S^as, their hearts
were farther abroad, their thoughts were large for the propagation not of there
own but of Christ's Kingdom, and that not so much in the Light as in the heat
and life thereof. They have the more to answer who here and elsewhere have been
the unhappy instruments, not only to frustrate these great and gracious
enterprises for the Weale-publick of Christendom, but also to bring the
undertakers to so low a condition, that they be obliged this day to God alone
for any tolerable subsistence and their very being: albeit we are hopeful the
Lord is reserving good things for them, who had so much Faith, charity, and
Courage, as to venture all for the cause of God, and their Brethren, the more
unkind men have proved unto them; The Lord who has been witness to all their
intentions, actions and sufferings, will in his own time accordingly reward
them, and will not let them be ashamed of their first hopes and constant
desires, upon the which himself for a long time did shine so evidently from
the Heaven, as ever upon any enterprise on the Earth. Though now that
brightness be much ecclipsed, and overclouded, yet we are expecting with
passionate desires, and confident hopes, the dissolution of these clouds, and
the dispelling of the present darkness by the strength of the Beams of his
ancient and undeserved kindness, toward that now suffering and much
distressed Nation.

But insensibly my pen has run beyond the bounds of a short Epistle, albeit
my experience of your Lordships readiness to dispense with your friends
indiscretion, makes me secure of my pardon. I will detain your Lordship no
longer, I lay down my Book at your Lordships feet, to be given to the world
by your Lordships hand. If it be received with so much candor and charity by
every Reader, as I know it is offered, it may possibly prove serviceable. Thus
wishing to your Lordship in these days of deep and dangerous trials, and too
great defection of many, constancy, and daily increase of affection to all
truth, Piety, Justice, and every Virtue, I remain,

Your Lordships in all Christian duty to be commanded. R. Baylie*
London, November. 19. 1645.
The Principal Authors, whose Testimonies are cited in the case of the
Brownists.
1 THe Brownists confession of Faith printed by themselves. 160^ 2 The
Brownists Apo^ogy printed. 1604 3 Robert Brownes Life, and manners of true
Christians printed. 1582 4 Henry Barrow his brief discovery of the false
Church. 1590 5 Henry Barrow his plain refutation of Mr Gifford, 1590. 6
Francis Iohnsons enquiry and answer to Thomas Whites Discovery of Brownism,
1606 7 Francis Iohnsons Christian plea, 1617. 8 John Cann his guide to Sion,
1638 9 John Cann his necessity of Separation. 1638. 10 Apologia Iusta quorundam
Christianorum, etc. per Iohannem Robinsorum. 1619 11 Robinsons justification
against Bernard reprinted at London, 1640 12 Syons royal prerogative, 1641. 13
A Light for the Ignorant. 1638.
The Principal Authors whose Testimonies are cited in the case of the
Independents.
1. An Apologeticall Narration by Thomas Goodwin, etc. 1643 2 John Cottons
Keys published by Thom: Goodwin, and Philip Nigh. 1644. 3 John Cottons way of
the Churches in New England. 1645. 4 John Cottons Sermons upon the seven
Vialls. 1642. 5 John Cottons Catechism, or the Doctrine of the Church. 1644. 6
An Answer to thirty two Questions, by the Elders of the Churches in
New England, published by Mr. Peter's. 1643. 7 An Apology of the Churches in
New England for Church Covenant, or a discourse touching Church Covenant. 1643.
8 A glimpse of Syons glory in a Sermon at a general Fast Day in Holland, by T.
G. printed at London. 1641. 9 Jeremy Burrowes Sermons upon Hosea. 1644. 10 The
personal reign of Christ by Io: Archer, Pastor of the Church at Arnheim. 164^
11 Io: Archers comfort for Believers. 1645. 12 Mr. Burtons vindication of the
Independent Churches. 1645. 13 John Goodwins Theo-machia. 1644. 14 A short
story of the rise, reign and ruin, etc. published with Mr. Welds large
Preface. 1644. 15 Mr Welds answer to Rathbans narration. 1644. 16 Mr Cottons
Letter to Mr. Williams. 1643. 17 The Anatomist anatomised by Mr Simson. 1644.
We cite also for some matters of fact, to which no satisfactory Answer has
been made hitherto by the Parties.
1 Mr Edwards Antapologie. 1644. 2 Mr Williams examination of Cottons Letter.
1644. 3 Mr Williams bloody Tenet. 1644. 4 Plaine-dealing, or News from
New England by Thomas Lechford. 1642. 5 The Anatomy of Independency, by a
Learned Minister of Holland. 1644. 6 Doctor Bastwicks Postscript. 1645. 7 Mr.
Prinns fresh discovery. 1645.
The CONTENTS of the following Treatise.
The Preface
THe chief and first mean to extinguish the flames of our war, is, the
waters of our heart poured out in prayers to God, page 1 Reformation after
mourning, is the second step to a solid peace, p. 2 The corruption of the
Church, is the fountain of our present misery, ibid. The State cannot be
settled till the Church be first reformed, 3 Every man would help what he can
to recover the languishing Church from her desperate disease, ibid. The offer
of a strange and easy remedy of a Looking-glass, 4 The malignity of Error,
ibid. The Authors intention is to set down in a Table for the clear view of
all, the errors which trouble us, ibid. And that with Justice and Love toward
all persons, 5 The partition of the ensuing Treatise, 6 Episcopacy was the
mother of all our present Sects, ibid. Presbytery will be their grave, 7 The
Presbyteriall way of proceeding, ibid. What England rationally may expect from
Presbyteries and Synods, 8
Chap. 1. The original and progress of the Brownists.
Satan is the great enemy of the Churches Reformation, 9 His chief instruments
always have been professed friends to Religion, ibid. Reformation at the
beginning did run with one impetuous current, ibid. What was its first stop, 10
The fountain of Protestant discord, ibid. The unhappy principle of the
Lutherans, ibid. And the more unhappy principle of the Anabaptists, 11 Somewhat
of both these ways was entertained in England, ibid. The original of the
English Bishops and Ceremonies, ibid. The original of the Separatists, 12
Brownism is a daughter of Anabaptism, 13 Bolton the first known Separatist in
England hanged himself, ibid. Brown the second leader of that way, recanted
his schism, and to his death was a very scandalous person, ibid. The humor of
Barrow the third master of this Sect, 14 The strange carriage of Johnson and
Ainsworth, the next two leaders of the Brownists, ibid. The horrible ways of
Smith their sixth master, 15 The fearful end of Smith his wanderings, 16
Robinson the last grave and learned Doctor of the Brownists, did in the end
undermine his party, 17 Robinson the author of Independency, ibid.
Chap. 2. The Doctrine of the Brownists.
They hold that all Churches in the world, but their own, are so polluted, that
they must be separate from, 20 Their injurious slanders of the Church of
England, ibid. Yet sometimes they say, that communion maybe kept with her both
in preaching and prayer, ibid. Their like dealing with all the other Reformed,
21 Their flattering of foreign Churches is not to be regarded, ibid. The
matter of a Church they make to be real Saints only, 22 Their unreasonable
strictness in this one point, is the great cause of their Schism, ibid. They
place the form of their Church in an express Covenant, 23 Seven may make a
perfect Church, yea two or three, ibid. The erecting of a Church, requires
neither the Magistrates nor Ministers assistance, ibid. They put all Church
power in a handful of people, without any Pastor, 24 The election, ordination,
deposition and excommunication of the Minister, belongs to his flock, and to it
alone, ibid. Every man of the Congragation may preach, and publicly rebuke,
not only the Pastor, but the whole flock, yea and separate from it, 25 Some of
them give the celebration of the Sacraments also to private persons, ibid. The
solemnizing of marriage they give to Parents, but Divorces they commit to the
parties themselves, 26 They make every Congregation independent, and of
Sovereign Authority, ibid. Their judgment of Synods, 27 Their high conceit of
their own way, and injurious depressing of all others, ibid. Churches, Bells,
Tithes, Glebes, Manses, and all set maintenance of Ministers, are unlawful;
not so much as a Church, yard must be kept up for burial, but all must bury in
the fields, ibid. The days of the week, the months, the year of God, they
will not name, 28 No Pulpits, no Sand-glasses in Churches, no Gowns, ibid. All
set prayer, even the Lords prayer, and all Psalms in meeter, yea in prose, if
used as praises, are unlawful, 29 Their opinion of preaching and Sacraments,
ibid. Their strange way of celebrating the Lords Supper, ibid. They reject
Catechismes, the Apostles Creed, and all reading of Scripture without
exposition, 30 After preaching they prophecy, ibid. Then come their Questions,
ibid. After all, they attend a very tedious discipline, ibid. Brown is for
liberty of Conscience, ibid. His followers are against it, 31 Their carriage
toward the Magistrate, ibid. They spoil Kings and Parliaments of their
Legislative power, ibid. They oblige the Magistrate to kill all Idolaters,
ibid. But to spare all thieves, 32 They will have the Universities destroyed,
ibid. Secular Authors and Learning must be abolished, ibid. Preachers must
study no other books but the Bible, ibid.
Chap. 3. The original and progress of the Independents, and of their
carriage in New England.
Independency is the smallest of all the Sects of the time for number, but
greatest for worth of its followers, 53 Independents are the Separatists
offspring, ibid. When the spark of Brownism was dying out in Holland, a little
of its ashes carried to New England, broke out there into a lasting flame, 54
By what means these ashes were kindled, ibid. Mr Cotton at first a great
Opposite to that way, 55 Mr Cotton with little ado, became the great Patron of
that Error, ibid: Mr Cotton was the mis-leader of Mr Goodwin and others, 56 Mr
Cotton often deceived, has given his patrociny to diverse gross errors, ibid.
Why God permits great men to fall in evident errors, ibid. His Prelaticall,
Arminian, and Montanistick tenets, 57 His Antinomy and Familism, ibid.
Independency full as unhappy as Brownisme, 58 Wherefore so much of the
Independent way lies yet in darkness, 59 The fruits of Independency in
New England, ibid. First, it has put thousands of Christians in the condition
of Pagans, ibid. Secondly, it has marred the conversion of Pagans to Christian
Religion, 60 Thirdly, it did bring forth the foulest heresies that ever yet
were heard of in any Protestant Church, ibid. A few examples of the many
abominable heresies of the New-English Independents, 61 The greatest part of
their Churches were infected with these errors, ibid. The piety of these
Heretics seemed to be singular, ibid. Their malice against all who opposed
them, was singular, especially against all their orthodox Ministers and
Magistrates, 62 Their errors in opinion did draw on such seditious practices,
as did well near overturne both their Church and State, ibid. Their proud
obstinacy against all admonitions, was marvelous, p. 63 In the midst of their
profession of eminent Piety, the profaneness of many of them was great, p. 64
Notwithstanding of all this we desire from our heart to honor, and imitate all
and every degree of truth and Piety, which did ever appear in any New-English
Christian, p. 65
Chap. 4. The carriage of the Independents in Holland at Rot^rdam and Arnheim,
p. 75.
Independency was no fruitful tree in Holland, p. 75 Mr Peter's the first
planter thereof at Roterdam, ibid. Their Ministers, Mr. Bridge, Mr Simpson, and
Mr Ward, renounced their English Ordination, and as mere private men took new
Ordination from the people, ibid. They did quickly fall into shameful
divisions and subdivisions, p. 76 The people without any just cause deposed
their Minister, ibid. The Schisms at Roterdam were more irreconcilable then
those at Amsterdam, p. 77 Anabaptisme is like to spoil that Church, p. 78
These of Arnheim, admire and praise themselves above all measure. ibid. The
easiness of their banishment and afflictions. p. 79 The new Light at Arnheim,
brok out in a number of strange errors. ib. First, gross Chiliasme. ibid.
Secondly, the grossest blasphemy of the Libertines, that God is the Author of
the very sinfulness of sin. p. 80 Thirdly, the fancy of the Euthusiasts, in
contemplating God as God abstracted from Scripture, from Christ, from grace,
and from all his attributes. ibid. Fourthly, the old Popish Ceremonies of
extreme Unction, and the holy Kiss of peace. p. 81 Fifthly, the discharging of
the Psalms, and the apointing of a singing Prophet, to chant the Songs made by
himself, in the silence of all others. ibid. Sixthly, the mortality of the
soul. ibid. Seventhly, the convenience for Ministers to preach covered, and
celebrate the Sacraments uncovered: but for the people to hear uncovered, and
to participate the Sacraments covered. p. 82. Their public contentions were
shameful. ibid.
Cap. 5. The Carriage of the Independents at London. p. 90
The work of the prime Independents of New England, Arnheim, and Roterdam,
these five years at London. p. 90 They did hinder with all their power so long
as they were able, the calling of the Assembly, ibid. When it was called, they
retarded its proceedings, p. 91 That the Churches of England and Ireland lie so
long in confusion, neither Papists, nor Prelates nor Malignants have been the
cause, ibid. But the Independents working according to their Principles, p. 92
The great mischief of that Anarchy wherein they have kept the Churches of
England, and Ireland, for so long a time, ibid. Independency is the mother of
more Heresies and Schisms at London, then Amsterdam ever knew, ibid.
Independency at London does not only bring forth, but nourish and patronize
Heresies and Schisms, contrary to its custom either in New England or
Amsterdam, p. 93 How hazardous it may prove to the State of England, p. 94
Chap. 6. An Enumeration of the Common Tenets of the Independents. p. 101
Why it is hard to set down the Independents Positions, p. 101 They have
declined to declare their Tenets, more then has ever been the custom of any
Orthodox Divines, ibid. When they shall be pleased to declare themselves to the
full, their principle of change will hinder them to assure us that any thing is
their settled and firm Tenet wherein they will be constant, ibid. The chief
Tenets which hitherto they have given out, and not yet recalled, p. 102 They
reject the name of Independents unreasonably, and for their own disadvantage:
ibid. When it is laid aside, the more infamous name of Brownists and
Separatists will inevitably fall upon them. ibid. They avow a Semi-Separation,
but a Sesqui-Separation will be proven upon them. p. 103 The Independents do
separate from all the reformed Churches, upon far worse grounds then the
Brownists were wont, to separate of old, ibid. Their acknowledgement of the
reformed for true Churches, does not diminish but increase their Schism, ibid.
They refuse all Church Communion, and Membership in all the reformed Churches,
ibid. They preach and pray in them as they would do among Pagans; only as
gifted men to gather materials for their new Churches. p. 104. About the matter
of the Church, and qualification of Members, they are large as strict* as the
Brownists, admitting none but who convinces the whole Congregation of their
real regeneration. p. 105 Beside true grace, they require in the person to be
admitted, a sutablenesse of Spirit with every other Member, p. 106 But in this
they are laxer then the Brownists, that they can take in without scruple,
Anabaptists, Antinomians and others, who both in life and Doctrine have evident
blots, if so they be zealous and serviceable for their way. ibid. About the
form of the Church (a Church Covenant) they are more punctual then the
Brownists. ibid. They take the power of gathering and erecting of Churches,
both from Magistrates and Ministers, placing it only in the hands of a few
private Christians who are willing to make among themselves a Church Covenant.
p. 107 This power of erecting themselves into a complete and perfect Church,
they give to any seven persons, yea to any three; neither admit they more into
a Church then can altogether in one place commodiously administer the
Sacraments and Discipline. ibid. The Independents will have all the standing
Churches in England except them of the Sectaries dissolved, and all their
Ministers to become merely private men, and any three persons of their way to
be a full Church. p. 108 Unto this Church of seven persons, they give all and
the whole Church power, and that independently. ibid. Unto this Congregationall
Church alone, they give the full power of Election and Ordination, of
Deposition and Excommunication, even of all their Officers, and of the final
determination of all Ecclesiastical causes, p. 109 The difference of Johnson
and Ainsworth, about the power of the people and Presbytery distinct one from
the other, is not yet composed among the Independents, ibid. The common
Doctrine of New England is Ainsworths Tenet, that the people alone have all the
power, and may excommunicate when there is cause, all their Officers, ibid. Mr.
Cotton the other year did fall much from them and himself toward Johnson,
teaching that the whole power of Authority is only in the Officers, and the
people have nothing but the power of Liberty to concur; That the Officers can
do nothing without the people, nor the people any thing but by the Officers.
p. 110 Yet that both Officers and people or any of them, have power to separate
themselves from all the rest when they find cause, ibid. The London
Independants give more power of Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction then the
Brownists, unto women, p. 111 Some of them permit private men to celebrate the
Sacraments, ibid* Brownists and Independents do perfectly agree i^ the point
of Independency, ibid: If a corrupt or negligent Congregation do not censure
the^ own Members, all the Assemblies in the world may not attempt to censure
any of them, though most apparently they did corrupt a whole Nation with the
grosseth Heresies, or most scandalous vices, p. 112 The point of Independency
is either the root, or the fruit of many Errors, ibid. To temper the crudity
thereof, they add to it three moderating Positions, but for little purpose,
ibid. They grant the being of Synods, but not of Classical Presbyteries. p.
113 Their Synods are merely Brownisticall without all Jurisdiction, wherein
every one of the people may voice; also they are merely Elective and only
occasional, ibid. The Sentence of non-Communion is Mr. Cottons invention, to
supply that defect which themselves make in the Ordinances of God, ibid. It
puts in the hand of every man a power to sentence all the Churches of the
World, p. 114 It carries to the highest degree of Separation, ibid. Their
supply of the defects of Independency, by the power of the Magistrate, was a
remedy which they learned from the Brownists; but now they have cast it aside,
denying to the Magistrate all power in matter^ of Religion, p. 115 The
Independents do advance their fancies, to as high a pitch of glory as the
Brownists, ibid. They are the Brownists Scholars in many more things, beside
the constitution and government of the Church, ibid. They give to the
Magistrate the celebration of Marriage, ibid. Mr. Milton permits any man to put
away his wife upon his mere pleasure without any fault, and without the
cognizance of any Judge, p. 116 Mr Gorting teaches the wife to put away her
Husband, if he will not follow her in any new Church Way which she is pleased
to embrace, ibid. They are against all determinations of the circumstances of
Worship, and therefore all Church Directories are against their stomachs, ibid.
The common names of the days of the week, of the Months of the year, of the
year of God, of many Churches and Cities of the Land, are as unlawful to them
as to the Brownists, ibid. All Tithes and set-mayntenance of Ministers they cry
down, but a voluntary contribution for the maintenance of all their Officers
they press to a high proportion, with the evident prejudice of the poor, p.
117 In their solemn Worship, often times they make one to pray, another to
preach, a third to Prophecy, a fourth to direct the Psalm, and another to
bless the people. ibid. They make it a divine Institution without any word of
preface, to begin the public Worship with solemn prayer for the King and
Church, p. 118 After the Pastors Prayer, the Doctor reads and expounds, ibid.
In preaching, they will be free to take a Text or not, as they find it
expedient, ibid. After the Sermon, any of the people whom they think able, are
permitted to prophecy, ibid. All are permitted to propound in the face of the
Congregation, what questions upon the Sermon they think meet, ibid. About the
Psalms they have diverse strange conceits, but the special is their new
Ordinance of a singing Prophet, who is place of the Psalms sings Hymmes of
his own making in the midst of the silent Congregation, ibid. They grant the
lawfulness of read Prayers in diverse cases, p. 119 They will have none to be
baptized but the children of their own Members; so at one dash they put all
England except a very few of their way, into the state of Pagans, turning them
all out of the Christian Church, denying to them Sacraments, Discipline,
Church Officers and all that they would deny to the Pagans of America, ibid.
They open a door to Anabaptisme by three farther Positions. First, they
require in all to be baptized a real holiness above a foederall, which in no
Infant with any certainty can be found, ibid. Secondly, they esteem none for
their Baptism and Christian education a Member of their Church, till they have
entered themselves in their Church Covenant, p. 120 Thirdly, they call none of
their Members to any account before their Presbytery for obstinate rejecting of
Paedo-baptisme, although the Brownists do excommunicate for that sin, ibid.
They participate with none of the reformed Churches in the Lords Supper, yet
they scruple not to communicate with Brownists and Anabaptists, ibid. Their way
of celebrating the Lords Supper, is more dead and comfortless then anywhere
else, p. 121 They have no catechizing, no preparation, nor
thanks-giving-Sermons; ordinarily they speak no word of the Sacrament in their
Sermons and prayers, either before or after, ibid. They have only a little
discourse, and short prayer in the consecration of both the Elements;
thereafter, in the action nothing but dumb silence, no exhortation, no reading,
no Psalm, ibid. They require none of their Members to come out of their Pewes
to the Table, and they acknowledge no more use of a Table then the Brownists at
Amsterdam, which have none at all, ibid. They teach the expediency of covering
the head at the Lords Table. p. 122 They are as much for the popular Government
as the Brownists, ibid. All Discipline must be executed in the presence and
with the consent of the whole people, and all must pass by the express
suffrage of every one, p. 123 Dissenters not only loose their right of
Suffrage for the time, but are subjected to censure if they continue in their
dissent, ibid. They are much for private meetings; for it is in them that they
usually frame the Members of other men's Congregations into their new mould; but
the Brownists, and they of New England having felt the bitter fruits of such
meetings, have relinquished if not discarged them, ibid. They flatter the
Magistrate, and slander the reformed Churches without cause, p. 124 Some of
them are for the abolishing of all Magistracy, ibid. All of them are for the
casting out, and keeping out of the Christian Church all Princes; all Members
of Parliament, all Magistrates of the Counties and Burrowes that now are, and
that ever have been, and are ever like to be hereafter, except a very few. p.
125 These few Magistrates which they would admit, have no security but by the
error or malice of a few, to be quickly cast out of the Church without any
possibility of remedy, ibid. When they have put all who are not of their mind
out of the places of Magistracy, yea out of all Civil Courts; the greatest
Magistrates they admit of, be they Kings or Parliaments, they subject them all
to the free will of the promiscuous multitude, ibid. When Magistrates will not
follow their new errors, they have been very ready to make Insurrections to
the great hazard of the whole State, p. 126 Many of them deny to the Magistrate
any power at all in the matters of Religion, ibid. Their principles do spoil
Princes and Parliaments of their whole Legislative power; they abolish all
humane Laws that are made, and hinder any more to be made, p. 127 The Civil
Laws which Mr Cotton permits men to make, bind no man any further then his
own mind is led by the reason of the Law to Obedience. p. 128 They put the
yoke of the Judicial Law of Moses on the neck of the Magistrate, ibid. They
give to their Ministers a power to sit in Civil Courts, and to voice in the
election of the Magistrates, and to draw from Scripture civil Laws for the
Government of the State, ibid. They offer to persuade the Magistrate
contradictory Principles according to their own interest; in New England they
persuade the Magistrate to kill Idolaters and Heretics; even whole Cities,
men, women and children. p. 129 But here they deny the Magistrate all power to
lay the lost restraint upon the grossest Idolaters, Apostates, blasphemers,
Seducers, or the greatest Enemies of Religion, ibid. No great appearance of
their respect to secular Learning and Schools, ibid. Independency much more
dangerous then Brownisme, ibid.
Chap. 7. It is unjust scrupulosity to require satisfaction of the true grace
of every Church Member.
The Independents prime Principles, p. 154 Its unjust scrupulosity to require
satisfactorie assurance of the true grace of every Churchmember, p. 154 Their
Tenet about the qualification of Members, is the great cause of their
separating from all the reformed Churches, though they do dissemble it, p. 155
In this they go beyond the Brownists, p. 156 The true state of the question,
is, whether it be necessary to separate from a Church wherein we get no
satisfaction of the true grace of every Member at their first admission? ibid.
For the negative, we reason first from the practice of Moses and the Prophets,
who did never offer to separate for any such reason, p. 157 The causes of a
just separation were smaller under the Law nor under the Gospel, ibid. Our
second reason is from the example of Christ and his Apostles, who did not
separate for any such causes, p. 158 The third reason, It is impossible to
find true grace in every member of any visible Church that ever was, or shall
be in the world, p. 159 The fourth. This satisfaction in the true grace of all
to be admitted, is builded on four errors, p. 160 The fifth Argument. Their
Tenet is followed with diverse absurdities, p. 161 Cottons reasons to the
contrary answered, p. 163 The first reason put in form, ibid. All the parts of
it are vicious, ibid His second Argument, p. 168 His third Argument, p. 169 His
fourth Argument, p. 170 His fifth, p. 171 His sixth, p. 172 His seventh, ibid.
His eigth, p. 173 His ninth; all his nine or twelve Reasons put in one, will be
too weak to bear up the weight of his most heavy conclusion.
Chap. 8. Concerning the right of Prophesying.
The state of the Question. 174 The first Authors of this Question. ib. The
Independents difference among themselves hereabout. ib. That none but Ministers
may ordinarily prophesye, we prove it first, by Christ's joining together the
power of Baptism and the power of preaching. 175 Secondly, These that preach,
must be sent to that work. ib. Thirdly, every ordinary Preacher labors in the
word and Doctrine. 176 Fourthly, none out of Office, have the gift of
preaching; for all that have that gift, are either Apostles, Evangelists,
Prophets, Pastors, or Doctors; and all these are Officers. ib. Fifthly, no man
out of Office might sacrifice. ib. Sixthly, all who have from God the gift of
preaching, are obliged to lay aside all other occupations, and attend that work
alone, 177 Seventhly, the Apostles appointed none to preach but ^ders. ibid.
Eigthly, the preaching of men out of office, is a means of confusion and
error. ibid. The contrary arguments which Mr Cotton in his Catechism and
Answer to the 32 Questions borrowes from Robinson, answered. 178
Chap. 9. Whether the power of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction belongs to the
people, or to the Presbytery?
What is meant by Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, 181 The state of the Question,
ibid. For the Negative, that the people have no power of Jurisdiction, we
reason, First, The Officers alone are Governors, and the people are to be
governed, p. 183 Secondly, the people have not the Keys of heaven to bind and
loose, p. 184 Thirdly, the people are not the eyes and ears in Christ's body,
for so all the body should be eyes and ears, ibid. Fourthly, the people have
not any promise of gifts sufficient for government, ibid. Fifthly, the popular
government brings in confusion, making the feet above the head, p. 185 Sixthly,
the people have not the power of Ordination, p. 186 Seventhly, this power in
the people, would disable them in their Callings, p. 187 Eigthly, this power of
the people would bring in Morellius Democracy and Anarchy in the Church, ibid.
Ninthly, this power of the people will draw upon them the power of the Word and
Sacraments, p. 188 Mr Cottons ten contrary arguments answered, p. 189
Chap. 10. Independency is contrary to Gods Word.
God is the Author of the union and dependency of particular Churches, p. 196
Separation and Independency were the Anabaptists inventions, ibid. From them
Morellius and Grotius learned the Tenet, p. 197 The state of the Question
cleared, ibid. That single Congregations are not independent, is proved, First,
from 1 Timothy 4.14. p. 199 The second argument from the Apostolic Churches,
which exercised full Jurisdiction; the chief whereof, if not all, were
Presbyteriall and not Parochial, p. 202 Our third argument from the
subordination of the Church of Antioch to the Synod at Jerusalem, Acts 15. p.
205 Our fourth argument from the subordination of fewer to more, appointed by
Christ, Matthew. 8. p. 209 Our fifth argument from the evil consequents which
reason and experience demonstrate to follow Independency necessarily and
naturally, p. 212 Our last argument, Independency is contrary to all the
Discipline that ever was known in Christendom before the Anabaptists, p. 215
The first objection or argument for Independency from Matthew. 18. p. 216 The
second objection is taken from the practice of the Corinthians excommunicating
the incestuous man, p. 218 The third objection from the example of the seven
Churches of Asia, p. 220 Their fourth objection from the practice of the
Church^s Thessalonica and Colosse, ibid. The fifth, sixth, seventh, and eigth
objection, p. 223
Chap. 11. The thousand years of Christ his visible Reign upon Earth, is
against Scripture.
The Original and progress of Chiliasme, ibid. The mind of the Indep^ndent
Chiliasts, ibid. Our first reason against the Chiliasts, is, that Christ from
his Ascension to the last Judgment abides in Heaven, p. 225 Our second reason
is built on Christ's sitting at the right hand of God till the day of Judgment.
p. 227 Our third reason is grounded on the Resurrection of the dead; the Godly
and ungodly do all rise together at the last day, p. 228 Our fourth reason is
builded on Christ's Kingdom, which is spiritual and not earthly, p. 229 Our
fifth reason is taken from the nature of the Church, p. 230 A sixth reason from
the secrecy of the time of Christ's coming, p. 231 A seventh reason from the
Heavenly and eternal reward of the Martyrs, p. 232 An eigth reason, the
restoration of an Earthly Jerusalem brings back the abolished figures of the
Law, p. 233 A ninth, Antichrist is not abolisht till the day of Judgment,
ibid. The Chiliasts first reason is from Revel: 20. 4. p. 234 Our new Chi^iasts
are Inventors of a new Heaven and of a new Hell, p. 236 Twelve other reasons of
the Chiliasts answered, p. 237
The PREFACE.
WHile the fire of War continues to scorch every one of these miserable
Dominions, The first and chief Mean to extinguish the flames of our War, is the
waters of the heart poured out in prayers to God.
it is the duty of all compassionate Contrymen to contribute the uttermost
of their best endeavors for the extinguishing of these unhappie Flames, before
the remainder of all our Churches and States be burnt down to ashes.

Too much Oil already has dropped from many unhallowed Pens; the times now do
passionately call for Waters; and them, the more cold and clear, the better,
for quenching the thirst of this devouring Beast. Vinegar and Gall, though in
the largest measures, whole rivers of Blood will not allay, but augment the
heat of a Civil War; The most hopeful Peacemakers, from whose intermedling the
greatest success is to be expected, are they whose vessels are filled most
plentifully with tears, to be poured out before the Throne of God.

The fire which this day prevails against us, which burns up not the flesh
only, but the very bones of our Kingdoms, is from above: it is the Lord who
burns against Jacob like a flaming fire which devours round about. Lam. 2.3.
When the scorching heat of the Sun dries up the moisture from the grass and
corn, there is no remedy for the languishing fields, till the vapors ascend
from below, and thicken in a cloud; then incontinent the burning beams are
intercepted, the showers descend from above to refresh and renew the withered
face of the parched ground. The most seasonable exercise of al who love the
peace of Jerusalem, is to fill the air with the exhalations of their Spirits,
with the perfumes arising from the kindled Incense of their Prayers; much of
these holy vapors will hardly make up one cloud; wherefore many hearts would
daily be breathing up together some store of that heavenly smoke. However for a
time all our endeavors may seem to be quite evanished, and when we have gone
out to behold much ofter then seven times, there may appear to our eye not so
much as the smallest beginning of the least cloud; yet when the period of Gods
appointed season is come, when the three years and six months are past over
and gone, there will certainly arise a cloud which, however at first very
small, and no broader then a hand, yet will quickly become so big as to fill
the heavens with voices, and send down to the wearied earth such plenty of rain
as could be wished.

Reformation after mourning, is the second step to a solid peace.
But to the end the waters of our Prayers may be the more acceptable in the
sight of our Prince of Peace, who alone dispenses at his pleasure to persons
and Nations that very desirable and much longed-for blessing of quietness, we
must cleanse our hands of those crimes which have drawn down from the Throne of
Justice that plague of War which so much this day does vex and well-neer undo
us: If once our ways did please the Lord, he would quickly make our enemies to
be at peace with us. Prove. 16.7. Psalm. 81.15
If Israel did walk in his ways, their enemies should soon be subdued, and the
hand of God so far turned against their adversaries, that they should submit
themselves without further opposition. 2 King. 9.22.
But what peace can be expected, so long as the Whoredom and Witchcraft, the
Idolatry and Oppression of Iezebel, the crying Crimes of many in the Land, yet
unrepented for, does offend the holy eye of the great Dispenser of Peace and
War? A Reformation after mourning, is the second step to a solid Pacification.
Long may we petition both God and men for peace in vain; long may we article
and treat for that end without any success, unless a real Reformation remove
from the sight of God the personal abominations, the State-transgressions, and
the Church-impieties of our Lands.

The corruption of the Church is the fountain of our present Misery.
The Crimes of persons are grievous, but those of a State are more. The
corruption of a member is not so grievous as of the whole Body; and the
deformity of the Body Political, is not so unpleasant to the eye of God as of
the Church: this is the Body, this is the Bride of Christ; nothing so much
provokes the passion of a loving Husband, as the polluting of his Spouse.
Church-grievances were the first and main causes of our present Troubles; the
righting of these, will open the door of our first hope of deliverance.

Whosoever will observe either the spring or progress of our present Woes in all
the three Kingdoms, will find that the open Oppression and secret Undermining
of the Commonwealth, by the craft and tyranny of the malignant Faction, did
highly provoke the wrath of God, and was a great occasion of all this D^scord
which has broke out among men: Yet it is evident, that the p^incipal cause
which has kindled the Jealousy of God, and enflamed the spirits of men to
shake off and break in pieces those Yokes of Civil Slavery, which ingenuous
necks were no more able to bear, was the constuprating of the Church, the
bringing in upon her by violence, and daily multiplying of Errors,
Superstitions, Idolatries, and other Spiritual Burdens.

The Method of our Cure, if ever it prove solid, The State cannot be (...) til
the Church be s^^^ reformed.
must lead our Physicians to the fountain of our Disease. All Treaties for
accommodating State-differences, will be lost, if in the first place Religion
be not provided for, according to the mind of God. If once the Temple were
builded, and filled with the cloud, the Difficulties would be small in making
up the breaches in the house of the Kingdom, and filling it with Peace and
Prosperity. So long as the Temple lies desolate, it is not possible to rear up
the walls of the City. It were the wisdom of our great Builders, when they
find themselves over-toiled in the Fifth year of their Work, as they desire
not to have all their bypast labors vain and fruitless, at last in good
earnest to set upon the building of the Church.

Interests of private persons and particular Factions, laid over with the
color of pretended State-reasons, may procrastinate days without number,
settling of Religion: yet if we trust either ancient or late experience, these
Statesmen provide best for the welfare of their Country, who give to the God
of heaven, to his Worship and House, the first and most high place in all their
studies and cares.

If we behold either the former, or the later Reformers of the State of Israel;
if we consider the practice of Moses, of David, of Hezekiah, of Zerubbabel, and
others, it is evident the Tabernacle, the Ark, the Temple, did first and most
lie at all their hearts. Our Neighbors and Brethren of Scotland, when this our
Disease was upon them, and did press them well-neer to death and ruin, by
this method of Physic did in a short time regain their full health and
strength, in the which they had great appearence to have continued, without any
Recidive, unless their pious compassion and brotherly attendance upon us in
our languishing, had made them partakers of these evils in our Company which
they had clean escaped,

The lamentable neglect for so long a time of the Churches disease, makes now
the Cure, if not desperate, Every man must help what he can to recover the
languishing Church from her desperate Disease.
yet much more difficult then once it was: so much the more had every good man
need to bring forth the best of his wits, at least of his wishes, for the
encouragement and assistance of our great Physicians, who now, blessed be God,
with all their care, are busied, above all things else, about the recovery of
that languishing Patient. The voices of some of her more faithful servants
crying aloud in the ear of all the world of their Mistress extreme danger, of
her approach to the doors of death; this noise has a wakened and given an
Alarm to many, that now they run with speed to recover the exparing breath of
their dying Mother, not without some disdain and ^nd^gnation against them by
whose subtle artifices, and more then ordinary industry, they have been kept
off all this while from so much as approaching the sick bed of the
dangerously-diseased Spouse of Christ.

And now while so many gracious hands are about this noble Patient, The offer
of a strange and easy remedy of a ^ooking-glass
every one out of their rich shops bringing the choicest Medicaments they can
fall upon; I also, out of my poor store, rather from a desire to testify
affection then confidence of any skill in this Art, do offer unto her, as one
mean of help, a Looking-glass, wherein if she will be pleased but to behold
the Symptoms of her Disease, by this inspection alone, and clear sight of her
face in this Glass, without any further trouble whether of Potions within, or
Applications without, I am hopeful, through the blessing of the great Master of
all lawful Arts, she shall be able to shake off the principal of those evils
which now do most afflict her.

That by the eye alone very noisome Diseases may be conveyed to the body, it is
the ancient credulity of some. However, daily experience puts it out of all
doubt, that through the glass of the eye the soul may be infected with the
desperate Diseases of most pestilent passions. But that which here is offered,
is much more rare and singular, by looking in a Glass to cure the worst
Diseases, and to remove from the soul the most dangerous passions by mere
contemplation.

The malignity of Error.
To leave Metaphors, my meaning is, that the greatest hazard of our Church this
day, comes from the evil of Error. This, if the Apostle Paul may be trusted, 2 Timothy 2.17. ^ Pet. 2.1, 2, 3, 4
does eat up the soul no less then a Gangrene the body. This, if we will
believe the Apostle Peter* is a pernicious and damnable evil which brings on
sudden destruction. The Authors intention is to set down in a Table for the
clear view of all* the Errors which trouble us.
It is a sin before God no less abominable then those which brought fire on
Sodom, the flood on the first world, the chains of darkness upon the evil
Angels.

At this instant, when the evil of Error has spread it self over the whole
Body of this distracted Church, it seems it may prove a remedy not unprofitable
to draw together the chief heads of those errors which now are flying abroad;
their faces being clearly described in one short Table in their true lineaments
and native colors, will appear so deformed, that many who now are bewitched
with them, upon this sight, may be brought out of all further affection toward
them.

This is the end of my present work, And that with justice and lo^^ toward all
persons.
without the least intention, so far as I can understand my own meaning, to
create any just offense or real hurt to any man's person. For, truly, I know
not the creature breathing, to whom heartily I do not wish Grace, Mercy, and
Peace; only the opinions which for a long time, with all license, are blown by
the Spirit of error over all the Land, to the dishonor of God and the
indangering of many a man's salvation, I wish were set out in their clear and
lively shap^s, that they may be seen, as truly they are, without any disguise,
by the eyes of all, I am much deceived if their bare and unmasked face shall be
found very pleasant to solid and intelligent minds.

And because it is a matter full of difficulty to set down the tenants,
especially erroneous, of any men, according to their own contentment; that
herein I may do wrong to none, it shall be my care in every thing I conceive
material and controverted, to speak nothing without Book, but always to bring
along my Warrant, to allege nothing doubtful of any man, but what himself or
some other, whose Faith is above just exception, has published before me to
the world.

If for all this, my Testimony be refused, I can but declare, that knowingly I
do not misreport either the words or the sense of any man; for, I esteem Truth
so honorable and so beautiful a creature, but falsehood so deformed and base,
that no consideration (I know) would so far overballance my mind as wittingly,
to make me entertain the one, with the prejudice of the other. Notwithstanding,
if so it should fall out, which is very casual to men, much my betters, that
through inadvertence I should misapprehend, and accordingly misreport any man's
judgment, upon the smallest conviction I purpose not only to retract my
misconceptions, but, for further satisfaction, I promise to make my
retractation no less public then was my error.

It is not my purpose to take notice of every extravagancy which has dropped
from all the distempered brains of the time; Only forth is r^ga^n^ng to the
Truth.
the profit of such a task would not co^ntervaile the Labor: only I will put
down, as it were in one table, so many of th^se irregular conceits, which now
are abroad, as may demonstrate to any common eye the undeniable footsteps of
the Spirit of Error and Schism walking among us, and bringing forth in great
plenty the births of his darkness, to the end that such a multitude of Satan's
Brats, appearing openly in the arms and bosoms of otherwise (I suppose)
well-meaning people, the beholders may tremble, and with all carfulness avoid
the deep deceit of that Angel of Light; and the deceived themselves seeing
with their eyes what they hugg and dandle, to carry in the face the clear
lineaments of a mishant Parent, for grief and shame that they have been so long
Nursing-Fathers to Satan's brood, may become the first to dash the brains of
these cursed Brats against the stones; or if they needs must obstinately
continue fond of that bastard Generation, they may enjoy what they love,
themselves alone; all well-advised men standing aloose from the danger of so
misordered and irrational affection.

The partition of the ensuing ^reatise.
The principal bypath, wherein the most among us this day do tread, who
divert from the high, open, and straight way of the Reformed Churches, may be
reduced to ten general Heads: The Brownists, or rigid Separatists, are the
first who break off at a side: The Independents, their Children, go on with
them for a time; but, wearied with the wideness of their Parents wandering,
profess to come in again toward the rode way, yet not so closely, but still
they keep a path of their own. How much nearer these men profess to draw
toward us then their Fathers, so much the farther their other Brethren run
from us; for, the Anabaptists go beyond the Brownists in wandering; the
Antinomians are beyond the Anabaptists, and the Seekers beyond them all.

These five lead aside on our right hand: toward the left there be no fewer
crooked Lanes; The Prelatical Faction; the downright Papists; the Arminians;
the Socinians; and, who now make as much trouble as any, the Erastian-Civilians.

Of all these we will thus far consider, as first, in a brief historick
narration, to set down their original and present condition; Secondly, to name
their tenants in particular; Thirdly, to refute from Scripture some of their
most prevalent errors:

Episcopacy was the Mother of all our present Sects.
Only in the entry, one stumbling block would be put by. It is marvailed by
many whence these new Monsters of Sects have arisen: Some spare not, from this
ground, liberally to blasphem the Reformation in hand, and to magnify the
Bishops as if they had kept down, and this did set up, the Sects which now
praedomin. But, these murmurers would do well in their calm and sober times, to
remember that none of the named Sects are births of one day; but all of them
were bred and born under the wings of no other Dame then Episcopacy: the
tyranny and superstition of this Stepmother, was the seed and spawn of
Brownisme, the great root of the most of our Sects; all which were many years
ago brought forth, however kept within doors so long as any Church-Disciplin
was on foot: Now, indeed, every Monster walks in the street without
controlement, while all Ecclesiastic Government is cast asleep; this too too
long inter-reign and mere Anarchy has invited every unclean creature to creep
out of its cave, and show in public its misshapen face to all, who like to
behold.

But, Presbytery will be their Grave.
if once the Government of Christ were set up amongst us, as it is in the rest
of the Reformed Churches, we know not what would impede it, by the Sword of God
alone, without any secular violence, to banish out of the Land these Spirits of
Error: in all meekness, humility, and love, by the force of Truth convincing
and satisfying the minds of the seduced.

Episcopal Courts were never fitted for the reclaiming of minds; their prisons,
their fines, their pillories, their nose-slittings, their ear-cuttings, their
check-burnings, did but hold down the flame to break out in season with the
greater rage.

But, The Presbyteriall way of proceeding.
the Reformed Presbytery does proceed in a spiritual Method evidently fitted
for the gaining of hearts; they go on with the offending party with all
respect, and at so much leisure as can be wished, appointing first the fittest
Pastors and Elders in the bounds, to confer and instruct him in private: if
this diligence do not prevail, then they convent him before the Consistory of
his Congregation; there by admonitions, instructions, r^proofs, and all the
means appointed in the Gospel, they deal with him in all gentleness, from
weeks to months, from months oftentimes to years, before they come near to
any censure, and if so it fall out that his insuperable obstinacy ^orce them to
draw out the terrible Sword, their proceeding here also is so exceeding
leasurely, and full of sensible grief and love to the party, of fear and
Religion toward God, that it is a singular ra^^ty among them to see any heart
so hard as not to be mollified, and yield before that stroke be given.
Excommunications are so strange in all the Reformed Churches, that in a whole
Province, a man in all his life will scarce^e witness to one, and among them
who are cut off by that dreadful Sword, very few do fall in the States hand to
be troubled with any civil inconvenience.

What England (...) may expect from Presbyteries and Synods.
By this kind of Government, other Reformed Churches with ease have kept
themselves pure and clean of all our Heresies and Schisms, not only Scotland,
Switzerland, and diverse parts of Germany, but France it self, which to this day
was never blessed with any assistance from the secular Arm; by this spiritual
and divine adminicle alone, have kept themselves safe from the irruption of all
erroneous Spirits.

I confess that Holland has been a cage to these unclean birds; but the
reason is evident, the civil State there walking in the corrupt principles of
carnal Policy, which cannot be blessed with final success, does imped the
exercise of Church Discipline in its most principal parts; these last forty
years that Land has not been permitted to enjoy more General Assemblies then
one, and how great Service that one did toward the purging of the much
corrupted Church, and calming the greatly disturbed State, all their Friends in
Europe did see and congratulate while their foes did grieve and envy it.

It is not prophecy, but a rational prediction bottomed upon reasons and
multiplied experience; Let England once be countenanced by her superior powers,
to enjoy the just and necessary Liberty of Consistories for Congregations, of
Presbyteries for Counties, of Synods for larger Shires, and National Assemblies
for the whole Land, as Scotland has long possessed these by the unanimous
consent of King and Parliament, without the least prejudice to the civil State,
but to the evident and confessed benefit thereof; or as the very Protestants in
France, by the concession of a Popish State, and King, have enjoyed all these
four spiritual Courts the last fourscore years and above; Put these holy and
divine Instruments in the hand of the Church of England, by the blessing of God
thereupon, the sore and great evil of so many Heresies and Schisms, shall
quicly be cured, which now not only troubles the Peace and welfare, but
hazards the very subsistence both of Church and Kingdom: without this mean, the
State will toil it self in vain about the cure of such spiritual diseases.

CHAP. I. The Original and Progress of the BROWNISTS.
THe greatest without comparison, Satan is the great enemy of the Churches
Reformation.
and most admirable work which the hand of God has brought to pass upon earth
in these later Ages, is, the Reformation of Religion from Antichristian
pollution and tyranny: No other could have been expected from the Prince of
Darkness, but extreme opposition to this so high a prejudice to his Kingdom:
Incredible is the help which this unclean spirit has made to Antichrist his
chief servant, for the upholding of his tottering Throne. How many Princes and
States has he stirred up to persecute with Fire and Sword, to the cruellest
deaths, the innocent Witnesses of the Truth? How many learned Divines has he
bewitched with his Enchantments, to spend their spirits and time in maintaining
by Word and Writings the grossest abominations of that Romish Idol?

But the chief Artifice whereby this crafty Serpent has most impeded the
progress of the Gospel, His chief instruments always have been professed
friends to Religion.
and kept the Triple-Crown upon the Popes head, is his powerful working in the
midst of the Children of Light: So cunningly has he insinuated himself into
the counsels and actions not only of the Children of this World, but of the
Sons of Sion themselves, that by their hands, more then any other, he has laid
in the way of Christ's running Chariot scandals insuperable, impediments
irremovable, by any humane might, till the Lord from heaven put them out of the
way.

The Light of the Gospel broke out so clear, the heat of Zeal, Reformation at
the beginning did run with an impetuous current.
the truly heroic and more then humane wisdom and courage of the first
Reformers, were so irresistible, that all the power of Papal Princes, and all
the learning of their Clergy, were not sufficient obstacles unto the Torrent
of their spirit; all these humane Bulwarks were overflowed with the Flood of
the Gifts of Gods Spirit in his Servants. The whole Kingdoms of England and
Scotland, Denmark and Sweden, Ireland and Navar, were subdued to the Scepter of
Christ; much of France and Pole, the most of Germany both above and below, the
most of Hungary and Switze were pulled out of the Popes mouth; Italy and Spain
were entered, and fair beginnings of a gracious day did appear to both.

What was its first stop.
But behold, in the midst of our Conquests and Triumphs, while all our enemies
without were upon the point of fainting and despair, the Dragon and his angels
got entresse in the heads of our friends, and by their hands drew us back from
the pursuing of our foes, who were ready to have given over and submitted; but
remarking our unexpected halt, and turning from them one upon another, they got
a time to breathe, and to gather such strength, that ever since they have been
the pursuers; and as long ago they have regained much of their loss, so
doubtless, had it not been for the invincible strength of our Captain, before
this day they had totally ruined us.

To pass a number of stratagems whereby Satan has diverted Protestants from
carrying on their work against the Popish party, I touch but upon two, a double
erroneous Principle, whereby he has infatuated many a thousand of men
(otherwise not irrational nor ungracious) and brought diverse whole Churches to
such perplexities and confusions, that they lie to this day entangled, unable
to disengage themselves of those snares and fetters, that (as all piety and
reason do command) they may join cordially their whole strength with their
Brethren against the common enemy.

The fountain of Protestant D^scord.
In our flight from Rome, he got some persuaded to stand too soon, before they
had past the Territories of the Whore, and the Line of her Communication:
Others he wrought to the contrary persuasion, he made them run on too long, not
only to the utmost Line of Error, but also far beyond all the bounds both of
Charity and Truth: Hence our greatest Woes, all our Discords and mutual Wounds
have sprung from these two Fountains: This is the true original of our
diversion from following the enemy, to attend the worst of Wars, our Civil and
Domestike Combats.

The unhappy Principle of the Lut^eranes.
By a very evil advice, Luther and his followers stuck at the later parts of
Reformation; they could not down with the whole Body; and in this their
sensible infirmity, they became utterly impatient of all contradiction: That
Calvin and his Brethren should go beyond them to cry down a corporal presence
of Christ in the bread of the Sacrament, to remove Images from Churches, to put
out of the Worship a world of idle Ceremonies, it was to them a matter of high
disdain, and a Quarrel, which yet is not dead, but continues transmitted from
the fathers to their children of this our Generation. Who would not have
thought that the rivers and seas of Germane blood which this last Age have run
in a good part out of this spring, might have been more then sufficient to have
drowned all such Quarrels in a much more implacable Nation?

On the other hand, Nicholas Stock and Thomas Muncer, And the more unhappy
Principle of the Anabaptists.
with their intemperate zeal, ran themselves so far out of breath, that their
followers to this day could never be content to be circumscribed within the
bounds of any moderation: They and their posterity the Anabaptists, under the
color of extreme promoting even to praecipitation, have been the greatest
retarders of the work of Reformation; for beside their own falling off, and
separating from all the reformed Party; yea, their cruel invading by Fire and
Sword, without any mercy, all their dissenting neighbors; their frantic
extravagancies became so terrible scandals to the remnant of Papists, that no
one thing did so much tie their heart to Rome, and avert them from entertaining
any good thoughts of that Religion which to them appeared the root whence so
cursed branches had sprung up.

Both those bitter roots were quickly transplanted from Germany to England,
Somewhat of both these ways was entertained in England.
where hitherto they have brought forth exceeding ill fruits, albeit not
altogether so pernicious and plentiful as in that ground where the hand of the
envious man at first did sow them.

Cranmer, Ridley, The original of the English Ceremonies and Episcopacy.
and some others of the prime Confessors and Martyrs of England, receiving
their first light from Wittenberg, and keeping still more correspondence with
their acquaintance in higher Germany, then with Calvin, or any of the French
Divines, did follow the Lutherane Principle, howbeit not in the Doctrine
wherein M^lancthon, Bucer, Martyr, and the rest of Luthers best disciples did
at that time leave their Master; yet so much in the Discipline, Worship and
Ceremonies, as that their great incogitancy has cost England very dear to this
day; for this was the chief spring of all the woeful Divisions which since have
rent our bowels of all the grievous persecutions which have undone many, and
vexed more of the godly, and banished far from their Country some thousands of
very precious souls; and at last, by the craft of some Sinons, this became the
Trojane horse, to carry in its belly, and let down in the midst of our City
and Temple, the whole Popery of Rome, and Tyranny of Constantinople, in a way
of so deep policy and mighty strength, that only the wisdom of God was able
to discover, and when discovered, his Arm alone was strong enough to break that
snare.

Whosoever is unwilling to give to God this glory, we must say he is
unacquainted with the counsels, and unattentive to the actions both of God and
men, which these bypast years in this Isle, upon a high Stage, have been
acted, albeit sometimes within, and sometimes without the Curtain.

The original of the Separatists.
The other Root of Anabaptism has always been sending up to us ungracious
fruits, and at this hour is very instrumental to our Woes. When Cartwright,
Hildersham, Travers, and many other gracious Divines, by the blessing of God
upon their great diligence, had undermined and well-neer overthrown the
Episcopal Seas, and all the Cathedral Ceremonies; incontinent the Generation of
the Separatists did start up, and put such retardances in the way of that
gracious Reformation, as yet remain, and, except by the hand of God, will not
be gotten removed.

It is true, the malignancy of the Episcopal party, and emulation of the
Separatists themselves, would make Cartwright and his friends the old
Unconformists, to be the Fathers of that Sect; notwithstanding whoever is
acquainted with the Times, or will be at the pains, with any consideration, to
confer the Tenants of both Parties, or who will advert the issue and sequel of
both ways, cannot but pronounce Cartwright and all his followers the
Unconformists, very free from the unhappiness of procreating this Bastard:
That ill-fac'd child will father it self; the Lineaments of Anabaptism are
clear and distinct in the face of Brownism.

The Doctrine of the Anabaptists, who in great number fled over to England,
when for their abomina^le and horrible Crimes, by Fire, and Water, and Sword,
they were chased out of both the Germanies, is so like, and in many things so
much the same with the Doctrine of the Brownists, that the derivation of the
one from the other, seems to be very rational.

Nothing more like then that as Morellius did learn from the disciples of
Muncer his Ecclesiastike Anarchy, Brownism is a daughter of Anabaptism.
whereby he troubled the Church of France, till by Beza and Sadael, in the
General Assemblies of that Kingdom, he was confounded, and his Anabaptistike
follies exploded; so that Brown and Bolton did learn in the same School, that
very ravery of Morellius, and many other the like, by the which, about the same
time, and ever since, they have pitifully vexed the Church of England.

That Brownism is a native branch of Anabaptism, is also evidenced by the
frequent Transition of many from the one to the other. The dissolution of Ice,
Snow, or any other vapor into water, argues strongly for their original from
that Element. The ordinary running over of Separatists to the Anabaptists,
demonstrates clearly enough who were their fathers of old, and who their best
beloved Brethren this day.

But passing the Kindred and Pedigree, Bolton, the first known Separatist in
England, hanged himself.
let us consider the Family it self, and the persons of greatest note that yet
have appeared therein. The first Separatist I read of, was one Bolton, a man by
whom his followers can have small credit; for the finger of Gods Justice
stirring in his conscience, made the sense of his Errors so grievous to his
soul, that not only he did publicly at Paul's Cross recant them, but
thereafter was so dogged with a desperate Remorse, that he rested not, till by
hanging of himself he had ended his miserable days. The truth of the Story is
confessed by themselves: That Bolton was a Minister of an old separate
Congregation before Brown: That he did recant his Separation, and hang
himself, Robinson* the best Advocate for that party, does liberally acknowledge
in his Justification, p. 50 (A)

The horror of this remarkable Vengeance did not deter Robert Brown, first a
Schoolmaster in Southwark, Brown, the second L^ader of that way, ^ecanted his
Schism, and to his death was a very scandalous person.
and then a Preacher at Islington ^eer London, to take up that banner of
Separation, which ^od* as with a Bolt from heaven, had wrung out of the hands
of miserable Bolton; albeit that cause did thrive no better with him then with
his predecessor.

When this rash young man; for old he could not be in the 1580 year of God,
when he was the prime Leader of that Sect, having but lately died: when he, I
say, had gathered a separate Congregation, and drawn up for the defense of his
Way these Writings, whence ever since the best Arguments for that Schism are
drawn; (B) they went over to enjoy their liberty to Middleburgh of Zeland: But
behold the wrath of God following them at the heels; when there was no
disturbance from without, they fell to such jarring among themselves, that soon
they broke all to pieces; the most turned Anabaptists, Brown himself returned
to England, recanted his Brownism, received a Parsonage at the hand of a
Bishop: The course of his life, to his deep old age, was so extremely
scandalous, that more then ordinary charity is needful to persuade that ever
he was led with a good spirit. I have heard it from reverend Ministers, that he
was a common beater of his poor old wife, and would not stick to defend
publicly this his wicked practice; also, that he was an open profaner of the
Sabbath; and that his injustice, in not paying the small pittance he was
indebted to him whom laziness in his Calling made him to keep for the supply
of the cure of his Parsonage, did bring him to prison, in the which, for that
very cause, he continued till death.

When the wickedness of this man is objected to Robinson his Scholar, he is so
far from denial, that under his hand he testifies it abundantly. (C)

The humor of Barrow the third Master of this Sect.
The third Master of this Sect was Barrow, the most bitter and clamorous
Censurer of all the Reformed Churches of any that yet has put Pen to Paper,
choose whom you will of the most despiteful Jesuits: let their Books which are
most besprinkled with Gall, be compared with Barrows Discovery, this to my
taste is nothing sweeter then the bitterest of them all: And yet there is small
reason why with so great arrogance he should have taken in his hand the Censors
rod, if all be true of him which his opposites object. However, before he could
gather any formed Congregation, his invectives against the Faith, Baptism and
Laws of England were so excessive, that Queen Elizabeth, impatient of his
Contumelies, The strange carriage of Johnson and Ainsworth, the next two
Leaders of the Brownists.
by the evil advice of the cruel Prelates about her, caused him in a morning to
be hanged on the Tower Hill.

The fourth Leader of this Way was Master Johnson, who, afraid at Barrows
execution, got over, with the Church he had gathered, to Amsterdam, and there
for many years was Pastor to the first settled Congregation of Brownists we read
of.

This man, with Ainsworth his Doctor, sent out to all the reformed Churches the
Confession of their Faith, in the year 1602. But long it was not till it
appeared to the world that no better spirit did reign in that company then in
the former Societies of this way.

For incontinent three shameful Schisms one upon the neck of another, broke
out among them: First, many of them turned Anabaptists, and were
excommunicated. Secondly, Master Johnson fell to so great odds, first with his
brother Master George, for small matters, and afterward with his father, that
he excommunicated them both, and was cursed by both, when he had rejected
peremptorily the mediation of the Presbytery of Amsterdam for reconciliation.
Thirdly, the remnant of the company, a little after, rent in two, upon
needlesle Questions: Master Ainsworth the Doctor with his half, did
excommunicate Johnson and his half, who were not long behind, for they also
did quickly excommunicate Ainsworth and all his followers.

Hereupon, the War betwixt these two handfuls of people became so sharp, that
Amsterdam could not keep them both; for Johnson, with his side of the house,
got away to Emden, where, after his death, that little company, as I suppose,
dissolved and vanished. Ainsworths's company, after his death, remained long
without all Officers, very like to have dissolved: yet at last, after much
strife, they did choose one Master Cann for their Pastor, but could not agree,
til very lately, upon any other Officer, and even yet they live without an
Eldership, as they did before without a Pastor. The most of these things are
the confessions of the party, (D) the rest are notorious, and will not be
denied.

The weight and evidence of Gods hand against Johnson and Ainsworth had so far
disgraced that Sect, The horrible ways of Smi^^ their sixth Master.
that in the opinion of the most no man would ever more look after it: Yet two
other Divines of very good parts, did set under their shoulders to support it
for some longer time; but so, that in the end they did undermine and undo it,
though in a contrary way.

Master Smith (a man as I have heard of right eminent parts) falling to that
side, and writing against the use of the Lords Prayer, was convinced in a
public meeting by Master Hildersham, and others, (for the Unconformists
always had the one eye no less intent upon the Separatists, then the other
upon Episcopacy) notwithstanding Master Smith (for all his conviction, and open
profession upon his knees of his full satisfaction) did relapse, and by his
persuasion, moved a great company to follow him out of England to Ley in
Holland.

There he persevered not long in concord with his Elder Brethren of the
Separation, but quickly accused them all of Idolatry in their worship, for
looking upon their Bibles in the time of Preaching, and on their Psalters in
the time of singing; ( E) and of Antichristianism in their Government, because
in their Presbytery they joined to Pastors, other two Officers, Doctors and
ruling Elders, which to him were humane inventions.

Neither here did the spirit of error permit him long to stand: But as in the
Preface of his Book of difference from the old Separatists, he professes a
resolution of inconstancy: ( F) So accordingly he did practice, falling from
Brownism to Anabaptism. And as ordinary Brownism, when he was a Brownist, did
not please his taste, without his own refinings; so turning Anabaptist, the
common sorts of that way did not please him; (though of the Anabaptists there
be more kinds then of any other Sect this day extant) yet by none of them all,
would his conscience permit him to be Rebaptised; but he needs must Rebaptise
himself, and so draw on the just infamy of a Sebaptist (G).

The fearful end of Smith his wanderings.
For a recompense of this wantonness in erring, behold how the just Lord
permitted Satan to lead him, yet one step further: It is not only a common
report, but I have heard it from the gravest and most approved Divines of the
Kingdom, That upon his deathbed he became a Preacher of his own perfect
righteousness, if not a professed Arrian.

A remarkable vengeance upon an erring spirit.
An example full of horror which God has set forth, if men will be so wise as
to be disciplined in the persons of others, to bridle the petulant wits of this
age, who make it, if not their pastime, yet their exercise and glory to impugn,
by their Sophisms, the settled Tenants and practices of all Christians before
them. Master Smiths progress and end ought to circumscribe their luxuriant
spirits within the circle of some moderation, lest all the glory of their new
inventions be crowned with some shameful conclusion. When the infamous
practices of Master Smith are objected to his party, they have no leaf of
excuse wherewith to cover them. ( H)

The other supporter of languishing Brownisme, in its dying days, was Master
Robinson, the most learned, polished, and modest spirit that ever that Sect
enjoyed: it had been truly a marvel if such a man had gone on to the end a
rigid Separatist.

This man having gone over from England to Leyden, Robinson the last grave and
learned Doctor of the Brownists, did in the end undermine his Party.
with a separate Congregation, did write for a time very handsome Apologies and
justifications of that evil way; but, Doctor Ames and Master Parker
compassionating the man, and pitying that so excellent parts should be so ill
employed, labored him so by Conferences and Letters, that there was great
appearance, if his days had continued, he might have proved a happy instrument
for the extinguishing and total abolition of that Schism: but God in his
wisdom intending some farther use of that great evil, was pleased to take him
away in the beginning of his good Work.

He came back indeed the one half of the way; he ruined the rigid Separation,
and was the Author of a Semi-separatism, printing in his later times against
his former Books, the lawfulness of communicating with the Church of England
in the Word and Prayer, albeit not in the Sacraments and Discipline: This was a
fair Bridge, at least a fair Arch of a Bridge for union; but the man being
removed by death before he could perfect what he had begun, his new Doctrine,
though it was destructive to his old Sect, yet it became an occasion of a new
one not very good.

It was the womb and seed of that lamentable Independency which in Old and
New England has been the fountain of many evils already, though no more should
ensue, as anon shall be declared: Robinson the author of Independency.
Only here we observe, that the last two best-gifted Leaders of the Brownists,
have been the real Overthrowers of that Way: for ever since the time of their
conduct, these of England whose humor carried them out of the bosom of their
Mother Church, have turned either to Smiths Anabaptism, or to Robinsons
Semi-separating Independency. These kinds are multiplied exceedingly; but for
the old Brownists, their number either at London or Amsterdam, is but very
small; and their way is become contemptible not only to all the rest of the
world, but to their own children also; even they begin to heap coals of
contumelies upon their parents heads, as may be seen in the Elogies which both
Master Cotton (I) and the five Apologists are pleased to give them in Print:
(K) Yea, so much are these children ashamed of their fathers, that they usually
take it for a contumely to be called after their name. No Independent will take
it well at any man's hand, to be called a Brownist either in whole, or in the
smallest part.

The Testimonies.
(A) Robinsons Justification, p. 50. It is true that Bolton was (though not the
first in this way) an Elder of a separate Church in the beginning of Queen
Elizabeth's days; and falling away from his holy profession, recanted the same
at Paul's Cross, and afterward hanged himself, as Judas did.

(B) Giffard against the Donatists, about the beginning. Whosoever shall read
Brown his Books, and peruse all his Scholars writings, shall see that they have
no sharp arrow but which is drawn out of his Quiver.

(C) Robinsons Justif. p. 50. Now touching Brown, it is true, as he forsook the
Lord, so the Lord forsook him, else he had never so returned back into Egypt,
as he did: And for the wicked things which Master B. affirms he did in this
way, it may well be as he says; and the more wicked things he committed in
this course, the less like he was to continue long in it.

(D) Johnsons Enquiry, p. 63. About Thirteen years since, this Church, through
persecution in England, was driven to come into these Countries: A while after,
diverse of them fell into the Heresies of the Anabaptists; and so persisting,
were excommunicated by the rest: Then a while after, many others, yea too many,
though not the half, fell into a Schism from the rest; and so many as continued
therein, were cast out. Also, Robinsons Justification, p. 51. True it is, that
George Johnson, together with his father, taking his part, were excommunicated
by the Church for contention arising at the first upon no great occasion;
whereupon many bitter and reproachful terms were uttered both in word and
writing. It is to us a just cause of Humiliation all the days of our lives,
that we have given, and do give, by our differences, such advantages.

(E) Smiths Differences, p. 4. The reading out of a Book, is no part of
Spiritual Worship, but the invention of the Man of Sin. Books and Writings are
in the nature of Pictures or Images, and therefore in the nature of Ceremonies,
and so by consequent the reading of a Book is Ceremonial: The holy Scriptures
are not to be retained as helps before the eyes in the time of Spiritual
Worship: It is unlawful to have the Book before the eyes in singing of Psalms.
The Presbytery of the Church is uniform: the treeformed Presbytery consisting
of three kinds, Pastors, Teachers, and Elders, is not Gods Ordinance, but
Antichristian, and the image of the Beast.

(F) Bernards plain Evidences, p. 19. Smith in his Epistle before his
Differences, because he is found so unconstant, to wipe away the shame thereof,
and to cut off offense for afterward; he without shame professes to be
unconstant, and desires that ever his last writing should be taken as his
present judgment.

(G) Ibid. He has founded a new Church; he has, if ye will believe him,
recovered the true Baptism, and the true matter and form of a true Church,
which now only is to be found pure among a company of Sebaptists. Master Smith
will hold ever this word Se to himself, for going into Brownism; he was a
Separatist, he held differing opinions from them; and now that he is in
Anabaptism, he is a Sebaptist, he wholly goes not with that heretical Sect.

(H) Robinsons Justif. p. 53. Master Smith his instability, and wantonness of
wit, is his sin, and our cross.

(I) Vide caput tertium O.

(K) Ibidem.

CHAP. II. The Doctrine of the BROWNISTS.
THe peculiar Tenants of the Brownists wherein they differ from other
Protestants, are many: Those that occur to my mind from some slight and
cursory reading of some of their Books, shall briefly and plainly be set down;
but with this premonition, That every thing mentioned, be not taken for an
Article of Brownism; for it is needful at some times to interlace Tenants which
are common to them with others, for the clearing of those which they have
peculiar.

Their differences run most upon the Constitution and Government of the Church:
They have also diverse Singularities about the Circumstances and Parts of the
Service of God; also concerning the Magistrate, and Schools, and diverse other
things. Without affectation, or curious search of Method, we shall propound
matters as they come to hand.

They hold that all Churches in the world but their own, are so polluted, that
they must be separate from.
Concerning the Constitution of the Church, consider their judgment, first,
what they think of others, then what of themselves. All other Churches they
condemn, so far, as to profess and practice a Separation from them. The edge
of their Arguments, is usually directed against the Church of England alone;
but when their Doctrine or Practice is looked upon a little more near, it
appears they shoot their Bolts at all other Churches in the world which refuse
their Way.

Their injurious slanders of the Church of England.
For the Church of England, they say it ought not to be called a Church; or at
best, that it is a false and Antichristian Church, out of the which every one
(though not persecuted) must flee, as they would avoid damnation. (A)

Sometimes, in their calm mood, they will give better words, and acknowledge it
to be a true Church, That the Doctrine and Sacraments thereof are true, Yet
sometimes they say that communion may be kept therewith both in preaching and
prayer.
That many thousands of its members are gracious and elect people. (B)

But their ordinary language is of another strain, to wit, That the Church of
England is a mere Harlot, divorced from Christ, (C) That the Worship thereof is
gross Idolatry, and the Service of the devil, (D) That all the members thereof
are unclean beasts, and the limbs of Antichrist, ( E) That her best Preachers
that preach most for Reformation, are but Pharisees and Deceivers, ( F) That
the Faith, Grace and Comfort which by their Ministry they seem to bring to the
hearts of the hearers, is but mere delusion, (G) That their Sacraments are
Seals, not of Grace, but of the wrath of God, ( H) That all Communion with her,
even in the Word and Prayer, is to be forsaken. ( I)

The Unconformists did always zealously plead against the Corruptions of that
Church, but never against the truth of her being, or the comfort of her
Communion: When by the force of persecution they were driven out, then they did
flee: Of their own accord they did never separate, but were ever most glad to
live and die in her bosom, willing to partake of her Worship and Sacraments,
whenever they were permitted to dissent in Doctrine, and to abstain in
practice, from those things which they conceived to be corruptions. ( K)

Concerning other Reformed Churches, Their like dealing with all the other
reformed.
though free both of Liturgies and Bishops, and many other of the English
stumbling blocks, notwithstanding all their Reformation, yet they pronounce
their Worship to be idolatrous, ( L) their Government tyrannous and
Antichristian, ( M) yea, their very Constitution both in matter and form to be
so vicious, ( N) that with a good conscience they cannot communicate with any
of them, ( O) that the reformed Presbyteries and Synods are no better then the
English Episcopacy; ( P) yea, to Episcopacy they are so favorable, that they
profess their willingness to acknowledge all their Civil Power, and much of
their Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction; ( Q 1.) that the Presbyterian Divines have
ever been as evil as Episcopal; ( Q 2.) that the vicious constitution and
government of the most reformed Churches in Europe, has flowed from the
ignorance and obstinacy of unhappie Calvin. (R 1.)

We must not be deceived with their pleasant words, Their st^ing of (...) Chu^
(...)
when they make fair professions of their hearty agreement in so many things
with the other Reformed Churches, and of their willingness to communicate with
them both in Word and Sacraments. ( R 2.) These flatteries are contradictory
both to their Doctrine and Practice; for when they had left England, they were
so far from joining with any of the Reformed, that they ever erected new
Churches after their own way, and made it an open and avowed cause of
Excommunication for any of their Members to communicate with the Churches of
Holland, among whom they did live; ( R 3) also the crimes of the Church of
Holland, which they cry out upon, are such which none of the Reformed Divines
do condemn. ( S)

On the other side, the Nonconformists whom the Episcopal persecution did
banish out of England, were ever well content without erecting of a new Church,
to join themselves as Members to any of the foreign Churches, Scottish, Dutch,
or French, according as they understood their Language, or had occasion of
abode among them.

The matter of a Church they make to be real Saints only.
Thus they do judge of others. As for the form of that Tabernacle which they
profess to build for themselves, thus we may conceive it: The matter or
members of that Church, they avow to be Saints; but the Members of other
Churches, they pronounce them for the most part to be wicked and flagitious. (T)

Their unreasonable stricknesse in this one point, is the great cause of their
Schism.
The Nonconformists with all the reformed, are willing to admit of no others to
the Lords Table but these who are Saints by calling, in whom they require three
qualifications: First, That they have a good measure of knowledge, and profess
to believe the truth. Secondly, That in their life and conversation, they be
without scandal. Thirdly, That they be submissive to the Discipline of the
Church: But the Brownists press a fourth qualification; Were a man's profession
never so fair, and his knowledge never so great: In all parts of Doctrine, let
him be most Orthodox, and in his Conversation most harmless, and inoffensive;
were he never so willing to join in all the Ordinances of God, and to be
governed according to the strictest Discipline of Christ; notwithstanding all
this, they count him not qualified to be a Church Member, except he declare
publicly in the face of the Congregation, such clear and certain signs of his
real Sanctification, and true Regeneration, as gives full satisfaction, not
only to the Minister and Elders, and many of the people, but to all and every
one, or at least the major part of the Church. (V)

If any profane person should be admitted, he should quickly so far pollute
the whole Church, that every Member thereof must needs become partaker of his
sins; (X) And if upon admonition they did not excommunicate him, they
themselves ought to be separated from, as an infected and leprous Society. (Y)

They tell us yet more, The least sin of any Member of a Church defended, is a
just cause of Separation.
that not only the profaneness of one person does pollute the whole Church,
but any one sin or error of any one Member, though godly and regenerate, if
after admonition he continue therein, and be not excommunicate, does so defile
the whole, that it must be separated from. ( Z) To distinguish here betwixt
sins greater and lesser, to make some errors Fundamental, and some
preter-Fundamental, it is to them a following of the Papists in their absurd
distinction of mortal and venial sins; the least Error joined with obstinacy,
to them is an Heresy, and a just cause of Separation. ( AA)

They acknowledge it is the fancy of the Anabaptists to separate for every
fault and error; but that which alone displeases them in this fancy, is a
fault whereof the Anabaptists seem not to be guilty, the not advertising of the
Church of the fault and error of the Member they complain of before they
separate; If this neglect be helped, the rest of the fancy they seem to
approve. (BB)

Thus much for the matter of their Church; the form of it, They place the Form
of their Church in an express Covenant.
not Accidental, but Essential and Constitutive, they place in an explicit
Covenant, ( CC) wherein, all and every one of the Members, by a voluntary
Association, without the Authority of either Magistrate, or Minister, do bind
themselves under a solemn Oath to walk in the ways of the Gospel. (DD.)

When two or three, or some very few, Seven may make a perfect Church, yea, two
or three.
(for they require no more then seven to a full and perfect Congregation; ( EE)
and they profess it unlawful to admit any more then can commodiously at one
time in one place, partake of all the Ordinances.) (FF) If when these few, I
say, have departed not only from the English, and the rest of the Reformed,
but also from every Church of their own way, wherein they find the least
error or sin of any of the Members, whereof they have complained, not to be
amended, either by the Repentance or the Excommunication of the party: (GG) The
Association of these men, The erecting of a Church requires, neither the
Magistrates, nor Ministers assistance.
thus separate into a Covenant, is the essential form of their Church.

But the association must be so voluntary and free, as not to wait for the
countenance of any Authority, either Ecclesiastic, or Civil; to supplicate the
Magistrate for his favor in the gathering of a new Church, is to them a sin;
(HH) and to erect a Church by the help of any Minister, to them is a
contradiction: For the Church newly erected, makes the Minister; but no
Minister can gather or erect a Church. (II) If a person, who elsewhere has
been a Minister, become the Author or Instrument of erecting a Church, he is
not then a Minister, but a mere private man* till the Church so erected by a
new call and ordination by themselves, does make him again a Minister.

They put all Church power in a handful of people, without any Pastor.
Unto their Church so constituted in matter and form, were their number never so
small, before it attain to any Officer, either Pastor, or Doctor, or Elder,
they ascribe great power and fair privileges; not only the power of Doctrine,
but of Ordination, and all Jurisdiction; even a full right to all the Keys of
the Kingdom of Heaven, and every privilege of any visible Church, how perfect
so ever. (KK)

The Election, Ordination, Deposition, and Excommunication of the Minister,
belongs to the flock, and to it alone.
This their new Church, they will have to elect the Pastor, and all other
Officers; if a Pastor should come to them by the presentation of a Patron, or
nomination of a Presbytery, however they did not oppose, yea, did consent to
his admission, yet if they were not the Electors, and first Nominators, the man
should be an intruder and a Woolf, whom they might not lawfully hear. (LL)

The Pastor being chosen, and that out of their own number, usually some
Artificer, or Tradesman (for they do not require Letters in their Pastors:) and
so far in their Elections, they tie themselves to their own Members, that if
any other were found meet and willing to be an Officer among them, he must
first enter into their Covenant, and become a Member before he were capable of
any Office. (MM) When I say they have elected him a Pastor, the same, and no
other then who did elect, do give him Ordination; for the right and exercise of
Ordination, (NN) they ascribe to the people, that is, according to Ainsworth,
and others, (if we believe Johnson) every Member of the flock, even Women and
Children. (OO) But according to Johnsons mind, only the men of the flock,
excluding Women and Children; yet including the meanest and most ignorant of
all the men who are Communicants: To these they ascribe the power of
Ordination, who in the exercise of it, appoint some of their number, whom they
think fittest to ordain the Pastor, that is, to examine him in all the needful
qualifications of his life and doctrine, to exhort him to all the parts of his
duty, publicly to pray for him, and at last to lay hands upon his head. (PP)

The Pastor so elected and ordained, becomes a servant, not only of Christ,
but of that flock from whom he has (as they speak) originally (QQ) all his
power to Preach, or celebrate the Sacraments, or to do any other part of his
Office: wherein if he fail, any one of the people has power to admonish and
reprove him publicly; (RR) and the greater part of the people in any
Congregation agreeing (suppose they were four, when the whole makes seven) have
full power to depose and Excommunicate him (SS); much more have they power to
cognosce, and definitively to determine upon the nature of Heresy,
Superstition, Error, or of any crime which procures these censures.

When the major part of the people have cast out the Minister, Every man of the
Congregation may Preach and publicly rebuke, not only the Pastor, but the
whole flock, yea and s^parate from it.
and all the Officers, and so many of the flock as adhere to them, no part of
their power by this ejection is lost, still they keep their full right to all
the Ordinances of Christ; any of them who is thought able, may prophecy, that
is, publicly expound the Word, and apply it for instruction, reproof, comfort,
and all other uses: (TT) Any of them may pray in the Congregation, any may
Ordain, any may Excommunicate; they give expressly a full power to every one
of admonition and rebu^e, yea, of censuring so far the whole, that if they
refuse to follow the just admonition of any one, he ought to denounce the
judgments of God publicly against them all, and separate from them as from an
obstinate and cursed society. (VV)

The only question remains about the Sacraments; Some of them give the power
of the Sacraments also to pri^ate persons.
all of them agree, that the smallest and weakest Congregation may choose and
ordain one of their own number when ever they will, to be Pastor, and so to
celebrate the Sacraments to the rest; ( XX) ^ut the most of them say, that
unless they have appointed a Pastor for that end, none of the rest can
lawfully celebrate a Sacrament: ( YY) Yet others of them make a Quaere hereof;
( ZZ) for say they, since the Church without Officers has the free exercise of
all other power, in Preaching, Prayer, and Censures; why may not the like be
said of the Sacraments? These men after their scrupling for some time, as their
custom is, come up at last to conclude and practice celebrating Sacraments
without any Pastoral charge, of Baptism it is certain; for Master Smith
professing himself a mere private man, having renounced his former Ministry and
Baptism also, took upon him to baptize himself; and who lawfully may celebrate
the one Sacrament, may as lawfully celebrate the other.

The solemnizing of marriage they give to parents, but divorces they commit to
the parties themselves.
When all the power is ascribed by them to their Church, yet peremptorily they
deny to it the power to solemnize marriage; ( AAA) for marriage to them is not
only a contract merely civil, but such a one as concerns the Church nothing at
all; so they remit it wholly to the Magistrate, or else to the Parents, (BBB)
to be solemnized in private Families; and as their marriage is private, so
likewise must their Divorces, without the cognizance either of Magistrate or
Minister. (CCC) They were wont to teach that adultery, did so far annul
marriage, that it was a sin, and the cause of excommunication for the innocent
party to forgive, and cohabit any longer with the party nocent; albeit, they
profess their retractation hereof, making it now fr^e for the innocent party,
either to depart or abide with the nocent, as they find it expedient, and all
this without any legal process. (DDD)

They make every Congregation Independent, and of sovereign Authority.
The power which they grant to their smallest Congregations, is very great; but
they add one circumstance to it that makes it high above measure; All the
power of their smallest Congregations must be Independent and Sovereign, that
is, absolutely Supreme upon Earth, depending immediately upon Christ; and none
else; for they deny all Ecclesiastic Authority above a particular
Congregation, which goes beyond a mere advice and council. ( EEE)

So that if the most part of a people in a Congregation should turn Heretical,
and extremely wicked, excommunicating their Pastor, their Doctor, their Elders,
and whole Consistory, only for truth and righteousness: For all this, no
persons on Earth, not an Oecumenick Synod shall have any more power to control
them, then the meanest of their own servants; for to the meanest servant they
give power to admonish, reprove, rebuke, and to separate from the whole Church,
when it is obstinate in any evil, and more power then this they will not give
to the greatest, and best Synods, over a Congregation of a very few, sometimes
very ignorant and weak persons. (FFF)

They do not deny that Presbyteries and Synods are the Ordinances of God, which
have many profitable uses; Their Judgment of Synods.
( G G G) but the Synods they allow of, must have these conditions.

First, They will have them only occasional and elective, not set or ordinary,
but as any Church shall have need to call together whom they think meet for
their help and advice, in what matters they think good to propound. ( H H H)

Secondly, The Members of their Synod must not be only Ministers and Elders,
and men clothed with Commissions; but all who please to come without exclusion
of any. ( III)

Thirdly, All who come, as well People as Officers, must have free liberty,
both of debate and voting decisively. ( KKK)

Fourthly, Nothing must go by number, or plurality of voices. ( LLL)

Fifthly, In their Synods there must be no Moderator, no Prolocutor for the
ordering of the Action. ( MMM)

Sixthly, They will not be content that any Synod should have the least power
of jurisdiction to censure the wickedest Heretic who is infecting all about
him far and near with the vilest Errors. (NNN)

In these their fancies they please themselves so well, Their high conceit of
their own way, and injurious, depressing of all others.
that they avow the very Crown, Scepter, and Throne of Christ's Kingdom to
consist in them: (OOO) That the Churches so constituted and governed, are
nothing less then the new Jerusalem coming down from Heaven: (PPP) That all
the Reformed Churches for their aberration from this Constitution and
Government, are either no Churches at all, Churches, Bells, Pulpits, Tithes,
Glebes, Manses, and all set maintenance of Ministers, are unlawful. Not so much
as a Churchyard must be kept up for burial, but all must bury in the fields.
or but Babylonish and Adulterous Churches, or at best, but corrupt Societies
from which a Separation is necessary.

In things concerning the Worship, they have crotchets not a few upon the
Maxim that all Monuments of Idolatry must be abolished precisely, according to
the Laws of the old Testament; they will have all Churches that were builded in
the time of Popery, made level with the ground, ( QQQ) their Bells to be
broken, yea, all Bells to be unlawful, being Humane and Popish inventions. (
RRR)

Not so much as a Churchyard must be kept up for Burial, but all must bury in
the fields. ( SSS)

What ever of old was dedicated to the maintenance of the Worship of God, they
will have it all rejected as an Instrument of Idolatry: But herein they seem to
deal scarce fairly with the Law; for howsoever they press the casting down of
the Churches, the breaking of the Bells, the abolishing of the Idols, and all
that belonged thereunto; ( TTT) yet they do leave to the Magistrate, or to any,
who in this are serviceable to their humor, the rich rewards of the Gold,
Silver, Brass, Vestments, Timber, Stone, Lands and Rents, which belonged to
these Churches, to be possessed by them with a very good Conscience, and
without the least scruple of any Sacrilege. ( VVV)

However they do maintain, that all the Officers of their Church, not only
Pastors, and Doctors, but every one of their other four sorts of Ministers,
Elders, Deacons, Helpers, Widows, ( XXX) ought in Conscience, and by Divine
right to be (by the Congregations, which they serve) ( YYY) provided for; yet
they are so far from permitting any of them to enjoy the least portion of the
old Rents of the Church, that they avow Parsonages and Viccarages, Glebes, and
Manses, to be altogether unlawful. ( ZZZ) That for a Minister to crave any
Tithes, or for any man for all that either Laws or Magistrates can command, to
pay any Tithes, is a sin which abolishes from Christ. ( AAAA)

They drive the abolishing of Church-rents, so high as to make all goods common.
They add further, That all set-maintenance to Church Officers, is against the
Gospel; that it is the Will of Christ, that Ministers now be provided for in
that same way as himself and his Apostles were of old, only by the voluntary
Contributions and mere alms of the people: They d^ive on this point so far, as
to come up in terms to the Anabaptist^ Tenent of making all goods common. (
BBBB)

The days of the we^k, the months, the year of God, they will not name.
Their hatred of Idolatry is so great, that they profess it unlawful, so much
as to mention in any civil way, the names of places or times that carry any
footstep of any ancient Idol, Saint Andrew, Saint John, Peter or Paul's Church:
Monday, Tuesday, Wednesday, Sunday; January, February, March; those and the
like words to them are profane and unlawful ( CCCC): The very year of God
displeases them; they will have it called, The year of the Saints last
patience (DDDD).

No pulpits, no hour-gl^sses, no Churches, no Gowns.
They will have no Circumstance in the Worship determined, not so much as by
custom, much less by Law; there must be no limitation of Preaching either to
time or place. Pulpits they scorn, they call them Privileged Tubs ( EEEE).
They laugh at preaching to an Hour-glasse (FFFF). To preach in a Gown, is to
them little better then a Surplice, or a Friars Coul. That Penitents in their
public confession should stand in a peculiar place, or in any habit diverse
from ordinary, is to them a matter of mockery ( GGGG). All set prayer, even the
Lords prayer, and all Psalms in meeter, yea in prose, if used as praises, are
unlawful.


As for the parts of the Worship, in all of them they have some one singularity
or other: They make all set-prayer, the very Lords Prayer it self used
Prayer-wise, not only to be inconvenient and unlawful, but to be Idolatry, and
the worship of the devil HHHH; howbeit Master Robinson here corrects his
companions, and professes that set-prayer, in some cases, is very lawful
worship IIII.

The singing of Psalms in meeter, not being formal Scripture, but a Paraphrase,
to them is unlawful ( KKKK); much more the singing of any other songs in the
Church, which are not express Scripture. They permit to sing Psalms in Prose,
not as an act of immediate praise LLLL; for set-Praise would be as idolatrous
as set-Prayer; but as a matter of instruction and comfort, whereby God is
glorified, as by all other actions, whether natural, moral, or spiritual, which
are done in faith.

But herein Master Smith is wiser then his fellows, telling us, That all Songs
in the Church out of a Book, whether in Verse or Prose, are Idolatry (MMMM);
yet he admits of singing such Psalms as the Spirit dictates to any person
immediately without Book (NNNN).

It seems the Brownists at Amsterdam have recanted their error in this point;
for all of them sing now in strange tunes the Psalms in meeter, of Ainsworths
exceeding harsh Paraphrase.

Preaching of the Word, to them is no Pastoral act, Their opinion of preaching
and Sacraments.
but is common, not only to all the Officers, but to every gifted Brother of
the Flock ( OOOO).

The word Sacrament to them is traditional, corrupt, and not to be used ( PPPP).

The Baptism of the English Church they make to be vain, and null, the seal of
no grace, but only of wrath and condemnation ( QQQQ); yet they will not have
it repeated.

They teach, Their strange way of celebrating the Lords Supper.
that the Lords Supper should be celebrated every Lords day ( RRRR): So
preparation-Sermons before, and Sermons for Thanksgiving after the Lords Table,
to them are needless. They will have all to sit at the Lords Table with their
Hats on: uncovering of the head in the act of receiving, to them is Idolatry (
SSSS). In this the present practice at Amsterdam contradicts their Doctrine;
for however they sit covered in time of all the reading and discourse; yet when
it comes to the participation of the elements, every man, during the time of
his eating and drinking, sits uncovered.

They reject catechisms, the Apostles Creed, and all reading of Scripture
without exposition.
They count it lawful to join with the Lords Table Love Feasts ( TTTT).

They reject all Catechisms, being set, and so unlawful forms of instruction (
VVVV). After a member is once received amongst them, they enquire no more for
his knowledge, having once gotten satisfaction, at his admission to Membership,
of his sufficient knowledge.

The Apostles Creed they detest, as an old Patchery of evil stuff ( XXXX):
Christ's descent into hell, they count a blasphemous Article ( YYYY).

They reject all public reading of the Word which is not backed with present
Exposition ( ZZZZ): They do not any way scruple the Office of Readers and
Expounders; for they give full liberty of public and ordinary Preaching to any
gifted man of the Flock, though he have no Office.

After preaching, they prophecy.
When the exercise of Reading, Expounding, Singing of Psalms, Praying and
Preaching by the Pastor, is ended, they will have one, two, three, or four, to
prophecy in order AAAAA; and all to have a free liberty of continuing so long
as they think meet.

Then comes the conference.
After all this is done, they have yet another exercise, wherein, by way of
conference, questioning and dispu^ation, every one of the Congregation may
propound publicly, and press their Scruples, Doubts and Objections against
any thing which that day they have heard BBBBB.

And, as if all these Exercises were not enough to tire out a spirit of Iron,
the most of them being repeated again in the afternoon, for a conclusion of
all, they bring in the laborious and long work of their Discipline, for which
the whole Flock must stay till they have heard, debated and discerned every
cause that concerns either the Officers, Brown for liberty of conscience.
or any of the people, whether in Doctrine or Manners CCCCC.

Concerning the Magistrate, Master Brown teaches, that he has no right to
meddle at all with any matter of Religion, but to permit the liberty and free
choice of Religion to the conscience of every one of his Subjects DDDDD. The
most of Browns followers do leave in this their Master, His followers against it
making it a great part of the Christian Magistrates Office to suppress,
within their own Bounds, Idolatry and False doctrine EEEEE; To compel all their
Subjects, if they will not be persuaded, to hear the Word preached, albeit no
way to enter themselves members of any Church, or to hinder any to enter in any
Church they will, or to erect new Churches of their own framing FFFFF. Further,
if the Magistrate be a member of any Church, they will have him, Their carriage
toward the Magistrate.
were he the King himself, to be so far subject to their Church Censures, that
a little small Congregation shall have power, upon his obstinacy in any sin or
error, to excommunicate him, and that without all delay, without any respect
to his Crown, more then if he were the poorest servant of the whole Flock
GGGGG; and, which is worst of all, the Prince his Excommunication by the hands
of so small and weak a company, must be without all possible relief; for he
has no liberty of appeal to any upon earth HHHHH; an oecumenike Council may
not assay to loose the knot of that Censure which the hand of the Congregation
has tied.

But their great Tenent about the Magistracy, is this, They spoil Kings and
Parliaments of their Legislative power.
That no Prince nor State on the earth has any Legislative power; That neither
King nor Parliament can make any Law in any thing that concerns either Church
or State; That God alone is the Lawgiver; That the greatest Magistrate has no
other power, but to execute the Laws of God set down in Scripture IIIII; That
the Judicial Law of Moses binds at this day all the Nations of the world, as
well as ever it did the Jews KKKKK: They tell us that whatever God in Scripture
has left free, it may not be bound by any humane Law, whether Civil or
Ecclesiastike; and what God has bound by any Law in Scripture, they will not
have it loosed by the hand of any man.

They lay it upon the Magistrate to punish by death, They obliege the
Magistrate to kill all Idolaters.
without any dispensation, every Adulterer, every Blasphemer, every
Sabbath-breaker, and above all, every Idolater LLLLL. And here is the great
danger, that by Idolaters they will have understood, not only Pagans and
Papists, but the far greatest part of all Protestants, all absolutely who are
not of their way; for, the using of a set Prayer, But to sp^re all thieves.
were it the Lords own Prayer, to them is clear Idolatry MMMMM 1. For all this,
they will not permit any Magistrate to hang any th^ef at all MMMMM 2.

They will have the Universities destroyed.
Against the learning of the Times, they make large Invectives; the
Universities, and all the Colleges in them, they will have razed to the
ground; they profess them to be worse then the Monasteries that justly were
abolished NNNNN: whatever Arts and Sciences are taught in the Christian
Schools, they count them idle and vain: Grammar, Rhetoric, Logic, Philosophy,
are all unlawful Arts OOOOO. Secular authors and learning must be abolished.


The Heathen Writers which are used in any Faculty, such as Aristotle, Plato,
Cicero, and the like, they would have them all burnt, as the Authors of
unlawful Arts. They reject all School-Degrees, such as Batchelors, Masters of
Art, Doctors of any faculty PPPPP. They will have no Students of Divinity QQQQQ.
They tell us that youths mis-spend their time, and exceedingly abuse
themselves, Preachers must study no book but the Scriptures.
by studying of those things which usually are recommended unto them as
preparations for the Ministry, whether Common places, Commentaries upon
Scripture, or Protestant writers of Controversies; all such Books they will
have laid aside RRRRR; yea, it is their advice to reject all Books but the
Bible alone SSSSS. As for Divinity-Disputations, they make large Invectives
against them, as Paganish and very sinful Exercises TTTTT; notwithstanding all
this, they proclaim themselves great Patrons of all true Learning VVVVV;
albeit, as yet they have not been pleased to let the world know what kind of
Letters and Books they will be pleased with, when all that hitherto have been
known, are laid aside by their persuasion.

The Testimonies.
A. Barrows Discovery, p. 26. In this estate, what communion is to be held with
the Church of England? What fellowship may the children of God have with such
Rebels and Apostates? Can the name of a Church, without blasphemy unto Christ,
be given unto them in these sins? They then not being under Christ's,
protection, nor in the state of Grace, while they continue in their sin, I have
often wondered how any man of sound judgment could give them the name of a
Church.

Ibidem, in the Preface. Let the rest no longer tempt God, or be held under the
dint of this dreadful Millstone, by any persuasion; but let them save their
souls out of this accursed false Church, and join themselves to the faithful
servants of Christ with all speed.

The Confession, Art. 31. These Assemblies standing thus in confusion, cannot
be said truly to have Christ their King, Priest and Prophet, neither in this
estate can be esteemed the true, visible, orderly, constitute Church of Christ,
whereof the faithful may become or stand members, or have any spiritual
Communion with them in their spiritual Worship and Administrations: Therefore
are all that would be saved bound by Gods Commandment with speed to come forth
out of this Antichristian estate, leaving the suppression of it to the
Magistrate, to whom it belongs.

A light for the ignorant, p. 8, 9. This Whorish City has a Body of false
Prophets; whosoever hears these, or any of these, breaks the first
Commandment; for in hearing and obeying these, they hear and obey the Dragon,
Beast and Whore that sent them, and gave them their Authority and Office; they
use some Divine Truths, to help to set a gloss on their Inventions; but both
divine and invented are consecrated and dedicated by the Beast, and administered
by his Office.

( B) Robinsons Apology, page 78. Convenit nobis quatenus reformatis Ecclesiis
Belgicis and aliis cum Ecclesia Anglicana in Articulis fidei hujus Ecclesiae
nomine scriptis; idem in his Book of the lawfulness of the hearing of the
Ministers of the Church of England.

Barrows Refutation of Giffard, p. 21. We never doubted but the foundation of
God stood firm, the Lord having many thousands of his elect among you known to
himself. Idem, in his Discovery, p. 119. The errors and fauls of Baptism being
purged by Repentance, it pleases God, in pardoning the faults, to reserve, and
not to have repeated the outward action. Their Apology, p. 93. We gladly
embrace the common faith professed in this Land, as most holy and sound: We
have a reverend estimation of sundry, and good hope of many hundred thousands
in the Land. Their Confession, p. 8. We testify by these presents to all men,
That we have not forsaken any one point of the true, ancient, Apostolic Faith
professed in our Land, but hold the same grounds of Christian Religion with
them.

(C) Barrows Discovery, p. 26 There is no cause to doubt but any of Gods
servants may avoid that Congregation which rejects Gods Word presumptuously,
as a wicked Assembly, and an adulterous Church* Ibid. p. 29. I deny these
assemblies to be true Churches of Christ, seeing they have broken the Covenant,
and cast off the Yoke of Christ.

(D) Barrows Refutation, p 33. We further conclude from the second Commandment,
That whatsoever Worship is devised by man, and whatsoever device of man is put
in the Worship of God, it is Idolatry: But a great part, if not the whole
Worship of God in your Church, is devised by man. If God be not worshipped with
this kind of Worship: Then, to speak as the Prophets and Apostles do, the
devil is worshipped thereby.

(E) Apology, p. 54. None can submit unto, or have any spiritual Communion
with the Hierarchy aforesaid, but they worship the Beast and his Image, and so
make themselves subject to the wrath of God. Barrows Discovery, p. 180. Here
would not be forgotten the sweet Psalmodical harmony of the Vultures, Cranes,
Owls, Geese; of the Leopards, Boars, Wolves, Dogs, Swine, Foxes, Goats. Pordon
me; for thus the holy Ghost terms the profane confused multitudes in false
Churches.

(F) Barrows Discovery, p. 52. Disguised Hypocrites, ravening Wolves, that come
to us in sheeps clothing, under the glorious titles of Pastors and Teachers,
Ministers of the Gospel, men of great Learning, holy Life, sighers for
Reformation; these Pharisees, these Sectaries are they that mislead the people
in their crooked paths of death. Ibid. p 112. No middle course can here be
taken; we must either make the Tree good or evil; These Ministers of the Church
of England are true or false: if false, then deliver they no true Sacraments;
then is all their Administration, Sacraments and Sermons accursed, how holy
soever or near the Truth in outward show; then are they the Ministers of Satan,
of Antichrist, sent by God in his wrath to deceive and destroy such as are
ordained to death; then ought not the Prince to repair to their Sermons for
comfort; then is all the comfort she takes there, but delusion, even the
deceit of Satan; then are they seducers who persuade her to go to them, as
whereby they draw her to the wrath of God, and imminent danger and inevitable
destruction, except she forsake them.

(G) Vide f. also Barrows Discovery, p. 154. The comfort received from their
Preaching, their whole Ministry being accursed, is a fearful sign of the
effectual working of their delusions: From their Ministry in this estate, no
comfort is to be looked for, but assured destruction; they being of God in his
wrath sent to deceive the children of death, the Reprobates.

(H) Barrows Discovery, p. 29. I deny their Sacraments to be the Ordinances of
God, seeing to them, in this estate, belong not the Sacraments and Ministry of
Christ, but the curse and judgment of God. Ibid. p. 31. Such Sacraments can no
ways be called the Ordinances of Christ, but rather sure Seals of his wrath to
as many as profane his holy Ordinances, and join together in that ungodly and
accursed action, until they repent.

(I) Vide f. also Barrows Dis. p. 43. There can be no greater allowance of
joining to them, then to make them our mouth or Ministers unto God, or together
with such to join in any action concerning the Worship of God.

(K) See Master Balls Confutation of the Brownists.

(L) Bar. Dis. p. 66. This Book being a public prescript Liturgy, were it
the best that ever was devised by mortal man; yet being brought into the
Church, yea into any private house, would be an abominable sacrifice in the
sight of God, even as a dead dog. Truly I am ashamed to write of so gross and
filthy abominations so generally received, even of all States of these parts of
the world, who of a Popish Custom and Tradition have received it one of
another, without any warrant from the Word. Ibid. p. 75. Other more smoothe
hypocrites, yet as gross idolaters, use the Lords Prayer as a close of their
own.

(M) Canns Necessity of Separation, p. 66. It is all one, whether turning on
the left hand we embrace the Idolatry of Bishops, or turning on the other hand
we follow the new devices of men's foolish brains; for utter destruction
certainly follows both.

(N) Robinsons Apology, p. 89. Quae nos ad Separationem solicitant, ipsam
Ecclesiae materialem and formalem constitutionem ejusdemque politeiae
administrationem essentialem spectant.

(O) John's. Enquiry, p. 25. Seeing by the mercy of God we have seen and
forsaken the corruptions which remain in the French and Dutch Churches, we
cannot partake with them in such case, without apostacy from the Truth.

(P) John's. Plea, p. 231. Every particular Church, with their Pastors, stand
immediately under Christ the Arch-Pastor, without any other strange
Ecclesiastical power intervening, whether it be of Prelates, or other unlawful
usurping Synods, or of any such like, invented by man, and brought into the
Church. Barrows Dis. p. 261. If we would but lightly examine these secret
Classes, these ordinary set Synods which the Reformists would openly set up,
they shall, no doubt, be found as new, strange, Antichristian, and prejudicial
to the Rights of the Church, as contrary to the Gospel of Christ as the other,
what show soever of former antiquity or present necessity they can pretend.
Idem Refut. of Giff^rd, p. 137. These are the ancient Sects of the Pharisees
and Sadduces, the one in preciseness, outward show of holiness, hypocrisy,
vainglory, and covetousness, resembling, or rather exceeding the Pharisees;
the other, in their whole Religion, and dissolute conversation, like to the
Sadduces, looking for no Resurrection, Judgment, or life to come; the one
removing from place to place for their advantage and best entertainment, in the
error of Ba'aam, for wages, seduce and distract the people of the Lord from
their own Churches and Pastors. Sions Royal Prerogative, in the Preface.
Whereas the Papists place the power of Christ given to the Church, in the Pope,
the Protestants in the Bishops, the Reformed Churches, as they are called, in
the Presbytery: Neither of them has right in this thing, but contrariwise
Christ has given the said power of his to all his Saints, and placed it in the
Body of every particular Congregation.

(Q 1.) Robinsons Apol. p 83. Personas Episcoporum vel autoritatem qua
potiuntur civilem in rebus vel civilibus vel etiam Ecclesiasticis non aversamur.

(Q 2.) Vide supra F.

(R 1.) Bar. Dis. p. 33. Such like detestable stuff has Master Calvin in his
ignorance brought to defend his own rash and disorderly proceedings at Geneva,
whiles he at the first dash made no scruple to receive the whole State into the
bosom of the Church: yea, that which is worse, and more to be lamented, it
became a miserable precedent and pernicious example to all Europe, to fall in
the like transgression, as in the confused estate of all those Regions where
the Gospel is thus orderly taught, is more then plain.

(R 2.) Robins. Apol. p. 7. Profitemur coram Deo and hominibus adeo nobis
convenire cum Ecclesus reformatis Belgicis in re Religionis, ut omnibus and
singulis earundem Ecclesiarum fidei Articulis prout habentur in harmonia
Confessionum fidei, paratisimus subscribere. Ibid. p. 11. Ecclesias reformatas
pro veris and genuinis habemus, cum iisdem in sacris Dei Communionem
profitemur, and quantum in nobis est colimus; conciones publicas ab illarum
pastoribus habitas ex nostris qui norunt Linguam Belgicam frequentant; Sacram
coenam earum membris si qua forte nostris coetibus intersint nobis cognita,
participamus: Malis illarum serio ingemiscimus. Apol. for the Brownists, page
35. We are willing and ready to subscribe those Grounds of Religion published
in the Confession of Faith made by the Church of Scotland, hoping in the unity
of the same Faith to be saved by Jesus Christ, being also like minded in points
of greatest moment with all other Reformed Churches; and on the contrary, for
Anabaptists, Familists, and all other Heretics, new, and old, we utterly
reject them, and all their Errors and Heresies. John's. plea. p. 245. I
acknowledge the Reformed Churches to be the true Churches of Christ, with whom
I agree, both in the Faith of Christ, and in many things concerning the Order
and Government of the Church.

(R 3.) John's. Inquiry, p. 57. Having declined to diverse Errors of the Dutch,
the Church did excommunicate him, and so still he remains. Ibid. p. 59. Yet it
is false that we have excommunicate any for the hearing only the Word preached
among the Dutch or French; for these that yet we have cast out here, it has
been partly for revolting from the truth which they professed with us, to the
corruptions of those Churches, and partly for other sins. (S) The Confession,
p. 26. The state of the Dutch Church at Amsterdam is so confused, that the
whole Church can never come together in one; they read out of a Book certain
Prayers invented and imposed by man; the command of Christ Matthew. 18. they
neither observe, nor suffer to be observed rightly; they worship God in the
Idoll-Temples of Antichrist, their Ministers have their set maintenance, their
Elders change yearly, they celebrate marriage in the Church, they use a new
censure of Suspension.

(T) Robins. apol. p. 81. Ecclesiae Anglicanae constitutio materialis est ex
hominum flagitiosorum colluvie, paucis si cum reliquis piis admistis
conferantur.

(V) Canns necessity, p. 167. He is to come himself into the public Assembly,
all looking on him with love and joy, as one that comes to be married, and
there he is to make public Confession of his Faith, to answer diverse
questions; being found worthy by the consent of the whole, he is to be taken
into the Communion.

(X) Bar. dis. p. 34. I have showed, that the known and suffered sin of any
Member, is contagious to all that communicate with them in that estate, and
makes them which communicate in Prayers or Sacraments with such an obstinate
offender, as guilty in Gods sight as he himself is.

(Y) Bar. dis. p. 34. I have showed that the whole Church has no power to
dispense with the breach of the least Commandment, and that such obstinate sin
in the whole Church breaks the Covenant with God, and makes it cease to be a
Church, or in Gods favor, till it repent.

(Z) Vide supra. X, Y.

(AA) Bar. dis. p. 157. They make this part of Gods Word substantial, that of
Form; this Fundamental, that Accidental; this necessary to Salvation, that
needless; but if the whole Word of God be holy* pure, and true, then is this
deep learning of theirs, devilish and blasphemous. Ibid. They thus to color
their wickedness, make some part of Gods Word Fundamental, Substantial,
necessary; other Accidental, Superficial, needless, which makes some sins
openly and manifestly convinced, yet obstinately persisted in without any
repentance in this life, not to be mortal as the Papists do.

Barrows refut. p. 24. We have learned to put difference betwixt Error and
Heresy. Obstinacy joined to Error after it is duly convinced, makes
Heresy: And further we say, that any Error being obstinately holden and
taught, after it is duly convinced and reproved, makes an Heretic; and
Heresy in that party, and in that Congregation that so holds and teaches,
does separate from the Faith and Communion of Christ. Ibid. p. 27. It is his
Scholastical, or rather Sophistical distinction of Errors Fundamental, etc.
They who obstinately hold any Error or Transgression, and will not by
repentance be purged, there from lose Christ, and so hold not the Foundation.

(BB) Bar. dis. p. 33. Such like detestable stuff has Master Calvin in his
ignorance, partly to confute that damnable sect of Anabaptists, which
fantastically dream to themselves of a Church in this life without spot, and
for every Transgression that arises, are ready to forsake the fellowship of
the Church, without due and orderly reproof.

( CC) Rob. Apol. p. 81. Formalis ecclesiae constitutio est ex fidei and
resipiscentiae confessione orali per adultos facta consociatio in particulares
coetus.

(DD) Confession of faith, p. 34. Being come forth of this Antichristian
estate, to the true profession of Christ, beside the instructing of their own
Families, they are willingly to come together in Christian communion, and
orderly to Covenant and unite themselves in visible Congregations. A light for
the ignorant. p. 12. This voluntary uniting, is the form and being of the
politic and visible Union and Communion.

(EE) Robins. Just. p. 107. This we hold and affirm, that a company consisting,
though but of two or three gathered by a covenant made to walk in all the ways
of God, known unto them, is a Church, and so has the whole power of Christ.
Ibid. p. 111. Two or three thus gathered together, have the same right with two
or three thousand; neither the smallness of the number, nor meanness of the
persons can prejudice their rights.

(FF) John's. plea. p. 250. The constitution of every particular Church should
be such that each of them may ordinarily come together in one place for the
worship of God and all other duties belonging to them, by the Word of God. Rob.
Apol. p. 12. Statu^mus non debere ecclesias particulares ambitu suo plura
membra complecti quam quae in unum locum simul coire possunt.

(GG) Vide supra. X, Y.

(HH) Bar. dis. p. 190. They suite to bring Christ in by the Arm of Flesh, by
suiting and supplicating to his vassals and servants* If so be they can imagine
them Christians, that will not suffer Christ to reign over them by his Laws and
Ordinances. If they judge them no Christians, then they suite and stay on his
enemies, till they will suffer Christ to reign and rule over his own Church.

(II) Confession. p. 34. Beside the instruction of their Families, they are
willingly to come together, and unite themselves in visible Congregations: Then
such to whom God has given gifts to interpret the Scriptures, may, and ought
by the appointment of the Congregation, to prophecy, and so to teach publicly
the Word of God, until such time as God manifest men with able gifts to such
Offices as Christ has appointed for the public Ministry of the Church, but
no Sacrament to be administered until the Pastors or Teachers be chosen, and
ordained to their Office.

(KK) Bar. dis. page 34. Which people thus gathered are to be esteemed an holy
Church, and has power to receive into and cast out of their fellowship,
although they have attained to have yet among them neither a Ministry nor
Sacraments, providing it be not by any default in them that they be wanting.
Ibid. It is manifest, that all the Members of the Church have alike interest in
Christ, in his Word, in the Faith; That all the affairs of the Church belong to
the Body together; That all the actions of the Church, Prayers, Sacraments,
Censures, Faith, be the action of them all jointly, and of every one severally,
although the Body to diverse actions uses diverse Members which it knows most fit
for the same; all the charged to watch, admonish, reprove, and hereunto have
the power of the Lord, the Keys of the Kingdom, even the Word of the most
High, whereby to bind the Rulers in chains, and their Nobles in fetters, to
admonish the greatest, even Archippus, to look to his Ministry, and if need
be, to plead with their Mother.

(LL) Canns Necessity of Sep p. 29. None may hear, or join in spiritual
Communion with that Ministry which has not a true Vocation and Calling, by
Election, Approbation, and Ordination of that faithful People whereto he is a
Minister. Ibid. p. 46. So necessary is a right election, and calling, to every
Ecclesiastike Office; that without the same, it cannot possibly be true or
lawful. Bar. Refut. p. 30. The Minister must not only be called to a true
Office, but must have a lawful calling to that Office; otherwise he is but an
intruder, a thief, and a murderer: Every particular Congregation ought to make
choice of their own Pastors.

(MM) A Light for, p. 17. In the false Church, the particular Congregations
have no Authority to produce or raise Officers out of themselves; for the
Clergy is a distinct Body, and sent by their Ecclesiastical Heads, and bring
their Office and Authority with them.

(NN) Bar. Refut. p. 19. This power of Ordination is not as the unruly Clergy
of these days suppose, derived from the Apostles and Evangelists, under the
permanent ministry of Pastors and Elders. Ibid. p. 130. Ordination is but a
publishing of that former contract and agreement, betwixt the whole Church and
these elected Officers, the Church giving, and the Elect receiving their
Offices, as by the Commandment of God, with mutual vow to each other in all
duties. Canns Necessity of Separ. p. 29. None may join with that Ministry
which has not a true calling, by Election and Ordination of that faithful
people to whom he is to administer.

(OO) John's. Plea. p. 316. It is to be understood according to Ainsworth,
Robinson, and Smith, of men, women, and children, in their own persons, who are
bo^^d in their own persons to be present, to hear and judge controversies.

(PP) Rob. Justifi. p. 9. also p. 111.

(QQ) Light for the ignorant, p. 17. These Officers have not only their
Authority from particular Congregations, but do arise originally and naturally
out of the same.

(RR) Vide supra. KK. Also Bar. Dis* p. 125. The least of the Church has as
much power by the Word of God, to bind the Sin of the Pastor; and upon his
Repentance, to pronounce comfort and peace to him, as he has to bind or loose
the sins of the least.

(SS) Confess. p. 23. As every Congregation has power to elect and ordain
their own Ministry, so also have they power, when any such default in Life,
Doctrine, or Administration breaks out, as by the rule of the Word deprives
them of their Ministry, by due order to depose them; yea, if the case so
require, if they remain obstinate, orderly to cut them off by Excommunication.

Canns Necessity, p. 155. If they shall sin scandalously, the Congregation that
chose them freely, has free power to depose them, and put another in their
room.

(TT) John's. Inquir. p. 7. We have in our Church the use of the exercise of
Prophecy spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. In which, some of the Brethren, such as for
Gifts are best able, though not in Office of the Ministry, deliver from some
portion of Scripture, Doctrine, Exhortation, Comfort; sometimes two at a time,
sometimes more.

(VV) Bar. Disc. p. 26. Their is no cause to doubt but any of Gods servants may
censure, judge, and avoid that Congregation which rejects Gods Word, breaks
Gods Law, despises his Reproof and Mercy, as a wicked Assembly, and an
Adulterous Church. Ibid. p. 38. Who can deny but that every particular Member
has power, yea and ought to examine the manner of administrating the
Sacraments; as also, the Estate, Disorder, and Transgressions of the whole
Church, and to call them all to Repentance; and if he find them obstinate in
their Sin, rather to leave their Fellowship, then to partake with them in
wickedness?

(XX) Vide supra. MM.

(YY) Vide supra. ll.

(ZZ) Smiths Differences, p. 56. It may be a question whether the Church may
not administer the Sacraments before there be any Officers among them.

(AAA) Bar. Disc. p. 121. I have always found it the Parents office to provide
marriage for their children; and that the parties themselves should affiance
and betroath one another in the fear of God, and in the presence of such
witnesses as are present; and that in their Parents or other private houses,
without turning to the Church or to the Priest.

Confess. page 45. The Dutch Church at Amsterdam celebrates marriage in the
Church, as if it were a part of the Ecclesiastic Administration, while as it
is in the nature of it merely Civil.

(BBB) Vide supra AAA.

(CCC) Vide supra AAA.

(DDD) John's. Inqui. p. 33. These of our Members that you censure, they avow
that they accused themselves of adultery, not for that end to be quit of their
wives, but being persuaded in their mind that they ought not to continue with
their wives, having by their adultery broken the bond of marriage. Ibid. This
indeed we held the most of us heretofore, and some of us are so persuaded
still; and while we were generally so minded, we thought it our duty to walk
accordingly (he means to excommunicate even the innocent party who was pleased
to dwell with her Husband after he had sinned) taking the innocent party that
retained such offenders, though upon repentance, yet to be defiled and live in
sin.

(EEE) John's. Plea, p. 231. Every particular Church with the Pastor, does stand
immediately under Jesus Christ the Arch-Pastor, without any other strange
Ecclesiastical power intervening, etc.

Vide supra P. Also Robinsons Apol. p. 17. Non magis erat Petrus and Paulus
homo integer and perfectus ex partibus suis essentialibus and integralibus
constans, sine relatione ad alios homines, quam est ^oetus particularis recte
institutus and ordinatus tota integra and perfecta ecclesia, ex suis partibus
constans immediate and independenter quoad alias ecclesias sub solo Christo;
non itaque movendi sub humanae prudentiae, antiquitatis, unitatis, aut alio
ullo color ecclesiae visibilis seu Ministerialis termini antiqui quos
posuerunt Apostoli.

(FFF) Canns guide to Sion, about the midst. It is sure that Christ has not
subjected any Congregation of his to any superior Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction
then to that which is within it self; So that if the whole Church shall err in
a matter of Faith or Religion, no other Church or Church Officer has any
warrant from the Word of God, or power to censure, punish, or control the
same, but are only to advise them, and so to leave their souls to the
immediate judgment of Christ.

Robins. Apol. p. 18. Licet imo incumbit Pastori unjus ecclesiae ut and
reliquis membris quod donum accepit sive spirituale sive temporale prout datur
occasio, id aliis ecclesiis and earum membris impertiri, ex charitatis vinculo
quo illis adunatur, non autem exequi in iis munus publicum ex authoritatis
prerogativa quam in suos solos habet.

(GGG) John's. Plea, page 251. To this end, and in this manner may be had a
profitable use of Synods, Classes, and Assemblies for mutual help and advice in
cases of question, controversy, and difficulty about Religion, so that they do
not challenge or usurp any unlawful jurisdiction or power over the particular
Churches, and their Governors.

(HHH) Bar. Disc. p. 261. These secret Classes, these ordinary set Synods which
the Reformists would set up.

(III) Bar. Refut. p. 81. In a Christian Synod no Christian ought to be shut
out, but all have equal power to speak, assent or dissent, without disturbing
the Order of the Holy Church, by presuming to speak before the Ancients, or
against any thing said by them without just cause; who so does, is reproved of
all, judged of all as a disturber.

(KKK) Vide supra. III.

(LLL) Bar. Disc. p. 261. In their Synods the matters being debated, the
greatest part prevails, and carries the judgment.

Ibid. p. 78. This balloting by suffrage or pluralty of voices, might well be a
custom among the Heathen in their popular Government, but it is unheard of, and
unsufferable in the Church of Christ.

(MMM) Ibid. p. 261. The order and manner of these Counsel^* is, first to choose
a Prolocutor, Moderator, or Judge to govern, and order the action, who, and
when they shall speak, and when cease.

Ibid. p. 191. Not here to speak of their solemn Order observed in these
Counsels and Synods, as their choice by suffrages among themselves of their
Archisynagogos or Rectorchori, their President as they call him.

(NNN) Vide supra. FFF.

(OOO) Bar. Disc. p. 38. Every Member of his Church is to pronounce upon them
the judgments that are written, and to throw upon them the Stone of his
judgment and consent: Therefore has the Lord raised up the Thrones of David
in his Church, and set his Saints in seats round about his Throne. A Light for
the Ignorant, page 10. The true power which Christ our King has received of
the Father, and communicated to his Saints; and these only is that dominion
which the Ancient of days has given to his Saints, Dan. 7.19.

(PPP) John's. Plea. p. 321. The Lord has promised to raise up his Church again
to the former integrity, and to set up the new and heavenly Jerusalem in the
Ancient beauty thereof.

(QQQ) Bar. Disc. p. 139. Their Churches stand in their old Idolatrous shapes,
and can never be purged till they be laid on heaps as their youngest Sisters,
the Abbacies were.

Confess. p. 39. It is the Office of the Magistrate to destroy all
Idol-Temples: The Dutch Church of Amsterdam worships God in the Idol-Temples of
Antichrist.

(RRR) Bar. Dis. p. 133. Some of their old Relicts are yet in use, as their
Bells, Surplices, etc. We may resolutely detest all such as abominable Idols,
such as by the Law of God are devoted to utter destruction; the very Gold of
them, Deuteronomy. 7. is to be destroyed; in such detestation ought Idolatry to be.
God has such Idol places, and all their furniture in detestation, so that he
has commanded the Magistrate to raze and deface them; so that, neither they
can be used to the worship of God, nor we have any civil use of them, seeing
they are execrable and devoted to destruction; if the most precious matters be
forbidden, how much more the baser Iron, Brass, etc.

Canns Necessity, p. 122. He that ordained first Bells, was Sabinian the Pope,
in the year 603. Whatsoever comes from Antichrist, comes from the devil and
out of the bottomless Pit.

(SSS) Bar. Refut. p. 38. Where learned you to buried in hallowed Churches and
Churchyards, as though ye had no Fields to bury in. Idem. Disc. p. 126. Me
thinks the Churchyards of all other places should be not the convenientest for
burial; it was a thing never used till Popery began: It is neither comely,
convenient, nor wholesom^.

(TTT) Confess. p. 39. It is the Office of the Magistrate to destroy all
Idol-Temples, and to convert to their civil Uses not only the benefit of all
such Idolatrous buildings and monuments, but also all the Revenues,
Possessions, Glebes and Maintenance of any false Ministry within their own
Dominions.

(VVV) Vide supra, TTT, also Bar. Disc. p. 61. Being given to the maintenance
of a Popish Ministry, they ought to be put to civil Uses, and not to the
maintenance of Christ's Ministry.

(XXX) Confess. p. 19. Christ having instituted and ratified to continue to the
worlds end, the Ministry of Pastors, Teachers, Elders, Deacons, Helpers for
Instruction and Government of his Church.

YYY. John's. Plea, 316. Whether it be not the duty of all Churches, and of the
members thereof, every one according to their ability, to give maintenance unto
their Ministers, and as there is occasion, to the Elders also that rule the
Church, and to the Deacons and Deaconesses that serve and minister therein.

ZZZ. Bar. Disc. p. 5. Parsonages and Vicarages, in Name and Office, are Popish
and Antichristian. Ibid. p. 61. Here also by the way, the unlawfulness of
their Glebes is well noted.

AAAA. Those men, whether Priest or People, which either pay or receive the
Tithes, still keep the Levitical Laws for the maintenance of the Ministry, and
thereby abolish the Gospel, and are abolished from Christ, whom we deny to be
dead, risen, or ascended, while we maintain the shadow or any part of the
Ceremonial Law to be revived. Ibid. p. 91. The Prince demands my goods; I am
ready and willing to depart with all to him, without all enquiry: But if he
command me to give my goods to such an Idol, or after such a wicked manner as
by way of Tithes to a Minister, or by way of Pension to an Antichristian
Minister; I may not obey, but rather suffer his indignation, yea death.

BBBB. Bar. Disc. p. 53. This Shepherd is not limited, nor the sheep
constrained to a tent or any stinted portion, but according to the present want
of the one, and the state of the other, they together relieving him, and he
together bearing the burden of their common poverty; every one that is taught,
freely imparting of all his goods to the competent maintenance of such as
instruct them, not unto excess, but sufficiency: Which contribution, as it is
the duty of the Saints, so the manner of it, it is a free offering of their
benevolence, an holy Alms unto the Lord; by contribution and alms, our Savior
Christ, and his Apostles, and all the Officers of the Church, were and are to
be maintained. Ibid. p. 61. They are not by rated proportions, as Tenths or
Third, but in love to make him partaker of that little or much the Lord
sends, according to his present wants and necessary uses; who, if he have but
food and raiment, ought to be therewith content. Confess. p. 45. At Amsterdam
their Ministers have their set-maintenance in another manner then Christ has
ordained.

BBBB 2. Rob. Ap. p. 36. Omnia etiam bona corporalia suo modo communia habenda,
prout cuique opus aequissimum videtur.

(CCCC) Bar. Disc. p. 132. The days of their week still are devoted to the
gods of the Heathen, having utterly lost the name and order of their Creator:
As the first, second, third day of such a week; the first, second, third month
of such a year. Idem. Refut. p. 34. If Luke should call it Mars-street,
speaking in his own name, and for himself, he should commit idolatry by naming
the creature of God after an Idol. David said he would not take the names of
their Idols in his lips, but Luke records only the story, and the vulgar
name of the place.

(DDDD) See the Preface of the Confession.

(EEEE) Bar. Disc. p. 180. They have a prescript place like a Tub, called the
Pulpit. Ibid. p. 138. In that his privileged Tub be may Preach what he list.

(FFFF) Ibid. p. 180. They are prescribed the time when they begin, they
dispute to the Hour-Glasse. Ibid. p. 54. He must Preach a Sermon an hour long.

(GGGG) Bar. Disc. p. 232. He may peradventure do his penance before all the
Sodomites of the Parish in white sheets.

(HHHH) John's. Plea, p. 245. Book-Prayer being men's invention, in the worship
of God, is a breach of the second command. These Books and stinted Prayers,
become indeed to be Idols, supplying the place of the Word and Spirit of God;
in which respect such manner of worship becomes Idolatrous and Superstitious,
and not to be communicate with; for what agreement has the Temple of God with
Idols?

Vide supra. D. L.

(IIII) Rob. Apol. p. 20. Non dubito quin rite and pie usurpari possit haec
ipsa forma in precando Deum, modo absit opinio necessitatis and perfectionis.

(KKKK) Bar. Disc. p. 180. Here would not be forgotten the sweet Psalmodical
harmony of the Vulturs, Cranes, etc. All these t^gether with one accord sing
some pleasant Ballad, or else to David's melodious Harp some Psalm in rythme,
well concinnate to the ear, though never a whit to the sense, purpose, or true
use of the Psalm. Idem. Refut. p. 254. I have not spoken against that most
comfortable and heavenly harmony of singing Psalms, but against rhyming and
paraphrasing the Psalms as in your Church, and against Apocrypha and Erroneous
Ballads in rythme, sung commonly in your Church instead of the Psalms, and
other Songs of holy Scripture.

(LLLL) Rob. Apo^. p. 20. Nego eandem esse rationem precationis and cantionis;
ipsi Psalmi quorum materia precatione aut gratulatione constat, in hunc finem
proprie and primo formantur a prophetis in cantiones and Psalmos spirituales,
ut nos edoceant, and quae vota illi in angustiis constituti ad Deum fuderint,
quasque liberati eidem Deo gratias retulerint, ut nos eosdem Psalmos sive
psallentes sive legentes, institueremus nos ipsos sive public sive privatim
sive docendo sive commone faciendo sive consolando ad Dei gloriam in cordibus
nostris promovendam.

(MMMM) Smiths Diff. p. 4. That the reading out of a Book is no part of
spiritual worship, but the invention of the man of sin; that Books and writings
are in the nature of Pictures and Images; that it is unlawful to have the Book
before the eyes in singing of a Psalm.

(NNNN) Smiths differences. Vide supra, cap. 1. E.

(OOOO) Confess. p. 34. Such to whom God has given gifts to interpret the
Scriptures, ought by the appointment of the Congregation to prophecy, and so to
teach publicly the Word of God, until such time as God manifests men with able
gifts to such Offices as Christ has appointed to the public Ministry.

(PPPP) Bar. Disc. p. 116. Shall I speak according to the times and say, Be no
true Sacrament? or rather leave that traditional word which ingendreth strife
rather then godly edifying, and say, Be no true Seal of the Covenant?

(QQQQ) Vide supra. F.

(RRRR) John's. Plea, p. 291. Whether it be not best to celebrate the Lords
Supper where it can be every Lords day; this the Apostles used to do; by so
doing we shall return to the entire practice of the Churches in former ages.

(SSSS) How corrupt is the sign of the Cross, kneeling and uncovering of the
head at the Lords Supper, and such things which Scripture prescribes not, but
men have taken upon themselves, thus breaking the second command, and joining
their Posts and Thresholds with the Lords. Men are thus drawn away from the
simplicity of the practice used by Christ and his Apostles, who sat when they
ate and drank and did no more discover then before.

(TTTT) John's. Plea, p. 294. To have love feasts on the days of the Lords
Supper, it is a thing indifferent to keep or leave them, as they shall be used
or abused, or as every Church shall find them to be most expedient for their
estate.

(VVVV) Bar. Refut. p. 43. Not here to mention the binding of the Faith of the
Church to an Apocrypha Catechism. Idem. Disc. p. 142. They are not ashamed to
Preach and publicly Expound in their Church, their fond Apocrypha Catechisms.

XXXX. Bar. Disc. p. 76. Their forged patchery, commonly called The Apostles
Creed.

YYYY. His Refut. p. 48. What Scripture can you bring for the blasphemous
Article of Christ's descent into hell?

ZZZZ. Cans Necessity, p. 44. Bare reading of the Word, and single
Service-saying, is an English Popery; and far be it from the Lords people to
hear it; for if they would do so, they would offer to the Lord a corrupt thing,
and so incur that curse of Malachi.

AAAAA. John's. Enquiry, p. 7. We have in our Church the use of the exercise of
Prophecy, spoken of, 1 Cor. 14. in which some of the Brethren which are for
gifts best able, though not in Office of the Ministry, deliver from some
portion of Scripture, Doctrine, Exhortation, Comfort; sometimes Two at a time,
sometimes more.

BBBBB. John's. Enquiry, p. 7. Then, if there be occasion, upon the Scriptures
treated, or questions propounded and answers made. Bar. Disc. p. 139. In that
his privileged Tub, he may speak of what be list; none of his auditory have
power to call in question, correct, or refuse the same presently or publicly.

CCCCC. Rob. Apol. p. 38. Prorsus inauditum ante haec nostra saecula sive inter
gentes, sive inter Judaeos, sive inter Christianos ut Judicia publica aliive
actus naturae publicae privatim aut seclusa plebe exercerentur. Ibid. p. 51.
Per plebem cujus Libertatem and Jus suffragandi in negotiis vere publicis
asserimus, non intelligimus pueros and mulieres, sed solos viros eosque adultos.

DDDDD. Browns Life and manners of all true Christians, in the Preface, or
Treatise of Reformation without tarrying for any; and of the wickedness of
those Preachers which will not reform till the Magistrate command or compel
them, p. 8. Know ye not that they which have their full and sufficient
authority and calling, are not to care for a further authority? And has not
every lawful Pastor his full authority? Ibid. p. 8. The Lord did not only show
them the Tabernacle, but bade them make it: But these men will not make it at
all, because they will tarry for the Magistrate. Ibid. p. 10. They could not
force Religion, as you would have the Magistrate to do: And it was forbidden to
the Apostles to preach to the unworthy, or to force a planting or government in
the Church. The Lords Kingdom is not by force, neither durst Moses nor any of
the Kings of Judah force the people, by Law or by power, to receive the
Church Government: But after they received it, if then they fell away, and
sought not the Lord, they might put them to death. They do cry Discipline,
Discipline, that is, for a civil forcing to imprison the people, or otherwise,
by violence to handle and beat them, if they would not obey them. Ibid. p. 11.
The Lords people is of the willing sort, they shall come unto Sion, and inquire
the way unto Jerusalem, not by force nor compulsion, but with their faces
thitherward: And p. 12. Because the Church is in a Commonwealth, it is of the
Magistrates charge, that is, concerning the outward Provision and outward
Justice they are to look; but to compel Religion, to plant Churches by power,
and to force a submission to Ecclesiastical Government, by Laws and Penalties,
belongs not to them, neither yet to the Church.

EEEEE. Confess. p. 32. Leaving the suppression of this Antichristian estate to
the Magistrate, to whom it belongs.

FFFFF. Bar. Refut. In the Preface. We acknowledge the Prince ought to compel
all his Subjects to the hearing of Gods Word, in the public exercises of the
Church; yet cannot the Prince command any to be a member of the Church, or the
Church to receive any without assurance by their public Profession of their
own Faith, or to retain any longer then they continue to walk orderly in the
Faith.

GGGGG. Bar. Disc. p. 245. When Princes depart from the Faith, and will not be
reduced by admonition or reproof, they are no longer to be held in the Faith of
the Church, but are to receive the censure of Christ, as any other, and to be
cut off as withred branches: The Church cannot, neither has in her power to
defer the sentence of Excommunication any longer, on hope of further trial,
because they have had already that trial which God allows; it is a Leaden
rule to proceed to the sentence of Excommunication with a Leaden-heel, when the
sin is ripe. Ibid. p. 15. Which censures, if the Prince contemn, he contemns
them against his own soul; and is thereupon, by the power of the Church
disfranchised out of the Church, and to be delivered over to Satan, as well as
any other offender.

HHHHH. John's. Inqui. p. 70. We hold it Antichristian to entertain or admit any
appeal from one Church to another; the highest ordained by the Lord for all
sinners, is that Church whereof the sinner is a member. And therefore, in
urging our Church to submit to another Church, they sought to draw it to
Antichristian bondage.

IIIII. Bar. Dis. p. 84. I am persuaded, that the Magistrate ought not to make
permanent Laws of that the Lord has left in our Liberty. Ibid. p. 255. We
approve all the Laws of God, to be most holy and inviolable, and all-sufficient
both for Church and Commonwealth, and the perfect instruction of every Member
and Officer of the same, in their several duties, so that nothing is now left
to any mortal man of what high dignity and calling so ever, but to execute the
Will of God according to his Word.

KKKKK. Bar. Disc. p. 108. God will have his Laws and Statutes kept, and not
altered according to the State and Policy of times; for these Laws were made,
not for the Jews estate, as Master Calvin teaches; but for all mankind,
especially for all the Israel of God, from which Laws it is not lawful in
judgment to decline to the right hand, or to the left. By the neglect of these
Laws, the whole world overflows with sin. Ibid. p. 212. In the Commonwealth
they have abrogated all Gods Judicial Laws, and cut them off at one blow, as
made for the Commonwealth of the Jews only, as if God had no regard of the
conversation of other Christians, or had left the Gentiles in greater liberty
to make Laws and Customs to themselves.

LLLLL. Ibid. Hereby it comes to pass that so many ungodly Laws are decreed,
and the whole course of Justice perverted, that so many capital mischiefs as
God punishes by death, such as blaspheme the Name of the Lord, open Idolatry,
Disobedience to Parents, are not by Law punished at all: Incest and Adultery,
are either past over, or punished by some light or triffling punishment. Ibid.
p. 155. The High Commission punishes the most execrable Idolatries but with
prisons or forfeitures, making it a pecuniary matter, contrary to Gods Word.

MMMMM. 1. Vide HHHH.

MMMMM. 2. Bar. Dis. p. 211. Theft, if above thirteen pence, is punished by
death.

NNNNN. Bar. Dis. p. 55. The University of Oxford and Cambridge have the same
Popish and Idolatrous beginning with the Colleges of Monks, Friars and Nuns;
and these Vermin had, and still do retain the same insufferable and incurable
abuses; therefore Queen Elizabeth ought by good right to abolish them as her
Progenitors did the Abbeys.

OOOOO. Ibid. p. 177. They repair to the Universities to be instructed in
Heathen and vain Arts: The Churches of Christ have not such Heathenish and
Idolatrous customs; they have no such profane Arts, vain Education and
Literature. Ibid. p. 56. We find them all generally the Seed of Unbelievers,
nourished in all manner of Profaneness, Heathenism, vain and ungodly
Sciences; their Education from their cradle is ungodly in the common Schools,
where they must learn their Greek and Latin from lascivious Poets or Heathenish
Philosophers: With this Liquor are their Pitchers at first seasoned; there are
they trained up in Logic, Rhetoric and Philosophy; which Learning they draw
from Aristotle, Cicero, and such like; there they learn to speak by Art
Syllogisms and Tropes.

Idem. Refut. p. 89. This I dare affirm, that from the Book of God, they never
derived these their Colleges, Schools, Halls, Orders, and Degrees; that I may
not say Arts, Authors, Exercise, use of Learning, Disputations, Commencements.
They fight with their School-Learning, vain Arts, Philosophy, Rhetoric,
Logic, against the Truth and Servants of God.

PPPPP. Vide supra. N, O.

QQQQQ. Vide RRRRR 2.

RRRRR 1. Bar. Dis. p. 179. In the Church of Christ, the name and offices of
Chancellor, Vice-Chancelor, Dean of Faculty, Masters of Colleges, Fellows,
Beadels, Bursours, and all their several Statutes and Customs are strange; as
also, their manner of Degrees, Disputing for their Degrees, and Order of
Teaching: Neither have any such Universities, Colleges, Society of Scholars,
any ground of the Word of God. I see not why they should have any more
toleration then their elder Brethren, the Monks, who every way had as great
color of Holiness, and show of Vtility to the Church, as they: They have all
one and the same Hellish Original they had; and these still retain the same
blasphemous incurable abuses, which can no ways be reformed but by their utter
dissolution.

RRRRR 2. Bar. Dis. p. 177. The English of Christian Religion, and Profession
of the Gospel, I can well away with; but this English Romish abstract of
Divinity, I am assured, came forth of this same Forge that the Title of the
supreme Head of the Church; and cannot by all the glosses they can devise, be
made other then most high blasphemy against the person of Christ, who is the
only Universal Doctor of all his Disciples. Ibid. p. 56. If they continue
still, and give their mind to the study of Divinity as they call it, which is
as much as to say, The reading of men's writings; with these Feathers they flee,
with these eyes they see; which Books being taken from them, they are as mute
as fish, as blind as moles. Ibid. Their Divinity is traditional, wholly
derived from other men's Books and Writings, both for the understanding,
dividing, and interpretation of all Scripture; as also for all Questions,
Doctrines, and Doubts that arise; and not springing from the Fountain of Gods
Spirit in themselves, according to the measure of Knowledge, Faith and Grace
given unto them.

SSSSS. Bar. Disc. p. 146. It were much better for the whole Church, that for
Prophecy and Doctrine, Preachers would lay aside all Authors, and be take
themselves wholly to the Book of God: So should that Book be more soundly
understood, so should they see with their own eyes, and not other men's.

TTTTT. Bar. Disc. p. 56. These Questions, as also the whole Scripture, must in
these their Schools and Disputations, be insufferably corrupted, wrested,
blasphemed, according to the lusts of these Philosophical and Heathen
Disputers, which here must handle, divide, discuss according to their vain
affected Arts of Logic and Rhetoric: All these prizes must be played in
Latin, that the Learning may the more, and the Folly the less be perceived,
least even the common people should hiss them off the Stage if they spoke in
English. Ibid. p. 52. They give liberty to their wits in their learning to
deface, strive, and dispute against the holy known Truth of God, tossing it as
a Tenice Ball amongst them, both publicly in their Schools, and privately in
their Colleges amongst them.

VVVVV. Bar. Refut. p. 124. I would not here that any should think we condemn
any lawful Art, or any necessary Science, or any Holy Exercise, or Schools of
Institution. Let their Arts and Sciences be necessary and Godly, not vain,
curious, unlawful: Let them be taught, not in a vainglorious or superstitious
manner, but in all sobriety, and the fear of God; If their Universities were
framed to these Rules, it were good.

CHAP. III. The Original and Progress of the Independents, and of their
Carriage in New England.
THe Sect (if so without offense it may be called) which this day is the
subject of the most discourse, Independency the smallest of all the Sects of
the time for number, but greatest for worth of its followers.
and the object of the greatest passions; some pouring out upon it more of
their love and hope, others of their anger and fear, then were convenient, is
that of Independency.

Of all the bypath wherein the wanderers of our time are pleased to walk,
this is the most considerable; not for the number, but for the quality of the
erring persons therein. There be few of the noted Sects which are not a great
deal more numerous; but this Way, what it wants in number, supplies by the
weight of its followers. After five years endeavors and great industry within
the Lines of the Cities Communication, they are said as yet to consist much
within One thousand persons; men, women, and all who to this day have put
themselves in any known Congregation of that way, being reckoned. But setting
aside number, for other respects they are of so eminent a condition, that not
any nor all the rest of the Sects are comparable to them; for they have been so
wise as to engage to their party some of chief note, in both Houses of
Parliament, in the Assembly of Divines, in the Army, in the City and
Countrey-Committees; all whom they daily manage with such dexterity and
diligence, for the benefit of their Cause, that the eyes of the world begin to
fall upon them more then upon all their fellows: It will be requisite therefore
that with the greater care we give an account of them.

Of this our Account there shall be three parts. The first, The division of the
following matter.
An History of their Original and Progress* to that height wherein now they
stand. The second, A Narrative of their Tenants. The third, A Con^tion of some
of their prime Principles.

Concerning, ^eir Original; the Separatists were their Fathers. Independents,
the Separatist^ offspring.
This is demonstrable, not only by the Consanguinity of their Tenants, the one
having borrowed all their chief Doctrines and Practices from the other, but
also by deduction of their Pedigree in this clear line.

Master Robinson did derive his way to his separate Congregation at Leyden; a
part of them did carry it over to Plymouth in New England; here Master Cotton
did take it up, and transmit it from thence to Master Goodwin, who did help to
propagate it to sundry others in Old-England first, and after, to more in
Holland, till now by many hands it is sown thick in diverse parts of this
Kingdom. But the manner how this seed did grow, is not unworthy consideration.

When the fire of Brownism was dying out in Holland, a little of its ashes
carried to New England, broke out there into a lasting flame.
When the Separatists for whole Fifty years had over-toil'd themselves for
little purpose, their horrible Divisions, wheresoever they set up, marring
their increase; behold* at the very point of time when their Spunk was dying,
and their little smoke, both at Amsterdam and Leyden, was well-neer vanished,
God in his secret providence permitted the tyranny of Bishops, which first had
begotten them, to put new life in their ashes, and bring them back from their
grave, to that vigor wherein now they appear.

After the death of Ainsworth, the Brownists at Amsterdam came to a small
unconsiderable handful, and so yet they remain. No other at that time in the
whole world were known of that Religion, but a small company at Leyden, under
Master Robinsons Ministry; which, partly by Divisions among themselves, and
partly by their Pastors deserting many of their Principles, was well-neer
brought to naught: Only about the Twenty eighth, as I take it, or the
Thirtieth year of this Age, some of them going over, for a more commodious
habitation, to New England, did persuade their neighbors who sat down with
them there at New-Plymouth, to erect with them a Congregation after their
separate way (A).

By what means these ashes were kindled.
This Congregation did incontinent leaven all the vicinity. The Planters in
New England, so far as their own informations give notice, not minding Religion
for many years after their first enterprise (B), were ready to receive, without
great question, any pious form which might be presented by their neighbors,
whose mind served them to be active in such ^ers. Also that way of new
Plymouth, beside the more then ordinary show of devotion, did hold out so much
liberty and honor to the people, that made it very suitable and lovely to a
multitude who had lately stepped out of the Episcopal thraldom in England, to
the free air of a new world. However it was, without any noise in a few years,
the most who settled their habitations in that Land, did agree to model
themselves in Churches after Robinsons pattern.

This for a time, was either not known, or not regarded in England. The first
who appeared in any displeasure at it, Master Cotton at first a great opposite
to that way.
was Mr. Cotton; for this reverend man, howsoever he had fallen off from the
practice of some, and but of some of the Ceremonies, and was distasted with
Episcopal Government, yet so long as he abode in England, minded no more then
the old nonconformity: In all his opposition to the Episcopal corruptions, he
went not beyond Cartwright, and the Presbyterians. With the way of the
Separatists he was then well acquainted, but declared himself against it in
print, as in his Preface to Master Hildershams Sermons upon John, may be seen
to this day (C). Neither thus alone, but a very little before his voyage to
New England, so soon as he understood of the prevailing of Robinsons way there,
such was his zeal against it, he wrote over to the Ministers who had been the
chief instruments of bringing these Churches under that yoke, admonishing them
freely of their falling from their former judgment, and that their new
Reformation was no other but the old way wherein the Separatists had walked, to
the grief and offense of the Anti-Episcopal party in England, and of the whole
Protestant Churches (D).

Notwithstanding this admonition, Master Cotton with little ado, became the
great patron of that Error.
the Brethren there went on in their way, yet without any hazard to others,
till the 1634. as I take it, or 1635. year of our Lord God, when the yoke of
Episcopal persecution in England became so heavy on the necks of the most of
the godly, that many thousands of them did flee away, and Master Cotton among
the rest, to join themselves to these American Churches. Here it was when that
new way began first to be dangerous to the rest of the world.

For Master Cotton, a man of very excellent parts, contrary much to his former
judgment, having fallen into a liking of it, and by his great with and learning,
having refined it, without the impediment of any opposition, became the great
instrument of drawing to it, not only the thousands of those who left England,
but also by his Letters to his friends who abode in their Country, made it
become lovely to many who never before had appeared in the least degree of
affection toward it.

Master Cotton the misleader of Master Goodwin and others.
Before his departure from England, by conferences in London, he had brought off
Master Davenport and Master Goodwin, from some of the English Ceremonies ( E);
but neither of these two, nor himself at that time, did mind the least degree
of Separation ( F); yet so soon as he did taste of the New-English air, he fell
into so passionate an affection with the Religion he found there, that
incontinent he began to persuade it, with a great deal more zeal and success
then before he had opposed it (G): His convert Master Goodwin, a most fine and
dainty Spirit, with very little ado, was brought by his Letters from
New England, to follow him unto this step also of his progress, and that with
so high an estimation of his new Light, that he was bold to boast of it in
terms a little beyond the lines of moderation (H).

Master Cotton often deceived, has given his patrociny to diverse gross
Errors.

Why God permits great men to fall in evident Errors.


It had been happy for England, that Master Cotton had taken longer time for
deliberation, before that change of his mind: He might have remembered his too
precipitant rashness in former times, both to receive, and to send abroad to
the world such Tenants whereof after he had cause to repent.

God in wisdom permits his dearest children to set black marks on their own
faces, not only to keep themselves in humility and suspicion of their own
hearts, but to divert others from idolizing their gifts, and setting up their
persons as a pattern for their too sudden imitation. I would not willingly
detract from any man's reputation; I am often ready enough, both to hear with
contentment, and liberally to speak to the praises of men much inferior in my
thoughts to Master Cotton: Yet when his gifts are turned into snares, when they
become occasions of stumbling, and, contrary to the mind of the giver, are
made inducements to follow him in his wanderings; I am of opinion, that neither
Piety nor Charity will hinder to remark his evident and known failings: That as
his eminent endowments are strong invitations to run after him; so the mixture
of clear weakness may be a retractive to every prudent man, and a caveat from
God, to beware of his ways, as well as of any other man's.

I take it for a great mercy of God to simple ones, that the most, if not all,
who have offered themselves to be Ringleaders in any Heresy or Schism, or other
by-way, have ever bin permitted to fall into some evident folly; to the end,
that they whose simplicity made them too prone to be misled by the strength of
pregnant wits, and the luster of excellent gifts, which in the most of
Sectaries to this day, have ever been apparent, might be held in the love of
the truth, and made cautious of being led aside by them in whose footsteps a
very blunt eye might perceive the print of an evil spirit.

Not to speak of Master Cottons long continuance in the Errors of his
education, His Prelatical Arminian and Montanistick Tenants.
sundry whereof stuck to him as he confesses all the time of his abode in
England (I): Nor of his more dangerous fall into the gulf of Pelagianism, some
of the Arminian Errors, from which the writings of Dr. Twisse are said to have
reclaimed him (K); However, the Doctor does say, that he has no assurance of
his recantation to this day, and therefore was willing that his Treatise
against Master Cottons erroneous writings should be published to the world. To
pass by also that which I have heard of some gracious Ministers of his old
Montanism, wherein some think he remains to this day.

That which I point at, is, another more dangerous fall, His Antinomy and
Familism.
which as already it has much humbled his spirit, and opened his ear to
instruction, and I trust it will not leave working till it have brought him yet
nearer to his Brethren: So to the worlds end, it cannot but be a matter of fear
and trembling, to all who shall know it, and of abundant caution to be very
wary of receiving any singularity from his hand without due trial. That which I
speak of, is, his wandering into the horrible Errors of the Antinomians and
Familists, with his dear friend Mistress Hutchinson; so far, that he came to a
resolution to side with her, and separate from all the Churches in New England,
as legal Synagogues.

The truth of this horrible fall, if ye will not take it from the parties
themselves, the followers of Mistress Hutchinson, who ofttimes were wont to
brag of Master Cotton for their Master and Patron (L); nor from the Testimony
of Master Williams (M), who had as much occasion to know it, as any man else;
and if I mistake not the humor of the man, is very unwilling to report a lie of
his greatest enemy. Yet we may not reject the witness of Master Winthrop, the
wisest of all the New-English Governors hitherto, and of Master Wells, a
gracious Minister of that Land, in their Printed Relations of the Schisms
there, both those, albeit, with all care and study they endeavor to save
Master Cottons credit, yet let the truth of Master Cottons seduction fall from
their Pens in so clear terms as cannot be avoided; for however, what they
speak of the erring of the most eminent in place, might be applied to the
Governor for the time ( N 1.): Yet when they tell us, that the most of the
Seducers lived in the Church of Boston, and that the whole Church of Boston,
except a few, were infected with that Leprosy, and that none of them were
ever-called to an account by the Presbytery of that Church till after the
Assembly, though the Pastor of that Church, Master Wilson, was always
exceedingly zealous against them; also that in face of the General Court,
Mistress Hutchinson did avow Master Cotton alone, and Master Wheelwright, to
Preach the truth according to her mind; and that Master Cotton himself, before
that same Court, did openly dissent, even after the Assembly, from all his
Brethren about Wheelwrights Doctrine. These, and other the like informations,
are so clear, that no art will get Master Cotton freed ( N 2.)

I have been also informed by a gracious Preacher, who was present at the Synod
of New England; that all the Brethren there, being exceedingly scandalized with
Master Cottons carriage, in Mistress Hutchinsons process, did so far
discountenance, and so severely admonish him, that he was thereby brought to
the greatest shame, confusion, and grief of mind that ever in all his life he
had endured. But leaving the person of Master Cotton, if not the Author, yet
the greatest promoter and patron of Independency, we will go on with the way it
self.

Independency large, as unhappy as Brownism.
What Master Cotton, and the Apologists, his followers, have testified of Gods
displeasure and judgments upon the way of the Brownists ( O), is as evidently
true of the way of the Independents; not only because, as it will appear
hereafter, both ways really are one and the same: But also, because in the
comparison of the events which have befaln to both ways, it will be seen that
the miscarriages and (because of them) the marks of Gods anger have been more
manifest upon this latter way then upon the former.

Independency brought to the utmost pitch of perfection which the wit and
industry of its best patrons were able to attain, having the advantage of the
Brownists fatal miscarriages, to be exemplary documents of wisdom, being also
assisted and fenced with all the security that Civil Laws of its friends own
framing, and gracious Magistrates at their absolute devotion, could afford;
notwithstanding in a very few, less then one week of years, has flown out in
more shameful absurdities then the Brownists to this day, in all the fifty
years of their trial, have stumbled upon.

The verity of this broad assertion shall be palpable to any who will be at the
pains a little to consider their proceedings in any of the places wherever yet
they had any settled abode: Wherefore so much of the Independent way lies yet in
darkness.
for however much of their way be yet in the dark, and in this also their
advantage above the Brownists is great; that in their Discords none of
themselves have proclaimed their own shame; none that have fallen from them,
have of purpose put pen to paper, to inform the world of their ways; neither
have any of them been willing to reply to any of the Books written against
them, that did put a necessity upon them to speak out the truth of many heavy
imputations which with a loud voice by many a tongue are laid on them; choosing
rather to lie under the hazard of all the reproach which their unfriendly
reports could bring upon them, then to make an Apology, wherein their denial
might bring upon them the infamy of lying, or their grant the fastening, by
their own testimony, upon the back of their party the Crimes alleged against
them: Notwithstanding so much is broken out from under all their coverings, as
will make good what has been said. Hitherto they have had but three places of
abode, New England, Holland, London. That any where else they have erected
Congregations, I do not know. Of their adventures in these three places, we
will speak a little.

In New England, The fruits of Independency in New England.
when Master Cotton had gotten the assistance of Master Hooker, Master
Davenport, and sundry other very worthy Ministers, beside many thousands of
people whom God in his mercy did send over to that new world, to be freed from
suffering and danger, in the day of their Countries most grievous calamities;
being there alone, without the disturbance of any enemy either within or
without, What were the fruits of their Church Way?

First, 1. It put thousands of Christians in the condition of Pagans.
it forced them to hold out of all Churches and Christian Congregations, many
thousands of people who in former times had been reputed in Old-England very
good Christians. I have heard sundry esteem the number of the English in that
Plantation to exceed Forty thousand men and women: when Master Cotton is put
to it, he dares hardly avow the one half of these to be members of any Church
(P): But if we do believe others who were eyewitnesses also, they do avow,
That of all who are there, Three parts of Four will not be in any Church ( Q
1.). To us it seems a grievous absurdity, a great dishonor to God, and
cruelty against men, to spoil so many thousand Christians, whom they dare not
deny to be truly religious, of all the privileges of the Church, of all the
benefits of Discipline, of all the comfort of any Sacrament, either to
themselves, or to their children; to put them in the condition of Pagans, such
as some of them profess all Protestants to be who are not of their way ( Q 2.).

2. It marrs the conversion of Pagans to the Christian Religion.
A second evil of their Way, is, That it has exceedingly hindered the conversion
of the poor Pagans; God in great mercy having opened a door in these last times
to a new world of reasonable creatures for that end, above all, that the Gospel
might be preached to them, for the enlargement of the Kingdom of Christ. The
principles and practice of Independents, does cross this blessed hope. What
have they to do with those that are without? Their Pastors preach not for
conversion, their relation is to their Flock, who are Church Members, converted
already to their hand by the labors of other men, before they can be admitted
into their Church.

Of all that ever crossed the American Seas, they are noted as most neglectful
of the work of Conversion. I have read of none of them that seem to have minded
this matter ( Q 3.): only Master Williams in the time of his banishment from
among them, did assay what could be done with those desolate souls, and by a
little experience quickly did find a wonderful great facility to gain
thousands of them to so much and more Christianity, both in profession and
practice, then in the most of our people does appear (R). But the unhappiness
of these principles whereof we speak, 3. It did bring forth the foulest
Heresies that ever yet were heard of in any Protestant Church.
did keep him, as he professes, from making use of that great opportunity and
large door which the Lord there has opened to all who will be zealous for
propagating of the Gospel (S).

Thirdly, the fruits of Independency may be seen in the profession and
practices of the most who have been admitted, as very fit, if not the fittest
members of their Churches. These have much exceeded any of the Brownists that
yet we have heard of; first, in the vileness of their Errors; secondly, in
the multitude of the erring persons; thirdly, in the hypocrisy joined with
their errors; fourthly, in malice against their neighbors, and contempt of
their Superiors, Magistrates and Ministers for their opposition to them in
their evil ways; and lastly, in their singular obstinacy, stiffly sticking
unto their errors, in defiance of all that any upon earth could do for their
reclaiming, or that God from heaven, almost miraculously, had declared against
them. All this I will make good, by the unquestionable Testimonies of their
loving friends.

For the vileness of their Errors: A few examples of the many abominable
Heresies of the New-English Independents.
They did avow openly the personal inhabitation of the Spirit in all the godly,
his immediate revelations without the Word; and these as infallible as
Scripture it self (T): This is the vilest Montanism. They avowed further, with
the grossest Antinomians, That no sin must trouble any child of God: That all
trouble of conscience for any sin, demonstrates a man subject to the Covenant
of Works, but a stranger to the Covenant of Grace (V): That no Christian is
bound to look upon the Law as a rule of his conversation (X): That no Christian
should be pressed to any duty of holiness ( Y). Neither here did they stand, but
went on to aver the death of the soul with the body ( Z): That all the Saints
upon earth have two bodies ( AA): That Christ is not united to our fleshly
body; but they would have him to be united to our new body ( BB), with the same
union where with his humanity is united with his Godhead: That Christ's Manhood
was not now in the heavens (CC), but that his body was his Church. These
abominable errors, and many more of this kind, to the number of Fourscore and
eleven ( DD), the New-English Independency did produce to the world in a very
short time.

For the second, The number of the erring persons; The greatest part of their
chief Churches were infected with these errors.

The pi^^ty of these Heretics seem^d to be singular.


this is said to have been incredible; not only multitudes of men and women
every where were infected ( EE), but almost no Society, no Family of that Land
was free of that Pest ( BB): Boston, the best and most famous of their
Churches, was so far corrupted, that few there were untainted ( GG).

Concerning the Hypocrisy of these Heretics, it was exceeding great: None
appeared so humble, so holy, so spiritual, and full of Christ, as they ( HH):
In their speech, naught but self-denial (II): In their prayers, ravishing
affections, and heavenly expressions ( KK): All their singular opinions, were
for the advancing of Free Grace ( LL); For the glorious light of the Gospel;
for the setting up of naked Christ on his Throne ( MM).

Their malice against all who opposed them, was singular, especially against
all their Orthodox Ministers,
Their malice toward all that dissented from them, was so extreme, that they
made the life of many, the most religious of their Neighbors, to be bitter and
a wearisome burden to them ( NN).

For their Ministers, some of them they adored: Master Cotton and Master
Wheelwright, they set up as the only true Preachers of the Covenant of Grace;
they extolled them to the skies, avowing, that since the Apostles days, none
had received so much Gospel Light, as they ( OO): But the rest of the
Preachers, not only all in Old England (PP), but also all in New England,
except a very few, and most of all the best, the most zealous and Orthodox,
even the instruments of their own conversion, were to them Baals Priests, Legal
Preachers, Popish Factors, Scribes and Pharisees, Enemies to the Gospel, void
of the Spirit of Grace ( QQ).

and Magistrates.
Their contempt of the Magistrates was as great as of the Ministers: Their late
Governor they professed was a true friend to Christ, and Free Grace ( RR); but
Master Winthrop their present Governor, and the most of the Magistrates, they
proclaimed enemies of Grace, Persecutors, Antichrists, Ahabs, Herod's, Pilates,
whom God would destroy ( SS). Their Preacher, Master Wheelwright, would exhort
the people in his Sermon, to deal with the Magistrates as such, remembering them
how Moses had killed the Egyptian (TT).

Their Errors in opinion did draw on such seditious practices, as did well
near overturn both their Church and State.
Their Heresies did bring on so dangerous seditions, as in a short time did put
their Commonwealth in a clear hazard of utter ruin ( VV); for the Heretics
had drawn to their side, not only multitudes of the people, but many of the
ablest men for parts, in all Trades, especially the Soldiers (XX). They kept
such intimate familiarity, and open correspondence with the most eminent men of
the Land; Mistress Hutchinson, and the late Governor, kept almost every day
so private and long discourse with Master Cotton, that made them conclude all
was their own (YY), and forced the wise Governor, Master Winthrop, to prevent
their designs, to put the former Governor, and all that followed him, from
their places in the general Court, and to desire him and them to be gone, which
was counted a real, though a civil banishment out of their Land (ZZ): Also to
disarm the most of that faction expressly upon fear, least the Tragedy of
Munster should be acted over again in New England (AAA).

Master Williams told me, that he was employed to buy from the Savages, for the
late Governor, and Master Cotton, with their followers, a proportion of Land
without the English Plantation, whither they might retire and live according to
their own mind, exempt from the Jurisdiction, Civil, and Ecclesiastic, of all
others. Master Williams was in so great friendship with that late Governor,
when he told me so much, That I believe he would have been loath to have spoken
any untruth of him.

Their obstinacy in all these things was truly mavelous; Their proud
obstinacy against all admonitions was mavelous.
for after all the pains which their godly Pastors took upon them, in
Preaching, in Conference, in Public Disputations: After the Magistrate had
executed the Law, and inflicted civil punishments upon some of their prime
Seducers; yea, when God visibly from the Heavens had declared his anger against
some of their chief Leaders, punishing Mistress Hutchinson with a monstrous
birth of more then thirty misshapen Creatures at one time ( BBB), and
Mistress Dyer her principal assistant, with another monstrous birth ( CCC) of
one Creature, mixed of a Beast, of a Fish, and a Foul: Notwithstanding all
these admonitions, their obstinacy was so great, that many of them continued
pertinacious without any repentance ( DDD).

For some of them separating of their own accord, others being banished by the
Magistrate, retired into those Lands which Master Williams had bought for them;
and in that their new Habitation, they continued not long; till beside all the
named Errors, they fell into many more, both Errors and Schisms (EEE).

And Mistress Hutchinson did make a new Separation, retiring to a new dwelling
(FFF), where after her long contempt of divine and humane patience, at last God
did let loose his hand, and destroyed her, sending in upon her a company of the
Savages, who burnt her self, her house, and all that she had ( GGG).
Notwithstanding all that God and man at that time and since has done to
discover the evil spirit that raged in that way, yet such is the stoutnesse of
many, especially of the late Governor, whose hand in all that business was
chief, that to this day if you will confer with them, they will assure, That
Mistress Hutchinson was much mistaken and wronged; that she was a most pious
woman, and that her Tenants if well understood, were all true, at least very
tolerable. We have often marvelled, that the Eldership of Boston did never so
much as call her before them to be rebuked for any of her Errors; though their
general Assembly had confuted and condemned them, yet still she was permitted
to go on, till the zeal of the new Governor, and the general Court did condemn
her to perpetual banishment; then, and not till then, so far as we can perceive
by the story, did the Church of Boston begin a process against her; and when
the process was brought to an end, Master Cotton by no means would put it in
execution; that burden was laid on the back of Master Wilson his Colleague, how
ever not the fittest instrument, being the person to whom Mistress Hutchinson
from the beginning had professed her greatest opposition; and when the sentence
was pronounced against her, they tell us, That the great cause of it was none
of her Heresies or Errors, but her other practices especially, her gross
lying ( HHH).

In the midst of their profession of eminent piety, the profanity of many of
them was great.
The profaneness also of these persons is considerable, their profession of
piety being so fair, that they avow their standing aloof from all the Reformed
Churches as unclean, because of their mixture with the profane multitude.
Beside all that is said of their Heresies, Schisms, Contentions, Contempt of
Magistrates and Ministers, all which are the profane works of the flesh: We
read of further pollution, breaking out among them, as both Master Cotton, and
Master Wells do testify ( III).

Out of the Governor, Master Winthrops Narration, I remark one abomination,
which to me seems strange, That the Midwives, to their most zealous women,
should not only have familiarity with the devil; but also in that very
service, should commit divellish Malefices, which, so far as they tell us, were
not only past over without punishment, but never so much as inquired after
(KKK).

All this and more, we read of the Independents in New England, in one short
Narration of two or three years accidents among them; what if we had their full
History from any faithful hand? it seems that many more mysteries would be
brought to light, which now are hid in darkness.

It is not our intention to bring any man to a prejudice, Notwithstanding all
this, we desire from our heart, to honor and imitate all and every degree of
Truth or Piety, which did ever appear in any New-English Christian.
or the least distaste of the Grace and Gifts which God has bestowed on Master
Cotton or any other in New England would to God, that all our Questions with
them, were come to that issue; they should find us here as willing as their
greatest admirers, to prize, to embrace, and as our weakness will permit, to
imitate what ever good did shine in any of them: But we have made these
Observations from what themselves have written, to bring if it be possible,
their own hearts; or if this be desperate, yet the minds of others, to a
suspicion of that their new and singular way, which the Lord has so manifestly
cursed with bader fruits, and greater store of them then ever yet did appear
upon the Tree of Brownism, which they do so much disgrace as an unlucky Plant:
notwithstanding, all the Gifts and Graces wherewith Ainsworth, Robinson, and
some others of its Branches, have been adorned by God in as rich a measure as
have been seen in any, who to this day have ingrafted themselves into their new
and bitter root of Independency.

The Testimonies.
(A) Master Cottons Letter to Skeleton, p. 3. Your other Error that our
Congregations in England, are none of them particular Reformed Churches,
requires rather a Book then a Letter to answer it. You went hence of another
judgment, and I am afraid, your change has sprung from New-Plymouth men, whom
though I much esteem as godly loving Christians; yet their Grounds, which for
this Tenent they received from Master Robinson, do not satisfy me, though the
man I reverence as godly and learned.

Rathbones Narration, p. 1. The Church at New-Plymouth was as I am informed,
one of the first Churches that was settled in New England, having been a part
of Master Robinsons Church in Holland, that famous Brownist, from whence they
brought with their Church Opinions and Practices; and which they there still
hold without any alteration, so far as ever I could learn. Master W. an eminent
man of the Church at Plymouth, told W. R. that the rest of the Churches of
New England came at first to them at Plymouth, to crave their direction in
Church courses, and made them their pattern.

(B) Vide Purchase Pilgrims in his discourses of America, in diverse Letters
from New England.

(C) Cottons Letter to the Reader before Hildershams Commentary upon John,
1632. That one Letter of his to a Gentlewoman against the Separation, which
without his consent a Separatist Printed, and Refuted, has so strongly and
clearly convinced the Iniquity of that way, that I could not but acknowledge in
it, both the wisdom of God, and the weakness of the Separatists: His wisdom
in bringing to light such a beam of his Truth by the hand of an adversary,
against the mind of the Author; and the weakness of the other, to advance the
hand of this Adversary, to give himself and his cause such a deadly wound in
open view, as neither himself nor all his associates can be able to heal; in
which respect, I conceive it was that the industrious Doctor Willet styles
this our Author, Schismaticorum qui vulgo Brownistae vocantur Malleus: The
Hammer of Schismatics whom they commonly call Brownists.

(D) Vide supra. A.

(E) Edwards Antapology, p. 17. Knowing something of the story of Master
Goodwins first coming to fall off from the Ceremonies, having seen and perused
the Arguments that past betwixt him and Master Cotton, and some others: Master
Goodwin assured me some months after his going off, that he had nothing to
say, but against the Ceremonies the Liturgy offended him not, much less
dreamed he of this Church Way he since fell into.

(F) Cottons Letter from New England to his friends at Boston, October 5. 1635.
Some other things there be, which were I again with you, I durst not take that
liberty which some times I have taken: I durst not join in your Book-Prayers.

(G) Ibidem. I durst not now partake in the Sacraments with you, though the
Ceremonies were removed. I know not how you can be excused from Fellowship of
their sins, if you continue in your place. While you and some of my other
friends continue with them, I fear the rest will settle upon their Lees with
more security. The wise-hearted that left their Stations in Israel, I doubt
not, were some of them, if not all, useful and serviceable men in their places;
yet they did themselves and their Brethren more good service in going before
their Brethren, as the Goats before the Flocks, Jere. 50.8. then if they had
tarried with them to the corrupting of their own ways. 2 Chro. 11.14, 16.

Antap. p. 32. After his going into New England, and falling into the
Church Way there, and sending over Letters into England about the new way,
presently after these Letters began the falling off and questioning Communion
in our Churches.

(H) Antap. p. 32. One of you, to wit, Master Goodwin was so engaged in his
thoughts of one of the Ministers of New England, to wit, Master Cotton, by whom
I am sure, he was first taken off, that he has said, there was not such
another man in the world again.

Ibidem, p. 22. One of you told some friends, that he had found out a Form of
Church Government, as far beyond Master Cartwrights, as his was beyond that of
the Bishops.

Master Williams Examination of Master Cottons Letter, p. 47. Some of the most
eminent amongst them have affirmed, that even the Apostles Churches were not so
pure, as the new English Churches.

(I) Vide supra. F.

(K) Antap. p. 40. He has had his Errors, and I refer you for proof to his
discourse about clearing the Doctrine of Reprobation. See the Preface of Doctor
Twisse his Answer.

(L) The short Story in the Preface, par. 10. What men they saw Eminent in the
Country, and of most esteem in the hearts of the people, they would be sure
still to father their opinions upon them, and say, I hold nothing but what I
had from such and such a man.

Ibid. p. 65. She pretended she was of Master Cottons judgment in all things.

(M) Williams Examination, p. 12. Some few years since he was upon the point to
separate from the Churches there, as legal.

Ibidem, p. 33. How could I possibly be ignorant as he seems to charge me, of
their estate, when being from first to last in Fellowship with them, an Officer
amongst them, had private and public agitations concerning their estate with
all or most of their Ministers.

(N) Short story, Preface, p. 7. By this time they had to patronise them, some
of the Magistrates, and some men eminent for Religion, Parts, and Wit.

Ibidem, p. 25. Master Wheelwright had taught them, that the former Governor
and some of the Magistrates then were friends of Christ and Free Grace, but the
present were enemies. The former Governor never stirred out but attended by
the Sergeants with Halberts or Carrabines, but the present Governor was
neglected.

Ibid. p. 35. After that she had drawn some of eminent place, and parts, to her
party, whereof some profited so well as in a few months they out-went their
Teacher.

Ibidem, p. 33. Upon the countenance which it took from some eminent persons,
her opinions began to hold up their heads in the Court of Justice.

(N 2.) Ibidem, p. 32. It was a wonder, upon what a sudden the whole Church of
Boston, some few excepted were become her new converts, and infected with her
opinions.

Ibid. Preface, p. 7. In the Church of Boston most of these Seducers lived.

Ibid. p. 36. The Court laid to her charge, the reproach she had cast upon the
Ministry in this Country, saying That none of them did preach the Covenant of
Free Grace but Master Cotton. She told them that there was a wide difference
between Master Cottons Ministry and theirs; and that they could not hold forth
a Covenant of Free Grace, because they had not the Seal of the Spirit.

Ibidem. p. 50. All the Ministers consented to this, except their Brother the
Teacher of Boston. Ibid. p. 52. Master Wheelwright being present, spoke
nothing, though he well discerned that the judgment of the most of the
Magistrates, and near all the Ministers closed with the affirmative. Ibidem, p.
21. Albeit, the Assembly of the Churches had confuted and condemned most of
these new opinions, and Master Cotton had in public view consented with the
rest; yet the Leaders in these Erroneous ways, stood still to maintain their
new Light; Master Wheelwright also continued his preaching after his former
manner; and Mistress Hutchinson her wonted meetings and exercises; and much
offense was still given by her, and others, in going out of the ordinary
Assemblies. When (Mr. Wilson) the Pastor of Boston began any exercise, it was
conceived by the Magistrate that the case was now desperate, and it was
determined to suppress them by Civil Authority.

(O) Apologetical Narration, p. 5. We had likewise the fatal miscarriages and
shipwracks of the Separation, whom you call Brownists, as Landmarks to
forewarn us of these Rocks and Shelves they run upon.

Cottons Letter to Williams, page 12. I said that God had not prospered the way
of Separation, because he has not blessed it either with peace among
themselves or with growth of grace. The Lord Jesus never delivered that way of
Separation to which they bear witness, nor any of his Apostles after him, nor
of his Prophets before him. We do not come forth to help them against Jehovah;
this were not to help Jehovah, but Satan against him. We cannot pray in Faith
for a blessing upon their Separation, which we see not to be of God, nor to
lead to him: It is little comfort to the true Servants of Christ that such
inventions of men are multiplied.

(P) Answer to the thirty two Questions, p. 7. Whether is the greater number,
these that are admitted to Church Communion, or these that are not, we cannot
certainly tell.

(Q 1.) Plain dealing, p. 73. Here such confessions and professions are
required, both in private and public, both by men and women, before they be
admitted, that three parts of the people of the Country remain out of the
Church, so that in short time, most of the people will remain unbaptised.

(Q 2. Williams of the name Heathen, p. 6. Nations protesting against the
Beast, no Papists, but Protestants, may we say of them that they or any of them
may be called in true Scripture sense, Heathens, that is, the Nations or
Gentiles, in opposition to the people of God, which is the only Holy Nation?
Such a departure from the Beast in a false constitution of National Churches,
if the bodies of Protestant Nations remain in an unregenerate estate, Christ
has said they are but as Heathens and Publicans.

(Q 3.) Plain dealing, p. 21. There has not been any sent forth by any Church,
to learn the Natives language, or to instruct them in our Religion first,
because they say they have not to do with them being without, except they come
to hear, and learn English.

(R) Williams of the name Heathen, p. 10. For our New England parts, I can
speak it confidently, I know it to have been easy for my self, long ere this,
to have brought many thousands of these Natives, yea, the whole Country to a
far greater Antichristian conversion, then ever was heard of in America. I
could have brought the whole Country to have observed one day in seven: I
add, to have received Baptism, to have come to a stated Church meeting, to
have maintained Priests, and Forms of Prayer, and a whole form of Antichristian
worship in life and death.

(S) Ibid. p. 11. Woe be to me, if I call that conversion to God, which is
indeed the subversion of the souls of millons in Christendom, from one false
worship to another.

Williams Key unto the language of America, p. 9. To which I could easily have
brought the Country, but that I was persuaded, and am, that Gods way is first
to turn a soul from its idols, both of heart, worship, and conversation, before
it is capable of worship to the true God.

(T) Short story, p. 32. Many good souls were brought to wait for this
immediate revelation; then sprung up also that opinion of the indwelling of the
person of the Holy Ghost.

Ibidem, Preface, p. 13. That their own revelations of particular events, were
as infallible as the Scripture.

(V) Short story, Preface, page 2. Sin in a child of God must never trouble
him. Trouble in conscience for sins of Commission, or for neglect of duties,
shows a man to be under a Covenant of Works.

(X) Short story Preface, p. 2. A Christian is not bound to the Law as the rule
of his conversation.

(Y) Ibid. p. 3. No Christian must be pressed to duties of Holiness.

(Z) Short story Preface, p. 13. Their Leaders fell into more hideous
delusions, as that the souls of men are mortal like the Beasts.

(AA) Short story, p. 59. These who are united to Christ, have in this life new
bodies, and two bodies.

(BB) Ibid. She knows not how Jesus Christ should be united to this our
fleshly body; these who have union with Christ, shall not rise with the same
fleshly body; and that the Resurrection mentioned in 1 Cor. 15.44. is not meant
of the Resurrection of the body, but of our union here in this life.

(CC) Ibid. p. 60. We are united to Christ with the same union that his
humanity on earth was with his Deity. That she had no Scripture to warrant that
Christ's manhood is now is Heaven; but the body of Christ is his Church.

(DD) Ibid. Preface, p. 1. You shall see a Litter of ninty one of their brats
hung up against the Sun, besides many new ones of Mistress Hutchinsons.

(EE) Ibid. Multitudes of men and women were infected before they were aware.

(FF) Ibid. Preface, p. 7. They had some of all sorts and qualities in all
places, to defend and patronise them: Almost in every family, some were ready
to defend them as the Apple of their own eye.

(GG) Vide supra. N 2.

(HH) Short story Preface, page 4. They would appear very humble, holy, and
spiritual Christians, and full of Christ.

(II) Ibid. They would deny themselves far, and speak excellently.

(KK) Ibid. They would pray with such soul ravishing affections and
expressions, that a stranger could not but love and admire them.

(LL) Ibid. They lifted up their opinions by guilding them over with the
specious terms of Free Grace, Glorious-Light, Gospel Truths, holding out naked
Christ.

(MM) Vide supra. LL.

(NN) Preface, p. 7. O their boldness, pride, insolency, the disturbances,
divisions, contentions they raised among us, both in Church and State, and
Families, setting division betwixt Husband and Wife!

Ibid. p. 9. And seeing a spirit of pride, subtilty, malice and contempt of all
men that were not of their mind breathing in them, our hearts were sadded, and
our spirits tired.

(OO) Ibid. p. 4. Their followers in admiration of them, would tell others,
that since the Apostles times, they were persuaded none ever received so much
light from God, as such and such had done, naming their Leaders. See also
before H.

(PP) Short story, page 39. She said it was revealed to her long since in
England, That all the pack of the Ministers there were Antichristian, so that
she durst hear none of them, after Master Cotton and Master Wheelwright were
once gone; for they could not preach Christ, and the new Covenant.

(QQ) Preface, page 8. The faithful Ministers of Christ must have dung cast in
their faces, and be no better then legal Preachers, Baals Priests, Popish
Factors, Scribes, Pharisees, and Opposers of Christ himself.

(RR) Vide supra. N 1.

(SS) Preface, p. 9. The Magistrates were Achabs, Amazia's, enemies to Christ,
led by Satan.

(TT) Ibid. These were enemies to Christ; Herod's, Pilates, Scribes and
Pharisees, yea, Antichrists; and advised all under a Covenant of Grace, to look
upon them as such: And with great zeal did stimulate them to deal with them as
such, and alleged the story of Moses that killed the Egyptian, and left it
barely so.

(VV) Ibid. It was a wonder of mercy, that they had not set our Commonwealth
and Churches on a fire, and consumed us all therein.

(XX) Preface, page 7. They had some of all quality to defend them, some of the
Magistrates, some Gentlemen, some Scholars, some of our Captains and
Soldiers, some in Military Trainings.

(YY) Short story, p. 33. They made full account the day had been theirs.

(ZZ) Master Williams in his Discourse to me, assured me hereof.

(AAA) Short story, p. 43. Under their conduct, the old Serpent had prepared
such an Ambushment, as in all reason would soon have driven Christ and the
Gospel out of New England, (though to the ruin of the instruments themselves,
as well as of others) and to the repossessing of Satan in his ancient Kingdom.

(BBB) Preface, p. 12. Mistress Hutchinson being big with child, and growing
toward the time of her Labor, brought out not one, but thirty monstrous
births or thereabouts at once, none at all of them of humane shape.

(CCC) Ibid. Mistress Dyer brought forth her birth of a Woman child, a Beast,
a Fish, and a Foul, all woven together in one, and without an head.

(DDD) Ibid. Though he that runs may read their sin in these judgments, yet,
behold the desperate hardness of heart in these persons, and all their
followers; they turned all from themselves upon the faithful servants of God
that labored to reclaim them, saying, This is for you ye Legalists, that your
eyes might be further blinded by Gods hand upon us in your legal ways, that
you may stumble and fall, and in the end break your necks in Hell, if ye
embrace not the Truth.

(EEE) Ibid. p. 5. These persons with many others infected by them, went
altogether out of our Jurisdiction into an Island, and there they live to this
day most of them, hatching and multiplying new opinions, and cannot agree, but
are miserably divided into sundry Sects and Factions.

(FFF) Mistress Hutchinson being weary of the Island, went from thence with all
her family, to live under the Dutch, near a place in the Map called Hell-gate.

(GGG) There the Indians set upon them, and slew her and all her family; her
daughter, and her daughters husband; and all their children, save one that
escaped. Some write that the Indians did burn her to death, withal that
belonged to her. I never heard that the Indians in these parts did commit the
like outrage upon any other.

(HHH) Vide KKK 1.

(III) Ibid. p. 13. They grew also many of them very loose in their practices;
for these opinions will certainly produce a filthy life by degrees: As no
Prayer in their Familes, no Sabbath, insufferable pride, frequent and hideous
lying; and some of them became guilty of fouler sins then all these, which I
here name not.

Cottons third Sermon, 6. Vial, page 9. The calamities of the Country are from
God; he takes away all; whether by our pride, that we must have every new
fashion, and be like the men of the world, in houses, apparel, and the like; or
daintiness, that we must have our varieties, though it cost never so much, and
no matter what follows, though it eat up our estates. The Lord has made use
of our folly, and pride, and daintiness, our idleness, and covetousness.

Idem. 2. Vial, page 26. We know that in England there is no such unfaithful
dealing, and hollow heartedness? no such bitterness between Christians. What
will befall your posterity, they will degenerate out of measure, by the
unfaithfulness of your lives, and the unrighteousness of your promises.

(KKK 1.) Short story, p. 44. The Midwife, one Hawkins, was notorious for
familiarity with the devil, and now a prime Familist: The most of the Women who
were present at Mistress Dyers travel, were suddenly taken with such a violent
vomiting, and purging, without eating or drinking of any thing, as they were
forced to go home; others had their children taken with Convulsions, which they
had not before, nor since, and so were sent for home: So that none were left at
the birth, but the Midwife and two other; whereof one fell asleep at such time
as the child died, which was about two hours before the birth: The Bed wherein
the mother lay, shook so violently, that all who were in the Room perceived it.

(KKK 2.) Ibid. p. 63, 64. Then Master Cotton told the Assembly, That whereas
she had been formerly dealt with for matter of Doctrine, he had according to
the duty of his place, being the Teacher of the Church, proceeded against her
unto admonition: But now the case bring altered, and she being questioned for
maintaining of untruth, which is matter of Manners, he must leave the business
to the Pastor Master Wilson to go on with her; but withal declared his
judgment in the case from that in the Revelation, chapter 22. That such as make
and maintain a lie, ought to be cast out of the Church; and whereas two or
three pleaded that she might first have a second Admonition, according to that
in Titus 3.10. He answered, That that was only for such as erred in point of
Doctrine; but such as shall notoriously offend in matter of conversation, ought
to be presently cast out, as he proved by Ananias and Saphira, and the
incestuous Corinthian.

Ibid. p. 65. It was observed that she should now come under Admonition for
many foul and fundamental Errors, and after he cast out for notorious lying.

CHAP. IV. The Carriage of the Independents in Holland, at Roterdam, and Arnhem.
THe fruits of this way in Holland, Independency no fruitful Tree in Holland.
are not much sweeter then these we have tasted in New England. All the time of
their abode there, they were not able to conquer to their party more then two
Congregations; and these but very small ones, of the English only: For to this
day, I have not heard of any one man of the Dutch, French, Scottish, or any
other Reformed Church, who have become a Member of any Independent Congregation.

Their first Church in Holland was that of Roterdam, Master Peter^ the first
Planter of that Weed at Roterdam.
which Master Peter's (A) (not the most settled head in the World) did draw from
its ancient Presbyterial Constitution, to that new frame which it seems he
also learned by Master Cottons Letters from New England.

This Church became no sooner Independent, then it run into the way of such
shameful Divisions as their Mother at Amsterdam had gone before them. Their
Pastor Master Peter's, was soon weary of them, or they of him; for what causes
themselves best know; but sure it is, he quickly left them, and went for
New England.

The Church was not long destitute of Pastors; Their Ministers, Master Bridge,
Master Simpson and Master Ward, renounced their English Ordination, and as mere
private men took new Ordination from the people.
for about that time Master Ward and Master Bridge came over to them from
Norwich, where they ever had lived fully conform, without any contradiction
either to Episcopacy or Ceremonies, only they withstood Bishop Wrens last
Innovations ( B).

So soon as they came to Roterdam, without any long time of adveisement, they
conformed themselves to the Discipline which Master Peter's had planted (C);
They renounced their English Ordination and Ministerial Office, joining
themselves as mere private men to that Congregation, which afterward did choose
and ordain both of them to be their Ministers ( D).

It was not long before Master Simpson also came hither from London, and
renouncing also his Ordination ( E), joined himself as a private member with
them.

Incontinent they did fall into shameful divisions and subdivisions.
Then did the Spirit of Division begin to work among them, and so far to
prevail, that Master Simpson malecontent with Master Bridge, for hindering the
private members of the flock to prophecy after the Brownists way, did separate
himself and erect a new Congregation of his own ( F): Betwixt these two
Churches, the contentions and slanders became no less grievous then those of
Amsterdam betwixt Ainsworth and Johnsons followers; and in this much worse,
that they of Roterdam abode not at one Schism; but after Master Simpsons
separation, broke out again into another subdivision.

Master Bridges Congregation was so filled with strife, so shameful slanders
were laid upon his own back, that displeasure did hasten the death of his wife
(G), and did well near kill himself, making him often profess his repentance
that ever he entered into that society ( H).

The people without any just cause deposed their Minister.
As for Master Ward, his Ministry became so unsavory to that people, that they
did never rest till judicially by their own Authority alone (for Presbytery
they had none, and Master Bridge did dissent from that act of unjust
oppression) they had deposed Master Ward from his pastoral charge ( I).

The Commissioners from Arnhem durst not come near the bottom of the business.
This act was much stumbled at by diverse who were fully persuaded of Master
Wards integrity, and at last by the intercession of some from the Church of
Arnhem he was restored to his place; but the ground of the controversy was no
ways touched: For when the four Commissioners from Arnhem, Master Goodwin,
Master Nigh, Master Laurence, and another, had met in a Chamber of a private
house in Roterdam, with some Members of that faulty Congregation ( K), and so
made up their famous Assembly, which the Apologists are pleased to equal, if
not to prefer to all the Assemblies they ever had seen ( L): Whether that
National Synod, wherein Master Nigh had seen the flower of the Scottish Nation
enter into the Covenant with very great devotion: Or this great Assembly at
Westminster, where he and his Brethren often have seen sitting the Prince
Elector, the most Noble Members of both Houses of Parliament, the prime Divines
of all England, the Commissioners of the Church of Scotland.

That Assembly, I say of Roterdam, did not so much as touch the main question;
they drew a thin skin over the wound, but durst not assay to lance it to the
bottom. For did they ever rebuke, or so much as once speak to the people of
that Congregation, for usurping a Tyrannical Authority to depose their Pastor.
Did they tell Master Ward of his siding with Master Simpson, against Master
Bridge, in the matter of Prophecy? did they ever attempt to cognosce on the
great scandal, the ground of all the rest, Master Simpsons Separation? did they
make any hearty and solid reconciliation betwixt Master Ward and the Church? It
seems the Assembly was wiser then to meddle with evils, which they found much
above their strength to remedy. Master Ward found himself after his restitution
in so pitiful a condition with his new friends, that he left their Company (
M).

The two Churches were irreconcilable, The Schisms at Roterdam were more
irreconcilable then those at Amsterdam.
till both Master Bridge, and Mr. Simpson had removed their Stations to
England; and even then the concord could not be obtained, till the Dutch
Magistrate had interposed his authority ( N): Neither by this means could
Master Simpsons Church be persuaded to return to Master Bridges, till for their
mere pleasure they got that Congregation to remove one of their prime members,
without the alleging of any cause but their own peremptory will and
satisfaction ( O). When by so much a do these two divided Churches are brought
together, it may be much doubted, if their Union shall long continue.
Certainly, it seems not to be so cordial, as that of the two lately divided,
and now reunited Churches a^ Amsterdam. For among these of Roterdam, not only
the grounds of the old division do evidently remain, but also the Seeds of a
new breach do appear above the ground.

The liberty of Prophesying, which Master Simpsons (now Master Simons)
Congregation did require, is not obtained in the way they desired it; for they
are not permitted to Prophecy in the Congregation, nor upon the Sabbath day,
nor in the place of public meeting: Only in a private place, on a week day,
where some of the Church who please do meet; they have liberty to exercise
their gifts. On the other part, what Master Bridges (now Mr. Parks) Church did
require, I mean a Presbytery for Government in the Congregation, cannot be
obtained. For however, they profess the lawfulness and convenience of Ruling
Elders, and of a Consistory for Discipline; yet it has so fallen out that for
many years they have had none, neither are like in haste to have, unless the
grumbling of Master Parks and his friends threatening a new breach, do force
them at last to the use of that Ordinance.

Anabaptism is like to spoil that Church.
But that which threatens not a Schism alone, but a total dissolution of that
Congregation, is the Pest of Anabaptism, which begins of late much to infect
them ( P). It is true, the Pastors do their best to reclaim all their members
from that Error; and when they find themselves not able to prevail, give good
words and assurances of a full and Brotherly Toleration; for as they scruple
not to give the hand of Fellowship to the Brownists of Amsterdam (Q); so will
they not cast out any from their Church for denying of Pedobaptism, if the
dissenting and erring party be pleased to remain peaceably amongst them: But
here is the pity, when the Independents have declared their greatest
readiness to tolerate and entertain in their Churches, both the rigid
Separatists, and the Anabaptists ( R); yet the most of those are unwilling to
stay, but are peremptory to separate from the Independent Churches as more
corrupt then that they with a good conscience can abide in them, though never
so much tolerated and cherished.

As for their Church at Arnhem, howsoever their small intercourse with others,
during their abode in that remote corner, and their taciturnity of their own
affairs, makes their proceedings to lie under a Cover; yet so much of their
ways is come to light upon diverse occasions, as will not be very inductive and
alluring of indifferent spirits, to tred in their footsteps.

They of the Church of Arnhem admire and praise themselves above all measure.
First, We find them greater admirers of themselves and proclaimers of their
own excellency then is the custom of modest and wise, though the best and
greatest men. They think it not enough to anoint their Masters and Friends of
New England with excessive praises, as men who have not been matched by any of
the Saints since the days of Abraham (S); but they are also bold to sound out
to themselves in Print in the ears of both Houses of Parliament, a commendation
much above the possible merit of any so small a number of men in the whole
world. The Synod of Roterdam they equal to the most solemn National Assemblies
of either or both Kingdoms (T). This exceeding great worth upon whose head must
it fall, but either alone or far most principally upon the Members of the
Church of Arnhem? For that Synod did consist of no other but the two Doctors of
that Church, and the two Elders thereof, together with Master Bridge, and the
Members of his Church. These last were present in that Synod as persons
challenged, and guilty of a grievous scandal; so to them in that action, but a
small praise can be due: Wherefore, the supereminent Excellency of that
meeting, must fall upon the Commissioners of Arnhem, the only persons which in
that meeting were void of offense, and free from challenges. To themselves
therefore it is alone, or at least above all others, that they ascribe the
superlative praises of that Synod.

In that same place they stick not to take to themselves the honor of so great
sincerity as any flesh in the world not only has at this present, but
possibly can attain in any following Age ( V). We wonder the less to hear them
canonize their Colleague Master Archer after his death, among the most precious
persons who ever trod upon the earth ( X).

This self-overvaluing seems to be the ground why they cry out of their very
moderate afflictions as of great calamities; The easiness of their banishment
and afflictions.
they ingeminate to the Parliament, over and over, their persecution, their
poverty, their miserable exile ( Y); when they who understand the case, give
assurance, that not one of Ten of the most prosperous Ministers of the whole
world, in the time of their greatest Sunshine, do live in more wealth, ease,
honor, and all worldly accommodations, then these poor miserable exiles did
enjoy all the time of that which they call their banishment ( Z).

My next observation upon that Church, is, The new light at Arnhem broke out
into a number of strange Errors.
that an humor of innovating at least, if not a spirit of error, did much
predomine among them. To pass by that wantonness of wit, which in their
Books, and Discourses does much appear, whereby they attribute without fear, to
a number of Scriptures, such new and strange senses as before them were never
heard of: We find them pleasing themselves in diverse Doctrines, which no
Reformed Church does assert for truth, yea, their own Brethren, both of
New England, and of Roterdam, and of Amsterdam, do reject as Errors.

They are not content with some few little touches of Chiliasm, First, Gross
Chiliasm*
which yet Master Cotton tells us are but fleshly imaginations ( AA): But they
run themselves over head and ears in the deepest gulf of that old Heresy. The
glimpse of Sions glory Preached at a Fast in Holland by T. G. (which common
report without any contradiction that I have heard declares to be Thomas
Goodwin) averrs, That Independency is a beginning, or at least a near
antecedent of Christ's Kingdom upon Earth (BB): That within five years Christ is
to come in the flesh (CC); and by a Sword of Iron, to kill with his own hand
the most of his enemies ( DD); and thereafter to pass over a thousand years (
EE) as a worldly Monarch ( FF) with his Saints: Who shall live with him all
that time in all sorts of fleshly delights ( GG). Master Archer the only
Pastor that ever they had, whose praises they sound forth so loud in their
Apologetick, would persuade us of the same, and more gross stories (HH).
Master Burrows in his late Sermons upon Hosea, runs in the same way ( II.)

Secondly, The grossest blasphemy of the Libertines that God is the Author of
the very sinfulness of sin.
Neither is this all the new Light that did shine forth in the Candlestick of
Arnhem; but there also Master Archer gives forth, for the comfort of his
hearers, without the reproof so far as yet we have heard of any of his
Colleagues, That God is not only the Author of sin (KK), but also of the
sinfulness, the very Formality, the Anomy, the Ataxy, the Pravity of sin (LL).
A doctrine which all Protestants ever did abhor as high Blasphemy; and which,
the Assembly of Divines, with both the Houses of Parliament, did condemn as
such; appointing Master Archers Book for that worst Heresy of the Libertines,
and grossest Blasphemy of the Antinomians, to be solemnly burnt by the hand of
the Hangman ( MM).

Thirdly, the fancy of the Enthusiasts in knowing God as God, abstracted from
Scripture, from Christ, from Grace, and from all his attributes.
There was also another sparkle of new Light brake up in that Church, wherein
one of their Doctors does so much delight to this day; That not being content
to have holden it out in Holland, he is said to have Preached it over and over
in the most solemn Assemblies both of Scotland and England; That it is a duty
incumbent to all who would be perfect, to know God as God, without Christ,
without the Scripture, in notions abstracted, not only from all Grace, but
from all Scripture, and from Christ (NN). I dare not affix unto this, the late
Doctrine of some Seraphick Jesuits and Monks, wherein they have extravagated
in their Lent Sermons, so many absurd and Heretical senses, as some very
learned and good men have done in Print without any answer ( OO); yet I must
profess, if it be a truth, it is a very metaphysical one and much transcending
my shallow understanding.

In that Church also the Doctrine of extreme Unction was so far brought back,
Fourthly, The old Popish Ceremonies of extreme Unction, and the holy kiss of
Peace.
That they began to anoint their sick with oil (PP); taking it as an Ordinance
of Christ, and a kind of a Sacrament for the people, at least a holy Ceremony,
no less of divine* Institution then Ordination and imposition of hands were
for Officers ( QQ.)

Also, they set on Foot another Religious ceremony in their Congregation, the
holy Apostolic kiss (RR).

And as if all these innovations had not been sufficient, Fifthly, The
discharging of the Psalms, the appointing of a singing Prophet to chant the
Songs made by himself, in the silence of all others.

Sixthly, The mortality of the soul.


they begun to put down all singing of Psalms, and to set up in their place
Their singing Prophets, making one man alone to sing in the midst of the silent
Congregation, the hymns which he out of his own gift had composed ( SS 1). And
this as I am informed by some who have been present, is now the settled
practice of the remainder of the Church of Arnhem.

Master Edwards lays to their charge, not only that their principles lead to
that horrible Error which (...) of their followers maintain, The mortality of
the sou^ (...) but also, that their chief Doctors had Preached, both is (...)
and England, without the rebuke of any of their fr^ (...) of the Saints go not
after death to the Heavens (SS^). (...) same place, the Pastor of Arnhem,
without the reproof o^ any of his party to this day, so far as ever I heard,
does take away, and deny, that Heaven and that Hell which all Christians before
him did ever believe; and in the place thereof, gives us new Heavens and new
Hells of his own invention: He tells us confidently, That no soul before
Christ's Ascension, did ever enter into that place which we commonly call
Heaven, neither ever shall enter there, if you except Christ alone, unto the
last day: That all the souls of the godly remain in a place of the higher
Region of the Air, or at highest in the Element of the Fire; That Enoch and
Elias, that the soul of Christ, before the Resurrection, and the soul of the
good Theif, went no higher (SS 4.) He tells us, That the place of the damned
before the last judgment, is not any infernal fire, but some prison in the low
Region of the Air, or at lowest, in some place of the Sea. After the day of
judgment, he makes Hell a very large place; the whole Elements, the Heavens of
the Planets and of the fixed Stars, yea, the whole Heavens, except that wherein
God and the Angels do dwell, being all turned to their first matter, to him is
Hell: With such fine new speculations do the Independent Pastors feed their
Flocks ( SS 5).

Seventhly, the convenience for Ministers to Preach covered, and celebrate the
Sacraments discovered: but for the people to hear discovered, and to
participate the Sacraments covered.

Their public contentions were shameful.


I have heard also one of their Doctors deliver it as his opinion, That it was
expedient for the Minister in Preaching to have his head covered; and the
people in time of Preaching to sit uncovered: But in the holy Communion, that
it was expedient the Minister should celebrate that Sacrament uncovered unto
the people covered. I do not deny my suspicion of the Spirit of these men, who
are not afraid in so short a time, to vent such a multitude of strange
novelties.

But the clearest memento which God has given us to beware of the ways of
that Church, is, Their bitter and shameful contentions among themselves, which,
if not stopped by the Churches dissolution, might long before this day have
produced as foul effects as any of the former. A part of this story, and but a
part of it, you may read in that unanswerable Book of Master Edwards, where at
length, you will see how their new fancies brought them to so bitter public
contention, and irreconcilable strife, as made their people confess their
doubting of the truth of their way ( TT); and their principal Doctor, Master
Goodwin, to avow his inclination to desert their society, and leave their
Church (VV).

The Testimonies.
(A) Anatomy of Independency, page 24. That Independent Church at Roterdam, was
formerly under Presbyterial Government, and conformable to the Dutch Churches,
and had only begun to decline in Master Peter's his time.

(B) Antap. p. 17. Master Bridge and Master Burrows were men judged
conformable, till the year of Bishop Wrens visitation, and the sending down of
his Injunctions to Norwich.

(C) Ibid. Master Bridge fell suddenly into the Church Way, as the short space
between his Suspension at Norwich and his being received into a Church at
Roterdam, and thereupon, his first Letter to some of his old friends in Norwich
will fully show.

(D) Anatom. page 23. They, all renounced their Ordination in England, and
ordained one another in Holland; first Master Bridges ordained Master Ward, and
then immediately Master Ward ordained Master Bridges.

(E) Antap. page 142. Master Simpson after some time of beholding the order and
way of the Church at Roterdam, desired to be admitted a Member, and was upon
his Confession received in.

(F) Ibid. Master Simpson stood for the Ordinance of prophesying, and that the
people on the Lords day should have liberty after the Sermon to put doubts and
questions to the Ministers. Mr. Bridge opposed: Yet he yielded so far, that the
Church should meet on a week day, and then they should have that liberty; but
this would not satisfy Master Simpson; whereupon the difference increased, and
Master Simpson would abide no longer, but quitted that Church: and with the
help of a woman, whom Master Bridge called the Foundresse of Master Simpsons
Church, set up a Church against a Church.

(G) Mistress Bridge laid these bitter differences and reports so to heart,
that they were a great means of her death.

(H) Ibid. Whether Master Bridges weakness and distempers were not occasioned
by the divisions and wicked scandals raised upon him, as well as by the Air of
Roterdam, himself knows best.

Ibid. p. 143. Upon Master Simpsons renting from the Church, and setting up a
Church against a Church, under Mr. Bridges nose; and upon wicked reports raised
about Master Bridges, there grew that bitterness, evil speakings, and deep
censurings, deadly feuds amongst these Ministers and their Churches, as never
was more betwixt the Jews and the Samaritans. Master Bridge confessed to me,
there were not such sharp tongues, nor bitter divisions as these.

Anatom. p. 6. Of these reproachings Master Bridges has found notable
experience at Roterdam, to the tyring out of his spirit amongst them there, in
so much as he has been often heard to affirm, That if he had known at first
what he met with afterward, he would never have come amongst them, nor being
amongst them, have given them such liberty as he had.

(I) Antap. p. 35. Master Ward, Master Bridges colleague and old friend at
Norwich, was deposed from his Ministry, and Office by Master Bridges Church,
for frivolous matters.

(K) Antap. p. 184. I much wonder how you can call the meeting of Master
Goodwin and Master Nigh, with two Gentlemen more, calling Master Bridge with the
rest of that Church supposed to be Delinquents, such a solemn Assembly.

(L) Apol. Naration, p. 20. The Ministers of the Church offended, with other
two Gentlemen of much worth, Members thereof, were sent as Messengers from that
Church, and at the introduction, and entrance of that solemn Assembly; the
solemnity of which, has left as deep an impression upon our hearts of Christ's
dreadful presence, as ever any we have been present at.

(M) Antap. p. 141. I desire to know whether Master Ward after he was restored,
did, as formerly, officiate in that Church, and how long; and whether Master
Bridge and he continued as fellow^Ministers; and whether between them two, and
between the Church and Master Ward, there was that mutual carriage that ought
to be between fellow-Ministers, and Ministers and People.

(N) Anatom. page 49. The way of Union of th^se Churches could never be found
till the Magistrates Authority and Command found it.

(O) Anato. p. 6. These two Churches being of late commanded by the Magistrates
of Roterdam to unite again in one, and that Church whereof Master Simpson was
Minister, being unwilling to join to the other, unless some Members thereof
should be cut off first, especially one; and the Church whereof that party was
a Member, being willing to gratify the other in this, and yet professing and
attesting as an act of the whole Church by writing, That all the time he had
been a Member, his conversation had been without offense: Yet their Teacher was
forced as himself confessed with grief of heart, having nothing to except
against the person, to urge him to take his dismission from the Church.

(P) Ibid. Add hereunto the defection of some of their Members to Anabaptism*
and how apt others of them are to be made a prey therein, more then the Members
of other Reformed Churches, as late instance has manifested, some having
professed Master Simpsons principles have made them Anabaptists.

(Q) Anatom. p. 24. They cannot show us such a fraternity between them and any
Reformed Church, as I am (and I believe truly) informed, Master Simpsons
Church (whether by him or after his time by Master ^imons, I have not enquired)
entered into with th^se of the ^eparation at Amsterdam, by a mutual covenant
and agreement to own each other. I believe it to be by virtue of that Covenant,
that some of their Members, not Officers of the Church, do publicly Preach in
Master Canns Pulpit at Amsterdam.

(R) Antap. p. 51. I can tell you how some of you who have not Churches here in
London, go to separate Churches to partake of the Lords Supper.

Ibid. p. 56. Instance has been given me particularly by a great friend of
yours now in London; that when some of you have come to Amsterdam, you never
would go to Master Herrings, a good old Nonconformist, but you have gone to
Master Cann the Separatist, and to his Church.

Ibid. For their going to the Brownists, and conversing with Master Cann more
then us, that is undeniable.

(S) Apol. Narration, p. 5. Whose sincerity in their way has been testified
before the world, and will be unto Generations to come, by the greatest
undertaking but that of our Father Abraham out of his own Country, and his
Seed after him.

(T) Vide supra. L.

(V) Apol. Nar. p. 3. In this inquiry we looked upon the Word of Christ as
impartially and unprejudicedly, as men made of flesh and blood are like to do
in any juncture of time that may fall out.

(X) Ibid. p. 22. We lost some friends and companions, our Fellow Laborers in
the Gospel, as precious men as this Earth bears any.

(Y) Apol. Nar. p. 22. When it pleased God to bring us his poor exiles back
again. Ibid. p. 23. Which was as great an affliction to us as our former
troubles and banishment. Ibid. p. 31. Consider us as these who for many years
suffered even to exile.

(Z) Antapol. p. 26. How dare you affirm that for your consciences you were
deprived at once of what ever was deer to you? were not your Wives, Children,
Estates, Friends, and Lives dear to you? had you not all these with you, and
did you not in the Netherlands live in the best places, in much plenty, ease,
and pomp? what great deprivation is this of what ever is dear, for men to take
their own times, and to go in Summer, with Knights, Ladies, and Gentlewomen,
with all necessaries, into Holland, and there to take choice of all the Land,
and with Wives, Children, Friends, and Acquaintance, free from the fears and
possibilities of vexation from the Spiritual Courts and Prisons, to enjoy all
plenty and freedom as you did? many would have been glad, and still would be,
to be so exiled into Holland, and to be able to spend there two or three
hundred pounds per annum.

(AA) Cottons 6. Vial, page 9. I dare not take up such carnal imaginations, as
that Christ shall come bodily, and reign here upon Earth.

(BB) Glimpse of Sions glory, p. 33. If God have such an intention to glorify
his Church, and that in this world, what manner of persons ought ye to be,
because ye are beginning this despised work, gathering a Church together, which
way God will honor? certainly, the Communion of Saints, and Independency of
Congregations, God will honor.

(CC) Daniel 12.11. From the time that the daily Sacrifice shall be taken away,
there shall be 1290. days; what is the meaning of this? A day is usually taken
for a year. This abomination of desolation was in Julians time in the 360.
year; now reckon so many years according to the number of the days, it comes
to 1650. and it is like to be it, as any that can be named. But it is said,
Blessed is he that comes to the 1335. days, that is, forty five years more
added; it shall begin in the 1650. but it comes not to full head till forty
five years more.

(DD) Ibid. In the Epistle, take this rule, That all Texts of Scripture are to
be understood literally, except they make against other Scriptures, or except
the very coherence of the Scripture show it otherwise.

Ibid. p. 17. Indeed, if we be put upon allegorical senses, we may put off any
Scripture; but if we take them literally, why should we not?

Ibid. p. 21. Christ is described in the 19. of the Revelation, with his
Garments dyed in blood, when he does appear to come and to take the Kingdom;
when he appears with many Crowns upon his head, that notes his many victories.

Ibid. p. 17. The promise that is made Revel. 12. He shall rule them with a Rod
of Iron, and as the Vessels of a Potter they shall be broken to shivers: What
shall we make of this?

(EE) Ibid. p. 14, 15. The reigning with Christ 1000. years, is not meant of
reigning with him in Heaven, but it must be meant of Jesus Christ's coming and
reigning here gloriously for 1000* years.

(FF) Ibid. p. 17. What shall we make of this, except there be a glorious reign
of Christ with the Saints? Christ is said to make them Kings, so as to have
power and dominion in the world.

(GG) Ibid. p. 13. There is no reason why that of the 26. of Matthew. v.29. I
will drink it new with you in my Fathers Kingdom, may not be taken literally.

(HH) Archers personal reign, p. 5. I call this last state of his, Monarchical,
because he will govern as earthly Monarchs have done, that is, universally over
the world in these days, known, and esteemed; and in a worldly, visible,
earthly glory, not by tyranny, oppression, and sensually, but with honor,
peace, riches, and whatsoever in and of the world, is not sinful, having all
Nations and Kingdoms doing homage to him, as the great Monarchs of the World
had.

(II) Burrows upon Hosea, p. 145. These are the new Heavens and the new Earth
that are to be created; and this is meant of the Church plainly: For the Text,
Verse 12. speaks of building houses, and inhabiting them, and of planting
Vineyards, and eating the fruit of them upon these new Heavens, and this new
Earths Creation.

Ibid. p. 191. And literally we are to understand many Scriptures that tend
this way concerning the fruitfulness of the Earth, and the outward external
glory, that then shall be in the Creatures.

(KK) Archers comfort for believers, p. 41. God may as truly and easily, have
a will and hand in, and be the Author of sins, as of afflictions.

Ibid. We may safely say, that God is, and has an hand in, and is the Author
of the sinfulness of his people.

(LL) Ibid. p. 36. The fear of some of these inconveniences, has made Divines
not to acknowledge so much of God in sin, as is in sin: They have erred on the
other hand, and made sin more of the Creature and it self and less from God
then it is: They grant that God is willing sin should be, and that he permits
it, and orders circumstances about its production, and has an hand in, and is
the Author of the Physical or Moral act, in, and with which sin is; but the
essence of sin, that is, the Pravity and Ataxy, the Anomy and Irregularity of
the act, which is the sinfulness of it, God has no hand, neither is he any
Author at all thereof. This opinion goes wrong another way, and gives not to
God enough in sin. Let us embrace and profess the truth, and not fear to say
that of God, which he in his holy Book says of himself, namely, That of him
and from his hand, is not only the thing that is sinful, but the pravity and
sinfulness of it.

(MM) A short Declaration of the Assembly, by way of Detestation of the
abominable and blasphemous opinion. The Order of the House of Lords runs thus,
Complaint being this day made to the Lords in Parliament, by the Assembly of
Divines, that a certain blasphemous and heretical Book, entitled, Comfort for
Believers, is printed and published, being written by John Archer; their
Lordships much abhorring the said blasphemies, do award and adjudge, that the
said Book shall be burnt by the hand of the common Hangman.

(NN) Doctor Stewarts Duply to M. S. second part, page 128. Not long since I
heard one of the Ringleaders of the Independents Sect deliver this doctrine in
a Sermon at the Abbey of Westminster. viz. That to a saving knowledge of God,
it suffices not to know him in the Book of nature; or secondly, as revealed in
the holy Scriptures; but that we must also know him as abstract from his mercy
and all his attributes.

(OO) Ibid. If I know God abstracted from his mercy, I know him out of Christ,
and out of the Gospel; for God in Christ and in the Gospel, is not abstract,
but concrete with mercy. If God be considered as abstract from all his
attributes, it is no more a knowledge of God, but some idol of the Independent
brains.

(PP) Antap. p. 36. Master Good win did anoint a Gentlewoman (whose name I
conceal) when she was sick, and she recovered after it, say they.

(QQ) Ibid. Anointing the sick with Oil, was held in that Church of Arnhem as a
standing Ordinance for Church Members, as laying on of hands was a standing
Ordinance for Church Officers.

(RR) Ibid. p. 60. I propound it to you, whether a little before your coming
over into England, some Members of the Church of Arnhem, did not propone the
Holy Kiss, or the Kiss of Love to be practiced by Church Members? Nay,
Whether by some persons in that Church was it not begun to be practiced?

(SS 1.) Ibid. p. 36. A Gentleman of note in that Church did propone in the
Church, that singing of Hymns was an Ordinance; which is, that any person of
the Congregation exercising their own gifts, should bring an Hymn and sing it
to the Congregation, all the rest being silent, and giving audience.

(SS 2.) Antap. p. 262. Some of Arnhem hold strange conceits: Daily the
Independent Churches like Africa, do breed and bring forth the Monsters of
Anabaptism, Antinomianism, Familism, nay, That huge Monster and old fleeing
Serpent of the Mortality of the soul of man.

(SS 3.) Ibid. p. 261. I have been told of some odd things preached by one of
you five, both in England and Holland, and of some points Preached in the
Church of Arnhem, never questioned there and since Printed not very Orthodox;
as for instance among others, That the souls of the Saints do not go to Heaven
to be with Christ.

(SS 4.) Archers personal reign, p. 23. This Objection supposes the souls of
the dead Saints to be in the highest Heavens, which is not so: It is likely the
souls of the dead Saints are not in the highest Heavens, but in a middle place,
which is meant in the New Testament by paradise; into this paradise went
Christ's soul, and the theifs, which was not Heaven. Its most probable that
Christ's soul never went into the highest Heavens, till his Body went also.
Ibid. None but Christ, and so none before Christ, ever entered the highest
Heavens. The way to Heaven was never opened till Christ the high Priest entered
Body and Soul into it. The highest Heavens never had but one man into them,
namely Christ, nor shall have till the worlds end.

Ibid. p. 25. If you ask where this place of Paradise is: I answer, It must be
below the highest Heavens; therefore, surely it is in the Region or Element of
fire, where the Sun and Stars are, or in the highest Region of the Air.

( SS 5.) Archers personal reign, p. 35. At the day of judgment the wicked
shall be sent with the Devil unto Hell, which Hell shall not be that which is
now called Hell, but another; for the Hell that now is, is but a prison, and
not the place of execution: At the last day this Hell that now is, shall cease.
This Hell which is at present, to be sure is in some of the places of the Air,
or the Waters, and not in the Earth: But the Hell which shall be the
everlasting torment of all the damned, shall be all this lower and visible
World. All the places of the Earth, Water, Air, Sun, Moon, Stars, and the Fire,
called the Heavens, and the Earth. The things which God immediately made out of
nothing, shall never change: As the highest Heavens, and the Angels in them,
and the souls of men, and this Chaos called the Earth; but all other things
being made out of something, even out of this Earth or Chaos, they shall after
a time change; and so all this World shall come to an Earth or Chaos again. God
in time did make two places, Heaven and Earth, immediately out of nothing, to
be eternal places, the one of Joy, the other of Torment. Thus you see when Hell
was made but it was quickly covered, and shall not be uncovered; till Christ do
it at the last day.

(TT) Antap. p. 36. The Gentleman censured, brings an accusation against Master
Nigh, charging him with Pride, want of Charity, etc. And this being brought
before the Church, continued in debate about half a year, three or four days in
a week, and sometimes more, before all the Congregation; diverse of the Members
having callings to follow, they desired leave to be absent. Master Goodwin often
professed publicly upon these differences, If this were their
Church Fellowship, he would lay down his Eldership; and nothing was more
commonly spoke among the Members, then that certainly for matter of Discipline,
they were not in the right way, for that there was no way to bring things to an
end.

(VV) Vide supra. TT.

CHAP. V. The Carriage of the Independents at London.
The work of the prime Independents of New England, Arnheim, and Roterdam,
these five years at London.
YOu have gotten a taste of the Fruits of this Tree, as it grows in New England
and Holland: When it is transplanted to Old-England, consider if the Grapes of
it be any thing sweeter. These Five last years, the chief of that party, both
from Arnhem, Roterdam and New England, have kept their residence at London, to
advance, by common counsels and industry, their Way, in these days of their
hopes. A full account of their courses in that place cannot be expected, so
long as many passages concerning them lie in the dark, and the end is not yet
come. But three things seem to be clear, which make their Way at London no more
lovely then in the places mentioned. First, they have been here exceeding
unhappie in retarding, and to their power crossing the blessed Reformation in
hand. Secondly, they have pregnantly occasioned the multiplication of Heresies
and Schisms, above all that ever was heard of in any one place in any former
Age. Thirdly, they have occasioned such Divisions in the State, that, had it
not been for the extraordinary mercies of God, the Parliament and all that
follow them, had long ago been laid under the feet of their enraged enemies,
and the whole Isle, long before this, totally ruined.

They did hinder with all their power, so long as they were able, the calling
of the Assembly.
As for the first, The Reformation of Religion, so much wished for by all the
godly for so many years, all know it could never have been attained without the
help of an Assembly of Divines: Who opposes the necessary Mean, cannot be
taken for a friend of the End. The Assembly, the necessary means of
Reformation, was for a very long time hindered, by the diligence of the
Independent party, to be called (A): and when, to their evident grief and
discontent, the Parliament had voted its calling, they may remember their
extraordinary industry to get* it modelled according to their Principles, both
in its members and power (B); to have it an elective Synod only for advice, to
consist of so many of themselves and of their favorers as was possible, not
any known Divine of any parts in all England of their opinion, being omitted.
How cautious they were by great slight of hand to keep off so many of the old
Puritan Unconformists, and how much more enclinable toward men of Episcopal
and Liturgick principles, themselves do know.

This their underhand-working before the sitting of the Assembly, was seen but
by few: but so soon as the Synod did sit, When it was called, they retarded its
proceedings*
it did then appear to the whole Company who were the men who made it their
work and greatest study to keep off, by their endless Janglings, the Assembly
from concluding any thing that might settle the distracted Church (C); so that
to this day, after two years time and above, in more frequent and learned
Sessions then every we read of in any Assembly since the world began (D), There
is nothing at all set up for the comfort of the afflicted Kingdom.

Their averseness to the Assembly does appear, not only in their opposition
to its calling, in their retarding of its proceedings, but in their pressing of
its dissolution. I do not speak of the huge Contumelies which some of their
party have poured out upon the face of that most Reverend Meeting, in a number
of very wicked Pamphlets, which to this day were never so much as censured,
though the Authors, by name and surname, are complained of in Print. But that
which I speak of, is the express Article of the Independent Petition, desiring
the Parliament in formal terms, according to Master Peter's dictates, to
dissolve the Assembly ( D 2.).

Had either the Popish faction, or the Episcopal party, That the Churches of
England and Ireland lie so long in confuon, neither Papists, nor Prelates, nor
Malignants have been the cause.
or the malignant Courtiers procured the continuance of our woeful Anarchie, our
anger would have been greater then our grief or shame. But when the mercies of
God now for some years have removed the Papists, Prelates and Courtiers so far
from us, that by word or deed they have not hindered us in the least measure to
heal the diseases of our Church at our pleasure; that her wounds to this day
should be multiplied, and all kept open to drop out her best blood, alone
through the obstinacy of our Brethren, though we compresse our indignation, yet
we cannot but be oppressed with a great measure of grief, nor can we choose but
to be covered with confusion and shame, when we are forced to taste the most
bitter fruits of our Brethrens principles, though denied by them in words, yet
ingenuously avowed by their friends in Amsterdam, and constantly practiced in
New England; to the uttermost of their power ( E 1.), they must oppose the
building of a Church any where in the world, if it be not after their pattern:

But the Independents working according to their principles.
That as in New England no Presbyterial Church on any condition may be
tolerated, so in Old-England no Presbyterial Church must ever be erected, if
all their skill and industry can hinder it. Such a Reformation, though expressly
according to the National Covenant, to them is a deformation which they cannot
wish, much less pray for or endeavor, but with all their strength must cross
it, as a corruption unsufferable, where they have power.

Its plain and demonstrable, that their Principles and Way have forced them to
oppose the Reformation in hand, and will ever force them so to do, till they
lay new grounds, and be changed in the sense of their erroneous mind. However,
the actions of our Brethren did proclaim loud enough their intentions to delay
so long as they were able, the setting up of any Government; yet when this evil
is become so gross and palpable, that all in words do disclaim it, and they
who most do procure it, do most in show abominate it, it seems a little strange
that some of their Divines are now begun in Print expressly to own it, and in
Print to persuade the delay of this work ( E 2.).

The great mischief of that Anarchy wherein they have kept the Churches of
England and Ireland for so long a time. Independency is the mother of more
Hereresies and Schisms at London, then Amsterdam ever knew.
It must be a heavy guiltiness to be a powerful instrument of keeping two so
great Kingdoms as England and Ireland without the Fold and Hedge of all
Ecclesiastike Discipline for diverse years together, especially in the time of a
devouring War. How many thousand souls have perished by this means in their
ignorance and profanesse, who in a wel-governed Church might have been
reclaimed?

Unto this great misery, another great unhappiness adds much weight. Beside
their marring of the begun-Reformation, they have occasioned the perishing of
some millions of poor souls, by the unheard of multiplication of Heresies and
Schisms (F). I believe no place in the world, for this mischief, is now
parallel to London. Amsterdam long ago is justified; that City has transmitted
hither the infamy of her various Sects. Now upon whom shall this blame be
fastne^ (...)?

It is well known that the Sects, at the time of the Independents return
hither, were inconsiderable, in regard of that which now they are by their
means. It was their work to bring people into distaste with the way of all the
Reformed Churches: this by their labors was made vile in the eyes of the
multitude; and people once having leaped over that wall within the which all
the Protestant Churches have dwelt in safety, by all the skill of their first
misleaders could not be holden from running farther away; as in New England
Independency was a mother to Anabaptism, Antinomianism, Familism, and many more
Heresies, We need not wonder to see it any where bring forth the like Brood:
But hereof indeed do we wonder, that in so short a time this Way should change
as it were its nature so far to the worse.

In Holland and New England, Independency, Independency at London does not
only bring forth, but nourish and patronize Heresies and Schisms, contrary to
its custom either in New England or Amsterdam.
so soon as it had found and discerned the young brats of Anabaptists,
Antinomians or Familists in her bosom, it was her custom incontinently to fling
them away as Bastards: But Independency at London has learned not only to
beget, but to cherish such children when they are brought forth. Not only the
Churches of New England, but the very Amsterdam-Brownists have ever been
zealous to cast out of their Society the Heretics and Schismatickes we speak
of: but here in London it is far otherwise.

We have heard that many of the Independents here, so soon as they have fallen
into Anabaptism or other Errors of the time, have quickly of their own accord
run away and separated from the Independent Congregations, as polluted, as
false, as no Churches: But that ever any of the London-Independents did cast
out of their Churches any man or woman for Anabaptism, Antinomianism or any
other Error, we never heard.

By the contrary, Independency here is become an uniting Principle; it has
kept our Brethren in the midst of all their bitter Jarrs with the Reformed
Churches abroad, and the Presbyterians at home, in a great entirenesse and
familiarity with all the Sectaries that pleased to draw near them. They have by
their debates and dissents labored to hinder the Assembly from giving the
least advice to the Parliament to take any order with the most absurd of the
Sectaries, when complained upon for their greatest Enormities; yea, they have
preached and printed diverse Tractates for a full liberty to all Sects (G). That
so soon they should have run thus far out, we could never have believed, if our
own eyes and ears had not been our perswaders.

How hazardous it may prove to the State of England.
As for the third Apple we observed on their Tree, The endangering of the State,
it is no less visible then any of the former. If there were no more but the
keeping of the Church-wounds so long open, the health, yea the life of the
State might justly be feared, from this ground alone, by all who know the
sympathy of these Twins, and the inseparable interest of these two much-united
Companions. But beside the keeping of the Church unsettled, the growth of
Schisms, how pregnant a cause it is of a States ruin, we need no other
witness then the declaration of their Brethren in New England (H). We are made
here to believe, that the Anabaptists and the Antinomians are so tame and
harmless creatures, that there is no danger of any violence from their
innocent hands. If it be so, the General Court at New-Boston has been
extremely unjust, who professed their wel-grounded apprehension of a total
subversion not only of all their Churches, but of their Civil State also, from
a far less number of these Sectaries then are here among us; and avowed to the
world their necessity to banish out of that Country the leaders of that
dangerous Faction, whether men or women, whether Church or Statesmen, and to
disarm many of their followers, upon much much smaller provocations and lighter
grounds of suspicion then by the words and deeds of their kinsfolks have been
offered lately unto this State. ( I)

What more might be said of the London-Independents practices upon the State,
readily may come to the world ere long by a much better Pen. I for causes at
this time abstain totally from writing on this subject.

The Testimonies.
(A) Antap. p. 51. I believe upon good grounds, and so do many more, you never
took any great content or joy in the thoughts of the Assembly, but have done
your utmost to delay it and to put it by. God knows your hearts, and men some
of your speeches about the meeting of this Assembly: But seeing it could not be
helped, and that you could not keep it off by all your friends, etc.

(B) Antap. p. 255 When an Assembly was first agreed upon, there were not many
more Ministers and Scholars of your way in the Kingdom who were capable of such
a Service, then you got in to be Members of the Assembly; so that you had as
much advantage as your condition was capable of, yea, and favor too. See the
Orders of the Assembly, which give no power at all of Jurisdiction to the few
selected Divines, but alone a power of advice.

(C) Antap. p. 269. I am confident had it not been for you five, and a few
more, the Reformation intended had been in a far fairer way then now it is.
Brethren, there are many complaints, and that by your dear friends, of the
retarding the Work of Reformation by your means. You are the Remora to the Ship
under Sails, you are the Spoaks in the Wheels of the Chariot of Reformation.
Parliament complains, Assembly, City, Country, all complain of the Work
retarded, and all is resolved into you five principally. I could tell you many
particular passages, but you know what I mean. In a word, all the Prelates and
the Papists cannot, nor do not hinder so much the Work of Reformation, as you
five Members of the Assembly.

(D 1.) The Scribes Books carry already above 500. Sessions.

(D 2.) Prynnes fresh Discovery, p. 17. They lately conspired together to
exhibit a Petition to the Parliament for present dissolving the Assembly, and
sending them home to Country cures, to prevent the settling of any Church
Government, to which end they met at the Winde-Mill Tavern, where John Lillburn
sat in the Chair, and Master Hugh Peter's suggested the advice, which was
accordingly inserted in the Petition.

(E 1.) Answer to 32. Quest. p. 83. If that Discipline which we here practice,
be the same which Christ has appointed, and therefore unalterable: We see not
how another can be lawful. So if a company of people shall come hither, and set
up another, we cannot promise to approve of them in so doing.

(E 2.) Burtons Vindication, p. 2. If the better heed be not taken, there may
be more haste to a Reformation then good speed; A Reformation therefore will
necessarily require longer time yet, that we may not go blindfold about it. See
also Saltmarsh his Queres.

(F) Bastwicks second part of Independency* Postscript, p 37. Before the
Independents Apparition in our Horison, there were but three or four Sects
known among us, and they were few in number, and well conditioned; but out of
the Independents Lungs are sprung above forty several sorts of stra^lers,
which before their coming over were never heard of among us. John Lillburn
related it unto me, and that in the presence of others, that returning from the
wars to London, he met forty new Sects, and many of them dangerous ones, and
some so pernicious, that howsoever, as he said, he was in his judgment for
Toleration of all Religions, yet he professed he could scarce keep his hands
off them, so blasphemous they were in their opinions; So that he gathered that
these were now the last days, wherein so many Heresies abounded: There are
innumerable diabolical Sects, and so prodigiously impious, that it is not for a
Christian to name their opinions; and most of them, if not all, were first
Independents, and such as separated from our Congregations as unholy, and were
of their new gathered Churches, and followers of their Ministry.

(G) A short Answer to Adam Stewarts second part, supposed to be written by
John Goodwin, p. 32. and 36. Is it not an ungodly thing to suffer men to be of
any Religion? Answer. No, For both our Savior and the Apostles, and the
primitive Christians did the same: Ought we not at least to keep our different
Opinions, and Religion unto our selves, in obedience to the Civil Magistrate
that commands it* Answer. No, Because its better to obey God then man; but if
Jesuited Papists, and other subtle Heretics be suffered; will they not seduce
many unto their erroneous Bypath? Answer. Though a Toleration of erroneous
Opinions may gain some to Satan, yet Truth being therewith to be published and
approved, will in all probability, not only gain so many more to God; but any
one thus wonn to the Truth, is worth thousands of these that fall from it.

(H) Cottons Model of Church and Civil power related in the Bloody Tenent, p.
120. The falls of Commonwealths are known to arise from their diminishing the
power of the Church, and the flourishing of Commonwealths is observed to arise
from the vigilant administration of the holy Discipline of the Church.

(I) Master Prynnes fresh discovery in the Epistle. Their Libels, actions,
speeches, proclaim a plotted, avowed confederacy among some furious Ringleaders
of these Independent Sectaries* against the Parliament, Assembly, and all their
resolves in matters of Religion. That which confirms me in this opinion, is,
first the new seditious Covenants which the Members of some Independent
Congregations enter into, to adhere, defend, maintain, to the uttermost of
their power, and contend for even to blood, the establishment of that
Independent Form of Church Government which themselves have set up, and to
oppose the Presbyterian.

Bastwicks second part, p. 28. This that I now say, I speak upon very good
ground; among these they think they may confide in, they affirm they will not
be beholding to the Parliament, nor any body else for their liberty; for they
will have it, and ask them no leave. They have the Sword now in their hand, and
they think their party strong enough to encounter any adverse party: And they
profess they care not how soon they come to cutting of throats, and speak of
nothing but the slaughtering and butchering of the Presbyterians: And therefore
there is just cause given us to think we may expect better quarters from the
very enemies, then from the Independents, who call us in their Pulpits
Brethren, but in their hearts hate us.

Ibid. Postscript, p 6. The Presbyterian Government not suiting with their
humor, they abhor it, and all such as endeavor to establish it; and wish
rather that all the old Trumpery were brought in again; and profess, they had
rather have the Government of the Prelates: Yea, some of them have not been
ashamed to protest unto Prelatical Priests, That before the Presbyters shall
rule over them, they will cut all their throats, and join with them for the
reestablishing of the Hierarchy.

Ibid. p. 30. Professing, that all such Preachers who Preach and write the
least thing in opposition to their Opinions, ought to be hanged: And had they
the power in their hands, they would trusse them up, as many can testify.

Ibid. p. 45. They boast of such a party in the Kingdom, if their own words may
be credited, as they now think by the Sword to be able to make their own Laws;
and have been frequently heard say, That they had many Abbettours in the
Assembly and both Houses of Parliament, and in many parts through the Kingdom,
besides in all the Armies: And they were all resolved to have the Liberty of
their Consciences, or else they would make use of their Swords, which they have
already in their hands.

Ibid. p. 68. I know not any Independent in England, except one man and his
wife, that do not as maliciously and implacably hate the Presbyterians as the
mortallest enemy they have in the world.

CHAP. VI. An Enumeration of the common Tenets of the Independents.
IT is not easy to set down with assurance the Independents positions, Why it
is hard to set down the Independents positions.
both because they have to this day declined to declare positively their minds;
as also because of their principle of mutability whereby they profess their
readiness to change any of their present Tenets.

How unwilling they are to declare their mind, They have declined to declare
their Tenets, more then has ever been the custom of any Orthodox Divines.
may appear by their obstinate silence, and refusing to answer any of these
Books that put them most to it; also, by hiding of their opinions from their
brethren, who most earnestly have pressed their Declaration.

These diverse years the Ministers of London have been dealing with them for
satisfaction herein, and once by importunity obtained a promise under their
hand of a full and free Declaration, but these four years they have eluded
that promise ( a).

Mr. Apollonius in name of all the Churches of Zealand with all earnestness
did entreat this duty of them ( b), but all in vain. When upon any occasion
they have been moved to make any kind of Narration of their way, it was ever
with an express proviso of their resolution to keep up as yet from the World
their positive Tenets; so they conclude their Apologetick (c), so they begin
their Keys (d).

And now when the indignation both of the Assembly and Parliament, and of many
more, was likely to break out upon them for this, that after so long time no
plain dealing has been seen in them, When they shall be pleased to declare
themselves to the full, their principle of change will hinder the^ to assure us
that any thing is their settled, and firm Tenet wherein they will be constant.
at last they have engaged themselves to declare their minds; and yet since
that their public engagement there are six Months past, and the Worlds
expectation of understanding at last their mind, is still suspended.

And though that their Declaration should come out to morrow, yet with what
assurance can we take any thing therein for their constant and settled Tenet,
so long as they profess it to be one of their chief principles to be so loose
and irresolute in any thing they maintain for the time, that they are ready to
leave it, and upon occasion to embrace the contrary ( e)? So long as this
skeptic irresolution is avowed, there is no hope, there is no possibility of
any fixed constancy.

The chief Tenets which hitherto they have given out, and not yet recal^ed, are
these following.
These things considered no man is able to set down their full mind, nor any one
of their positions whereto any dare assure they will firmly stand; only the
chief of their singularities which they have been pleased to let come abroad,
and have not to our knowledge as yet revoked, we shall set down as they come to
our thoughts.

It has been hitherto their earnest desire to decline the infamy of Brownisme,
They reject the name of Independents unreasonably, and for their own
disadvantage.
and it was the charity of their Brethren to distinguish them from that Sect,
under the new name of Independents: importing their chief difference from us
to stand not in the point of separation, which is our proper quarrel with the
Brownists, but alone in the point of Church Government, which against all the
Reformed Churches they ma^ntaine to be Independent, that is, not subject to the
Authority and Jurisdiction of any Superior Synod. This was thought to be their
proper distinctive and characteristicall Tenet, till of late we find them
passionately reject the name of Independents, and tell us, that the dependency
or independency of their Congregations will be found one of their least
differences and smallest controversies.

In this our long mistake, we are content to be rectified; albeit our charity
should not be reproved* who being ignorant of their willingness to differ from
us in any thing higher or deeper then the Dependency of Congregations upon the
Authority of Superior Assemblies, did put upon them no other name then that
which employed this difference alone.

It seems that this Title is not only the most reasonable, but the most
innocent and inoffensive note of distinction, which themselves could have
chosen: The term not being invented by any of their ill-willers, but by their
own chief Leaders ( f), who did think that word most proper to notify their
Tenet of Government; When it is laid aside, the more infamous name of Brownists
and Separatists will justly fall upon them.
and since some name must be given to every eminently differing party, it
seems none less irritative could be fallen upon, then that which most
properly did signify the chief matter in Controversy.

But now finding they avow their chief differences to lie elsewhere, for my
part I could yield to them to have the name of Independents buried, did I not
fear it behoved to be changed with another Title, which would much more
displease: For since they are gone beyond the question of Independent
Government, and now do question the constitution of our Churches so far as
puts them on a necessity of Separation, and in this do place the chief of
their Controversies with us: If a Sect may be denominated either from the
Author or principal matter, as they make no bones to Print us Calvinians (g)
and Presbyterians (h): I cannot conceive why they ought not to take it in good
part, if when the name of Independents is laid by, they have in place of it,
the Title of Brownists and Separatists fastened upon them.

Of their own accord they take upon them openly the half of the thing we
allege professing themselves to lie halfeway off us, They avow a
Semi-Separation, but a Sesqui-Separation will be proved upon them.
toward Brownisme (i) avowing the truth to consist in this their middle way:
But whosoever considers better of the matter, will find, that however in some
things they incline to a middle way; yet in the chief and most, they come up
close to the outmost line of Brownisme, and in many things do expatiate so
much beyond it* that in place of the Semi-Separation they mention, they may be
justly argued to have drawn upon themselves the blot of Se^qui-Separation and
more also: how true this is, it will appear to any, who will be pleased to
make a parallel of the forementioned Tenets of the Brownists with these of the
Independents, which here are subjoyned.

First, the worst and uttermost Tenet of the Brownists for which they cook to
themselves, The Independents do separate from all the Reformed Churches upon
far worse grounds then the Brownists were wont to separate.
and had bestowed upon them by others the style of Separatists, was their
doctrine and practice accordingly, to Separate from the Churches of England: In
this the Independents go beyond them. For beside that the practice of both is
the same, both actually Separating from all the Congregations of England; the
grounds of the Brownists Separation were a great deal more reasonable, then
that of the Independents, albeit neither of them be good and sufficient: For
the Brownists did build their Separation on the Tyranny of Bishops, on the
Superstition of the Ceremonies and Service Book; on the gross, avowed, and
neglected profaneness of the most in every Congregation: if these corruptions
had been removed, so far as I have read in any of their writings, they would
no more have Separated. But the Independents having no such stumbling blocks in
their way, Bishops and Books being abolished, and a bar set up in every
Congregation to keep off from the Sacrament, every scandalous and ignorant
person, notwithstanding they will yet Separate. The more unjust and less cause
they have so to do, their separation must be so much the worse, the grosser
and more inexcusable Schism.

Their acknowledgment of the Reformed for true Churches does not diminish, but
increase their Shisme.
What they say for the avoiding of this challenge, will not hold water; while
they tell us that they are not Separatists, because they avow the Church of
England to be a true and gracious Church, That the Ministry of it, is true and
saving. They should consider that the Brownists, when the fit of charity
comes upon them, say large as much as all this, as before from their own
words we have shown ( k): also that some of the Independent Party have gone as
far as that which they confess makes the Brownists to be justly called
Schismatics ( l); but however, suppose their allegation were true, it does not
excuse and diminish, but much increase the fault of their separation: For it is
a greater sin to depart from a Church which I profess to be true, and whose
Ministry I acknowledge to be saving, then from a Church which I conceive to be
false, and whose Ministers I take to have no calling from God, nor any blessing
from his hand.

They refuse all Church communion and membership in all the Reformed Churches,
they preach and pray in them as they would do among P^gans, only as g^ft^d men
to gather new Churches.
Neither are they cleared from the blot of Schism by their countenancing the
English Assemblies, by their preaching and praying therein: for beside that
they do no more in this then Mr Robinson has taught them ( m); They should
remember they teach their Scholars, that Preaching, Prayer, Psalms, and all
things they do in the English Congregation, are no acts of Church Fellowship (
n): that none of them does import any Church Membership, nor any Ecclesiastic
Communion: but are such which without scruple they can dispense to very Pagans.

But we would entreat them to declare if they would be willing to receive any
Sacrament in the English Congregations, or if they will be content to be under
any part of their Discipline, if they will be either Members or Officers in any
of our Churches.

I see indeed the Apologists profess their participation of Baptism in our
Congregations, but besides that, the Brownists will profess so much of
themselves ( o); yet how this is consistent with the constant practice and
Doctrine of the Independents, I confess my understanding is too blunt to
conceive.

For however in New England, they give the right hand of Fellowship to the
Brownists Congregations (p); and at London they are said to go to the
Brownists Sacraments ( q): and we did never hear that either in England or
Holland, they refused any to be a Member for their belief of rigid separation,
or Anabaptisme; nor censured any of their Members for falling into these
errors: yet in formal terms, they do deny the most gracious of their
Brethren to live beside them in New England in the Presbyteriall way of the old
Non-conformists ( r): yea, in Print they avow that whoever refuses their Tenet
of Independency, were they otherwise never so Orthodox and pious, they ought
not to be admitted to the Sacraments, nor enjoy any Church Privilege ( s): as
people who cannot be wholly, but at most are in part only converted: Yea, as
such who must be taken for Antichristian spirits, for enemies to Christ and
his Kingdom ( t): Neither have I heard that any of them now for many years*
have either celebrated to others or received themselves the Sacraments in any
English Church.

And when it was propounded that they might take charge in some of the best
Reformed Congregations of England; with a full assurance of a personal
dispensation to them for their whole life, if they would leave but that one
intolerable Tenet of Separation; to this day they have disregarded that kind
and brotherly Accommodation; showing expressly that in this point of separate
Congregations they would be tolerated, or nothing else would satisfy their
consciences; beyond this their best friends were not able by their long and
earnest endeavors for diverse weeks together to draw them one haires-breadth (
w): About the matter of the Church and qualification of members, they are
large, as strict as the Brownists, admitting none but who convinces the whole
Congregation of their real regeneration.
if this be not a more clear and a more inexcusable Separation then was ever
yet laid to the charge of any Brownists, I profess my utter mistake of the
nature of Schism, and desire to be rectified.

The next singularity of the Brownists, their Doctrine of the constitution of
the Church in matter and form, the Independents have borrowed to the full: and
not only enlarged it, but when all other grounds fail, upon this alone they
build the necessity of their separation.

Concerning the matter of the Church, the Independents have learned all their
unjust scrupulosity from the other; as the Brownists require every Church
member to be a Saint, really regenerate and justified, who at their admission
have publicly satisfied the whole Congregation by convincing signs of their
true holiness: the other requires the same ( x.) What ever indulgence here the
Independents profess to give, either to weak ones in whom they find the least
of Christ, or to women whom they remit from the Congregation to speak more
privately in the Eldership ( y^, this is no other then the present practice of
the Brownists at Amsterdam.

Only we observe, that the Independents here go farther from the Reformed
Churches, both in the strictness, and in the loosnesse of their satisfactions.
Besides true grace they require a sutablenesse of spirit.
The Brownists are satisfied with the signs of personal grace, but the
Independents require more; they proceed to a trial by a long conversation of
the sociable and complying disposition of the person to be admitted, with the
spirits of the whole Church whereof he is to be a member ( z); without this
sutablenesse of spirit they will reject them whom otherwise they find to be
Saints ( aa). But in this they are laxer then the Brownists, that they can take
in without scruple Anabaptists, Antinomians, and others, who both in life and
doctrine have evident blots, if so they be zealous and serviceable for their
way.
But their chief excess here is in loosnesse. The Brownists will not dispense
with known errors and sins in the members; they will not admit of
Anabaptists, of proud, luxurious, contentious people. If they find any such to
have crept in among them, they profess their judgment is for their casting
out by censures But the Independents will here be more wise for the increase of
their party: and however they will have nothing to do with Presbyterians (bb),
nor with such people who can live in their confused Congregations; yet they
make it their rule to hold out none for any error that is not fundamental,
nor for any sin that is not continued in against conscience ( cc); walking
according to this rule, they swallow down without trouble the small gnats of
Anabaptism, and all other Sects, who err not fundamentally, and obstinately,
and against conscience: how many Sectaries are thus far guilty, who can
determine? The little spot of luxury in apparel, in diet, and many fleshly
delights, About the form of the Church, a Church Covenant they are more
punctual then the Brownists.
of strife, of disdainful railing, and such other faults (as are too common in
their members) are of easy disgestion ( dd).

Concerning the other part of the Church essence, its form, their Covenant: in
this the Disciples go much above their Master. Mr Cotton has perfected by an
express Treatise, this part of Brownism (ee), as many others. The Covenants of
New ^ngland are much straiter then any that ever we heard of at Amsterdam. It
is true that of late both in Old and New England the Independents seem much to
modify the rigor of their Covenant ( ff); but whatever may be said of their
profession, I never could learn of their practice, to admit any into their
society who gave not full assurance of embracing their whole way, and all their
differences from the Reformed Churches. Sure I am, they did never admit any
upon easier terms then lately I my self did hear Mr Can admit a member into
his Church at Amsterdam; yet if Mr Prynnes information be well grounded, they
are become at London more rigid in their Covenant then ever; They take the
power of gathering and erecting of Churches both from Magistrates and Ministers
placing it only in the hands of a few private Christians, who are willing to
make among themselves a Church covenant.
he tells us that now it is their custom to make it a part of their Oath to
oppugn the Government of the Reformed Churches, and to defend Independency
with arms and violence, ff. 2.

Unto the constitution we may refer the efficient of a Church, and the number
of its members; in both the Scholars follow punctually their Masters. As for
the efficient, it is not only the Brownists, but the Independents also who put
the power of gathering Churches, and joining together by Covenant in a Church
way, in the hand of private Christians alone, without any Officer, or the
authority of any Magistrate. It is presumption in any Minister, if he assay to
make up a Church, only people must associate themselves into a Church, and then
create their Ministers and other Officers ( gg.)

In New England at the erection of a new Church, This power of erecting
themselves into a complete and perfect church they give to any seven persons,
neither admit they more into a Church then can altogether in one place
commodiously administer the Sacraments and Discipline.
they are content with the presence both of the Magistrate and Ministers of the
neighbor Churches; but they declare that neither is necessary, and that the
presence of either gives no authority to the action, and the absence of both
detracts no authority from it ( hh.) That the whole power to gather a
Congregation and to erect a Church is alone in the covenanting persons ( ii.)

As for the number of the members, the Independents go as low as the Brownists,
avowing that seven persons make a full ministerial and completely organized
Church ( kk): nor do they extend the number any farther then the Brownists,
avowing that no Church, except the universal, may have any more members then
conveniently can meet and be accommodated in one place for the exercise of all
holy duties (ll), not only preaching of the Word, whereat thousands may be
present, but celebration of the Sacraments, and administering all parts of
Discipline; to which acts a few hundreds cannot commodiously meet.

The Independents mind about the gathering and erecting of Congregations, The
Independents will have all the standing Churches in England dissolved, and all
their Ministers to become merely private men, and any three persons of their
way to be a full Church.
may be clearly perceived by their late practice in the Summer Islands, wherein
they are applauded by the Churches of New England, and defended by Master White
against Master Prynnes Fresh Discovery, with a great deal of confidence and
high language: there he justifies the necessity of the dissolution of all the
Churches in the Barmudaes (which yet he professes were among the best of all
the English Plantations;) there were above 3000 people in the Isle, who had
lived without all controversy with any of their Ministers from their first
planting till the year 1641, when their Ministers persuaded by some writs of
the Brethren of New England, found it necessary to lay down their charges, and
become mere private men, denying to administer to their old flocks any
Ordinance, till three of them entering in a Covenant, and thereby becoming a
new Church, did persuade of the 3000 Islanders some thirty or forty at most to
join with them in their new Church Covenant; these covenanted persons did choose
one of their old Ministers for their Pastor, and two others of them for Ruling
Elders, who as gifted men were content to join with the Pastor in preaching,
not only to the Church members, but to the whole Isle, to fit them to be Church
members; but all the three refused absolutely to celebrate any Sacrament, or
administer any Discipline, or do any act of a Pastor to any but to the forty
named only. All this Mr White maintains as just and necessary, and petitions
the Parliament in print for their countenance and approbation, whereby it seems
it is the Independents avowed and clear intention when they have power to
dissolve and annull all the Churches of England, yea of the world, to spoil
all Ministers living of their pastoral charge, and all people of all Church
privileges, and to erect new Churches of their own framing, Unto this Church
of seven persons they give all and the whole Church power and that
independently.
into which they are to admit at most not one of an hundred of those who now do
count themselves Christians: all this you may see at length in Mr Whites very
peremptory Reply to Mr Prynnes Fresh Discovery.

Leaving the constitution, their chief Tenets concern the power of the
Congregation, so constitute as is said: in this they come up fully to their
Masters side; for they give unto their Church, that is, their seven covenanted
persons, the whole Ecclesiastic power, and that independently upon any person
under heaven.

First, they put it in their hands to create all the Officers; Unto this
congregationall Church alone they give the full power of election and
ordination, of deposition and excommunication even of all their officers, and
of the final determination of all Ecclesiastic causes.
they not only give them suffrages in their election, ( mm) but the whole power
of Ordination also ( nn), the examination of their Pastor in all the abilities
requisite for his charge ( oo), the laying all the parts of his Office upon
him, public prayer, imposition of hands, and what other acts are requisite
for a regular Ordination, are all performed by one of the people whom the rest
have appointed for that end ( pp).

As they have power to make all their Officers, so they have power to unmake
them, to depose, and excommunicate all their Ministers ( qq), to cognosce and
finally to determine, without any appeal, in all cases, both in life and
doctrine, of all Heresies and Scismes, of all Truths and Errors, to order all
things belonging to the worship of God, and to do all things else (rr), The
difference of Johnson and Ainsworth about the power of the people and
presbytery distinct one from the other, is not yet composed among the
Independents.
which other Churches ascribe to the most General Assemblies of the most
learned Divines.

Upon this passage of Power come in the differences which divided the Brownists
among themselves: whilst Johnson would give all these acts of power to the
Eldership, and Ainsworth would keep them for the Congregation; these same
questions vex the Independents to this day, and are likely to divide the
Children as they did the Fathers.

The most of the New English Divines, with Ainsworth, attribute the whole
Ecclesiastic power to the body of the people: unto the Eldership they give the
preparation of affairs (ss), The common Doctrine of New England is Ainsworths
Tenet, that the people a^one have all the power, and may excommunicate when
there is cause all their officers.
but the judgment and determination of all does pass by the plurality of the
peoples voices ( tt): the power of the keys they put in the hand not of the
Presbytery, but of the fraternity ( ww), as they speak. And in some places upon
the peoples sense of the Presbyteries encroaching and fear of their farther
usurpation, they have thought it expedient to have no Eldership at all, as in
Amsterdam the Brownists, so in Rotterdam the Independents, for these many
years have had no ruling Elders, and so no Presbytery ( xx); but have governed
all their affairs by the voices of the people: and why might they not as well
live without ruling Elders, as their Brethren at Arnem for diverse years did
live without a Pastor ( yy) the more necessary Officer. Mr Cotton the other
year did fall much from them and himself toward Johnson, that the whole power
of authority is only in the Officers, and the people have nothing but the power
of liberty to concur; that the Officers can do nothing without the people,
nor the people any thing but by the Officers.
Mr Cotton and some others feeling to their small contentment the great and
intolerable power of the people over the Eldership have begun to fall from
Ainsworth to Johnson, and to plead the Authority of the Eldership above the
Brotherhood, and the necessity of their subjection by divine right to the
Elders as to their Superiors ( zz); yet to salve all, and to please both
parties, he makes the concurrence of the Eldership and Brotherhood to be both
necessary, to be both sine quo non (aaa): whatever Authority he gives to the
Eldership, he makes it all vain and frustaneous without the consent of the
people ( bbb): and notwithstanding all the obedience and subjection he puts
upon the people, yet he gives to them such a power of Liberty, that their
concurrence with the Eldership in every act of power is not only necessary but
authoritative ( ccc).

He goes yet one step further in case of the obstinate and incorrigible
aberration of the Presbytery; he gives power to the people, albeit not to
execute any act of power, yet to separate from the obstinate Eldership ( ddd),
Yet that both officers and people or any one of them have power to separate
themselves from all the rest when they find cause.
and out of their own number to make new Elders, who will be willing to
administer cen^ures, and do all else that they conceive to be right.

For all this, so far as we can learn, there is yet no full agreement among
them, either in New or Old England, in setting the merch-stones of power
betwixt the Eldership and Brotherhood: many School distinctions they use, yet
by them all they cannot come to concord. The Independents here confess their
agreement with Mr Cotton in the chief things wherein he differs from his
Brethren in New England, and from his own self in his late Book of the way of
the Churches: they applaud much his new invented distinction of the power of
Authority, and the power of Liberty ( eee). Yet in other things they avow their
dissent from him ( fff): what these other things may be, they yet have not had
leisure to inform us. I hope it be not the extent of Church power unto women,
and the giving of a power to celebrate Sacraments unto private men, which yet
are said to be the Tenets of some of their friends.

It is true, the Synod of New England makes not only the fraternity, but as
they speak, The London Independents give more power of Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction then the Brownists unto women.
the sorority also to be the subject of the private power of the Keys of the
Kingdom of heaven ( ggg); also we have shown how they have permitted women to
be Leaders to their whole Churches, and chief Pastors in Church actions of the
highest nature: we have good witnesses that a woman was the founder of Mr
Simpsons Church at Rotterdam (hhh); that a woman, and that none of the best led
away Mr Cotton, and with him great numbers of the best note in New England,
toward the vilest errors, and to the brink of a new separation from all the
Churches there ( iii). Notwithstanding all this, none of the Independents,
either in New England or Holland, neither the Brownists of Amsterdam, did ever
give unto any women any public Ecclesiastic power. In this, our London
Independents exceed all their Brethren, who of late begin to give unto women
power of debating in the face of the Congregation, and of determining
Ecclesiastic causes by their suffrages, if Doctor Bastwick be rightly informed
( kkk).

Concerning the power of the Sacraments, Some of them permit private men to
celebrate the Sacraments.
Mistress Chidley is permitted to print in defense of the Independent cause,
without the reproof of any of that party, so far as I have heard, that not
only Pastors but private men out of all office, may lawfully celebrate both the
Sacraments ( lll).

However, Brownists and Independents do perfectly agree in the point of
Independency.
in these and other things there may be great difference among them in the
point of Church power, yet that which is the principal point in this head of
power, the matter of Independency, in it there is a full and perfect agreement
among them all. Whatever power, whether of Liberty or Authority, be in the
Congregation, organicall, or homogeneous* radically or habitually, in the
Brothehood or Eldership, conjunctly or severally; whatever power it be, or
wheresover it be, all of them place it in the Congregation, without any
subjection to any other Superior ( mmm). The word of Independency, some of
them do much abominate, and yet but some; for there are of their chief Leaders
this day, who do not mislike it ( nnn): but what ever we speak of the word,
the matter which every man did understand by it, is stiffly maintained by them
all. In nothing there is greater concord among them then that in the smallest
Congregations, even of seven persons, the whole Ecclesiastic power does reside
absolutely without any dependence upon or subjection to any or all the
creatures on earth ( ooo). If a corrupt or negligent Presbytery do not censure
their own members, all the Assemblies in the world may not attempt to censure
any of them, though most apparently they did corrupt a whole Nation with the
grossest Heresies or most scandalous vices.


Whatever may be said of a charitable advice or friendly counsel, or brotherly
rebuke, yet if you speak of any authoritative power to censure, all of them
avow that the offer of this from all assemblies of a nation, or of the world,
is Antichristian Tyranny ( ppp): and for any person in the smallest
Congregation to receive, or submit themselves to any such censure, were to
betray and cast away the liberty wherewith Christ has made them free (qqq). So
that it is utterly unlawful for all the Churches of the World to inflict the
least censure, or to give the smallest admonition in order to any censure, not
only to any Congregation, but to any one man therein, suppose he were never so
erroneous, never so scandalous; although he did infect and destroy, not only
all the souls of that Congregation, but as a common pest did corrupt the
Churches of a whole Nation, or if it were possible, of the whole World (rrr).

The point of Independency is either the root or the fruit of many errors.
This strange Tenet seems to be either the root or the fruit, either the
mother or the daughter of all the rest of their errors: the mother and root,
because a few persons having locked themselves up within the narrow walls of
one Congregation, with an Independent power, having made themselves
uncontrollable by any or all upon earth; they open a wide door to any
erroneous spirit, to mislead them toward what ever fancy can enter into any
cracked brain, without all possibility of any effectual remedy; the daughter
and fruit, because men who are conscious to themselves of singularities, which
they fear will not be liked nor tolerated by others, upon their fond love
toward these errors, do affect such a liberty which may exempt them from all
danger to be ordained by any censure to relinquish these darlings, which they
have resolved to keep still in their bosom.

To temper the crudity of this Tenet, they add to it three moderating
positions, but for little purpose.
The fatuity of this Tenet they use to season with the grains of three more
sapid positions: First, they grant the being of Classical Psesbyteries and
Synods ( sss). Secondly, they ascribe to them the censure of Non-Communion (
ttt). Thirdly, they allow the Magistrate to correct Heretical and Shismaticall
persons ( www). But if they will consider, they shall find that in none of
those positions, they go beyond the Brownists and by them all they do not any
whit cure the disease of Independency.

For the first, they admit not of any Classical Presbytery differing from a
Synod; They grant the being of Synods, but not of Classical Presbyteries.
for what ever they speak of their granting gladly unto us all the degrees and
Subordinations of Assemblies which we could wish: yet betwixt a Congregationall
Eldership and a Synod, they grant not any interposition of a Classis; or
compounded Presbytery over more Congregations then one ( xxx), which kind of
Presbytery the Reformed Churches make the first and ordinary subject of
Ordination, and of sundry acts of Jurisdiction: esteeming it a Iudicatory
specifically different both from the inferior Eldership of a single
Congregation and the Superior Synod, whither of a Shire or a Province, or a
Nation, or of more, or of all Nations.

Besides* that Synod whereof they approve, is only a Brownisticall one, such as
needs not to be moderated by any Preacher ( yyy); Their Synods are merely
Brownisticall without all Jurisdiction, wherein every one of the people may
vote; also merely elective and only occasional.
at the which any man who pleases may be present to debate, and vote
decisively ( zzz). Yea, they go here much beyond the Brownists and their
Brethren of New England also; for they deny that the 15 of the Acts, is either
a pattern or ground for any Synod ( aaaa), expressly contrary to Mr Cottons
latest Doctrine; neither will they have any ordinary or set Synods, but only
occasional, and when the occasion of a Synod comes, they will have it to be
merely elective ( bbbb 1.): consisting of such persons alone as themselves
please to choose, not only of the Churches of their own Independent way alone,
but also of such only among these as themselves think meet to pitch upon ( bbbb
2): if a Classis or Synod be of any other temper, they count it so corrupt and
so tyrannical a Court, that they could not countenance it with their presence;
yea, not so much as they would do an Episcopal Sea ( cccc): the one being
much worse then the other: that the Brownists Independency went ever thus far
I do not know.

As for their sentence of Non-Communion, The sentence of Non-Communion, is Mr
Cottons invention to supply that defect which themselves make in the Ordinances
of God.
it is one of Mr Cottons new additions to old Brownisme (dddd); which it seems
rather to embitter then sweeten; for it is a mere humane invention to supply
the ordinances of God, which men injuriously have cast away: when they have
denied to Synods the power of these censures which God has appointed, and
find themselves straightned by the absolute necessity of the matter, to take
up again either them or their equivalent: they will not be so changeable as to
resume the censures whereof God is the Author, having once cast them away: but
in their place they are forced to find out some of their own, these their new
declarations and abstentions from fellowship and such like new censures of
their own.

It puts in the hand of every man a power to sentence all the Churches of the
world.
But which is worst of all, these their new censures if there be any force in
them, advance their Independency to the highest degree of power: or rather lift
it up highly in the air, and by a repugnancy and contradiction, make it
evaporate to nothing; for this Non-Communion gives power to every one, even
the smallest Congregation, over all the Churches in the World it pleases to
deal with, so far as to admonish, rebuke, declare against them all, and cast
them all out of her Communion ( eeee). The Reformed Churches contend only for a
power to a great Assembly, for censuring a faulty member of a small
Congregation; but this Non-Communion gives to the smallest Congregation of any
seven persons, the power of sentencing the whole Churches and all the
Assemblies in the World.

Howbeit, this Non-Communion, seems to be contradictory and destructive of
that Independency which it was invented to salve: For if every Congregation be
Independent, how shall all Congregations be so dependent upon every one, that
any the least may inflict this high censure upon the greatest, yea upon all.

It carries to the highest degree of Separation.
Beside, this Non-Communion is nothing but the highest strain of separation
that ever any Brownist aimed at; it gives a power for any Church to deny
Communion to all Churches, and to live separate without all Communion with any
Church for ever.

This produces an other power of a farther separation, to wit, a power to
every member of that separate Church upon any grievance not satisfied to
separate himself, and either live there alone as many do, or to gather a new
Church, of any whom they find willing to associate with them: these things are
brought not so much for reasons to evert the positions in hand; as to show how
unfit limitations they are of the extravagancy which appears in Independency,
and how much they run out beyond the bounds which they pretend to hem in.

As for their third Tenet of the Magistrates concurrence, Their supply of the
defects of Independency by the power o^ the Magistrate, was a remedy which they
learned from the Brownists, but now they have cast it aside, denying to the
Magistrate all power in matters of Religion.
to second their sentence of Non-Cummunion, besides that the Brownists go as
far as ever any of them did in this (ffff): we see now that the chief of
them have recalled the Tenet: though all the Protestant Churches, and none more
then they of New England, do maintain the Mag^strates power to suppress
errors; yet this unhappy love toward liberty, whereinto the Independent party
here among us have lately fallen, makes them to entreat the Magistrate to let
alone the affairs of Religion, though they run into all the confusion
whither Satan and his Instruments are able to carry them ( gggg). If the
Magistrates fear of God does stop his ear to such impious petitions, then
they flee up very high even to the denial and decrying of all the Magistrates
power in matters of Religion ( hhhh); which yet the Papists in England and the
Arminians in Holland, who have been the greatest pleaders hitherto for liberty,
were never bold to impugn; but of this more hereafter.

I hope I have demonstrated that in the point of Separation and of the
constitution and government of the Church, The Independents do advance their
fancies to as high a pitch of glory as the Brownists.
the great and only intended Articles of the Brownists, our brethren the
Independents come nothing behind them: Sure, in these their conceits they
applaud themselves no less then the former; they put in these things the very
Kingdom of Christ: all their opposites, in these fancies, they make them
enemies to Christ's Kingdom ( iiii): they avow Independency to be a beginning,
They are the Brownists scholars in many more things beside the Constitution and
Government of the Church.
and a part of that glorious Kingdom which Christ for a thousand years is to
enjoy upon earth ( kkkk).

Concerning the worship of God and other heads of Divinity, whatever crotchets
the Brownists have fallen into, the Independents punctually do follow the most
and worst of them: and if in any they come short, they are sure to exceed in
other things more dangerous.

First, for the marriage blessing, They give to the Magistrate the Celebration
of marriage.
they applaud the Brownists Doctrine, they send it from the Church to the
Townhouse, making its solemnization the duty of the Magistrate ( llll^; this
is the constant practice of all in New England: the prime of the Independent
Ministers now at London, have been married by the Magistrate, and all that can
be obtained of any of them, is to be content that a Minister in the name of
the Magistrate and as his Commissioner may solemnize that holy band.

Mr Milton permits any man to put away his wife upon his mere pleasure, without
fault and without the cognizance of any Judge.
Concerning Divorces, some of them go far beyond any of the Brownists, not to
speak of Mr Milton, who in a large Treatise has pleaded for a full liberty for
any man to put away his wife, when ever he pleases, without any fault in her
at all, but for any dislike or dyspathy of humor (mmmm); for I do not know
certainly whither this man professes Independency (albeit all the Heretics
here, whereof ever I heard, avow themselves Independents); Mr Gorting teaches
the wife to put away her husband, if he will not follow her in any new Church
way which she is pleased to embrace.
what ever therefore may be said of Mr Milton, yet Mr Gorting and his Company
were men of renown among the New-English Independents, before Mistrisse
Hutchinsons disgrace: and all of them do maintain, that it is lawful for
every woman to desert her husband, when he is not willing to follow her in her
Church way, and to take her self for a widow, loosed from the bond of
obedience to him, only because he lives without that Church whereof she is
become a member ( nnnn).

Concerning the circumstances of the worship of God, they will have nothing
determined, but all which Scripture has not determined, They are against all
determinations of the circumstances of worship, and therefore all church
Directories are against their stomachs.
to be left so free, that all Directories are much against their stomachs. How
much they did cross that gracious and excellent work of the Directory for the
three Kingdoms, and when it was begun, how long they did retard it; and after
it was brought to an end, through all the mountains of impediments which they
did cast up in its way; how earnest they were by slight of hand to have put in
its Preface such phrases as might have altogether made frustrate the use of it,
is well known to many: yea, when a Directory for the three Nations is
established by the Assemblies and Parliaments of both Kingdoms, they are bold
so far to slight it, The common names of the days of the week, the months of
the year, of many Churches and Cities of the Land, are as unlawful to them as
to the Brownists.
as to write unto the very Parliament, that uniformity is but a matter of
form, in the which for peace sake men will come up so far as conscience can
permit, intimating that all our covenanted uniformity must be resolved into the
free will or erroneous conscience of every private man.

In the abolishing of the monuments of Idolatry, they agree so far with the
Brownists, that they will not name the days of the week, the months of the
year, the places of meeting after the ordinary manner ( oooo); yet they make
no scruple to use the Churches builded in the time of Popery, nor of Bells
though invented by a Pope, and baptized with all the Popish Superstitions* how
this does stand with their principles, I do not well know, especially with
their practice about another circumstance, the Church-maintenance.

For, the ancient way of maintenance by Tithes, or Lands, All tithes and set
maintenance of Ministers they cry down; but a voluntary contribution for the
maintenance of all their Officers, they press to a high proportion, with the
evident prejudice of the poor.
or set Stipends, they do refuse, (pppp) and require here the reduction of the
Apostolic practice. They count it necessary that all the Church Officers
should live upon the charge of the Congregation, the Ruling Elders and Deacons
as well as the Pastors and Doctors (qqqq); but all they will have them to
receive, is a mere Alms, a voluntary Contribution, laid down as an offering at
the Deacons feet every Lords Day, and by him distributed to all the Officers
and the poor of the Congregation according as they have need (rrrr). This is
their Doctrine, but it seems they are weary long ago of its practice. The
Brownists (as I hear) are yet constant to practice what they teach, allowing
their Ministers for their better supply, and that they may not be too
burthensom to the Congregation, the use of handy Trades. but the Independents
of New England have a better provision, not only a proportion of Land, but a
certain Tax of money laid on by the Magistrate, both upon the members of the
Congregation, and upon all the neighbors, though not received members of any
Church. ( ssss) These also of London, Arnheim, and Roterdam, have been famous
for a sufficient care of a set provision, above the ordinary, to the rate of
two or three hundred pounds a year ( tttt.) And lest their Income should
decrease with too large deduction for the supply of the poor, it has been
their providence to admit none or few poor members of their Congregations (
wwww. In their solemn worship often times they make one to pray, another to
preach, a third to prophecy, a fourth to direct the Psalm, and another to
bless the people.
)

Concerning other circumstances, the form of their Church, and Pulpit, and such
like, I have not observed any difference in the Meeting Houses of the one at
Roterdam, and the other at Amsterdam.

For the parts of the worship, as I take it, there is little difference; only
the Independents seem in their administration more to vary the persons;
sometimes they make one to pray, and another to preach, a third to prophecy,
and a fourth to dismiss with a blessing (xxxx).

In the ordering of the parts of their worship after Mr Cottons invention, They
make it a divine institution, without any word of preface, to begin the public
worship with solemn prayer for the King and Church.
they take it for an Apostolic injunction, to begin first of all with a large
solemn Prayer for the King and the Church, applying the words of the Apostle
against the clear scope of the Text, and all the writers which I have
consulted upon it, to this very method of the ordinances, and to this matter of
the first Prayer ( yyyy).

After the Pastors prayer the Doctor reads and expounds.
After the Prayer the Doctor proceeds to read and expound: their ordinary
practice here agrees with the other, but their Doctrine differs; for the
Independents at London grant, that reading by it self without exposition, is a
divine Ordinance, however in their practice they conjoyne both.

In preaching they will be free to take a Text or not, as they find it
expedient.
In preaching they differ from the Brownists and us, and join with the Popish
Monks; they will not be tied to a Text of Scripture, for the ground of their
discourse, but will be at liberty to run out on whatsoever matter they think
most fit and expedient for their hearers ( zzzz).

After Sermon any of the people whom they think able, are permitted to
prophecy.
About prophesying after Sermon, they are at a full agreement, permitting to any
private man of the flock, or to any stranger whom they take to be gifted,
publikly to expound and apply the Scripture, to pray and to bless the people.
They permit two or three of these after the end of the Sermon to exercise their
gifts ( aaaaa).

All are permitted to propound in the face of the Congregation what questions
upon the Sermon they think meet.
When the exercise of the Prophets is ended, they use another Ordinance of
questioning the Preachers and Prophets by any member of the Congregation, about
any point of the Doctrine ( bbbbb); but this exercise, as also the former, has
proved so unhappy in New England, that gladly there they would be quit of both
(ccccc).

In the Psalms the Independents wander wider then their Teachers; some of them
will have no songs in the time of public Judgments (ddddd): About the Psalms
they have diverse strange conceits; but the special is their new Ordinance of a
singing Prophet, who in place of the Psalms sings Hymns of his own making in
the midst of the silent Congregation.
others will not permit women to sing in the Church ( eeeee): but the greatest
difference is, that the Independents of Arnheim did stop the mouths of all but
one, who did sing the Hymn which himself had composed, in the midst of the
Congregation for their edification ( fffff).

In Prayer they fall short of their masters; They grant the lawfulness of read
prayer in diverse cases.
for however they use no set Prayer, yet they are so far from esteeming of it
Idolatry, that they profess both set and read Prayer to be lawful ( ggggg):
They will have none to be baptized, but the children of their own members; so
at one dash they put all England except a very few of their way, into the state
of Pagans turning them all out of the Christian Church, denying to them
Sacraments, Discipline, Church Officers, and all that they would deny to the
Pagans of America.
The Lords Prayer they commend to be said even in public, and they permit
private men to read prayer in their families ( hhhhh); in this they have Mr
Robinson for their guide; yet at London their pactice is constantly to forget
the Lords Prayer.

In the Sacrament of Baptism the Independents lay a pathway to Anabaptism; for
first they come close up to the most rigid Brownists, denying Baptism to the
most part of Christian Infants; yea they will grant it to a very few; to these
alone whose immediate parents are members of their Congregation ( iiiii), who
are a wonderful poor handful: all other Infants they will have unbaptized
till they come to the years of understanding, and declare not only their
actual faith and holiness, but their subjection to the Kingdom of Christ,
that is to their Independency: they will have no stipulation made for the
Infants education; they dispute much for dipping, though they deny not the
lawfulness of sprinkling ( kkkkk).

But that which makes men most afraid for their Anabaptism, is their open
deserting all the Reformed Churches, and the Brownists themselves, in three
grounds.

First, they deny the federall holiness of Christian children; against this
Tho. Goodwin did preach, and deny openly that common distinction of Protestants
of real and federall holiness, They open a door to Anabaptism by 3 farther
positions.
requiring in every Infant to be baptized a real and inherent sanctity. If
this ground be maintained, I see not how Anabaptism, or else Arminianism, will
be avoided; for if this real holiness above foederall, be the great ground of
Baptism, 1. They require in all to be baptized a real holiness above a
foederall, which in no Infant with any certainty can be found.
and this cannot be asserted in the judgment of verity of any Infant; for
whatever we say of the judgment of charity, yet in the judgment of truth, and
with the certainty of faith wherewith we must assent to every Scripture, who
can say that any particular Infant is holy, and so that any Infant should be
baptized? or if we can say in the judgment of truth, that every baptized
Infant is really sanctified, as it seems Mr Robinson has taught Mr Goodwin, if
Mr Rathband understand right the 309 p. of Rob. justification ( kkkkk 2), the
Arminians have won the field; for no man doubts but many baptized Infants,
even in their way, do fall away totally and finally from whatsoever holiness
can be supposed to be in them. If these inextricable difficulties did move Mr
Goodwin to stop the Press that it went not on with his Sermons against the
Anabaptists, 2. They esteem none for their Baptism and Christian education a
member of their Church, till they have entered themselves in their church
covenant.
himself does know.

Secondly, they esteem not baptized Infants to be members of their Church
before they have entered into their Covenant; till then they hold them from the
Lords Table and all the acts of Discipline, as people without the Church and
not members of it ( lllll): If it be so, their Baptism was of so small use that
well they might have wanted it to the time of their admission to be members.

3. They call none of their members to any account before their Presbytery for
obstinate rejecting of Paedo-baptism, although the Brownists do excommunicate
for that sin.
Thirdly, they account Anabaptism a very tolerable error; so far as ever we
heard to this day, they did never so much as rebuke any of their members for
it, much contrary to the practice of the Brownists, and of their Brethren in
New England, who ever have removed the Anabaptists from their Churches, as
Sectaries of a special evil note. We have long observed the great affection
of Independents here toward them who professed opposition to Paedo-Baptism,
but did never expect to have heard them declare any thing toward the Arminian
errors of the Anabaptists.

The Lords Supper they desire to celebrate at night after all other Ordinances
are ended ( mmmmm); albeit the Brownists now take it in the forenoon.

They participate with none of the Reformed Churches in the Lords Supper, yet
they scruple not to communicate with Brownists and Anabaptists.
In the persons who do communicate, they are as strict as any of the Brownists;
for notwithstanding all that their Brethren of New England, and themselves
also, and their Apology do profess, of their communicating of the Sacrament
with the rest of the Reformed Churches, which sometimes also is the Brownists
profession; yet it is told them without reply to this day, that in London,
however they have admitted Brownists and Anabaptists to their Sacrament, and
they have communicated in the Brownists Congregations ( nnnnn); yet that none
of them have ever offered to participate of the holy Communion in any other
Congregation, nor have admitted any to communicate with them who were not of
their own way ( ooooo).

For the manner of their celebration, they who have seen it, Their way of
celebrating the Lords Supper is more dead and comfortless then any where else.
profess it to be in a very dead and comfortless way: it is not as in New
England, once in the month, but as at Amsterdam, once every Lords day ( ppppp),
which makes the action much less solemn then in any other of the Reformed
Churches, and in this too much like the daily Masses of the Church of Rome.

They have no preparation of their flock before: They have no Catechizing, no
preparation, nor thanksgiving sermons, ordinarily they speak no word of the
Sacrament in their Sermons and prayers either before or after.
they are so happy as to have all their members prepared always sufficiently
for the Lords Table, from their first entrance into their Church to their dying
day; for all this time there is no catechizing among them, this exercise is
below their condition, and altogether needless in any of their Congregations.
They will have no Sermon in the week before, nor so much as any warning of the
Communion. This practice of New England, to give warning the Sabbath before, is
disliked now at London: nor must there be any Sermon of Thanksgiving after that
Sacrament: They have only a little discourse and short prayer in the
consecration of both the Elements; there after in the action nothing but dumb
silence* no exhortation, no reading, no Psalm.
They use not so much as a little application of the Doctrine in the Sermon
before it to that occasion ( qqqqq).

When they come to the action, there is no more but one little discourse, and
one short prayer of the Minister; all the time of the participation, there is
nothing in the Congregation but a dumb silence: no reading, no exhortation, no
Psalms, their people need no such means to furnish them in their Sacramental
meditations; they have also learned from the Brownists, a double and distinct
consecration, one for every element apart.

They have another difference from all the Reformed, and in a part also from
their Brethren of New England.

That their Conformity with the Brownists may be full, They require none of
their members. to come out of their Pewes to the Table.
the New-English do count sitting at a Table, not only to be necessary, but
to be a part of our imitation of Christ, and a Rite significant of diverse
heavenly Privileges and Comforts ( rrrrr); but as the Brownists at Amsterdam
this day have no Table at all, And they acknowledge no more use of a Table then
the Brownists at Amsterdam who have none at all.
as they send the Elements from the Pulpit (the place where the Minister
preaches, and celebrateth the Sacrament) by the hand of the Deacon to all the
Congregation, where in their meeting house they sit up and down in their
several places: So the Independents at London, do vehemently contend for the
needlesnesse of any to come to the Table, what ever be the practice of all the
rest of the Reformed Churches: But they will have the holy Seals carried from
the place where the Minister preaches to the people in their Pews, or where
ever else they have their ordinary places for hearing of the Word; although
most easily in their small Congregations without any disturbance all might be
brought to the Table ( sssss).

They teach the expediency of covering the head at the Lords Table.
But their maine difference from all the Reformed, and greatest consonancy with
the Brownists, is in this, that as they teach all outward signs of Worship in
the time of the Celebration to be Idolatry, and hereupon declare the necessity
of all men who will follow the example of the first Communicants, to keep on
their Hats, all the time of this holy action; so likewise the Independents
begin to teach their disciples; for however at Amsterdam this day the named
Doctrine be not fully practiced, the men there covering their heads in the
time of the Celebration; but every one uncovering, during the time of their own
personal participation of the Elements; yet we are now taught at London that
covering is most requisite at the time of participation. That this act is a
Rite significant to the Communicants of their Table-honor, and fellowship with
Christ, also that the Minister in all his Celebration must be uncovered, and
that in sign of his service to the Communicants, as the Lords much honored
children, sitting covered when they eat of their Fathers meat (ttttt).

They are as much for the popular Government as the Brownists.
After all the Worship is ended, the Congregation may not yet be dismissed, but
one ordinance more in the end of the day must be attended, the exercise of
Discipline; in this the Independents come up fully to their masters; the whole
people must be present to hear, judge, and voice at every act of Discipline
(wwwww).

In any Congregation the acts of discipline, when best managed, are very
tedious and long, but with them more then anywhere else; for their contentions
are more and more tough, as we may see in the best ruled Congregations that
ever they had; That of Arnheim and Roterdam: if the praise given by the
Apologists to them be just; there the exercise of discipline has bin very
tedious: the whole Congregation to their extreme weariness and fretting, have
been forced to lay aside the works of their ordinary calling for many days of
the week, to attend the Judging of these causes which on the Sabbath days
could not be ended ( xxxxx).

In the Cognition of these causes, All Discipline must be executed in the
presence and with the consent of the whole people, and all must pass by the
express suffrage of every one.
every member of the Congregation must be satisfied in his own mind concerning
every passage of every action; for they do not proceed by the plurality of
numbered voices, but with the harmonious consent of all who have right to voice
( yyyyy).

And if it fall out that any do dissent from the most, they appoint in that
case pains to be taken for the information of the dissenters that they may
consent; but if these pains prove fruitless, and the Dissenters refuse to
join with their brethren, Dissenters not only lose their right of suffrage for
the time, but are subjected to censure if they continue in their dissent.
they are declared obstinate, and to have lost the right of voycing for that
time (zzzzz). Yea, which is worst of all, and which puts these Congregations
upon the smallest occasions upon unavoydable and remediless divisions, they
appoint all who continue in their dissent in any matter of weight, to be
farther proceeded with for their contumacy (aaaaaa).

The public meetings of the Brownists are so long and tedious, that we do not
hear of their stomach for any private; They are much for private meetings, for
it is in them that they usually frame the members of other men's Congregations
into their new mould, but the Brownists and they of New England having felt the
bitter fruits of such meetings, have relinquished, if not discharged them.
but the Independents are yet for private meetings; how long they will be in
love with them, we cannot say; for in New England where they were most in
request, their fruits have been very bitter; these meetings of a middle sort
betwixt Congregationall and Domestic, were the occasion very near to ruin
both that Church and State; for in these it was where under the pretense of
religious conference, and re-petition of Sermons, false doctrine and wicked
calumnies against the most Orthodox of the Ministers and Magistrates, were
spread for the renting and (had not God prevented it) the destroying of the
State both Civil and Ecclesiastic (bbbbbb).

For the present, where they are in gathering of their Congregations, these
meetings in private houses (of all who will) are a very pregnant means to
steal away men and women from their own Pastors; but if once their gathering
of Churches were at an end, and their greatest care were for the keeping and
edifying of what they had gotten, it is like that then they would be as
cautious as now all other Churches are, even the Brownists and these of
New England, of such meetings which except well moderated and limited, under
fair pretenses, are exceeding fit to make new divisions, and ever to frame new
Societies of some, as it were, more select and eminent Christians out of the
common Congregation.

They flatter the Magistrate and slander the Reformed Churches without cause.
Concerning the Magistrate, the Tenets of the Independents would be well
considered, because of their open proclamation of their loyalty beyond and
above all which the principles of any Reformed Church will permit them (cccccc).

Had they magnified never so much their own virtues, without the express
disparagement of others; had they put in the balance with themselves an equal
or a double number of the greatest men in any of the Reformed Churches, who yet
would be very ponderous when they lie in the Scales against five particular men
the Authors of that comparison, had they preferred themselves before all the
Reformed Churches, in a casual and contingent action, not in a maine duty,
which their very principles are alleged to diminish; had they whispered all
this in the ears of their friends, and not made a Proclamation of it to both
the Houses of Parliament, and that in print to be trumpeted out in the ears of
all the world; it might have been past over with the less either observation
or offense: But since in so public a manner they have required the Magistrate
to believe their great deferences to him and the smaller respect he can expect
from any out of their way: it seems very necessary to produce, not these
particular respects which the Reformed Churches profess, according to their
principles to give unto the Magistrate and continually have given according to
their professions (for these are well known to the world long before any of our
new Censors were in being) but what these singular duties may be, which the
Independents above all other men by their principles are forced to perform to
Magistrates, while they may be at leisure to publish them to the world, I will
here present unto them the materials of some few short observations for that
purpose.

Some of them are for the abolition of all Magistracy.
First, that diverse of their party, and those of very eminent note, though
miscarrying in other things, yet keeping fast to the way of Independency, have
denied to the Magistrate all power over any of the Godly ( dddddd).

And others of them with the grossest Anabaptists have denied the lawfulness
of any Magistrate at all ( eeeeee).

Secondly, do not their principles hold out of the Church, All of them are for
casting out and keeping out of the Christian Church all Princes, all Members of
Parliament, all Magistrates of the Counties and Burroughes that now are, and
that ever have been and are ever like to be hereafter, except a very few.
and deprive of all Christian consolation which flows from any Church
privilege, the far greater part, if not absolutely all Kings, and Princes
that are this day in the Christian world, and have been since the days of the
Gospel, or ever are likely to be upon earth to the worlds end? how exceeding
few of all that are, or have been Members of Parliament of either House, of all
that have been or are Magistrates in England, if their principles might be put
in practice, would be admitted to the Lords Table, or yet their children be
baptized, or themselves be reputed Christians and Members of any lawful Church?

Thirdly, of these exceeding few Kings, Princes, Peers, Commoners and
Magistrates of the Land, which they could take into their Congregations; how
many could have assurance to live any long time in a Christian condition as
Members of a Church according to their principles? Since they tell us that they
are to Excommunicate without any delay, These few Magistrates whom they would
admit, have no security, but by the error or malice of a few, to be quickly
cast out of the Church without any possibility of remedy.
the greatest Kings for any fault either in belief or life, which does subject
the poorest servants to censure; how many and frequent these faults may be, it
is hard to judge; but the worst is, when the greatest Kings and the chief
Members of Parliament without any respect to their dignity, are cast out of the
Church for themselves and their children, by the peevishness or error, or
malice of a few in a small Congregation, they have no means under heaven to
redress themselves of their injury; they and theirs must live as Pagans out of
the Church, till they who did cast them out, be persuaded and become willing to
take them in; should all the Divines all the Assemblies, all the Churches of
their Dominions, see clearly as the light their notorious wrong; yet there were
no possibility to help it by any mortal hand till the injurious Congregation
it self, of its own accord, should be pleased to repair it.

Fourthly, When they have put all out of the places of Magistracy, yea out of
all civil courts who are not of their mind, the greatest Magistrates they
admit of, be they Kings or Parliaments, they subject them all to the free will
of the promiscuous multitude.
they permit none to be Magistrates where they have power, not so much as to be
a member of their smallest civil Courts, except they be fully for their way,
and be admitted members of their Church, as it has ever been their practice in
New England to this day; but the Magistrates they admit of, who are of their
mind, they debase their power so low as to suspend it all on the will and
pleasure of the promiscuous multitude, not only to limit the Sovereignty of
Princes within the bounds of their just Laws, and to confine them unto the
Counsel of their Parliaments, but to bring both them and Parliaments and all
Magistrates to their first original and Makers, to the free will of these whom
they use to style the profane multitude ( ffffff).

Fifthly, have any of the Reformed Churches now for an h^ndred years and
above, given to Magistrates such occasion to fear an unjust insurrection, When
Magistrates will not follow their new erro^^s they have bin very ready to make
insurrections to the great hazard of the whole State.
as they in the few years of their being have already furnished?

To pass by all their threatenings in this time of confusion ( gggggg) (while
their strength is yet inconsiderable) and their mighty endeavors to get Arms
into their hand to enable themselves with the evident hazard of the whole Isle,
to do what they please by force ( hhhhhh).

Let men only look over to the fruits of their principles in New England, not
many years ago there, upon a very small, and so far as I know very
groundless suspicion, to have somewhat of their Government altered by the King
contrary to their Patent, they did quickly purchase and distribute Arms among
all their people, and exact of every one an Oath for the defense of their
Patent against all impugners whosoever; Mr Williams opposition to this Oath as
he alleges, was the chief cause of his banishment ( iiiiii).

What principles could these be, that moved the same people a little after to
do and say such things for which their Magistrates did disarme so many of
their Church members, not only elsewhere, but even at Boston, upon fear of an
apparent insurrection for the killing of the principal Magistrates, and
overturning the whole state of that Country ( kkkkkk 1.)

Few Magistrates will hereafter confide in these principles which saved not the
Governor and general Court of New England, from extreme danger by the members
of Mr Cottons Congregation at New Boston.

Many of them deny to the Magistrate any power at all in the matters of
Religion.
Sixthly, do the Independents principles give to the Magistrate any
Ecclesiastic power at all? will they submit to his civil power in any
Ecclesiastic affairs? will they be hindered by the Magistrates sentence,
unless it be executed with violence to erect Congregations within his
Dominions at their own pleasure? will their principles permit them upon the
command of King and Parliament, to refuse to take into their Congregations the
members of other Parish Churches without a dismision, or take and admit upon
the Magistrates command within their number, any whom they account unfit for
membership, or to recall for the Magistrates pleasure any of their Church
censures? have they not very lately declared to the Parliament, that they
esteem all matters of Religion free and exempt from their sword and power? That
all matters both of worship and doctrine, that all things of the mind as they
speak, or matters of opinion, and all matters of outward form wherein
uniformity is required according to our Covenant, are so far to be ruled by
every man's own conscience his own light and reason* that the Parliament is not
in any such matters to interpo^e their power? whither this be the true sense
of their openly avowed and repeated letters to the Parliament it self, let
every intelligent man consider who reads the words ( kkkkkk 2).

Seventhly, Their principles do spoil Princes and Parliaments of their whole
^egislative power; they abolish all humane Laws that are made, and hinder any
more to be made.
are any of the Reformed Churches or any Churches or persons of the whole world
so injurious to Magistrates as their principles force them to be, who ^poyl
Christian Kings and Parliaments of their whole Legislative power? they will
have us to believe, as good Divinity, that it is not only unlawful for
Church Assemblies to make Ecclesiastic Canons, but that it is alike unlawful
for any Prince or State to make a Civil Law, (llllll)

That the placing of a Legislative power in Kings or Parliaments, is to usurp
the property and prerogative of God. ( mmmmmm 1)

These Principles cannot be very favorable to the State, which at one stroke
annihilate all the Acts of Parliament that now are in force, either in this or
any other Kingdom, and make it impossible (if they were believed) to have any
more in any place of the earth, to the worlds end. Look back upon what I have
cited from the chief of the Brownists writings. I grant the New English
polishers of Brownism do not express their Tenets in terms so hugely gross;
yet see how near they come to them in substance, when they tell us that no
Magistrate may make any Laws about the Bodies, Lands, Goods, Liberties of the
Subject, which are not according to the Laws and Rules of Scripture, Scripture
being given to men for a perfect rule, as well in matters of Civil Justice, as
of devotion and holiness ( mmmmmm 2); and if so, then they must make it as
unlawful and contrary to the Scriptures perfection, for any man to make Laws
in matters of Righteousness and of the State, as in matters of Holiness and
of the Church.

The Civil Laws which Mr Cotton permits men to make, bind, no man any further
then his own mind is led by the reason of the Law to obedience.
That beside things in themselves good or evil, which Scripture determines by
its Laws expressly, things of an indifferent nature, whereupon the most of
civil Laws are made, must be regulated according to the Scripture rules of
Piety, Charity, and Conscience, so far that the expediency and reason of the
Law must ever carry and convince the conscience of the Subject: that no man is
obliged to the obedience of a civil Law in a thing never so indifferent by the
authority of the Lawgiver, but every man whose conscience is not convinced of
the piety and charity of that Law, is free from all obedience and subjection
thereto: Thus far Mr Cotton (mmmmmm 3.)

They put the yoke of the judicial Law of Moses on the neck of the Magistrate.
Eighthly, what men besides them have made so bold with Kings and Parliaments, as
not only to break in pieces their old Laws, and to divest them of all power to
make new ones; but also under the pretext of a divine right, to put upon their
necks that unsupportable yoke of the Judicial Law of the ^ewes, for peace and
for war, without any power to dispense either in addition or substraction (
nnnnnn 1)? I grant this principle of Barrow is limited by Mr Cotton to such
Judicials as do contain in them a moral equity ( nnnnnn 2); but this moral
equity is extended by him to so many particulars, as Williams confesses the
whole Judicial Law to be brought back again thereby, no less then by the
plain simple and unlimited Tenet of the rigidest Brownists (nnnnnn 3.)

They give to their Ministers a power to sit in civil Courts and to voice in
the Election of the Magistrates, and to draw from Scripture Civil Laws for the
government of the State.
Ninthly, does any Reformed Church appoint their Ministers to be members of the
highest civil Courts, with power of voiceing in the election of the supreme
Magistrate? ( oooooo.)

Do any Divines but theirs, since the Bishops were abolished, join themselves
as companions with the Magistrates, to draw out of Scripture a body of civil
Laws for the Government of the State? ( pppppp.)

Tenthly, did ever any Divines but theirs, They offer ^o persuade the
Magistrate contradictory principles, according to their own interest.

In New England they persuade the Magistrates to kill all Idolaters and
Heretics, even whole Cities, men, women, and children.


so evidently mock the Magistrate, by instructing him according to their own
interest, as it were from heaven, to contradictory practices, in New England
where the Magistrate is in their way, to persuade him the necessity under pain
of sin and judgment, to kill all Idolaters, and false Prophets, to destroy
whole Cities; men, women, and children, who are seduced by a false Prophet (
qqqqqq)?

Making a pathway by this means to the slaughter, not only of all Papists and
Heretical Sects, but also of many good Protestants, who to the Brownists are
Idolaters for the reading of Prayer, and obstinate enemies of the Kingdom of
Christ for their mislike of Independency, according to the open profession of
the prime Independents (rrrrrr.)

Their Doctrine in Old England, where the Magistrate is out of their way, is
diametrally opposite to this: But here they deny the Magistrate all power to
lay the least restraint upon the g^ossest Idolaters, Apostats, Blasphemers,
Seducers or the greatest enemies of Religion.
for here they make it a Theomachy ( ssssss), a fighting with God to deny a
free liberty to Papists, to the worst Heresies and Schisms, to Judaism,
Turcism, Paganism, or if any error can be imagined to be more pernicious. I
believe that few prudent Magistrates, when they have well ruminated these and
the like principles of the Independents, will esteem them much more conducible
for their ends, then the principles of the Reformed Churches.

In the point of Schools and Learning, how far they will follow the
Brownists, I cannot say: diverse of them have as good a share in learning as
their neighbors; yet whatever they have of that kind, No great appearance of
their respect to secular learning and Schools.
they got it all before they entered into their new way, and whatever learning
all of them do possess, it is no more then what was among the Brownists, when
they did most cry down learning. The most of their erudition this day dwells in
New England, that any real course has ever there been taken for its
entertainment and propagation, I have not heard much; though the Magistrate and
the whole Land have been and are at their Devotion; and till of late they had
no apparent hope of supplying their way from the Schools of other parts of the
world.

Were we not weary, Independency much more dangerous then Browni^
we might go on yet farther in the parallel, especially in the doctrinall
Tenets of the Independents, wherein already they have gone far beyond the
Brownists: you had a touch of the Arminianism of some in the real
Sanctification of all baptized Infants; of the enthusiasms of others in their
contemplations of God without Scripture; of the Libertinism of a third,
blaspheming God as the Author of the sinfulness of sin: of the Arminian
reprobation, the Antinomian, Montanist^ck and Familistick Tenets of a fourth;
for which I doubt if to this day they have given any satisfaction. The whole
City has been filled these many years with the noise of the Socinianism of
the fifth; many of them are passionate for a full liberty of all Religions in
every State. The Apologists declare, that they will have none cast out of the
Church for any errors which are not fundamental; and how far they will
extend this principle who can know? only it would seem that all the named
errors which do lodge or have lodged, as is alleged, in their prime Leaders,
without any censure to this day, must be taken within the compass of errors
tolerable, not only in the State, but in the purest Churches.

And if Arminian, Socinian, Anabaptistick, Antinomian, Familistick,
Enthusiastic errors be declared not fundamental, and tolerable in a Church,
what shall we say of Prelaticall, Cassandrian and the most of the Popish Tenets
that are no ways so gross? Spalato and others have been at great pains to
prove that none of all the Popish errors are fundamental. The Remonstrant
Apologists labor to free the greatest Heresies that ever were in the Church,
such as Arrianism of old, and Vorstianism of late* from that infamy. Certainly,
though our Brethren had kept in their principle of change, and not declared
their full resolution to go on farther then themselves or others have yet
thought: what already they have positively delivered, gives to the world just
reason of doubt whither they may go, and where at last they will stop their
very swift and volant progress.

The Testimonies of the sixth Chapter.
(a) ANtap. p. 243. It was agreed upon, that they out of hand should bring in a
Narrative of their opinions wherein they differed from us, and then should
join with us in preaching against the Brownists and Anabaptists; they never
brought in their Narrative until this day, and though at full meetings of the
Ministers, they have been spoken unto, and some Ministers have been sent from
the Company to some of them, and the Narrative was promised at such a time, and
then at such a time yet it was never performed; and whereas the agreement in
writing for our side, was left in Mr Calamies hand, Mr Nigh comes after some
time to Mr Calamy, and pretends some reasons to borrow it for awhile; but after
he had it, he carries it away into Yorkshire, that so upon occasion of
complaints of the breach of the agreement, when we would have consulted with
that paper, it was gone, and Mr Nigh keeps it to this day, and having been moved
to restore it, His answer is, it is at Hull amongst other papers.

(b) Apollonius Letter to the 5 Apologists, the 3 of May 1644. Hasce
quaestiones ad vos reverendi viri transmitto de iisdem sententias vestras
quaerens and ob mutuam nostram fidem and charitatem serio vos oro ut non
detrectetis sincere dilucide and accurate absque Rhetorici apparatus
diverticulis declarare, quid vos and fratres illi quibuscum societatem vestram
Ecclesiasticam colitis de hisce sentiant, quoniam meae fidei ab Ecclesiis
Christi id commissum est. Spero vos ex timore dei and charitate erga nos
fratres vestros absque ullo pretextu sententias vestras hac de re declaraturos,
idque quam cito fieri potest, urgent enim Ecclesiae nostrae ut opus hoc
maturem; This zealous adjuration has not to this day drawn from any of them
any declaration.

(c) Apol. Nar. p 30. A relation of our judgments in the points of difference
about Church Government, we reserve unto the more proper season.

(d) Keys Preface, p. 6. Only we crave leave of the reverend Author to declare
that we assent not to all expressions scattered up and down, or to all and
every assertion interwoven in it; yea, nor to all the grounds or allegations of
Scriptures, nor should we in all things perhaps have used the same terms, to
express the same materials by.

(e) Apol. Nar. p. 10. A second principle we carried along with us in all: our
resolution was not to make our present judgment and practice a binding law
unto our selves for the future; and therefore in a jealousy of our selves, we
kept this rese^ve to al^er and retract, though not lightly what ever should be
discovered to be taken up out of a misunderstanding of the rule, which
principle we wish were next to that most supreme, enacted as the most sacred
Law of all others.

(f) Cottons Keys published by Goodwin and Nigh, p. 49. In what sense the
Church of a particular Congregation is the first subject of the power of the
Keys, in the same sense it is Independent and none other, we taking the first
subject and the Independent subject to be all one. Answer to the 32 questions.
p. 46. For the matter of Independency, we confess the Church is not so
Independent, but it ought to depend upon christ; But for Dependency upon men or
other Churches, or other Subordination unto them in regard of Church Government
and power, we know not of any such appointed by Christ and his Word. The
Churches were not Dependent and Subordinate to others, but all of them
absolutely free and Independent. Burtons Vindication* p. 42. We are not so
ashamed of the Title of Independency* as utterly to disclame it, and that for
two reasons; first, for distinction sake, between us and that which you call
Presbyteriall Government; The second is, because this word Independent is to
signify that we hold all particular Churches of Christ to be of equal
authority, and none to have Jurisdiction over another, but each Church is under
Christ's Goverments as the sole head, King, Lord, Lawgiver thereof.

(g) Apol. Nar. p. 22. We do professedly judge the Calvinian Reformed Churches
of the first Reformation from out of Popery to stand in need of a further
Reformation themselves.

(h) Ibid. p. 19. We think we give more to the Magistrate then the principles
of the Presbyteriall Government will suffer them to yield.

(i) Ibid. p. 24. We do here publicly profess we believe the truth to lie
and consist in a middle way, betwixt that which is falsely charged on us,
Brownisme, and that which is the contention of these times, the Authoritative
Presbyteriall Government. Preface to the Keys, p. 5. We are yet neither
afraid, nor ashamed to make profession that the substance of this brief
extract, is that very middle way betwixt that which is called Brownisme, and
the Presbyteriall Government.

(k) Vide supra, Chap. 2. (B) and ( R 2.)

(l) Prynnes Discovery, p. 29. John Lilbourn in his Answer to 9 Arguments, p.
4. writes the Church of England is a true whoorish mother, and you are one of
her base begotten and bastardly children. I say, the Church of England neither
is, nor never was truly married to Christ in that espousall band which his true
Churches are and ought to be, but is one of Antichrists National wh^orish
Churches: your Church is false and Antichristian, the Ministers of the Church
of England, are not true Ministers of Christ, but false Ministers of
Antichrist, ibid. p. 31. This language and opinion of his concerning our
English Church and Ministry, is seconded by most Independents in their late
Pamphl^ts.

( m) Mr Robinson has written a whole Treatise upon this subject.

( n) Answer to the 32 questions, p. 27. If we were in England, we should
willingly join in some parts of Gods true worship, and namely, in hearing the
Word where it is truly preached; yea, though we do not know them to be true
Churches. For some worship, as prayer, and preaching, and hearing the Word, is
not peculiar to Church Assemblies, but may be performed in other meetings.
Cottons letter examined, p. 43. The second thing which Mr Cotton himself has
professed concerning English Preachers, is, that although the Word, yet not the
Seals may be received from them, because (says he) there is no Communion in
hearing, and the Word is to be preached to all but the Seals, etc.

(o) Vide supra. Chap. 3. (G.)

(p) Cottons Letter examined, p. 37. Cotton here confesses these two things;
first, if any reproach the Church of Salem for Separation, it is a sin meet to
be censured: secondly, the Churches themselves may be separated from, who
tolerate their members in such causlesse reproachings, which I leave to
himself to reconcile with his former profession against Separation.

(q) Vide supra. Chap. 4. (R)

(r) Vide supra, Chap. 5. (E 1).

(s) Burtons Vindication, p. 45. We esteem the Government of Christ's Church so
holy, as we cannot think them fit to be admitted, be they never so good, that
think so slightly of the way, and of them that walk in it, that they refuse to
agree to walk in this way with the people of God. Ibid. p. 62. Do you not know
that no Infants have any title to Baptism, but by virtue of their Parents
faith outwardly professed, and what outward profession of faith in the Parents
that refuse Christ for their only King? If therefore the Parents refuse thus to
be in visible Covenant, can the children be said to be in visible Covenant, and
so to have a right to baptism? If then the Parents by refusing Christ as their
King, do hereby cut themselves off from the Covenant, they do therewith cut
off their children to.

(z) Ibid. p. 63. We dare not baptize the children of these Parents that refuse
to profess the faith of Christ as their only King as well as their only
Priest and Prophet; for Christ divided, becomes no Christ to the divider; this
is to dissolve Christ, that is, to receive him only in part and not in whole,
which is the spirit of Antichrist, ibid. p. 55. Such a conversion as you speak
of, comes not home to whole Christ, and such with their Converters do deny
Christ's Kingly Government; what kind of Converters call you these? at best they
are converted but in part, and that maine thing is wanting, to wit, Christ's
Kingly Office which they come not up to by the preaching thereof.

(w) Paper of Accommodation after the ninth proposition: We having weighed our
Brethrens principles, do find no probability of an Accommodation for them
ordinarily to enjoy Congregations, unless it shall happen in a Parish that the
Minister cannot administer the Sacraments to all of the Parish, whom possibly
the neighbor Ministers or the Classis may judge fit to be admitted, such
persons shall have power to procure to themselves the Sacraments by the help of
a neighbor Minister, ibid. Whereunto our brethren add as follows, or
otherwise if in a Parish it happen that there be a considerable number of such
as cannot partake in the Ordinances with the Minister and people, there they
shall have liberty to dispose of themselves as a distinct Church, and to choose
a Minister or Ministers, at their own charge to be maintained to be their
Pastor.

(x) Thomas Goodwin to I. G. p. 1. Indeed we that are to admit do it upon a
conviction and persuasion of the parties true grace some way made forth visible
to us. Welds answer, to chap. 3. He tells us that they must be real Saints
and sincere Believers, and that the Church in admitting of them, does make
exact trial by examination of their knowledge, and the work of grace, first in
private, then in public, and that they be such as can cleave together in
opinion and affection, and that they be such as know what belongs to
Church Covenant, approve it and seek it; is there any thing in all this that
you can blame?

(y) Ibid. In the Churches where we have lived many years, we have seen such a
tender respect had to the weaker sex, that we commit their trial to the
Elders, and some few others in private, who upon their Testimony are admitted
into the Church without any more ado.

(z) Rathbones Narration, p. 11. Beside true and real Saintship, they require
that the members to be admitted, be such as can cleave together, both in
opinion and in affection, and that there be sutablenesse and sweetness of
spirit in them, apt to close one with another.

(aa) Vide supra, (Z) also Cotons Way, p. 7.

(bb) Vide supra, fifth Chap. ( E 1.)

(cc) Apol. Nar. p. 9. Excommunication should be put in execution for no other
kind of sins then may be evidently presumed to be perpetrated against the
parties known light, as whether it be a sin in manners and conversation, such
as is committed against the light of nature, or the common received practices
of Christianity professed in all the Churches of Christ; or if in opinion, then
such as are likewise contrary to the received principles of Christianity, and
the power of godliness professed by the party himself, and universally
acknowledged in all the rest of the Churches, and no other sins to be the
subject of that dreadful sentence.

(dd) Bastwicks Postscript, p. 58. also his Just defense. p. 39.

(ee) An Apology of the Churches in New England, for a Church Covenant

(ff) T.G. to I.G. p. First, it is no more with us then this, an assent and
resolution professed by them that are to be admitted by us, with promise to
walk in all these ways pertaining to this Fellowship, so far as they shall
be revealed to them in the Gospel; thus briefly, indefinitly and implicitly, in
such like words and no more or otherwise, do we apply our answers to men's
consciences. Church Covenant, p. 36. We deny not, but the Covenant in many of
the English Congregations is more implicit, and not so plain as were to be
desired; yet there wants not that real and substantial coming together or
agreeing in Covenant, and that substantial profession of faith, which thanks
be to God, has preserved the essence of visible Churches in England unto this
day.

(gg) Plain dealing, p. 2. A Church is gathered after this manner; a competent
number of Christians come together in some fit place in a public manner, and
there confess their sins, and profess their faith, and enter into
Church Covenant; after this, they do at this same time or some other all being
together, elect their own Officers, as Pastor, Teacher, Elders, Deacons, if
they have fit men enough to supply these places; else as many of them as they
can be provided of; then they set another day for the Ordination of their said
Officers.

( hh) Answer to the 32 questions, p. 36. If Church Communion and the exercise
of such Ordinances, as Christ has appointed for his Church, was lawful and
needful, when Magistrates were enemies to the Gospel, and be not so when
Magistrates profess the Gospel, we do not see but Christians may sometime be
losers by having Christian Magistrates, and in worse condition then if they had
none but professed enemies, ibid. p. 41. It is our practice in Ordination of
Ministers, as also in removing of them, to have the assistance of Ministers of
other Churches; but for authority and power, we know none, that Ministers have,
properly so called, in any Congregation save that one over which the holy Ghost
has made them Overseers, and therefore we think it not lawful when a Church
is to Ordain Officers, to call in by way of authority or power the Ministers
of other Churches.

(ii) Cottons Way, p. 1. The Church to which Christ has committed the
censures, is a combination of faithful godly men, meeting by common consent
into one Congregation, ibid. 7. Then such whose hearts God teaches often meet
together about the things of God and perform some duties of prayer and
spiritual conference together, till a sufficient company of them be well
satisfied in the spiritual good estate one of another, and so have approved
themselves to one another consciences in the sight of God, as living stones
fit to be laid in the Lords spiritull Temple, ibid. p. 10. The Church being
thus gathered as has been described: Our next care is, that it may be
supplied with all these Officers which Christ has ordained.

(kk) Answer to the 32 Questions, p. 43. We do not find that God does
anywhere say they must be above forty or else they cannot be a Church: nay
rather that speech of Christ's, of two or three gathered together in his name,
does plainly imply, that if there be a greater number then two or three, whom
they being not satisfied in the answer of an offender, may appeal unto, and in
so doing tell the Church, such a small number may be a Church, and may have the
blessing of his presence to be among them.

(ll) Ibid. p. 8, 9. When a visible Church is to be erected, it is necessary
that in respect of quantity it be no more in number in the days of the New
Testament, but so many as may meet in one Congregation.

(mm) Ibid. p. 15. The Church is before the Ministers, seeing the power of
choosing Ministers is given to the Church by Christ.

(nn) Ibid. p. 68. The Church that has no Officers, may elect Officers unto
themselves; therefore it may also ordain them: if it has power from Christ
for the one, and that the greater, it has also for the other which is the
lesser: now, Ordination is less then Election.

(oo) Ibid. p. 42. Unto the 13 question, whether you think it convenient, that
a company of private and illiterate persons should ordinarily examine, elect,
ordain, and depose their Ministers: a part of the answer to this question is,
if there were none among them who had humane learning, we do not see how this
could hinder them of their Liberty to choose Ministers, purchased to them by
Christ's precious blood; for they that are fit matter to be combined into a
Church body, have learned the Doctrine of the holy Scriptures in the
fundamental points thereof; they have learned to know the Lord in their own
hearts; therefore they may not be reproached as illiterate or unworthy to
choose their own Ministers; nay they have the best learning, without which all
other learning is but madness and folly.

(pp) Plain Dealing, p. 3. They set a day for the Ordination of their
Officers, and appoint some of themselves to impose hands upon them: where there
are Ministers or Elders before, they impose their hands upon the new Officers;
but where there is none, there some of their chiefest men two or three of good
report amongst them, though not of the Ministry, do by appointment of the same
Church lay hands upon them. Cottons way, p. 40, 41. Toward the end of the day,
one of the Elders of the Church, if they have any, if not, one of the graver
Brethren of the Church, appointed by themselves to order the work of the day,
stands up and enquireth in the Church etc. he advertiseth him who is chosen,
what duties the Lord requires of him in that place toward the Church; then
with the Presbytery of that Church, if they have any, or if not, with two or
three others of the gravest Christians among the Brethren of that Church, being
deputed by the body, he does in the name of the Lord Jesus ordain him to that
Office, with imposition of hands, calling upon the Lord; and so turning the
speech to the person on whom their hands are imposed, he as the mouth of the
Presbytery, expresses their Ordination of him, and puts a solemn charge upon
him to look well to himself and the flock. After this the Elders of other
Churches present, observing the presence of God in the orderly proceeding of
the Church to the Officers Election and Ordination, one of them in the name of
all the rest, does give unto him the right hand of Fellowship in the sight of
all the Assembly.

(qq) Answer to the 32 questions, p. 48. If the Church has power by election
to choose a Minister, and so power of instituting him, then of destituting also;
Instituere and destituere ejusdem est potestatis.

(rr) Ibid. p. 44. We conceive that every Church properly so called, though
they be not above ten persons, or the least number that you mention, have
right and power from Christ to transact all their own Ecclesiastical
business, if so be they be able, and carry matters justly; for the power of
the Keys Matthew. 16.19. is committed by Christ unto the Church.

(ss) Cottons Catechism, p. 10. It is committed to the Presbytery to prepare
matters for the Churches hearing.

(tt) Answer to the 32 quest. p. 60. In this sense matters with us are carried
according to the vote of the major part, that is, with the joint consent of the
whole Church, but yet because it is the mind of Christ.

(ww) The propositions to which almost all our Elders did agree when they were
assembled together: the first, the Fraternity is the first subject of all
Presbyteriall power, radicaliter, id est causatim per modum collationis, non
habitualiter, non actualiter, non formaliter.

(xx) Anatom. p. 26. I hear of no ruling Elders that ever Mr Simpson had in
his Church. Anatomist anatomised, p. 12. It is true de facto we had none, but
were resolved to have them. Notwithstanding this answer of Mr Simpsons, that
Church of Rotterdam to this day has never had a Presbytery, after more then
seven years delay.

(yy) Antap. p. 52. Pastors are necessary Officers in your Churches, and yet
according to your practices your Churches are many years without them.

(zz) Keys p. 10. Authority is a moral power, and a superior Order or State,
binding or releasing an inferior in point of subjection. Christ has given no
Jurisdiction but to whom he has given office. The Key of power in a large
sense, or Liberty, is in the Church; but the Key of authority or rule, in a
more strict sense, is in the Elders of the Church.

(aaa) Excommunication is one of the highest acts of Rule; and therefore cannot
be performed but by some Rulers* now where all the Elders are culpable, there
be no Rulers left in that Church to censure them: as therefore the Presbytery
cannot excommunicate the whole Church, though apostate, for they must tell the
Church, and join with the Church in that censure; so neither can the Church
excommunicate the whole Presbytery, because they have not received from Christ
an Office of Rule without their Officers. Ib. preface p. 4. He gives unto the
Elders or Presbytery a binding power of Rule and Authority peculiar unto them,
and to the Brethren distinct and apart an interest of power and privilege to
concur with them, and that such affairs should not be transacted but with
the joint agreement of both, though out of a different Right: so that as a
Church of Brethren only could not proceed to any public censures, without they
have Elders over them; so neither in the Church have the Elders power to
censure, without the concurrence of the people: so as each alone have not power
of excommunicating the whole of either, though together they have power over
any particular person or persons in each.

(bbb) Ibid. also Keys p. 13. Else the Brethren have a power of order, and the
privilege to expostulate with their brethren in case of private scandals: so
in case of public scandal, the whole Church of brethren have power and
privilege to join with the Elders in inquiring, hearing, judging of public
scandals, so as to bind notorius offenders and impenitents under censure, and
to forgive the repentant.

(ccc) The propositions, 3. prop. The fraternity having authoritative
concurrence with the Presbytery in Judicial acts.

(ddd) Keys, p. 16. Though the Church want authority to Excommunicate their
Presbytery, yet they want not liberty to withdraw from them.

(eee) Keys Preface, p. 5. When we first read this of this learned Author,
knowing what has been the more general current both of the practice and
judgment of our brethren for the Congregationall way; we confess we were
filled with wonderment at that Divine hand that had thus led the judgments
without the least mutual interchange or intimation of thoughts or notions in
these particticular of our brethren there and our selves here.

(fff) Ibid. Only we crave leave of the reverend Author to declare that we
assent not to all expressions, etc. Vide supra.

(ggg) Tabula. Potestas charitativa mere est primo frat^um and Presbyterorum
charitative non politice ambulantium, secundo sororum.

(hhh) Vide supra, Chap. 4. (F).

(iii) Vide supra, Chap. 3. (M).

(kkk) Bastwicks Independency, p. 99. The fifth Quaere is whether the women and
people as well as the Ministers have the Keys? and whether the women have all
their votes in the Church, both for election and reprobation of Members and
Officers as well as the men? and whether the consent of all the women, and the
greatest part of them be requisite for the making of any one a member, or
officer, so that if they gainsay it, being the greater number, or allow of it,
the most voices carry the business? the practice of this the brethren in some
of their Congregations hold for Orthodox. Mr Prynnes Fresh Discovery, in his
Dedicatory Epistle to the Parliament, p. 5. And to interest the femall Sex and
draw them to their party, they allow them not only decisive votes but liberty
of preaching, prophesying, speaking in their Congregatitions.

(lll) Keys p. 6. We be far from allowing that sacrilegious usurpation of
the Ministers Office, which we hear of to our grief to be practiced in some
places, that private Christians ordinarily take upon them to preach the Gospel
publicly, and to Minister the Sacraments. Katharine Chidleys Justification of
the Independent Churches, p. 28. Yet that the Church must want the Word
preached, or the Sacraments administered, till they have Pastors and Teachers in
Office, is yet to be proved; but that which has been alleged, is sufficient
to prove that the family must not be unprovided for, either for the absence or
the negligence of a Steward.

(mmm) Keys, p. 53. A particular Congregation being the first subject of the
Church power, is unavoidably Independent upon any other Church or body for the
exercise thereof; for the first subject of any accident or adjunct, is
Independent upon any other, either for the enjoying or for the employing, the
having or using of the same.

(nnn) Vide supra (mmm).

(ooo) Answer to the 32 Questions, p. 36. For Dependency upon men or other
Churches, or other Subordination unto them in regard of Church Government or
power, we know not of any such appointed by Christ in his Word.

(ppp) Welds Answer to Rathband, 14. chap. Our Churches are tender to persuade
men to act without light, much more to command or to compel; both which very
words though the thing required were lawful, are odious in the Churches of
Christ most fitly becoming the Synagogues of Antichrist.

(qqq) Vide Cottons Keys, p. 8. and infra (zzz).

(rrr) Cottons Catechism, p. 13. All the Churches thereabout may meet
together, and by the Word of God may confute and condemn such errors in
doctrine or practice as are offensive, to prevent the spreading either of the
gangrene of heresy or of the leprosy of sin; and if the Church offending,
shall not yet hearken unto their brethren, though the rest of the Churches have
not power to deliver them to Satan; yet they have power to draw from them the
right hand of Fellowship. Vide infra, (sss).

(sss) Keys, p. 57. In the Election and Ordination of Officers and censure of
offenders, let it suffice the Churches consociate to assist one another with
their counsel, but let them not put forth the power of their Community to take
such Church Censures out of their hands; let Synods have their just authority
in all Churches how pure so ever, in determining such diataxeis as are
requisite for the edification of all Churches. Keys Preface, p. 4. He
acknowledges that Synods or Classes are an Ordinance of Christ, unto whom
Christ has committed a due and just measure of power, furnishing them not
only with ability to give counsel, but also a Ministerial power and
Authority, to determine, declare and enjoyne such things as may tend to the
reducing of Congregations to right order and peace; but not arming them with
power of Excommunicating either Congregations or their members; they are to
leave the former act of this censure to that Authority which can only execute
it, placed by Christ in these Churches themselves; which if they deny to do or
persist in their miscarriage then the Synod may determine to withdraw communion
from them.

(ttt) Ibid.

(www) Keys, p. 50.51. The Magistates address themselves to the establishment
of Religion, and Reformation of corruptions by civil punishments upon the
wilful opposers; Josiah put to death Idolatrous Priests; nor was that a
peculiar duty of the Kings of Judah; for of the times of the New Testament it is
Prophesied, that in some cases capital punishment shall proceed against false
prophets.

(xxx) Keys Preface, p. 4. He asserteth an association of Churches, sending
their Elders and Messengers into a Synod; so he purposely chooses to style
these Assemblies of Elders, which the Reformed Churches do call Classes or
Presbyteries.

(yyy) Cottons Catechism, p. 3. The office or work of the ruling Elders, is to
moderate the carriage of all matters of the Church Assembled, as to propound
matters to the Church, and to order the season of speech and silence in the
Church.

(zzz) Keys p. 48. The pattern of Synods is set before us, Acts 15. There the
Apostles assembled together with the Elders, and a multitude of brethren
together with them, the whole Synod being satisfied, determine of a Judicial
sentence, and of a way to publish it by Letters and Messengers; so the matter
is at last judged in a Congregation of Churches in a Church of Churches; for
what is a Synod else but a Church of Churches? ibid. p 57. All the liberties of
Churches were purchased to them by the precius blood of the Lord Jesus, and
therefore neither may the Churches give them away, nor many Churches take them
out of the hands of one.

(aaaa) Keys Preface, p. 6. In all humility we yet see not that assembly of
Apostles, Elders and brethren Acts 15 to have been a formal Synod.

(bbbb 1) Ibid. 4. He a^knowledgeth a Synod to be an Ordinance of God, in
relation to the rectifying of male administrations and healing dissentions in
particular Congregations and the like cases; in such cases they declare and
judge the nature of the offense.

(bbbb 2) Antap. p. 146. I was desired by Mr Ward to be present at that
meeting; but when the time came, neither I, nor any English Ministers, but them
of Arnheim were called; whether were the other Churches of our Nation or any of
them, who could not but be offended, as them of Amsterdam, Hague, Vt^ick,
Leyden, Delph, called in by Arnheim, or by the Church at Roterdam to join in
the hearing and trying of that business? or did they send Messengers, or was
it only agitate by two Ministers, and two Messengers of the Church of Arnheim,
one Church only, Arnheim to Roterdam^ one to one, both equal. The
Sub-Committee for Accommodation Prop. 8. Some of them do desire, that the
effect of that which hereafter follows, may be for explanations sake
inserted, viz. That the Elders and Brethren of such Congregations in case they
find any thing too hard for themselves, or have any controversy among
themselves, may have liberty to advise with any of these select Elders and
others in the Province jointly or apart, or with the Elders of any other
Churches, for the determining and composing the controversy, or resolving that
difficulty.

(cccc) Bastwicks Independency second part. Postscript, p. 6.7. They professed
that they had rather have the Government of the Prelates then the
Presbyteriall, and protest that before Presbyters shall rule over them, they
will join with Prelaticall Priests, for the re-establishing of the Hierarchy.

(dddd) Vide supra (rrr).

(eeee) Apol. Nar. p. 17. What farther Authority there is of one or many sister
Churches toward another whole Church or Churches offending, we do not yet
see; and likewise we do yet suppose that this principle of submission of
Churches that miscarry unto other Churches offended, together with this other,
that it is a command from Christ enjoined to Churches that are finally
offended, to denounce such a sentence of Non-Communion, and withdrawing from
them whilst impenitent, as unworthy to hold forth the name of Christ; these
principles are mutual duties as strictly injoynd them by Christ as any other.

(ffff) Vide supra, Chap. 2. (EEEEE).

(gggg) Theomachia, p. 37. Concerning other civil means for the suppression
and restraint of these spiritual evils, errors, heresies, etc. as
Imprisonment, Banishment, Interdictions, Finings, etc. Both reason and
experience concur in this demonstration, that such fetters as these put upon
the feet of errors and heresies to secure and keep them under, still have
proved wings whereby they raise themselves the higher in the thoughts and minds
of men, and gain an opportunity of further propagation.

(hhhh) Ibid. p. 49.50. To hold that the persons so elected (the members of the
House of Commons, chosen by men unworthy, and strangers to the power of
godliness) have a power by virtue of such nomination or election, to enact
Laws and Statutes in matters of Religion, and to Order under mulcts and
penalties, how men shall worship and serve God, as it is a means to awaken the
eye of jealousy upon them, and so is seven times more destructive unto and
undermining, not only of their power, but of their honor peace, and safty
also, then any thing that is found in the way so ill entreated; so is it the
settling upon the electors of such persons, I mean upon the promiscuous
multitude of the Land, a greater power then ever Jesus Christ himself had, at
least then ever he exercised.

(iiii) Vide supra, (s).

(kkkk) Vide supra, Chap. 4. (BB).

(llll) Plaine-dealing, p. 39. Marriages are solemnized and done by the
Magistrates and not by the Ministers.

(mmmm) Miltons Doctrine of divorce, p. 6. That indisposition, unfitness or
contrariety of mind arising from a cause in nature, unchangeable, hindering and
ever likely to hinder the maine benefits of conjugall society which are solace
and peace, is a greater cause of divorce then natural frigidity, especially if
there be no children, and that there be mutual consent. Ibid. p. 15. God
himself commands in his Law more then once, and by his Prophet Malachy, as the
best Translations read. That he who hates, let him divorce, that is, he who
cannot love, Ibid. p. 16. He who can receive nothing of the most important
helps in marriage, being thereby disabled to return that duty which is his,
with a clear and hearty countenance, and thus continues to grieve whom he
would not, and is no less grieved, that man ought even for loves sake and
peace to move divorce; it is a less breach of wedlock to part with wise and
quiet consent betimes, then still to profane that mystery of joy and union,
with a polluting sadness and perpetual distemper, Ibid. p. 63. Only these
persons are joined by God, whose minds are fitly disposed and enabled to
mantaine a cheerful conversation to the solace and love of each other; the
rest whom either disproportion or deadness of spirit or something distasteful
and averse in the immutable bent of nature renders unconjugall, error may have
joined, but God never joined against the meaning of his own Ordinance; and if
he joined them not, then there is no power above their own consent to hinder
them from unjoyning when they cannot reap the soberest ends of being together
in any tolerable sort, Ibid. p. 76. The freedom and eminence of man's creation,
gives him to be a Law in this matter to himself, being the head of the other
sex which was made for him; whom therefore though he ought not to injure, yet
neither should he be forced to retain in society to his own overthrow, nor to
hear any judge therein above himself, it being also an unseemly affront to
the modesty of that sex, to have her unpleasingnesse and other concealements
bandied up and down, and aggravated in open Court by these hired masters of
tongue-fence.

(nnnn) Williams Paper. I thought good to let you see some particulars wherein
I could not close, nor go along with them. First, that it is lawful for a
woman who sees into the mystery of Christ, in case her husband will not go
with her, to leave her husband and follow the Lords House; for the Church of
God is a Christians home where she must dwell; and where the Saints are, there
is the Lords house; and in so doing, she leaves not her husband, but her
husband forsakes her: The odiousness of this point was further manifested unto
me by the speech of Ezekiel Hollimers wife saying that she counted her self
but a widow.

(oooo) Plaine-dealing, p. 21. They call the days of the week, the first,
second, third, fourth, fifth, sixth, and seventh which is Saturday; also the
Months beginning at March, by the names of the first, second, and so forth to
the twelfth, which is February; because they would avoid all memory of
Heathenish and Idols names.

(pppp) Ans. to the 32. quest. p. 77. For settled and stinted maintenance,
there is nothing done that way among us except from year to year, because the
conditions of Ministers may vary, and of the Church to which they do belong;
neither do we know any such thing to be appointed by Christ our Lord for the
maintenance of the Ministry in these days; the bringing in of settled
endowments and eminent Preferments into the Church, has been the corruption,
and to some the destruction of such as lived by them, both Church Officers and
Church Members.

(qqqq) Cottons Way, p. 38. The Deacons were elected, and ordained for the
serving at Tables, to wit, the serving of all these Tables which pertained to
the Church to provide for, which are the Lords Table; the Tables of the
Ministers or Elders of the Church, and the Tables of the poor Brethren,
whither of their own body, or strangers, for the maintaining whereof we do not
appoint them to go up and down to collect the benevolences of abler brethren;
but as the Apostles received the oblations of the brethren brought and laid
down at their feet, and thereby made distribution as the use of the Church
required, so the Deacons receive the oblations of the brethren every Lords day,
brought unto them and laid down before them, and distribute the same as the
need of the Church does require.

(rrrr) Ibid.

(ssss) Plaine-dealing, p. 19. At some other places they make a rate upon every
man as well within as not of the Church, residing with them, toward the
Churches occasions; and others are beholding now and then to the general Court
to study ways to enforce the mantenance of the Ministry.

(tttt) Antap. p. 276. Have you not carried a greater port then most of the
godly Ministers in the City or Country? have not some of you the prime
Lectures of the City and other good places of advantage and profit? besides,
what some of you have from your own Churches. Vide supra Chap. 4.

(wwww) Bastwicks Independency, p. 142.143. It is well known and can
sufficiently be proved that godly Christians of holy conversation, against whom
they had no exception either for doctrine or manners, and who offered
themselves to be admitted members upon their own conditions, and yet were not
suffered to be joined members, only because they were poor; and this very
reason was given them for their not-admission, that they would not have their
Church over-burdened with poor, Ibid. It was replied, that the Congregation of
which he was Pastor* consisted of great Personages, Knights, Ladies, and rich
Merchants and such people, as they being but poor, could not walk so sutably
with them; wherefore he persuaded them to join themselves with some other
Congregation among poor people, where they might better walk, and more
confortably, in fellowship with them.

(xxxx) Plaine-dealing, p. 16. The Pastor begins with solemn prayer continu^ing
about a quarter of an hour, the Teacher then reads and expounds a Chapter,
then a Psalm is sung which ever one of the ruling Elders dictates; after that
the Pastor preaches a Sermon, and sometimes ex tempore exhortes, then the
Teacher concludes with prayer and a blessing.

(yyyy) Cottons Way, p. 66. First, then when we come into the Church according
to the Apostles direction, 1 Timothy 1. We make prayers and intercessions, and
thanksgivings for our selves and all men.

(zzzz) I have heard the chief of our Brethren maintain this publicly, and I
understand it is the practice of some of them in the City.

(aaaaa) Cottons Catechism, p. 6. Where there be more Prophets besides the
Elders, they may Prophecy two or three if the time permit, the Elders calling
to them, whither in the same Church or others, if they have any word of
exhortation to the people to say on.

(bbbbb) Ibid. And for the bettering of a man's self or others, it may be
lawful for either young or old, save only for women, to ask questions from
the mouth of the Prophets.

(ccccc) Answer to the 32 quest. p. 78. Some think the people have a liberty to
ask their questions publicly for their better satisfaction upon very urgent
and weighty cause, though even this is doubted of by others, and all judge the
ordinary practice of it not necessary; but if it be not meekly and wisely
carried, to be inconvenient if not utterly unlawful; and therefore such asking
of questions is seldom used in any Church among us, and in most Churches never.

(ddddd) Anatom. p. 26. In the matter of singing of Psalms they differ not only
from us, but are also at variance among themselves, some thinking it unlawful
for any to sing but he who preaches; and this has been the late practice at
Arnheim: others thinking it unlawful for women to sing in the Congregation;
hence some women at Rotterdam do not sing; I hear also they think it unfit
for any at all in such times of the Churches trouble as this.

(eeeee) Ibid.

(fffff) Vide supra Chap. 4. (SS 1.)

(ggggg) If the question be of joining in some few selected prayers read by an
able and faithful Minister out of the book, as of the one side we are tender
of imputing sins to these that so join. Vide infra (hhhhh).

(hhhhh) To that part of the Directory which recommends the use of the Lords
Prayer they did enter no dissent: an Answer to the 32 Questions p. 55. By a
Liturgy and form of prayer, we suppose you mean not a form of private
prayer, composed for the help of the weaker: as for a form of prayer in
general, we conceive your meaning cannot be of that; for it is evident that
many Preachers constantly use a set form of prayer of their own making before
their Sermons, with whom the people refuse not to join, ibid. p. 59. We
acknowledge the Lords Prayer, and other forms set down in Scripture, may be
lawfully used as prayers, due cautions being observed. Cottons pouring out of
the spirit p. 10. Not that I would discourage any poor soul from praying on a
Book, for I think as we may sing Psalms on a Book, so we may in some cases pray
on a Book.

(iiiii) Vide supra (s). Also see the Petition of the Inhabitants of the Colony
of the Summer Islands p. 2. Our children die unbaptized, our selves are
deprived of the Lords Supper, our daughters cannot be given in marriage.

(kkkkk) Plain Dealing p. 40. At New Plymouth Mr Chancey stands for dipping in
Baptism only necessary.

(lllll) Cottons Catechism p. 4. What manner of men has God appointed to be
received as members of his Church? Answ. Such as do willingly offer themselves
first to the Lord, and then to the Church, by confessing of their sins, etc.

(mmmmm) This we hear is their ordinary practice at London.

(nnnnn) Vide supra Chap. 4. (Q). (R).

(ooooo) Vide supra ibid.

(ppppp) This is the Apologists common profession.

(qqqqq) This also they profess as a clear consequent of the former.

(rrrrr) Cottons way p. 68. The Lords Supper we administer for the gesture to
the people sitting, according as Christ administered it to his Disciples sitting
Matthew. 20.26. who also made a symbolicall use of it to teach the Church their
majority over their Ministers in some cases, and their Judicial authority, as
Cosessors with him at the last Judgment, Luke 22.27. to 30.

(sssss) For this the Apologists did plead as much and as sharply as any.

(ttttt) I have heard some of their chief men discourse publicly enough to
this purpose.

(wwwww) Cottons Catechism p. 10. The body of the Church has power from Christ
to enquire, and hear, and assist in the judgment of all public scandals.

(xxxxx) Vide supra Chap. 4. (TT).

(yyyyy) Vide supra Chap. 6. (tt).

(zzzzz) Answer to the 32 Quest. p. 61. If it appear, they who dissent from
the major part, are factiously or partially carried, the rest labor to
convince them of their error by the rule; if they yield, the consent of all
comfortably concurreth in the matter; if they still continue obstinate, they
are admonished, and so standing under censure, their vote is nullified.

(aaaaaa) Ibid. If the difference still continue, the sentence is still
demurred even till other Churches have been consulted with; if the Church or
the Elders should refuse the Testim^ny of other Churches according to God, they
will deny them the right hand of Fellowship etc.

(bbbbbb) Short story p. 32. Then M^stris Hutchinson kept open house for all
comers, and set up two Lecture days in the week; when they usually met at her
house three or fourscore persons, the pretense was to repeat Sermons; but when
that was done, she would comment upon the Doctrines, and interpret all passages
at her pleasure; she did lay all that opposed her, being near all the Elders
and most of the faithful Christians in this Country, under a Covenant of
works to advance her Masterpiece of immediate revelations; wherein she had not
failed of her aim to the utter subversion both of Churches and civil State,
if the Lord had not prevented it. Ibid. p. 34. What say you to your weekly
public meetings? Answ. There were such meetings in use before I came; we began
it with five or six, and though it grew to more in future time, yet being
tolerated at the first, I knew not why it might not continue. The Courts reply,
There were private meetings indeed, and are still in many places, of some few
ne^ghbours; we allow you to teach younger women privately, and upon occasion;
but that gives no warrant for such set meetings for that purpose, neither do
ye teach them that which the Apostle commands, to keep at home.

(cccccc) Apologet. Nar. p. 19. To the Magistrate we give as much and, a^ we
think, more then the principles of the Presbyteriall Government will suffer
them to yield.

(dddddd) Williams paper, Prop. 2. That the Saints are not to submit to the
powers of the world or worldly powers, and that the powers and governments of
the world have nothing to do with them for civil misdemeanors; these
Governors must keep in their own sphere, as Whales, not to govern Whales,
but other fishes; Lions not to govern Lions, but the beasts of the forest;
Eagles, not to govern Eagles, but the other fowls of the air.

(eeeeee) Mr Williams related to me, that Mistress Hutchinson (with whom he was
familiarly acquainted, and of whom he spoke much good) after she had come to
Rid Island, and her husband had been made Governor there, she persuaded him
to lay down his Office upon the opinion which newly she had taken up of the
unlawfulness of Magistracy.

(ffffff) Bloody Tenet p. 135. Williams sets down these words of Cottons
model, The proper means whereby the civil power may and should attain its
end, are only political, and principally these five: First, the erecting and
establishing what form of civil Government may seem in wisdom most meet
according to the general rules of the Word and state of the people: upon these
words Williams comments thus; from this grant I infer that the Sovereign
original and foundation of civil power lies in the people, whom they must
needs mean by the civil power distinct from the Government set up: and if so
that a people may erect and establish what form of Government seems to them
most meet for their civil condition, it is evident that such Governments as
are by them erected and established, have no more power, nor for no longer
time, then the civil power or people consenting and agreeing shall betrust
them with. This is clear, not only in reason, but in the experience of all
Common-weals where the people are not deprived of their natural freedom by
the power of Tyrants. How right this Commentary is, Mr Cottons own words will
declare, set down p. 140. In a free State no Magistrate has power over the
Bodies, Goods, Lands, Liberties of a free people, but by their free consent;
and because free men are not free Lords of their own estates, but are only
stewards under God; therefore they may not give their free consents to any
Magistrate to dispose upon their Bodies, Lands and Liberties at large as
themselves please, but as God the Sovereign Lord of all pleases; and because
the Word is a perfect rule, as well of righteousness as of holiness, it will
be therefore necessary that neither the people give consent, nor that the
Magistrate take power, but according to the laws of the Word.

(gggggg) Vide supra Chap. 5. E.

(hhhhhh) Bastwicks Independency second part. Postscript p. 65. It may
evidently appear, that all the projects of the Independents in getting prime
places by Sea and Land, and in the Armies, and in the Towns, Cities, Forts,
and Castles, and all other places, and in all Committees, is only for the
advancement and fomenting of their Faction: and this I conceive to be the only
cause of all the linsie-woolsie Committees through the Kingdom.

(iiiiii) Williams Examination page 4. After my public trial, one of the most
eminent Magistrates stood up and spoke; Mr Williams, said he, holds forth that
it is not lawful to call a wicked person to swear, to pray, as being actions
of Gods worship.

(kkkkkk) Vide supra Chap. 3. TT. WW. AAA.

(kkkkkk 2) Lieutenant General Cromwells Letter to the Parliament from
Bristoll; As for being united in forms commonly called uniformity, every
Christian for peace sake would study and do as far as Conscience would
permit; and from Brethren, in things of the mind, we look for no compulsion
but that of Light and Reason; in other things God has put the sword into the
Parliaments hands for the terror of evil doers, and the praise of them that
do well; if any plead exemption from it, he knows not the Gospel.

(llllll) Vide supra Chap. 2. (HHHHH), (IIIII) (KKKKK.)

(mmmmmm 1) Vide supra ibid.

(mmmmmm 2) Vide infra (mmmmmm 3.)

(mmmmmm 3) Cottons Model of power in the Bloody Tenet p. 140. The Magistrate
in making Laws about civil and indifferent things in the Commonwealth;
First, he has no power given him of God to make what Laws he pleases, either
in restraining from or constraining to the use of indifferent things; because
that which is indifferent in its nature, may sometimes be inexpedient in its
use, and consequently unlawful: it is a prerogative proper to God to require
obedience of the sons of men, because of his Authority and Will. It is an evil
speech in some, that in some things the will of the Law, not the reason of it,
must be the rule of Conscience to walk by: and that Princes may forbid men to
seek any other reason but their authority, yea when they command men frivola
and dura; and therefore it is the duty of the Magistrate in all Laws about
indifferent things, to show the reasons, not only the will; to show the
expediency as well as the indifferency of things of that nature; and because
the judgment of expedient and inexpedient things, is often difficult and
diverse, it is meet that such Laws should not proceed without due
consideration of the rules of expediency set down in the Word, which are these
three; First, the rule of Piety, that they may make for the glory of God, 1
Cor. 10.31. Secondly, the rule of charity, that no scandal come thereby to any
weak Brother. 1 Cor. 8.13. Thirdly, the rule of Charity, that no man be forced
to submit against his Conscience, Romans 14* 14, 23.

(nnnnnn 1) Vide supra Chap. 2. (KKKKK.)

(nnnnnn 2) Cottons Model in the Bloody Tenet p. 140. The Magistrate has
power to publish and apply such civil Laws in a State as either are expressed
in the Word of God, in Moses Judicials; to wit, so far as they are of
general and moral equity, and so binding all Nations in all ages; or else to
be deducted by way of general consequence and proportion from the Word of God.

(nnnnnn 3) Ibid. p. 118. A strange model of a Church and Commonwealth after
the Mosaicall and Jewish pattern, framed by many able, learned and Godly
hands, which wakens Moses from his unknown grave, and denies Jesus yet to have
seen the earth.

(oooooo) Plain Dealing p. 23. The Ministers give their votes in all elections
of Magistrates.

(pppppp) Ibid. p. 25. The Ministers advise in making of Laws, especially
Ecclesiastic, and are present in Courts, and advise in some cases criminal,
and in framing of fundamental Laws. Ibid. p. 27. A draught of a body of
fundamental Laws, according to the Judicial laws of the Jews, has been
contrived by the Ministers and Magistrates, and offered to the General Court
to be established and published to the people.

(qqqqqq) Cottons third vial p. 8. In old time, if a man played the false
Prophet, the Lord judged him to death; and so in the New Testament, as in the
Old he condemns all such to death; it is a Law Deuteronomy. 13. That false Prophets
who did fundamentally pervert Religion, should not live; if high Treason
against Princes on earth justly be punished by death, verily this is as
dishonorable to the Prince of all Princes; that whole 13 of Deuteronomy. is spent
about the seducing of false Prophets, and he puts a threefold gradation; if he
be a Prophet; Therefore never so seemingly holy by his place and gifts, he shall
surely be put to death: if there be never so many that shall join, if a whole
City shall join together in such a course, thou shall rise against it and
destroy the City, and burn it with fire, and leave not a stone upon a stone.
Ibid. p. 12. The third reason is taken from the just desert of soule-murther;
there is none of all these Priests, or Jesuits, or Heretics, but they worry
and devour the souls of Gods people; and this murder of souls is justly a
capital crime, as Moses said before: if they thrust thee from thy God, let not
thine eye spare such kind of corrupters. Ibid. p. 16. Are not Moses moral
Laws of perpetual equity, and therefore to be observed in all ages? Is not
murder of souls as damnable now as then? a wonder that such f^ivolous
interpretations should come in the hearts of men, to hinder the free passage of
the Justice of God on such notorious offenders. Cottons third vial p. 8. on
the 22 of Joshua, when the two Tribes and an half set up an Altar by Jordan,
although they thought not to bring in an other object of worship* but another
manner of worship; yet the other Tribes would have cut them off if they had
found another Altar for worship: he is the same God, and h^s zeal is as deeply
provoked against the like kind of vitiousnesse now as ever he was then, Ibid.
p. 17. A soul that sins of ignorance, may be pardoned; but if he shall
continue obstinate, were it a City or a Tribe, they shall not suffer such in a
Country; but you will say that the tares and wheat may grow together; grant;
but it is not said that briers and thorns should grow up with them, Ibid. p.
19. You see the first use is to justify the equity of such capital
punishments upon Priests and Jesuits, and consequently on such who bring in
other Gods, or another way of worshipping the true God then that wherein we may
enjoy fellowship with the true God.

Cottons third Vial, p. 19.20. For a second use, it may serve to reprove the
carnal and sinful foolish pity that is found in any estate that shall be
sparing to spill such blood of the Priests and Jesuits; the Lord loatheth this
kind of lenity and indulgency; cursed is he that does the work of the Lord
negligently; and cursed is he that keeps back his sword from blood, when the
Lord calls us to sheath the sword of Authority on such kind of Delinquents, a
State shall be separate from God for these tolerations.

(rrrrrr) Vide supra, Chap. 6. (s).

(ssssss) Goodwins Theomachy; also Chap. 5 (G). (H). and Chap. 6. (kkkkkk 2).
also Chap. 6. (bbbb). (hhhh).

CHAP. VII. It is unjust scrupulosity to require satisfaction of the true grace
of every Churchmember.
The Independents prime principles.
HAving set down the Proceedings and Tenets of the Brownists and Independents,
so far as my slender reading of some of their writings and observation of
their ways have brought to my memory at this time: Before I leave them, it
will not be unfit to examine the truth of their chief principles whereby they
have disturbed the Church, and will continue so to do until they have changed
their mind. For shortness, I will pitch but upon four grounds which the
Independents have learned in the Brownists school: The first, concerning the
members of a Congregation; The next three concerning their power. We will first
consider whither the members of every particular Church be obliged at their
first admission to show to the whole Congregation convincing signs of their
Regeneration and true grace. Secondly, whether the people of a Congregation
have a power of voycing in every Ecclesiastic affair. Thirdly, whether the
power of the Congregation be absolute and Independent? Fourthly, whither every
man who has a gift though not an office, has power to preach and prophecy
publicly.

The first question is of the grearest importance: Their Tenet about the
qualification of members, is the great cause of their separating from all the
Reformed Churches though they do dessemble it.
The Independents would gladly dissemble their mind therein; to this day they
have declined all solemn debate upon it, they speak as if they were either
fully or very near accorded with us, professing their utter dislike of the
Brownists unreasonablenesse herein; but I profess this has always seemed to
me their capital and fundamental difference, the only cause of their
separation from us, and wherein if we could either agree or accommodate, there
would be a fair possibility of accord in all things else, at least so far as
to be united in one and the same Church; but this difference is the great
partition wall, which so long as it stands, will force them to continue their
intolerable practice of separating from all the Reformed Churches in the world,
and that for fewer and more unjust causes then any who ever did carry the name
of a Separatist, to this day did pretend. This seems to be the reason why
both Apollonius and Spanheim very excellent Divines, have begun their dispute
with this question.

For the stating of the controversy, consider how it stands betwixt us and the
Independents at this time; the Brownists for their separation were wont to
allege the impurity of our worship, the corruption of our Government, the open
profaneness of the most in our Congregations. By the mercy of God, the first is
fully Reformed, at least so far according to the mind of our brethren, that
they have entered no dissenting vote to any one passage of the Directory for
worship: The Government also is so far cleared in the Assembly, that they
have entered their dissent from no part of it, except that alone which concerns
the Jurisdiction of Presbyteries and Synods; and their dissent herein, might
and still may well be so carried as not to occasion any breach.

In this they go beyond the Brownists.
But the third is the great cause of division, wherein they much out-runne the
Brownists; for they did never offer to separate upon this ground alone; and the
matter whereupon here they stumbled, was only open profaneness and that
incorrigible, either through want of power or want of care to remedy it. If the
profaneness was not open and visible, or if the Church had her full power to
execute discipline, and according to her power made conscience really to
censure scandalls: These things as I conceive, would have abundantly satisfied
the Brownists, and cured their separation.

The true state of the question is whether it be necessary to separate from a
Church, wherein we get no satisfaction of the true grace of every Member at
their first admission.
But the Independents now do draw them up much higher then they were wont to
stand; They teach them to stumble not only at open profaneness, but at the
want of true grace; yea, at the want of convincing signs of Regeneration: They
teach them to require not only a power and care in the Church to censure such
profaneness, but also a power in every member of the Church to keep out all
others with whom they are not satisfied in the truth of their grace; So the
question is not as usually it is made, of the quality of the members of the
Church, but of the necessity to separate from that Church wherein we are not
satisfied by convincing signs of the true faith and grace of every member at
their first admission. We grant it is earnestly to be wished, and all lawful
means would diligently be used both by Pastors and people, to have all the
members of a Church most holy and gracious, and what ever lawful overture our
Brethren can invent for this end, we with all our heart will embrace it, or
else be content to bear much blame; We grant also, that it is the duty of
Church Governors to keep off every scandalous person from profaning to their
own damnation the holy things of the Lord; and that it is the duty of these
Governors not only to suspend from the holy Table all scandalous persons but
farther to cast all such out of the Church without respect of persons in the
case of obstinacy, when by no means they can be brought to satisfactory
repentance; we grant also, that Church Governors deficient in these duties,
ought themselves to be disciplined by the rod of Church Censures; these things
were never controverted. But the question is, whether because of the admission
of some to Church Membership who have not given satisfaction to every member of
the Church in the point of their real Regeneration, a Church may lawfully be
separated from, as vitiously constitute, for that essential defect in its very
matter?

Our Brethrens constant and resolute practice albeit gilded over with many
fair words, makes this to be the clear state of the question, against which
I reason thus:

First, For the Negative, we reason first from the practice of Moses and the
Prophets, who did never offer to separate for any such reason.
What to Moses and the Prophets was not a sufficient cause of separation from
the Churches of their time, is not a sufficent cause for us to separate from
the Churches in our times. But, want of satisfaction by convincing signs of
the true grace of many members of the Church, was not a sufficient cause for
Moses and the Prophets to separate in their times. Ergo: The minor is clear
and uncontroverted; for Moses and the Prophets were so far from separating
from the Churches of their days for want of assurance of the true grace of
every person in these Churches that they remained still to their dying day in
the bosom of these Churches, comumnicating with them in the Word, Prayer,
Sacraments and Sacrifices, though they were assured of the evident wickedness
of the most of their fellow members. Moses knew the Body of Israel to be a
crooked and perverse generation: Isaiah tells the Jews that they were another
Sodom; Jeremy shows that Israel in his days was uncircumcised in heart, no
better then Moab, Ammon, or Edom; Micah, that the godly in his time were very
rare as the summer fruits, as the grapes after the Vintage; of this truth all
the Prophets are full; yet for all this, none of the Prophets did ever think of
a separation.

All the difficulty then is in the major, which thus we prove: The causes of a
just separation were smaller under the Law, nor under the Gospel.
The Church in the days of Moses and the Prophets, was one and the same with
the Church of our days: The House of God, the body of Christ, the Elect and
redeemed people, the holy Nation, the peculiar treasure and spouse of the Lamb:
The difference of the true Church in any age is at most but in accidental
circumstances, and not in any essentials: so what ever moral evil does defile
the Church now, and is a just cause of ejection or separation, that must be so
at all times, especially, under the old Testament, where all the Ceremonial
differences that are alleged betwixt the Church then and now, make for the
strengthening of the Argument; for then the causes of separation were stricter
and smaller; a little Ceremonial pollution would then have kept out of the
sanctuary; much more a moral uncleanness would have made the sacrifice
abominable. If therefore at that time the matter in hand was no cause of
separating from the Church, much less can it be so now, when God has given a
greater liberty to the Church in her majority, and when Christians are not so
easily infected by their neighbors sins as of old in the days of the
Churches infancy they were; Idolatry, false doctrine, open profaneness, were
then most abominable, and more terribly punished then now, by the total
destruction of whole Cities and Countries wherein they were entertained; also
the duty of mutual inspection and admonition, the contempt whereof is made the
grand cause of separation, was most clearly enjoined in the Old Testament.

The weakness of their Reply.
What here is replied, that all separation from the Jewish Church was simply
impossible, because then there was no other Church in the whole earth to go
to: We answer, that the Replyers themselves will say that a separation must be
where there is just cause, and where a person cannot abide without pollution
and sin, although there be no other Church for him to go to; for they make it
better for men to live alone separate from all, then to abide in any Church
where they cannot live without the participation of their neighbors sins. We
answer further, That it was easy for the godly under the Law to have joined
together in the service of God, and to have excluded the wicked thence; and
whereas it is said that this could not be done, because the Censure of
Excommunication was not then in being; We answer, the Gospel makes it clear;
That casting out of the Synagogue which was real Excommunication, Our second
reason, is from the example of Christ and his Apostles, who did not separate
for any such causes.
was frequent in the Old Testament; as also the keeping off from the service
with a great deal of circumspection all who were unfit by any legal
pollution, much more by any known moral uncleanness; Kings themselves when
polluted, were removed from the Altar and put out of the Sanctuary.

Again, I reason thus; That which moved not Christ and his Apostles to separate
from the Church of their time, is no cause to us of separation; but, want of
satisfaction by convincing signs of the true grace of every member of the
Church, was to them no cause of separation from the Churches of their times,
Ergo.

The major is clear, except we desire a better pattern for our practices then
Christ and his Apostles; what ever carries us beyond their line, must be high
presumption and deep hypocrisy.

The minor is clear, by many Scriptures; the Scribes and Pharisees were a
generation of vipers; Jerusalem worse then Sodom and Gomorrah; Corasin and
Bethsaida was worse then Tyrus and Sidon, and to be cast lower in Hell then
these: yet the Lord did not give over to preach, to pray, to go to the Temple
with them. Judas when a declared Traitor, did not scarre him, nor any of his
company from the Sacrament. After he went from the Table, when his wickedness
was revealed that a Devil was in him; yet none of the Apostles offered to cast
themselves out of the body because this wicked member was not cut off. Many
members of the Apostolic Churches were so far from convincing signs of true
grace, that the works of the flesh were most evident in their life. In the
Corinthians, fundamental errors, open Idolaty, grievous scandal, bitter
contentions, profanation of the Lords Table. In the Galatians, such errors as
destroyed grace, and made Christ of none effect. In the Church of Ephesus, of
Laodicea, and the other golden Candlesticks, diverse members were so evidently
faulty, that the Candlestick is threatened to be removed; yet from none of these
Churches did any of the Apostles ever separate, nor gave they the least warrant
to any of their Disciples to make a separation from any of them.

A third Argument. The want of that which never was to be found in any Church,
is no just cause of separation: The third reason; it is impossible to find true
grace in every member of any visible Church that ever was or shall be in the
world.
But satisfaction by convincing Arguments of the true grace of every member,
was never to be found in any Church.

The major is unquestionable for what is not, cannot have any operation; non
entis nulla sunt accidentia.

The minor is demonstrable; from the nature of a visible Church, it is such a
body whose members are never all gracious, if we believe Scripture; It is not
like the Church invisible, the Church of the Elect. It is an heterogeneous
body, the parts of it are very dissimilar, some chafe, some corn, some wheat,
some tares; a net of fishes good and bad; a house wherein are vessels of honor
and dishonor, a fold of sheep and goats, a tree of green and withered
branches, a table of guests, some with, some without a wedding garment; in a
word, every visible Church is a society wherein many are called, few chosen;
except therefore we will alter the nature of all visible Churches whereof
Scripture speaks, we must grant that in every Church there are some members
which have no true grace; and if so, how can they give convincing and
satisfactory signs of that which is not to be found. Hypocrites may make a
show without, of that which is not within; but shall we lay an obligation upon
every hypocritical member of a Church to be so eminently skillful in the art
of counterfeiting as to produce in the midst of his gracelesnesse, so clear,
so evident and satisfactory signs of his true grace, as may convince the
hearts of every one of the Church that the thing is within the man's breast
which certainly is not there?

The fourth, this satisfaction in the true grace of all to be admitted, is
builded on four errors, first that the power of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction is
in the hand of every one of the people.
The fourth Argument, The want of that which cannot reasonably be supposed of
every member of a Congregation, is no just cause of separation from any Church;
but satisfaction etc. Ergo.

The major is clear; for if the want of such satisfaction be a just cause of
separation from the Church; Then the presence of such a satisfaction is very
requisite to be in every member, as a necessary mean to keep it in union with
that Church.

The minor, that such a satisfaction may not justly be supposed in every member
of a Congregation; for this would import these four things, all which are
unreasonable. First, that every member of a Congregation is to have power to
try all its fellow members, to let them in or hold them out, according as in
this trial he is satisfied: This is a large limb of the Brownistick Anarchy,
putting the key of Authority and Jurisdiction into the hand of every
Churchmember; if all the Independents will defend this, let them speak it out
plainly.

Secondly, that one man may attain to the certain knowledge of the true grace
in the heart of another.
Secondly, it requires a great deal of more ability in every member of every
Church, then can be found in any mortal man: for not to speak of the
impossibility of a grounded and certain persuasion of true grace in the heart
of an Hypocrite, who has no grace at all: how is it possible to attain unto
any grounded certainty of true grace in the heart of any other man? for the hid
man of the heart, and the new name, are not certainly known to any but to such
as have them. The grounds of a man's own certain persuasion, the act of his
faith either direct or reflex, the witness of his conscience, or the seal of
the spirit, cannot go without his own breast: all the demonstrations which can
be made to another, are so often found false, that in understanding men they can
breed at most but a fallible opinion or a charitable hope, which is far from
any certainty either of sense or science, much more of faith or immediate
revelation.

Thirdly, it lays a burden unsupportable to the strongest, Thirdly, that it
is a duty of every member of a Church to seek and find satisfaction in the
true grace of all his fellow members.
upon the conscience of every weak one; they must ever be in perplexity and
doubt what to do, whether to stay in the Church, or under the pain of sin to
separate from it till they have accurately examined, and after all needful
trial attained to a full satisfaction and assurance of mind of the
regeneration of every member, were they never so many of that Church whereunto
he belongs: The burden of such a task might break the back of the strongest
Pastor, much more of a silly Lamb.

Fourthly, Fourthly, that all the Reformed Churches must once be dissolved and
unchurched, that they may be reformed according to the new mould of the
Independents.
this presupposes that all Congregations must of new be gathered, and all
their members admitted of new, which none may grant who minds not for the
Independents pleasure at once to dissolve all the Reformed Churches, and to
avow that every person though born in the true Church, within the Covenant of
grace sealed in Baptism with the seal of God, religiously educated in the
fear and knowledge of God, is notwithstanding without the Church, and no
member of the body of Christ, till he be admitted to the Lords Supper.
Ordinarily in all Chistendom persons are actual members of the Church wherein
they were borne of faithful parents, baptized and Christianly educated, before
they be admitted to the holy Table. The case and question of admitting members
by a Congregation after all are convinced of the true grace of him who craveth
membership among them, is but a new, rash, unjust case of the Independents,
which will infer the gathering of new Churches, the dissolution of all our
old ones, and lay a high royal street for Anabaptism, excluding all our
baptized children from Church Membership till they give personal satisfaction
of their true grace, and enter into a formal express Covenant. The fifth
argument. Their Tenet is followed with diverse absurdities.


I add but one other reason; No real absurdity does follow upon any divine
truth* but diverse real absurdities follow necessarily upon the ground of
Separation in hand. Ergo, the ground of Separation in hand is no divine truth,
but an evil error.

The major no man controverts; for every true consequent is a stream that
flows out of the antecedent as its fountain; as the fountain is bitter or
sweet, so are the streams; from a true antecedent a false consequent by no
force can be extorted; if the consequent be rotten, it is a sure sign the
antecedent is not sound.

As first, it is necessary to separate from all Churches that are this day in
the world, except it be from these of the Independents.
The absurd consequents I name for the proof of the minor, are, First, That
then it shall be necessary to separate from all the Churches that are this day
in the world, except alone from these of the Independent way; for no other
Church does so much as intend or assay to give assurance to every one of their
members of the true grace of all the rest; but on the contrary they teach such
an endeavor to be both impossible and unreasonable. The absurdity of the
consequent is so clear, that I pursue it no farther then to this Dilemma; If
it be necessary to separate from all the Churches of the world but the
Independents; Then, all other Churches but theirs are false, or else it is
lawful to separate from Churches that are true; but, neither of these will
sound well in a Protestant ear.

Secondly, it was necessary to separate from all Churches that ever have been.
The second absurd consequent, That then it was necessary to separate from all
other Churches that have been in any former time; for not one of them ever, no
not the greatest Schismatics, the Novatians, the Donatists themselves did ever
mind that every one of their members should so narrowly examine all their
fellows, as to come to a certain persuasion of their real regeneration.

Thirdly, there can be no rest for any till they turn seekers, and leave all
societies that are called Churches.
The third consequent, That then to the worlds end no Church anywhere can have
any solid foundation; for this principle is a mountain of quicksilver that
rests not till all the Churches builded upon it be quite overthrown. The
conviction of every members conscience of the true faith and grace of all their
fellow members, is so sandy a foundation, that nothing builded upon it can
stand. What else has broken in halfes, and quarters, and demi-quarters these
separate Societies? What made them of Amsterdam first break off from England,
then from Holland, and all the Reformed, then among themselves once and the
second time? What made Smith at Leyden, after he had fallen off from England,
next to leave the Brownists, and after the Anabaptists, till at last he broke
off from all Christians to the Arrian heresy? What else does drive many of Old
and of New England, when they have run about the whole circle of the Sects, at
last to break out into the newest way of the Seekers, and once for all to leap
out of all Churches, betaking themselves to their devotions apart: here indeed
it is, and no where else, where they come to a possibility of satisfaction of
the inward estate of these in their way, that is of themselves alone. This is
the reward of presumptuous error; it cannot rest when it has led the seduced
soul about the whole round of the fancies of the time, till at last it throw
it out of all that is called or so much as pretended to be a Church.

The reasons alleged for the opposite Tenet, Cottons reasons to the contrary
are answered.
may be seen in the Brownists Apology, also in Robinsons Justification, in Cans
necessity of Separation, in Barrows Discovery; but for shortness we will only
consider what is brought by Mr Cotton in his Way of the Churches; for there,
the best of the Brownists arguments are brought in the greatest luster and
strength which Mr Cotton thought meet to put upon them. Also what there is
brought by Mr Cotton, is acknowledged by our Brethren as their judgment,
without the haesitation of any marginall asterisk, which when they dissent or
doubt, they profess to affix to some other passages of that book.

The best form I can set on his first argument, is this; His first reason put
in form.
If every member of each Church is not only in profession, but in sincerity and
truth to be a Saint and faithful; then, the Officers and body of each Church
must take trial, and be satisfied of the true faith and sanctification of
every person before they receive him into the Church; but, every member of each
Church is not only in profession, but in sincerity and truth to be a Saint and
faithful; Ergo, the Officers and body of each Church must take trial, and be
satisfied of the true faith and sanctification of every person before they
receive him into the Church. All the proof is bestowed upon the minor from
these Scriptures which make all the members of the Church to be Saints by
calling, and faithful Brethren: the Church it self to be the body of Christ,
the Temple of the holy Ghost, the spouse of Christ, the sons and daughters and
children of God.

We answer that no part of this argument is sound. The major, All the parts of
it are vicious* the conclusion proves not the question.
minor, and conclusion are vicious. First, the conclusion comes not near the
question; for were it granted, it concludes no more but a duty of the
Church Officers and members to try and be satisfied about the state of these
who are to be received into the Church, but it has no word of an other duty
which is the point in question: It speaks nothing of a necessity to separate
from a Church upon the neglect of the former duty; this alone is the state of
the present controversy, which neither is expressed nor by any consequence
does follow from any thing that is expressed in this conclusion: for suppose it
were a duty laid by God upon every Church Officer and member, to enquire
accurately after the Faith and Sanctification of all to be received among them,
and to expect satisfaction in their trial; yet I hope that every neglect of
duty in the Church Officers, much less in every Churchmember, and least of
all the want of success of a duty truly performed, will not be found a just
and necessary cause for every one to separate from a Church; if all this be not
expersly concluded, this arrow misseth the mark.

It stands upon a chief ground of Anabaptism, and presupposes the nullity of
all the Reformed Churches.
Secondly, That which is expressed in the conclusion, pitcheth only upon one
particular case, which the Reformed Churches neither do nor may acknowledge;
for it speaks only of admission of members upon their confession of sins. This
fits well the practice of the Brownists, who suppose a necessity to dissolve
the Reformed Churches that now are as vitiously constituted from their first
beginning. They may seem to have reason in their gathering of new Churches, to
put their members to trial before admission; but the Reformed Churches who
take themselves to be so far true, that they need no dissolution or new
erection, are not concerned in this case of admission; for their members were
borne in the Church, and had the Covenant sealed to them in Baptism; what
trial they take of their children when they admit them to the Lords Table, is
no ways for their admission to be members; for this practice is a maine pillar
of Anabaptisme; and our brethrens engagement therein, is the ground of all
their sympathy and symbolising with that Sect: So then the conclusion comes
short of the question, and touches not the Reformed Churches, but is builded
on the pillars of rigid Separation and Anabaptisme, taking that for granted
which no Reformed Church may admit, but upon hard terms; no milder then the
nullity and dissolution of all their Churches: that out of the rubbish, a new
building may be erected after the Separatists pattern.

The major also is vicious; The major is many ways vicious.
for suppose the antecedent of it were true, yet there is no force therein to
infer the consequent; be it so, that every Churchmember ought to be so holy
as you will; yet, can this infer the peoples power to try that holiness
which is the one half of the consequent? Such a power in the people would make
every one of them a Church-Governour, which none of the Reformed Churches, nor
the half of the Separatists themselves will admit; and they who do plead for
it, set it upon other pillars but no man I know deduceth it from any thing in
the antecedent now in hand.

For the rest of the consequent, the Officers satisfaction in the true and
sincere grace of the members at their first admission, if it have any truth,
yet it comes too short of reason, and runs also far beyond the most rigid
Separatists. If a trial must be made of Church Members, why at their first
admission alone and never after? Is it not an ordinary case in all Churches,
and as much among the Brownists and Independents as any other, that many who at
first have been taken for truly regenerate, have thereafter fallen to such
errors in judgment and such practices in life, as have given just ground to
conclude the irregeneration of some, and to doubt the regeneration of others?
Now, if the uncertainty of regeneration, be a just cause to hold a man out of
all Churches, is it not as just a cause to cast a man out of a Church, when by
doctrine or life, this uncertainty appears, which at first was covered? yet
none of our Brethren affirm that the uncertainty of regeneration, nor the
certainty of irregeneration is a just ground to cast any man out of the Church
who once is come in. The consequent also runs wide of the rigid Separatists;
for the holiness they require, is expressly external, which may stand with the
internal wickedness of hypocrites; but the consequent speaks of inward
sincerity contradistinguished from all outward professions.

The Minor is the part of the Argument which they labor to fortify, knowing
the greatest weight to lie upon it: But the minor is the most faulty part of
the Argument.
We do deny it as a very dangerous error; every member of a visible Church is
not in truth and sincerity a Believer and Saint: This is against Scripture and
all experience in every visible Church; all who are called are not chosen: In
the field of God there are tares among the wheat, in his fold goats amongst the
sheep, in his net bad fishes among the good, in his house vessels for
dishonor, not for honor only. In the best Churches of the Scripture, we have
too many bad members, Judas, Ananias and Saphira, Simon Magus, Hymeneus and
Philetus, Demas and the like; They dare not deny but some graceless hypocrites
are in their best Congregations; and if they should deny it, the frequent
out-breaking of their enormities to the eyes of the world would extort their
confession.

The proofs of the minor are answered.
The proofs they bring, come not up to the Question; that in the first of the
Corinthians, first and second, sanctified in Christ, and called to be Saints;
if ye understand it of an outward calling alone, The first.
it is not pertinent; if of an inward efficacious call, it is true not of every
member, but of some only, and is attributed to the whole Church of Corinth
indefinitely, because of these some, who truly were elected, justified, and
sanctified; but that this was not true of all and every one of that Church, is
clear by the Apostles complaint of many among them; of some for Incest, of
others for injurious defrauding of their neighbors, of some for carnal
Schisms, of others for profane drunkenness at the Lords Table it self, of
others for fundamental errors.

The second.
The first of the Gal. 2.v. has nothing sounding toward the present question;
but the fourth verse is brought by the Brownists to something near it; that
Christ had dyed for the Galatians sins and separated them from this present
evil world; if this import any true grace, yet it may not be applied to every
member of that Church; for in the words following, the Apostle bears witness
that sundry of them were removed to another Gospel; that they were foolish and
bewitched to rebel against the truth.

The third and maine proof of the minor.
The relation of the Church to the persons of the Trinity, that it is the body
and Spouse of Christ, the Temple of the holy Ghost, the sons and daughters of
the Father, must be understood as many such privileges, of the universal and
invisible Church; or when any of them are to be applied to a particular visible
Church, they must be understood of that Church not according to every one, but
only the living and gracious members thereof. That such privileges of the
Catholic invisible Church when they are applied to a particular visible
Congregation, are to be understood according to this distinction of members,
Robinson him self while yet in his rigid separation, grants it expressly.

The places thus expounded, prove not the point; for grant to every
Congregation so high privileges as you will, yet if they must be verified of
that Congregation only according to some members, and not according to all; if
they be to be understood only of the Elect in that Congregation who have the
sanctifying Spirit of Christ, not of many others who are dead in nature, and
yet are such members who have right from God according to our Brethrens own
Tenet, to perform Church acts, such as are the preaching of the Gospel, the
celebration of the Sacraments, the admission of members, the execution of
censures, with such authority from Christ, as makes all these acts truly valid
for the comfort and salvation of the Elect; they prove not the true grace of
every person whom we must acknowledge to be a true member of a Church.

If you will extend these places to every singular member of particular visible
Churches, This drives to universal grace and Apostasy of the Saints.
as indeed the Argument if it have any strength, does import, the absurdity
will be great; for so it will carry to the Pelagianisme of Arminius in the
extent of the true grace of God beyond the Elect, to all the members of a
visible Church; also to the total and final Apostasy of many who are the
Temples of the holy Ghost, the members of Christ, the faithful and sanctified
children of God: For the Argument makes every member of any visible Church to
be such, and daily experience proves that many members of every visible Church
are castawayes.

Yea, Yea, to Socinianisme and further.
the Argument drives further then any of the Arminians will follow; for
however, they extend the true and saving grace of God beyond the Elect members
of a Church, yet none of them ever said that this sanctifying and saving grace
must be in every person before they can be admitted members of any Church; For
this is that gross error which the Independents have learned not so much from
Arminius as Socinus, to put all men unconverted without the Church, that in
this condition they may be converted by the preaching of private men, and if by
Pastors, yet by their Preaching, not as Pastors, but as private men dealing
with these who are none of their Flock, but without the Church.

Neither do the Socinians, so far as I know, extend their Tenet thus far,
as to require all before they be members of the Church, to be truly regenerate,
as if the only instrument of regeneration and conversion, were the preaching of
private men without the Church: and the preaching of Pastors within the Church,
did serve only for the continuing of the sense of justification and the
increase of sanctification, as being performed of purpose only unto these
persons who at their first entrance into the Church while yet they were without
and but coming in, have demonstrate the certainty of their enjoying these
graces.

His second Argument.
The second Argument. God receives none to be members of the visible Church, but
those who shall be saved: but the Stewards of Gods house may receive none but
whom God does receive: Ergo, the Stewards of Gods house may receive none to be
members of a visible Church but those who shall be saved.

The Conclusion is faulty.
Answer. The Conclusion is subject to the most of the faults observed upon the
conclusion of the former Argument, which I do not repeat; only consider that
this conclusion bears expressly that none may be members of a visible Church
but these who shall be saved, and so who are truly Elect. We would not be
deceived with their distinctions of inward and outward holiness, of seeming
and real grace, of charitable and veritable discerning; for this and the other
Argument inferres flatly that no other must be received as members in a visible
Church but such as first are tried and found to be really holy, and who shall
be saved.

We Answer therefore to the Minor, That it is evidently false for the Reasons
which we brought upon the Minor of the former Argument. The minor is false.
The place of the Acts brought for the proof of it is detorted; Its proof is
unsufficient.
such as were to be saved were added to the Church; is this indefinite
proposition to be understood universally, that all who were to be saved were
added to the Church? the former Argument makes this no necessary truth; for if
men must be justified, sanctified, and put in the way of salvation before they
be added to the Church, then though they were never added to the Church, they
may well be saved.

They would do well here to remember their own ordinary practice, contrary to
that which here they profess to be the way of God. Why do they not add to
their Church all that are to be saved? why exclude they many whom they grant to
be truly gracious and Elect, upon this ground alone that they cannot approve of
their Independency or Covenant?

Or suppose the proposition to be universal; yet, must it be reciprocal and
convertible? Be it so, that all who were to be saved, were added to the Church:
yet, must all who are added to the Church be saved? This is an evident untruth.
Will they that all the members of their Church must be saved? or do they think
that all the persons of their Churches who shall not be saved, were never true
members of their visible Church? Judas was made a member of the Apostolic
society by Christ, and many men were brought into the visible Church by the
Prophets and Apostles, who shall not be saved. Shall damnation and want of true
grace cast them all out of the true Church, and take from them their power and
right, to do the actions of a Churchmember?

The third Argument. If it be put in any form, His third Argument.
will readily fall under the exceptions of the first; but since the Author puts
no form upon it, I shall only consider its matter. It consists of the
misapplication of three Scriptures, first of Peter's Confession, P^eters
Confession much mis-applyed.
Mat^h. 8. they allege that such a profession of Faith as the Father reveals
to particular persons, is the ground of a visible Church, and so who ever is a
member of that Church, must both profess Faith, and have the Spirit to indite
that profession.

Answer, This is a strange Argument. For first, we may not admit that the
Church founded upon the Rock is every particular visible Church: The
privileges of the Catholic and visible Church, which the Jesuits by all
their wrestlings have never been able to extort from us for their Idol of
Rome, shall we throw them away upon every Independent Congregation? how
unstable Rocks these Congregations are, and how easily by small tentations
shaken in pieces, themselves may remember.

Secondly, the Rock whereupon the Church is builded, is Christ, whom Peter did
confess; we may not make any man's profession, were it never so clear and
never so zealous, the foundation of the Church in such a fashion, that the
ignorance or hypocrisy of any man may remove the foundation of any Church.

Thirdly, shall no man be a member of a Church, till the holy Ghost dictate
unto him such a confession of Faith as he did unto Peter? if none but the Elect
and those who are filled with the holy Ghost, may be members of Churches, the
Anabaptists have won the field. However, what here is alleged, is not true of
Peter himself who long before that confession was a member of the Church.

The guest without the wedding garment more mis-appl^ed.
The second place mis-applied, is the reproof of the guest for his coming to
the Lords Feast without the wedding garment; whereupon is inferrd the duty of
the Church to hold out all who want the wedding garment of true grace. Answ.
This conclusion is not only beside, but against the Text, verse. 9.10. the
servants are commanded to invite as many as they could find both good and bad;
they had no commission to hold out any for want of the wedding garment, for
that garment was within upon the soul unperceptible by any but his eye who
searches the heart and the reins. The Apostles in their search went not beyond
a blameless profession; and experience may teach our Brethren, that themselves
are able to reach no farther, finding after all their trial so many in their
purest Congregations whom time declares to want that garment.

The parable of the Tares is thrown against its principal scope.
The third place mis-applyed, is the parable of the Tares, as if the Tares came
into the Church by the sleepiness of the servants. Answ. This also is a bold
addition to Scripture: it is not said, while the servants sleeped, but while
men sleeped, noting no negligence in men who did sleep when it was seasonable
and necessary for them to sleep; but only the secret and dark time of the
night, or the secret, dark, and imperceptible way of Satan his working in
hypocrites, and corrupting the Church. However, this part of the parable is no
ways argumentative; for Christ in his full application touches not at all
upon this circumstance; but the maine scope of the parable declares to us the
nature of the visible Church upon earth, contrary to the argument in hand, That
Christ does not intend to have upon earth any Church wherein the Tares shall
not be mixed with the wheat; for if he did not find in his wisdom the
expediency of this administration, His fourth argument, that all who cannot
demonstrate the truth of their regeneration, deny the power of godliness, is
not true.
he could in his power easily alter or prevent it.

Their fourth argument is drawn from the second to Timothy, 3.5. who have a
form of Godliness, but deny the power of it, from such we must turn away.
Ergo, who are not found to have positive and satisfactory signs of
regeneration, ought not to be admitted members of any Church. Answ. The
consequent is naught; for the strength of it will lie in this proposition,
Every professor who brings not demonstrative signs of his regeneration and
true grace, is a man who has the form of godliness and denies the power
thereof. How false this is, both the Text and our Brethrens practice will
evidence. The Text puts it out of doubt, that the men whom the Apostle calls
the denyers of the power of godliness, are persons openly scandalous and
flagitious, as the verses both before and after do demonstrate; even such whom
the Apostle describes, Tit. 1. abominable, disobedient, and to every good work
reprobate. Now it is clear that many professors who are not able to bring out
any convincing signs of their regeneration, are notwithstanding free from all
scandal; and however many hypocrites can go beyond them in making fair and
satisfactory shows to men: yet sundry of them may be the elect children of
God, and really most gracious in his eyes, how unable or unwilling soever they
be to make this much appear to the world.

Secondly, the men whom the Apostle speaks of, are to be cast out of the Church
after their admission; but our Brethren will not cast out all of whose
regeneration they are not convinced, after once they are admitted; for if so,
Excommunication in every Church would become too frequent.

Their fifth argument is this; No hypocrite, His fifth, that no hypocrite is to
be admitted a member of a Church, is a very rash argument.
none who at last will leave their first Love, are to be admitted in the
Church; for all such will ruin the Church, and procure the removing of the
Candlestick: but all that cannot prove their regeneration convincingly, are
such. Answ. This is a bold and rash argument, laying a necessity to exclude all
hypocrites from the Church, and all such as may fall away from any degree of
their first love. We answer then that the minor is very false; for many
gracious persons far from hypocrisy, and free from all decay of their first
love, may be unable to satisfy themselves or others in the certain truth of
their regeneration. But the major is more false, against the practice of Christ
and the Apostles, who did always receive diverse hypocrites; and our Brethren
dare not deny that they do so also; for their Churches consist not all of real
Saints. However the very Text alleged proves our Tenet; for Ephesus to
Christ, there is a most true Church, notwithstanding their fall from their
first Love, and his threatening of them with the removal of their Candlestick
if they did not repent.

His sixth, from the roughness of the stones of Solomon's Temple, is a wanton
reason
Unto this fifth they subjoyne as appendices, two other arguments taken from the
ancient types under the Law. The first, The stones in Solomon's Temple were not
laid rough in the building; Ergo* men irregenerate must not be admitted
members of a Christian Church. Answ. This is a wanton argument; though the
Temple might be a type of every Congregation: and the stones of Temple, of the
members of a particular visible Church; yet that the roughness of the stones
should be a type of irregeneration, and above all, that the place of hewing
these stones should be a type, and that argumentative, to infer that the
place of our vocation, regeneration, justification and sanctification must be
without the Church; and that it is necessary we be like a stone perfectly hewn
before we be laid in the Church building: this is a kind of Ratiocination
which solid divinity will not admit.

His seventh, from the porters exclusion of unclean persons from the Temple,
has no strength.
The other typical argument is this; The porters excluded unclean persons from
the Temple; therefore, the Officers ought to keep the irregenerate from the
Church. Answ. There is no argumenting from symbolick types, except where the
spirit of God in Scripture applies a type to such a signification and use.

Where did our Brethren learn to make the porters of the Temple types of the
Church Officers. Their people will not be content to be cheated of the Keys
by such symbolizing. If they will make the Temple a type, not only of Christ's
body and the Church universal, but of every Congregation; yet by what
Scripture will they make legal uncleanness typifie the estate of
irregeneration? And above all, how will they make the exclusion from the Temple
for legal uncleanesse, a type of rejection from Church Membership for
irregeneration?

Nothing more common then legal cleanesse in a person irregenerate, and legal
uncleanesse in a person regenerate. Legal uncleanesse did never hinder any
from Church Membership under the old Testament, albeit for a time it might
impede their fellowship in some services; but irregeneration did never hinder
communion in any service. It is a question whether very scandalous sins did
keep men ceremonially clean from the Temple and Sacrifices; but out of all
doubt irregeneration alone was never a bar to keep any from the most holy and
most solemn services, whether of the Tabernacle or Temple.

There are two other arguments couched in the conclusion of the debate. First,
His eight, that John the Bapt^st excluded the Pharisees and people from his
Baptism, is expressly against the Text.
from the 3 of Matthew. John the Baptist excluded the Scribes and Pharisees and
the profane people from his Baptism; Ergo, the officers and body of the people
should not admit irregenerate people to be members of the Church. Ans. The
consequence is not good from John the Baptist to all the officers and body of
the people, nor from Baptism or any Sacrament to Church Membership, nor from
the Scribes, Pharisees and profane people, to every irregenerate person: what
loosnesse is in such reasoning? But the worst is that the antecedent is clearly
against the places of Scripture alleged. John the Baptist did not exclude
either the Scribes or the Pharisees or the common people from his baptism, but
received all that came, both the Scribes and Pharisees, and Jerusalem, and all
Judea, and all the region about Jordan, requiring no other condition for their
admission to his Sacrament then the confession of sin and promising of new
obedience, acts very feasible to irregenerate people.

His last argument is from Acts 8. His ninth, that Philip required the Eunuchs
confession before baptism, infers not the conclusion.
Philip admitted none to his baptism but upon profession of Faith. Ergo none
should be admitted members of a Church without an evidence of their
regeneration. For shortness I mark but one fault in the consequence, yet a
very gross one, That profession of faith is made a certain argument of true
grace and sanctification. Will any of our Brethren be content to admit their
members upon so slender terms as Philip or any of the Apostles did require of
their new converts? Will the profession that Jesus is the Christ, or such a
confession of faith as Simon Magus and all the people of Samaria men and women,
after a little labor of Philip among them, could make, be an evident and
convincing sign of regeneration?

Thus we have considered all Mr Cottons arguments: All his nine or twelve
reasons p^t in one will be too weak to bear up the weight of his most heavy
conclusion.
let any man according to his conscience, pronounce what strength he finds in
any of them; whether or not in them all together there be such firmness as to
sustain the unspeakable weight that is in the conclusion builded upon them; I
mean a necessity of separation from all the Reformed Churches except these of
the Indepent way: I may add, from them also and all else that ever have been
in the world from the beginning to this hour; for in none of them these hard
conditions of satisfactory evidences of regeneration before persons can be
admitted members, were ever so much as required; and among the Independents
where these conditions have been required, they were never found, nor possibly
can be found as they do require them.

CHAP. VIII. Concerning the right of Prophesying.
The state of the question.
THe second question I propounded, concerns the dogmatick power, so to call
it, of their Church Members. They teach that the power of prophecy or public
preaching both within and without the Congregation, belongs to every man in
their Church who has ability to speak in public to edification. The Reformed
Churches give this power only to Pastors and Doctors who are called by God and
the Church to labor in the Word. They do not deny to every Christian all true
liberty in private as God gives them occasion, in an orderly way to edify one
another, nor do they deny to the sons of the Prophets who are fitting
themselves for the pastoral charge, to exercise their gifts in public for
their preparation and trial; but public preaching they do not permit to any
who are not either actually in the Ministry or in the way unto it.

The first authors of this question.
The Socinians and Arminians, the better to advance their design of everting the
public Ministry, do put it in the hand of any able man to preach the Word and
celebrate the Sacraments. The Brownists upon the mistake of some Scriptures,
give liberty to any of their members whom their Church thinks able to preach.

The Independents difference among themselves here anent.
Mr Cotton and his Brethren in New England, did follow for a long time the
Brownists in this practice; yet of late feeling as it would seem, the great
inconveniency of this liberty of prophesying, they are either gone or going
from it; for in their two last books, The way of their Churches, and the Keys,
they not only pass this popular Prophesying in silence, but also do evert the
chief grounds whereupon before they did build it; our Brethren here of Holland
and London, seem not yet to be accorded about it; these of Arnhem did to the
last day of their Churches standing maintain it; their gentlemen preaching
ordinarily in the absence of their Ministers; but at Roterdam, Mr Bridge would
never permit it; yet Mr Simpson thought it so necessary an ordinance, that the
neglect of it was the chief cause of his secession from Mr Bridge, and
erecting a new Church; neither ever could these two Churches be united till
after both Mr Bridges and Mr Simpsons removal; their Successor did find a
temper in this question, permitting the exercise of prophecy, not in the
meeting place of the Congregation, but in a private place on a week day; our
Brethren at London are for this exercise, not only upon the former grounds, but
especially to hold a door open for themselves to preach in the Parish-Churches
where they neither are nor ever intend to be Pastors, only they preach as
gifted men and Prophets, for the conversion of these who are to be made members
of their new Congregations.

The reasons we bring for our tenet, are these. First, Who ever have power to
preach the word ordinarily, have also power to baptize. That none but Ministers
may ordinarily prophecy, we prove, it first by Christ's joining together the
power of baptism and the power of preaching.
But only Ministers have power to baptize: Ergo, only Ministers have power to
preach the Word ordinarily. The Minor how ever the Arminians and some few of
the late Brownists deny, yet all the Independents grant it; but they deny the
Major, which we prove by two Scripturall reasons; first, Christ conjoyns the
power of baptism with the power of preaching; Ergo, who have the power of
preaching have also the power of baptising, which Christ has anexed to it,
Matthew. 28.19. Go and teach all Nations, baptising them. Their Reply that Christ
speaks here of Apostles and not of ordinary Ministers, is not satisfactory; for
he speaks both of Apostles and ordinary Ministers because of such officers who
were to remain in the Church unto the end of the world, and with whose Ministry
he was always and ever to be present as it follows in verse 20. But the
Church from that time to the worlds end, was not to be served by Apostles only,
who soon after were removed, but by ordinary Pastors also, the Apostles
Successors. Moreover, there is no reason for the connection of baptism and
Preaching in the person of the Apostles that will not hold as well if not
better in the person of ordinary Ministers.

Our other proof of the major, is this. The power of preaching is more then
the power of baptism; Ergo, who have the first, have the second also. The
antecedent is manifest from 1 Cor. 1.17. Christ sent me not to baptize but to
preach; to intimate the excellency of the one above the other; the Apostle
declares not only his seldom practice of the one, Secondly, these that preach,
must be sent to that work.
but denies his commission for it in comparison of the other.

The second Argument; Who ever have power to preach are sent of God to preach.
But, these who have no office in the Church are not sent of God to preach,
Ergo: They that have no office in the Church have no power to preach. The major
is grounded on Romans 10.15. How shall they preach except they be sent? The minor
may be proved, not only from the nature of the thing, the calling of God to
preach, and a man's ordinary preaching on Gods call importing an office and
charge to do such a work: but also from the place in hand compared with its
fountain, whence it is derived Isay 52.8. Thy watchmen shall lift up the
voice, where it is clear that these whom the Lord sends to preach are
watchmen, from whose hand the blood of them, that die without warning will be
required, Ezeck. 33.6. Who watch for the peoples souls as they who must give
an account, Heb. 12.17. which is not true of any man who has no charge.

Thirdly, every ordinary preacher labo^rs in the Word and Doctrine.
Every ordinary preacher labors in the word and doctrine; no man out of office
labors in the word and doctrine; for laboring in the word and doctrine, is
the character and specific difference of the Pastor and Doctor, whereby they
are distinguished from the ruling Elder, 1 Timothy 5.17. This character and form
of the prime Officers cannot be given to men out of all office. The major is
proved from the very terms of the proposition, for no man can acquire an
ability to preach ordinarily the Word in the Congregation and to exercise that
gift for the Churches edification without great and constant laboring in that
Word.

Fourthly, none out of office have the gift of preaching* for all who have that
gi^t are either Apostl^s, Evangel^sts, Prophets, Pastors, or Doctors, and all
these are officers.
Fourthly, Every Preacher of the Word has gotten a gift from Christ for the
perfecting of the Saints, for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the
body of Christ; but, no man out of office has gotten such a gift; Ergo. The
major they do not deny, for they make the ground of their Prophets preaching to
be their gift to edify the Church. The minor thus we prove, Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors and Doctors, are not out of office. But, all who
have received such gifts, are Apostles, etc. Ergo, none who have received such
gifts are out of office. The major none will deny; the minor is grounded on
Ephesians. 4.8. and 11. where there is a perfect enumeration of all the teaching
gifts which Christ gave to the Church for edification; of these are reckoned up
only five, Apostles, etc. and to Gods perfect numbers men may not add.

Fifthly, no man out of office might sacrifice.
Fifthly, It was unlawful for men out of office to sacrifice; Ergo, it is
unlawful for men out of office to preach. The consequence lies in the parity
of preaching to sacrificing, the one being as great an honor if not a greater
then the other; for I suppose it will be granted that the Sacraments of the New
Testament are in many respects more excellent then the Sacrifices of the old.
Now preaching as we have proved before, is more excellent then baptism, a
Sacrament of the New Testament. The antecedent is proved from Heb. chap. 5. v
3.4, 5. No man takes this honor to himself, viz. to offer up Sacrifices, but
he that is called of God as was Aaron; so also Christ glorified not himself to
be made an High Priest; Here it is made unlawful both for Aaron and Christ to
offer up Sacrifices before they had a calling to be Priests.

Sixthly, Sixthly, all who have from God the gift of preaching are obliged to
lay aside all other occupations and attend that work alone.
Whoever have gotten of God a calling or a gift to preach the Gospel, they are
obliged to keep and increase their gift, and to improve that calling by giving
themselves wholly to reading, by laying aside all worldly occupations, and not
intangling themselves with the things of this life; but, no man out of office
is thus obliged. Ergo. The minor they grant, for they will not have their
Prophets to be so much in reading as may distract them from their worldly Trade
and civil occupation: The major is proved from 1 Timothy cha. 4. ver. 13.14, 15.
where Timothy is commanded to keep his gift of preaching by the means named.
The reason is alike to all that have that gift, whether they have it by
Prophecy, and laying on of the hands of the Presbytery as Timothy had it, or
any otherwise: for the gifts of God however gotten, must not be neglected,
and the means prescribed of God for the entertaining of these gifts may not
be slighted, least of all by them in whom the gift is but mean and small; they
of all others have most need of the strongest means to make their smoking flax
to burn: beside, public preaching is a faculty of that nature, that all the
reading and attendance which any man can bestow upon it, will have enough ado
to support and entertain it in any useful and edifying condition.

Seventhly, Seventhly, the Apostles appointed none to preach but Elders.
None may lawfully preach but such as the Apostles appointed to preach. But,
the Apostles appointed no man out of office to preach. The minor alone is
questionable; which thus we prove. The Apostles appointed no others to preach
but Elders; Ergo, none out of office. The antecedent we have from Titus 1.5.
Eighthly, the preaching of men out of office is a means of confusion and error.
That thou should ordain Elders in every City as I had appointed thee.

Eighthly, the permitting of private men out of office to preach, is a great
means of confusion in the Church and breeding of errors and strife; Ergo, its
not of God. The antecedent is made too clear by daily experience; the
consequence is builded upon the nature of God who is a God and Author of truth
and order; what is from him, is conduceable to these ends, not to the contrary.

The contrary Arguments which Mr Cotton in his Catechism and Answer to the 32
Questions, borrows from Robinson, are; First, in the Church of Corinth men out
of office did Prophecy. Ans. these men were officers or their preaching was
extraordinary.
The opposite Arguments are many. Robinson while yet he was, as I suppose, in
the height of his Separation, did fill a whole book with them; the best of
these Arguments whereupon our Brethren are pleased to pitch, be these
following. First, in the Church of Corinth, men out of office did ordinarily
preach in the Congregation; Ergo, it is lawful to do so still. Answ. We may
either deny, or distinguish the antecedent: They that preached in the place
alleged, were Prophets, and so not out of off^ce. Secondly, they who preached
there, were men endued with extraordinary gifts, whose practice can be no
pattern to the Churches now a days, where these gifts are ceased. That it is
so, verse. 30. makes clear, where the Prophets do preach extemporary
Revelations.

Also Mr Cotton himself in his last book of the Keys, p. 20. does grant this,
and expressly recals what himself in his Catechism, and both he and his
Brethren in their Answer to the 32 Articles, had delivered about prophesying.
This ingenuity is amiable, and if it might please God to bring our Brethren off
the other points of Brownisme as fairly, there might be hope quickly of an
happy Accommodation.

Secondly, Iehoshaphat and his Princes did preach; Answ. The Kings exhorting of
the Levites to do their duty and the Princes c^untenancing of them therein was
not properly preaching.
Their second Argument. Iehoshaphat and his Princes did preach the word. But,
Iehoshaphat and his Princes were not Church Officers; Ergo, some who are no
Church Officers, may preach the Word. Ans. We deny the major; for that which is
recorded of Iehoshaphat, Chro. 2.19. was nothing but the Kings exhortation to
his subjects, to stir up the Levites and Judges to a faithful discharge of
their office; this was no exposition of the Law, nor any dispensing of that
knowledge which the Priests lips were appointed by God to preserve; What is
spoken of his Princes preaching, Chron. 2.17, 6. beside that it was but once in
the time of an extraordinary Reformation, the way of that teaching is expounded
in the following words, not to have been by themselves, but by the Levites who
carried the Book of the Law, they only did preach; the Princes accompanied
them, and by their Civil authority countenanced and assisted them in their
preaching. That thus it was, Mr Cotton confesses in the abovementioned place
of his Keys, avowing that in the Church of Israel none did preach either in the
Synagogue or Temple, but Priests and Levites, except they had an extraordinary
call to Prophesy.

Thirdly. What we are commanded to regard is lawful. But, Thirdly, w^e must
not despise prophecy. Ans. The Apostle speaks of the preaching of men in office.
the preaching of men out of office we are commanded to regard 1 These. 5.
Despise not prophesying. Answ. We deny the proof of the minor; for the
prophesying spoken of by the Apostle is not the preaching of men out of office,
but either of such extraordinary Prophets as were in the Church of the
Corinthians and other Churches in those primitive times, or else of ordinary
pastors who often in Scripture are called prophets, Mat. 11.9. He that receives
a Prophet in the name of a Prophet, shall receive a Prophets reward; a Prophet
is not without honor but in his own Country. A Pagan poet by the Apostle is
called a Prophet. Rev. 18.24. In her was found the blood of the Prophets and
Saints; and 22.9. I am thy fellow servants, and of thy brethren the Prophets.

Fourthly, Fourthly, the sons of the Prophets did preach. Answ. Their
designation to be Prophets gave them right to initiall and preparatory
exercises toward that office.
our Brethren of New England bring no more arguments. The rest of Robinsons
stuff is not so considerable: he reasons thus; The sons of the Prophets did
preach, 1 Samuel 15.5. 2 Kings 2.7. also 4.1. But, the sons of the Prophets were
men out of office. Answ. The major is not proved by the places alleged; for
the first speaks of the Prophets, but not of their sons; the other two speak of
the sons of the Prophets, but nothing of their preaching: yet we do not deny
the major; for we think it may be proved from other Scriptures; but we deny the
minor, That the sons of the Prophets were men altogether out of office; for
their call from God, and appointment by the Prophets to wait on that service,
did give them such a beginning and entrance into the office of a Prophet that
made them capable of an initiall exercise of their begun gifts: so we deny not
in the New Testament, to men who are destinate to the Ministry and in their
preparations for it, a power to preach for attaining an habit of that gift
whereunto initiall Sermons are a necessary means, without which neither the gift
nor the calling can be obtained without a miracle.

Fifthly, Robinson reasons thus; Fifthly, Moses wished all the people to be
Prophets. Ans. But not without Gods calling to that offi^e.
All these whom we ought to wish to be Prophets, may lawfully preach. But, we
ought to wish all the people of God to be Prophets, Number. 11.20. Would God that
all the people of the Lord were Prophets, and that the Lord would put his
spirit upon them. Ans. We deny the major, because our desire for the
enlargement of Gods honor and the propagation of his truth, that many more
then are, were sent out to preach and baptize gives not to any man either a
gift, or a power, or a calling to preach and baptize, till God and man give the
calling. Moses wish was, not that all the people should prophecy, but that all
might have the office of Prophets and the spirit of God to enable them for
prophesying.

Sixthly, the Apostles before the Resurrection did preach. Ans. At that time
they were true Apostles and did baptize.
Sixthly, the Apostles before Christ's resurrection did preach. But, the Apostles
before Christ's resurrection were not in the office of Apostleship. Answ. The
minor must carry that they were men out of all Church office, which is
eviden^ly false; for beside that Mat. 10.1. they are called expressly Apostles
at their first mission; and Judas, Acts 1.25. is said to have had the ministry
and the Apostleship: they did celebrate the Sacrament of Baptism, which the
adversary will grant could not lawfully be done by men out of office.

Seventhly, Paul and Barnabas were invited to exhort. Ans. they were men in
office.
Seventhly, Paul and Barnabas were invited to preach where they were in no
office, and by those who did not know them to be in office anywhere, Acts
13.15. Men and Brethren if ye have any word of exhortation for the Brethren,
say on; Ergo, men out of office may lawfully preach. Answ. The antecedent is
false, for Paul and Barnabas were men in office, true Prophets and Apostles;
their bounds were as large as all Nations. Beside, a Pastor in one Church, for
the relation he has to the Church universal, upon a lawful call may preach
in any Church. Also that the rulers of the Synagogue did not take Paul and
Barnabas for Preachers, is as easily denied as affirmd: the same both of their
preaching and miracles might easily have come before or with them from Cyprus
into Pysidia.

Eighthly, the Scribes and Pharisees did preach. Answ. They were officers and
sat in Moses chair
Lastly, the Scribes and Pharisees did expound and preach the law; but, the
Scribes and Pharisees were in no Church office; for all the offices of the
Church under the old Testament, were in the hands of Levites alone: now the
Scribes and Pharisees were not Levites but of other tribes. Ans. The minor is
false; for the Lord tells us that the Scribes and Pharisees were in Church
office, that they sat in Moses chair, and were doctors of the Law. The
confirmation is not good; for how will they prove that in these times of great
confusion, the Levites alone had all Ecclesiastic offices, not only in the
Temple about the sacrifices, but in the Synagogue about the doctrine and
discipline? Also though this were yielded, yet how will they prove that the
Scribes and Pharisees were of any other Tribe then of Levi?

CHAP. IX. Whether the power of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction belongs to the
People or to the Presbytery.
THe next Question concerns the power of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction to whom it
may be due: What is meant by Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction.
by Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction is understood the admission of Members into a
Church, their casting out again by Excomunication, their reconciliation after
repentance, the Ordination of Officers, their deposition from their charge, the
Determining of Questions, The state of the Question wont to be clear, the
Reformed Churches putting the power and exercise of Jurisdiction in the hand of
the Presbytery alone; the Brownists, and Independents in the hand of the people
only; but Mr. Cotton and his followers the other year have perplexed the
Question with their many Schole distinctions. If they put the power of
Jurisdiction only in a Church organized and Presbyterated, they fall from much
of the Brownists, and their own, both doctrine and practice.
the deciding of Controversies and such other acts of Ecclesiastic authority.

Till of late the state of the Question here was very clear and plain: the
Reformed Churches do put both the power and the exercise of Jurisdiction into
the hand of the Presbytery, that is, the company of Elders, and College of
Church Governors. The Brownists, and after them the Independents did ascribe
all these acts to the Church, as well without, as with a Presbytery: but of
late Master Cotton in his Book of the Keys and his Brethren in their Synodick
meetings of New England have so subtilized, and as to me it seems, involved
the Question with a multitude of new distinctions, that it is very hard to
apprehend with any certainty and clearenesse their meaning, and more hard to
reconcile any one with himself, much less one with another.

They would seem to differ much from the Brownists, they stand not to put them
in the Category of Morellius, the first Patron of Democracie and popular
government in the Church: they profess a midway of government, well balanced
with a prudent mixture of the Officers power with the peoples, giving a part to
both, and all to neither: They bring a multitude of distinctions rather to
eschew the dint of our former arguments in the darkness of these Thickets,
then to give any light to this very great Question. They insist most on two
distinctions, whereby they think to answer all we bring against them.

First, they distinguish betwixt a Church Organized or Presbyterated, as they
speak, and a Church inorganized and unpresbyterated: the one is a body
Heterogeneous, a covenanted people with their Officers framed in a Presbitery;
the other a body Homogeneous a people in a Church Covenant without Officers, at
least without a Presbytery. They would seem to plead, or else the distinction
is for no purpose, for the power only of an Organized and a Presbyterated
Church. If they would stand to this in earnest, and firmly, we should be glad;
for so they should openly desert, not only the whole race of the Brownists,
but all their own former Writings, practices, and enervate the best of these
very arguments they still adhere unto: for if ye will consider what is written
by Mr. Cotton either in his Catechism, or way, or answer to the thirty two
Questions, or the Arguments that still he insists upon in the Keys, or their
general practice in Holland and New England to this day, you will see that
they maintain the Jurisdiction of a Church, as well unpresbyterated, without a
Presbytery, without Officers, as of a Church Presbiterated; for the power of
Ordination of Officers, and of their deposition, the power of admitting and
casting out of Members, which are the highest acts of Jurisdiction, they
ascribe expressly to every Church, whether it have, or want Officers, as its
proper and undeniable privilege.

Their last and best beloved invention of the power of Authority, and power of
Liberty, is for no purpose but to involve the Authors in new difficulties.
Their other new distinction, wherein openly they applaud so much one another,
as it were contending who should have the glory of its invention, is of a
double power, one of Authority, and another of Liberty: ascribing unto a
Presbyterated Church the whole power of Jurisdiction and every part of it, both
to the Officers of their Presbytery, and to the people in their fraternity or
brotherhood; but, so that the interest of the Officers in every act, is a power
of authority which makes that their action only is valid and binding; but the
interest of the people is a power of liberty to concur in these acts of
Jurisdiction by an obedientiall, yet a necessary and authoritative concurrence.

This new distinction will not serve their turn, for first, its not applicable
to the chief acts of Jurisdiction in question: their Ordination of Officers,
their admission of Members, are done ordinarily by their people alone, without
the concurrence of any Officers, who then are not in being. Secondly, their
arguments for the peoples interest in Excommunication, Absolution, and other
acts of Jurisdiction, infer either nothing at all, or much more then that
which they call a power of Liberty, or of an authoritative concurrence.
Thirdly, this distinction involves the Authors in new unextricable
difficulties, it makes the Keys and Sword of Christ altogether inserviceable
in common and ordinary cases, wherein they have most need and occasion to be
set on work.

Not only according to their former principles, they make every Congregation
uncensurable for any possible crime: As they wont to make their smallest
Congregations Independent and uncensurable for any crime, so now by this
distinction they divide all their Congregations in two parts, and make every
one of these parts Independent also, and uncensurable for any imaginable sin.
For the negative, that the people have no power of Jurisdiction, we reason:
First, the Officers alone are Governors, and the people are to be governed.
But by this new Doctrine they confess, that every Presbytery in a
Congregation becomes uncensurable, and that every people of a Congregation
becomes incapable of any censure. Yea farther, if the most part of the
Presbytery, suppose two ruling Elders join together in the greatest heresies
and crimes, the whole people with the rest of the Presbitery, suppose the
Pastor cannot censure these two Elders; also if the greatest part of the people
should join in the greatest wickedness, yet the whole Presbytery, with the
rest of the people that remain sincere and gracious, cannot censure the
wicked. In all these, and diverse such ordinary cases, they have no remedy but
Separation, and always Separation upon Separation, till their Church be
dissolved into so small portions that it cannot by more Separations be farther
divided. But let us consider the Arguments upon both sides.

First, we reason thus, The people are not the Governors of the Church, But the
acts of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction belong to the Governors of the Church; Ergo,
The acts of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction belong not to the people. The Minor is
clear from the nature of the very terms; for Jurisdiction is either all one
with Government, or a chief part of it: now Government is essentially relative
to Governors. The Major is proved by many Scriptures, which make the people so
far from being Governors, that they are obliged to be subject and obedient to
their Officers, as to them by whom God will have them governed, Heb. 13.17.
Obey them that have the rule over you, for they watch for your souls as they
who must give an account. 1 Timothy 5.17. Let the Elders who rule well, be counted
worthy of double honor. 1 These. 5.12. Know them which are over you in the
Lord, and esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. God has made
them Pastors, and the people their flock; them Builders, the people the stones
laid by them in the building; them Fathers, the people children begotten by
their Ministry; them Stewards, the people domestics under their conduct.

2. The people have not the Keys of Heaven to bind and loose.
Secondly, whosoever has the power of Ecclesiasticke Jurisdiction, to them the
Lord has given the Keys of Heaven for the remitting and retaining of sins.
But to none of the people the Lord has given these Keys. Ergo. The Major is
not controverted. The Minor is thus proved. To whom Christ has given the Keys
of the Kingdom of Heaven to retain and remitt sins, they are in some
Ecclesiasticke Office, They are sent out by Christ, as Christ was by his
Father, they have some part of the Apostles ordinary charge; but these things
are not true of the people. Ergo. The Major is proved, John. 20.21. As my
Father has sent me, so send I you; and when he had said this, he breathed upon
them, and said receive ye the Holy Ghost; whose sins ye remitte they are
remitted, and whose sins ye retain they are retained. What was promised to
Peter, Mat. 16.19 is here performed to him and the rest of the Apostles, and to
their Successors in their ordinary Office of Elders: for this was a power
necessary for the Church to the end of the world. The Minor also is clear; for
these things were not given to all the Disciples, but to the twelve, and to
their Successors. What was promised to Peter, was not promised to every
faithful person, and to every Orthodoxe Confessor; for so, all and every one
should be bearers of the Keys, and Ecclesiasticke Officers, which is against
the Scriptures of the first Argument.

3. The people are not the eyes, and ears in in Christ's Body; for so, all the
body should be eyes and ears.
Thirdly, to whom these acts of Jurisdiction do belong, they are the eyes,
ears, hands, and principal Members of the Body of Christ: for the eminent
persons and Officers of a Church, are compared to these Members, because of
these actions. But the people are not the eyes, ears, hands; are not the
principal Members of the Body of Christ: for if so, there should be none left
in the Church to be the feet, or less principal Members: all should become
eyes, and hands, and the Church should be made a Body Homogeneous, contrary to
the doctrine of the Apostle, 1. Cor. 12 19. If they were all one Member, where
were the Body? but now are they many Members, and the eye cannot say to the
hand I have no need of thee, nor the head to the feet I have no need of you.

4. The people have not any promise of gifts sufficient for government.
Fourthly, Who have a right from God to the acts of Jurisdiction, they have a
promise of gifts needful for the performance of these acts. For a divine right
and calling to any work is backed with a promise of Gods presence, gifts and
assistance in doing of that work; but, the people have no promise of any such
gifts. For besides that daily experience declares numbers among the people to
be altogether destitute of such knowledge, wisdom and other gifts which are
necessary for the performance of these acts of Jurisdiction: The Apostle
himself teaches that such gifts are not given to all, but to some only.

Fifthly, 5. The popular government brings in confusion making the feet
above the head.
That is not to be given to the people that brings confusion into the Church,
for the Lord is the God of Order. But the putting of the power of Jurisdiction
in the peoples hand, brings confusion into the Church, for it makes the feet
above the head, it puts the greatest power into the hand of the meanest, it
gives power to the Flock to depose and excommunicate their Pastor. Our
Brethren were lately wont to digest with the Brownists these absurdities: but
now they begin to dislike them, and rather then to stand to their Prior Tenets,
they will limit the Minor, asserting that the power of Jurisdiction belongs to
the people not severally, but jointly with their Officers: so that neither they
can excommunicate their Officers, nor their Officers can excommunicate them.

But it seems this new Subtilty will not long please the Inventors of it, for
as we have said it makes the Keys of Heaven much more inserviceable for
opening and closing then needs must; when it has taken the keys out of the
hand of all others, and put them in the little weak fist of a particular
Congregation; it will not permit them to open or to close the door, neither
to the people, nor yet to the Eldershippe. The Eldershippe cannot remitt, nor
retain the sins of the Brotherhood, nor the Brotherhood, of the Eldershippe:
yea none of the Eldershippe can be censured by all the people, without the
consentient vote of the Presbytery, nor any of the people can either be bound
or loosed without the consentient vote of the people. In these cases which may
be very frequent, The Keys of Christ must be laid aside, and a new key of the
Independents own invention, their sentence of Non-Communion, or that much
beloved and a little elder key of separation, forged by the Brownists, must
come in the place thereof, to be used against any or all other Churches,
against their own Church or its Eldershippe, or its Brotherhood, or any Member
of either.

6. The people have not the power of Ordination.
Our sixth argument concerns Ordination, a special act of Jurisdiction, which
all the Independents to this day put in the hands of the people alone, when
ever a new Congregation is to be erected: which to them is no extraordinary nor
rare case: or when in a Congregation already erected, there is no Presbytery,
which among them is frequent. For a Presbytery must consist of more Governors
then one, and usually their Presbiteryes exceed not the number of three or
four. At the death of their Minister, suppose one of their two ruling Elders
be sick, or absent, or the two differ between themselves: in this case they
make no difficulty to cause some of the people out of all office to ordain a
new chosen Pastor; Against this very ordinary practice we reason.

Unto whom the power of Ordination does belong, they have a Commission from God
authoritatively to send Pastors for preaching and celebration of the
Sacraments, They have no Commission to send Pastors to themselves, to impose
hands to examine their Pastors, to pray publicly and exhort.
also to lay hands upon them for that effect; But people have no such
Commission. Ergo. The Major, is the nature of Ordination; for the essence and
inward form of it is the authoritative sending named: the outward Form and
Sign used in Scripture, is imposition of hands. The Minor is proved from three
grounds; first, that the people however they elect, yet they do not send; for
so they should send to themselves. The Senders and they to whom the Preachers
are sent, should be one and the same. Secondly, an authoritative mission
imports a Superiority in the Sender above the Sent; But, the Pastors are over
the people not under them. Thirdly, the examples of the New Testament make it
evident, that the authoritative sending, and imposition of hands, the sign
thereof, were never used by any of the people, but by the Elders only. 1 Timothy
4.14. With the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery: 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands
suddenly upon no man. 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift of God that is in thee by
the putting on of my hands. So it was not only at the first sending of men to
preach, but in posterior missions to any particular Service of the Ministry.
Acts. 13.1. There was in the Church certain Prophets and Teachers, and the
Holy Ghost said, Separate me Barnabas and Saul to the work whereunto I have
called them; and when they had fasted and prayed, and laid their hands on them,
they sent them away. Fourthly, None of the people ordinarily have the gifts
requisite for this action, as skill to examine the Minister in all things he
must be tried in, a gift of public prayer, a faculty to instruct and exhort
the Pastor and people to mutual duties.

Seventhly, That power belongs not to the people which disableth them both in
their Christian and Civil duties. But, 7. This power in the people would
disable them in their callings.
the power of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction does so. The Major is grounded on the
nature of all power and all gifts which God does give; for all are for
edification, and none for the hurt of these to whom they are given. The Minor
may be demonstrated by this* That it lays a necessity upon all the people to
attend in the Sabbath day upon the exercise of discipline, which by the very
length will make the Sabbath-Service insupportably burdensome; and also will
fill the minds of the people with these purposes which naturally occur in
the agitation of Ecclesiasticke causes, and cannot but cast out of common weak
minds much of the fruit of the preceding worship.

Further, the peoples necessary attendance on all Ecclesiasticke causes, will
make the process in the most causes so prolix, as cannot but rob the people
of that time which they ought to employ in their secular callings for getting
of bread. For every one of the people being a Judge, must be so satisfied in
every circumstance of every action, as to give their Suffrage upon certain
knowledge and with a good conscience: now before this can be done in a few
causes of the smallest, and best ordered Congregations much time will be spent:
as the Church of Arneim found it in one cause alone, though but a light one;
and betwixt two only, even of their chief and best Members.

Eighthly, That power is not to be given to the people, 8. This power of the
people would bring in Morellius democracy and anarchy in the Church.
which brings in the popular government of Morellius into the Church: but, the
power in question does so. The Major is the common assertion of all the
Brethren, that they are far from democracy, and further from Morellius
anarchy, and that they are ready to forsake their Tenet, if it can be
demonstrated to import any such thing. The Minor thus we prove, That which puts
the highest acts of Government in the hands of the multitude, brings in the
popular government: for in the greatest democracies that are or ever have
been, there were diverse acts of great power in the hand of sundry Magistrates;
but the highest acts of power being in the hands of the people alone: such as
the making of Laws, the creation of Magistrates, the censure of the greatest
Offenders, these were the sure signs of Supremacy, that gave the denomination
to the government. Now we assure that the Tenet in hand puts the highest acts
of Ecclesiastic Authority in the hands of the people. For the Ordination and
Deposition of Officers, the binding and loosing of Offenders, are incomparably
the highest acts of Ecclesiasticke Jurisdiction: These they put in the hand of
the people.

That they do conjoyne with the people the Officers to expound the Law, and
declare what is right, and to give out the sentence makes nothing against the
peoples Supremacy: for in Rome and Athens at their most democraticke times, and
this day in the States of Holland, in all the Provinces and every City, where
the people are undoubted Sovereigns, they have their Magistrates and Officers
in all their proceedings to go before them, to declare the case, to take the
Suffrages, and to pronounce the Sentence.

As for them who of late have begun to put the whole Authority in the Officers
alone, and to give the people only a liberty of consenting to what the
Officers do decree of their own Authority, we say they are but few that do
so, and these contradictory to themselves. Also these same men give absolute
Authority to the people in diverse cases: further, that liberty of consent they
come to call an authoritative concurrence. Lastly, the most of the arguments
even of these men, do conclude not only a liberty to consent, and to
concur, but an authoritative agency in the highest acts of Jurisdiction.

9. This power of the people will draw upon them the power of the word and
Sacrament.
Ninthly, They who have the power of Jurisdiction, have also the power of
preaching the word, and celebrating the Sacraments, unless God in his word
have given them a particular and express exemption from that employment. But
none of the people have power to preach the word, and celebrate the Sacraments.
Ergo. The Major is built on these Scriptures which conjoyne the administration
of the Word, Sacrament and Discipline in one and the same terms: and upon
these Scriptures which lay a part of these administrations upon some men, with
an express exception of another part of them. Math. 16.19. under the name of
the Keys of the Kingdom of Heaven, is comprehended the whole Ecclesiasticke
power of the Word, Sacraments, and Discipline; what there is promised. Joh. 20.
it is performed in these terms, as the Father has sent me, so I send you.
But, 1 Timothy 5.17. where this power is separated and distinguished, the one part
of Jurisdiction is ascribed to the ruling Elders, with an express intimation
of their freedom from preaching the Word, and by consequence from celebration
of the Sacraments. The Minor was that none of the people have power of the word
and Sacraments. For the power of the Sacraments, it is confessed not to belong
to the people. That the power of preaching the Word, belongs no more to them,
was proved in the former Chapter. None of our Brethren do ascribe the power of
preaching to all the People, but only to a few of them who are able to
prophecy: so the power of Jurisdiction according to the ground in hand, could
be ascribed to none of the people but these few Prophets alone.

For the other side, the Separatists and Master Parker, Mr Cottons contrary
arguments answered.
in this point as far wrong as the other, bring many arguments: but I will
meddle only with these which Master Cotton does borrow from them in his way of
the Churches, and answer to the 32. Questions.

First, from Math. 16.19 he reasons thus. The Power of the Keys is given unto
Peter upon the confession of his faith. Ergo, First, Christ gave to Peter the
Keys of H^aven as to a believer: Ans. not so, but as to an Apostle and Elder of
the Church.
every Believer has the Power of the Keys. Answer. I deny the consequence, for
however upon the occasion of his confession the Keys are promised to him: yet
they are not promised to him because of his confessing, nor under the relation
of a believer; for if so, then all and only believers should have the full
Power of the Keys; but our Brethren will be loath to avow this direct Assertion
of Smith the Sebaptist; for they do not ascribe the Power of the Sacraments to
any believer out of Office, nor any power of the Keys to every believer: for
some believers are not Members of any Church, and the Keys are only for
Domestics. Neither do they put the Keys into the hands of believers alone;
for so, Judas and many Pastors for want of true faith could not validly either
preach or baptize. The Keys therefore are not promised to Peter under the
notion of a believer, but in the quality of an Apostle and Elder of the Church,
as is cleared in the paralled places of Math and John, where the gift here
promised is actually conferred upon all the Apostles, who all were Elders, and
whose Office of opening and closing the doors of Heaven, was to remain in the
Church to the worlds end, not in the hand of every believer, but of the
Governors of the Church joined in that Presbytery which other Scriptures do
mention.

2. Till the Church replies that the people have power of Excommunication.
Anser, The Church here to be told is the Presbytery, and not the people,
according to our Brethrens own grounds.
Secondly, they reason from Man. 18. who ever is the Church to whom scandalls
must be told, and which must be heard under the pain of Excommunication, they
have the power of Church Censures; But the people are that Church. Ergo. Ans,
we deny the Minor, with the good leave of our Brethren: for albeit they are
wont to make the people alone without their Officers the Church in this place,
proving hence the peoples power of Jurisdiction before they have any Officers,
also their power to cast out all their Officers when they have gotten them; yet
now they have gone from the Separatists thus far, as to say, that the people
alone cannot be the Church here mentioned: but the Church must be the people
with their Officers, whom now they will be loath as sometimes to make mere
accidents and adjuncts of this Church: for now they hold them for integrall
Members, so necessary, that without them no censure at all can be performed
upon any.

They go here a little further, telling us that the Church in this place
cannot be the people, though with their Officers; but must be taken for the
Officers with the people: because both the Power and the Execution of censures
belongs to the Officers alone, though in the presence of the people, and with
their consent, and concurrence. They tell us that the Right and Authority of
censures is given only to the Presbytery of governors, in such a manner that
the Presbytery can be censured by no others, neither can any other be censured
not only without their consent, but not without their action.

We add a third step, whether our former arguments must draw them, that the
Church here meant, must be the Governors alone without the peoples
concurrence: for if Excommunication the great act of government, did belong to
the people, either by themselves alone, or jointly by way of concurrence with
their Officers, it would follow that the people were either sole governors
above their Officers, or joint governors with their Officers: which albeit our
Brethren did hold lately with the Separatists, yet now they will not assert, so
much the more as they declare it to be their judgment and practice that the
Elders alone without the People, do meet apart in their Presbytery to hear
all offenses and to prepare them for public Judgment, whence I thus argue.

They to whom offenses are to be told immediately after the two or three
witnesses are not heard, They are the Church to whom in this place the power of
excommunication is given; but, the Elders alone without the People, being set
apart in their Presbytery, are they to whom offenses are to be told, etc. Ergo,
The Major is clear from the Text, for it speaks but of one Church which must
be told, and heard under the pain of censure. The Minor is their own
confession, and practice: and if that meeting of the Elders to whom they tell
the offense, for preparation of the process to their peoples voice, be not the
Church here mentioned, Then their ordinary practice of bringing scandalls first
to the Presbytery, before they be heard in the Congregation, shall be found not
only groundless beside the Scripture, but altogether contrary to the
Scripture in hand: for the method here prescribed is that the Church be told
when the witnesses are not heard: if therefore that company which is told after
the witnesses are contemned, be not the Church: Christ's order is not kept, and
the Church gets wrong.

Thirdly, they reason from 1 Cor. chap. 5. ver. 4.5.7.12.13. 3. The people of
Corinth did Judge and Excommunicate the incestuous man* Answer, Tbe Text will
prove no such matter.
They who are gathered together with the Apostles Spirit, and the Power of
Christ to deliver the incestuous man to Satan; Who were to purge out the old
Leaven, and to judge them that are within, and put away the wicked Person: they
have power to excommunicate; but, the People do all these things. Ergo.
Answer, the Minor is denied.

First, that gathering together might well be of the Presbytery alone, which
our Brethren grant most meet in diverse preparatory acts to censure.

Secondly, if it were of the whole people which can not be supposed in Corinth,
where the People and Officers were so many, that the Congregations, as in
Jerusalem, and else where, were more then one: yet, suppose that all the people
did meet to the excommunication of that wicked man, this proves not that every
one who did meet unto that censure, had either the power or the execution of
it, more then of the Word and Sacraments to which they did more frequently
meet.

Thirdly, the purging out of the old Leaven, and the putting away the man, is
commended indefinitely to these unto whom the Apostle wrote, which our Brethren
grant cannot be expounded without sundry exceptions. First, none doubt of women
and children; again in the next chapter, it is written indefinitely, you are
sanctified, you are justified, your Bodies are the Temples of the Holy Ghost;
this must be restricted to the elect and regenerate, except we will turn
Arminians.

Everywhere in Scripture indefinite propositions must be expounded according as
other Scriptures declare the nature of the matter in hand; so here, the act of
purging and putting away, ascribed indefinitely to the Church, must be
expounded not of all the Members, but only of the Officers of the Church. For
the Brownists themselves make not every Member to be a ruler: nor do our
Brethren give the formal authority and power of censures to any other but
Officers, ascribing to the rest of the Members only a Liberty of concurrence,
so that the next word of Judging is expounded by them of a Judgment of
discretion, not of any judicial and authoritative Judgment, which alone is in
question.

4. The people of Colosse might censure Archippus their Minister. Answer. there
is no Word in this Text of the peoples censure.
Fourthly, from Coll. 4.17. they reason: the people of Colosse had power to
admonish their Minister Archippus to fulfill his Ministry. Therefore the
People of any Church have power if need be to excommunicate their Minister.
Answer. First, That however our Brethren pretend to have come off from the
extremity of the Brownists, half way toward us: yet their arguments drive at
the utmost of their old extremities, at no less then a power for the people to
excommunicate their Ministers. Thus far the most of their reasons do carry,
if they have any force at all. Secondly, the Antecedent may well be denied, all
that the Apostle speaks to the Collossians indefinitely, must not be expounded
of every one of the people: This precept of speaking to Archippus, could not be
better performed then by the Presbytery, whereof Archippus was a Member.
Thirdly, the consequence is invalid, They might admonish, therefore
excommunicate. Every admonition is not in order to censure; it is a moral duty
incumbent to every one to admonish lovingly and zealously his Brother, when
there is cause: it is a sin and disobedience to God if we let sin lie upon
any whom we by our counsel and admonition can help; but to conclude that we
have power to Excommunicate every man, whom in duty we ought to admonish, is
an absurdity which none of the Separatists will well digest.

Fifthly, From Revel. 2.14.20. 5. The whole Church of Pergamus is rebuked for
not censuring the Heretics. Answer, The power of Censure was in the Angels,
but the whole Church might be faulty in not encouraging the Angels to do their
duty.
The whole Churches of Pergamus and T^yatira, are rebuked for suffering wicked
Heretics to live among them uncensured. Ergo, it was the duty of all the
Church to censure them. Answer. First, the conclusion is for a power to the
people to censure, which our Brethren now deny. Secondly, The Antecedent may be
denied; for the fault of that impious Toleration is not laid upon the whole
Church, but expressly upon the Angel. Thirdly, the consequence is not good. The
whole Church might be reproved for a neglect of their duty, in not inciting and
encouraging their Officers to censure these Heretics; but a reproof for this
neglect, infers not that it was the peoples duty to execute these censures:
Thus much our Brethren will not avow.

Sixthly, They reason from Revel. 4.4. 6. The twenty four Elders sit on
Thrones with Crowns on their heads. Answer, This will not prove a regal power
of judging in every one of the people.
The four and twenty Elders sat on Thrones in white Robes with Crowns on
their heads. Ergo, Every one of the Church has a power of judging, as Kings
with Crowns sitting on their Thrones. Answer, First, the conclusion ever
inferres the full Tenet of the Separatists. Secondly, the consequence is very
weak, except many things be supposed which will not be granted without strong
proofs: first, that this Type is argumentative for the matter in hand:
secondly, that this place is relative to the Church on earth, rather then to
that in heaven: thirdly, that these Elders do typifie the people rather then
the Officers: fourthly, that the Thrones and Crowns import a Kingly Office in
every Christian to be exercised in Church censures upon their brethren, more
then the white robes do infer the Priestly Office of every Christian to be
exercised in Preaching the Word and celebrating the Sacraments.

7. The Galatians must stand fast to their Liberty. Anser, By Liberty
hereinothing less is understood then a power of presence and concurrence in
judgment without all power of Authority.
Seventhly, They reason from Galatian 5.1.13. the Galatians were called unto
Liberty, whereto they behoved to stand fast, as to a privilege purchased by
Christ his blood; Ergo, Every one of them had a power to cut off their
Officers. Answer. This is the Scripture whereupon our Brethren have lately
fallen, and make more of it then of any other. I confess, their reasoning from
it seems to me the most unreasonable throwing of the holy Scripture that I
have readily seen in any Disputant. The whole scope of the place carrying
evidentty a liberty from the burden and servitude of the Law. Their fathering
upon it a new and unheard of sense, to wit, a privilege of Church censures,
without any authority or proper power therein, is very strange: they cannot
produce any Scripture where the word Liberty has any such sense, and though
they could, yet to give the word that sense in this place where so clearly it
is referred to a quite diverse matter, it seems extremely unreasonable.

8. The whole Congregation of Israel had power to punish malefactors. Answer.
What the people under the Law did in the State, is not a warrant for the people
under the Gospel to do the same in the Church.
Eighthly, Thus they reason, The whole Congregation of Israel had power to punish
Malefactors, as in the case of Gibea* and in the message of Israel to the two
Tribes and half; also the people had power to rescue from the hands of the
Magistrates, as in the case of Jonathan from Saul. Answer. The consequence is
null; for the practice of the Israelites in their civil state, is no
sufficient rule for the proceedings of the Church of the New Testament. Our
Brethren would beware of such Arguments, least by them they entertain the
jealousy which some profess they have of their way, fearing it be builded
upon such principles as will set up the common people, not only above their
Officers in the Church, but also above their Magistrate in the State: That it
draw in a popular government and Ochlocracie both in Church and State alike.

9. The people elects their Officers. Ergo. they may depose and Excommunicate
them. Answer. Election is no act of power, or of Jurisdiction.
Ninthly, They thus reason. Who ever do elect the Officers, they have power to
ordain them, and upon just cause to depose and excommunicate them. But the
people do elect their Officers; Ergo. Answer. The major is denied; for first,
election is no act of power; suppose it to be a privilege, yet there is no
Jurisdiction in it at all* but Ordination is an act of Jurisdiction, it is an
authoritative mission, and putting of a man into a spiritual Office. The
people, though they have the right and possession by Scripturall practice of
the one, yet they never had either the right or the possession of the other.
Secondly, suppose the Maxim were true, whereof yet I much doubt, unless it be
well limited, Ejus est destituere cuius instituere, that they who give
authority, have power to take it back again; yet we deny that the people who
elect, give any authority or office at all, their election is at most but an
Antecedent, Sine quo non; it is the Presbytery only who by their Ordination
do confer the Office upon the elect person.

Finally, They argue, 10. The people must be present and consent to every act
of Judgment. Answer, It is not so, and if it were, yet it inferres not their
power of Jurisdiction.
No act of Jurisdiction is v^lid without the peoples consent; Ergo, to every
act of Jurisdiction the peoples presence and concurrence is necessary: Answer.
The antecedent in many cases is false; a gracious Orthodoxe Minister may be
ordained a Pastor to a Heretical people against their consent: an Heretical
Pastor, who has seduced all his flock, may be removed from them against their
passionate desires to keep him: but the Consequent is more vicious; where ever
consent is requisite, their presence, much less authoritative concurrence, is
not necessary: all the soldiers are not present at the Counsel of War, and
yet the decrees of that Counsel of War can not be executed without the consent
and action of the Soldiers: every member of the Church of Antioch was not
present at the Synod of Jerusalem: diverse members of the Independent
Congregations are absent from many Church determinations, to the which upon
their first knowledge they do agree.

CHAP. X. Independencie is contrary to the Word of God.
God is the Author of the union and dependencie of particular Churches.
THe Divine Wisdom which found it expedient for man before the Fall, not to
live alone, has made it much more needful for man to live in Society after
his weakening by sin; Woe to him that is alone, for if he fall who shall raise
him up? The best wits of themselves are prone to errors and miscarriages, and
left alone, are inclined to run on in any evil way they have once begun: But
engagement in fellowshippe, especially with the Saints, is a preservative
against the beginnings of evil, and a retractive therefrom when begun. Every
gracious neighbor is a Counselor and Pedagogue, the greater the
incorporation is of such, the better is every Member directed and the more
strengthened. Hence the goodness of God has ordained not only the planting
of particular men into a small body of one single Congregation, but for the
greater security both of Persons and Congregations, the Lord has increased
that Communion of Churches by binding neighbor Congregations in a larger and
stronger Body of a Presbytery, or Classis; yea a number of Presbyteryes by the
same hand of God are combined in a Synod; neither this only, but for the
strengthening of every stone and of the whole building, the Lord has appointed
the largest societies that are possible, the very Church universal and the
representation thereof, an Oecumenick Assembly. This congregative way is
divine; the dissolution of humane societies, especially of Ecclesiasticke
Assemblyes, must be from another Spirit.

The first we know to have opposed the holy Societyes we speak of, were
Anabaptists, who liking a Catholic anarchy in all things, and pressing an
universal liberty, did strive to cut in pieces all the bands, as of Politic
and Oeconomick union whereby Kingdoms and States, Cities and Familyes did
stand, so also of the Ecclesiasticke conjunction, making every person at last
fully free from all servitude, and simply independent, or uncontrolable in any
of his own opinions or desires, by any mortal man.

Their first follower among the reformed, From them Morellius and Grotius
learned the Tenet.
was one John Moreau a Parisian, who in the French Churches did vent the
Independency of Congregations from Synods, and the popular government of these
Independent Congregations: But his scismatick pamphlet came no sooner abroad
then the French Divines did most unanimously trample upon it. In their general
Assembly at Rochell, most Reverend Beza Moderator for the time, and in their
next Assembly, Learned Sadeell with others, did so fully confute these
Anabaptistick follies, that thereafter in France this evil Spirit did never so
much as whisper; only in Holland, in the Arminian times, it began to speak by
the tongue of Grotius, and others of his fellows, who being conscious to
themselves of Tenets whereunto they despared the assent of any Synod, yea
fearing to be prejudged in the propagation of their errors by a cross
Sentence of a National Assembly, did set themselves to call in question, and
at last to deny the Authority and Jurisdiction of all Church meetings. But when
the goodness of God in that happy Synod of Dort, did crush the other errors
of that Party, this their fancy did evanish, and since in these bounds has
been buried in Oblivion. By what means this Anabaptistick root which neither
France nor Holland could bear, when Grotius and Morellius did assay to plant
it, does thrive so well in England, after Brown and Barrow with their
followers did become its dressers, I have declared at length before.

However the Novelty of the Tenet, Laying aside all prejudice we will reason
the matter.
the Infamy of its Authors, the evil success it has had wherever yet it
has set up the head, does burden it with so just contempt, that all further
audience might be denied thereto; yet in this impudent and malapertage, where
the greatest absurdityes will importunately ingyre themselves, and require
belief as unanswerable and most covincing truths, unless in a full hearing
their naughtiness be demonstrate, we are content without all prejudices to
reason the matter it self from the ground, and to require no man to hate this
error for its Authors, or any external consideration, unless it be clearly
shown to be contrary to the revealed will of God.

The state of the Question has no perplexity, The state of the Question
cleared.
if its terms were cleared. The Brownists affirm that every Parish Church,
that every single Congregation, is Independent from any Presbytery, any Synod,
any Assembly: This we deny, affirming the true dependence and subordination of
Parochial Congregations to Presbyteries, and of these to Synods: to which we
ascribe power, authority, and Jurisdisdiction.

Before we fall to reasoning, let us understand the words, which in this
debate do frequently occur. First, what is a Parochial Church, or single
Congregation. Secondly, What is its independence. Thirdly, What is a
Presbytery, and a Presbyteriall Church. Fourthly, What is a Synod. Fifthly.
What is Authority and Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical. We intend no definitions,
but such popular descriptions as may make clear what the parties use to
understand by these words.

A particular Church, a Parish or Congregation in this Question, is taken for a
company of faithful people, every one whereof in the face of the whole
Congregation, has given so clear tokens of their true grace and regeneration,
as has satisfied the mind of all: A company, I say, incorporate by a
particular Covenant and Oath to exercise all the parts of Christian Religion,
in one place under one Pastor: Our Opposits affirm, that in one Church there
must be but one Pastor, assisted indeed with a Doctor, and three or four
Elders, yet no more Pastors but one. They will admit into a Church no more
people then commodiously, and at their ease, may convene in one house; how few
they be they care not; ten families, or forty persons to them are a fair
Church: you have heard that some of their Churches have been within the number
of four persons.

Independencie is the full liberty of such a Church to discharge all the parts
of Religion, Doctrine, Sacraments, Discipline, and all within it self without
all dependence, all subordination to any other on earth, more or fewer, so that
the smallest Congregation, suppose of three persons, though it fall into the
grossest heresies, may not be controlled by any Orthodoxe Synod, were it
Oecumenicke of all the Churches on earth.

A Presbytery, as it is called in Scotland, or a Classis, as in Holland, or a
Collogue, as in France, is an ordinary meeting of the Pastors of the Churches
nearly neighboring, and of the ruling Elders deputed therefrom, for the
exercise chiefly of discipline, so far as concerns these neighboring
Churches in common.

A Presbyteriall Church, is a company of Professors governed by one Prysbytery,
who for the exercise of Religion meet in diverse places, or who have more
Pastors then one.

A Synod, is a convention of Pastors and Elders sent and deputed from diverse
Presbyteries, meeting either ordinarily or upon occasion for the affairs that
are common to those that sent them.

Ecclesiasticke Jurisdiction, is a right and power, not only by advice to
counsel and direct, but by authority given of God, to injoyne and to perform
according to the rule of Scriptures these things which concern the Ordination
of Ministers, the deciding of Ecclesiastical Causes, the determination of
Doctrines, the inflicting of Censures, etc. The signification of these words
being presupposed, the state of the Question, or mind of the parties, can not
be obscure.

The first Argumen for the truth I cast into this Form. That single
Congregations are not Independent is proved; first, from the 1 Timothy 4.14.
because they have not the right of Ordination.
Every Independent Church has always, and ordinarily, the right of
Ordination, and power to lay hands on Pastors. But, no single Congregation, or
Parochial Church huth that right and power. Ergo* No single Congregation is an
Independent Church. The Major is not questioned by the adverse party, for they
place the nature of their Independencie in a right and power intrinsecall and
essential to every the least Congregation of Ordaining, Deposing,
Excommunicating, and exercising all acts of Jurisdiction upon all their own
Members, as well Pastors as others. I said always, and ordinarily, for we
question not now what at some times in some extraordinary cases may fall out to
be lawful and necessary, not only to single Congregations, but even to single
persons: Also the power which our adverse party disputes for, is not
Hypotheticke, which sometimes on supposition of such and such cases belongs
to a Church, but absolute, which is inherent to every Congregation at all times.

The Minor we prove thus: What is proper to a Presbytery the right thereof
belongs not to any single Congregation: Ordination belongs to the Presbytery.
But Ordination, and imposition of hands is proper to a Presbytery, as
appears from 1 Timothy 4, 14. Neglect not the gift that is in thee, which was
given thee by Prophecy with the laying on of the hands of the Presbytery. The
Apostle makes that right proper to the Presbytery, which he will have to
remain in it, and not to be removed therefrom, notwithstanding sundry
extraordinary cases which might have excused the removeall of it. For Timothy
was a Pastor not altogether ordinary, and inferior, but an Evangelist; he had
for the ground of his Office the extraordinary call of some Prophets when he
was sent out to Preach, Paul himself laid hands upon him; notwithstanding all
this, that the due and just right of the Presbytery migh be proclaimed, the
Apostle marketh that the gift, office, and grace of Preaching the Gospel was
conferred on Timothy by the laying on of the Presbyteries hands.

For the proof of the last Mayor, we need not much descant on the Word
Presbytery, and the sense of it in the forenamed place, nor to refute the
misinterpretations which some make of it, especially they, who under the
mis-alledged authority of Calvin, would understand not the convention of any
men, but the Office of a Presbyter, as if an Office or any accident could have
had hands which might have been laid on Timothies head. Passing therefore such
digressions, we prove the Mayor in hand, thus: No single Congregation is a
Presbytery, nor any ways necessarily has a Presbytery within it self; yea if
our adverse party may be believed, no Congregation can have, at least should
have in it self such a Presbytery whereof Paul speaks. Ergo. What is proper
to a Presbytery, the right thereof may not be usurped by any single
Congregation. Of the consequence there is no doubt: the Antecedent has three
parts: only the first is needful to be proved; but for more abundant
satisfaction, we shall assay to prove them all.

No Congregation is a Presbytery.
The first, thus; A Presbytery is a member and part of a Congregation, according
to our adverse party (we love not to strive for words, be it so that the
meeting of a Minister and Elders governing single Congregations, which we call
a Session, as over-Sea it is called a Consistory, may go under the name of a
Presbytery) Ergo. No Congregation is a Presbytery. The Consequence is clear,
for no member may be affirmed in the Nominative of its own whole, especially
Heterogeneous: The body is not the head, the finger is not the hand; he door,
or the Window is not the house.

Concerning the second part of the Antecedent, that no Congregation has a
Presbytery any ways necessarily within it self, No Congretion has within it
self necessarily a Presbytery.
this is clear from the common practice of our adverse party: very often their
Churches have neither Session, nor Pastor, nor Doctor, nor Elder at all; they
make not any of the Officers necessary parts of the Church either essential or
integrall, without the which the Church may not subsist; yea, as the most
learned, and most acute Mr. Rutherfoord has well observed, page 272. their
grounds take away the necessity of any Ministry at all. Mr. Paget tells us
that their chief and Mother Church at Amsterdame, through the mis-government
of their Pastor, Mr. Can, has wanted now for some years both a Doctor and
Elders and a Session, or Congregationall Presbytery.

But the pith of the Argument is in the third part of the Antecedent, that no
single Congregation can have, No single Congregation ought to have within it
self Paul's Presbytery.
or (which is all one when we speak of right and wrong) ought to have within
it self Paul's Presbytery. This we prove. No single Congregation may, or ought
to have more Pastors than one. Ergo. Neither Paul's Presbytery. The Antecedent is
the Doctrine of our adverse party. The Consequence leans on this Proposition.
In Paul's Presbytery are more Pastors, which thus is proved: Where there are
many layers on of hands on Pastors, there are many Pastors: But, in Paul's
Presbytery are many layers on of hands on Pastors; for in the alleged place,
not one, but many lay on their hands with Paul on Timothy. The last Mayor
leans on this ground, that only Pastors lay hands on Pastors, so that many
laying hands on Pastors, must be many Pastors, and by Consequence, in one
Congregation, where there are not many, but one only Pastor, (yea none at all
whenever by imposition of hands a new Pastor is to be ordained to that
Congregation,) the act of Ordination can not be lawfully performed by the
proper members of that Congregation.

That which alone remains to be proved, that only Pastors lay hands upon
Pastors, is cleared by an Induction, Only Pastors lay hands on Pastors.
against which no instance can be brought. 1 Timothy 5.22. Lay hands suddenly on
no man. 2 Timothy 1.6. Stir up the gift of God that is in thee, by the putting
on of my hands. Tit. 1.5. I left thee in Crete that thou should ordain
Elders. Acts. 13.1.3. Certain Prophets and Teachers laid their hands upon
them, and sent them away. Acts. 14.23. They ordained them Elders in every
Church. In all these places both the first Ordination, and posterior Mission to
preach the Gospel, is the Act only of those who were Pastors, neither
elsewhere read we that it was otherwise.

The second Argument from the Apostolic Churches which exercised full
jurisdiction, the chief whereof, if not all, were Presbyteriall and not
Parochial.
The second argument: Every Independent Church, exercises ordinarily within it
self, by its own members all acts of Ecclesiasticke Jurisdiction. But, this
no single Congregation does ordinarily. Ergo, no single Congregation is an
Independent Church. Only the Minor is dubious, which we prove thus; Every
Church ordinarily exercising all acts of Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction is
Presbyteriall: But, no single Congregation is a Presbyteriall Church. Ergo. No
single Congregation exercises ordinarily all acts of Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction. The Minor is clear from the nature of a single Congregation and
Presbyteriall Church, as in the stateing of the Question both were described.
The Major is proved by a full Induction of all the Churches which in the New
Testament we read to have had the full exercise of all Ecclesiastic
Jurisdiction* that all such were Presbyteriall and not Congregationall; We
prove it thus: A Church which cannot all convene in one house for the public
Service of God, a Church which has more Pastors then one, is Presbyteriall,
not Congregationall, according to the grounds of our Adversaryes. But all the
Churches we read of in the New Testament to have had the full exercise of all
Ecclesiastic Jurisdiction, did meet in more places for divine worship, and
had more Pastors then one. This we demonstrate of the chief, the Church at
Jerusalem, Samaria, Rome, Corinth, Ephesus, Antioch, neither can a reason be
given why the rest of the Scripturall Churches should not be of the same kind.

Such was the Church at Jerusalem.
Begin with the Mother Church of Jerusalem. A company consisting of many
thousand persons, and wanting a public house of meeting, could not convene
into one place for worship: for this very day when Christians have gotten
most stately and spacious Palaces for Churches, hardly one thousand can
commodiously be together for solemn worship; and if we look to the practice
of the Adversaries, a few scores of men will be a large Church.

As for the State of the Church at Jerusalem. First, It is granted that for
many years after the Apostles, neither it nor any other company of Christians
in any part of the world had a public place of meeting. Secondly, That this
Church did consist of many thousand people, the following places prove Acts.
2.41. The same day were added unto them about three thousand. Also chap. 4.5.
The number of the men were five thousand. And where there were so many men, if
ye look to the ordinary proportion, there were of women and children twice or
thrice so many. Neither did that Church stand at the named thousands, for Acts.
5.14. more multitudes both of men and women were added to the Church, and the
number of the Disciples was yet more multiplied, chap 6.1 Also that which we
read chap. 2.47. The Lord added to the Church daily, seems to have continued
for a long time.

To that which is replied by some, that a great part of the named multitudes
were strangers, and not Inhabitants at Jerusalem, and so no Members of that
Church; We answer, that this is said without warrant. That of the three
thousand mentioned in the third chapter, some part were strangers, we will not
deny to be likely; but that the most part were so, or that of all the thousands
named in the fourth, fifth, and sixth, any one was a stranger, it cannot be
proved from the Text.

As for that which they bring from the 2 chap. 44. How the Church comes
together.
All who believed were together: as if the whole Church had always come to one
place for the public worship. We say that it was simply impossible for
three thousand people, not to speak of twenty thousand and above, to meet in
one private house, for they had none public, neither did they in the streets
celebrate their Sacraments. So we are necessitated to take the Churches being
together, one of three ways: either for the conjunction of their minds, as the
following words do import ( they continued with one accordin the Temple) or
else their meeting together must be understood distributively in diverse places,
not collectively in one, as the words in hand will also bear where the
celebration of the Lords Supper, and breaking of bread is said to be not in any
one house only but from house to house. The Church meet thin a third way
together when not all the members but the Officers with a part of the people
convene in a Presbytery as appears from the 15 and 21 chapters.

The Church of Samaria also was Presbyteriall.
The case is no less clear of the Church of Samaria Acts 8.6.10.12.14. verses
the People of that City with one accord from the least to the greatest both men
and women did believe, in such a number that the chief of the Apostles Peter
and John, were sent from Jerusalem to assist Philip in their instruction. Could
this whole City which was amongst the greatest of Canaan convene all to Gods
worship in one private room, or be served with one Pastor, who required for
a time the attendance not only of Philip but further of two prime Apostles?

So that of Rome.
Come to the rest. The Roman Church was one Body. Romans 12.6. yet so great that
it could not meet in one private room. For in the 16. chap. beside the Church
which met in the house of Aquila v. 5. there are a number of houses set down,
in which, besides diverse Saints named, there were many others also unnamed
which worshipped with them, v. 14, 15. So great were the multitudes of
Christians then at Rome that their fame was spread over all the world. chap.
1.8. and chap. 16.19. In the City of Rome were many hundred thousand men, the
half of which according to Tertullian, were Christians the age after the
Apostles; and a little after Cornelius records that more then forty preachers
did attend the instruction of that people who yet had no public place of
meeting.

And of Corinth.
The same was the case of the Church at Corinth at its very beginning, Acts.
18.8. It did consist of a multitude both Jews and Gentiles; beside all which,
God had much people in that City, v. 10. which by the continual labors of
Paul for 18 months were converted, v. 11, for whose instruction beside Paul,
Apollos, Timotheus, a great number of other Doctors attended, 1 Cor 4.15. not
to speak of a multitude of false Teachers; they had also a number of idle and
vain Teachers who kept the foundation, but builded upon it hay, stubble and
timber. Could all these meet together in one private place? unless ye would
understand their meetings distributively, or for the convention of their
Officers with a part of the people for discipline.

And of Ephesus.
Also at Ephesus was but one Church. For Acts. 20.17. Paul called to him the
Elders of that Church, in the singular; yet that in Ephesus there was so great
a number of Christians as could not commodiously serve God in one private
room, it seems most clear; for in that most noble Mart Town Paul did preach
whole two years. Acts 19.10. yea he ceased not day nor night for full three
years, cha. 20.31. The fear of God fell on all that people both Jews and
Gentiles, and the name of Jesus was magnified, cha. 19.19. So great a multitude
even of Scholars was converted that the Professors of curious arts alone did
make a fire of Books to the value of 50000 pieces of silver; so mightily grew
the word of God there, v. 20. Further, in the Church of Ephesus were many
Pastors; for Acts. 20.17. Paul called for the Elders, not one only. That
diverse of these if not all, were Pastors and Doctors, it appears from v. 28.
where they are appointed by the Holy Ghost, to be feeders of the flock and get
a Commission to oppose false Doctors, about the which they went faithfully, as
the Lord bears them witness, Revel. 2.2. Now the charge of the Doctrine to
try and examine false Teachers, lies principally on preachers.

This is alike true of the Church of Antioch: Also of Antioch and the rest.
The hand of the Lord was in the City, and a great number believed, Acts 11.21.
Thereafter by Barnabas labor there was much people added, v. 24. yea, by the
joined pains of Barnabas and Paul for a year together, there was such a
multitude converted, that the name of Christians was first imposed upon them.
Here, as in the Metropolitan City, not only of Syria, but all Asia, beside
Barnabas, Paul and other Prophets, v. 27. Peter also, and many other Doctors
had their residence, Gal. 2.11. It were too long to speak of the rest of the
Apostolic Churches, whose condition was not unlike the former.

Our third Argument: Our third argument from the subordination of the Church of
Antioch to the Synod at Jerusalem, Act. 15.
No Synod has authority to impose Decrees upon an Independent Church: But some
Synods have authority to impose Decrees upon particular Churches, whether
Presbyteriall or Congregationall. Ergo, Particular Churches, whether
Presbyteriall or Congregationall are not Independent. The Mayor is not
controverted; our adverse party acknowledges the lawful use and manifold
fruits of Synods: They grant it is the duty of every good man, and much more of
every Church, and most of all of a Synod consisting of the Messengers of many
Churches, to admonish, counsel, persuade, and request particular Curches to
do their duty: But, that any company on earth, even an Oecumenicke Synod,
should presume to injoyne with authority the smallest Congregation, to leave
the grossest heresies under the pain of any censure, they count it absurd.
Upon this ground, that every Congregation, how small soever, how corrupt
soever, is an Independent body, and not subordinate to any society on earth,
how great, how pure, how holy soever.

The Minor thus is proved: The Synod of Jerusalem imposed with Authority, her
Decrees upon the Church of Antioch. Ergo, Some Synod; and if you please to make
it universal, every lawful Synod may impose its Decrees upon particular
Churches. The Antecedent is to be seen, Act 15.20. It seemed good to the Holy
Ghost and to us, to lay no further burden on you then these things necessary.
The Consequence is good, for Antioch was among the chief of the Apostolic
Churches; in it Barnabas, Paul, and other Prophets inspired of God were
Preachers: If this Church was subject to the Authority of Synods, what Church
may plead a freedom from the like subjection?

Answer to the Replies.
Many things are here replied, as usually it happens when no solid answer can be
brought: The chief heads of the Reply are three; First, that the meeting at
Jerusalem was no Synod. Secondly, What ever it was that it did injoyne nothing,
authoritatively to any other Churches. Thirdly, That other Synods may not
pretend to the privileges of that meeting since its Decrees were indicted by
the Holy Ghost, and stand now in the holy Canon as a part of Scripture.

The meeting of Jerusalem was a true Synod.
To the first, we say, that the meeting at Jerusalem is either a true Synod, or
else there is no pattern in all Scripture for Synods, even for counsel, or
advice, or any other use. But, this were inconvenient; for they acknowledge
that Synods are lawful means for many gracious ends in the Church: Now, to
affirm that any Ecclesiasticke meeting is lawful, necessary, or convenient
for gracious ends, whereof no pattern, no example can be found in Scripture,
were dangerous.

But beside this argument, toward our adverse party, we reason from the nature
of the thing it self. A meeting consisting of the Deputies of many
Presbyteriall Churches, is a true Synod; but, the convention at Jerusalem, Acts
15. was such a meeting. The Mayor is the essence of a Synod; there are many
accidental differences of Synods; for according to the quantity and number of
the Churches who send their Commissioners, the Synod is smaller or greater, is
Provincial, National, or Oecumenicke: according to occasion, the Churches
sending Commissioners, are sometime more, sometime fewer, sometime nearer,
sometime further off: also according to the commodity of place, and necessity
of affairs, they come from one Church more, and from others fewer: all these
are but accidentalls, which change not the nature of the thing. Unto the
essence of a Synod; no more uses to be required then a meeting of
Commissioners from more Presbyteriall Churches. The Minor is clear; That the
Church of Antioch and Jerusalem were more Churches, no man doubts; that both
were Presbyteriall, it was proved before, that from both these Presbyteriall
Churches, Commissioners did sit at that meeting, it is apparent from that often
cited, Acts 15. Yea, that from the other Churches of Syria and Cilicia, besides
Antioch, Commissioners did come to Jerusalem, may appear by conference of the
2. verse. of the 15. chap. with verse. 23. for that with Paul and Barnabas
Commissioners for the time from the Antiochians, others also did come, it is
certain: that those others, at least some of them, were Deputed from the
Churches of Syria and Cilicia, it is like, because the Synodick Epistle is
directed expressly no less to those than to this of Antioch; also those, no
less than this, are said to be troubled with the Questions which occasioned
that meeting. But to pass this consideration, it is clear that in the
Convention at Jerusalem were present, not only the Commissioners of some few
Presbyteriall Churches, but also they whom God had made constant Commissioners
to all the Churches of the world, to wit, the Apostles; their presence made all
the Churches legally subject to the Decrees of that Synod, though they had no
other but their grand and constant Commissioners to Voice for them in that
meeting.

The second Answer is clearly refuted from the 28. verse. where the Decrees are
not proposed by way of mere advice, It does not only advise but command. The
Decrees of that Synod at their first making had only Ecclesiastic authority.
but are enjoined and imposed as necessary burdens, with Authority, not only
of the Synod but of the holy Ghost.

Concerning the third, we say that the merely Divine, and more than
Ecclesiastic Authority of these Decrees in their first Formation, is not made
good from this, that now they stand in holy Scripture, and are become a part of
the Bible; for a world of Acts merely indifferent, and which without doubt in
their Original had no more then Ecclesiasticke Authority, are Registered in
Scripture. Was the Presbytery of Lystraes laying on of hands on Timothy any
other then an act of Ecclesiastic Ordination? The Decree of the Church of
Corinth for the incestuous man's Excommunication, or relaxation after
Repentance, was it any more then an act of Jurisdiction merely Ecclesiasticke?
Paul's circumcision of Timothy, his Uow at Cenchrea, the cutting off his hair
at Jerusalem, were free and indifferent actions: The nature of these things,
and many more of that kind, is not changed by their Registring in the Book of
God. Neither also is the merely Divine Authority of the Decrees at Jerusalem
proved by this, that in their first framing they were grounded on clear
Scripture, and after proclaimed in the name of the holy Ghost; for that is the
condition of the lawful Decrees of all gracious Synods. Did not of old the
Fathers of Nice, and of late the Fathers of Dort, through the inspiration of
the holy Ghost, who remains with the Church, especially with gracious Synods
to the worlds end, pronounce from the holy Sctipture their Decrees of the
Godhead of Christ against Arrius, and of the grace of God against Arminius:
Shall we for this cause ascribe to the Canons of Nice or Dort any greater
authority then Ecclesiastic and Humane? Howsoever, that the Apostles in
framing the Canons at Jerusalem did proceed in a way merely Ecclesiastic,
and far different from that they used in dictating of Scripture, and
publishing truths merely Divine, appears from this; first, that these Canons
were brought forth by much Disputation and long discourse, But, Divine Oracles
without the process of humane Ratiocinations are published from the immediate
inditing of the Spirit, 2 Pet. 1.21. The Prophecy in old time came not by the
will of man, but the holy men of God spoke as they were moved by the holy
Ghost. Secondly, Oracles merely Divine are published only in the name of God,
Thus says the Lord; but, these Canons are proclaimed, not only in the name of
God, but also in the name of man, It seems good to the holy Ghost, and to us.
Thirdly, The Oracles of God are dictated to the Church by the Ministry only of
the Prophets and Apostles, and men inspired with an infallible Spirit, Ephesians.
2, 20. Being built upon the foundation of the Prophets and Apostles. But, the
Canons of that Synod, Acts 15. are declared to be the work, not only of the
holy Ghost, ^d the Apostles, but also of the Elders, and of all who Voyced to
them. So it is clear, that in the making of these Canons, the Apostles, as
elsewhere often, did come down from the eminent. Chair of their Apostolic,
and extraordinary authority to the lower place of Ordinary Pastors, that in
their own persons they might give an example to ordinary Pastors in what
manner holy Synods might be rightly celebrated to the worlds end. Had not this
been their end, how easy had it been either for Paul or Barnabas at Antioch,
without the toylesome voyage of a long journey to Jerusalem, or for Peter or
John, or James, or any one of the Apostles at Jerusalem, without the
superfluous pains of any convention or disputation, as infallible Apostles to
have pronounced Divine and irrefragable Decrees of all the matters in question.

Our fourth argument. A Church subordinate is not Independent; but, a Parochial
Church is subordinate to a Presbyteriall: Our fourth argument from the
subordination of fewer to more, appointed by Christ, Matthew. 18.
For a lesser Church is subordinate to a greater, as a part to its whole
wherein it is contained. Now a Parochial Church is lesser and the least of all
Churches; a Presbyteriall Church is greater. Of the quantity, that the one is
lesser, the other greater there is no doubt; but of the matter it self there
is question whether there be any such thing as a Presbyteriall Church. Now this
was proved before and hereafter also will be more clear; the chief plea here
is against the second major which we prove thus: A smaller number of the
faithful is subordinate by Christ to a greater number of the faithful. But, a
lesser Church is a smaller number of the faithful, and a greater Church is a
greater number of the faithful. The Major is proved from the 18 of Math. v.
15.16.17.18. If thy Brother trespass against thee, etc. Here the Lord in
admonitions and Church censures institutes a subordination, a gradation, a
process from one to two or three, from two or three to more. Understand those
more not absolutely and at randoun but in a society bound together by the
orderly ligaments of divine policy, such as we suppose the Churches to be from
the smallest to the greatest till you come to the very Church universal.

Here they distinguish the Major, granting that in this place a subordination
is appointed by Christ of fewer to more within the same Church but not without
it. We might oppugn the application of the distinction to the Minor, and prove
that a Presbyteriall Church is a greater number of the faithful within not
without the same Church; for a Congregationall Church may not unfitly be
compared with a Presbyteriall as a part with its whole; especially if you
compare the meeting of the Officers which rule the Parish with the Presbytery,
these two are not extrinsecall the one to the other; for the Sessions, or
Consistories, or Classis, are in the Presbytery which is composed of the
Commissioners from Sessions as of its own and intrinsecall Members.

Christ's subordination is to be extended to the utmost bounds of the Church
universal.
But leaving this, we oppugn the ground of the distinction as it lies in the
Major, breaking the one half of it upon the other. The subordination of fewer
to more in the forenamed place is established say they within the same Church.
Ergo, say we, without the same Church, we mean with them without the same
Parochial Church: the consequence we prove by three arguments. First, there is
a like reason for the subordination of fewer to more without the same Church as
within the same; for the chief reason why the Lord ordaines us in admonitions
to proceed from one to two or three, from two or three to a number sitting as
Judges in the Session of one Congregation, is, because in the admonitions of
two or three, more authority, gravity and wisdom are presupposed to be than
in the admonitions of one alone: and that a Delinquent is stricken with more
fear, shame, and reverence by the faces and mouths of many who sit as Judges
in the name of the whole Congregation, than he would be by the mouth of two or
three only. Does not this power, virtue and weight of admonition increase
with the number of admonishers, as well without as within the same
Congregation? For as the admonition and censure of ten sitting in the name of
one Congregation, has greater weight then the admonition of two or three of
that same Flock who represent none but themselves; so the admonition of thirty
Ministers and Elders representing in a Presbytery fifteen Congregations, whose
commissioners they are, shall have more weight then the admonition of ten which
represent but one flock: for it is according to reason, that those thirty
Members of the Presbytery should exceed in wisdom, zeal, gravity, and other
qualities which add weight to an admonition, these ten which in a Session
represent one Congregation, so far as those ten go beyond the two or three
several persons of that Congregation.

Secondly, unless in this place be established a subordination of fewer to
more, as well without as within the same Congregation, the remedy brought by
Christ will be unable to cure the ill for which it was brought. The Lords
means will be disproportionable and unequal to its end; but this were absurd
to say of the wisest of all Physicians. The reason of the Major is this, Christ
is prescribing an help and cure for brotherly offenses; now one may be
offended by a brother as well without as within the same Congregation: and as
well by many brethren as by one; yea, as well may we be offended by a whole
Church as by one member thereof: Now, if after the mind of our adverse party,
the subordination of fewer to more might not be extended without the bounds of
one Congregation, the Lords medecin were not meet to cure very many ordinary
and daily scandals; for what if a man be scandalized by the neighbor Church?
To whom shall he complain? When the Church offending is both the Judge and
party, it is likely she will misregard the complaints that are made to her of
her self. What if a man be scandalized by his own Church or by the most, or
by the strongest part of it? What if that Church to whom he complains, take
part against Justice and reason with him upon whom he complains? It will be
impossible to remedy innumerable offenses which daily fall out among brethren,
unless appeals be granted, and the subordination established by Christ be
extended, not only without the bounds of one Parish, but as far and wide as
the utmost limits of the Church universal: for upon this place is rightly
grounded by the Ancients, the Authority of Synods even Oecumenick of all the
Churches.

Thirdly, the subordination established by Christ, Matthew. 18. is so far to be
extended in the Christian Church as it was extended in the Church of the Jews;
for Christ there alludeth to the Jewish practice. But so it is, that in the
Jewish Church there was ever a subordination of fewer to more, not only within
the same Synagogue, but within the whole Nation, and so within the whole Church
Universal: for all Synagogues everywhere in the world were under the great
Council at Jerusalem. No doubt of the Minor; the Major is builded upon this
ground, that what ever Christ has translated from the Synagogue to the Church,
especially if it be of natural equity, has as great force now amongst
Christians, as of old among the Jews. Now, that the subordination of
Synagogues to the great Council is of natural equity, it appears thus: A
Synagogue was the lowest Ecclesiasticke Court, the Council was the highest;
but the subordination of the lowest Court to the highest, is of natural right;
for Nature has ever dictated to all Nations, as well in things civil as
religious, a subordination of the lowest to the highest.

Our fifth argument from the evil consequents, which reason and experience
demonstrate to follow Independency necessarily and naturally.
Our fifth Argument: That which takes away all possibility of any effectual
remedy against Heresy, Idolatry, Schism, Tyranny, or any other mischief that
wracks either one or more Churches; is not of God: for God is the Author and
conserver of truth, purity, union, order, liberty, and of all virtue; God of
his goodness and wisdom has provided for all and every one of his Churches
means and remedies, which if carefully made use of, are sufficient to hinder
the first arising of Heresy, Schism, or any other evil: and when they are
risen to beat them down* and abolish them: so that what ever cherishes these
mischiefs, and is a powerful instrument to preserve them safe, that none with
any power, with any authority, for any purpose, may get them touched, that must
be much opposite to the Spirit of God, and good of the Church: But, such is
Independencie, as both reason and experience will prove. Behold first several
Churches; Suppose, which too often has fallen out, that the Pastor become a
pernicious Heretic; let him begin with the venom of his Doctrine to poison
the hearts of his people, what shall be the remedy? Independency binds the
hands of Presbyteries and Synods. Pastors of Neighboring Congregations, have
no power to bind, or expel that ravenous wolf: in the destroyed flock there
is no Pastor, but the wolf himself. Be it so that the people in their
judgment of discretion perceive well enough the wickedness of the false
doctrine whereby they are corrupted; yet the office, charge, and authority to
cure their Pastors disease, lies not on them. The Spirits of the Prophets are
subject to the Prophets: the Pastor is not to be proceeded against with censure
by the people of his flock; for so the order which God has established in his
Church, should be inverted, if they whom he has commanded to obey should
rule: and they whom he has set above and over the flock, should be under it.
Further, Suppose the Pastor to be most gracious, what if the flock, or the
greater part of the flock become so wicked as to abuse their Pastor, or to
abuse the most godly of the Congregation? What if a wicked spirit of Heresy,
Schism, or Tyranny, set the most part of the flock against God, against their
gracious Pastor, and the godly of the flock, what shall be done in this
pitiful, and very possible, yea, often contingent case? Ind^pendency closes the
door of the troubled Congregation, that no man may go out to cry for any
powerful help to neighbors, though their kindled house should burn them all
to death; within there is no remedy; for all most go there by the number of
voices, and the most part oppresses the best, the most wicked go on against
the Counsels, the entreaties, the prayers of the rest, and cease not till they
have either corrupted or cast out their Pastor, Elders, and all of their
fellow members who are constant in goodness, that so their wickedness without
control may domineere in the whole subdued Congregation. So long as
Independency stands, no effectual authoratative or powerful help can
possibly be found for the preservation of any single Congregation against ruin
and total subversion.

Further, Independency hazards the being of all Churches as well as of every
one. For who shall hinder any member of a corrupted Congregation to infect all
the neighbor Churches with the poison of his doctrine and manners? If a
ramping Lion, a viperous Serpent, a crafty Fox should go and devour all the
Lambs of the neighbor flocks; Independency does hinder any order to be taken
with that limb of Satan, no sword of censure can be drawn against him, he
must be referred absolutely to his own Congregation; other Churches may
entreat, advise, and pray him not to make havoke of them: but should he
trouble, infect, and destroy twenty, an hundred, a thousand neighbor
Congregations, no Ecclesiastic censure may pass upon him but by his own
Church: and when complaints of him come to his own Church, his misdeedes there
are excused, defended, commended; his Heresies are proclaimed sound doctrine his
devouring of souls is declared to be zeal and painfulnesse to win souls to
CHRIST.

Our Argument is backed by experience, as well as by reason; The first
Independent Church we read of, was that company which Mr. Brown brought over
from England to Middleborough; how long did it stand before it was destroyed by
Independency? when once Anabaptistick novelties, and other mischiefs fell
among them, there was no remedy to prevent the companies dissolution. When Mr.
Barrow and his fellows, assaied at London to erect their Congregation, the
success was no better; their Ship scarce well set out was quickly splitupon
the Rocks, was soon dissipate and vanished. When Johnstoun and Ainsworth would
make the third assay, and try if that tree which neither in England nor Zealand
could take root, might thrive in Holland at Amsterdam, where plants of all
sorts are so cherished, that few of the most malign qualite do miscarry; yet
so singular a malignity is innate in that seed of Independency, that in that
very ground, where all weeds grow rank, it did wither: within a few years
new Schisms burst that small Church asunder: Johnstoun with his half, and
Ainsworth with his made several Congregations, neither whereof did long
continnue without further ruptures; Behold who please, with an observant Eye
these Congregations which have embraced Independency, they shall find that
never any Churches in so short a time have been disgraced with so many, so
unreasonable, and so irreconcilable Schisms.

Neither the duties of charity, nor the authority of the Magistrate can remedy
these evils.
Against these inconveniences they tell us of two remedies, the duties of
charity, and the authority of the Magistrate; but the one is unsufficient, and
the other improper The duties of charity are but mocked by obstinate Heretics
and heady Schismatics; to what purpose are counsels, rebukes, entreaties
employed toward him who is blown up with the certain persuasion that all his
errors are divine truths, that all who deal with him to the contrary are in a
clear error, that all the advices given to him are but the words of Satan from
the mouths of men tempting him to sin against God?

As for the Magistrate, often he is not a Christian, often though a Christian, he
is not Orthodoxe, and though both a Christian and Orthodoxe, yet often either
ignorant or careless of Ecclesiasticke affairs; and however, his help is
never so proper and intrinsecall to the Church, that absolutely and necessarily
she must depend thereupon. Now all our Question is about the ordinary, the
internal, the necessary remedies which Scripture ascribes to the Church within
it self, as it is a Church even when the outward hand of the Magistrate is
deficient or opposite.

Our sixth and last Argument: That which everteth from the very foundation the
most essential parts of discipline, Our last Argument, Independency is
contrary to all the discipline that ever was known in Christendom before the
Anabap^ists.
not only of all the reformed, but of all the Churches known at any time in
any part of the world, till the birth of Anabaptisme, it can not be very
gracious. But, this does Independency: The Minor is clear by induction: That
the Government of the Scottish Church by Synods, Presbyteries and Sessions
sworn and subscribed of old, and late by that Nation in their solemn
Covenant; that the same discipline of the Churches of France, Holland, Swiiz,
Geneva, as also the Polity of the High Dutch and English, and all the rest who
are called Reformed, is turned upside down by Independency, no man doubts; for
this is our Adversaries gloriation that they will be tied by no Oaths,
Covenants, Subscriptions: they will be hindered by no authority of any man, no
reverence of any Churches on earth, to separate from all the reformed, that so
alone they may enjoy their divine and beloved Independency.

If you speak of more ancient times, either the purer which followed the
Apostles at the back, or the posterior impurer ages; that the Polity of these
times in all Churches, Greek and Latin, is trodden under foot by
Independency, all likewise do grant: and how well that new conceit agrees
with the discipline practiced in the days of Christ and his Apostles, or in
the days of Moses and the Prophets, the preceding arguments will show. I
confess such is the boldness of the men, against whom we now dispute, that
although they glory in their contempt of the authority of all men, dead and
living: yet they offer to overwhelme us with testimonies of a number, as well
ancient as late Divines: But who desire to see all that dust blown back in
their own eyes who raised it, and the detorted words against the known mind
and constant practice of the Authors, clearly vindicated and retorted, let
them be pleased to take a view of Mr. Pagets Posthume Apology, where they will
find abundant satisfaction in this kind.

The first Objection or Argument for Independency from Matthew. 18.
For the other side, a great bundle of arguments are also brought; we shall
consider the principal. First: To whom Christ has given the right of
excommunication the greatest of all censures, they in all other acts of
Jurisdiction, and in all acts of Ecclesiastic discipline, are Independent: But
Christ has given the right of excommunication to every Congregation, and to
these alone. Ergo, etc. They prove the Minor. Unto the Church Christ has given
the right of excommunication Mat. 18. Go tell the Church, if he hear not the
Church, let him be to thee as an Ethnicke: But every Congregation, and it
only* is the Church, because in the whole Scripture the word Church where ever
it is not taken for the Church universal, or invisible, is ever understood of
a single Congregation, which in one place with one Pastor serves God. Answer.
Passing the Majors, we deny the Minors, and affirm that no where in Scripture
the word Church may be expounded of their Independent Congregation, and least
of all in the alleged place; If we will advise either with the old or late
Interpreters, or with the best and most learned of the Adversaryes themselves,
who affirm with us that by the Church Math. 18. no Congregation can be
understood, unless we would bring in among Christians most gross anarchy,
except we would set down on the Judgment seats of the Church every member of
the Congregation, men, women, young, old, the meanest and weakest part of the
people to decide by the number, not the weight of their voices the greatest
causes of the Church, to determine finally of the excommunication of Pastors,
of the nature of haeresie and all doctrine, and that with a decree irrevocable
from which there may be no appeal, no not to an Oecumenicke Synod. Wherefore
beside the rest of the Interpreters a great part of the Adversaries by the
Church in this place understand no whole Congregation, nor the most part of any
Congregation, but a select number thereof, the Senate or Officers who cognose
and discern according to the Scriptures.

This is enough for answer to the argument: but if further it be inquired, the
Senate of which Church is pointed at in this place, whether of a Parochial
Church, or Presbyteriall, or National, or Oecumenicke, or of all these. Ans.
It seems that the Senate of all the Churches must here be understood, and
especially of a Presbyteriall Church, at least not of a Parochial only and
independently as our Adversaries would have it. By no means will we have the
Session of a Parish prejudged, and are well content that the authority of
Parochial Sessions to handle their own proper affairs should be grounded upon
this place; only we deny that from this place a Church-Session has any
warrant to take the cognition of things common to it self with the
Neighboring Congregations, or yet to govern her proper affairs absolutely
and independently so that none may attempt to correct her when she erreth, or
by censure to put her in order when she begins by heresy schism and
tyranny to corrupt her self and others.

That in this place principally the Senate of a Presbyteriall Church is
understood, is clear; for of such a Church Christ here speaks, as were the
Churches at Jerusalem, Antioch, Corinth, and others in the new Testament which
we proved before to have bin presbyteriall. The Senate of such Churches
attending on government, and discipline, is here called the Church, as
elsewhere, Act. 5.20. It seemed good to the Apostles, Elders and whole Church:
The Church met to cognosce on the questions from Antioch, cannot be understood
of all the thousand Christians at Jerusalem; it must then be taken of the
Presbytery to which the cognition of such questions does belong. In the fourth
verse of the same chapter, Paul is said to be received of the Church, the word
may well be expounded not of the whole Body, but of a select number thereof;
even the Presbytery; as in the 21 he is said to be received of the Apostles and
Elders, before the multitude had met together.

Only observe that however we affirm the Senate of a Presbyteriall Church
cheifely here to be established, yet we understand not this in a way
independent from provincial, National, or Oecumenick Synods; for all these
meetings in their own place and order are also grounded on this passage, as
before has been declared.

Their second Objection: The practice of the Church of Corinth, The second
Objection is taken from the practice of the Corinthians, excommunicating the
incestuous man.
approved by the Apostles is the due right of every Parochial Church and
single Congregation: But, the censure of Excommunication was the practice of
the Church of Corinth approved by the Apostle, 1 Cor. 5.12, 13. Do we not judge
them that are within? therefore put away from you that wicked person. This
judgment is authoritative, and this putting away is the censure of
Excommunication, cutting off from the body of Christ, which censure is here
committed unto the Corinthians, being gathered together in one, verse. 4. and so
to them all, and every one of them: for to them all the Epistle is written, and
not to the Presbytery only. Answ. The Mayor must be denied for two causes;
First, The practice of the Corinthians was grounded not only upon the express
command of the Apostle, but also on the singular presence of the Apostles
Spirit and authority with them in pronouncing the sentence of Excommunication
against that incestuous person, v. 3. I as present in Spirit have judged
already. This singular privilege of the Corinthians is not a ground of common
right to every Church who wants the authority of the Apostles express command,
and singular presence. Secondly, we may not argue from the Church of Corinth to
every Congregation; for it is proved before, that the Church of Corinth was not
Congregationall, but Presbyteriall, consisting of so many as could not meet
commodiously in one private room; also it had within it self a College or
Senate of many Pastors, Elders, and Prophets; to such a Church we grant
willingly the exercise of all acts, both of Ordination and Jurisdiction.

The Minor also cannot be admitted but with a double distinction; the act of
Excommunication is given to the Church of Corinth, not according to its whole,
but acording to the select part, to wit the Presbytery thereof. It makes
nothing against this, that the Epistle is written to the whole Church; for what
is written to the whole Church indefinitely, must be applied according to the
matter and purpose, sometime only to the Pastors excluding the people:
sometime only to the people, excluding the Pastors: sometimes to both
together, to Pastors, and Flock. The first Epistle, Chap. 1. verse. 12. Every
one of you says, I am of Paul, I am of Apollos, and I of Cephas; this cannot
be taken of the Pastors, but of the people following Schismatically some one,
some another of the Pastors. Likewise, Chap. 4. verse. 1. Let a man so count of
us as of the Ministers of Christ, must be taken of the people, as Chap. 3.
verse. 12. ( Now if any man build on this foundation gold, silver, precious
stones) is to be understood of the Pastors, as Chap. 4. verse. 2. Also it is
required in Stewards that a man be found faithful; but the most of the other
places are to be expounded of both. Now that the preceding passages concerning
the Church Censures, are not true of the whole Congregation, it appears; for
beside the absurdity of confusion and Anarchy, it would follow that very women
have right judicially to Depose, and Excommunicate by their voices their
Pastors, which the very Adversaries profess to reject as absurd, albeit not
congruously to their Tenets; for it is not reasonable that the right which from
these places they ascribe to every member of the Church, should be taken away
from women, upon this only reason that in 1 Timothy 2.11. a commandment is given
to the women not to teach, but in silence to learn; for as the brethren of our
Adversaries, the Anabaptists have marked, that place takes away from women the
public charge of Preaching, but not of speaking in judgment or giving their
voice in Church-judicatories. Surely, nowhere absolute silence in
Church-judicatories is enjoined to women, we truly give the power of
witnessing, and of selfe-defence as well to women as to men in all
Church-judicatories. However that the censure of the incestuous man was not
inflicted by the whole Church, it appears from the 2 Epist. Chap 2. verse. 6.
Sufficient to such a man was the punishment which was inflicted of many. Who
were these many but the Officers who were set over the Church in the Lord?

Another distinction also would be marked, that whatsoever right we ascribe to
the Church of Corinth, whether according to its whole, or according to any of
its parts, whether we take it for a Presbyteriall or a Parochial Church, all
that right is to be understood not absolutely, nor independently, which here is
the only question. For the Church at Corinth had no greater privileges then
the Church of Antioch. Now that in a dubious and controverted case, and in a
common cause the Church of Antioch was subordinate unto a Synod, it was before
proved.

Their third objection. That which the Holy Ghost gives unto the seven Churches
of Asia, The third Objection from the example of the seven Churches of Asia.
must be the right of every single Congregation. But, the Holy Ghost gives unto
the seven Churches of Asia all Ecclesiasticke Jurisdiction within themselves.
Revel. 2.2. Thou can not bear with them which are evil, and thou have tried
them which say they are Apostles, and have found them liars. And ver. 14. I
have a few things against thee, because thou have there them that hold the
doctrine of Balaam. And ver. 20. I have a few things against thee, because thou
suffer the woman Jezabell to teach. Here the Churches of Ephesus, Pergamus,
and Thyatira, are praised, when they proceeded with censure against those who
deserved it: and are dispraysed when they held in the sword of excommunication,
and did not cast out Heretics and profane Persons.

Answ. Both the Propositions are vicious: The Major because the Churches in
Asia were Presbyteriall, not Congregationall. This we proved of Ephesus, and we
know no reason why the rest should not be of that same condition. Secondly,
Albeit the Churches of Asia at that time in the first preaching of the Gospel,
and so in the great paucity of Churches should have had no Neighbors with whom
commodiously and ordinarily they could keep society: what is that unto the
Churches of our days who live in the midst of many Sisters? The Minor also may
not be granted; for that which the Text ascribes to the Angel, may not by and
by be applied to every Member of the Church. We grant that great reason and
many authorities do prove and evince that the Angels in those places cannot
be expounded of the single persons of Bishops, but of the whole Body of the
Presbytery in the which there was one man chosen by the Suffrages of the rest
President for a time; but that by the name of Angel should be understood every
Member of the Church, no reason will carry it. Beside, there is no consequence
from one act of reproof to the whole right of Ecclesiasticke government even
in every case; for a common cause and an appearance of error and many other
things, will enforce a necessity of subordination.

Their fourth Objection from the practice of the Church of Thessalonica and
Colosse.
Their fourth argument: The right of the Church of Thessalonica and Colosse
belongs to every Church: But, the Church of Thessalonica and Colosse had right
to exercise every part of Ecclesiasticke discipline within their own bounds.
Of the first, see 2 Thessalonians 3.6. Withdraw your selves from every Brother
which walks disorderly, and ver. 24. Note that man, and have no company with
him that he may be ashamed. Of the second, see Col. 2.5. Joying and beholding
your Order. Ans. Let the Mayor be true of all the Churches of the same Species
and Nature with these of Thessalonica and Colosse, that is, of all
Presbyteriall. That the Church of Thessalonica was such, that it had more
Pastors, it is proved from the 1 to the Thessalonians 5.12. Know them which
labor among you, and are over you in the Lord and admonish you: that these
were Pastors, it is the mind of the best Interpreters.

Also that in Colosse, beside others, Epaphras and Archippus did labor in the
word and doctrine, is manifest from chap. 1. ver. 7. and chap. 4.17. Further,
let the Mayor be true of all Churches of that same state and condition with
those named, to wit, when it falls out that few or no Neighbor Churches can be
had with which such a society may be kept. Concerning the Minor, suppose that
both the right and the exercise of all Ecclesiasticke acts were granted to the
foresaid Churches, yet the question is not touched except you add
independently and in every cause and case even of aberration, and that without
all remedy of appeal to any Synod; Upon this hinge the Question depends, and
of this the argument has nothing.

Their fifth argument: Their fifth objection from the Episcopal tyranny of the
Presbytery.
That which abolishes our liberty purchased by Christ's blood, and puts upon out
neck a yoke equal to the Antichristian tyranny of Bishops, is intolerable:
But, the dependence of Congregations upon Presbyteries and Synods does so. Ans.
The Minor is false; for the subordination of Churches imports no slavery and
takes away no liberty which God has granted; it is Gods Discipline and Order,
it is the easy yoke of Christ not to be compared with the cruel bands of
Bishops, since the one is humane, the other divine: by the means of the one,
one man commands, either according to his free will, or according to the
Canon Law of the Pope; but by the means of the other, more men advise in common
according to the acts of the Reformed Churches grounded upon the Word of God:
The judgment seats of Bishops are merely external to the Church which they
govern: But, Presbyteries and Synods are Courts internal, for the only
members whereof they consist, are the Comissioners of the Churches which they
govern; these Churches they represent, the mind and desire of these Churches
they do propose, unto these Churches they give account of all their
administration, they confirm and establish the rights of Congregations, they
do not abolish nor labefactate any of them.

Their sixth Objection from the Congregations right to elect their Pastor.
Sixthly, These who have power to choose the Pastor, have also the right of the
whole Ecclesiastic Discipline. But every Parish has that power. Answ. The
Major is not necessary; for there is a great difference betwixt the Election of
Ministers, and Ministers Ordination, Deposition, Excommunication, and many
other acts of Discipline: Election is no act of Authority or Jurisdiction. The
Minor also is not true, if you understand it of all the members of the
Congregation; for it is not needful that Ministers should be chosen by the
express voice of every man, muchlesse of every woman of the flock: Yea, that
Election does not always belong to the whole flock, except ye take election
as many seem to do, for a consent with reason, to the which is opposed, not
every, but a rational dissent grounded upon clear equity and justice:
certainly it is needful at sometimes to misregard the peoples consent in
choosing of a Pastor, for why should not a flock infected with heresy be set
under an wholesome and Orthodox Shepherd whether it will or not, and be rent
from under the Ministry of an heretical Shepherd, how much soever against
its own mind?

Their seventh Objection from plurality of cures cast upon one Pastor.
Their seventh argument: That is not of God which makes Pastors Bishops of
other men's Diocesses, and lays upon them the care of other Congregations then
those to which the holy Ghost has made them Overseers: But, the subordination
of Parishes to Presbyteries and Synods does this. Answ. The Minor is false, for
neither does every member of a Presbytery become a Pastor to every Congregation
subordinate to that Presbytery, neither are Congregations consociated and
conjoined in a Presbytery altogether, without the reach of the care and
inspection of neighbor Pastors. This is clear, not only by the arguments
formerly deduced from Scripture, but by the daily practice of the Adversaries;
for themselves profess their care to oversee, and admonish, and rebuke, and to
use many other gracious actions as they have occasion, toward neighboring
Churches, without any blame of busy Bishops, There is almost no difference at
all of their acts and ours toward neighboring Churches, so far as concerns
the matter; the only question is concerning the fountains and grounds of
these acts, they ascribing their actions only to charity, we not to charity
alone, but to authority grounded upon the former reasons: This difference
belongs not to the present plea.

Their eight argument. Their eight Objection from Christ's immediate government
of his Church.
Only Christ has authority over the Kingdom of God, the House of God, the
holy Jerusalem, his own Spouse, his own Body. But, every single Congregation
is the Kingdom of God, etc. Answ. Passing by the Minor. The Major is false and
Anabaptisticke: for by the same reason the Anabaptists exempt from all
authority both Ecclesiasticke and Civil, not only every Congregation, but
every single person who are the members of Christ and his Spouse, and in whom
the Kingdom of God does dwell. The high and excellent styles of honor which
the Scripture gives not only to whole Churches but to every particular Saint,
exempts neither the one nor the other because of their immediate subjection to
God and Christ, from the bonds and yoke of any authority, either
Ecclesiasticke or Civil, which the Lord has appointed in holy Scripture.
Christ's internal government of souls by his Spirit albeit never so immediate,
takes not away the external administration of men either in the Church or
Common wealth.

Who please to see much more upon this Question, let them consult with Mr.
Rutherfoord his Peaceable Plea, with Appolonius and Spanheim, with the Author
of Vindiciae Clavium, especially with the Divines of the Assembly, their
Answers to the Reasons of the dissenting brethren; of purpose I have abstained
from making use of any of these Writings at this time, waiting for the
Independents last Reply for their Reasons, and the Model of their positive
Doctrine which they have made the world to wait for too too long a time.

CHAP. XI. The thousand years of Christ his visible Reign upon earth, is
against Scripture.
The Original and progress of Chiliasme.
AMong all the Sparckles of new light wherewith our Brethren do intertaine
their own and the peoples fancy, there is none more pleasant then that of the
thousand years; a conceit of the most Ancient and gross Heretic Cerinthus,
a little purged by Papias, and by him transmitted to some of the Greek and
Latin Fathers, but quickly declared, both by the Greek and Latin Church to be
a great error, if not an heresy. Since the days of Augustine unto our time,
it went under no other notion, and was embraced by no Christian we hear of,
till some of the Anabaptists did draw it out of its grave: for a long time
after its resurrection, it was by all Protestants contemned; only Alstedius,
after his long abode in Transylvania, began in his last times to fall into
likeing with some parts thereof, pretending some passages of Piscator for his
encouragement. Alstedius Heterodox Writings were not long abroad when Mr. Meade
at Cambridge was gained to follow him: yet both these Divines were far from
dreaming of any personal reign of Christ upon earth: only Mr. Archer, and
his Colleague, T. G. at Arnheim, were bold to set up the whole Fabric of
Chiliasme, which Mr. Burrowes in his London Lectures upon Hosea does press as
a necessary and most comfortabe ground of Christian Religion, to be infused
into the hearts of all children by the care of every parent at the Catechizing
of their family.

The mind of the Independent Chiliasts.
Our Brethrens mind in this point, as I conceive, they have Printed; is this,
That in the year 1650. or at furthest, 1695. Christ in his humane nature and
present glory is to come from heaven unto Jerusalem where he was crucified; at
that time the heaven and earth, and all the works therein, are to be burnt and
purged by that fire of conflagration, mentioned by Peter, 2 Epist. Chap. 3. At
the same time all the Martys, and many of the Saints both of the Old and New
Testament are to rise in their bodies; The Jews from all the places where now
they are scattered shall return to Canaan and build Jerusalem: in that City
Christ is to reign for a full thousand years; from thence he is to go out in
person to subdue with great bloodshed by his own hand all the disobedient
Nations; when all are conquered, except some few lurking in corners, then the
Church of Jews and Gentiles shall live without any disturbance from any enemy,
either without or within; all Christians then shall live without sin, without
the Word and Sacraments or any Ordinance: they shall pass these thousand
years in great worldly delights, begetting many children, eating and drinking
and enjoying all the lawful pleasures which all the creatures then redeemed
from their ancient slavery can afford. In this Earthly happiness shall the
Church continue till the end of the thousand years when the relics of the
Turkish and Heathenish Nations shall besiege the new Jerusalem, and Christ with
fire from heaven shall destroy them: afterward follows the second
resurrection of all the dead good and bad for the last judgment. Thus far
the Independent Preach and Print: further Cerinthus himself went not, if you
will except the Polygamy and sacrifices of the old Israelits. What truth may be
in these things, let the arguments which are usually brought* either pro or
contra, declare.

Against the mentioned Tenet I reason, first, Our first reason against the
Chiliasts is, that Christ from his ascension to the last judgment abides in
the heaven.
He that remains in the heaven unto the last Judgment comes not down to the
earth a thousand year before the last Judgment. But, Christ remains in the
heaven unto the last Judgment. Ergo. The Mayor is unquestionable; the Minor is
proved from the Article of our Creed. From that place he shall come to judge
the quick and the dead, importing that Christ from the time of his ascension
does abide in the heaven at the right hand of the Father, and comes not down
from that place to the earth till he descend in the last day to judge the
quick and the dead.

I know they are not moved with the authority of any humane Creed, yet they
would do well to speak out their mind of this Article, as they do of some
others. Surely to say that Christ shall come from heaven in his humane nature,
to abide a thousand years on the earth, and then to return again to the
heaven, that he may descend the third time from the heaven in the last day to
judge the quick and the dead, is so evident a perverting of that Article that
Mr. Mead their great Doctor and leader in this Tenet, to eschew it, falls
into a very strange and singular conceit, wherein I doubt whether any of the
Independents will be pleased to follow him; with all other Orthodox Divines he
makes but two commings of Christ from the heaven to the earth; the first at the
Incarnation, the second at the day of Judgment: but this day of Judgment he
extends to a round thousand years, and this day to him is the only time of
the Millenary reign. We need not refute this fancy; for the best arguments
which are brought for it, are some testimonies from the Talmudicke Rabbis, and
these, as I conceive, understood against the true sense of the Authors. The
stream of Scripture and Reason run more against this conceit then any other
part of Chiliasme, as the most of the Chiliasts themselves will confess.

However, what I brought from the Apostolic Creed of Christ his aboade in the
heaven till the last day, I prove it from Scripture, Acts. 3 21. Whom the
heavens must receive till the time of the restitution of all things which God
has spoken by the mouth of all the holy Prophets since the world began. This
place proves clearly the aboade of Christ's body in the heaven till the time
of the restitution of all things. So much our Brethren grant, but they deny our
assumption that the time of the restitution of all things is the last day; this
therefore we prove not by the Testimony of all the reformed, who unanimously
bring this place as a maine ground against the Papists and Lutherans in the
questions of Transubstantiation and Ubiquity, but by three reasons from the
Text it self. First, that time here is understood when all things that are
spoken of by all the Prophets, are performed: But, all things spoken of by all
the Prophets, are not performed till the last day. Master Burrowes alleadgeance
that all the Prophets are frequent and large upon the Reign of the 1000
years, but rare and sparing upon the doctrine of the last Judgment and life
eternal, might well have been spared for the one half of it, and left to the
Socino-Remonstrants; but suppose it were all true, yet if any of the Prophets
have spoken any thing at all of the last Judgment, as the Apostle Jude puts it
out of question even of Enoch it is clear that the time of the performing of
all things, which any of the Prophets have spoken, cannot possibly exist before
the last Judgment, as we may see Romans 8. ver. 21. compared ver. 18.23. where
the restitution of the creatures to their desired liberty comes not before the
redemption of our bodies, and the glory to be revealed upon the whole Church at
the last day.

Secondly, the time here spoken of is when the Jews to whom Peter did speak,
were to be refreshed, by the Lords presence; but this shall not be before the
General resurrection; for the Chiliasts do maintain that all the Jews shall
not rise, neither that any of them to whom the Apostle did then speak, shall
be partakers of the first resurrection, unless some of them who were Martyrs;
for the honor and Glory of this first resurrection, the most of them make it
so rare and singular a privilege, that Daniel himself does not obtain it but
by a special promise.

Thirdly, The time when God does solemly before Men and Angels declare the
absolution and blotting out of the sins of all his people, is not before the
last day. But this is the time whereof the Apostle Peter speaks in the present
place, as appears by the 19 verse; That your sins may be blotted out, when
the times of refreshing shall come from the presence of the Lord.

Take but one other place for Christ's aboade in the heaven till the last day.
John 14.2.3. I go to prepare a place for you, I will come again and receive
you to my self, that where I am there you may be. Behold Christ goes to the
heaven and comes back again but once, for this very end, to take his
Disciples with him, not to abide with them upon the earth, but to place them in
the Mansions of his Fathers House in the Heavens, which he went to prepare for
them, wherein all the time of his absence he himself was to remain.

A Second argument we take from Christ's sitting at the right hand of God. Our
second reason is builded on Christ's sitting at the right hand of God till the
day of judgment.
This error how innocent soever it seem to some, yet it perverts the true
sense of sundry articles of our Creed, and forces its followers to coin new
and false senses to a great many Scriptures whereupon these articles were
builded. This was the reason why neither Piscator nor Alstedius nor Mead when
they laid too fast hold upon some of the branches of Chiliasme, yet the bulk
and root of that Tree, Christ's coming down to the earth in his humane nature
a thousand years before the last day, they durst never touch: but our Brethren
have more venturous Spirits, they see much further then their Masters, they
scruple nothing to make all these things popular and Catecheticke doctrine. The
reason I spoke of, is this, Christ sits at the right hand of God till the last
day. Ergo, he comes not to reign on earth a thousand years before the last
day. The consequence is builded upon this Proposition, Christ's sitting at the
right hand of the Father is not in earth but in heaven, which many Scriptures
prove. Ephesians. 1.20. He set him at his own right hand in heavenly places. Heb.
1.3. He sat down at the right hand of the Majesty on high. Heb. 8.1. He is set
on the right hand of the Throne of the Majesty in the heavens. The antecedent I
prove thus, He sits at the right hand of God till all his enemies be made his
footstool. So speaks the Psalmist, Psalm. 110.1. But all his enemies are not
made his footstool till the last day: for till then, Satan, Sin, Death, and
all wicked men are not fully destroyed.

Our third reason is grounded on the resurrection of the dead; the godly and
ungodly do all rise together at the last day.
Our third argument we take from the resurrection of the dead. All the Godly at
Christ's coming from heaven do rise immediately to a Heavenly Glory. Ergo,
none of them do arise to a Temporal glory of a thousand years upon earth.
The antecedent see in Heb. 9.28. Unto them that look for him shall he appear
the second time without sin unto salvation. Christ has but two times of
coming to the earth, first in weakness to die upon the Cross; The second time
in glory to give eternal Salvation without distinction to all believers who
look for his coming.

Also 1 These. 4.14. Them which sleep in Jesus, will he bring with him. The
Lord himself shall descend from heaven with a shout, and the dead in Christ
shall rise first; then we which are alive shall be caught up together with them
in the clouds to meet the Lord in the air, and so shall we be ever with the
Lord. The ground of comfort which the Apostle propounds to the Thessalonians
for all their dead, as well Martyrs as others, was their resurrection, not
before the Lords coming with the voice of the Archangell, but at that time
when all the dead in Christ without exception do arise, and non of them abide
on the earth, but all are caught up in the air to meet the Lord, and all
remain with him eternally thereafter without any separation.

See also, 1 Cor. 15.22. In Christ shall all be made alive, but every man in
his own order; Christ the first fruits, afterward they that are Christ's at his
coming; then comes the end when he shall have delivered up the Kingdom to
God. The Apostle here speaks of the Resurrection of all, and particularly of
the Martyrs such as with the Apostle dyed daily and every hour were in
jepoardy and fought with Beasts; although he professes to distinguish the
diversity of order that might be in this great work of the Resurrection: yet
he affirms that these who are Christ's, do not arise till his coming; and his
coming he makes not to be till the last day when Christ renders up his
Oeconomicke Kingdom, having destroyed all his enemies, especially death, and
fully perfected the work of his mediation. This Resurrection is after the sound
of the last Trumpet, when all the godly rise, and are changed, and put on
incorruption and immortallity, when death is swallowed up into victory, and the
godly inherit the Kingdom of God; these things are done at the last day, not a
thousand years before it, as John 6. Christ avoweth thrice, in the end, ver.
39.40.44. I will raise him up at the last day. At that time the judgment is
universal, both of the godly and wicked; and the execution of both their
sentences is immediately by the present glorification of the one and the
destruction, of the other as we have it Math. 25.31. When the Son of man shall
come in his glory, before him shall be gathered all Nations; and he shall
separate them one from another, as a shepherd divides his sheep from the
Goats.

Fourthly, we reason from the nature of Christ's Kingdom. Our fourth reason is
builded on Christ's Kingdom which is Spiritual and not earthly.
The conceit of the thousand years makes Christ's Kingdom to be earthly, and
most observeable for all worldly glory; but the Scripture makes it to be
Spiritual without all wordly pomp; neither does the Word of God make the
Kingdom of the Mediator of two kinds, and of a different nature, but one,
uniforme from the beginning to the end, Luke 1.32. The Lord shall give him the
throne of his Father David, and he shall reign over the house of Jacob for
ever. 1 Cor. 15.25. He must reign till he have put all things under his feet;
here there is but one Kingdom, and one way of ruling, a Kingdom merely
Spiritual, and nowise worldly. Luke 17.20. The Kingdom of God comes not
with observation, neither shall they say lo here, or lo there, but the
Kingdom of God is within you. John 18.36. My Kingdom is not of this world; if
my Kingdom were of this world, then would my servants fight; but now is my
Kingdom not from hence. Romans 14 17. The Kingdom of God is not meat and
drink, but righteousness, peace, and joy of the holy Ghost. Ephesians. 1.20. He
raised him from the dead and set him at his right hand in heavenly places, and
has put all things under his feet, and gave him to be head over all to the
Church. The Millenaries make his Kingdom to appear in Armies and Battles, in
feasts and pleasures, in worldly pomp and power, and will not have his
Kingdom to stand in any of that spiritual power which since his ascension he
has executed on principalities and powers, or shall perform upon the souls
of men, till these thousand years of worldly power and earthly glory visible
to the eyes of men shall begin.

Our fifth reason is taken from the nature of the Church.
We take our fifth argument from the nature of the Church; Scripture makes the
Church of God so long as it is upon the earth to be a mixed multitude, of Elect
and Reprobate, good and bad, a company of people under the cross and subject
to various temptations, a company that has need of the Word and Sacraments,
of Prayer and Ordinances, that has Christ a High Priest within the veil of
heaven interceding for them. But, the Doctrine in hand changes the nature of
the Church, and makes it for a thousand years together to consist only of
good and gracious persons, without all trouble, without all Ordinances, without
any need of Christ's intercession.

Which ever on earth is mixed of good and evil.
For the first, That Scripture makes the Church always to be a mixed company,
See Matthew. 13.40. As the tares are gathered and burnt in the fire, so shall it
be in the end of the world. The Son of man shall send forth his Angels, and
they shall gather out of his Kingdom all things that offend and that do
iniquity: and verse. 49. So shall it be in the end of the world, the Angels
shall come forth and sever the wicked from among the just. Also, Chap. 24.11.
Many false Prophets shall arise and deceive many, and because iniquity shall
abound, the love of many shall wax cold. Luke 18.8. When the Son of man
comes, shall he find faith upon the earth? These places declare the mixture
of the wicked with the godly in the Church to the worlds end, and most about
the end.

And subject to crosses.
As for Crosses, See Psalm. 34.20. Many are the afflictions of the righteous. Mat
5 4. Blessed are they that mourn and that are persecuted for righteousness.
Acts 14.23. By many tribulations we must enter into the Kingdom of heaven.
Romans 8.17. If so we suffer with him, that we may be glorified together. 2 Timothy
3.12. All that will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer persecution. Heb.
12.6. Whom the Lord loves, he corrects, and he scourges every child that he
receives. Many such places show the condition of the Church in this life that
she is ever subject to tribulation.

Concerning Ordinances, that they must continue to the last day, Having need
of Ordinances
See Ephesians. 4.11. He gave some Pastors and Teachers for the perfecting of the
Saints for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ
till we all come to a perfect man. And for the continuance of the Sacraments, 1
Cor. 11.26. As often as you eat this bread and drink this cup, ye do show
the Lords death till he come.

That in the most godly while they live on earth, Because of her sinful
infirmities.
sin does remain, and that always we have need of Christ's intercession in
the heaven with the Father, it is clear from 1 John 1.8. If we say we have no
sin, the truth of God is not in us. And Chap. 2. ver. 1. But if any man
sin, we have an Advocate with the Father. Heb. 9.24. Christ is entered into
the heaven it self now to appear in the presence of God for us.

Thus the Scripture describes the condition of the Church on earth; but the
Doctrine in hand alters much the nature of it for a great part of its time
here: for of the 2650 years which they give to the Church from the coming of
Christ to the last judgment, they make her to consist for a whole thousand
years only of godly persons, without the mixture of any one wicked; and all
the millions who are borne in the Church in that large time, they are free from
their birth to their death of all crosses, of all sorrows, of all temptations,
and as it seems of all sin also; for that is the time of the restitution of
all things when old things are past and all things become new: They make them
to have need neither of Word nor Sacraments, or any Church-Ordinance, neither
of Christ's Intercession in the heavens with the Father; for they have him among
them in the earth, and they are freed from all sin; and all misery.

A sixth Argument. A Sixth reason from the secrecy of the time of Christ's
coming.
Scripture makes the time of Christ's second coming to be secret and hid, not
only to men, but to the very Angels, and to Christ himself as he is man,
Mark 13.32. But of that day and that hour knows no man, no not the Angels
which are in heaven, neither the Son, but the Father. But this Doctrine makes
that day open, and tells the time of it punctually; for they make the thousand
years to begin with the 1650 year, or else with the 1695. and the day of
Judgment to be at the end of the thousand years; so if their count do hold,
every child in the Church might tell us that Christ will come to Judgment in
the beginning of the 2651 year, or at farthest in the beginning of the 2696.

A seventh Argument. The reward of the Martyrs is eternal life in the heavens,
A Seventh, from the heavenly and eternal reward of the Martyrs.
promised to them at Christ's coming to judge the just and the unjust. Ergo, It
is not temporal in an earthly Kingdom of a thousand years. The Antecedent is
proved from Matthew. 5.10. Blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousness, for theirs is the Kingdom of heaven. 2 Timothy 4.6. I am now ready
to be offered, and the time of my departure is near; I have fought a good
fight; I have finished my course; henceforth is laid up for me a crown of
righteousness, which the Lord the righteous Judge shall give at that day, etc.
The reward that Paul expects after his Martyrdom, is the Crown which Christ
at the last day gives to all that wait for his coming at that time when he
takes ven-geance on the wicked, as we have it 2 These. 1.6, 7, 8, 9.10. where
the rest and retribution of the Martyrs, of Paul himself and those who at that
time were troubled for the Gospel, is said to be at Christ's coming to take
vengeance in flaming fire on all the wicked, and to be glorified in all the
Saints, and admired in all them that believe which without all doubt is not
before the last Judgment; and if it were otherwise, the Martyrs would be at a
loss; for instead of a reward, a punishment should be put upon them, their
condition should be made worse then that of the common Saints, who during the
time of the thousand years remain in the heavens among the Angels, beholding
and enjoying the Trinity, while the souls of the Martyrs are brought down to
the earth, and return to a body, not like to the glorious body of Christ, nor
unto these incorruptible, immortal, Spiritual bodies, which yet are promised
to the least of the faithful at their resurrection, 1 Cor. 15. but unto such a
body that eats, drinks, sleeps, fights, delights in fleshly pleasures, and
converses with beasts and earthly creatures, in such a Paradise whereof the
Turkish Alcorane and the Jewish Talmud does speak much; but to a godly soul
is very tasteles, and to a soul that has been in heaven, or to one that
injoyes the presence of Christ, is exceeding burdensome and bitter.

An eight reason. The opinion of the Millenaries supposes the restoration of
Jerusalem and of the Jewish Kingdom after their destruction by the Romans.
But, Scripture denies this, An eight reason, the restoration of an earthly
Jerusalem brings back the abolisht figures of the Lgw.
Ezekiel. 16.53, 55. When I shall bring again the captivity of Sodom and her
daughters, and the captivity of Samaria and her daughters, then will I bring
again the captivity of thy daughters in the midst of them. When thy Sister
Sodom and her daughters shall return to their former estates, and Samaria and
her daughters shall return to their former estate, then thou and thy daughters
shall return to your former estate. The Jews are never to be restored to
their ancient outward estate, much less to a greater and more glorious
Kingdom. Jerusalem was to be rebuilded, and the spiritual glory of the second
Temple was to be greater then the first; and in the end of this same chapter,
the restitution of the Jews after the Babylonish captivity, by the virtue of
the new covenant is promised; but the outward estate of that people was never
to be restored to its ancient luster more then Samaria, or Sodom, as Amos
speaks of Samaria, chap. 5.2. The Virgin of Israel is fallen, she shall no
more rise. And Isaiah of Jerusalem, The transgression thereof shall be heavy,
and it shall fall and not rise again, according to the Prophecy of Jacob,
Genesis 49.10. The Scepter shall not depart from Judah till Shiloh come. Importing
that the Tribe of Judah should ever have some outward visible rule till the
coming of Christ in the flesh; but thereafter the Scepter and power of the
Church should be only spiritual in the hand of Shiloh the Messiah; he was the
substance and the body of all these Types, the restoration of Jerusalem and
the erecting of a new Monarchy in Judah, for the Jews, were to bring back the
old evanished shadows contrary to the doctrine and nature of the Gospel.

One other reason. The Millenaries lay it for a ground, A ninth, Antichrist is
not abolisht till the day of Judgment.
that Antichrist shall be destroyed and fully abolished before their thousand
years begin; but Scripture makes Antichrist to continue to the day of
Judgment. 2 These. 2.8. Then shall that wicked man be revealed whom the Lord
shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth, and shall destroy with the
brightness of his coming. The brightness of Christ's coming is not before
the last day, as before is proved. See also, Revel. 19.20. The beast was taken,
and with him the false Prophet; these both were cast alive into a lake of fire
burning with Brimstone. Compare it with verse. 7. Let us be glad and rejoice,
for the Marriage of the Lamb is come. Antichrist is cast alive into the lake
at the Marriage of the Lamb; no living men are cast into hell before the last
day; and Christ's Marriage with his Church is not solemnized with a part of the
Elect, but with the whole body at the general resurrection.

The Chiliasts first reason is from Re^^l. 20.4
For the opposite Tenet diverse Scriptures are brought; above all, Rev. 29 4, 5,
6. And I saw the souls of them that were beheaded for the witness of Jesus,
and they lived and reigned with Christ a thousand years; but the rest of the
dead lived not again till the thousand years were finished; this is the first
resurrection. Hence they do infer Christ's personal reign upon earth for a
thousand years; also the resurrection of the Martyrs, and of some others a
thousand years before the general resurrection: Diverse such conclusions do
they draw from this place. Answer
We Answer, First, that the resurrection

Alstedius, Mead, Archer, Goodwin, Burrowes, Matton; every one of them have
their proper conceits wherein they differ from the rest, as will be found by
any who compare their Writings.

Thirdly, In all this Chapter there is not one syllable to prove did reign
with Christ, had been upon earth themselves; this would not prove that Christ
(because they are said to reign with him) was upon earth with them; for Romans
8.17. If children, then joynt-heires with Christ, if so be^ that we suffer with
him that we may be also glorified together. There is here in one verse three
parallel phrases with that in hand, Heirs with Christ, Suffering with Christ,
Glorified with Christ; and a fourth, Ephesians. 1.3. Who has blessed us with all
Spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ; Will it hence follow that
Christ's humane nature was then upon earth with them who suffered with him, were
heirs with him, were blessed in him in heavenly places with all spiritual
graces, and were to be glorified with him? if none of these four phrases imply
a personal presence of Christ upon earth with men, much less will the place
controverted do it; for they speak expressly of men living upon the earth, but
it speaks as expressly of the souls of men that were in the heaven; the same
that are mentioned, Revel. 6.9. I saw under the Altar the souls of them that
were slain for the Word of God. This place then is so far from proving
Christ's personal presence upon earth, that it imports the contrary, both
because they that are said to reign with him, were not upon the earth, but
under the Altar in heaven; and also because in verse. 11. Christ's Throne
whereupon he judges the quick and the dead, is mentioned after the reign of
these thousand years. Now we have proved from many Scriptures that Christ
remains in the heavens till he come down in the last day to sit upon that
Throne.

Fourthly, We deny that there is any thing in this place which Coll. 2.12. You
are risen with him through faith: also 3.1. If then ye be risen with Christ
etc. But a first resurrection of the body no scripture intimates; for so there
should be not only a first and second, but a third resurrection, as they tell
us of a first, second, and third coming of Christ to the earth. Further, the
resurrection here spoken of is attributed to the Souls of them that were
beheaded; these are not capable of a bodily resurrection, in propriety of
speech; and if to these souls, men at their own pleasure without any warrant
from scripture, will ascribe a body, they fall into a great inconvenience: for
their love to this imagined first resurrection of the body, they overthrow both
the heaven and the hell which hitherto have been believed; and make no scruple
to create a new heaven and a new hell of their own invention, to the dangerous
scandal of all Christians.

Our new Chiliasts are inventors of a new heaven and of a new h^ll.
Master Archer seeing well the absurdity to bring a soul from heaven back
again to an earthly condition, tells us plainly That no soul at all went ever
to that which we call heaven; That the Soul of Christ at his death, and of the
good theife went only to an Elementary Paradise, a place below the Moon, in
the region of the air, or at highest in the Element of the fire; That Enoch
and Elias are gone no higher; That no soul of any of the Saints goes to the
third heavens where Christ is, unto the last day. As for hell, he tells us that
all Christians but the Independent his followers, have been in an error about
it; he teaches that the hell whether the wicked now goes, is not that fire
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, whether at the last Judgment they
shall be sent; but only a place of prison in the Low region of the air, or in
some part of the Sea, where the souls of the wicked are kept till the day of
Judgment; but at the day of Judgment, he tells us of a second hell, very
large, and far higher then the present heaven of the Saints, the whole body
of the four Elements, all the heavens of the Planets and fixed Stars, and
what ever else is below the third heavens the habitation of God; he turns it
all into the first Chaos, and makes all that confused body without any
distinction, to be hell. In all this, the man is so confident, as if there were
nothing in these strange novelties to be called in question.

They shall be Priests of God and of Christ, and shall reign with him.
Christians on earth are Priests, but not to offer bodily sacrifice; and while
they are upon earth they are Kings, but not to rule men's outward estates: for
if so, then there should be all these thousand years many more Kings then
Subjects. Master Archer tells us confidently without any scruple, that not the
Martyrs alone, and some few privileged Saints, as his Colleague T. G. would
have it, but that all the godly without any exception, shall rise and be Kings
to rule and judge the Saints, who shall be borne in the thousand years,
Suppose it should be no disparagement for all these who then shall be borne, to
be excluded, while they live from all places of authority and power: yet would
it not be some piece of disorder to have more Kings to command then Subjects to
obey, for I suppose that the godly of all bygone ages arising together will be
many more then the Saints in any one age of these thousand years.

Sixthly, we deny that a thousand years in any propriety of David, and ruling
his Church as King and Monarch thereof; yet it were uncomely to confine the
time of his reign to come to a thousand years; this were too small an
endurance for his Monarchy. Many humane Principalities, sundry States and
Empires which have been and this day are in the world, might contend for a
longer continuance, for this cause it seems to be that Master Archer the most
resolute Doctor in this question that I have met with, makes the thousand
years we debate of, to be only the evening of Christ's Personal reign; but
to the morning thereof wherein at leisure all the processes of the Last
Judgment are gone through, he ascribes a great many more years, readily
another thousand; and why not two or three or more thousands? It is good to be
wise to sobriety; arrogant curiosity and presumptuous wantonness of wit ^s
detestable, though in the best men.

Seventhly, the place makes Satan to be bound up only from seducing the
Nations, that he should not be able as before the coming of Christ he was, to
misleade the Nations of the whole world to Idolatry, a free door then being
opened to the Gospel in every Nation, for their conversion to the truth; but
our new Doctors extend the place much further; they will have Satan bound up
for a 1000 years, not only from seducing Nations to Idolatry, but from
tempting any person to any sin; this is contrary to these Scriptures which
makes every Saint in all ages, to fight not only with flesh and blood, but
with Principalities and Powers: which makes Satan always to go about like a
roaring Lion seeking whom he may devour; and that so boldly that in the very
presence of Christ, he does seek to winnow the best of his Disciples: yea, the
place in hand gives to Satan in the very time of the thousand years, so great
power upon multitudes of men who never were sanctified, but ever his vassalls,
led by him at his will, that he makes them compass the holy City, and the
Camp of the Saints to fight against God, till fire from heaven did destroy
them.

Their second reason from Daniel 12.
Beside this famous place, Master Archer, Master Mattoun and T. G. in his
glimps, bring a number of other scriptures for their Tenet, wherewith we need
not meddle: for Master Petree, and Master Hayne in peculiar treatises have
answered them all; only the chief of them, which Master Burrows in his
treatise upon Hos. 1. is pleased to choose out, we will consider. He builds much
upon Daniel. 12. as if it did prove the resurrection of some of the godly to an
earthly glory a thousand years before the last Judgment; he borrows from
the glimpse four arguments, word by word; there is a fifth also in the
glimpse, which the most of that party do much insist upon; the first is taken
from the second verse of that 12 chap. At the last Judgment say they, all
shall rise; but, in that place, many do rise, not all.

We Answer
Answer. We prove that the Prophet speaks here of the last Daniel speaks, is
expressly to life eternal; not that prior resurrection which out Brethren aim
at, to a temporal Kingdom of a thousand years. Secondly, the resurrection of
the wicked to eternal shame, is only at the last day; for according to our
Brethrens Doctrine, the wicked have no part of the first resurrection, and rise
not till the thousand years be ended; now, the resurrection whereof Daniel
speaks in verse 2. is expressly of the wicked to shame and death, as well as
of the godly to life and glory. As for their Argument from the word Many, it
proves not that all did not rise, but only that these that did rise, were many
and a great multitude. Therefore Deodate Translates the words well according to
the sense of the Original, The multitude of these that sleep in the dust. The
Collectives, omnes and multi, are sometimes Synonemy's, according to the matter
in hand; as omnes must sometimes be taken for multi; so multi must sometimes be
taken for omnes.

Secondly, They reason from the third verse, that in the last resurrection
verse evinces unanswerably, that the Prophet here is speaking of the last
resurrection to life everlasting; as for the argument, it does not follow that
they who here are said to have so much glory, may not elsewhere be said to have
more; for that which here the Prophet intends to express is not the absolute
but the comparative glory of the Saints; however the least disciple should
shine as the Sun, yet if ye compare his glory with the greater light of an
other, you may express the glory of both in the similitude of lightsome bodies
less glorious then the Sun, if so these bodies differ one from another in
degrees of glory; for all that the Prophet here aims at, is only this
difference of glory. Christ in the Gospel makes all the Saints to shine as the
Sun, yet the Apostle 1 Cor. 15.45. distinguishing the different degrees of
glory that is among the Saints, scruples not to express the glory of the most
of them in the similitude of bodies less glorious then the Sun; There is one
glory of the Sun, another glory of the Moon, another of the Stars; for one
Star differs from another Star in glory; so also is the resurrection from
the dead. Further, will our Brethren affirm that the bodies of the Saints on
earth during the time of those thousand years, shall be so far changed, as
to shine like the Stars, and yet to eat, drink, and sleep? so much glory
can hardly stand with so much baseness.

Thirdly, They reason from the fourth verse; The last resurrection is no
mystery nor any secret to be sealed up to the end of the vision. But, the
resurrection here spoken of, is such a mystery as must be sealed up.

Answer, First, according to Mr. Burrowes express profession in the same
place, the Argument may be inverted; for the first resurrection to the thousand
years of glory, he makes a Doctrine very well known and much insisted upon by
all the Prophets before Christ; but the General resurrection and life
everlasting he makes to be a hid and secret Doctrine which the Prophets in the
old Testament do scarcely touch. Secondly, Life eternal and death eternal,
heaven and hell, are to this day very great Mysteries to the most of the world;
and Scriptures concerning these, are hid and closed above any other. Thirdly,
The words speak not only of the resurrection, but of the whole preceding
Prophecy, especially of the peoples deliverance by Michael the Prince from the
oppression of Antiochus, which was not much to be understood till it came to
pass.

verse; Life eternal is common to all the Saints, and no singular privilege
of Daniels. But, the resurrection here spoken of, is promised to Daniel as a
singular favor.

Answer, Mr. Archer who is deepest learned in these Mysteries, affirms. That
all the goldly as well as Daniel, had their part in the first resurrection; and
indeed, if once you begin to distinguish, it will be hard to find
satisfactory grounds to give this glory to Daniel, and to deny it to David, to
Moses, to Abraham and many others. Secondly, We may well say that life eternal
albeit common to all the Saints, yet is so divine, so rare and singular a mercy
to every one that gets it, that it may be propounded to Daniel and every Saint
as a sovereign comfort against the bitterness of all their troubles. Thirdly,
The place according to the best Interpreters, speaks nothing at all of any
resurrection; only it imports a promise to Daniel to live in peace all his
days, that notwithstanding all the troubles, of the Church which he saw in
these visions (as Diodate Translates it) yet so far as concerned himself he
should go on to his end, and rest, stand, or continue in his present honors
and prosperous condition to his death, and (...) of his days.

Fifthly, from the 11. and 12. verse they conclude peremptorily Julian the
Apostate who after Constantine's death, did re-establish Paganism in the
Empire, and encouraged the Jews to build the Temple of Jerusalem, till God
hindered them by an Earthquake which did cast up the foundation-stones of the
old Temple. Beginning their account at this time, the end of their first number
falls on the year 1650, and of the second on the year 1695. This is Archers
calculation, which T. G. and others follow precisely.

Answer, We marvel at the rashness of men who by the example of many before
them, will not learn greater wisdom; if they needs must determine
peremptorily of times and seasons, That they do not extend their period beyond
their own days, That they be not, as some before them, laughed at before
their own Eyes, when they have lived to set the vanity of their too confident
Predictions; however, in this calculation, there seems nothing to be sound;
neither the beginning, nor the middle, nor the later end. If the thousand
years begin in the 1650 year, if Christ then come in person to the earth,
what will keep him from perfecting his Kingdom to the 1695 year thereafter;
will he spend whole 45 years in wars against the Nations, before they be
subdued to his Scepter? Secondly, What warrant have they to begin their account
with the Empire of Julian? Did he set up any abomination at all in the Church
of God? He opened again in the Territories of his Empire the Pagan Temples,
which by Constantine had been closed; by counsel and example he allured men to
idolatry; but he troubled not any Christians in the liberty of their
profession, he did not set up idolatry in any Christian Congregation; The Lord
did quickly kill him and so prevented his intended persecution of Christians.
But although it could be verified of him, that he did set up the abomination of
desolation in the Temple; yet how made he the daily Sacrifice to cease? he was
so far from this, that to t^ uttermost of his power he labored to set up
again the daily Sacrifice which some hundred years ceased. Scripture speaks
only of two times wherein the solemn sacrifice was made to cease, and the
abomination of desolation was set up. First, by Antiochus Epiphanes, and then
by Titus Vespasian; but of Julian his making the sacrifice to cease, Scripture
speaks nothing. That Story of the Earthquake whereupon Mr Archer builds,
albeit reported by some of the Ancients, seems to be a great fable;
Certainly, the application of it to Christ's Prophecy of the Gospel, A stone
shall not be left upon a stone, as if this had not been fulfilled till that
Earthquake had cast up all the foundation-stones of the ancient Temple, is very
temerarious. As The beginning and end of their calculation is groundless, so
also the midst and the whole body of it is frivolous. What necessity is there
to expound days by years especially in that place, where years are divided
into days? In the very preceding words, verse. 7. the days here mentioned, are
expressed by a time, times, and half a time: can they show in any place of
Scripture that ever a day is put for a year, where years, and days are
conjoined, and a few years are extended in the enumeration of all the days
that are in these years?

The words of the Prophet Daniel are clear, if they be taken as they lie; but
if they be strained to a Mystical sense, they become inexplicable. The Lord is
comforting the Prophet and the whole Church by the short indurance of the
desolations which Antiochus was to bring upon them; for from the time of his
scattering of the Jews, and discharging of the solemn sacrifice, unto the
breaking of the yoke of his Tyranny, it should be but three years and a half
with a few more days: yea, unto that happy time when the plague of God should
fall on his person, it should be but 45 days more. The History of Josephus and
the Maccabees, makes the event accord with this prediction. Why then should we
strain the Text any further to a new sense which neither agrees with the event
nor with the words?

Their third argument.
Another place alleged by Mr. Burrowes, is Psalm 102.16. When the Lord shall
build up Sion, he shall appear in his glory; As if this did import both the
building again of Sion and also Christ's glorious appearance upon the earth.

Answer.
Answer. This place speaks of no such things; the ordinary Exposition of late
and old Interpreters, agrees so well with the contexture of the whole Psalm,
that to drive it farther, were needless, the place speaks of the Babylonish
Captivity, and of the earnest desire of the godly at that time to have
Jerusalem and Sion then in the dust, again restored. This desire of the Saints
is granted, and a promise is made to them that Sion should be again builded,
and that the Lord by this act of mercy should get great glory. But for any
third building of Sion after the days of the Messiah, or for any personal
reign of Christ upon earth, no syllable in this place does appear.

His next place is Romans 11.12. Their fourth place.
If the fall of them be the riches of the world, and the diminishing of them be
the riches of the Gentiles; how much more their fulness?

Ans. There is nothing here for the point in hand: Answer.
we grant willingly that the Nation of the Jews shall be converted to the
faith of Christ; and that the fulness of the Gentiles is to come in with them
to the Christian Church; also that the quickening of that dead and rotten
member, shall be a matter of exceeding joy to the whole Church. But That the
converted Jews shall return to Canaan to build Jerusalem; That Christ shall
come from the heaven to reign among them for a thousand years, there is no
such thing intimated in the scriptures in hand.

Master Burrous fifth place, is Acts 3.20, 21. Their fifth place.
He shall send Jesus Christ whom the heavens must receive unto the times of the
restitution of all things.

Ans. That these words are to be understood of Christ's coming to the last
Judgment, Answer.
and not of his coming to any Temporal Kingdom on earth, we did before prove.

His sixth place, is 2 Pet. 3.10.13. Their sixth place.
But the day of the Lord will come as a Theife in the night, in the which the
heavens shall pass away with a great noise, and the Elements shall melt with
fervent heat; the earth also and the works that are therein, shall be burnt
up: nevertheless we according to his promise, look for new heavens and a new
earth wherein dwells righteousness.

Ans. First it would be remembered that our Brethren do add among many other
things, Answer.
this also unto the Tenet of the old Chiliasts, That before their golden age
the earth and all things therein must be destroyed; That the earth wherein they
are to reign, that the Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Trees and all other creatures
they are to make use of in their thousand years, are to be of new created, all
the old creatures in their whole kinds being burnt to ashes, and destroyed.

verse 4. requiring in scorn the performance of the promise of Christ's
coming, not unto this thousand years reign, but to the day of Judgment and
perdition of ungodly men, as the Apostle speaks expressly verse. 7. Now, all
the Chiliasts confess that this Judgment and that perdition, is not till
after the thousand years; so the burning of necessity according to their own
grounds, cannot precede, but must follow them.

Thirdly, the time whereof the Apostle speaks, is called the day of the Lord,
the usual description of Christ's coming to Judgment; also the day that comes
on the world as a thief in the night, which phrase oftentimes in scripture is
attributed unto Christ's coming unto Judgment, but is not true of his coming
to the Millenary reign: for the calculation of that time is so well known,
that it is preached and printed to be at such a year, if not such a mounth or
day. Also, this dissolving of the heavens and Elements with fire, is a
concomitant of Christ his coming to the last Judgment, as is expressly
intimated. 2 These. 1.8.9.

As for the words whereupon alone they ground their argument, the new Earth
wherein dwells righteousness. As if these words could not be true after the
last Judgment: no righteous man then dwelling upon the earth. If they had
looked upon the original, they would have seen the weakness of their
collection; for the words run thus, We in whom righteousness dwells, look
for new Heavens and a new Earth; The habitation of righteousness referring
neither to the heavens not to the earth, but to the godly and righteous persons
who did wait for the performance of the promise of new heavens and a new
earth, as our late annotations do observe; And though you would read them
according to our English Translation, yet that inhabitation needs not refer
to the earth, but to the heavens only, as Junius well observes. For it is not
in qua terra, but in quibus coelis; and our Brethren if they believe Mr.
Archer, must refer the Pronoune not to both the Substantives, but only to
the one; for he teaches That during the thousand years no righteous soul
inhabites the heaven: and thereafter, that no righteous soul does inhabit
either the earth or the heavens wherein now the souls of the godly are, all
these being turned into hell, the habitation of unrighteous men and devils.

Mr. Burrows seventh place, Isa. 65.21. Their seventh place.
And they shall build houses and inhabit them, and they shall plant Vinyeards
and eat the fruit of them. and ver. 17. Behold, I create new heavens and a new
earth, etc. Hence concluding not only a new heaven and a new earth for the
Millenary reign, but a planting of Vinyeards, a building of houses; which
cannot be after the day of Judgment.

Ans. First, Answer.
Master Burrowes referres this place to the former passage of Peter; if
therefore Peter's new heavens and new earth life to come; Isaiahs new heavens
and new earth must be understood of the same.

Secondly, Its very new and harsh divinity to say that after the Burrows
notwithstanding his argument and reference of Isaiah to Peter, seems in that
same place to retract and acknowledge that the new heavens and the new earth
must be expounded by a Metaphor, and import no more then the doing of so
glorious things by God for the Church, in the latter days, as shall manifest
his glorious and creating power, as if he did make new heavens and a new earth.
This is far from the burning of the heavens and earth that now are. It is no
more then what the Apostle Peter brings from the Prophet Joel: Acts. 2.19. And
I will show wonders in heaven above, and signs in the earth beneath, blood and
fi^^, and vapor of smoke; the Sun shall be turned into darkness and the
Moon into blood. All which Peter makes to be performed upon the day of the
Pentecost. It is no more then that of Haggay 2.6. Yet once it is a little while
and I will shake the heavens and the earth, and the sea, and all the dry land;
which the Apostle Heb. 12.26, 27. makes to be performed at the first coming of
Christ.

Thirdly, That the matter of this 65. chap. of Isai. v. 16. is to be Gentiles,
is clear by comparing the first verse of this chap. I am found of them that
sought me not, with the 20 verse of the tenth to the Romans; But Isaiah was
very bold, and says, I was found etc.

Jews, and to give them too great an excuse for their long misbeliefe, and too
pregnant arguments for to delay their faith while the Messiah come to perform
these promises upon earth, till their Jerusalem were again builded, and they
put in possession of the holy land, to build their houses and plant their
Uineyeards therein; till they saw themselves put in possession of their present
carnal and legal hopes. Yea, T. G. his literal exposition of this and the
like places goes beyond the most of the Jewish apprehensions. For that any of
the Talmudists do dream that at the coming of the Messiah, the Lion shall
eat straw, that the Leoparde and the Lamb, the Serpent and the sucking child
shall be brought to such a sympathy of natures, as not to have the least
disposition to do harm the one to the other; That the life of men shall be so
much at that time prolonged, as one of an hundred years must be taken but for
an Infant and a child; that the most fabulous of the Rabbis have gone thus
far in a litterall belief, I do not know.

Their eight place.
His eight place, is Heb. 2.5, 8. For unto the Angels he has not put in
subjection the world to come; but now we see not yet all things put under him;
whence he inferres that Christ in the world to come, is to reign and to have
all things put under his feet, which is not now performed, the Apostle saying
expressly that now all things are not put under him; neither is this true in
the life to come; for then the Kingdom of Christ is rendered up to the Father.

Ans. The world to come is not that imaginary world of the 1000 years, Answer.
whereof the Scripture speaks no thing; but the days of the Gospel of which
the Apostle is there speaking, and showing that the Gospel was administered not
by Angels as the Law had been upon Mount Sinai, but by the Son of God
himself: This new world under the Gospel did differ more from the old world
under the Law, then the earth in the days of Noah and the Patriarchs after the
flood, from the earth in the days of Noah before the flood. This new world of
the Gospel began with Christ's first coming in the flesh; it was demonstrated
in his Resurrection, When all power in heaven and in earth was given to him.
Math. 28.18. When all the Angels of God did worship him. Heb. 1, 6. When he
was set far above all Principalities and Powers. Ephesians. 1.21. The
accomplishment of this world is not till the Last day, when Death, Hell, and
Satan, which yet are not made Christ's footstool, shall fully be conquered.
These things cannot be verified of the thousand years. For according to Mr.
Burrowes grounds, before they begin, many things are annihilated, and so not
made subject; The heavens and elements are melted with fervent heat; The earth
and the works thereof are burnt up with fire; Also, during these thousand
years, Christ's chief enemies are not fully subdued; death still has dominion
over men; the devil is only bound, but yet alive, and not cast into the lake.

His ninth place, is Ier. 3.16.17. The ninth place.
They shall say no more the Arc of the Covenant of the Lord, neither shall it
come to mind, neither shall they remember it; at that time they shall call
Jerusalem the throne of the Lord, and all the Nations shall be gathered unto
it, neither shall they walk any more after the imagination of their evil
heart. Hence, he inferres, A state of the Church in the Last days so glorious,
that all things bypast shall be forgot; That Judah and Israel shall return
from their captivity to Jerusalem; That all Nations shall join with them; That
they shall no more walk after their old sins; That Jerusalem which before
times was at best but the footstool of God, shall then become a throne of
glory.

Answer. Answer.
There is no word here of Christ's abode upon earth for a thousand years.
Secondly, the old things that are to be forgotten, are expressed to be the
Ceremonies of the Law, but no Ordinance of the Gospel. The Prophet names the
Arc and the Temple which by Christ's first coming were removed. Thirdly, The
walking of Judah and Israel together, and the Nations joining with them,
Imports no more but the calling of Jews and Gentiles by the Gospel to the
Christian Church the heavenly Jerusalem: The same which the Prophet Esaias has
in his second Chap. verse. 5. The establishing (in the Last days) of the House
of God on the top of the mountains; the flowing of all Nations thereto; for
out of Sion shall go forth a Law, and the Word of the Lord from Jerusalem;
These Last days, were the days of the Apostles, when they from Sion and
Jerusalem did blow the Trumpet of the Gospel to all the Nations* These were
the times whereof Jeremy in the 15 verse of the Chapter in hand does speak. I
will give you Pastors according to my heart, which shall feed you with
knowledge and understanding. The Pastors there promised, were Christ and his
Apostles; better Pastors then these God never sent, neither ever shall send to
his Church. Fourthly, Walking after Gods own heart, does not import a freedom
from all sin; but only a state of grace, wherein according to the new
Covenant, God gives his people a newheart, and writes his Laws upon the same.
Fifthly, That whereupon the greatest weight of the argument is laid, seems to
be a very groundless conceit, That Jerusalem, when it is a throne of glory,
must be the old Jerusalem builded again; as if Jerusalem under the Law, and
Jerusalem in the days of the Gospel (the Church in the new Testament, the
mother of us all) were but the footestoole of God. This is a doctrine expressly
against Scripture; for in diverse places, Jerusalem, Sion, and the Arc, even in
the old Testament, are called not only the footstool, but the throne of God
Ier. 14.21. Do not abhor us for thy names sake; do not disgrace the throne
of thy glory. Also Chap. 17.12. A glorious high throne from the beginning is
the place of our Sanctuary. The Lord did as it were sit upon the Mercy Seat as
upon a chair of State, under the Canopy of the wings of the Cherubins within
the Sanctuary the chamber of his most Majestuous presence. Jerusalem under the
new Testament, is called not only the throne of God, but his footstool, Esaias
40.13. To beautify the place of my Sanctuary, and I will make the place of my
feet glorious. This place our Brethren expound of the Sanctuary during the
time of the thousand years. However, it is clear it must be expounded of the
Church in the same times whereof Jeremiah speaks in his third Chapter whence
the Argument in hand is brought.

Their tenth place.
The tenth place is Dan. 2 44. And in the days of these Kings shall the God of
heaven set up a Kingdom which shall never be destroyed, and it shall stand for
ever. Whence, is inferred an everlasting Kingdom of Christ, and a joy of
Jerusalem unchangeable to any sorrow.

Answer.
Answer. Christ's Everlasting Kingdom, is merely spiritual and heavenly. That
dominion which the Father gave to the Son at his Incarnation, Luke. 1.32, 33.
The Lord shall give unto him the throne of his Father David, and he shall
reign over the House of Jacob for ever. This Kingdom for the matter of it, is
truly everlasting, being the glory which Christ and his Saints enjoy for ever
in the heavens; albeit for the manner of the administration thereof it be
rendered up by the Son to the Father, when the work of mediation is
perfected, and all enemies are fully destroyed. To deny the beginning of
Christ's Kingdom over his Church, unto the thousand years, is many ways
absurd; And, because of the eternal indurance of his dominion and glory in the
heavens, to make the Church on earth in which he reigns, to be void of all
tribulation, of all changes, to have a perpetual day without any darkness,
is contrary to the Scriptures alleged in the former arguments.

In the eleventh place, he alleges Revel. 19.13. Their eleventh place.
And he was clothed with a vesture dipped in blood. And Ezekiel. 21 28. And there
shall be no more a pricking brier unto the house of Israel, nor any grieving
them of all that are round about them. Whence, they infer That in the
beginning of the thousand years, Christ with his own hands shall kill so many
of the wicked, that his garments shall be dipped in blood, and not one of them
left to trouble the Church.

Answer. Answer.
It is a very strange conception to make the Lord Jesus embrue his holy hands
in the blood of so many men. That these battles are not fought with the hands
of Christ, in a literal way, will appear by a parallel place, Isay 63.1. Who
is this that comes from Edom, with died garments from Bozra? Unto Christ here
are ascribed garments died in blood, because of the slaughter of the Edomites,
a little after the Babylonish captivity, at which time Christ had neither a
body nor a garment in propriety of speech. As these battles were fought by
Christ, not in his own person nor upon the earth; so neither these battles of
the Revel-which so much the less can be literally expounded, as in the 14 and
15 verses of that 19 Chapter, the instrument whereby Christ is said to fight
these battles, is not any Sword in his hand, but the two-edged Sword of his
mouth; and the Soldiers whom he leads out to these battles are not armed with
Sword and Spear, but ride upon white Horses, clothed in fine linen white and
clean.

As for that of Ezechiel, if you consult either with the original, or the best
Interpreters, it must be expounded first and principally, if not solely of the
Town of Sidon which the Lord was to destroy, that it might no more be a thorn
in the side of Israel.

From this, to infer the purging of the Christian Church of all other enemies
in this life, and that by killing of them all as cursed Canaanites: were a
dangerous conclusion, far from the justice and innocence of Christians in all
bygone times, the belief whereof would quickly renew unto us the horrible
tragedies of the Anabaptists.

The twelfth place.
In the twelfth place, he cites Rev. 21.23, 24. And the City had no need of the
Sun, neither of the Moon to shine in it; and the Kings of the earth do bring
their glory and honor unto it. also chap. 22. ver. 1, 2, 3. and he showed me a
pure river of the water of life, etc.

Answer.
Ans. The Divines who apply these two chapters to the condition of the Church
upon earth after the calling of the Jews, take the most of the passages in a
figurative and allegorical sense. To expound them literally and properly, of
any Church on earth, the Text will not permit. Shall ever the Church on earth
be so free of sorrow and death, as not to sorrow for sin, or to have none of
its members mortal? Shall they so immediately see the face of God, as the use
of Temples, Tabernacles, or any ordinance, shall be needelesse? shall ever man
upon earth, be without the Sun and the Moon? These things are true in a
proper sense, only of the Saints of heaven. What is here alleged to the
contrary, That the Kings of the earth bring not their riches and honors to the
Heavens; we say, it is but a part of the Allegory, to express under that
similitude the glory and wealth of the life to come; as in the same place, the
Spirit of God expresses the happiness of heaven by the Metaphors of gold and
precious stones, of rivers and fountains, of trees and fruits. To expound all
these in a literal sense, of any Church either in earth or heaven, were
incommodious; except our Brethren would put us upon more fancies then any of
them yet have spoke of.

Their last place.
In the last place, they cite for the gifts of the Saints, Zach. 12.8. He that
is feeble among them, in that day, shall be like David; and the house of David
shall be as God: and for the honor of the Saints that in the thousand years
they shall be taken into private familiarity by Princes and great men, Rev.
11.12. And they heard a great voice from heaven saying unto them, come up
hither; and they ascended up to heaven in a cloud, and their enemies beheld
them.

Ans. The gifts meant by Zachary, Answer.
are such as are powered upon all the Saints of the New Testament with the
spirit of grace and supplication, which makes the least of the Kingdom of
Heaven to be like unto David, to Elijah, and greater then John the Baptist, as
Christ speaks. But what is this unto the imaginary glory of the Chiliasticke
Kingdom? The honor they speak of, cannot be fetched out of that eleventh of
the Revel. For who but themselves will expound heaven in that place, of the
Thrones of Kings, of the Privy Chambers of Princes and great men? The calling
up of the two witnesses to heaven, by none else but them, will be taken for the
Saints familiarity with great Statesmen: And according to their own Tenets, in
the Chiliasticke Kingdom there is no such degrees of honor, as in this world.
For there Christ in his own Person is King, and all the Saints do shine at
least as the firmament; and the glory of these Saints is greatest whose grace
is most eminent. Familiarity with Princes and worldly Statesmen, is then for
no purpose. Beside, the ascension of the two witnesses to the heavens, is
before the fall of the tenth part of Rome, and so before the thousand years
begin.

There be yet some more places cited by Master Burrowes and others for their
Tenet; but these which we have answered, are the principal: and if they be
cleared, there is no difficulty in the rest.

Besides Scriptures, Master Burrowes takes from the Glimpse of T. G. sundry
testimonies of antiquity; all which, T. G. does borrow from Alstedius. To the
which I answer, That no Protestants build their faith upon humane testimonies;
and, no men in the world make so small account of antiquity as our Brethren. It
is mavelous if in earnest they should encourage themselves in their Tenet by
such testimonies of the Fathers, as by the Catholic consent of all posterior
antiquity and the unanimous profession both of Protestants and Papists this
day, are censured of error.

Who pleases to know the mind of antiquity in this subject, Let him consult
especially with Augustine de civitate dei. Book 20. almost through the whole;
and the Commentaries of Vives, and Coqueus thereupon. If humane authorities
either ancient or modern, could give our Brethren any satisfaction in this
question, it were easy to present them with great store thereof.

Thus far had I proceeded when by my Superiors I was called away from these
Studies to an other employment, so what I intended to have spoken to the
Anabaptists, the Antinomians, the Erastians, and especially to the remainder of
the Popish and Prelaticall Malignants I must remit it to another Season.

FINIS.

