A Brief DISCOURSE OF CHANGING MINISTERS TITHES INTO STIPENDS, OR, Into another
THING.

Wherein is showed, I. How TITHES are of Divine Right, how not. II. How
Canonical, Ecclesiastical, Political or Judicial. III. How Leviticall. How
Not. IV. Not Ceremonial. V. How alterable, and How Not.


LONDON, Printed by S. G. for W. Lee, and are to be sold at his shop, at the
sign of the Turks-head in Fleetstreet, over against Feterlane end, 1654.

THE PREFACE.
THese Quaestiones Spinosae, perplexed and intricate Questions, whilst that
they have been by Canonists, Schoolmen, and others curiously and learnedly
disputed, the Decision is left by them more dubious then they found them. Which
gives occasion to conceive, that there is a greater mystery in searching out
the Original Right of this sacred Revenue, then some men of this Age do
understand. Who therefore ought to be so much the more circumspect, what they
attempt herein, by how much the power of him with whom is the contest, is the
greater: For the Dispute is (not inter homines inter se Litigantes; sed inter
Deum and Homines not betwixt men, but by men with God. Casus tremendus, non
temeritate exequendus; A Controversy to be trembled at, not with temerity or
rashness to be determined. For woe unto him that striveth with his Maker. Esaias
45.9. Be wise now therefore, Oh you Rulers, and be Learned, ye who are Judges
of the Earth. And in such dubious and sacred matters, be sure to give judgment
the safest way. For if your Judgment be Erroneous, it is Robbery in the
Superlative Degree.

The last point has only been touched cursorily, by such who have written on
this Subject. And it never was so seasonable here in England, as now, to be
treated on purposely. Thou then who shall be censorious of this Discourse, let
it provoke thee to pen a better, in the behalf of thy Mother the Church, which
is the only ambition of him who thinks his name unworthy to be mentioned for
her Advocate.

The Contents of this Treatise.
THe pretenses for the Alteration Gods peculiar Reservation of Tithes to
himself. God the Donor of Tithes to Priests and Ministers. Gods Assignation to
the Levites pro tempore. Tithes Reverter to God after the Leviticall Law ended.
Opinions of the Quo Jure of Tithes. The alteration, of great weight and
concernment. The Institution of the kind, Morally and Naturally Divine.
Scrupulous consciences sifted and satisfied. Morally Divine or Judicials. Not
Leviticall nor Ceremonial. The end whereunto Tithes were ordained. Tithe not
always the Tenth. The end of their Institution. How alterable. The pretense of
contention answered. Whence the contention arises. How the contention may with
ease be prevented. Whence the stipend may issue, and its evil consequences.
The incertainty of Tithes examined and confuted. The alteration inconsistent
with Law and Justice. Patronages destroyed by such alteration. The now low, and
to be lamented condition of the Church. A Caveat for Supreme Power, and its
Bounds. The Sum, and close of all.
A Brief Discourse concerning changing of Ministers Tithes into Stipends or
other Thing.
THE Ministry of the Church of England, and maintenance of the Ministers,
having been for many Ages legally settled and established in this Nation, and by
Divine Providence having been both lately delivered from headlong destruction,
threatened by a generation of men (shall I say) or rather beasts in the shape of
men: The Church cannot yet promise her self security or safety; for though her
enemies have bin prevented by laying her level by a downright blow, yet they
will not cease to solicit Supreme power to do their work by a circumference,
and before the Church could be thoroughly sensible of her aforesaid late
delivery, they have already contrived how to undermine her, by a specious way
held out of Peace and Profit, as it were, intended toward her. But if the
Church must be destroyed, the difference is not great, whether it be done by
the means of the open mouthed Ravenous Wolfes, or by the underminings of the
subtle Leering Foxes.

Now in short, the contrivance is, to take that from her which she has, and to
find out a new way for her subsistence, and as is pretended less subject to
scruple and contention, and not so uncertain. From which exchange, I shall pray
for her delivery, and that Supreme Power will take the counsel of Solomon
herein, Not to meddle with them that are given to such change, Prove. 24.21.
lest destruction arise sudditinly on them both.

In the handling of which Subject, the first thing to be taken into
consideration will be; By what Power and Authority Tithes became and were
ordained, for the Ministers Portion originally? Wherein some there are, and
those not a few, nor men of weak judgment and learning, that have held,
written, and maintained that God himself was the first Donor of Tithes unto his
Ministers. And that though he be the Creator and Lord of all the World, and
gave the Earth, and the fruits thereof to the Children of men, that yet, in
that very gift, he did reserve in a peculiar manner, a Part or Portion thereof
unto himself, not that he needed any, but wherewith he would be honored, and
have Religion perpetuated by the Sons of men, for their own good, who by their
offerings of such part of their goods, wherewith God did bless them, they
should honor him with their substance as it is, Prove. 3.9. and acknowledge
their Homage to him, and perform that service toward him, which from the
beginning was ordained them to do. And for proof of this truth, the offerings
of Cain and Abell are alleged, who had no other commands that we read of, then
the very dictat of nature herein to guide and direct them, And because there
was then no other Ministry ordained by God, therefore was this offering of
theirs made unto God himself, which as some do conjecture, is for the part that
which was afterward called Tithes. See Sir H. Sp: c. 24. p. 102.


For we do not read in Sacred Writ, that the Lord did own any other part for
His, of the goods he had given unto man, (I mean Morally or Judicially, not
Ceremonially) then Tithes, and of those he says, Levit. 27.30. that Tithes are
the Lords, Holy to the Lord. As for other offerings, the Lord did never own
them, till man had vowed or offered them. We speak not of first Fruits or
Sacrifices, or what was ceremonial. But of Tithes, you see it is said, that
they are the Lords (not yet the Levites) in the Present Tense, and his peculiar
Right, before they were either severed or paid, or assigned to the Levites.

Now so soon as we read either of Priesthood or Ministry. We see that God
appointed that that part or portion of worldly goods, which by the Law of divine
nature, man was to offer unto the Creator, was to be offered unto the Priest,
for no man will doubt, but what Abraham offered or gave to Melchisedeck, was by
divine appointment, And that which he did give is named Tithes, but whether
only of the spoils as some would have it, or of all his substance as others
affirm it, we will not here dispute it. But what was this of Abraham's tithing
for? Not for Sacrificing, for he offered nothing, but for blessing, which the
Ministers of Christ perpetually performing, the same reward is due to them that
did belong to the Priest, for no change of the Law, but by the change of the
Priesthood, which is the same of Melchisedeck and Christ for ever. Heb. 7.12.
And again that that which Jacob vowed was Tithes, not a voluntary vow as some
would have it, but a dictat of divine nature, according to the example of
Abraham his Grandfather, and in common understanding to be paid unto the Priest
as Abraham did, the eldest Son of the Families being then the Priest, till
Aaron: see more of this in Mr. Seldom.

The matter being thus stated and uncontroverted, Mr. S. p. 5.
that the great and wise Creator reserved to himself a peculiar right in the
Creatures (though the Quota be not agreed on) which he afterward conferred
upon, and assigned to his Priests in the dark times before the Law, it will
under the Law be most plain and perspicuous both for the kind, and for the
Quota also, that the Portion which the Lord appointed to his Ministers, the
Tribe of Levi for their service in the Tabernacle was (amongst other things) of
the Fruits and production of the Earth in kind, and the Tenth part thereof,
truly called Tithes. For the Tribe of Levi, being joined to the Priesthood the
House of Aaron, a Levite and his Sons, the Tithes by this were not taken from
the Priesthood, to whom they only belonged, but by that conjunction, the
Priests and Levites being united, Tithes became the Right of both as Priests;
and the people paid their Tithes to the Levites, and they Tithes to the
Priests, Numb. 18.26.
but notwithstanding this conjunction the Levites had only the charge of the
Tabernacle and Aaron and his Sons the charge of the Sanctuary, Altar and
Vessels thereunto belonging, and yet by reason of this union the Priests were
sometimes called Levites, Ezech. 44.1 s. Heb. 7.5.
as in Ezech. 44. and the Levites Priests, Heb. 7. where it is said that the
Sons of Levi, who receive the office of Priesthood have command to take Tithes
of the People. This observation will not be altogether useless, because it
meets with an objection that Tithes were taken from the Prests, and given to
the Levites, who were not Priests, and so became Leviticall, and ended with
Levi. Whereas by this it appears that the Levites were joined to the Priests,
and God might make whom Priests he pleased; and so Tithes were not take from
the Priests, but belonged to the Levites, being joined to the Piresthood. Nor
and Tithes been taken from the Priests by God, and given to the Levites, would
that conclusion have followed, that Tithes must then end with the Levites, as
shall be made more plain hereafter. Nor does it follow, that, because if God
the Creator and true owner did take them from the one, and give them to the
other Pro Tempore, therefore man may so do, or destroy them for ever, of which
more hereafter.

The first place in the Old Testament of the Law, where Tithes be spoken of
expressly, saving that of Abraham and Jacob, is that before remembered of Levit.
the 27. 30. in which the Lord only declares his Right unto them. The next place
is that of Numb. 18.21. where he assigns them to Levi for an inheritance for
their service in the Tabernacle. These two Texts of Sacred Writ, and the
constant Practice of the Jews in paying their Tithes during the time of the
Law, even to the coming of Christ, as by that of our Savior of Tithing mint,
etc. and by the boasting Pharisees speech to our Savior of tithing all he
possessed appears, do so manifest the truth hereof, that it admits no dispute,
until the Leviticall Law was abrogated.

Now that Law ceasing by the death of our Lord and Savior Christ Jesus; the
next thing considerable will be, what became of Tithes, when the Levites
service in the Temple ceased. For the Right understanding whereof, let us look
a little back to that which has been said. For if it be true, which indeed
cannot be denied, that God did reserve a Part and Portion of the Creatures as
his peculiar Right, in the offering whereof, man for Gods blessing on his
goods, was to express his gratitude to his Creator and Benefactor, even by the
Divine Law of Nature, which is so grounded in the Nature of mankind, as that
there never yet was any People, who honored God, but held it their duty to do
him honor with their goods; for it is a principle in Nature, Hooker. P. 424.
a truth infallible, and an Axiom unquestionable, that men are eternally bound
to honor God, with their substance from whom they have it in token of their
gratitude. Nor ever was any people so barbarous, but did acknowledge a Deity,
and to that Deity which they did so acknowledge, they naturally did offer of
those good things, which they supposed to receive from such Deith. Upon which
ground arises that Interrogation of the Prophet, Will Any man spoil his gods?
Mal. 3.8.
arguing the with holding of Tithes to be a violation of the Law of Nature, and
not of the Levitical Ordinances. If this (I say) be a Truth, and that the part
and portion thus due unto the Creator, be that which he calls Tithes, (for
other part of man's goods the Lord does not challenge in that peculiar way, but
Tithes he does in express terms,) And them you see he bestows upon his
Pirests before the Law, and under the Law upon the Levites for their service in
the Tabernacle, (out of which still the Priests had a Tithe) which assignation
to the Levites, has this tacit condition annexed unto it, that when that
service failed, then the wages ceased, and the Levites were no longer to enjoy
their Tithes, then whilst the service lasted, for perofrmance whereof that
wages was allowed, it follows of congruity, that those Tithes part or portion
which were the Lords peculiar right before the Levitical assignation, should
return again unto the Lord, as in his former right; for else we deny God that
Reverter of his own proper and peculiar inheritance, which we enjoy in ours,
when the line fails upon whom we make the Intail.

And Tithes being thus reverted to God, not for any need he had of them, but
for the need mankind had of the Priests and Ministers of the Gospel. Which
Ministry, as it cease not till the second coming of our Lord and Savior
Christ Jesus, so it cannot be supported without Temporal means, which leads
us to the next Consideration, Whether the Lord has not assigned that his right
of Tithes unto the Ministers of the Gospel.

Though it be true, that there is no such express Text of Scripture in the New
Testament to prove the Lords assignment of Tithes unto the Ministers of the
Gospel, as that of Numb. 18.21. to prove his assignation thereof unto the
Levites, yet the consequences and arguments drawn from several Texts of the New
Testament, do evidently enough prove Tithes to belong to them for their
Ministry, as well as to the Levites for their service.

That the New Testament does frequently command and call for a maintenance for
the Minister, and that to be not only competent, but honorable, we need not
cite the particular Texts of Scripture for it: That any other ordinary
maintenance is intended the Ministry of the Gospel, by the New Testament, then
Tithes, the Scripture is silent in it, and we must be ignorant of it. Nor does
it appear that the Lord has otherwise disposed of this his Priestly patrimony:
therefore we may with safety conclude, that the ordinary maintenance of the
Ministers of the Gospel intended by the New Testament, is partly Tithes, which
if they may not enjoy, there is no other can claim or derive a title to. And
the Maxim of the Law is, that In aequali Jure Melior est conditio Possidentis.

The non-payment of Tithes to the Ministers of the Gospel in the Apostles days,
and in the Primitive times of Christianity, is no argument against their right;
for till a Nation became Christian, Tithes could not be paid, nor could the
Ministers of the Gospel in those times of persecution, receive, collect, or
retain them. 1 Cor. 9.12.15
The Apostle prevents this objection of nonusage of their power, to be no
prejudice to their right.

It has been, and yet is much controverted amongst the Learned, by what right
Tithes are due, some holding them to be due Jure Divino morali, Mr. S. P.
150.158.
as the Canonists generally, with whom agree many of our English and Learned
Divines; but some agree the tenth part to be only due by Law Positive and
Ecclesiastic, and that there is no more Jus Natural, or Divinum Morale in it,
then what commands a competence to the Priesthood; and what now is, is in
imitation only of the Jewish state ordered by the Almighty, and not obligatory
under the Gospel, but that the Church might freely have ordained a ninth,
eleventh, or other part.

Others there are who hold, that Tithes amongst the Jews were only Judicials,
and not due by Divine, Moral Law, or Law of Nature, but by the Civil Law of
that Nation. And of this opinion are the Schoolmen generally, who when they
speak of their Jus Divinum, they are to be understood to speak of the Law
Positive of the Church, imitating the Divine Judicials, which retain their vim
exemplarem, though not obligativam; neither do they make any difference betwixt
Tithes praediall and personal, in this respect, which the Canonists do.

Others there be, who hold them Ceremonial, and to determine with the Levitical
Law, though they be not able to show what the payment of Tithes did signify,
nor what they did typifie, nor whereof they were a ceremony, which are the only
Discoverers of that which is Ceremonial. In this variety of opinions, the
question amongst the Canonists, Schoolmen, and Divines, not being yet
determined by what Law Tithes are due (though it may be gathered for a truth,
from the Scriptures, the Fathers, and other Humane Writers, that for so much as
concerns the due maintenance of the Minister, that it is due Jure Divino
Morali,) by the Law of Nature, that yet the part as it was declared by the
Judicial Law of the Jews, so is it due by the Civil or Positive Law of the
Nation, but yet from the time of Grant or Dedication, to be the Lords to the
worlds end, unless himself, or perhaps the Ministers his Trustees, shall
renounce or relinquish them.) It is no small or trivial business for those in
present power to go about an universal alteration of this sacred patrimony.
(Sacred, I say, that is, set apart toward the service of God, in perpetuity
under the limitation abovesaid of the Lords or of his Ministers renunciation.)
Before there be a judicious determination of its Original right, by an Assembly
of Learned and Orthodox Divines, Lawyers, Canonists, and Casuists, thereunto
called by Supreme Authority.

For if Tithes be due to the Ministers of the Gospel Jure Divino Morali, or by
the Law of Nature in kind, or in quantity, then will that State which shall
alter them, or enforce an exchange of them for some other thing, be guilty of
no less sin then Sacrilege, which is of so high a nature, that it cost
Ananias and Sapphira dear; a president the highest of that nature, we read of,
in the New Testament, intimating unto us, that sin to be the greatest which
after the death of our Savior was in all the Apostles times acted or
committed. Not for breach of the Levitical Law, then ended; but of the Moral
law, in withdrawing a thing devoted, the taking away what our forefathers
devoted, (as Tithes) aggravates the offense, and so will do the punishment. Nor
have those parts or persons wherein, or by whom it has been practiced, gone
unattended with direful Judgments; Neither Germany, France, Holland, nor
Scotland, (I will not speak of Englands condition) can at this day glory of
their prosperity, where that sacred patrimony, with other of the like nature,
have been swallowed up totally, or converted into Stipends or other things.

And besides the sin of Sacrilege, it must needs be interpreted a transcendent
and high presumption for man to take upon him to be wiser then his Creator. And
whereas God in his wisdom has appointed Tithes to be the maintenance of his
Ministers, that man should take upon him to chop and to change, to take away or
confound what the Lord has ordained. When we pay our Tithes duly, we have in
that particular discharged our duties both to God, and to our Minister, either
according to the Divine, Moral Law, or exemplary-wise by imitation of the
Divine Judicial Law; but when Tithes shall be turned into Stipends, or some
other thing now, or into Hoc aliquid nihil, hereafter, how can a man be
satisfied when he has paid or performed that, that he has done what he
ought, or done his duty without diminution, the surest way for God to have his
right, and the truest way for man to do no wrong, is payment in kind out of
the very self-same goods, which the Earth by his gracious blessing does
continually produce. It was a witty observation of the Hebrews, that when a man
pays his Tithes, he is the Husbandman, and receives nine parts for one, and
God who receives one of ten is the Priest. But when Tithes are not paid, then
God is the Husbandman, and keeps the nine parts, and man is the Priest, and
has but the tenth; for then ten acres of Vine shall yield but one Bathe, Esa.
5.10. So tender were the consciences of men heretofore in point of Tithing,
that few of them could be satisfied that they had so punctually paid them as
they ought, and therefore usually in their Wills they bequeathed somewhat to
the Parson for Tithes omitted, in lieu whereof the Mortuary is paid to this
day: how seared are the consciences of men now, that would pay no Tithe at all?

Now those who write against the Divine Moral Right of the Quota, or tenth
part, yet still agree that a part or portion of the Increase of the fruits of
the Earth, etc. in kind, is the right of the Ministers of the Gospel by the
Divine Moral Law, and by the Evangelical Texts of Muzling the Ox, Planting a
Vineyard, Feeding a flock, and not partaking of the milk and Fruit thereof in
kind, with many other places of the New Testament, which the Apostle urges
not, as an Ordinance de Novo, but from the Law which proves most fully, that
the manner of tithing under the Gospel, ought to be as it was under the Law,
both in kind and quantity. How then can it stand with the Consciences of them
in Power to alter the way, that God has appointed for maintenance of his
Ministers? will they still be wiser then he?

If the Tenth part be looked upon by the Repining people, as too great a
Portion for Gods Ministers of the Gospel to enjoy, wherein thou man do
still take upon thee, to be wiser then thy Creator, who appointed his Priests
that and much more among the Jews. Why then do not thou only content thy
self with an Abridgement of the Quota or part? but thou must be altering of the
very Nature and kind also of that maintenance, that God in his wisdom has by
Divine Moral Law ordained for his Ministers, and not without visible and
pregnant Reason. For this way of maintenance, is suitable to all times, both of
plenty and scarcity; agreeable to all prices of Corn, Grain, Hay, and other
commodities, the Prices whereof though they change daily, yet Nature being
usually the same, keeps the true standard betwixt God and man. Again of
convenience to all persons both Parishioners and Ministers, the one to go no
further to pay, nor the other to recive what is due, then to the Land it self
within the Parish. And of best Equality, the Poor not burdened, nor the Rich
eased, (for the disproportion betwixt Tithe of Pasture and arrable, makes not
Tithing unequal, comparing Land of the same quality one with another, but the
inequality thereof proceeds from the owners usage, who is at liberty to husband
his Land, in what kind he pleases, whether he be rich or Poor.) The duty more
readily performed in paying Tithe in kind, then by paying the value thereof in
money, which with most Farmors is usually wanting, when their commodities are
most plentiful, and may be better spared.

And again it is more Natural that Tithes be paid in kind then otherwise, For
Tithes procure an increase of the Heap, out of which they are taken, and by the
Jews were accounted the very Mound, Fence, and Bulwark of all their substance.
And if you look upon the quantity, See much more of this Number in Sr. H. Sp.
c. 14. De Orb: concordia. Lib. 3. c. 10.
Ten is the number of Natures perfection, beyond which we cannot go without
iteration and Repetition. And Postellus tells us, that it stands with Reason,
that forasmuch as all Creatures do bear the Character of Divine Power, Wisdom,
and Mercy of the Creator, That Tithes as well as Tribute should be paid of,
that to him whose Image and Superscription they bear, How else do we give
Honor, to whom Honor belongs, or to God the things that are Gods, our
Wealth being Gods, as well as the time of our Lives, whereof he Reserved a
seventh part to himself, but of the other only a tenth.

And again Nature and Reason do plead for the Minister to participate with the
People in that kind, wherein there may be equallity of fortune, and whereby
Sympathy and Communion, that great Bond of Nature, between the Church and
Commonwealth is preserved (as a late Learned Bishop of this Church has it) as
in fair and seasonable weather, Bishop Andrews.
and in times of Plenty, the Minister to rejoice and praise God with the
People, in want and tempestuous weather, to mourn and pray together, But where
the Priest is a stipendary, when the People rejoice for Plenty, or lament for
want, the Minister does neither; for what is their Sowing, Mowing, or Reaping
unto him, when the Bond of Nature is dissolved, the like may be said, where the
Minister walks, waits and attends for his (it may be two narrow) stipend
that is withheld from him, for want whereof he, his Wife, Children, and Family
Mourn, Lament, an Famish, what is all this to the People? there is no
Sympathising one with another, either in Mirth, or Misery, for the greatest
Bond of Nature is dissolved.

Let us now come to consider of the Grounds, and Motives held forth for the
alteration of Tithes, the settled Revenue, and undeniable Right, and Property of
the Ministers of the Church and the converting of them into stipends, or some
other thing,

The first Argument I find is, that the Payment of Tithes is scrupulous to
tender Consciences.

To which it may be answered, that those Consciences should be first examined,
and then Rectified, rather then such an universal alteration should be made of
that Sacred and settled Revenue of the Church; And again it is contrary to
Reason, and the Rules of Government to Repeal, or to overthrow a Fundamental,
General and well settled Law, because a few either Sickbraind, or Dissembling
sort of People do quarrel at it: First let such men be well examined, whether
it be Conscience or Covetousness, that is most predominant with them. And that
you may easily discover by this Touchstone, viz. whether he be willing to set
forth as much Land for the Minister, as is equivalent to the value of his
Tithes, if he will so do, then am I so charitable as to think, that persons
Conscience to be truly tender, and great pity it were to offend it. But this
particular Case may better be composed by a Temporary, or mutual agreement
betwixt the Parson and such Parishioner, then by altering of a general Law,
for the satisfaction of such particular persons, whose number you will find
very inconsiderable to the multitude, and happily his Posterity, or he that
shall succeed him in his dwelling, may be of another mind; And then as good
cause to alter the Law again. And thus by seeking to please the Humors of some
particular persons, a Fundamental of the Law must be infringed, not only to
the General prejudice of the Mininsters, but also to the Public incertainty,
and Confusion of the propriety of all men.

But if by this Essay, you find such tender conscience, neither willing to pay
Tithe, nor any thing else in Lieu thereof to the Minister; you may conclude him
either Covetous, Hypocritical or Schismatical; For whose sake it is to be
hoped that those in Supreme Power will not hold it fit to make such a general
alteration in so Sacred a Revenue, but rather that such pretended scrupulous
persons be brought to conformity to the good old Law of the Land, then to make
the Laws of Church and Commonwealth conformable unto them. Those whom
Providence lately prevented, from destroyin both Ministry, Church Maintenance
and Propriety, will yet be glad to see such an universal Alteration, as a step
leading to their design.

Let us yet examine this scrupled Conscience a little further, and see if any
thing there be in sacred Scripture to raise this scruple; for it must arise,
either from the original institution of them, or from the end whereunto they
were instituted. Their original institution is either by the Divine Moral
Law, and Law of Nature; or by the Judicial and National Law of the Jews; Or
by the Leviticall Law; Or by the Ceremonial Law. For these four (if we may
make so many of them) are all the opinions we read of, that have been broached
of the Quo Jure of Tithes.

Now if they be due by the Divine Morrall Law, and Divine Law of Nature, that
binds all People, in all Places, and at all times, and from thence there can
arise no Scruple.

If in the next place it be granted, that they are Judicialls, and so
obligatory to the Jews as their National Law; Then by that reason it must
follow, that Tithes ought to be paid in this Nation, because they are due to
the Ministers, by the National Law of this Land, which ought to be as binding
here in England, as it was amongst the Jews, from whom England had its Pattern
and example, which is the most that can be truly said of a Jewish continuance
with us; yet not that we are in Love with it, because it was Jewish, but like
it, because it was the Lords ordinance Judicial, if not Moral.

If Leviticall. Hence indeed may arise a Scruple, because the Leviticall Law is
ended in our Savior. But that they are not of Leviticall Institution, some
give this answer (that would prove them due by the Law of Nature) that Tithes
were paid before the Leviticall Law given, by Abraham and Jacob, and therefore
cannot be Leviticall. Others answer, that all that is Leviticall in Tithes is
only their Assignation to the Levites for their service, and that service being
ended, the Right of Tithes return again to the Lord, the Donor, by him to be
disposed of according to his good will and pleasure.

If Ceremonial; Then true it is that Tithes are not to be continued, amongst
Christians, forasmuch as it is agreed, that Judicialia sunt Mortua, and may be
imitated, and taken up in example again: But Ceremonialia sunt mortifera,
deadly and not to be revived or continued; But the double answer last before
mentioned to the Leviticall answers the Ceremonial pretense also, but
because a threefold Cord is not easily broken, take hereunto this third answer
also, that they were not Ceremonial, forasmuch as they did neither signify,
nor Typifie any thing.

But the end of Tithes is the Honor and service of God, (which no conscience
may scruple at) and maintenance not of the Levites only, but of the Ministers
of the Gospel of Christ at all times to remain, so long as the Ministry shall
stand, and though not paid in the Apostles time, or times of persecution, yet
were they by the Ancient Fathers succeeding, the Apostles challenged to the
Church as the Lords Ordinance for maintenance of the Ministry, and by
universal consent of all Christendom first or last paid. For as soon as the
state of the Church could permit and admit thereof, Christians held it most
Natural and Fit, that God should as before the Law, and under the Law, have
his ancient Revenue of Tithes after the Law.

Wherein I would not be mistaken, Mr. S. Epist. p. 8.11. and cap. 8. p. 243.244.
as if I did affirm that the Tenth part (when I speak of the payment of Tithes)
was so universally paid, but that some part more or less of the Fruits of the
Earth in kind were paid. For you may see that Decinia, or Decimatio do not
always signify either a real Tithe, or a Tenth part, but sometimes money
paid in Lieu of Tithe, or as it were of the nature of Tithe, so called, but not
so in truth in the statutes of 27. H. 8.21. and 37. H. 8.12. Sir H. Sp. c: 14.
p. 67:
and the Decree made upon them concerning London. And sometimes less then a
Tenth, as the four Thraves of Corn, of every Plow-Land, in the East Riding of
York, given by King Athelston to the Church of Beverly, which came not near to
a Tenth, is styled Decimae in the Bull of the Pope. And the gift of two Sheaves
in an ancient Chartulary there remembered, is called Decimatio. And for
satisfaction herein, you may see the Etymology of the word Decima or Tithe, to
signify the Tenth, whether it be the Tenth part or not. But this by way of
Digression, which yet may serve to reconcile many disputes concerning the
Quota, or part ththed, if well and rightly weighed.

But to return once more to the Scrupulous Conscience, for I am loath to leave
him unsatisfied, or at least unconvinced. It is the General tenet of all the
Learned, that Tithes are neither Ceremonial, nor Leviticall, otherwise then in
their Assignation to the Levites for the Service of the Tabernalce. And Saint
Paul well knew, that the Leviticall and Ceremonial Law were ended, and would
never have used an Antiquated Law for Argument, or proof of the Right of the
Ministers of the Gospel, as he does that of Deuteronomy. 25.4. Of Muzling the Ox,
etc. If that Law had not been rather Natural then Ceremonial. moniall. But
though that service be ended of the Levites, yet the end whereat that
maintenance aimed, was the service of God, which the Ministers of the Gospel
yet performing, That very maintenance ex Congruo, and by Saint Paul's aforesaid
Argument (if not from the Divine moral Law, yet) from the Political Law of
the Jews not wholly cancelled, belongs to the Ministers of the Gospel, which
none but the most seditious Sect of Anabaptists will deny, who denying also the
very Ministry it self, can do no less then deny their maintenance, to whom I
shall give no other Answer then before, as to the Right of Tithes. And for
their other opinions concerning the Ministry it self, they have been abundantly
confuted, by many of the Learned, and it is a proper Subject for the Divine to
undertake, if any thing De Novo can be allegded by them.

But here I trust is sufficient matter showed to prove Tithes to be due, either
by the Divine Moral, or Natural Law, or by the Positive Law of this Nation,
wherein the Canonists, and Divines generally holding the Divine Moral Right,
the Schoolmen, Papists, and many others the Positive Laws of each Nation,
which question, I will not take upon me to determine, forasmuch as Tithes being
the Ministers due here in England, by either of those ways; it serves the turn
for this discourse, the Scope and aim thereof only being, to satisfy the
Reader, that whether Tithes are due here, by the one Law, or the other to the
Church, that they may not be taken from it, nor a stipend, or other thing to be
exchanged for them, without the consent of Parson, and Patron at least.

I must confess, that could that Divine Moral Right to the Tenth part be
sufficiently eleered, that this would easily resolve the rest; and no man could
then go about the Alteration herein, but he must set God himself at defiance:
But so much thereof being herein proved, as that by the Divine Moral Law, an
Honorable Portion in kind, is due to the Minister of the Gospel, and many
Ancient and modern writers have held, and do maintain the settled maintenance
belonging to the Church of England, to be the Portion of Divine Right belonging
to it, That which I shall now say, is by way of Caveat to them in Supreme
power, that it highly concerns them (if they intend any alteration herein) to
be sully satisfied in this Point of Divine Right, as well for the kind, as for
the quota, before they go about it; for it is not for men of dubious thoughts,
but well resolved, by sound and solid Arguments, to undertake a mutation of
this sacred Revenue, for if either the kind or quota be Moral, the Alteration
is desperate; and why should Supreme Power run the hazard of a curse from
Heaven upon themselves, and the whole Nation, by resolving that which at least
is questionable, not with men only, but between them and God, to whom the
judgment belongs; There, to be given, where he is the only Advocate, whose
Spouse (if the Right be hers) is disinherited. Religion and Policy both, prompt
men in matters dubious to resolve of the safest course; No danger in confirming
the Minister maintenance as it stands established, but great hazard in the
commuting.

2. The second Argument for this Exchange, is, that the way of Tithing is a
contentious way of maintenance of the Minister, and for peace sake some other
way must be found out for their subsistence, less subject to contention.

Those who frame this for a reason of the Alteration, scarce look so far as to
the Donor of this sacred maintenance; for if they did, then would they consider
that God himself made this a Law among the Jews his own select people; (to go
no higher, having said enough thereof before) And unless we will be wiser
then he who is Wisdom it self, we may not censure this way of maintenance for
contentious, nor hold forth any other as more peaceable for Jews or Christians,
the Christians imitating them who did receive their Law from the mouth of God
himself.

Certainly had there been a more peaceable way to have been found out, for
maintenance of Gods Ministers, the Omniscient and Omnipotent Lord, as he must
needs have known it, so his Goodness and Power is such, that he would have so
appointed it; Let us then lay our hands upon our mouths, and be filent, or if
we will be speaking, let us condemn out own foolishness, and magnify his
wisdom.

But because it is the corrupt nature of man to be finding out inventions, and
to be always changing, though for the worse, before we fall upon this Exchange,
with us, let us enquire whether the Jews did, or lawfully might have been such
Exchangers? that they had cause so to be, (if contention be a cause) is
evident, for there wanted not amongst them who withheld, subtracted, and
witbdrew their Tithes, as now amongst us, witness the complaint of the
Prophet, and the vainglorious boasting of the Pharisee, that He paid Tithe of
all that he possessed; Mal. 3.8. Luke 18.12.
implying that others did not; that their natural inclinations prompted them to
it, is apparent; for they were and yet are the greatest Brokers and Exchangers
that the world affords. THat they yet did not put such Exchange in practice, it
is evident by that of our Savior in the Gospel, Luke 11.42.
Ye Tithe Mint, and Rue, etc.: and that of the pround Pharisee before; so that
you see, that though the Jews were the most perverse and stiff-necked people
of all others, (notwithstanding they were the only select Nation) yet they were
not grown to this height of impiety, as to exchange the sacred Patrimony by a
Law.

Let us then examine the second part, Whether lawfully they might have been
such Exchangers of Tithes? Observe here, that I do intend the first Tenth paid
to the Levites, not the second Tenth out of the nine parts, which the two first
years were to be brought to Jerusalem, there to be spent in Feasts, and the
third year upon the poor and Levites within his own gates: For if the way were
too far from Jerusalem, then by Levit. 27.31. they might change those Tithes
into money, adding a fifth part more to them, (which few of our Exchangers will
be willing to do.) But the Inquisition here handled is of the first tenth,
Whether the Jews might lawfully have exchanged that? which I am persuaded, no
man of sound judgment will maintain: For the allowance of their exchange of the
second tenth in case Supra, excludes the exchange of the other. Now what was it
that might hinder this exchange, we will spare the Divine Right, for we have
spoken enough of that before; But admitting that did not impede, then certainly
it must be the Judicial Law given them that did restrain them from it. If so,
then why should not our Humane Positive Laws withhold us from the like? If you
will make the difference to rest in this, that God more immediately prescribed
that to the Jews for their National Law, then this Positive Law to us; this is
a difference without a diversity, for by that reason the Jews should have been
more strictly bound to the observation of the Decalogue, (though Moral) then
Christians. And again, it was a Law given to them for their Nation, not
exclusive, that no other Nation should use it, but rather as a pattern for
other Nations to imitate; and so it being unto the Jews but a bare Judicial
Law, it could be no more binding to them by reason of a more immediate
prescription, then to us by a mediate imitation, having not so much the Jews
for example, as God for the Author of that Law.

Again, whence arises the ground of this contention, which makes the Ministers
maintenance by Tithing so litigious, as that some new way for their subsistence
must be found out? Does this contention arise from the Parsons part, or from
the Parishoner? If on the Parishioners part, then in Justice and Reason, ought
Supreme Power to provide better Laws to compel the Parishioner to pay his due,
and not to enforce the Parson to depart with his indisputable Right, because
his Parishioner does him wrong, for that were all one, as if my neighbor have
a mind to my house, or land, and because I will not let him have it, he will
disseise or dispossisse me of it, and then Supreme Power to make a Law to
enforce me to take money or another thing for it; whereas Authority is ordained
by God, to punish him that does wrong, and to relieve the innocent and him that
is injured.

Now that the Parishioner is the contentious person in this case, The Judges of
Assise are able to testify this Truth.
it is manifest by the multitude of actins that the people put the Parsons to,
wherein the Trials generally and constantly go with the Parson who is injured,
and from whom right is detained; whereunto the people are the more encouraged,
because Tithes have been discountenanced, the ancient remedy for their recovery
partly taken away, the Title scandalized, as if the payment of them were
superstitious, and Popish, and against the Laws both of GOd and man, which the
people most greedily swallow, and no satisfaction endeavored to be given to
the avaritious multitude of their Legality: But as if the payment of them were
as bad as clamor makes them, the peoples hopes are daily fed and heightened by
holding forth of other Provisions intended for them; whereas in point of
Justice, Governors should make new Laws to suppress new deceitful Inventions,
and confirm all Legal Interests and Proprieties.

And thus you see how it comes to pass that payment of Tithes is looked upon
as contentious and troublesome, because the people make it first litigious, and
then cry out for an abolishment, or change at least, because it is litigious;
as if it were lawful for one to take away the goods of another, and unlawful
for him whose goods they were to use his lawful remedy for their recovery: Or,
(yet more plainly) as if it were lawful to steal, and then to hang him up whose
goods were stolen, for prosecuting the Thief: If this be not, I know not what
is, the calling evil good, and good evil, the justifying of the wicked, and
condemning the just, the reward whereof you may see in one word, Esa. 5.20.23.
Prove. 17.15.
Woe, Esa. 5.20.23. which general word compriseth all particular judgments here
and hereafter, temporal and eternal.

Nor is the payment of Tithes contentious, because the Parson sues for more
then his Right, but because the Parishioner will not pay what he ought: and the
proof of the values resting as well of the one side as the other, the
Parishioner is too hard for the Parson frequently, which gives an inlet, and
opens a wide gap both to Witnesses and to Jury men, (who never were friends
to Tithes) of the greatest and most familiar perjury, that happens in any
Trials whatsoever; And all with impunity, for want of some Superior Court,
whereunto the Judges of Assise may bind such Jurors to appears and to answer
for their misdemeanors in those trials. And that by the Law as now it stands,
the Plaintiff can recover no costs of Suit: In which two cases, if Authority
would provide remedy, Tithes would be paid with less scruple and contention by
far, then now they are, and less difficult would it be for them in Supreme
Power to provide Laws for the more just payment of Tithes, and avoiding Suits
and Contentions therein, then to find out and establish a new Provision in lieu
of them, which at the best will tacitly censure the Wisdom of God, as has
been showed; For this contention arises not from the nature or manner of
Tithes, but from those who rob God and his Ministers of them.

And again, such new Provision must necessarily arise either out of the Land,
subject to the payment of Tithes, or else out of the public Treasury. If not
of the Land, I demand then whether he that now scruples at, or contends in the
payment of Tithes, will not be as troublesome and contentious in payment of
another thing in lieu of them? It is not to be doubted, but he will, if the
contest arise from the thing it self, which is the scruple and contest of the
Anabaptist and Sectary, who disrellish the Ministry it self; and therefore
scruple and contend at any maintenace at all, and they fall not under this
dispute of Alteration, who are altogether for abolition.

But if the contest arise about the name of Tithes or other ground, then
possibly they may not be scrupulous or contentious to allow another thing,
which as is showed before, may more easily be composed by a private agreement,
then by a public and general Act; for difficult will it be, by a general Act,
to make the exchange equal, or at least such as the Church may not be a loser,
and yet the Parishioner not think himself overcharged; which if he be, or do
but think himself so to be, how contentious will he prove? and how litigious
will be the payment? and so in stead of one evil spirit conjured down, many
will be raised up.

But suppose the Parishioner be made to pay his Tithes to the State, and the
Minister to have his pay from the public Treasury, (which is the most likely
project.) How intricate a matter will it be found to settle a due Stipend? Some
Parishes are greater then other; some Ministers more deserving then other; some
having a greater charge of wife and children then other; some in birth and
education brought up at an higher charge then other; some places dearer to live
in then other: All which, with a multitude of other difficulties, are to be
taken into consideration, and then if the Stipend be not fixed to the place,
every removal and succession will require a new Alteration in perpetuity.

If the Minister of each Parish be to receive out of the public Treasury the
rent of the Tithes of his Parish; First, besides that, that the Parishioners
will not be pleased to pay their Tithes to the State-Officer, Tenant, or
Collector, the Parson cannot receive his due, for the Tenant, Officer, or
Collector are to have their share out of it, then the Treasurer, Auditor,
Tellers, Paymasters, and many other public Officers, and their Clerks and
Attendants, are to have their salaries, and the State must not be a loser; and
by that time that all these have had their shares out of a fat Benefice, how
lean will the Parson look? though there were no bribery to be thought on, for
Publicans will not be always Saints, nor will Saints be always Publicans. And
how naked shall the poor Parson be, when he has neither hay, straw. nor food
for horse or beast, nor bread, drink, or meat for himself or family, nor one
pound of wool to clothe them all? Those that live in Cities, or in Market
Towns, (if they have money) may provide such necessaries; but how will it fare
with those who live in Country Villages, especially remote from Markets? So
that upon the matter there must be for every place a peculiar Alteration, and
for every Alteration a peculiar Law. Those that seek peace in an unjust way,
let them in so seeking assure themselves that they shall find contention and
trouble enough: For Opus Justitiae est Pax. Peace is the fruit or effect of
Justice, not of Injustice, for which you may see the sacred Text, Esa. 32.17.
Dum Pacem habemus Bellum quaerimus, they who destroy Religion with one hand,
and Justice with the other, who hold Meum in the one hand, and Tuum in the other,
who will keep what they have, and get what they can, by destroying Religion,
Law, and Propriety, let their Emblem be, Sic quaerimus Bellum.

A third Argument there is, That this way of Tithing is an uncertain way of
maintenance for the Minister, and therefore some new way to be found out that
shall be more certain.

This reason sounds as if Ministers were weary of the old sacred Revenue, and
now sought for an Alteration: But herein certainly the Minister is injured, it
is not their seeking, nor can they in conscience or prudence desire any
exchange. First, with what conscience can they seek it, or accept of it, when
that they and all the Learned know and acknowledge the way of Tithing to be a
Moral Institution, and an Evangelical Ordinance for the Ministers maintenance,
and nothing but the quota or part controverted in it. And if by an Alteration
the scrupulous conscience of one Lay man be quieted, the consciences of all the
Clergy will hereby be offended.

Nor can the Clergy in prudence desire it, if they do but consider, how their
right and title to their Tithes is honored by Venerable Antiquity, and
established, ratified and confirmed by all the Positive Laws of this Nation;
and that the wits of all Ages since it became Christian, could invent or
excogitate. And how long will it be before Stipends will gain that Repute, or
be ratified by like Authority? And if Right, backed with such Authority, and
Antiquity, cannot now support Tithes, with how small a blast will Stipends of a
new stamp be blown away?

Again, let us examine wherein the incertainty of Tithes consists, that
requires such Exchange. Is Tithe more uncertain then the nine parts? Can the
Husbandman promise to himself a more certain increase in his Nine parts, then
the Parson can do of his Tenth? Or, does not the Tithe yield as certain a Rent
or Revenue, as the nine parts? And does not the Parson pay as certain a
Monthly tax for his Tenth part, as the Husbandman for his Nine? And what
incertainty is there more in the telling of ten Cocks of Corn, then in the
telling of ten pounds of money? There is thus much more certainty in receiving
of Tithe, then of a Stipend, that the Tithe has been certainly paid in
Harvest, and a Stipend will be certainly paid when the Parson can get it. So
you see Nature pays its due certainly, man incertainly, and yet the incertainty
of man cried up to be certain, and the immutability of Nature condemned for
incertainty.

By what then has been said, you may discover the invalidity of those motives
of scrupulous consciences, contentions, and incertainties held forth as grounds
and causes for the Alteration of this Sacred Revenue. All other Arguments for
this Alteration are more clamorous then colorable. These I take to be the most
sober, and yet not solid pretenses, but such as best deserved a satisfactory
Answer.

Now whether in Justice such a Mutation may be, or not, by Supreme Power
professing to govern by the known Laws of the Land, is considerable, and I
trust that without offense, may by the Rules of Justice and Reason, admit of
disquisition: For this is not to limit their Power, Coke lib. 4.13. etc. lib.
8. in case of the College of Physicians.
but to rectify Judgment.

It is a Maxim in the Law, that an Act of Parliament against Commmon Right and
Reason, or against the Law of God, is ipso facto, null and void. If a Law
therefore should be made to destroy an innocent person, either in his life or
estate, this would be (ipso facto) void; or if to take away the Right of
another against his will, without a crime, it would be null and void: Much more
Illegal will it be to destroy or take away the Right of a Society, Function, or
Profession of men. And because some Ministers have been contentious, that
therefore all must suffer. The Schoolmen hold it unlawful to excommunicate a
Corporation, or Society, out of a presumption that some of them may be Innocent.

If any shall urge presidents either Forain, or Domestic, Former, or Recent,
here with us; it is answered, That besides that, that presidents are not always
to be practiced, nor is the commonnesse of an offense any States justification;
You may know, that neither Monasteries, etc. vested in the Crown or State, till
the Corporation, Order, etc. were dissolved. But now the Ministers Right is to
be taken away, and yet the Ministry to stand: and if it be not lawful to take
away their Right, the conferring of another thing upon them in exchange, will
not cure the wrong. Ahab was not grown to that height of -- as to act such
Impiety.

Authority is ordained by God and man, to justify the Innocent, and punish the
Guilty, to maintain right and suppress wrong. Are not therefore some fiery
spirits condemned, and that justly, that of late voted down Right, I mean the
Right of Patronages? Does it not concern others then to be very wary, how they
go about to turn Tithes into Stipends, or some other thing, whereby they do
not only take away the Parsons Right, but the Patrons too, and in the
alteration of the one, they destroy the other. 2 part. Inst. p. 646.661.364.
For you may read in a Learned Writer of the Law, that if you take away the
Tithe from the Parson, you take away the Right of Patronage from the Patron;
for in a Writ of Right of Advowson, (which is one of the most ancient Writs of
the Law) the Patron must make his Title to the Patronage, by alleging the
taking of the Tithes by the Parson; for the whole benefit of the Patron
consists in conferring his Tithes upon his Chaplain; and if the Tithes be
taken from him, the Advowson or Right of Patronage does vanish as a thing
without fruit or benefit. Other Writs and matters of Antiquity might be
produced for the Rights of Patronages, which we trust to be needless now to
urge, since the vote for taking away those Rights of the People, has been
condemned by all sober men, as a thing so destructive to Right and Propriety,
that no man could have told where such High Injustice would have ended. Let
them then that now or hereafter shall fit in the Seat of Authority be well
advised, how by the Alteration of one Fundamental point of the Law, or of the
Propriety of one sort, Condition or Quality of persons, they do not destroy
another; and by the opening of such a Gap, make way to the Ruin and
destruction of all.

May we not now rather bewail the mean, poor, despicable and contemptible
condition of the Church of England, whereunto she is at this day Reduced; Then
to seek to take from her, that one, Only and Single Right of Tithes, that is
left her: Her Rights, Liberties, and Privileges were so Numerous heretofore,
that no former Age held it safe to begin their enumeration, or to sum them up,
lest any should be omitted. Nor did any Act of Parliament hitherto enumerate
them; though the great Charter of this Nation did particularise, and specify
the Rights and Liberties of the Lay People, 2. Part Inst. p. 3.4.
and no other are confirmed unto them, but what were therein mentioned, yet the
Rights, Privileges, and Liberties of Holy Church not being held safe to be
then numbered, are by that Magna Charta, in favor of the Church, confirmed in
terms of Generality, and that Form only of Confirmation used by all Succeeding
Parliaments. Of all the Ornaments that did set forth her Beauty heretofore,
whereof she is now deflowred, shall we not leave her one Jewel or Ensign,
whereby she may be known, you that are now her Enemies, and solicit Supreme
Power still against her, be now charitable at last, afflict not her that
mourns. neither add sorrow to her affliction. Think upon the Curses of them
who persecute such as the Lord has smitten, Psalm. 69. and Esaias the 47.
throughout.
and talk how they may vex them, whom the Lord has wounded.

Those who bear the Sword, have been highly successeful against men in their
Millitary employment, and let them not take this Caveat in evil part, to be
way of contending with God, for they that shall alter this Sacral Revenue of
the Chucrh must take upon them to resolve the Point of Divinity, which all the
Learned of former Ages throughout all Christendom have left undermined; and
yet most of them both Ancient and Modern, have held with the Divine Right,
which if it should now be Resolved amiss, how can you afterward expect that
the Heavens should favor you. And again what an Earthquake may we imagine will
arise amongst Proprieties, if this lead the Dance? And if such a Judgment
begin at the House of God, and in the Sacred Revenue, what may we think will be
the issue of Common and Lay-Proprieties?

Lastly, if Divine Right will not support this Church-Patrimony, yet me thinks
Humane Right may be sufficient to preserve it. For the Laws for
Ecclesiastical Rights are as Positive, and ought to be as powerful, as for
Temporal Rights; therefore is said, 2. Part Inst. p. 3.
Quod Jura Ecclesiae, publicis aequiparantur, and that it which is Granted to
the Church for the Honor of God, and maintenance of his Religion and service
(as men must acknowledge tithes were) is Granted for and to God. And if so, not
in the Power of man, to take away from his Ministers against their wills,
wherein I would not be mistaken, as if I did limit Supreme Power, or derogate
from it; But my meaning is to ascribe that Honor to it, which the Law requires
that all men should have of it, that is, that they cannot, because they will
not, do an unjust thing, wherein the Gods on Earth do resemble the God of
Heaven. For if when it is said that Supreme power may do what they will, this
shall be extended that whatsoever they will do, be it just or unjust, is
lawful; that is an apparent error. For never was any such Power given unto
men, as that their wills should be a Law: For this is the Peculiar Prerogative
of the great God For what he wills is always; just, because he wills it; But
what man wills is never good unless it be just.

We read but of one amongst the Heathen that could say, Sic volo, sic Jubeo,
stet pro Ratione voluntas. And but of one other in sacred story, of whom it was
said, thus it must be, and thus it must not be, for Hophni will not have it
thus, but so, it is God only who is essentially just, Man is just, but
accidentally as he is well, or ill affected and therefore a Subject improper to
whom such an absolute power should be allowed, as that his will should be a
Law. Nor do we read that ever any settled Government, or Governors claimed a
Power de Jure to deprive an Innocent man, or a Profession, or Society of
Innocent men of their Rights, which by the Laws of that Land are, and stand
vested and settled in them. For what were this, but a mere Arbitrary Government,
to say no worse of it, we treat not of Conquered Nations, because (we think) we
are a settled Government. And yet William the Conqueror lost nothing by
confirming the Rights of the Church in the first place, Anno. 4to in his Survey
of All the Ancient Laws of the Land.
and Tithes thereunto in particular, for though not his Line, yet his Regiment
continued till these days. And it seldom goes well long with the
Commonwealth, when it goes ill with the Church.

Thus have I endeavored in this discourse (though with too much weakness for
so Pious a Patrimony, yet with ardent zeal) to preser the Church from suffering
and dissuade others from transgressing, in altering this Sacred Revenue into a
stipend, or other thing. By showing the Primary owner to be Lord in a Peculiar
manner. The Lord to be the first Donor to his first Priest before the Law; To
the Levites pro Tempore under the Law. And afterward to the Evangelicall
Ministry in perpetuity. Who may neither per Factum, nec per Feoffamentum nec
pro Excambium alienate or alter them to the Churches prejudice; Nor to be
either Agents, or willingly Patients in this permutation. Forasmuch as this
Revenue in its kind is most Natural, most convenient, most equal. The
Institution thereof in the thing (if not in the Quota also) by the Divine
Moral or Natural Law. The Donation or Assignation both of the Thing and of
the Quota or Part, Judicial to the Jews, Not Ceremonial, nor the Thing
Leviticall, otherwise then in the assignation pro Tempore; Since the Law, the
Thing it self at least in kind (if not in the Quota also) Evangelicall. The
Thing and Quota by the Judicial, National and Positive Laws of England
established, vested, and settled in the Church as her Propriety, Not in the
Legislative Power (for so much as concerns the Divine Moral or Natural
Right thereof) to be altered: Nor (without offense be it spoken) for what
thereof concerns the Judicial or Positive Laws of this Nation, without the
consent of Parson and Patron, to be changed; Neither upon pretense of Scruple,
Contention, Incertainty, or Inequality, nor any other pretense whatsoever. For
Justitia est Suum Cuique tribuere, (Suum non Alienum) that is to say, Justice
gives to every man his own, Not to one man that which is another; So that no
Respect whatsoever ought to incline a Judge to give Judgment against the Law
or Right.

In all or any of which particulars wherein I have fallen short (For it was not
my purpose to be tedious, nor to Muster up the Objections, or Answers for, or
against the Rise the Author, the Right or the Quota of Tithes, which are enough
to be the Subjects of a voluminous Book, but only to show the Dogmaticall
truths, and the Concessions, if not of all, yet of the Generality of Writers in
this Summary discourse) I trust some others more able will afford their helping
hand for the support of this Sacred Revenue, which is the last of the flowers
of the Churches Temporal Garland now left her, that is considerable. And it is
to be hoped, (if it be well defended now by able Pens) that it will be the last
Conflict and Contest she shall find against this Judicial at Least, Divine
Patrimony, which has this only Adversary to confute or satisfy now remaining,
especially if the Eyes of the people were but once open, and their
understanding enlightened, and their hopes of Gain (their great Diana) abated,
by looking upon Holland our Sister Commonwealth, France and other Places where
Tithes have been translated only from the Ministers, to the State
Commissioners, where they, and I will both end in this Alteration, For Quod Non
capit Christus, capit Fiscus, what is not paid to the Church, must be paid to
the Checquer. Vnde Nulla Redemptio, from whence there is No Return.

FINIS.

