A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE PROVINCE OF East-Jersey IN AMERICA.

PUBLISHED By the present PROPRIETORS thereof, VIZ, William Penn, Robert West,
Thomas Rudyard, Samuel Groom, Thomas Heart, Richard Mew, Thomas Wilcox, Ambrose
Rigg, John Heywood, Hugh Hartshorne, Clement Plumsted, Thomas Cooper,
Who intend to take in Twelve more to make the number of Proprietors Twenty
four.

For Information of all such Persons who are or may be inclined to Setle
themselves, Families, and Servants in that Country.

LONDON, Printed for Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombardstreet,
Bookseller, M DCLXXXII.

A BRIEF ACCOUNT OF THE PROVINCE OF East-Jersey IN AMERICA, etc.
TO say any thing in the Praise, or much in the Description of a Country so
well known, would seem needless. The late Accounts and Descriptions of the
adjacent Countries West-Jersey and Pennsilvania, which are much of the same
nature, etc. might suffice. But considering that in Foreign Colonies, yea, here
in England, every particular County has some Excellency in Soil, Product or
Situation, that may Affect and Delight many Persons beyond the places
adjacent, We may for the Satisfaction of such, give some brief Account thereof.

I. This Province or Colony lies between 39 and 41 Degrees of Latitude, being
about 12 Degrees more to the South than the City of London: And is bounded
South-East by the main Sea; East, by that vast-Navigable Stream called
Hudsons-River, which divides this from the Province of New York; West, by a
Line of Division, which separates this Province from West-Jersey; and N^^^h,
upon the main Land; and extends it self in length on the Sea Coast, and along
Hudsons River one hundred English Miles and upwards.

II. The convenience of Situation, temperature of Air, and fertility of Soy^^
is such, That there is no less than seven considerable Towns, viz. Shrewsbury,
Middletown, Burgin, Newark, Elizabeth Town, Woodbridge, and Piscataway: which
are well inhabited by a Sober and Industrious People, who have necessary
Provisions for themselves and Families; and for the comfortable entertainment
of Strangers and Travelers. And this Colony is experimentally found Generally
to agree well with English Constitutions.

III. For Navigation it has these Advantages, not only to be Situate along
the Navigable part of Hudsons River, but lies also Fifty Miles on the Main Sea.
And near the midst of this Province is that Noted Bay for Ships, within Sandy
Hook, very well known not to be inferior to any Harbor in America, where
Ships not only Harbor in greatest Storms, but there Ride safe with all Winds,
and Sail in and out thence, as well in Winter as Summer.

IV. For Fishery the Sea Banks there are very well stored with variety of Fish,
not only such as are profitable for Transportation, but such also as are fit
for Food there: As Whales, Cod-fish, Cole and Hake-fish, large Mackerill, and
also many other sorts of Flat and small Fish. The Bay also and Hudsons-River,
are plentifully stored with Sturgeon, Great Basse, and other Scale Fish; Eels,
and Shell Fish, as Oysters, etc. in great plenty, and easy to take.

V. This Country is also plentifully supplied with lovely Springs, Rivolets,
Inland Rivers, and Creeks which fall into the Sea; and Hudsons-River, in which
is also much plenty and variety of Fresh Fish, and Water Fowl.

VI. There is great plenty of Oak-Timber, fit for Shipping, and Masts for
Ships, and other variety of Wood, like the adjacent Colonies, as Chestnut,
Walnut, Popler, Cedar, Ash, Firr, etc. fit for building within the Country.

VII. The Land or Soil (as in other places) varies in goodness and Richness,
but generally fertile, and with much smaller Labor than in England. Produces
plentiful Crops of all sorts of English Grain. Besides, Indian Corn, which the
English Planters find not only to be of vast increase, but very wholesome and
good in in its use. It also produces good Flax and Hemp, which they now Spin
and Manufacture into Linen Cloth. There Is sufficient Meadow and Marsh to their
Up-lands. And the very Barrens there (as they are called) are not like some in
England, but produce Grass fit for Grazing Cattle in Summer Season.

VIII. The Country is well stored with wild Deer, Conies, and Wild Fowl of
several sorts, as Turkeys, Pigeons, Partridges, Plover, Quails, wild Swans,
Geese, Ducks, etc. in great plenty. It produces variety of good and delicious
Fruits, as Grapes, Plumbs, Mulberryes, and also Apricocks, Peaches, Pears,
Apples, Quinces, Water Mellons, etc. which are here in England, planted in
Orchards and Gardens: These, as also many other Fruits which come not to
perfection in England, are the more natural product of this Country.

IX. There is also already great store of Horses, Cowes, Hoggs and some Sheep,
which may be bought at reasonable Prises, with English Moneys, or English
Commodities, or man's Labor, where Moneys and Goods are wanting.

X. What sort of Mines or Minerals are in the Bowels of the Earth, After-time
must produce, the Inhabitants not having yet employed themselves in search
thereof. But there is already a Smelting-furnace and Forge set up in this
Colony, where is made good Iron, which is of great benefit to the Country.

XI. It is exceedingly well furnished with safe and convenient Harbors for
Shipping, which is of great advantage to that Country, and affords already for
Exportation great plenty of Horses; And also Beef, Pork, Pipestaves, Boards,
Bread, Flower, Wheat, Barley, Rye, Indian Corn, Butter and Cheese, which they
Export for Barbados, Jamaica, Nevis, and other adjacent Islands, as also to
Portugal, Spain, the Canaries, etc. their Whale Oil and Whale-Finns, Bever,
Mink, Raccoon and Martin Skins, (which this Country produces) they Transport
for England.

XII. The Situation and Soil of this Country may invite many who are inclined
to Transport themselves into those parts of America. For,

1. It being considerably Peopled and Situate on the Sea Coast, with
convenient Harbors, and so near adjacent to the Province of New York, and Long
Island, being also well Peopled Colonies, may be proper for Merchants
Tradsemen, and Navigators.

2. It Is likewise proper for such who are inclined to Fishery, the whole Coast
and very Harbors Mouths being fit for it, which has been no small Rise to the
New England people, and may be here carried on also with great advantage.

3. For its Soil it is proper for all Industrious Husbandmen, and such who by
hard Labor here on Rack Rents, are scarce able to maintain themselves; much
less to raise any Estate for their Children, may, with God's blessing on their
Labors, there live comfortably, and provide well for their Families.

4. For Carpenters, Bricklayers, Masons, Smiths, Mill-wrights and
Wheel-wrights, Bakers, Tanners, Tailors, Weavers, Shoomakers, Hatters, and all
or most Handicrafts, where their Labor is much more valued than in these
Parts, and Provisions much Cheaper.

5. And chiefly for such of the above mentioned, or any other w^o upon solid
Grounds, and weighty Considerations are inclined in their minds to go into
those Parts; without which, their going there, cannot be comfortable, or answer
their expectation.

XIII. The Indian Natives in this Country are but few, comparative to the
Neighboring Colonies; and those that are there, are so far from being
formidable or injurious to the Planters and Inhabitants, that they are really
serviceable and advantageous to English, not only in Hunting and taking the
Deer, and other wild Creatures; and catching of Fish and Fowl fit for food in
their Seasons, but, in the killing and destroying of Bears, Woolves, Foxes, and
other Vermin and Peltry, whose Skins and Furrs they bring the English, and
sell at less price than the value of time an Englishman must spend to take them.

XIV. As for the Constitutions of the Country, they were made Anno Dom. 166 and
in the Time of John Lord Barclay, and Sir George Carteret, the late Proprietors
thereof; in which, such provision was made for Liberty in matters of Religion
and Proper^^^^y in their Estates, that under the Terms thereof, that Colony has
been considerably Peopled, and that much from the adjacent Countries, where
they have not only for many years enjoyed their Estates, according to the
Concessions, but also an uninterrupted Exercise of their Particular persuasions
in matters of Religion. And we the present Proprietors do determine, so soon
as, any persons here in England, or elsewhere are willing to be Engaged with
us, we shall be ready and desirous to make such farther (...)litions and
Supplements to the said Constitutions, as shall be thought fit for the
encouragement of all Planters and Adventurers; And for the farther settling the
said Colony with a sober and Industrious People.

XV. Having with all possible brevity given an Account of the Country, we shall
say something as to the disposition of Lands there.

1. Our Purpose is, if the Lord Permit, with all convenient expedition, to
erect and build one Principal Town; which by reason of Situation, must in all
probability* be the most considerable for Merchandise, Trade and Fishery in
those Parts. It Is designed to be placed upon a Neck or Point of Rich-land
called Ambo-point, lying on Rariton-River, and pointing to Sandy-Hook-Bay, and
near adjacent to the place where Ships in that Great Harbor commonly Ride at
Anchor; A Scheme of which isalready drawn, and those who shall desire to be
satisfied therewith may treat for a share thereof.

2. As for Encouragement of Servants, etc. we allow the same Privileges as was
provided in the Concessions at first.

3. Such who are desirous to Purchase any Lands in this Province, Free from all
Charge, and to pay down their Purchase Moneys here, for any quantities of
Acres; Or that desire to take up Lands there, upon any small Quit Rents to be
Reserved, shall have grants to them and their Heirs, on moderate and reasonable
Terms.

4. Those who are desirous to Transport themselves into those Parts, before
they Purchase, if any thing there present to their satisfaction, we doubt not
but the Terms of Purchase will be so Moderate, Equal and Encouraging, that may
Engage them to setle in that Colony.

Our Purpose being withal possible Expedition to dispatch Persons thither, with
whom they may Treat; and who shall have our full Power in the Premises.

As for Passage to this Province, Ships are going hence the whole Year about,
as well in Winter as Summer, Sandy-hook-Bay being never frozen. The usual price
is 5 l. per Head, as well Master as Servant, who are above 10 years of Age; all
under 10 years, and not Children at the Breast pay 50 s. Suching Children pay
nothing. Carriage of Goods is usually 40 s. per Ton, and sometimes less, as we
can Agree. The cheapest and chiefest time of the year for Passage is from
Midsummer till the latter end of September, when ma^y Uirg^nia and Maryland
Ships are going out of England into those Parts; and such who take then their
Uoyage, Arrive usually in good time to Plant Corn sufficient for next Summer.

The Goods to be carried there, are first for peoples own use, all sorts of
Apparel and Household Stuff, and also Utensils for Husbandry and Building; and
2dly, Linner and Woollen Clothes; and Stiff^ fitting for Apparel, etc. which
are fit for Merchandise and Truch there in the Country, and that to good
Advantage for the Importer; Of which further Account will be given to the
Enquirer.

Lastly, Although this Country, by reason of its being already considerably
inhabited, may afford many conveniences to Strangers, of which unpeopled
Countries are destitute, as Lodging, Victualling, etc. yet all persons
inclining unto those Parts must know that in their Settlement there, they will
find their Exercises, they must have their Winter as well as Summer. They must
Labor before they Reap. And till their Plantations be cleared (in Summer time)
they must expect, (as in all those Countries) the Muscato Flies, Gnats, and
such like, may in Hot and Fair Weather give them some disturbance, where People
provide not against them, which as Land is cleared are l^ss troublesome.

And all such Persons who desire to be Concerned, may repair to Thomas Rudyards
or Benjamin Clark in George-Yard in Lombard Street, where they may Uiew the
Constitutions, the Scheme of the intended Town, the Mapp of the Country, and
Treat on Terms of Purchase.

FINIS.

