A brief exposition of our Lords Prayer.
Showing That through ignorance and the wickedness of their own hearts, those
that use it most, does abuse and profane it most, and pray against themselves
that instead of a blessing, they draw down a curse upon themselves.
After this manner therefore pray ye,

Mat. 6.9.
Our Father which art in Heaven.
TH^se words are the Preface to the Prayer, now Prayer is to put up our
requests to God according to his word with contrite hearts in the Name of Jesus
Christ with assurance of Faith to be heard, what it is to pray.
in what we call upon him for according to his will, 1 John 15.4. First, then
we must pray to God alone, and invocation and faith must go together. 2dly. We
must pray in knowledge according to Gods word, otherwise our prayers of
ignorance will but prove to be a mocking of God and dishonor to him, for the
voice and utterance, whether it be in reading a prayer or otherwise it is no
part of the prayer, but an outward means whereby prayer is uttered, and
expressed, therefore if faith and the spirit of grace in prayer be wanting, it
cannot be a prayer acceptable to God* for the ordinary prayers of men, for form
and fashion sake, do grievously offend and displease God, because without faith
it is impossible to please him, Heb. 11.6.

Our Father, this teaches to whom we must pray; namely to God only, and not
to Saints nor Angels, and we are to pray not only for our selves, but also for
our brethren, yea for our enemies as they are men, bless them that cause you,
and pray for them that persecute you, Mat. 5.44 Yet we may pray against their
sins and wicked counsels, and in our prayers we must bring love to men, and
faith toward God, or else how can a man call God father, if ye have not some
assurance by faith, that he is Gods child, and his Father in Christ.

2dly. If God to whom we pray be in Heaven then this teaches us to pray with
Heavenly and reverent affections, which must appear in the holiness of our
thoughts, and comeliness of our gestures, and all wandering thoughts and vain
bab^ing should be avoided, and our hearts in prayer shall be lifted up to God
in Heaven to pray for Heavenly things, and to believe that God is not only able
but also willing to grant our requests for such things as God has promised to
give.

The first petition, Hallowed be thy Mame.
The three first petitions concern God, the three last concerns us, the first
concerns Gods Glor^, the other two the means whereby Gods glory is man^fest
among men For whether we eat or drink or whatsoever we do, we should do ^ll in
the (...) of G^d, 1 Cor. 10 31. Here you see in this text, that the glory o^
God should be the end and aim of all our actions, and Gods name is glor^^ed
among men* when his Kingdom is erected and set up in men's hearts and ^i^^s, and
his will done by them, this is the first petition, and it teaches us to prefer
Gods glory before all other things in the world.

A thing is hallowed when it is set apart to an holy use, as the Temple was,
What is it to hallow a thing
and the Priests were sanctified and set apart to the service of God, so Gods
name is hallowed when it is used with reverence and Godly fear, and therefore
ought not to be used in form, or for fashion or custom in prayer, or any other
way erreverently.

The second petiton, Thy Will be done.
This petition depends on the former, for in this is laid down the means how
Gods name must be hallowed and glorified among men, and that is done when Gods
Kingdom, his ordinances, and worship, is erected and set up in the hearts and
lives and conversations of men, What it is to glorify God.
for we cannot glorify God, until he rule in our hearts, by his word and
spirit, and then by believing on him, and yiedling obedience unto him and to
his word, and praising him for bestowing these and such like merci^s upon us.
God is glorified, as in Psalm 50.23. Whosoever offers me praise, glorifieth me,
and to him that orders his converfation aright, will I show the salvation of
God:

By Kingdom in this petition is meant the administration of Christ's Ordinances,
and Laws in his Church, which is his Kingdom, as he is the Sovereign King and
Head of his Church and Kingdom, whereby he rules, orders and frames the hearts
of men, by his word and spirit, to the subjection and obedience of his word and
will, for as in a Kingdom, there must be a King, and there must be Subjects,
and there must be Laws, whereby the Subjects must be ruled and governed.

And so it is here in Christ's Kingdom the Church, Christ is the supreme King
and Head of his Church, and the Scriptures of the Old, but especially of the
New Testament, are the Laws of Christ's Kingdom, asd believers are the Subjects
of Christ's Kingdom, To whose Laws we ought to submit, whether to the right King
or to Traitors.
and as he is a Traitor and an Usurper that in any Kingdom presumes to make
Laws for the Government of the Kings Subjects, other then the King has made
and established, and compel the Kings Subjects by penalties to submit unto
them, so are they Traitors to Christ, and Usurpers of his authority, who dare
presume to make Laws for the Government of Christ's Subjects, believers (other
then Christ has made and recorded in his word, and to endeavor by fines,
imprisonment or banishment, to compel Christ's Subject^ believers to submit unto
them, for subjection to God only must be yielded, in giving subjection to Gods
word which is the Laws of his Kingdom, but no word of God requires us to yei^d
subjection to the Laws, Ceremonies and Traditions of Popes and Prelates, but to
the Laws of God only.

Of this Kingdom of Christ which is his Church of believers all men are not,
The difference to know Christ's Subjects from Antichrists.
but only those who are subject to Christ, and obedient to his Laws, and ruled
by his authority according to his word, for those that choose to l^ve at
liberty, after the Laws of Popes and Prelates inventions, and not after the
word of God, they are no true nor faithful Subjects of the Kingdom of God, for
Gods Kingdom which we pray for does come, when Gods Laws and Institutions does
take place, and not the Laws of men's devising, for he that observes and obeys
the Laws and Traditions of Popes or Prelates, more, or rather then the rules
and institutions of Christ, he breaks the fifth Commandment, of honoring God
as our Father in Christ, and all such pray against themselves, because they
endeavor not to practice* as they pray, but quite contrary.

The Scriber and Pharisees were condemned for laying the burden of their
Traditions upon men, as means of Gods worship, and binding conscience, Man. 23
4 the power of the Church is nothing, but a Ministry or Service whereby they
publish and pronounce according to Gods word, what Christ binds and loses,
and not what they can bind and loose by their pretended usurpation, for
Ecclesiastical Laws, and Traditions as they are called does not stand in the
authority and pleasure of men, no nor of councels, No Law is of force to bind
conscience, but as is is agreeable to the word of God.
but in the consent and agreement which they have with the Scripture, and all
such as have rule or Government, in Church, State or Family, they must not rule
according to their will and pleasure, but in the Lord and for the Lord,
according to the word of God, doing hom g^and ^eildi^g obedience to their Head
and King Christ Jesus, and every on^ inde^vour to rule as a King over his own
thoughts, will and ^ff^ctions, by Gods word and spirit, Rev. 1.6. and ^hos to
live unto God in men's several places is to have Gods Kingdom to com^; and to be
erect d and set up among men, when Christ alone is exalted accor^ing as we pray.

For this Kingdom is nor meant of Gods absolute Kingly power, whereby he
immediately of himself rules all things in Heaven and Earth, but as is said
before it is meant of the setting up of his Laws and O dinances in the Church,
the Kingdom of Grace here on Earth in the hearts of man, the outward means
thereof, as the preaching of the word, and the administration of the
Sacraments, The Devil and evil instruments, hinder the setting up of Christ's
Kingdom.
which is and may be hindered from exercising of them in their purity according
to Christ's institutions, by the Devil, the Pope, and other Prelates, who will
not suffer Christ's ministers, to minister his Ordinances according to the word
of God, except they mingle men's devised Ceremoni^^ and Traditions with the Laws
and institutions of Christ, and thus at this time, the coming or setting up of
Gods Kingdom in the hearts of men is hindered as much as they can, though they
Hi^orri^ically pray that his Kingdom may come and he advanced, and therefore it
behooves all that are of Gods Kingdom the true Church, to pray to God without
ceasing to remove all blocks and impediments out of the way, that his Kingdom
may come, and his Will may be dome.

The third Petition, Thy Will be done in Earth as it is in Heaven.
In the former petition we pray that God-Kingdom may come, that he may Reign
and Rule in our hearts by faith, and if he must Reign th^^ we must be his
Subjects, and obey his Laws and do his Will, and his Will must be done, by
denying our selves, and our own carnal wisdom, and all humain inventions in a
devised outward form^lity of will worship, for all is will worship that is not
according to the perfect and acceptable will of God, Will worship forbidden.
it is utterly condemned, Romans 12.1.2. Yea even all the Comm^ndements and
Doctrines of men; though they have never so great a show of holiness and
humility in their will worship it must perish, and will not avail the
worshippers os Col 2.22.23. Here in these two Texts all voluntary Religion is
condemned, therefore nothing may go under the name of Gods worship, but that
which he has prescribed in his word, Deu. 12.31.32. For the rule of divine
worship, is not the will of him that worshippeth, but the will of him that is
worshipped, therefore to worship after the precepts of m^n is detestable and
vain, for Gods a Spirit, and they that worship God, most worship him in Spirit
and in truth, for our father to whom we pray, seeks such to worship him. John
4 23.24.

For man's in ^n^^^n does not make Gods worship, but Gods will revealed in his
word, for ^^aal in Israel was some time worshipped as the true God, if we
respect the intention of men, The intention of men does no make the Worship of
God.
therefore men's intentions in worshipping by Ceremonies and Traditions, of
there own devising is no part of the worship of God, and therefore we pray, thy
will be done in Earth, by us men, as thy Saints and Angels do thy will in
Heaven, and they do Gods will, willingly cheerfully and readily, and his will
only, and not the wiles nor Ceremonies of men, neither should we, but the will
of God only, for so we pray that we may do the will of God in Earth, as the
Saints and Angels do it in Heaven, now to pray that we may have grace given us
to worship God, with that integrity and willingness that Saints and Angels do,
and after so praying to worship him after the precepts of men, it is mere
Hypocrisy, and praying against our selves, and a mocking of God, openly
declaring that we will not have Christ to Reign over us, nor take him for to be
King and Governor of his Church nor submit to his Laws, like Johanan and the
rest of Captains and people, that sent the Prophet Jeremias to inquire of the
Lord for them, but they resolved before that whatsoever the Lord said by the
Prophet, they would do after their own devices. Jer. 42. and like the Idolaters
who said to Jeremias, as for the word which thou have spoken to us in the Name
of the Lord, we will not hark in unto thee here.

Mr. Perkins on the negative part of the second Commandment he says that will
worship, is to worship God with a naked and bare good intention as in Col. ^^
22.23. and so Saul's burnt-offering was a will worship, for which Samuel told
him he had done foolishly in not keeping the Commandment of the Lord,
wherefore, the Kingdom should not continue with him, 1 Samuel 13.9. to 14. he
also faith that holy days and some sorts of apparel, gestures, Ceremonies,
altars, temporary prayers, Consort in Church, Music in divine Service, feeding
the ear, The Negativ^ part of the second commud^^^
and not edifying the mind, giving God a painted show of worship, without the
sincerity of the heart, to seek the pomp and glory of the world, to be more
forward to observe Traditions then the Law of God, to corrupt Gods worship
ordained for his Church, by detracting or adding any thing to Christ's
Institutions, as Ceremonies or Traditions all these and the like he says are
forbidden in the second Commandment, for they are but Images to worship God by
them, for we may not obtrude any thing in Gods worship, which Christ himself
has not ordained and appointed as a part of his worship, for after the
publishing of the Gospel, the Ceremonies of the Jews Church, though formerly
commanded, yet now became unlawful, and so shall continue to the end of the
world, There is no new institution of Ceremonies in the Gospel.
and there is no new institution since neither of any of them, nor any other
Traditions or Ceremonies in the New Testament of Jesus Christ, nor no command
of God, that Popes or Prelates should suspend Gospel Ministers for not using
them, therefore they ought not to be imposed upon any, for they are no part of
Gods instituted worship, nor serve any way as a help, but rather are a
hinderance to his worship, therefore the Church, that is believers should not
be burdened with them, for Bernard says, that only elect believers are the
Church, thus it is evident that the coming of Gods Kingdom, and the doing of
Gods will is hindered by the Comandments and prescriptions of men, for none but
Christ can perform the duty of an head unto his Church, to govern it, and to
prescribe Laws to bind Conscience.

We should strive with all our might to do the will of God, according as he
has revealed his will in his word and to this end, we should pray heartily
that we may know what that good, that acceptable and perfect will of God is.
Romans 12.2. For the soul to be without knowledge it is not good. Prove. 19.2. For
ignorance of Gods will or dissobedience to his will, is infallible takens of
them that have neither fellowship with Christ, nor with the members of Christ,
we pray that Gods will may be done but how can a man do the will of God, if he
be ignorant of what the will of God is, and yet ignorance will not excuse any
man, Christ told the Sadduce^ ye^ do ^rre not knowing the Scriptures, Math.
22.29. ignorance is no excuse.
And the Scribes and Pharisees who knew much of the Scriptures but like our
Doctors stood to much upon their traditions and ceremonies, Christ told them
that in vain do y^ worship ^^e ^^^ching for doctrines the Commandments of men,
that they might keep their own traditions, Mark, 7.7. But this is not the way
to do the will of God, according as we pray, and yet the Pharisees for all the
woes that Christ pronounced against them, were mor to be excused then our
Doctors, for they had not then the Gospel, To sin against knowledge is a
grievous sin.
nor our Lords Prayer written for their direction, as now our Doctors have, and
if so many woes were the just due of the Scribes and Pharisees that had not the
means of knowledge that now we have, what woes belongs to them that now under
greater Gospel light do the same that the Scribes and Pharisees did, that pray
for one thing, and do the quite contrary in presumption.

Make not then the word of God of none effect by your traditions and
Ceremonies, let Gods Kingdom be set up in the purity of his ordinances, and let
his will be done in earth as it is in Heaven, according as you pray, or else
you pray against your selves, for if God be God obey and worship him according
to his will revealed in his word, E^ther let Christ's Kingdom be set up or
Ant^christs.
as you pray, and that without adding, or dimi^ishing, but if Antichrist be God
obey him and so you may make a hotch potch of Religion, and mix the word of God
and his traditions and ceremonies together, but know this, that Christ will
have no partner, for he trod the Wine press of Gods wrath alone, and in all the
world there was none to help him, Is. 63.3. And so he will govern his Church
alone, by his own Laws, and institutions without the help of of Pope Cardinal
or Prelate to join their Laws with his, this was hinted at in the Law, Lev.
16.19. Ye shall keep my Statutes, thou shall not let thy Cattle gender with a
diverse kind, thou shall not sow thy field with mingled s^ed, neither shall a
garment mingled of linen and woollen come upon thee, and thou shall not plow
with one Ox and an Ass together, Deuteronomy. 22.10. God did teach them by these
expressions, that they should not be double hearted in Religion, to have one
heart for God and another heart for Idols, neither would he have us to have one
heart for God, and another for Antichrist, to give our hearts partly to Gods
Laws, and partly to Ceremonies and Traditions of men.

The fourth Petition, Give us this day our daily bread.
By Bread we understand all things, whereby temperall life is preserved, which
we are not to ask absolutely but conditionally with submission to Gods will,
and to be content with what God is pleased to give us be it little or much, as
may be for his glory the building up of his Kingdom in us, and enabling us to
do his will, and his will is partly done, by our depending on his providence
for the things of this life, and depending on his mercy for the pardon of our
sins, and by depending on his power for the resisting of temptations.

It is cal^ed our Bread because in Christ all things are theirs who believe in
Christ, 1 Cor. 3.22. All are yours and ye are Christ's and Christ is Gods, all
that believe are Christ's, and none can pray aright but believers, others do but
babble over the words, we must pray in faith and leave all to God without our
immoderate care, for Peter bids us cast all our care upon God who cares for us.
learn to pray in faith without babbling.
1 Pet. 5.7. And Paul admonishes us to be careful for nothing he means with
immoderate care, but in every thing by Prayer and supplication with
thank^giving, let your requests be made known unto God, Phil. 4.6. Not but that
men may and ought to have a moderate care and leave the success to God* that we
may attend upon the Lord without distract^on, 1 Cor. 7.35. Thus we should pray
for daily Bread, or Bread for the day, without distraction or immoderate care,
for the Israelites gathered Manna but for one day.

Also our Savior Christ teaches us that no man by care or t^king thought can
add one Cubit unto his stature, therefore says he take no thought saying, what
shall we eat or what shall we drink, or wherewithal shall we be clothed, for
after all these things do unbelievers seek, and your heavenly Father to whom we
pray for daily Bread knows that ye have need of all these things, but seek ye
first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness and all these things shall be
added unto you, they shall be cast in as an overplush without your taking
thought, as if he had said I have taught you to pray for Bread for the day,
take no thought for to morrow, to morrow shall take thought for the things of
it self, Math. 6.25. to 34.

Our Savior Christ here comandeth us, to s^ek first the Kingdom of God and his
righteousness, that is the righteousness of Christ imputed, which is to be
applied by faith, but we have no promise that we shall find Gods Kingdom or his
righteousness in the use and practice of Ceremonies Traditions consort of
Church music or Coristers, there is no promise of Gods righteousness in the
use of Ceremonies.
seeing there is no Ordinance of Christ's institution, but it tends to the
edification of the hearers, but Church music and Coristers does but please the
ear, and does not edify the multitude that hears it, therefore we think that
it is no Ordinance of Christ, nor the actors are no officers of Christ's
in^titution in the Church of Christ, nor none of these is any way or means to
obtain the Kingdom of God or his righteousness.

Therefore if we would seek the Kingdom of God in the right way, we must seek
it in the revealed will and word of God, and not in the devised forms and
Traditions of men, for he is a transgressor of the first Commandment, whose
fear of God is taught by the precepts, four Commandments broken by the use of
Ce^imonies in Gods worship.
C^rimonies and Traditions of men, Is. 29.13. And he break^ the sec^^d
C^mmandment, that changes or corrupts the worship of God in whol^ o^ i^
part, Deu^. 12.32. and Chap. 4. v. 2. And he breaks the third C^mmandment that
uses the name of God or any of his titles in any way or manner of worship not
insti^uted by Christ, or in any Ordinance unreverently, which is done when
Christ's institutions are mixed with men's precepts, and traditions in any part
of his worship, and he breaks the fifth Commandment that for fear of men does
observe the precepts and Commandments of men, and regards not to do the
Commandments of God, to worship him according to his own word and will, Acts
4.19. Whereas we are bound in Conscience to ob^y the institutions of Christ and
none other, touching the worship of God, though all men were offended with us
for so doing, for all Doct^ines pertai^ing to the foundation and good estate of
the Church, and the who^e worship of God, are set down and recorded in the
written word of God, 2 Timothy 3 16.17,

And the excellency of the Church the Spouse of Christ stands in her subjection
and obedience to Christ her Head and Husband, according to his will and word,
for as a Wife ought to submit to the lawful commands of her Husband rather then
to Strangers and Foreigners, so and much more ought the Church of believers,
for all others though they be in the Church, they are not of the Church, Christ
ought to be obeyed rather then Strangers.
1 John 2.19. therefore believers ought to submit to the righteous Laws and
institutions of Christ their Head and Husband only, and not to the traditions,
nor Ceremonies, nor precepts of Popes or Prelates, who are as Strangers and
forraigners in respect of Christ and the higher that any man is exalted either
in Church or Commonwealth, the more careful they should be in giving good ex
mple in yiedling obedience to Christ, lest by evil examp^e, they prove to be
like unsavory salt, to be esteemed of God, sit for nothing but to be cast upon
the Dunghill to be trodden down of Swine.

The fifth Petition, Forgive us our Debts or Tresp^sses, etc.
In the former petition we pray for temporal b^essings, and in this petition,
and the next we pray for spiritual blessings, and hence we are taught, that our
care for our Souls should be double to the care for our bodies, and the ^rder
here set down is that we first trust Gods providence for the things of ^his
life, for unless we can do that, we cannot rest on Gods mercy for the ^ardon of
our sins, for he does but deceive himself that thinks he does beieve in God for
the pardon of his sins, and the Salvation of his Soul, and yet distrusts Gods
providence, for food and raiment, and things necessary for ^he body, for is not
the life says Christ more then meat, and the body more then raiment, Mat. 6.25.

Forgive us our debts, as a debt binds a man to make satisfaction or else to go
to Prison, so our fins binds us to make satisfaction to Gods Justice, or else
to suffer eternal damnation, but this satisfaction we cannot make in our own
persons but by our surety Jesus Christ, who is called the Lord our
Righteousness, Jerem. 23 6. and Isa. 45.24. In the Lord have I righteousness
and strength. Therefore God so loved the World, that he sent his only begotten
Son, that whosoever believes in him, should not perish, but have everlasting
Life. Christ only is our Righteousness, and the alone satisfier of Gods Justice.
John 3.16. now to forgive sins, is to have sins covered or not imputed as
Psalm. 32. 1 2. and sins is covered and not imputed to elect believers, by the
free Grace of God in accepting of that satisfaction which Christ by his death
and sufferings gave to Gods justice in the behalf of believers, when God saw
the travel of his Soul and was satisfied, Isaiah 53.11. Thus Christ's
righteousness and satisfaction is imputed unto believers for their
righteousness and satisfaction, when they do believe and by a particular faith
apply the same unto themselves, for all the good works in the world as some
plead for, can never give satisfaction to Gods divine justice for the least
sin, but we must acknowledge the forgiveness of our sins, and salvation of our
Souls, to be of the free grace, mercy and favor of God without our desert.

As we forgive them that trespass against us, this is the second part of the
fifth Petition, and here we pray conditionally to be forgiven, as we forgive
others that trespass against us, and our Savior Christ assures us, that if we
forgive not others their trespasses according as we pray, neither will our
Heavenly father forgive us, Mat. 6.14.15.

By this it is lamentable to consider, how many thousands not only of ignorant
people, but even such as pretend to be teachers of others, who prays this
prayer, and yet their hearts swells with malice, envy back biting, and evil
speaking against others, epecially such as differ from them in judgment,
Envious persons pray for one thing and do the contrary.
of the right way of worshipping God, though perhaps they understand but little
of the grounds and reasons, why those who they hate and despise descent from
them, this is a raging and a reigning sin, for while such pray to be forgiven,
as they forgive others, when their consciences witness against them that they
hate and envy others, so that in their praying they pray against themselves,
that i^^ff^ad of ^^pacting a blessing in answer of their prayers they may
expect a curse, and never to be pardoned without unfeigned repentance, being
condemned by their own words and of their own Consciences, for he that hates
his Brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has Eternal Life
abiding in him, 1 John 3 15, and none are more forward in this wickedness, then
those who ignorantly do most pray or say this prayer, not understanding, or not
seriously considering the extent and meaning of it.

Suppose those men whom you so malligne were in an error, which was never yet
proved against some sort of them, ye that are strong or think your selves so
ought to bear the infirmities of the weak and not to please your selves, but to
please others for their edification, for Christ pleased not himself, Romans 15.1,
2, 3. And if any man be not so conformable in all things as some would have
them, ye which are spiritual and would be called so, if ye be spiritual ye
ought to restore such a one in the spirit of meekness, and bear one another
burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gala. 6.1, 2, 3. And not lay
burdens of fines, imprisonment or banishment upon them, for if you do, how can
you pray that you may be forgiven, but as you forgive and not expect to pull
down wrath and vengeance upon your selves, therefore if you believe Scripture
to be the word of God, which is no more then what the Devils believe and
tremble, and if your Consciences be not seared, cease from your unmerciful
persecution and hatred, for he shall have judgment without mercy that has
showed no mercy, James, 2.13. Therefore as ye expect that God for Christ's sake
should forgive you, so also do ye, for otherwise you will lead your selves
into temptation, whereas in the next Petition ye pray that you may not be led
into temptation, for thus God is mocked when they pray and practice contrary to
what they pray.

The sixth Petition, Lead us not into temptation,
In the former Petition we pray for pardon of sins, and because forgiveness of
sins and grievous temptations are in sepperable Companions in this Life,
therefore in this, Petition we pray that we may not be led into temptation,
that is let us not be enticed to sins, Many lead themselves into temptation.
the Apostle James says that God temps no man he moves no man ^o sin, but
every man is tempted when he is drawn away of his own lust and enticed James,
2.13.14. To be led into temptation then is to be overcome in temptations, or to
be drawn away of our own lust, and enticed, for many that pray this Prayer lead
themselves into temptation, for Christ shows us the means of deliverance, his
word and Ordinances in their purity according to his divine institution but
those that will not obey, but chose rather to follow the precepts, Ceremonies
and Traditions of men, these men lead themselves into temptation, and pray
against themselves, as to the matter and manner of his worship

For Christ as he is King and governor of his Church, he does exercise two
prerogatives royal, which he will not impart to any other, neither in whole no
in part, and that is first, to make Laws-for the government of his Church, for
there is but one Law giver says James, 4.12. And he is able to save such as
obey his laws, and to destroy all those that dare oppose or presume to b^ Check
mate with him, to add their Ceremonies or Traditions, to his Laws or
institutions for the government of his Church, Christ's second prerogative royal
is, to appoint and ordain what officers shall be in his Church now in Gospel
times, and as all Scripture is given by divine inspiration, 2 Jam. 3.16. So God
has set down by the Pen men of holy Scripture in Ephesians. 4.11, 12. that Church
officers were ascension gifts, for when he ascended up on high he gave gifts
unto men v^z. he gave some Apostles, and some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers, for the perfecting of the Saints, for the work
of the Ministry, and for the edifying of the body of Christ, the same Church
officers are also mentioned in the 1 Cor. 12.28. With this addition helps in
government. That is ruling Elders, which some call Lay Elders, and Deacons. But
neither A^ch Deacons, nor sub Deacons, but Deacons to minister to the poor as
in Act, 6.3. to v. 6. And these officers though instituted by the Apostles, we
may r^^^nally believe that they did it by direction from Christ, the forty days
after ^i^ resurection in which time he spoke to his Apostles of the things
pertaining to the Kingdom of God as in Acts. 1.2. And as they also were
authorized and inspired by the holy Ghost. 2 Timothy 3.16 And that none since
them, have been so authorized.

And now seeing these are all the Church officers that Christ and his Apostles
has instituted and appointed in the new Testament for the perfecting of the
Saints, for the work of the ministry, and for the edifying of the body of
Christ, and if Christ whose prerogative royal it is to appoint Church officers,
appointed these and none other, and saw them sufficient for those and; above
named, Ephesians. 4.12. Then all others call them by what names or titles soever you
will from the Pope to the Par^itor, they are superfluous and vain usurpers, and
none of Christ's Church officers, nor of his institution and appointment now
then to worship God in any way or manner then he has prrscribed in his word,
or by any other Church officers, then Christ you see has appointed and
ordained, and mix this Prayer with Ceremonies; and forms of their own
inventions, what is it but a mocking of God, being drawn away as Jame. says of
their own lusts and enticed for by ends of pleasure or profit, fear or favor,
and so a leading of themselves into temptation whil they think they pray
against temptation, they pray against themselves to draw down Gods vengeance
upon them, in stead of a blessing, because in this Prayer they in words in the
presence of God, they seem to pray for that which they do not intend or purpose
for to do namely, that Gods will may be done in Earth as it is in Heaven which
if it be then must he be worshipped according to his own institutions, and not
according to men's devisings, and by such Church officers as Christ has
instituted, and not men.

As Mr. Stilling fleet in his book of the Idolatry practiced in the Church of
Rome, says Page 49. that Gods honor in his worship is not to be measured by
the intentions of men, it being in the power of God, to determine in what way
he will be worshipped we are not to inquire what men's intentions are in their
worship, but whether God will allow of such a worship or no, for God^ divine
Law says he is the rule of worship, whatever the intention of the Person be,
^or our worship is not to be guided by our own fancies says he, but by the
will of God, Page 98. for we affirm says he that we ought not only perform the
offices of Religion out of obedience to his divine commands, but with due
veneration of his majesty, with subjection of our souls to his supreme
authority about these things. Page 102 did the Heathen says he use solemn
Ceremonies of making any capable of divine worship, so do the Roman Church,
etc. Page 139.

It is agreed he says on both sides, that the Scriptures do contain in them
the unquestionable will of that God whom we are bound to serve, and it being
the end of devotion, as it ought to be of our lives to serve him, what is there
the mind of any who sincerely desire to serve God, can be more inquisitive
after, or desire to be satis^ied in then the rules which God himself has given
for his own service, because it is so easy a matter for men to mistake, in the
ways they choose to serve him in, page 188. 189. for the Gospel does teach to
love all men, and God above all, to believe in Christ, and to obey his commands
and page 193. and speaking of the Scriptures, he says, that they who
understand Greek and Latin there is ten times more fear of them then of the
common people, he meaned by falsely applying it to serve their own ends and
interests, f^t all men see that none are so capable of doing mischief there by
as men of greatest wit and learning, and that have the fairest appearance of
piety to the world, page 194. 195. thus we desire, and it is the duty of every
one to worship and serve God, according to Gods holy rules and institutions in
the New Testament, for to worship God by a tedious Ceremonious way of external
devotion, it is he says as dull and as cold as the earth it self, page 284.

Now as the second Commandment is transgressed in making an Image, either of
the true God, or of a feigned God to worship God by it. Deuteronomy. 4.15.16. etc. So
also it is transgressed, by changing the worship of God in whole or in part,
Deuteronomy. 12.32. and by worshipping God in a formal way with lip service, and in
praying without knowledge of the meaning of the prayer, or to worship God in
any other manner then he has prescribed in his word, especially the New
Testament, or with any other Church Officers then Christ has appointed, for
all others are but Images of true worship, or true prayer, or true Officers,
they all come within the compass of worshipping God by an Image or
representation of Gods true Gospel worship and service, and he breaks the fifth
Commandment that obeys men, rather then God, by yiedling to men's precepts more
then Gods, Acts 4.19. He also breaks the first Commandment says Mr. Perkins,
that sca^s God by the precepts and traditions of men. Isa. 29.13.

But deliver us from evil.
That is, that God would free us from the power of the flesh the world, and the
Devil, for it is a hard and difficult thing to be delivered from these snares,
therefore we have great need to pray against them, and that we may be delivered
from them, for the Apostle says, that the whole world lies in wickedness, 1
John. 5.19. But when a man is delivered from evil he is not led into
temptation, the cause being taken away, the effect cease.

For thine is the Kingdom the Power and the Glory for ever.
These words are a reason of all the former six petitions, that seeing all
power and glory is Gods, therefore we are encouraged to ask all things needful
and lawful to be asked, of God, who has all power to give us what we ask
according to his will, 1 John 5.14. And it is for his glory that God do give
what he has promised to those that ask in Faith, and by Faith depend upon him
for the same, for all earthly Kings, and men on earth whatsoever good thing
they have, it is the gift of God, for all things are his in Heaven, and in
Earth, and every man must give an account of his stewardship for what God
intrusteth him with for all is Gods, as in 1 Chronicles. 29.11. Thine O Lord is the
greatness, and the power, and the glory, and the victory, and the Majesty, and
all that is in Heaven and Earth is thine, thine is the Kingdom O Lord, and thou
art exalted as head over all, and thou raignest over all, therefore neither
Pope nor Prelate should reign by their precepts as Lord over Gods heritage, 1
Pet. 5.3. For all glory is due to God, and all invocation and prayer ought to
be made to God, according to his will and word.

And the stability of all Kingdoms stands in yiedling obedience to the Gospel
of Christ according to Christ's rules and institutions, and not according to
men's traditions and Ceremonies, Solomon says, Take away the wicked from before
the King, and his throne shall be established in Righteousness, Prove. 25.5. But
a man shall not be established by wickedness, but the root of the Righteous
shall not be moved. Prove. 12.3. For Gods Kingdom is most sure and stable, and
when the Gospel is obeyed in its purity in any Kingdom, that Kingdom is as it
were founded in the Kingdom of God, and what Paul sets down of the use of meat
and drink, that they are sanctified by the word of God and prayer, must be
extended to all the Ordinances of God, the word of God must be our rule and
square, both as to the worship of God, and as to our Christian Conversation
among men, and not the precepts nor traditions of Popes nor Prelates.

Amen. This word Amen, is not only a bare assent to what the Minister or any
other do pray for, but it is also a testification of our faith, whereby we
believe, that which we have prayed for shall be granted, as our Savior said,
if two of you shall agree on Earth touching any thing that ye shall ask, it
shall be done for them of my Father which is in Heaven, Mat. 18.19.

Well seeing it is thus as you have heard, then who can imagine, what woe is
due unto them, who persecute, hate, and despise, such as would willingly
worship God according to his holy institutions in his word, and not according
to men's devises in Ceremonies and Traditions, and the like, and upon this
account, they that descent in judgment and practice from others, for which
they think we trespass against them, the which we are bound to do rather then
to trespass against God, and the light of our Consciences whatsoever we suffer,
but those who persecute and hate us for this, and yet dare pray this prayer, so
often as they pray to be forgiven, but as they forgive them that trespass
against them, so often they pray against themselves, that the same mischief may
fall upon themselves, which they desire may befall others, for God knows the
dissimulation of their hearts, and their own Consciences knows that they do not
forgive, therefore, if they will not forgive those that trespass against them,
it were better for them to give over praying, least thereby they increase their
own damnation, therefore if thou bring thy gifs to the alter and there
remembrest that thy brother has ought against thee, leave there thy gift
before the altar, and be first reconciled to thy brother, and then come and
offer thy gift says our Savior Christ, to whom be glory and praise for ever
and ever Amen. Mat. 5.23 24.


