THE LIVING WORDS OF A DYING CHILD. BEING A TRUE RELATION Of some part of the
Words that came forth, and were spoken by JOSEPH BRIGGINS On his Deathbed.

Being on the 26th day of the 4th Month called June, 1675. Aged 11 Years, Five
Months, and 15. Days.

Out of the Mouth of Babes and Sucklings have thou ordained strength, Psalm.
8.2. Printed in the Year, 1677.

TO THE READERS WHETHER Children or others.
THis Youth was a very dutiful Child to his Parents, and patient, and ready to
receive Instructions; never was known to resist his Father or Mothers Advice
and Counsel, but always ready to obey their Commands, and minded good things,
being very bashful, and ready to put himself forward to do any business to
please his Parents or Relations; never sullen nor dogged; and what he did it
was with all his might faithfully in Obedience to a meek and quiet spirit, to
the last minute. In the Time of his Health for Three Years last past, he used
to go to hear at the Meetings of the People called Quakers, and no where else,
and was by rude Boys scoffed at, and called a Quaker. He was a very manly,
meek and sober Child, not given to quarrel with any. What we have here related,
that he spoke of the great Love of the Lord, both to his own soul, and to his
people, is far short of what he declared. His Departure hence was on the Third
Day of the Fifth Month, 1675. at 7 in the morning, the 13th Day of his
sickness; in great stilness and patience he en^ered into Everlasting Life.

And We who were Eye and Ear Witnesses of this following Relation, do testify,
that his Words were so in Verse, and in such a great Power they were expressed,
indeed greater then We can declare.

We whose Names are subscribed are Witnesses for the Lord in this matter,
besides several others then present.

William Briggins, his Father and Mother living in Bartholomew-Close, in
London. Hester Briggins. his Father and Mother living in Bartholomew-Close, in
London. John Goodson, Surgeon, at the Surgeons Arms in Bartholomew Close,
next neighbor. Margaret Adams the Nurse. Elizabeth Harford the Maid. Mary and
Elizabeth Meux Lodgers in the House.


The Wonderful Sayings spoken by Joseph Briggins, worthy to be minded.
ON the 26th day of the fourth month, about the seventh hour in the Evening
being (as we thought) very near death, after he had layen silent for about an
hour, he began to appear full of exceeding great joy and pleasantness, and his
mouth was opened and he said, I shall praise the Lord; for he is only to be
praised: So he went on in Heavenly words in Prayer, to the admiration of the
Nurse and Maid that heard him; of all which they only could rememeber that he
said in admiration.

Oh! I have never heard of any other God but thee, O my Holy One.

And the Nurse offering him some Cordial to drink.

Nay, said he, I shall not eat nor drink-until I have seen my Heaven^y Father's
Face in Glory-

And more and more he was changed, and filled with exceeding great Joy and
Pleasantness, and said;

I have heard of thee, but now I see thee in Glory.

And many Heavenly sayings and expressions came from him; the Maid and Nurse
did think he had been near going away: He hearing them speak so, He earnestly
said, Pray call up my Father and Mother, for I have something to say to them
concerning what I have seen of my Heavenly Father's Glory.

So he went on uttering many Heavenly Sayings and Exhortations in sound
Judgment; his Mother was called up, and seeing him so greatly changed in so
short a time, she wept, and ran down stairs and called his Father, and several
People that were there at that time, and when he heard them come up, he
joyfully called out,

Father, Father, Oh Father; and held out his Hand, and shook his Father by the
Hand, and said.

Oh! pure and glorious is my Savior which has appeared to me, and has taken
me into his Kingdom: Oh! mine eye has seen his Glory.

His Words were expressed in so great Wisdom and Power, that we were all amazed
at them, being also in Meeter for the space of about one hour and a half
praising God, and admiring him, and his glorious Power, and Holy Order of
glorified Saints and Holy Angels, and of the Glorious Day of God revealed, said
he. Some of which many Words he gave forth to us are as follows, viz.

O most Glorious God, great and wonderful things are brought to pass by thy own
pure holy Power, by which thou have revealed thy Son unto us thy Ministers, O
my King, O let all People fear and stand in awe of thy Power, by which thou
have gathered many out of their sinful ways, into pure Obedience to thee: Oh,
thou have given us a living Knowledge of thee, O pu e, glorious, holy God, let
thy Life reach unto all my dear Friends, and keep them that know thee firm and
steadfast upon thy Holy Foundation Christ Jesus my King, whose appearance is
very glorious at this day, and of his Government no end is to be; but Thousands
of Thousands, Millions of Thousands shall come to see, and be made with me,
partakers of his glorious bright shining-day.

Of which many Words more he spoke which cannot be remembered.

Again he said, O Glory, Glory, Everlasting Praises be given to thee by me, and
all we that know thee; O I have much to say for thee.

He was asked if he knew what he had said? his answer was, I have preached the
Gospel to you.

His Father desired all present to hearken and mind what he said, and spoke
some of his words to them, but he was grieved, and said:

O be silent all flesh and stand by, for we that have seen thy pure mighty
Glory can preach this Gospel which is thy power, and the day comes on apace,
that all that undertakes to speak of thee, and obeyes not thy Power, by this
Power they shall be brought to Silence: There are many Ways and Baptisms in the
world; but Oh thou Pure, Holy, Holy one, we thy Ministers have known thy
Spiritual Baptism into Christ Jesus my Lord, by which the living water have we
known and felt. Oh it is indeed exceeding pure, by which we have been washed
from all our Sins. Oh my King thou wast slain, and by the virtue of thy pure
Blood, we have this gain. Oh that all may wait continually upon thee, that they
may be kept from all the deceiveable ways of this world. Oh mind and serve the
Lord in your day; for his Holy Truth revealed in you is the Way in which you
must Wait and Obey. Oh! Glorious are the Beams of the Sun that has shined into
my Heart, in which I have seen the Glory of his Day, although in the grave
shortly this Body is to lie. But Oh Glory, Glory, and Halelujahs my Soul does
sing to thee O my King, for the Redemption of my Soul, that shall never dye;
but in Praises pure for ever shall endure; a living taste thou have given to me
most sure. O my Father and Mother; all my Friends which to me are dear; yet a
Glory I have seen most bright; in which I shortly must appear; He is my King
and Leader which is my Savior most dear; O exceeding glorious is this Holy
Place where Saints and Angels in bright shining Glory behold his pure Face: Oh
All obey his pure Truth in your day.

That you may feel the Virtue of his Grace;
For mortal man is but to run his Race.
And woe to them that shall not Obey his Grace; for such do not feel his
Virtue, nor ever shall see his Face.

Some were whispering together toward the further end of the room, at which he
seemed to be grieved, and said these Words, pointing with his Finger.

Here is a Spirit speaks in this room that is not of God.

He was so much spent, he could hardly speak, and bid the People that stood by
stand further that he might have a little Air; he was offered something to
drink, he said, he would not receive it; a little after he was ^ressed again to
receive it,

No, said he, If I should I should tell a ^ye, and gave a Sign to put it away,
and said,

Oh the Sons of God have better refreshment then a Cup of cold water. And so
lay silent a while, but again spoke as follows: The Lord has taken me into
his Kingdom, He has discovered the fresh Springs of his Love to my Soul. O all
that know the Lord, be obedient to his Power, and he will discover himself more
to you, and you shall know more; Thousands, Thousands, Millons will the Lord
call. O that my Kindred after the Flesh might come to know the Lord.

Again after some time of Silence he said,

O that my Fellows, my Companions might know the Lord; they shall know the
Lord, they shall follow me: Here be some stand by me that do not know the Lord.

Which he repeated again, and again, and then said,

What wait you to hear? What do you all stand here to hear?

His Father answered him, they stand to hear what the Lord will speak by thee.

He said, No, all that are here do not wait to hear the Lord speak; you do not
all know the Lord, you think you know him; but you know him but in the Notion,
but when you come to dye, you shall know, that you did not know the Lord.

When some spoke of his being light headed, and as though he should speak he
knew not what, he seemed grieved, and earnestly said,

I had rather be torn alive by Dogs, then that an Impure or Unholy Word should
come out of my Mouth.

Some that knew him very well wondered to hear him speak as he did, and said,
they had never heard such words come from him before; he said,

The Lord has fully made that known to my Soul, which I had some feeling of
before.

On the next day about the Seventh Hour in the morning; he was very earnest in
Prayer softly to himself; but some words were heard, viz.

O let all that know not thy pure Truth come and receive it says my Soul.

And sung of the Olive Tree, and the Ftuit thereof, which he had fed on, and of
his Refreshment he had thereby.

He was asked what he meant by the Olive Tree? He said, The Tree of Life.

And many more Heavenly Sayings he uttered before he departed to his
Everlasting Rest.

THE END.

