A BRIEF RELATION OF THE PERSECUTION and SUFFERINGS OF THE Reformed Churches OF
FRANCE. Translated out of FRENCH, and Published for more general Information.

Non minus Principi turpia sunt multa supplicia, quam Medico multa funera.
Remissius imperanti melius paretur
Pestifera vis est, valere ad nocendum.
Seneca. LONDON, Printed by A. Maxwell, 1668.

A Brief Relation of the (...) Reformed Churches of (...)
IF any man would exactly relate (...) ^^^secutions, raised by the Popish
Clergy against (...) Protestants in France, either in general or particular
(...) should be engaged to write a volume, they (...) ^^^erous: therefore (to
avoid prolixity) let it first (...) only the Fountains which our Adversaries
(...), and whence they derive all the Mischiefs that they do us. And they who
read this discourse, must look upon the Contents thereof, not as an enumeration
of all Particulars but as general Heads out of which innumerable Desolati^^
have flowed into all Provinces, Cities and Families, and with extremest sorrow
and affliction have filled all places where the Reformed Religion was
established.

1. The first and most considerable Measure used by the Prelates to hasten our
ruin, is that of Commissions: for under pretext of Executing the Edict of
Nantes and the Decrees made in consequence thereof, and providing against the
Breaches of the same, they have engaged the King to send Commissioners into all
Provinces. This pretext I confess is speciously colored, (...) certain, that
under this fair show they have hid (...) violent Injustice; for clearing
whereof, we must remember, that Henry the Fourth of happy memory, having found
it convenient (for the quiet of his Subjects) to make this Edict as a
particular and Irrevocable Law, did send Commissioners into all the Provinces
to execute the same; and after those Commissioners had established all things
in due form, they returned their executions into the hands of the King to serve
as a Rule in all future Debates which could arise on that Subject. I grant, if
since this Establishment (which ought to be looked upon as Fundamental) we have
Usurped Places for the exercise of our Religion, or by our own Authority have
taken any thing not appertaining to us, it is just that they call us to an
account, and reduce us to our first Condition. But this is not the use that the
Clergy make of those new Commissioners: for they well know that in stead of
Usurping any thing since the first Execution of the Edict, we have (on the
contrary) sustained innumerable losses; and that if the Plea were about
Reparation of breaches of the Edict, they should be obliged to recompense us in
a thousand particulars, whereof we have too just cause to complain. They have
now altogether perverted the Business; for, concealing the first Execution of
the Edict, they have compelled all the Reformed Churches within the Kingdom, to
appear before those Commissioners, and again produce their Titles to verify
their Right for the public exercise of their Religion and to be Judged a
second time, as if the Edict had never been put in Execution. But who does not
see that this is to violate the public faith, and under pretense of Executing,
to destroy the Edict for the Edict ought not to be separated from it is first
Execution, without which (it being made according to the true intent of the
King, and after exact cognizance of all particulars, whereupon Sentences
proceeded) the Edict it self is of no force. This then is most evident
Oppression, that after so many years, during which we have been in Lawful
possession, they will Judge again that which has once already been Judged; in
every thing quarrelling Matters of Fact, the knowledge whereof, by length of
time, and diverse Revolations of the Kingdom, is much obscured. and (which is
yet more strange) albeit particular Churches produce Acts made in their
favors, by the first Commissioners (Executors of the Edict) yet those new
Commissioners, without any regard thereof, reject the same as utterly Invalid;
certainly if this manner of procedure take place, we can have nothing secure
within the Kingdom. For from day to day they may proceed to new Executions, and
from these to others, until, in end, all our Churches by this Mean shall be
destroyed; so much the rather, because there is no likelihood that they can
perpetually preserve their Titles (of the years 1596 and 1597) contained in
Papers which by the Apostasy, Corruption, or Unfaithfulness of those who had
them in keeping (and a hundred other ways) may be lost; and which the first
Execution made to be neglected as Titles that were never to be any more
questioned,

2. This Oppression is the greater, That those Commissioners are commanded to
execute the Acts of Council, made in consequence of the Edict: for (as we shall
afterward show) these Acts are no other then so many Violations of the Edict;
which now by this course is nothing else but an empty Name, without effect or
reallity.

3. The Maxim lately established viz. That the Clergy of France shall be
acknowledged as our formal opposite party in matters of Religion; and in that
quality be admitted before the Commissioners, and in the Council, to pursue all
kinds of Actions against us, cannot be otherwise looked upon, then high
Injustice. This form of procedure has been hitherto unheard of; for never any
appeared there in our affairs, except the Kings Attorney General. And indeed,
the Edist being intended not as an agreement or decision between the Clergy and
us, but as a Declaration of his Majesty's Sovereign and Royal Pleasure, they
have no right to interpose in the Execution thereof, nor to make that their
proper work; yea, this Interposition has not been invented but upon design,
upon the meanest occasion to set us in opposition to a most powerful and active
Party, before which we can never appear without being incontinently swallowed
up.

4. This oppression is yet the more evident, That the Council Anno 1662, past
an Act, by which it is ordained, That the Protestants shall not be admitted
before the Commissioners to prove the Rights for the exercise of their Religion
by Inquests or Witnesses, even although the Witnesses be Roman Catholics. Now,
beside that this manner of probation was never rejected, what greater severity
then to deprive us of the only Mean, which in most of places is left us to
justify our Titles? for during the late Wars, many Churches being pillaged or
burnt, they cannot otherwise evidence their possession, then by the testimony
of ancient men yet alive, who can depose the Condition wherein Affairs stood in
the years 1596, and 1597.

5. Whatever Injustice is in the Commission it self, there is no less in the
Commissioners; Each Province has two, the one a Papist, the other a
Protestant. As for the Popish Commissioners, we find by experience that from
them we can expect no Justice; For they look upon themselves as called to
destroy us, and in effect proceed according to the Instructions of Menier the
Jesuit, who has printed a Book, wherein, fast'ning impertinent expositions
upon the plainest terms of the Edict, and changing his Majesty's Authentic and
Royal words, into Jesuitical Equivocations, he has perverted all things
according to his own inclination; This is a notable Cheat: For when we plead
the Edict, they tell us (indeed) that it shall be observed; but, that to the
King, and not to us, belongs the interpretation; and when we come to an
interpretation, in lieu of his Majesty's, they give us that of a cruel,
envenomed, deceitful Jesuit. He it is, who mean while inspireth the Governors
of the Provinces (who are the Popish Commissioners) with all their prejudice
they have at us, and Counsels they take about our affairs: So that our
strongest Reasons are scorned, and our best Titles rejected as trifles, whilst
their own trifles and false Allegations are admitted as the best of Arguments.
And, which is yet more strange, they pass Sentences with so much inequality,
and little Justice, that they condemn some Churches, which produce the like and
much better Titles then those alleged by some other Churches, whose
Privileges they have ratified. A sufficient demonstration, that they act by
Humor, and not by Reason; and that having order to preserve some Churches, and
not to destroy all at one Blow, it is left to the Governors Arbitrament, what
Churches to spare, which commonly are the most inconvenient, and least
considerable, and that they only wait for further Order to sacrifice the rest,
and perfect their work already so far advanced. And for the Protestant
Commissioners, we can expect very little Justice and Protection from them;
first, because the greatest part of them are chosen by direction and
recommendation of the Bishops, which alone is enough to make them suspected:
For, although they profess our Religion, yet that is not always a sure
evidence of Faithfulness and Honesty. For this, I shall only instance Monsieur
Sigoniac of high Guyenne, who was chosen by the Bishop of Montauban, and by his
credit maintained in his Commission, contrary to the dissent of the Protestants
made before the King. This man after he had done whatever the Clergy desired,
and basely betrayed the Churches, by pitiful parting or sharing By this Sharing
of Churches it seems the Protestants are forced to use their public worship by
turnswith the Papists in the same place; whereunto (for diverse reasons) some
more tender and zealous Protestants will not resort; and so are deprived of all
public worship.
the places of Public Worship between the Papists and Protestant's (whereunto
the Bishop himself gave consent) in end, changing his Religion, became Roman
Catholic; and by his change declared, That this Commission had been procured
in compensation of his former Promise and Obligation to that effect.

6. Again, the Protestant Commissioners are prepossessed of opinion, That it is
the Kings will, that without respect to the first execution of the Edict, they
should examine de novo the Titles of our Churches, and execute the Acts of
Council, without examination whether they be confirmed by, or conform to the
Edict: So that having once accepted the Commission, they find themselves
engaged by necessity of this supposition to do us abundance of mischief. And it
is to be observed, that such has been the credit and cunning carriage of the
Clergy, that by means of this Concurrence of the Protestant Commissioners, they
have made these things pass as consented to, and approved by us, which
otherwise would have been looked upon as only granted by the King unto their
own importunity, and so (perhaps) would, have left us some hope, of redress. In
fine, suppose those Commissioners to be resolute and favorably inclined, yet
the Governors of the Provinces being Masters of the Instructions, by which
they proceed and conclude, they can do no good for us, but be swallowed up
themselves, by their Popish Colleagues, who have all the Authority and Power in
their own hands. And at their utmost, all that they are able to effect, is a
Sharing of Churches, which are always finally Determined in Council, by advice
of the Popish Commissioners: For there they observe this general Rule, that in
all matters of difference and debate, the advantages, without regard to right
of reason, must be given to the Catholics; So that if the business comes once
to Sharing it is even as good as lost. And to evidence that Injustice is
arrived at a great hight, These Sharings of Churches agreed upon amongst the
Commissioners, are ordinarily concluded in Council, upon the report of the
Governors, who having made and being engaged to maintain their own reports,
never fail to put a good face upon them, which they may the more easily do,
because their Protestant Colleagues are never either Called or Heard. The
consequences of these Commissions have been generally very fatal to the
Reformed Churches within the kingdom: For it may be truly affirmed, that
partly by the Acts made with common consent of the Comissioners for executing
the Decrees of Counsel, partly by these other Acts which they have made worse
then the Decrees themselves, and partly by these Sharings of Churches thus
agreed upon among the Commissioners, and approved in Council, according to the
mind of the Clergy, we have lost well nigh three parts of four of all our
Churches. The Province of Provence which had Fifteen or Sixteen Churches, is
now reduced to Four. The County of Gex, which had Twenty three has now but
Two. In all Bretagne remains but Two. The losses of high and low Languedoc
Cevenes Vivaretz, high Guynne and Daulphine
have reduced them at least to one half of what they formerly possessed. And
(to speak nothing of what Zantogne Angoumois, and the County of Aulnix are upon
the point of losing, the Commissioners having agreed to Share nigh Sixty
Churches) the Province of Poictou, which alone had Sixty one indisputable
Churches, by an Act of Aug. 6. 1665. is reduced to Thirteen. Thus these
Provinces see themselves, all at once, fallen into extreme Desolation; Their
Churches demolished, their Flocks scattered, and all that innumerable Multitude
of Persons whereof their Congregations were composed, now necessitated either
to live without any public Exercise of Religion; or, through infinite Dangers
and Inconveniences, to wander about, and seek it Fifty or Sixty miles distant
from their Habitations.

7. Moreover, All men know, that the Clergy finding themselves of late in
capacity to obtain whatever they desired of the Council, provided it be against
us, have caused such a multitude of Acts to be published, that we have been
utterly overwhelmed therewith; a Second immediately following the First, and a
Third giving us no leisure to consider the Second; and hard to say, which of
them all is the most Afflicting.

One Act of Council May 6. 1659, and March 17. 1661.
has robbed us the Liberty of Praising God, by forbidding the Singing of
Psalms, even privately in our Houses; not considering, That it is an Eminent
part of Christian Worship, very Edifying, and full of Piety.

Another Act Aug. 7. and Nov. 3. 1662.
has deprived us of the Comfort of paying our Last Duty to our Dead, with any
convenience; compelling us to bury Clandestinely, and in the Night; forgetting,
That the very Heathens had respect to the Tombs of their Enemies; and that
Hatred should not reach beyond Death.

Another October. 5. 1663.
has divested Protestant Magistrates, whatever be their Charge or Quality, of
the Privilege of presiding in their Courts.

Another Feb. 26. 1663.
has taken away all Means of Instructing and Educating our Children, leaving
us at most (and that only in some places) the smaller Schools, where is only
taught to Read, Write, and Count: As if our knowledge of God, rendered us
unworthy to study Human Sciences.

Another Jan. 29. 1663.
has restrained the Liberty of Printing any Books in favor of our Religion,
by imposing upon us a necessity of obtaining Licenses from the King's Council:
Which any may well know they will never grant.

Another Declar. October. 24 1663, and Act of Council, Ian. 30. 1665.
ordains Parents to give Pensions to their Children who change their
Religion, even although the said Children will not dwell with them: As if
Paternal Authority were Nulled by Childrens Apostasy: Not remembering, That the
Christian Religion does not absolve Slaves from their Subjection to their
Heathen Masters; How much less can the Romish Religion discharge Children of
their Obedience which they owe to their Parents of another Religion?

Another October. 5. 1663.
prohibits the Exercise of Charity toward our Brethren, who have not
Sufficiency of their own to support them under their Burdens: Which is directly
to Forbid what God has Commanded.

Another discharges Payment of Debts by those of the Commonalty who shall turn
Papists: The like whereof was never heard; the very Heathen themselves never
pretending, That those Christians who Apostatize to them, should be exempted
from payment of their Debts.

Another Feb. 22, 1664.
prohibits Ministers to Preach without the place of their Residence: Thereby
depriving us of the benefit of Annexations; that is, the privilege of one
Minister's supplying Two Churches, which singly are not able to afford a
competent Maintenance.

Another Sept. 13 1660.
depriveth us of the Liberty of our Colloloques.
Presbyterial Meetings, in the intervals of Synods: Whereby the exercise of
Discipline is restrained, and the Mean of timely repressing or composing these
Differences which disturb our Churches, is taken away.

Another October. 5 1663.
prohibiteth the Censuring of Protestant Parents, by the Consistory, i. e.
Parochial Eldership, or otherwise, for sending their Children to be Educated
by Jesuits, or Popish Tutors: Whereby they compel Elderships and Ministers, by
their silence, to approve a Scandalous Practice, which Conscience and Office
obliges them to condemn.

Another Sept. 18, 1664 and May 12, 1665.
gives liberty to Priests and Friars to enter our Houses, and come unto our
Bed-sides when sick, or dying, to solicit us to change our Religion. This is
the utmost of all Afflictions, That we are not permitted to dye in peace; and
that we should be exposed to the Cruelty of such Men, who when they cannot
triumph over Consciences, forget nothing to satisfy their own Revenge: And to
that effect, after our death, carry away our Children; alleging falsely, That
at our death we gave some sign or other of Willingness to embrace the Romish
Religion.

Another June 30 1663.
makes it criminal in Ministers to style themselves Pastors, or Ministers of
the Word of God. Nay, though nothing has been more free in France, then the
form of Garments, they have gone so low, as to regulate the Apparel of
Ministers, forbidding them to wear a long Garment, that they might have no
Character to distinguish them from the common people.

But we might reckon to a Century, and engage our selves in a prodigious
length, should we be exact in this sad Subject. One word only of the
Declaration Declarat. 1663, Ratified in Parl. Ian. 7. 1663
of pretended Relapses. By this it is ordained, That those among us who have
once embraced the Popish Religion, shall never again return unto us, under pain
of perpetual Banishment from the Kingdom. Now this is a sort of Inquisition
never heard of in France, by which they put men's Consciences upon the wrack,
constraining the Weak who have been overcome by strong Tentations, to remain in
a Communion against the light of their Consciences, and to stifle their
remorse, having no liberty to show any evidence of Repentance. A thing plainly
contrary to the Edict. Yea, in the Execution of this Declaration, they have
proceeded so far, that they have given it a Retroactive Power (as they call it)
by putting it in Execution against persons who returned to us a long time
before the Declaration was in being; whom they have Imprisoned, compelled to do
Penance By going barefooted and bareheaded through the streets with a burning
torch, to the place of Justice, or person offended, and there to ask
Forgiveness.
, and then banished the Kingdom. And, that they may not act this Cruelty
without a pretext, they alledg, That these persons by forsaking the Catholic
Religion, have so violated the respect which they owe it, that they deserve
Exemplary Punishment. This is utterly to destroy all Liberty of Conscience.

8. To these Afflictions they have added another, not less grievous to us,
which is, That they seem to forbid us all hope of being heard in our own
Defense: For our Judges themselves are become formally our Party, either
because they are afraid to encounter the Papists, a Party now so formidable to
the World; or because themselves are of that Party; or because they perceive
that the only way to advance their own Interest, is to Oppress us; as on the
contrary, to do us the least Justice, or show any commiseration of our
Afflictions, is reputed a punishable Crime. I shall not insist upon the furious
passion expressed against us by the Provincial Parliaments, although arrived at
such a height, as nothing can either restrain or mitigate it. Nevertheless, we
cannot but heavily groan under their daily Injuries, the Number and Violence
whereof is hardly conceivable. All France knows the Decrees which the
Inferior Parliaments of Tholouze, Rouen, Rennes, Bourde aux, Pau, Provence,
Dijon, and Metz, have already made, and which (with all greediness embracing
every occasion to pour out their Wrath upon us) they are daily making against
us. Neither shall I speak of the Malice of Inferior Courts, there being scarce
any petty Country Justice who does not expect to raise his Reputation, and
make himself Illustrious by persecuting of us. I shall only instance one thing,
hardly credible, though very true, viz. That there is no hope of being heard at
the Council it self, where all our Affairs have their last Appeal and Audience:
For it has often come to pass, That the Protestant Deputies, sent by the
Provinces and Cities to plead their Cause, have been expressly commanded by the
King to return, without so much as only liberty to appear. Thus in the year
1661, Monsieur Vignolles, deputed by the Province of Low-Languedoc, to solicit
their Affairs, was no sooner arrived at Paris, but he was commanded by an
Express, to withdraw within Eight days, under pain of Disobedience. Likewise
Anno 1664, the Inhabitants of Privas having Commissioned Monsieur de la Faisse
to Negotiate their Business, he no sooner appears, but the Captain of the
Watch intimates to him the King's Order to return presently into Languedoc,
under the same pain. And the last year, (1665,) the Province of Low-Guyenne,
having deputed Monsieur de Sarran for the same effect, immediately thereafter,
he received a Letter under the Seal, prohibiting him to come to Court. By which
it is abundantly evident, That they have no mind to hear us, and less to do us
Justice. And if other Commissioners have not been treated after this manner,
yet they very well know what Repulses they have endured. What difficulties
before they had access but to the Doors of the Judges? What pains to find but
one Commissioner willing to receive and present their Petitions? And when
through Importunity they have so far prevailed, they likewise know what kind of
Hearing they have obtained; Their best Arguments have been rejected, and most
evident Probations contemned, whilst the slightest pretenses alleged by their
Adversaries, have been admitted with great applause. So that some have spent
six months, some whole years to procure a Hearing; whilst the Acts sued against
Us by the Clergy, have been obtained in less then twenty four hours; and in end
after a thousand cares and vexations, they have only had the grief to return to
their Provinces, with the news of the loss of the Cause, which they solicited.

9. This is not all. The malice of the Clergy goes yet much higher; for, it is
well known how they endeavor to intimidate and affright our Ministers, thereby
to obstruct and disturb them in the care which they should have of their
flocks. Thus they have violently Silenced some, others they labor to ensnare
upon every hand, some they criminally indite for very trifles, some they
banish, and some they transport whither the Prelates please; and all this to
make their Life and Condition so miserable, that henceforth no man may be
willing to embrace the Profession and Calling of a Minister. The Provinces of
France are so full of such Examples, that to relate them all would swell to a
large Volume.

10. These Cities where Protestants for number are most considerable, seem to
be the principal object of our Enemies fury; and especially those which during
the late Commotions were zealous in his Majesty's service. Of these, Montauban,
Rochel, and Milan, formerly three flourishing Churches, but now reduced to
extreme desolation, are most doleful Examples. Montauban being first deprived
of their University and Common Council, has endured a Garrison of five or six
thousand Soldiers for four months together; has seen her Inhabitants, some
hanged, some burnt, some scourged, some banished; the Houses of others pulled
down, and Pyramides erected in their place; others compelled by beating, and
all manner of Violence, to go to Mass, and in end forced to accept an Act of
Oblivion for an Imaginary Crime. For in all that Tumult alleged against them,
there was not one Sword drawn, one Pistol discharged, one Hat pierced, nor one
drop of blood spilt; it having only been a Church Assembly according to the
ordinary Custom, from which a Messenger was dispatched to the Governor of the
Province, entreating the delay of the execution of an Order, to surrender to
the Jesuits the public Schools of a College, which being built at their own
expenses, did lawfully belong to themselves; and that only until such time as
they should precisely know his further pleasure with protestation, that
thereafter they would entirely submit themselves. This is the crime for which
they have been used with the same cruelty, as if they had Rebelled against the
State, and ever since have been exposed as a prey to the rage of the Priests,
who exercise merciless Tyranny upon the poor Inhabitants. Milan has received
almost the same measure, for no other cause then burying a dead Corpse after the
accustomed manner, contrary to the general Decree, which prohibits the
performance of that charitable and sorrowful Office to the Dead in that manner.
And as for Rochel, all France knows the Banishment of some of the
Inhabitants, and cruel enslaving of the remnant, to such rigor as is worse
then Banishment it self. But all this is nothing to what is done at Privas: In
this Town, although the Reformed Religion had been established by Authority of
the late King, and the Inhabitants maintained in that Establishment by several
Decrees; yet after Thirty two, or Thirty three years peaceable possession, they
are now banished the Town and Territories thereof, with such Inhumanity, as
they have not exercised upon Barbarians. This poor people, to the number of
Five or six hundred Men, Women and Children, being spoiled of all their Goods,
and miserably hunted from place to place, like very Beasts, are now wandering in
Woods, without any certain place to this day i. e. The time of writing of this
Relation.
, where to settle and rest: And all this without any other pretense than an old
Declaration Anno 1629, relating to the Commotions of the year 1627.

11. Whatever brevity we proposed in this Discourse, yet we cannot but reflect
upon another Device, whereof our Adversaries every where make use to render our
Condition insupportable, and that is, to Vex and Ruin us with Civil and
Criminal Lawsuits, as well against the body of our Church as particular
persons; sometimes in the name of the King's General Attorneys, or their
Substitutes; sometimes in the name of Diocesan, or Monastic Attorneys, or
their Chapters: and all this, oftentimes, for things utterly false, as, That we
have spoken Irreverently of the holy Sacraments, or such like enormous
Impostures. For proving of all which, they never want Suborners, and false
Witnesses. And if at any time the Forgery be discovered, the Judges seldom
punish the Authors; or if they inflict any Punishment at all, it is but such as
through the slightness thereof gives greater liberty and encouragement to such
persons. What Justice was there done upon a Priest of Eymet in Low-Guyenne, who
accused several Inhabitants of that place, of having profaned the Mysteries of
the Romish Religion, although the Judges, in end, found and acknowledged the
falsehood of the Accusation? What Justice was done upon another Priest of
Chastelleraut, who accused an innocent Maid of expressing some disrespect to
the King's Person, although the Judges did likewise acknowledge the imposture of
the Priest, and falsehood of the Accusation? What reparation was there ever made
to the Name and Memory of a poor Man, who was accused before the Parliament of
Rennes, and by Sentence thereof, Burnt alive, for alleged stealing a Chalice
out of the Church, although thereafter themselves made it evident, by putting
three Thieves to death, who had committed the theft, that they had murdered an
innocent person? What pitiful Justice did the Parliament of Thoulouze lately
upon a wicked fellow, convict before them of having suborned false Witnesses to
depose against a Merchant of Montauban, that he had blasphemed the Virgin Mary?
He was (forsooth) condemned in a hundred Livers This is about 7. lib. sterling.
fine or damage, and that was all the punishment. What satisfaction has there
been made to Monsieur Bobineau, Minister of Puzange in Poictou, who was falsely
accused by a Curate, of Seditious Preaching, and upon that pretended crime, was
detained two months Prisoner in the Common Goal of Poictiers, although the
accusation was found false, and the Accusers convict of Forgery? What Cruelty
was exercised upon Monsieur Boxie, Minister of Turenne, who being shut up in a
close Dungeon with Irons upon his feet, was for a whole year treated with all
manner of Barbarous Inhumanity, and thereafter condemned to perpetual
Banishment, by Decree of the Parliament of Bourdeaux Sept. 5. 1664.
? In which Act it is declared that from his words in a Sermon, they had some
ground to draw consequences, reflecting upon the honor of the Blessed Virgin;
whereas (in effect) he had uttered nothing in the Sermon, but that none except
Jesus Christ, was born without sin. What punishment was put upon Monsieur
Faison, Baily of Privas, who before the Justice Court of Vivaretz, was convict
of false accusing some Inhabitants of Privas, as if they had deterred and
hindered their Brethren from changing their Religion? And what Justice was done
upon a Priest of Nyort, convict before the King's Council, of falsifying an Act
of Parliament, which being made against the Protestants of Mer, he would have
executed against those of Nyort? Although there was never a more bold Cheat, in
the very face of King and Council; yet in stead of punishing the Author, the
business ended in laughter.

12. When these false Accusations and foul convictions are made appear to the
Judges, in lieu of Punishment, they tell us, That they must respect the Honor
of the Catholic Religion; not considering that they should much better
preserve it by punishing these Impostures which disgrace it, then (as their
trade now is) by destroying honest people, by such practices, horrible in
themselves, and odious to the World. But it plainly appears, that the design of
this Popish Cabal is, by all means and ways to crush and bear us down, until
being wearied, disheartened, and impoverished by such a long tract of miseries
and cross affairs, we become utterly unable to defend our selves, and then in
end, being overcome with tentation, seek our peace in the ruin of our
Consciences.

13. I shall add a word further of the Liberty granted to Priests and Monks
(whose Nature without encouragement is forward enough) to insult over us, to
commit all manner of Violence and Injustice, without fear of punishment; yea,
and to execute the Acts of Council against us, as now they do in Poictou; where
the Priests, running from place to place with unparalled Barbarity, demolish
Churches, dig up and search the very lowest stones of the Foundation, break
open Chests, carry away the Poors Moneys, pull down particular Men's Houses, and
the Castles of our Gentry, most spitefully abusing their Persons with all
manner of injurious words, and violent actions.

14. There is nothing more strange then the ways which those men take to make
Proselytes; For, neglecting Instruction and good Example, (which are the only
proper and lawful means of gaining Souls to God) they only use Promises,
Threatenings, and labor to catch men by snares. Is a Woman at variance with her
Husband? thither they run and offer her the Protection of the Romish Religion,
provided she will embrace it. Is a man decayed, and his Estate disordered?
immediately they promise to bear him up against his Creditors, and mountains of
Gold, if he will but change his Religion. Is there a debauched Son, and
disobedient to his Father? they are presently with him, persuading him to change
his Religion, by a promise of the favor and protection of the Church. Has any
man an unjust Suit at Law like to go against him? Is another justly pursued for
his Crimes? their surest refuge is their change of Religion. Is a man poor or
sick in a Hospital? A Danish Gentleman lying mortally wounded in an Hospital,
was solicited to change his Religion; which, when he would not do, they
counterfeited the Apparition of Devils, with a Death's head, wherein they had
put a light. Those seigned spirits, having several times spoken to this
Young Man, thus, That he was damned if he would not turn Roman Catholic; in
end, they so afrighted him, that he dyed the 24th of January, 1666.
let him but change his Religion, and he shall be sure of kindness and good
entertainment; but if he remain steadfast, he shall be abandoned, and die in
misery. Thus those men show their zeal to propagate their Religion; or rather,
and more truly, thus they scandalize and damnifie it. For while by these ways
they labor to promote the same, they but add to their fellowship such vile
persons, as having changed upon such base Motives will never do good among them.

15. Nothing can be added to the rigor continually exercised against us through
all the Kingdom, whereby they deprive us of all means of acquiring a
Livelihood, and all hopes of Preferment, there being no admittance of us unto
any public Office (except those of the Chambers of the Edict) no, not so much
as to the petty Offices of a Notary, Attorney, or Sergeant; nor yet to learn
Arts and Trades. For, although the King by his Decree, Jun. 28. 1665.
permits Protestants as well as Papists, to learn Arts and Trades, by way of
Apprentiship; yet by the opposition which is made, when particular persons
offer themselves, whereby they are involved in tedious Suits of Law, the
expenses whereof in end, ruin them, the execution of that Decree is obstructed,
and the Decree it self without effect. So that even the Privilege which the
King was pleased to grant us, is become a snare, and ends in our ruin, by the
perverseness of those to whom the Execution of the Decree was committed.

16. These things being considered, it may be truly affirmed without unjust
aggravation, That the Protestants in France are reduced to the greatest
extremity of imaginable misery; being without Help, without Comfort, without
hope of Justice, overprest with troubles, and destitute of all relief, having
scarce the liberty of praying unto, or being instructed in the Knowledge of God;
So that indeed there is nothing left but the Life, and that is nothing else but
a sorrowful Breath, drawn from a more sorrowful and afflicted Heart, whereof
were they likewise deprived, they should be so much the more eased and happy,
for, then should they rest in peace, having no sorrows, nor fears. And yet the
Clergy not contented to see them in this deplorable Estate, must needs have
them utterly destroyed, and therefore will never give over their design until
they have accomplished it.

17. And to make this evident, there needs no more, but read an Oration made by
the Bishop of Vsez before the King, in name of the whole Clergy: Wherein,
having first rendered thanks to his Majesty for what he has already done
against us, and then petitioned him for a present Declaration, prohibiting
Catholics to embrace the Protestant Religion, and for another Decree,
Incorporating the mixed Courts (which consisting of half Protestants, and half
Papists, had been established in favor of the Protestants) into the Courts of
Parliaments; in end, he exhorts, persuades, and adjures him by all the most
moving Arguments, that he would now give the last blow toward our utter
destruction, seeing he was now able and in capacity to effect it. I hope the
King will beware to follow Counsels so terrible and violent; and am sure would
have been much more edified had he seen the Bishops more Human, more Christian,
and more agreeable to their Profession. But here we yet see their design, and
what we may justly expect, from a Party equally powerful and maliciously
inflamed against us.

18. That our miseries may be yet more piercing, to injustice they add derision
and scoffs, and by those who have done us the greatest injuries, publish
abroad, that we are marvelously well used, and have all reason to be satisfied
with their Moderation. This is evidence sufficient that they are far from
repairing our losses, when having left us but very little, even that Little
must pass as an Act of Grace.

In short, Our Fears are doubled. When (upon the one hand) we consider, That
all the Sharings of Churches, and Determinations of Council against us, have
been made and concluded without any regard of the Titles produced by our
Churches; then which, none could be better, or more convincing; such as, The
Books and Registers of Marriages and Baptisms, the very years of the Edict,
Consistorial Acts, Acts or Instruments of Notaries; the Appearance of these
Churches before Presbyteries, and Provincial Synods, 1596, and 1597: and I know
not how many more Evidences of the like nature. Notwithstanding all which, they
proceeded to Sentence against us. And (upon the other hand) when we see the
Province of Bearn so cruelly used by the Parliament of Pau, that after
innumerable Severities against both Ministers, and their Flocks, wherein they
went so far, as to make Acts against Ministers for not admitting to the Lords
Supper flagitious persons, Synodally suspended for their scandalous lives; The
said Parliament, in end, has formally stated themselves their Opposite Party,
and (among other things very strange, and never heard of) have petitioned the
King for the Extermination of the Reformed Religion out of the whole Province.
And when we see that the Clergy of Bearn by their Petition agreeing with the
Parliaments, have required the very same things which the Clergy of France
required, in that Oration of the Bishop of Vsez, made before the King, and now
published in Print: When (I say) we see and consider these things, have we not
just cause to fear, That more dreadful Calamities then we have yet seen, are
preparing for us. Moreover, is not the present Desolation of the Province of
Poictou, a most astonishing and terrible Object? In all that vast Diocese of
Luson, they have not left so much as one Church. So that the greatest part of
our Brethren are forced to travel above Fifty and Sixty Miles to hear the Word;
and to expose their newborn Infants (in order to Baptism) to manifold Dangers.
And the rest of the Province is but very little better treated, there being but
Thirteen Churches allowed for above a Hundred thousand persons of our Religion.
In fine, Are not our Fears very reasonable, and well grounded, when we see that
the Protestants, contrary to the very words of the Edict of Nantes, and without
regard of their Privileges have been formally subjected to that great Court of
General Sessions, which the King has erected in the City of Clermont; and
especially, if ye add, That the Heads of that Superstitious Cabal are now
secretly at work, procuring Subscriptions through all France, unto a League for
persecuting of us with all Severity. These things make us justly apprehensive,
that, in end, they will break out in acts of open Violence; there being nothing
which they are not in case to undertake for accomplishing of our Ruin. And
unless we be wilfully blind, we cannot but see, that they design to drive us
(by Despair) into some Insurrection: (But that we shall never do; preferring
rather to suffer the greatest Extremity, and our very. Blood to be shed, then
in the least to violate the respect which we owe to our Prince.) And if they
cannot overcome our Patience, (as assuredly they never shall) then their
Resolution is, By continual Importunity to prevail with His Majesty to drive us
out of the Kingdom. But we hope that the King is so Good and Just, that he will
never gratify them in such a thing, without a Parallel. And if we should be
called to such a Trial, we hope God will give us such Strength and Courage, as,
without regret, to abandon our Native Land, that we may serve him wherever his
Providence shall call us. And this, in effect, is the general Resolution of all
the PROTESTANTS within the Kingdom.

FINIS.

