A brief Deduction of the Case between George Carew Esqr. Administrator of the
goods and chattels, rights, debts and credits of Sr. William Courten, knight
deceased unadministred, with his will annexed, Plaintiff. And Jacob Pergens,
Bewinthebber of the West India Company at their Chamber in Amsterdam, defendant.
As it was delivered in Low Dutch to the Scheepens and Judges in Amsterdam, in
the month of October 1676.
1. SR. Jacob Cats late Pensionaris of Holland, John Corcelis and others became
bound by their writing obligatory at London, dated 29 July 1631 unto Sr.
William Courten in the Penalty of 3000 pounds for payment of 2080 pounds to the
said Sr. William his Executors or administrators according to the Laws and
Custom of England.

2. In the year 1636 the said money continuing at interest, Sr. William Courten
died indebted to many persons, and left William Courten his Son and Heir his
sole Executor.

3. In the month of September 1643. the said William Courten became insolvent
for his own debts, and absented himself from his Creditors.

4. On the 31 of October. 1653. William Courten at London assigns the said
Obligation of 3000 pounds to Jacob Pergens, upon pretense of an old debt due to
the said Pergens from Sr. William Courten, and gives him procuration to sue for
the said money accordingly.

5. In the year 1645 Jacob Pergens summoned Sr. Jacob Cats before the
Provincial Court of Holland, and instituted his Process for the said debt and
damages.

6. In the year 1647 Jacob Pergens (during the Civil wars in England)
procured Letters from the late King to the States General and the Prince of
Orange in favor of himself against Sr Jacob Cats, and the East India Company.

7. In the year 1653. Jacob Pergens gave 400 pounds to the Comissioners
concerning Banckrupts to release their right to the money due from Sr. Jacob
Cats, and to assign their pretense unto Pergens salvo jure of other men.

8. In the year 1655. depending the said process against Sr. Jacob Cats,
William Courten the Executor died in Florence intestate.

9. In the year 1660. Letters of Administration of Sr. William Courtens Goods,
debts and effects unadministred by Will. Courten Esquire (with the Testament
annexed) were granted by the Prerogative Court of England to the said George
Carew.

10. In the year 1661. the Provincial Court of Holland pronounced a Sentence in
favor of Jacob Pergens against the Heyrs of Sr. Jacob Cats, who appealed to
the Supreme Court of Justice at the Hague, from the same.

11. In the month of May 1662. George Carew Exhibited his Request unto the
High Court, and intervened in the said Cause, praying that his right might be
preserved according to Law; and in consequence thereof, that the Heirs of Sr.
Jacob Cats might be ordered to pay the money to him in right of his
Administration; and that Jacob Pergens should be likewise enjoined to deliver
up the bond as an unadministred Effect of Sr. William Courtens Estate.

12. Whereupon Jacob Pergens refused to answer unto the principal demand, but
made his Exception in writing, that he was a Burger of Amsterdam, and ought to
be impleaded before his Competent judges there, notwithstanding he dwelt then
in the Hague.

13. After several pleadings, repliques, duplicques and advertisments of right
with several advices upon the case transmited from the Judges of England to
the said High Court of Judicature; the Lords nevertheless admitted the
exception of Jacob Pergens, and renvoyed Carew before the Scheepens of
Amsterdam with Compensation of Costs.

14. On the 6 of November 1663 George Carew cited Jacob Pergens before the
Lords of Amsterdam and exhibited his request, as aforesaid, for the recovery of
his right, desiring a precise day as a stranger. Yet the Scheepens ordered the
process to be written by demand, answer, replicque and duplicque: as by the
acts of the Court inventaried appears.

15. However on the 34 of October 1664 the High Court at the Hague proceeded to
a Sentence in favor of Mr. Pergens against the Heirs of Sr. Jacob Cats.
Whereby the Lords ordered them to pay the money with interest, and Charges to
the said Pergens, which amounred unto 4200 pounds Sterling: And directed
Pergens to assign the said bond with power to sue the other obligers. Although
the Judges of England had intimated Mr. Carews right, to the said high Court,
and subscribed the same before Major Wright and John Daniel two Public
Notaries in London.

16. In the years 1669 and 1670 Mr. James Boeve solicited the said Process and
caused the writings and papers on both sides to be inventaried and exchanged by
the Procters Francis Meerhout and Arnold Vingbooms: then by a contrivance
between Pergens and the sons of Peter Boudaen, James Boeve was arrested at the
Hague upon a vexatious action out of the Admiralty of Zealand, which they
bought purposely to trouble Mr. Boeve: whereupon he was detained a Prisoner,
and so obstructed the prosecution in this Cause some time longer.

17 In the year 1672 Mr. Carew arrived at Amsterdam and desired his Advocate
Mr. Paulus Buys to draw an Advertisment of right to be delivered over with the
pieces and papers to the Lords, which was retarded yet longer by reason of the
war with England, and Mr. Carews detention in prison at the Hague upon
pretense of being an Enemy to the country for demanding common justice.

18 In the month of May 1676 Mr. Carew arrived again at Amsterdam, and applied
himself to Advocate Buys to make an advertisment of right, that the Sentence
might be pronounced thereupon; who refused to serve any longer in the Cause,
pretending that he had married a kinswoman of Mr. Pergens; yet demanded his
Salarie of 116 Gilders for perusing the papers drawn by Advocate Caw and
others, (yet* no disparagement to Mr. Buys his abilities) although he never
pleaded in the Cause.

19. In the month of August last Mr. Paulus Buys and Arnold Vingboom summoned
Mr. Carew before the Magistrates at Amsterdam, for their respective Salaries,
and arrested his Goods for the same: whereupon the Lords condemned Carew to pay
their demands accordingly: Mr. Buys having interdicted all Others to serve in
the Cause before he was paid.

20. Then Pergens and Boudaens having published a scandalous Book against the
Procedings of Carew and Boeve, it was answered by another Book, many whereof
they caused to be taken away by Inglebreght the under-Scout of Amsterdam from
Stephen Swart, A Bookseller near the Exchang by order of the president
Scheepen, as Inglebreght pretended.

21. In the month of September last Mr. Carew having then gotten his papers
and writings from Mr. Buys and Vingboom, paid them both their Salaries and
proceeded to the advertisment of rights: following upon which he craves the
Judgment of the Honoerable Lords the Scheepens.

Advertisment of Right.
1. THe said George Carew appointed Administrator of the Goods, Rights and
Credits of Sr. William Courten, as aforesaid, stands obliged by the Laws and
Customs of England, to Exhibit a perfect Inventarie of the Goods and Effects
upon Oath, and faithfully to administer the same, giving preference only to
the King, and to such Creditors as have obtained decrees or judgments for their
debts, (as several have done in the Courts of Record at Westminster.)
Therefore all obstructions that are made to hinder the said Carew in the due
Execution of his Administration, are destructive to Mutual Society, and
Commerce.

2. Admitting that Jacob Pergens was bona fide a Creditor of Sr. William
Courten, as he alleges by an Obligation of 1500. pound, dated the 12. of
March 1634. for payment of 1000. pounds with interest, the Copy whereof being
mentioned in the Inventary marked with the Letter F. Yet he must come in
Concurrence with other Creditors, who would otherwise suffer great prejudice,
against the rules of Equity; Sr. William Courten dying indebted 100000 pounds
and upwards to many Orphans and Widows, which are yet unsatisfied, besides a
particular debt of 35000. pounds to Sr. Paul Pyndar, whereof two third parts are
yet owing, as appears by an Authentic Writing marked with the letter M.

3. As soon as William Courten the Executor died, the debt of Sr. Jacob Cats
became an unadministred Effect of Sr. William Courtens Estate, and must be so
inventaried. The rule in Law both in England and all other Nations is positive,
quod actio personalis Moritur cum persona. Vide the several advices
transmitted from the Judges of England to the supreme Court of Judicature at
the Hague under the letters C. D.

4. The Sentences pronounced by the Court of Holland and the supreme Court of
Judicature at the Hague are erroneous and have a nullity in themselves, as acts
coram non judice after the death of William Courten the Executor, who could not
by the Law of England transport or assign any of his Fathers Obligations. Vide
the Judges opinions and advice aforesaid.

5. That in all original Obligations and Contracts between man and man, right
must be done according to the Law of the Land, where such Contracts and
Obligations were first made.

6. If the Laws of Holland should not be admitted to take place in England upon
Dutch contracts made in the United Provinces, it might be of dangerous
consequence to the Subjects of the States General, whose Moneys and Estates
do often fall or come into the hands of Englishmen.

7. The Commissioners upon the Statutes concerning Banckrupts had no power or
Authority, by force of the Statutes or their Commission to intermeddle with Sr.
William Courtens Estate, which must be appropriated unto his own Creditors, and
not applied unto the Sons debts: nemo plus juris in alium transfer potest
quam ipse habet. Vide the Judges advice, u^ ^upra.

8. Every man is bound to take notice of another man's right, that intermeddles
in any thing which concerns that man's property.

9. An Heir or Executor unto any person that dies indebted in England can have
no quality to dispose the Goods of the deceased but as the Law directs. And
without a Commission from the Prerogative Court no Executor or Administrator in
England can Legally intermeddle with the Goods of the deceased.

10. William Courten Esquire possessed himself of his Fathers goods under the
benefit of an Inventary, and he that has received any of the Estate contrary
to Right and Equity is responsible to make restitution thereof to the right
proprietors.

11. Letters of Recommendation from the late King, or any Treaty of Alliance,
cannot create a right, or alter the property of any particular Estate: the Law
must determine that point.

12. Wherefore all the subterfuges of Jacob Pergens in his answers duplicques
and papers produced in this Case having no force of reason or strength of
Arguments in them to hinder Carews right: The Plaintiff humbly desires the
Judgment of the Honorable

Mr. David de Wilhem. Hendrick Becker. Mr. Cornelis Cloeck. Joan Appelman. Mr.
Everart Scott de Jonge. Dr. Dirk Boelensz. Lieve van Loon. Jan van Dijck. Mr.
Jacob Popta.

Present Scheepens, that is, Sheriffs of Amsterdam, according to the Merits of
his Cause; and prays that he may have his Costs and Damages sustained, in
the forbearance of his money and the prosecution of this Cause.



A Memorandum.
For the more abundant Satisfaction of all Persons concerned, the fraudulent
practices of Jacob Pergens are here discovered, who was born at Cologne in
Germany, bred up in London, made a free Denizon of England, lived some years a
Porter in Middelburg, having first married Old Peter Boudaens Sister, and
afterward came to be a Burger of Amsterdam, and a Bewinthebber of the
West India Chamber there.

1. BY a Sentence of the supreme Court of Justice at the Hague on the 16 of
March 1666. an action is reserved againse the said Jacob Pergens for 691 L 16 s
7 d Sterling Money paid unto himself by James Boeve in the years 1635 and 1636
out of Sr. William Courtens Cash and the Companies, more then was received of
the said Pergens. Vide the Sentence between Boeve and Boudaenmarked. A.

2. On the 22 of February 1648 five years after William Courten became
insolvent, and seven years after he had assigned his Ships and Goods in the
East Indies to Sr. Edward Littleton and Sr. Paul Pyndar, Jacob Pergens (having
knowledge thereof) took another assignment at the Hague in consideration of his
pretended debt, and Covenanted to refund the overplus to such persons as should
have right to demand the same. vide the Notariall Acts marked B.

3. That in Pursuance of the said Assignment Jacob Pergens received 85000.
gilders of the Directors of the East India Company on the 18th of September.
1649. as appears by the Act marked C.

4. That Jacob Pergens having made an Attestation on the 23. of January 1675.
concerning a bond brought in reconvention toward balance of accounts in a
Process between Carew and Boudaens, an authentic Copy being required by Mr.
Carew of Mr. David Doornick, Pub^^^^e Notary in Amsterdam where the Attestation
was made, Pergens interdicted Doornick from delivering it. And Carew having
cited the said Doornick before the Scheepens, Pergens arres^ed the Copy of the
said Attestation in Doornicks hands after Carew had tendered him Money for it,
and so would continue Process in Amsterdam ad insinitum. Vide the Acts of the
Vierscha^^ marked D.

5. That Jacob Pergens and some of his Friends are so abominably wicked and
absurd, to report, that the States of Holland will protect him from Rendering
any account for the 85000 Gilders in the ordinary Courts of Justice, upon
pretense of Some treaty between the King and the States; And so would endeavor
by forced interpretations to bring an Odium upon his Majesty and the States
General; as if they intended to take away the natural liberty of any
particular Man to prosecute his right in the ordinary Course of Justice.

Wherefore any man that has his Five Senses, and can read his ABC may consider
whether it be convenient to suffer the said Jacob Pergens to prosecute his
evil designs any longer, that has done so much mischief already to many
Families both in England and Holland.




