A BRIEF DISCOURSE, DECLARING And approving the necessary and inviolable
maintenance of THE LAUDABLE CUSTOMS OF LONDON.

Namely, of that one, whereby a reasonable partition of the goods of husbands
among their Wives and Children is provided:

With an answer to such objections and pretenced reasons, as are by persons
unadvised or evil persuaded, used against the same.

LONDON, Printed by JAMES FLESHER, Printer to that Honorable City, 1652.

Juris civilis de consuetudine Axiomata sive Maximae.
Consuetudo vim habet rei Judicatae. Consuetudo est optima legum interpres.
Conventio and consuetudo vincunt legem. Consuetudo firmata est ubi simili
aliquando contradicto, Iudicio quid est obtentum seu Iudicatum. Coepta usucapio
vel praescriptio per defunctum, continuatur per haeredem, cum in omne jus
defuncti succedat haeres. Profunda requie humano generi prospexit usucapio.
Barto. Usucapio est quies periculi solicitudinisque litium. Cicero.
A Brief Discourse, declaring and approving the necessary and inviolable
maintenance of the laudable Customs of London.
WE find it necessary in all commonwealths, for subjects to live under the
direction of Laws, constitutions or customs publicly known and received, and
not to depend only upon the commandment and pleasure of the governor, be
the same never so just or sincere in life and conversation. For that the Law
once enacted and established, extends his execution toward all men alike
without favor or affection: whereas if the word of a Prince were a Law, the
same being a mortal man, must needs be possessed with those passions, and
inclinations of favor or disfavour that other men be: and sometimes decline
from the constant and unremoveable level of indifferency, to respect the man
besides the matter, if not to regard the person more then the cause. Wherefore
it was well agreed by the wisest Philosophers and greatest Politics, that a
dumb Laws direction is to be preferred before the sole disposition of any
living Prince, both for the cause before touched, and for other reasons which I
will here omit. But to descend to the particularities of my intention, and to
treat of the validity and inviolable observation of some laudable (I might
term them sacred) customs, being the principal joints, and very sinews of all
good Corporations and Fellowships, and being also the maintainers of a sacred
unity and natural amity between the husband and his wife, the parents and
their children, which (as Aristotle the wise Philosopher terms it) is the
beginning of a City. For what is a City but a manifold and joint society
consisting of many households, and living under the same Laws, Freedoms and
Franchises? so I must needs confess them to be the procurers and causes of
sundry good effects to the general estate of the City wherein they be
observed: as of the other side they may breed sundry inconveniences in such a
City where the same are violated and broken with allowance and impunity. I will
therefore shortly show the nature of a custom, and the difference which it
holds from a public Law. And next I will declare how necessary the same are
to manage the government, and to entertain the prosperity and traffic of this
City: and namely that one good custom which I intend to speak of. Lastly, I
will endeavor to answer those pretensed reasons, and colorable objections made
against the precise maintenance and defense thereof.

First then I suppose that a custom which justly deserves that name, is of no
less reverent regard and authority then a written Law, passed and allowed in
Parliament: which notwithstanding I do grant that there are certain differences
between a Law and a custom: for the custom takes his force by degrees of
time, and consent of a certain people, or the better part thereof, but a Law
springs up in an instant, and receives life from him that is of sovereign
authority to command. A custom enlarges it self by plausible entertainment,
and acceptable circumstances of time and occasion, with general liking and
allowance, whereas a Law is commanded and published by power and received by
dutiful constraint, and that often against the good will of them that are
bound by it, for which cause Chrysostom not improperly compared the Custom to
a King, and the Law to a Tyrant. Moreover the custom does neither promise a
reward for observation, nor inflict a punishment for violation thereof: whereas
the Law always imports either a consideration of gain, or a terror of
punishment or damage, if the same be not a Law of enlargement or permission
that disanulleth the prohibitions of a former Law. Finally a custom is applied
to the commodity of some one province, circuit or City, and grounded upon a
special reason of conveniencie or commodity, See 34 H. 8. B. custom, 59. A
man may not prescribe or plead a custom per totam Angliam, for that is common
Law and no custom otherwise if the custom had been pleaded to be in such a
City or County, as Gavelkind Gl^t. Fee and such like. Boroughenglish.
for those persons or place where it is observed: whereas the Law has a
general reason, extended to the whole Nation bound by the same, without
private consideration of the due importances of any peculiar place or people.
Therefore it is well said, and put in ure by the common Lawyer, Quod consuetudo
ex rationabili causa profecta private communem legem, That a custom grounded
upon reasonable and honest consideration abridgeth or alters the judgment of
the common Law. So that in customs the estate or condition of the people are
to be respected, and such customs as are consonant to reason, and most
appliable to the estate and quality of such people, are to be allowed. For
example; the custom of Boroughenglish, yet in force in sundry places of
England, whereby the younger son is to inherit his fathers land, has taken
strength by this reason, that the father may (if he be not careless and secure
to do his children good) train up his elder Sons in some good Trade or
Occupation by which they may be able to get their own living: whereas the
youngest, by the impotency and tenderness of his years, may be perchance unapt
and unable for such instruction. And so the Custom commendable that provideth
for the relief of the young and impotent. Also by an old custom of this Land,
in sundry Boroughs and Towns, Lands were devisable by Will, though the Laws of
England pronounced such devises to be void; But see now the Stature of 32 H. 8.
c. 2. and 34. H. 8. c. 5. of Explanation.
and the reason was, for that inhabitants of Boroughs or Cities, whose
traffic and Trade rests much upon mutual trust and credit, are oftentimes
indebted at the time of their death. Wherefore it was thought meet, that they
might devise their land for the due satisfaction of their creditours, which to
do, they were enabled by the custom. In Kent and other places of this land,
the custom of Gavelkinde is maintained, which imports an equal division of
the inheritance to be made among all the brethren: a custom partly grounded
upon a natural consideration, for that all the Sons hold the like obligation
of nature and desert with their Parents, in the which they have an equal
interest: and also suffered to take place in Kent, and other places of this
Land, in those days most inclinable to rebellion, to the intent to enfeeble
their forces, and to bring their great houses and families to impuissance and
decay, thereby to disable and discourage them from such unlawful and violent
attempts.

And to come nearer to the matter, this famous and renowned City of London has
many laudable and ancient customs: which though they derogate and differ much
from the rules of the common Law, yet have they been not only approved by
inviolate experience of sundry ages, but also have been of old ratified and
confirmed by sundry Acts of Parliament, and Charters of Princes, and namely by
the Statute of Magna Charta, Magna Charte. ca. 9.
by these words following, Quod civitas London habeat omnes libertates suas
antiquas and consuetudines quas habere consuevit, which is, That the City of
London have all their ancient liberties and customs which they have used to
have. The words following for other Cities, etc. be, Quod habeant omnes
libertates and liberas consuetudines suas, which signifies, that they shall
still retain their liberties and free customs, that is to say, their
freedoms and immunities, as to be discharged of toll, pontage, and such like:
Whereas the City of London has provision made by that estatute, for all usages
and customs whatsoever. Verily as the City of London bears odds, and
prerogative over other Cities in Engl. being the Metropolis or mother City
thereof, so are the inhabitants of it no less necessary then profitable members
of the Commonwealth, in transporting our commodities into other lands, and
enriching us with the benefits and fruits of other countries. The City of Rome,
and Citizens of the same had that prerogative as in other things, so also in
their executions for causes capital, that they should not be crucified, being
a death of great torment and infamy, but only beheaded. The benefit of which
custom Saint Paul claimed and obtained in the time of Nero: pretending that
he was a Citizen of Rome. The said Citizens also by the dignity and reputation
of their City were not for any transgression or offense to be fettered,
whipped, or scourged, which privilege likewise the said Saint Paul took hold
of, who being oppressed by the calumnious accusations and outcries of the
Jews, was by commandment of Claudius Lysias the Captain to be examined by
torture of whips, Acts. 22.
what was the cause of that general murmr and exclamation of the people
against him: yet Saint Paul by alleging that he was a free man of Rome, not
only delivered himself from the injury and rage of the people, but also made
the Captain much afraid of question or punishment for the indignity offered
unto him, so great was the Majesty of that City, and so reverent the reputation
of all such as were accounted members thereof. Athenaeus termed Rome in those
days very fitly, Epitome totius orbis, an abridgement of the whole world, for
the continual concourse and resort of all Nations thither. We may derive
thence an argument for our purpose, that London being worthy that title,
Epitome totius Angliae, in respect of the necessary repair and frequent
assembly of all estates therein, whether it be for Justice by the Laws of this
Land, which are here administered, or by trade of merchandise, which is here so
great that it may be termed totius occidentis emporium: and chiefly because of
the favorable and often sojorn of our most royal and gracious Sovereign,
whose Majesty's chamber this is as it always has been of her most noble
progenitors: the same is no less worthy of sundry preheminences which by
Custom and Charter it enjoys above other Cities of this Land.

We find in our Law Books, that the Scholars of Oxford claimed a privilege by
custom, 43 E. 3. fo. 17. Vide Brook, Preser. 8.
to have preferment of any house or lodging, that was to be let in the City of
Oxford, and the same was allowed in the Common place in Westminster, where
Justice Finchden a man of great reckoning at that time said, that it is reason
that they which are principal Instruments of great good in the Commonwealth,
should have beneficial customs for the maintenance of their societies: the
like reason (says he) serves for the Merchants of the staple in Westminster,
and also for the Justices of Assizes, or Justices in Air, to have the like
prerogative. Also it is not unfit to remember, that the Barons of the Land have
diverse prerogatives above other subjects, that is, they shall not be sworn when
they pass upon their Peers, and if they bring an appeal, the defendant shall
not wage battle against them, and they are exempted out of all returns in
Juries, and shall not be sworn in Leets, and all in respect of their dignity,
and for the necessary use of them in government of the Commonwealth. So that
persons of needful employment in the estate, have always been favored in all
their honest customs or prescriptions, and especially the Citizens of London,
and the rather for the great presumption and opinion conceived of their
experience, who being trained by hard education, in great use of service and
affairs: and also by their travail and traffic beyond the Seas, by
continual negotiation with other Nations must needs (by all reasonable
likelihood) procure unto themselves great judgment and sufficiency, to manage
a politic Regiment in their City, according unto that verse of the Poet Homer
in the beginning of his Treatise of wise Ulysses his adventures remembering his
travail into sundry Nations and Cities.

Dic mihi Musa virum captae post temporae Troiae,
Qui mores hominum multorum vidit and urbes.
The sense whereof may be well expressed in English verse without rhyme thus:

All travailers do gladly report great praise of Ulysses:
For that he knew many men's manners, and saw many Cities.
Which opinion of their policy and experience conceived and approved by the
noble Princes of this Land in all ages does evidently appear by the manner of
their government, whereat strangers do no less envy then admire seeing so
populous a City, containing by true estimation more then 500 thousands of all
sorts of Inhabitants, managed not by cruel Viceroyes, as is Naples or Millain,
neither by proud Podesta, as be most Cities in Italy, or insolent Lieutenants
or Presidents, as are sundry Cities in France, (whose Presidents are noble men
or Captains, having their persons environed with a guard of Soldiers, and
holding their Cities possessed with a Garrison, as well in the quietest calm of
peace, as in the hottest combustion of war:) but by a man of Trade or a mere
Merchant, who notwithstanding, during the time of his Magistracy, carries
himself with that honorable magnificence in his port, and ensigns of estate,
that the Consuls, Tribunes or Pretors of Rome, (namely, when as the same was
reduced to a Monarchy) much less the Podesta of any City in Italy, never bare
the like representation of dignity, and that not only in peaceable seasons but
in time of greatest war: for such credit the Princes of this Land have still
reposed in their fidelity and wise direction, that we have few examples in any
Chronicle of any noble man or other appointed to assist the Lord Mayor in his
government, much less to be sole Ruler or Lieutenant for the time, were the
state never so troublesome, and the affairs of never so great consequence and
importance.

And to add a little more in proof of the singular good conceit had of their
service to the Commonwealth, and that the same has in all ages from the
Conquest given them prerogative above other Cities of this Land, 7 H. 6.32.
we read in the vii. year of Henry the vi. that in nativo habendo brought by
the Lord to recover his villain, it was adjudged a good return made by the
Sheriff of London, that such was the Custom of London, that a villain having
remained there the space of one whole year and a day, could not be fetched or
removed out thence. For so great is the prerogative of that place, that it
gives protection to the villain or bondsman against his Lord, while the said
bondsman shall be resiant there. Likewise it was taken for a good custom in the
City of London, that no attaint should be maintained for a supposed false
verdict given in that City. 7 H. 6.32. and the same case was adjudged in 2 E. 3.
In the which case the Sheriff of London made return upon a writ of attaint
sued against a Londoner, that such was and had been always the custom of the
City, that no attaint should be allowed against any Commoner or other Citizen
of the same, for which cause he might not salvis libertatibus without
impeachment of their liberties, serve or execute the writ. Then was there a
writ directed out of the Chancery to the Justices of the Kings Bench with
express commandment to allow to the Mayor, Sheriffs and Citizens all their
liberties, immunities and customs, and further out of that writ was a Venire
facias directed to the Mayor and Sheriffs, whereby was day given them to come
and make declaration of their custom, at which day the parties plaintiff and
defendant being present, the Mayor and Sheriffs had full allowance of their
customs, the Sheriffs were holden excused for their return, and the parties
writ was abated, and himself punished by imprisonment for his vexation. I have
here at large remembered this case, to the end it may appear both what credit
and opinion of conscience and truth, the Law ascribed to the Citizens of
London, and also how careful and vigilant the Mayor and Sheriffs have always
been to preserve and uphold their customs, although sithence that only
custom was for especial causes abrogated by the Statute of 11. 11 H. 7. c. 21.
H. 7. and an attaint given in London. Moreover, we find it recorded in M. 2.
E. 3. that whereas a Citizen of London brought an appeal of Robbery, M. 2 E. 3.
cor. pl. 157.
and the defendant would have tried his innocence by battle, as he may in
semblable case against another man, Wilby then Justice answered him, that he
was not to have allowance of battle in an appeal commenced by a Citizen of
London, for that by custom of their City they were exempted from it. The like
appeal was sued P. P. 20 E. 3. cor. pl. 125
20. E. 3. wherein the defendant made offer of the same Trial. And although
he that sued the appeal, would have joined battle without regard of this
franchise, the Lord Mayor with the rest of the Corporation sued a writ out of
the Chancery, reciting their custom or franchise, and prayed allowance of it
in disturbance of the battle. 20. E. 3. Coron. 125.

If a free man or free woman of London be committed to Ludgate, they are to be
excused from the ignominy of Irons, if they can find sureties to be true
prisoners, and if the sum be not above an hundred pounds. Upon the like reason
is that custom established for the liberal and mild imprisonment of the
Citizens in Ludgate, whereby they have indulgence and favor to go abroad into
any place by Baston as we term it, under the guard and superintendency of their
Keeper, with whom they must return again to the Prison at night: a custom
verily, though quarrelled with by some, and supposed to be the hinderance and
delay of Justice, and oftentimes a mean to defraud men of their true debts and
executions, yet the ground thereof being well examined, it wants not a sound
maintenance in the course of reason (as I think.) For the prescription or
custom is but a mitigation of the extremity of their imprisonment, serving
rather for the expedition of their discharge, and speedy satisfaction of their
creditours, then for any other purpose: so that this scope and license in
proper construction and sense of Law, cannot be termed an enlargement or
liberty. For to remain in the material Prison in the night, and to go forth
out of the same in the day, under the restraint and control of a continual
Keeper, is always an imprisonment, though exercised with greater mildness and
lenity. And diverse causes there are to warrant the same in London rather then
in other places: the one is for that the City of London stands chiefly upon
the traffic and intercourse of Merchants, and the use of buying and selling
of their sundry commodities, which is not always performed by themselves, but
by their factours and servants, and oftentimes one factour or agent serves the
turn of many Merchants, whereby he is pressed to sundry and several accounts.
Wherefore to the end the prisoners may enform themselves upon their mutual
reckonings, both what they owe, and what is due unto them, and also that upon
conference and account with their agents returning from other countries, they
may be made acquainted with the increase of their adventures or commodities, it
is necessary they should have places of meeting, which will not be so
convenient in a close prison, the same being no place of assembly or free
access (especially it being no common duty in the Jailer to permit any person
to come among his prisoners for any such occasion) and if the Jailer were bound
to endure and suffer such common and voluntary repair unto his prisoners: yet
will it be no fit place for Merchants to treat and negotiate their causes,
which cannot be well determined without their Books of accounts, and witnesses
of their contracts, and often must the same be decided before the Masters of
their Trades or Companies. So that this custom made in furtherance of mutual
accounts, Vide 4 E. o. com. 36.
does very much enable the prisoner to procure his liberty and pay his debt.
Also if the prisoner be poor and of himself unable to pay, this toleration of
their going abroad with the Keeper, is a good mean for him to procure the
Alms, and relief of other charitable people, thereby the sooner to purchase
his liberty. Whereby it appears what reckoning the Law makes of them, in
consideration of their great hazard by Sea (through danger of shipwreck or
piracy) and adventure in strange Countries (by falsehood and negligence of
Factours) or by wars between Princes, the inconveniences and mischiefs
whereof, are not so offensive or prejudicial to any, as to Merchants, whose
condition as it may by a fortunate voyage be much enriched and advanced: so may
it by any of the mischances aforesaid, be so empaired and overthrown, that it
may turn himself, his wife, and family to utter calamity and distress.
Therefore as the hope and comfort of the wife (having commonly no assurance of
jointure in the City, nor expectation of dower as other women have) and also of
the children (being for the most part born to no great patrimony, other then
that which their fathers shall by their virtuous industry acquire) does only
depend upon the fortune of their husbands or fathers travail, it has laudably
and conscionably been observed for a custom, and is yet by the wiser and
better sort religiously regarded that when any Citizen of London dies, his
wife shall have the third part of his goods, and the children another third
part, equally to be divided among them, according to the proportion of his
goods, and himself another third part to dispose by his last Will and
Testament at his pleasure. A partition so reasonable and grounded upon so good
consideration, (the quality and estate of the Londoners considered,) that if it
were not approved by custom, but to be proposed in the wisest and highest
Court of Parliament, whether it were fit to have the force of a Law, I think no
man (unless he were a Timon by nature, or a Diogenes by disposition) no man I
say possessed with common humanity would gainsay or impugn it. Does not the
common Law now in force give the husband presently by the intermariage, all the
goods and chattells of his wife, though the same be of the value of 10000
pounds, so that when she is once his wife, the Law disableth her to give or
dispose any thing that was hers before? And shall not the husband be bound by
semblable Obligation of reason to leave his wife the third part of his goods,
and if the Law be in that respect defective (as what Law in the world, except
the Law of God, is without his imperfections?) shall not the custom supply it
in such sort, that no barbarous and uncharitable or cautelous, and unkind
practices by deed of gift, or otherwise, shall disappoint or defraud the same:
especially here in London, where the good estate of men, for the most part
consists in movables, by reason of their continual Trades and Exchanges, so
that their wives cannot assure themselves of their dowry commonly called
thirds, as they might if their husbands were seized of Lands in Fee-simple.
Also the comfortable society between husband and wife, is of that precious
estimate and honorable reputation before God and man, that there may not
possibly a more sacred and strait conjunction be imagined among the children of
men. Charondas the Philosopher calls them Homosipios, which signifies, fed
with the self same food. And Epimenides another Philosopher calls them
Homocapnos, which is as much to say, as using the self same smoke, and the
self same manger, and as it were drawing the self same breath. Finally, the
Scripture gives express charge to each man to tender his wife with
extraordinary good offices by saying, Matthew. ca. 19. Mark. cap. 10. 1 Cor. ca.
7. Ephesians. ca. 5.
Thou shall leave thy Father and Mother, and cleave to thy wife. If the force
of custom did not enforce the matter, these only considerations were
sufficient to prove, that there should be nothing private, nothing peculiar,
nothing proper, but every thing in common, every thing equally interested
between the husband and the wife. The like though not equal affection is
commanded by the Apostle to the Col. 3. by the Fathers toward their children.
You fathers be tender and loving unto your children, and discourage them not.

But let us see what account our common Law has made of the like customs,
founded upon the love and affection between man and wife. It was used of
ancient time in Gavelkinde Land, and has received the allowance and judgment
of a good and lawful custom, 8 H.M. 3 Pres. 60.
that if the husband be attainted and executed for a Felony by him committed, 8
E. 2. It in can. Preser. 50.
yet shall his wife for the solace of her loss and desolation have her dowry
of his Land, and also the heir shall inherit the same according to that old
saying: P. 35 H. 6.58.
The Father to the Bough, and the Son to the Plough: although the common law by
rigorous imputation to make man more fearful to offend in crimes of such
quality, extends the punishment though not to the persons of the wife and
children, yet to their fortune so far as it may turn to their utter
impoverishment and discomfort.

In the City of York there is a custom, that the husband may enfeoffe his wife
of such Land as he shall purchase, which though it be against the rule of the
common Law (which disableth the husband to convey any Land to his wife) by
feoffement or deed, 12 H. 3. Pres. 6.1.
yet by force of the custom it was adjudged to be lawful and effectual. Also
the custom of many places in England is, that the wife shall enjoy the whole
Land of her husband in name of her dowry, as it appears by M. Litt. himself,
Litt. ti, Dower.
and the husband cannot by any cautele or devise defeat her thereof. And in
some other Countries they have the moity or tone part, and generally by the
common Law the third part. In Northwales the custom is so beneficial for
wives, (that although they be sure of their thirds of such Land as their
husbands shall chance to be seized of at any time during the marriage) yet are
they to have the moity or tone part, not only of his goods and movables, but
also of his Leases, be the terms thereof never so long. 14 Eliz.
Not many years ago the custom of Taundean was alleged and allowed by the
Court of the Kings Bench, that the husband or wife whether so ever of them did
happen to over-live should have the inheritance or Fee-simple Land of the other
by survivor, a custom verily neither contrary to reason nor repugnent to
Religion, as no well disposed or good husband can deny, when he enters into
consideration of those holy duties and good observances that are commended and
commanded in holy Scripture. Read the Epistle to the Ephesians. ca. 5.
If then these customs bear sway in sundry places, and are publicly approved
by judicial sentences, what Citizen will be so senseless, what Londoner so
loose; what Merchant or other free man so inconsiderate; and unregardfull of
his own good estate, and so ready to defile his own nest, as once to attempt or
practice the violation or breach of so good a custom? What is he who seeing
the Estate of London is preferred before other Cities of the Land, by the
benefit and means of their most profitable customs, that will give a dangerous
example to abrogate the same, and to call their usages in question? A custom,
if it have been once notoriously discontinued, or interrupted, loses the title
and appellation of a custom, and by instance given of the time when it was
disused lacks a great part of his authority. Then unnatural or at least wise
unadvised is that Citizen which to serve his private humor brings a general
custom either into question by his fraud, See before in the case of Robbery,
how careful the City was to avoid this danger and to preserve their custom,
and and in the case of the attaint before 7 H. 6, etc.
or by his example into contempt. Pernicious also is the president of one
custom called in question to the ruin of the rest: Namely; when as the City
by their Counfell in her Majesty's Courts of Westminster, claiming the benefit
of their customs, may be encountered and confronted, with a counter plea given
by themselves, that such of their own Aldermen and commons have by their deeds
and devises either disaffirmed or disanulled the same. A practice as of great
condemnation in them that do it, so no doubt of great oversight and
incircumspection in them that suffer it.

But somewhat to satisfy the idle cavils pretended to the contrary, says some
one, is not the general Law of England sufficient to manage the government of
London as well as of all other Subjects, but that Londoners must have private
customs and usages of their own? This objection made by the enviers or enemies
of the wealth of London (howsoever they make show to the contrary) rather
deserves a hiss then a reply, and is sufficiently confuted in the former
discourse.

But it is further urged by some hard husbands, My wife is froward and
undutifull, and has not deserved it. She is a fool and cannot rule it. She
will marry again, and enrich some other with the fruit of my travail.
Wherefore I think it necessary to abridge her of that liberality which the
custom does extend. Also my children be evil inclined, disobedient or
untractable, or some of them be. Wherefore I may with reason deprive them of
the benefit of this custom. First to answer the undutifulness, I wish thee
whosoever thou art to summon and convent thy self to the tribunal seat of thy
inward mind, as Saint Augustine says, Aug. in lib. confess.
and to make conscience thy Judge, thy cogitations the Witnesses, thy actions
the accusers, thy memory the register or record to give in evidence: and let it
be discussed in all due circumstances, whether thou did not likewise forget
the offices of a good husband and defraud her of her duties, (as Saint Paul
says) or provoke her to impatience which the same Apostle forbids in these
words, 1 Corinthians. ca. 7. Col. ca. 3.
You husbands be loving to your wives, and no way be bitter unto them. Peter
Epist. 1. ca. 1.
Which also S. Peter remembers in advising husbands to dwell with their wives
sincerely and according to knowledge in doing honor unto them as to the weaker
Vessel. Let it I say be examined in the consistory of thy conscience whether
thou either by thy fault wittingly, or negligently by thy default, or by thy
unkindness unduly, have caused her being the weaker vessel to be the more
intolerable. If thou find thy self condemned by thy conscience, let remorse be
thy executioner, and amendment with kindness toward thy wife be thy penance:
but if thou find thy self guilty of no want of affection, love or good
carriage of thy self toward her, so that her undutifulness proceeded of her
self: yet I pray thee remember the benefits which God has given thee by her
means, whether they be gifts of fortune in bettering of thy estate, or
eschewing of sin, by her lawful and comfortable company, or the blessing of
children, a sovereign good in this world, thy children being the monuments of
thy life and being upon earth, and the repayrers of thy decay. And let these
favors and graces enjoyed by her company cover and countervaile her other
imperfections whatsoever. Follow therein the example of the wise Socrates, who
being demanded how he could endure the continual scolding and vexation of his
wife Xantippe, likewise asked of the other why he suffered the cackling and
unpleasant noise of Hens and Turkeyes in his house, Because said the other they
lay Eggs and breed Chickens for me: and so said Socrates Xantippe bears me
Children, which good turn alone covers and dispenses with infinite defects.
Callicratides the Athenian being demanded why he a man so nobly descended, but
having matched with a base Thessalian woman, yet by his last Will bequeathed
unto her all his substance, leaving his other friends and kinsfolks
unregarded: because (said he) she is my wife, meaning that she who was by his
judgment and choice made worthy to be his wife, should be unworthy of nothing
that was his. Which may also satisfy that second point of supposed folly in
the wife, and want of discretion to marshal so great a proportion of wealth, as
the custom will give her. Wherefore would thou mary with a fool, if thou
thoughtest her unworthy of the rights of marriage? then seeing thy choice has
estopped thy Testimony of her folly, thy duty toward thy wife shall bind thee
to favor and conceal her weakeness, and to perform that which the custom
pronounces to be convenient. It cannot be evil bestowed upon her, whose right
by custom demands it, and whose estate and imperfections have need of it,
whereas if the husband may be permitted by this color to defeat his wife, many
inconveniences and disorders might ensue.

First a general custom, Leges se accommodant ad ea quae frequentius non quae
raro accidunt. Bartolus.
which is as also a general Law, never provided for such rare accidents as
seldom fall in experience, but for things that ordinarily and commonly happen,
should be broken, to the general scandale and offensive example of all through
the inhability of one, which were a thing unreasonable. Likewise then might
husbands, (if that were admitted for a just allegation) easily devise and
publish that or some other imperfection to be in their wives, and thereby
bereave them of their right. No more then it is a just counterplea or bar to
a woman's dower to allege that she is a fool, no more is the imputation of such
simplicity honest and sufficient to exclude her from her Portion. No it is well
said and maintained for a Maxim in the Common Law, Better it is to suffer a
mischief then an inconvenience. Less harmfull and hateful it is for a man to
swallow twenty of these light offenses, and to digest sundry of these pretensed
scruples, then by violating of a custom no less common then commendable to
leave to posterity an odious memory and obloquie of his name.

The last objection against wives is no less ridiculous then Tyrannical,
grounded upon an unjust desire to restrain them from marriage. Marriage is an
honorable Ordinance of God, fit and necessary for all persons disposed
thereunto, to the avoiding of sin, and maintenance of a comfortable and
sociable Christian life. To restrain or prohibit the same either in maids or
widows, (as Saint Paul says) is the doctrine of devils. Tim. ep. 1. ca. 4. 43
E. 3.6.
And to indent or condition with any that he or she shall not mary, is a
condition limited against Law, and by the same pronounced unlawful and
unreasonable. Make it thine own case, admit thou did match with a wealthy
wife, whose furniture and riches has increased thy Estate, if God should call
for her, would thou in a kind memorial of the benefits attained by her
means, make thy self a votary to live unmaried? Do those which mary great
Heirs being women, and after their wives deaths enjoy their whole inheritance
by the courtesy of England, making their wives heirs to expect during their
lives, take it for any matter of conscience or scruple to mary again? Unless
it be in some place where the force of the custom and the benefit of the
living joined together work a contrary resolution in some husbands: which
custom annexed to Gavelkinde Lands in Kent and other places is of this
quality, 16 E. 3. aid 129. 19 E. 3. aid 144.
that the husband shall after the decease of his wife be Tenant by the courtesy
of her land as long as he remains unmaried, whether he have issue by her or
not: but upon his next marriage shall utterly forgo all his interest therein. A
custom therefore the less unreasonable because the restraint of marriage of
the one side is countervailed by the beneficial favor of the other side to
have the land by the courtesy without issue, and also for that he is to
deprive the next Heir of his wife, who perchance has been married with him but
few months or days, of the profit and commodity of the whole Land during his
life. But chiefly because it is a custom grounded and grown in continuance to
such religious observation and regard, that it seems an offense of conscience
to infringe it. But in our case sithence there is neither custom nor
conscience to warrant thy will, why should thou then seem to quarrel with
the lawful liberty of thy wife, if she survive thee, she being weak by kind
and education, and thereby less able to direct her occasions, and govern her
estate without a companion and coadjutor? no, on Gods name refer her to her
own choice and conscience therein, and make it no pretense and color to
abridge her of her right, because she seems inclinable unto that, which God
has ordained, and all men and women do embrace. As to the fear and suspicion
pretended, that another in matching with thy wife should be enriched by thy
travail, what should move thee to make that superstitious account of thy goods
when thou art gone? Were they any longer thine, then while thou had life and
license to employ them? Thou must needs know and acknowledge besides thy daily
experience, by the very Etymology and signification of the word, the true
nature and quality of the thing. These worldly goods are called temporal,
because they serve one but for a time; they are termed transitory, for that
their property is fleeting from one owner unto an other; they are named
moveable or current, because all their grace and credit is in running and
removing into diverse hands, according to that rude and old (but yet true)
Latin rhyme.

Omnia mundana per vices sunt aliena,
Nunc mea, nunc hujus, post mortem sunt alterius.
This worldly wealth each day does change
Their owners as we see,
Now mine, now his, and after death
An others goods they be.
Then sithence thy wealth has waited upon thee all thy life long, would
thou require the same to rest at thy devotion after thy death? If that seem
impertinent and unprofitable unto thee, then relinquish this care and suffer
the goods of this world to have their natural course and condition, which is
to be still in exchange, passage, and posting from hand to hand, serving all
men, ut peregrinationis viaticum, Hieronymus in Epist.
That is, A Pilgrims charge or defrayment in his journey, as Saint Hicrome
terms it. And address thy mind to the desire of such goods as are neitheir
temporal, transitory, current nor moveable, but perpetual, permanent,
constant, and not only immutable but inestimable.

But finally to satisfy the last objection against thy children, I wish thee
to look back unto that I have said, that thou may not for a private injury
or displeasure, seem as much as lies in thee to supplant and abrogate a
public custom, to the no less prejudice then offense of a great number that
have interest therein. In enriching thy Son, thou do discharge the duty of a
natural father toward him, which if he prodigally or wickedly mispend or
abuse, he carries his own condemnation and proves a wilful enemy to
himself. Luke 2.25.
The good father mentioned in the Gospel, who at the suite of his undutifull
and disobedient Son, (that would needs abandon the service and attendance on
his father to run the course of an extravagant Libertine with lewd company)
gave him a great portion of his wealth, is not any way blamed by our Savior
for that indulgence, but rather recommended to all posterity as a true Pattern
of a kind father. Saint Paul commands the father to be well affected to his
children, and no way to discourage them. Col. c. 3.
What may breed greater discouragement or coffeehouse in any child, then to
see himself by the place of his birth, and the good fortune of the City
entitled to the commodity of a good custom, and yet injuriously by his own
father, (whose affection should be always occupied and earnest in procuring
the good of his children) disappointed of his hope and defrauded of his right.
And as well as some having just cause of displeasure against their Son and
child, may in this unlawful and disorderly sort practice their revenge, so
may some other inconsiderate and wilful father upon a conceit taken against a
good Son and of singular desert, for that he concurreth not with him in some
humor or disposition, most wrongfully distress and undo him by such a
president. Thus the mischiefs objected on the one side are light and of small
moment, whereas the inconveniences apparent on the other side be manifold and
of dangerous consequence.

I will not vouchsafe to answer that undiscreet Sarcasmus or bitter scoff that
some use, We may play our wealth at dice without offense to the custom,
wherefore should we not then dispose the same from our wife and children by
our deeds of gift? This amounts to as much as if a married man would say, I
may commit felony or treason, and be attainted and hanged therefore, and then
the Law gives my wife no dower, nor my heir no patrimony, then why should I
not in reason use my discretion with the Land without encumbrance by the one,
or injury to the other? Match these two cases together with judgment, and thou
shall perceive they have a sensible concurrency in their address and
application to this purpose. It is well said by the Poet.

il juvat exemplum quod litem lite resolvit. The example of one wilful or
wicked act gives no just countenance or allowance to another. Let so much said
to thy objections take some place to alter thine humor, or at least be a
preparative for thine own reason in the fear of God to purge thee of the same.

But to conclude this short discourse with one consideration of great
importance, I wish thee to consider, that this City of London is and has been
happily preserved in this flourishing prosperity by the wise and politic
consent that all and always the particulars have had to increase the general
good estate thereof, thinking it their duty as they got and acquired their
substance in this City, so also to spend and defray it in the same: insomuch
that whatsoever falls from the one comes and grows unto another, and by
alteration of private fortunes (as chances and changes of times do require
from one Citizen to another) the general estate has flourished, and never
wanted particular men of wealth and ability to sustain the offices and
functions of the City. Upon which consideration by most laudable and ancient
Custom, the Lord Mayor and Senate of London have been and are entitled to the
tuition and custody of young Orphans and their goods, and likewise are made
acquainted by ordinary good means of inventaries taken and produced, what
substance and wealth each man dies possessed of, to the intent that although
that man which by his good travail and Trade has grown to be rich among them,
be departed hence, yet his goods may remain as among his wife and children in
use and property, so to the general strength of this City in account and
reckoning. For we often see that one rich man's wealth passes to the increase
of the good estate of another Citizen, either by marriage of the widow, or of
the Orphan: so that the City though deprived of a member or inhabitant, yet is
not destitute of such as may discharge his employment and place. Whereas if
this pernicious practice and uncharitable liberty might take root by deeds of
gifts and cautelous conveyance to strangers, not only the wife and children
may be distressed, but also the state of the City much weakened, and in danger
of a great disreputation and decay, from that that it has bin and yet is. For
if it be adjudged lawful in one, of what degree soever he be, it is neither
impossible nor unlikely, that the same will be used by many, and consequently
may be practiced by all: which if it befall, what will become of the happy
condition of this City, it is not hard to conjecture. I mean not to extend my
speech to the prejudice of any true debts that a man owes without fraud or
collusion, seeing the custom very providently cares for the discharge
thereof, but my purpose is to dissuade men from evil example, from insolent
violation of good customs, and from odious and unseemly practices of deceit
and evil meaning toward their wives and children: Which persuasion I would
wish all professors of the Law seriously and carefully to use and enforce to
their clients, being Citizens of London, as in good conscience and discretion
they ought to do.

Blame not my bold enterprise (gentle Reader) nor reprove my simple censure
herein presented unto thee, An Apostrophe to the Reader, and the motive of this
Treatise.
which might I know both for the matter and manner of it have been by any
other, and perchance by my self more largely and effectually delivered: if the
opportunity of my leisure might have answered the quality of the argument which
I had in hand. But fearing lest I should with too long a discourse in so plain
a proposition breed more lothsomness then liking, I would not, for want of
leisure I might not, and if I had had time at will I minded not (seeing for any
urgent occasion, the error being yet fresh, the practice rare and not grown to
an enormity, I needed not) but in a word or two to make thee acquainted with
the cause that moved me to address these few reasons to thy gentle view, So it
happened, that I being in company and conference with some persons (though
otherwise wise and well-affected, yet in this matter strangely conceited) it
chanced that the lawfulness and convenience of this custom came in question
and debate among us, and was by some of them (being men for sufficiency, of
great opinion, and for countenance and credit of good appearance and regard in
the City) so pressed with objections, that the most part of those which were
present seemed to incline to that persuasion. Wherefore lest the authority of
the men might the sooner seduce the simple multitude unto their error, and for
that I thought it a charitable policy to prevent the peril in the prime,
before it grew to a festering sore or incurable evil, according to the Poet
Ovids advise, Principiis obsta: sero medicina paratur,
Cum mala per longas invaluere moras.
VVithstand at first the springing evil
With medicines fit therefore,
Too late it is to take the cure
Of old and festred sore.


I thought good to apply this simple Receipt of reason to the minds of all such
as shall chance to be distempered be these disswasions: hoping that they will
yield me that friendly requital of good construction, which my offerred good
will may seem to deserve: and although I keep my self unnamed, and unknown, it
may please them to have this opinion of me, no more favorable then reasonable,
that he which is well devoted to the defense of good customs, is rather to be
justified in his good meaning, then condemned or held suspected of any sinister
conceit.

The Table.
Governors Charge. President. Fol. 4 Treasurer. ibid. Surveyors. Fol. 6
Almoners. Fol. 7 Scrutiners. Fol. 9 Admonition to the Auditors. Fol. 10 Orders
for keeping the Evidences. Fol. 11 The Renter Clerk and his Charge. ib. The
Hospitalers Office. Fol. 17 The Stewards Office. Fol. 19 The Matrons Office.
Fol. 20 The Sisters Office. Fol. 22 The Chirurgians. Fol. 23 The Porter. Fol.
24 The Bedells. Fol. 26 The Visitor of Newgate. Fol. 27
FINIS.

