A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF The late Treacherous and Horrid DESIGN, Which by the
great Blessing and especial Providence of God has been lately discovered: And
for which, Public Thanksgiving is by Order of both Houses of Parliament
appointed on Thursday the 15. of June, 1643.

TOGETHER WITH A true Copy of the Commission, under the great Seal* sent from
Oxford, to several persons in the City of LONDON.

ORdered by the Commons in Parliament, That this Narration and Commission be
read in all Churches and Chapels, in the Cities of London and Westminster, and
Suburbs thereof, on the day above said.

H. Elsynge Cler. Parl. D. Com.

LONDON: Printed for Edward Husbands, and are to be sold at his Shop in the
Middle Temple. July 12. 1643.

A brief Narrative of the late Treacherous and horrid Design.
AFter a continual succession of secret Conspiracies and open violences,
Plotted and attempted against The true Protestant Religion, Laws and Liberties
of this Kingdom, there has of late risen up, under the plausible Pretenses of
Moderation and Peace, a most dangerous and wicked Plot of diverse persons, to
join themselves with the Armies raised by the King, and to destroy the Forces
raised by the Lords and Commons in Parliament, to surprise the Cities of London
and Westminster with the Suburbs, and by Arms to force the Parliament; and in
a word, To have delivered up Religion, Parliament, City and Kingdom, into the
mere will and pleasure of the King, now in the hands of most desperate and
pernicious Councillors.

Toward the effecting whereof;

There was framed a mixture and conjunction of Persons of several qualities,
some whereof were of both Houses of Parliament; others of the Court and of the
City, who were in their respective Places and Employments to form and perfect
this Work, raised out of the Ashes of the late Petition of London for Peace.

The Method observed by them for the Conduct and carrying on their Design, was
first for several persons in the City, to dispose of themselves into a
Committee, being those who had been principal Movers and Fomenters of that
Petition.

The part that this Committee was chiefly to act, was;

First, To hold intelligence with both Armies, Court, and Parliament.

Secondly, To take a general survey of the Affections and numbers of persons,
within the several Wards and Parishes of the City and places adjacent, by the
Weekly Bill of Mortality, under three Ranks; of, Right men, (or the Kings
party) of, Averse men (or the well affected to the Parliament) of, Moderate
men, (or Neutrals) as they called them.

Thirdly, To consider of Arms, Ammunition, and all other Provisions of War
requisite thereunto.

Fourthly, Out of themselves to appoint some select persons to treat with M.
Waller, and M. Tompkins, with relation to the City, Court, and Parliament, as
also with Crispe, Roydon Broom and Binion; then at Oxford.

Master Wallers part in this business was;

First, To engage a considerable Party of the Lords and Commons in the Design.

2. To be the means of conveying all Counsels, Resolutions, and Intelligences
between the said party of Lords and Commons, and the Committee of the City.

M. Tompkins was not only an Assistant to M. Waller in the premises, but an
Instrument to convey by Hazell, and others, the particulars of their
proceedings in the Court, by address principally to the Lord Faulkland, and to
receive from Court directions, Powers, and commands, for the completing of the
work. For preventing discovery, Protestations of secrecy were taken by them to
this effect, As they were Christians, not to disclose it. Secondly, No man to
endeavor the engaging above two, whereby no one man could impeach many.

The part which was acted from the Court was,

1. By M. Herne, M. Alexander Hampden, and others employed upon Messages from
the King to the Parliament, under pretense of Treaties for Peace, to convey
their directions, encouragements, and Councels unto their party in London.

2. To give Power and Authority by Commissions under the great Seal, by
Warrants under the Kings hand; and otherwise for settling of a Council of War;
naming of Generals (and other Officers.) Execution of Marshall Law; Raising of
Moneys, and Provision of Arms and other necessaries.

3. For the disposing of some part of the Kings forces at Oxford, to be near
the City, and in readiness to assist the Party here, as cause should require.

The steps and degrees to bring this into Action were:

1. A Commission under the great Seal brought from Oxford, about a fortnight
ago, by the Lady Aubigny, with the Authorities aforesaid, thereby inabling and
commanding them by force of Arms to destroy, kill, and slay, the forces raised
by the Parliament, and their Adherents as Traitors, and Rebels.

2. Several Propositions, most of them agreed, and resolved by Master Waller,
in behalf in the said Party of the Lords and Commons, and the Committee of the
City, in behalf of the Party depending upon them, for the more ready and
orderly execution of the design. As first, Concerning the number of men Armed.
Secondly, The places where Magazines were laid; The places for Randevouz, and
for retreat upon occasion, The Colors, the Marks and Tokens for distinction
from others, The strength to be relied on within the walls, and without, What
to be done with the Tower, Where the chief Commanders affected to the
Parliament dwelt, The time of executing the design.

3. A Declaration was framed by them under pretense of asserting and
maintaining the heads of the Protestation, thereby the better to color
mischievous intentions to the people.

4. A Message was sent from Oxford, on Saturday was fortnight to acquaint the
Lord Faulkland by Hazel, that the design was come to good perfection, unto
which, Answer was returned, That they should hasten it with all speed.

The particulars of the design it self were:

1. To seize into their custody the Kings Children.

2. To seize several Members of both Houses, the Lord Major, and Committee of
the Militia, under pretense of bringing them to a legal Trial.

3. To seize upon the Outworks, Forts, Tower of London, Magazines, Gates, and
other places of Importance in the City.

4. To let in the Kings forces to surprise the City, and to destroy all those
that should oppose them by Anthority of Parliament.

5. By force of Arms to resist all Payments imposed by authority of the Houses
of Parliament, for the support of the Armies employed for their just defense,
and preservation of the true Protestant Religion, and Liberties of the Subject;
To suspend, if not alter, the whole Government of the City, and with
assistance of the Kings force, to awe and master the Parliament.

All which has been made appear to both Houses of Parliament, by the
Examinations and Confessions of M. Waller, M. Tompkins, M. Challenor, M.
Hazell, and other persons, principal Actors in the same, now under restraint;
The publication of the evidence being deferred till after their Trial.

A true Copy of the COMMISSION under the Great Seal, sent from Oxford to
several persons in the City of London.
CHARLES Rex.

CHarles, by the Grace of God, King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland,
Defender of the Faith, etc.
To Our trusty and welbeloved, Sir Nicholas Crisp, Sir George Stroude, Knights;
Sir Tho. Gardener, Knight, Record^r of London; Sir George Binion, Knight;
Richard Edesand Marmaduke Royden, Esquires; Tho. Broom, Esquire Peter Paggon,
Charles Ginnings, Sir Edw. Carlton, Robert Abbot, Andrew King, Will. White,
Steven Boulton, Robert Alden, Edmund Foster, Tho. Blinkhorne, of London,
Gentlemen; And to all such other person and persons as according to the true
intent and purport of these presents shall be nominated and appointed to be
Generals, Colonels, Lievtenant-Colonels, Serjeant-Majors, or other Officers, or
of Our Council of War, Greeting:
Whereas in Our Cities of London and Westminster, and Suburbs thereof, Our
Borough of Southwark and County of Middlesex, there are raised and continued
great number of Military Forces, both Horse and Foot, who under the Command of
Robert Earl of Essex, as their General, and under the Conduct of diverse
others, pretending to derive their Authority from the two Houses of Parliament,
have traitorously leavied War, and rebelled against Us their natural Liege
Lord; and many of Our Subjects have been seduced by false Informations, by the
practice of a few, who have been the contrivers of the mischievous Plots, and
have joined with them, either in person, or by ayding of them with Men, Money,
Horses, or other things, and many of our good and loyal Subjects overawed by
the Power of the Rebels, have been forced to contribute to them for the
maintenance of this unnatural War; and others refusing, have been Plundered,
and Robbed of their estates, and some committed to several Prisons, and others
barbarously used, contrary to the liberty of freeborn men, the Laws of the
Land, and contrary to all humanity; of which injuries and calamities falling
upon Our good Subjects, We are very sensible, and are desirous to give relief
to Our good Subjects by all the best means We can, and to resist the violence
and insol^ncie of the Rebels and their adherents, We having no other End
therein, but to preserve the true Protestant Religion in the integrity and
purity thereof; To maintain the Laws of the Land, and the Liberty of Persons,
and the Property of the Estates of Our Subjects, and the just Privileges of
Parliament. We have thought fit, for Our better Service, to settle a Council
of War in or about Our City of London, who may take these things into their sad
considerations which may conduce best to this end, and to have such Commanders
and Officers settled in the places aforesaid, which may both raise, govern, and
lead such Forces as may be raised there.

Know ye therefore, That We, reposing special trust and confidence in your
fidelities, industries, and good discretions, have made choice of, nominated,
and appointed you to be Our Council of War for the said Cities of London and
Westminster, and Suburbs thereof, Our said County of Middlesex, and Borough of
Southwarke; And do hereby give and grant Authority to you, or any four of you,
to make choice of such other able and discreet persons as you shall think fit
to nominate, under the Hands and Seal of any four of you, which with your
selves shall make up in all the number of Twenty one, and no more: And We do
give and grant to you, or any four of you, Power and Authority, at such times,
and in such places as you shall think convenient, to assemble and meet
together, and there to consult, advise, and resolve of all such things, and of
such ways and means as you, or any four of you shall think fittest, for the
raising of Forces both of Horse and Foot, either of the Inhabitants of the said
Cities, County, Borough, or any the adjacent Counties or other places, who will
voluntarily associate themselves to that purpose; And these Forces to Arm,
Muster, Conduct, Order, Lead, and Govern in the places aforesaid, or in any
the Counties adjacent, or elsewhere, in such manner as you your selves, or such
other able and fit persons as you, or any four of you shall to that purpose
appoint, according to these Presents shall think fit: And the better to effect
this Our Service, We do further give and grant to you, or any four of you,
Power and Authority, under your Hands and Seals, to make choice of, and appoint
such a fit Person as you shall think meet, to be Captain General of all these
Forces thus to be raised, and such other persons as you, or any four of you
shall in like manner make choice of and appoint, to be Colonels,
Lievtenant-Colonels, and Serjeant-Majors, over the Forces, in such manner, and
in such places as you shall so appoint; who by virtue thereof, and by virtue of
these Presents, shall have Power and Authority to do, execute, and perform all
such things, which to these several Offices and Employments, according to the
Law Martial, do belong: And We do hereby promise and grant, That with all
convenient speed after We shall have notice from you, or any four of you, under
your Hands and Seals, of your nomination of any person or persons whose
several places We shall grant and confirm unto them, and every of them
respectively, those several places to which you have so nominated them as
aforesaid, under Our Great Seal of England, or otherwise, as shall be
reasonable d^^ised and required of Us. And We do further by these Presents give
and grant unto you full Power and Authority, by all such good ways as you, or
any four of you, under your Hands shall agree upon, to raise Money for the
clothing, arming, furnishing, and paying of all such Soldiers as shall be thus
raised, and for the providing of all Ammunition, and other necessaries for the
War; all which money, upon a just account, we do for Us, Our Heirs, and
Successors, promise, grant, and agree, well and truly to repay, so soon as We
shall be enabled thereunto; and in the mean time to secure the same to those
for Our Service, and by your mediation and industry, shall lend or disburse the
same. And We do further by these Presents grant, That such Generals, Colonels,
Lievtenant-Colonels, and other Officers so by you nominated as aforesaid, shall
have full Power and Authority, by virtue of these Presents, to lead and order
the Soldiers severally under their Charges; and with them to fight against Our
Enemies and Rebels, and them to slay and destroy, or them to save, according to
the Law Martial, or course of War: For the doing of all which, this shall be
to you, them, and every of them, a sufficient Warrant; willing and commanding
all such Officers and Soldiers, which by virtue hereof you shall retain, to
obey readily, to receive and accomplish your directions, commands, and summons
in all things hereto appertaining, or necessary to be done; As also all Majors,
Sheriffs, Justices of Peace, Commissioners of Array, and all other Our Officers
and loving Subjects, to be ayding and assisting both to you, and to all such
Officers and other persons whom you shall appoint, under any four of your Hands
and Seals, for the furthering and advancement of this Our especial Service;
for which, this shall be to you, to them, and every of them, a sufficient
Warrant. In witness whereof, We have caused these Our Letters to be made
Patents.

Witness Our Self at Oxford, the 16 day of March, in the eighteenth Year of
Our Reign.
FINIS.

