A BRIEF DIALOGVE BETWEEN ZELOTOPIT ONE OF THE DAUGHTERS OF A ZEAlous
Roundhead, and Superstition a Holy Friar, newly come out of France.

SHOWING, The Zeal of good Motions of the one, and the Idolatry of the other.

AS ALSO, The Passages of their Holy ones, when that they be in their
Conventicles, each one condoling with his Holy Sister.

Composed by Owen Dogerell.

London Printed for John Biard.

A BRIEF Dialogue between Zelotopit one of the Daughters of a zealous
Roundhead, and Superstition a holy Friar.
Superstition. HOw now M. Caco-zeal, what is the reason you came no sooner,
seeing I sent for you.


Zeal. In truth Sir, I was so busied in pulling down Cheap Side Cross, and
preparing my Journey for Amsterstam, I could make no more haste.


Super. What for Amsterdam, I think now the Spirit blows where it lists?
what News I pray you in England, you must need go that pilgrimage: has your
Zeal bin so fervent that ye have set England on fire, and in a mutiny, that now
it is grown to hot for you.


Zeal. I must confess, that our Zeal was hot, so that we set them all in an
uprore: but to tell you in a truly the shepherd is smitten, and the flock is
scattered, our old Prophet Samuel How is dead; but I thank my God that many
more are risen, but must not be allowed to pray ex tempore, no not to pray at
all without a set Form and Order (Order say I) I cry the Lord hearty mercy for
presenting that word, it is a slip in me, the Lord will not suffer his best
servants to fall, we use no order but in making the spirit work in Order.


Super. After what Order.

Zeal. Not after the Order of the wicked, somewhat more precise in our actions,
not communicating with Publicans and Sinners, neither distrubuting to the poor
nor any other. But cleaving close unto a holy brother neither visiting the
sick; for it is quite contrary to our Discipline and Form of teaching, we have
scarce so much time as to get our dinners at home, nay our breakfasts, we are
so early: for I must tell you the spirit moves even at midnight, if so be I
had had but a brother the last night* I could have expounded to him in
sincerity, for then the spirit gave me utterance.


Sup. Are you a maid o^ no?

Zeal. I am Sir, graced with three Olive Branches, these three Children.

Super. A maid with child: It is beyond all humane reason, and the shallowness
of my brain is not able to conceive it. J am sure, J never found such a thing
in all my 30. years study, neither have J met with any or the like miracle in
all the whole Cloister, formerly J have bin idle, but now will sit more close,
and will search in the quintisence of a Nun, if that it be to be found there.


Zeal. No miracle with us holy ones, for J tell you Sir, it is more common with
us, then the saying of our Pater noster,


Sup. It is a miracle with us, we perhaps have as many with young as you have,
but none after that are maids.


Zeal. But J must tell you the spirit is upon us, and very quick in operation,
especially when on my Beds Green, for he with his wholesome destructions
instructs me in the night* that before morning I begin to propogate and
conceive, my self to bring forth the Seed of the Faithful.


Sup. Me think you look like a vestall, or a doded sheep, what is become of
your hair, has your holy Brethren new shorn you, and now turn you to graize,
and to seek for a new plantation, or was the spirit so fervent, that it has
put you into a swet, so as you have lost it all.


Zeal. No. Sir, the Nazerens were known by their long hair, and so are we by
our Roundheads, and the Armies display an Ensign in Battle, that the common
soldiers may know their Captains and Leaders: so do we in displaying, and
setting forth our lave ears we are knowu to be enemies to God, and the world,
but not to the flesh and the Devil.


Super. Then you will confess your selves Friends with the Devil.

Zeal. Yea sir, because the Devil is new turned Roundhead, and we must follow
our Leader, he is a devourer: for when we feast the Hob-goblins, our Elders
eat poor widows out of their habitations (as it is said they devour widows
Houses.


Sup. What is the reason you look so pale, and intends to leave your Country.

Zeal. I look pale, it is true, for I am troubled with a Timpany in my body, and
do daily labor and travel in loop to bring forth some new doctrine and
opinion, and for the leaving of my Country, it* is because we caunot keep our
Conventicles, and receive that happy Be ediction after prayerr, without many
disturbances and incombrances.


Sup. What is a Conventicle, define this word, sor you have past the sphere of
my understanding, and as we dominicans say, you trade out of my Element.


Zeal. O Superstition, J think you are a Friar.

Super. Do you know my name?

Zeal. Not I, I profess to yon.

Super. For certain my name is Superstition, for so I was named in Baptism.

Zeal. Out heresy, baptized! it is not lawful to be baptized, until that we
be 17. and that our names be written in the book of the Faithful.


Sup. But M. Caco-zeal, they say the Church is sick of an Ague, and it is thought
that if means be not made with a preservative for her health, that she will
fall into a deep Consumption.


Zeal. That's the first news J heard of it, truly Sir, for my part J never look
after the Church, let the Church look after her self, if J can receive a
benediction post ultum nonvale, I matter not* for that is the height of my
ambition, and the chiefest of my devotion: and again sir, we are so much busied
in studying to dismember Superstition, and to pull down the Crosses, that we
have not time to visit the sick, and comfort the comfortless and distressed.


Sup. Heaven bless me from you, if ye begin to dismember Superstition: J will
be gone, help some dear Saint, O holy Bonner where art thou now, save thy
Servant from these too much zealous Hypocrites, who never say their Pater
Noster.


Zeal. Yea sir, for the great Prophet Walker an Ironmonger, that good man was
putting up his petitions, and in the midst of his devotion, was sent to the
Kings Bench, and was prosecuted, that it might be fulfilled which was spoken by
the mouth of our holy Prophet Samuel, how in his last Tub Sermon took his
ultimum vale, and leave of us all, said follow the word close, and give due
benevolence to our Sisters in spirit, loving your Neighbors well, but their
wives better, for ye shall be persecuted, but be faithful till the end, and
keep this Conventicle in remembrance of me. For verily J say unto you,

My days are short, my time is past,
I take my leave of aul and last.

Sup. What is a Conventicle once more I crave for as yet Mrs. Caco-zeal you
have not resolved me.

Zeal. It is a place compounded of confusion,
Which make bad premises, but a loose conclusion.

Super. Then welcome Virgin, Maid, Sister, and Mother,
To Amsterdam, and to your holy Brother.
My leave I take, and have no great desire
With Roundheads Zeal to set my self on fire:
No new Plantation I will seek to find,
Nor have any brains to turn with every wind.
I Will keep my name indeed, and turn will never,
I lived in Superstition, and so will ever.

An excellent new Dittie.
To the tune of TOM of BEDLAM.
AM I mad O Noble Festus,
When Zeal and godly knowledge,
Has put me in hope to deal with the Pope
As well as the best in the College.
Still do I teach, hate a Cross, hate a Surprice,
Miters, Copes, and Rotchets,
Come hear me pray, nine hours a day,
And fill your heads with Crotchets.
In the house of Pure Emanuel
There I had my Education,
Where my (...) eyes,
With the light of (...).
Still do I teach, etc.
In the Holy tongue of Canaan
I placed my only pleasure,
Where I pricked my foot, with an Hebrew root,
That it bled beyond all measure,
Still do I teach, etc.
I unhorst the Whore of Babel,
With a Lance of Inspiration,
I made her to stink and spill all her drink,
In the Cup of Abomination.
Still do I teach, etc.
I Talk much of Salvation,
Although I cannot Clark it,
Yet I do say grace, in every place,
Though I taste but a Cheese in the Maaket.
Still do I teach, ctc.
Now fie on the Common Prayer Book,
The Letanie is but a fable,
I think it no scorn to have a Church in a Barn,
And a Pulpit at the end of a Table.
Still do I teach hate a Cross, hate a Surplice,
Miters, Copes, and Rotchets,
Come hear me pray, nine times a day,
And fill your heads with Crotchets.
FINIS.

