A BRIEF NARRATIVE OF A Strange and Wonderful Old Woman that has A Pair of
Horns Growing upon her Head.

^iving a true Account how they have several times after their being shed,
grown again. ^eclaring the Place of her Birth, her Education and Conversation;
With the first Occasion of their Growth, the time of their Continuance; And
where she is now to be seen, viz.

^t the Sign of the Swan near Charing Cross.

You that love Wonders to behold
Here you may of a Wonder read.
The strangest that was ever seen or told,
A Woman with Horns upon her Head.
With Allowance.

London, Printed by T. I. 1676.

A NARRATIVE OF A strange and wonderful Old Woman, that has a Great Pair of
Horns growing upon the hinder parts of her Head; And is at present to be seen
at the Swan in the Strand near Charing Cross.
READER,
IT may be, upon the first View of the Title of this short Relation, thou will
throw it down with all the carelessness imaginable, supposing it to be but an
idle and impertinent Fiction, such as some Frontless persons have too
frequently exposed to public View, on purpose to impose upon the Credulity of
the Gazing Multitude, who are apt to gape at Wonders, and to think all true as
the Gospel, they see in Print.

That this may court thy more favorable Thoughts, call to mind, that such as
intend to deceive, tell of Wonders that are remote, and too far distant from
thee, either suddenly to disprove, or presently to confirm thy self in the
belief of what they have told.

This gives thee an Account of what thou may with little trouble, and as
small expense, behold: Take but a Walk to the Swan in the Strand, near
Charing Cross, and there thou may satisfy thy Curiosity, and be able to
tell the World whether this following Narration be truth or invention.

There thou may see a Woman has Horns growing upon the hinder part of her
Head, an Object not only worthy of your Sight, but Admiration too! She is
Seventy six Years of Age, Bred and Born in the Parish of Shotwick in Cheshire,
and within four Miles of Chester, Tenant unto His Blessed Majesty, upon a Farm
of Sixteen pounds per Annum; so that she is not necessitated to this Course of
Life: or to deceive the credulous and short-sighted People, but to manifest to
the World such a Wonder in Nature, as has neither been read or heard of (we
may justly suppose) since the Creation.

She was Wife to one Master Henry Davies, who dyed Thirty five Years passed;
And since she has lived a Religious Widow, all along of a spotless and
unblameable Life and Conversation, of singular use to her Neighbors, for she
is a profess^d Midwife; happy and successful in that Undertaking: So that her
Departure was generally lamented in the place of her Abode, in such a measure,
that several of her Neighbors and Acquaintance brought her many Miles of her
Journey.

This strange and stupendous Effect began first from a Soreness in that place
where now the Horns grow, which (as it is thought) was occasioned by wearing a
straight Hat. This Soreness continued Twenty Years, in which time it miserably
afflicted this good Woman, and ripened gradually unto a Wenn near the bigness
of a large Hen Egg, which continued for the space of Five Years, more sadly
tormenting her than before: After which time it was, by a strange operation of
Nature, changed into Horns, which are in show and substance much like a Ramms
Horns, solid and wrinckled, but sadly grieving the Old Woman, especially upon
the change of Weather.

But more accurately to Describe its Nature and Manner of Production, may be a
Subject proper for a College of Physicians; and no question but it will be
esteemed worthy to employ the Ingenious Vertuoso's of the Age, who need not
their Glasses to magnify its Wonder.

She has cast her Horns three times already; The first time was but a single
Horn, which grew long, but as slender as an Oaten straw: The second was thicker
than the former: The two first Mr. Hewson Minister of Shotwick (to whose Wife
this Rarity was first discovered) obtained of the Old Woman his Parishioner:
They kept not an equal distance of time in falling off, some at three, some at
four, and another at four Years and a halfs Growth.

The third time grew two Horns, both which were beat off by a Fall backward;
one of them an English Lord obtained, and (as is reported) presented it to the
French King for the greatest Rarity in Nature, and received with no less
Admiration: The other (which was the largest) was Nine Inches long, and two
Inches about; it is much valued for the Novelty, a greater than any John
Tradeskin can set to view, or the greatest Traveller can with truth affirm to
have seen. Sir Willoughby Aston has also another Horn which dropped from this
Woman's Head, and reserves it as a Choice Rarity. At this present she has a
pair of Horns upon her Head of Six Months Growth; And it is not without reason
believed, they will in a short time be larger than any of the former; for
still the latter have exceeded the former in bigness.

The Circumstance of this Relation considered or examined, at least with the
sight of her, I hope it will not readily be believed to be an Imposture, or
Artificial Projecting; For so grossly to impose upon His Majesty, and all His
Loyal Subjects, would be an unpardonable Crime, and would deserve men's
Contempt, and not their Company, and certainly expose the Party to the Violence
of a rude Multitude, who discovering a Cheat, would, I believe, soon make the
Old Woman pull in her Horns.

FINIS.

