A REVIEW OF DOCTOR BRAMBLE, Late Bishop of LONDENDERRY, HIS FAIR WARNING
Against the Scotes Discipline.

By R. B. G.

Printed at DELF, By Michiel Stael, dwelling at the Turf-Market 1649.

For the right Honorable the Noble and potent Lord JOHN Earl of Cassils, Lord
KENNEDY, etc. one of his MAJESTY'S privy counsel, and Lord Justice general of
Scotland.
RIGHT HONORABLE.
MY long experience of your Lordships sinceer zeal to the truth of God, and
affection to the liberties of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, against all
enemies whomsoever; has imboldened me to offer by your Lordships hand to the
view of the public, my following answer to a very bitter enemy of that Church
and Kingdom for their adhaerence to the sacred truth of God and their own just
liberties.

At my first sight of his Book and many days thereafter I had no purpose at
all to meddle with him: The Authors reasons of his writing.
your Lordship knows how unprovided men of my present condition must be,
either with leisure, or accommodations, or a mind suitable for writing of
books. Also Doctor Bramble was so well known on the other side of the Sea, the
justice of the Parliament of England and Scotland having unanimously condemned
him to stand upon the highest pinnacle of infamy, among the first of the
unpardonable incendiaries, and in the head of the most pernicious instruments
of the late miseries in Britain and Ireland: and the evident falsehood of his
calumnies were so clearly confuted long ago in printed answers to the infamous
Authors whence he had borrowed them; I saw lastly the man's Spirit so extreme
saucy, and his pen so wespish and full of gall, that I judged him unworthy of
any answer. But understanding his malions boldness to put his Book in the hand
of his Majesty, of the Prince of Orange, and all the eminent personages of this
place who can reed English; yea to send it abroad unto all the Universities of
these Provinces, with very high and insinuating commendations, from the prime
favorers of the Episcopal cause: hearing also the threats of that faction to
put this their Excellent and unanswerable piece, both in Dutch, Frensh, and
Latin; that in the whole neighboring World the reputation of the Scotes might
thereby be wounded, killed, and buried, without hope of recovery; I found it
necessary, at the desire of diverse friends, to send this my review after it,
hoping that all who shall be pleased to be at the pains of comparing the reply
with the challenge, may be induced to pronounce him not only a rash, untimous,
malicious, but also a very false accuser. This much justice do I expect from
every judicious and aequitable comparer of our wrytes, upon the hazard of their
censure to fall upon my side. The Praelats are unable by reason to defend
Episcopacy.


His invectives against us are chiefly for three things; our Discipline, our
Covenant, our alleged unkindnes to our late Sovereign. My apology for the
first is that in discipline we maintain no considerable conclusion, but what is
avowed by all the Reformed Churches, especially our Brethren of Holland and
France, as by the approbatory suffrages of the Universities of Leyden, Vtrecht
and others, to the theorems whereupon our adversary does build his chief
accusations, may appear. If our practice had aberred from the common rule, the
crookednes of the one ought not to praejudge the straightnes of the other:
though what our adversary alleges of these aberrations is nothing, but his
own calumnious imputations: the chief quarrel is our rule it self, which all
the reformed harmoniously defend with us, to be according to Scripture; and
the Episcopal declinations, to be beside and against the line of the word,
yea Antichristian.

If our Praelats had found the humor of disputing this maine cause to stir in
their veins, why did they not vent it in replies to Didoclavius and Gersome
Bucerus, who for long thirty years have stood unanswered? or if fresher meats
had more pleased their taste, why did not their stomachs venture on Salmasius or
Hondels books against Episcopacy? If verbal debates had liked them better then
writing, why had none of them the courage to accept the conference, with that
incomparably most learned of all knights now living or in any bygone age Sir
Claud Somayis; who by a person of honor about the King, did signify his
readiness to prove before his Majesty, against any one or all his praelaticall
divines, that their Episcopacy had no warrant at all in the word of God, or any
good reason?

But our friends are much wiser then to be at the trouble and hazard of any
such exercise; Their stronged arguments are trucks of Court.
the artifices of the court are their old trade, they know better how to watch
the seasons, and to distribute amongst themselves the hours of the Kings
opportunities, when privately without contradiction they may instill in his
tender mind their corrupt principles, and instruct him in his cabine, how safe
it is for his conscience, and how much for his honor rather to ruin himself,
his family and all his Kingdoms with his own hands, then to desert the holy
Church, that is the Bishops and their followers; then to join with the
rebellious Covenanters, enemies to God, to his Father, to to Monarchy: that the
embracing of the Barbarous Irish the pardoning of all their monstrous murders,
the rewarding of their expected merits with a free liberty of Popery, and
access to all places of the highest trust, though contrary to all the Laws
which England and Ireland has known this hundred years; all this without and
before any Parliament, must be very consistent, with conscience, honor and all
good reason. Yea to bind up the soul of the most sweet and ingenuous of
Princes, in their chains of their slavery for ever, they have fallen upon a
most rare trick, which hardly the inventions of all their praedecessors can
pararel. The Brothers unlu^ foot is (...) in (...)
They rest not satisfied, that for the upholding of their ambition and greed,
they did harden our late Sovereign to his very last in their Errors, and
without compassion did dryve him on to his fatal praecipice; unles they make
him continue after his death to cry loud every day in the cares of his Son in
his later will and testament, (...)
to follow him in that same way of ruin; rather then to give over to serve the
lusts of the praelaticall clergy. They have gathered together his Majesty's
last papers, and cut of them have made a book, whereupon their best pens have
dropped the greatest eloqution, reason and devotion was among them, by way of
essays; as it were to frame the heart of the Son by the fingers of the dying
Father to piety, wisdom, patience, and every virtue; but ever and znone to
let fall so much of their own ungracious dew, as may irrigat the feeds of their
praelaticall Errors and Church interest; so far as to charge him to perseveer
in the maintenance of Episcopal government upon all hazards, without the
change of any thing except a little p. 278. and to assure that all Covenanters
are of a faction engaged into a Religious rebellion, who may never be trusted
till they have repented of their Covenant; and that till then never less
loyalty justice or humanity may be expected from any, then from them; that if
he stand in need of them he is undone, for they will devour him as the
Serpent does the dove.

These and the like pernicious maxims framed by an Episcopal hand, of purpose
to separat for ever the King from all his covenanted subjects, how far they
were from the heart, language and wrytings of our late Sovereign, all who were
aquainted with his carriage and most intime affections at New Castle, in the
Isle of Wight and thereafter, can testify, But it is reason when the Praelats
do frame an image of a King that they should have liberty to place their own
image in its forheade, as the statuary of old did his, in the Boss of Pallas
targe, with such artifice that all her worshipers were necessitat to worship
him and that no hand was able to destroy the one without the disfolution and
breaking in pieces of the other; yet our Praelats would know, that in this age
there be many excellent Engyneers, whose witty practicks transcend the most
skillful experiments of our Ancestors: and what ever may be the ignorance or
weakness of men, we trust the breath of our Lords mouth will not fail to blow
out the Bishop from the Kings arms, without any detriment at all to royalty,
Always the wicked and impious cunning of these craftsemen is much to be
blamed who dare be bold to insert and engrave themselfes so deeply in the
images of the Gods as the one cannot be intended to be picked out of the other
more then the Aple from the eye, unles the subsistence of both be put in hazard.

The other matter of his railing against us is the solemn league and covenant;
The only crime of the Covenant, is that it extirpate praelacy.
when this nimble and quick enough Doctor comes assisted with all the reasons
the whole University of Oxford can afford him, to demonstrat it as he professes
in his last Chapter, to be wicked, false, void, and what not; we find his most
demonstrative proofs to be so poor and silly that they infere nothing of his
conclusion. To this day no man has showed any error in the matter of that
covenant; as for our framing and taking of it, our adversaries drove us
thereunto, with a great deal of necessity; and now being in it, neither their
fraud nor force may bring us from it again, for we fear the oath of God.
After much deliberation we found that covenant the sovereign means to join
and keep together the whole orthodox party in the three Kingdoms, for the
defense of their Religion and Liberties which a popish, praelaticall and
malignant faction with all their might were overturning who still to this day
are going on in the same design, without any visible change, in the most of
their former principles. And why should any who loves the King hate this
covenant, which is the straytestty the world can devise, to knit all to him and
his posterity, if so be his Majesty might be pleased to enter therein; but by
all means such a mischief must be averted, for so the root of Episcopacy
would quickly wither without any hope of repullulation; an evil far greater
in the thoughts of them who now manage the conscience of the Court the^ the
extirpation of Monarchy the eversion of all the three Kingdoms or any other
earthly misery.

As for the third subject of the Warners fury against us, The Bishops are most
justly cast out of England.
our unkindnes to the late King, if any truth were in this false challenge, no
other creature on earth could be supposed the true cause thereof, but our
unhappy praelats: all our grievances both of Church and State, first and last,
came principally from them: had they never been authors of any more mischief,
then what they occasioned to our late Sovereign, his person, family and
Dominions this last dozn of years, there is abundant reason of burying that
their praeter and Antiscripturall order in the grave of perpetual infamy. But
the truth is, beside more ancient quarrels, since the days of our fathers the
Albigenses, this limb of Antichrist has ever been witnessed against; Wickleif,
Huss, and their followers were zealous in this charge, till Luther and his
disciples got it flung out of all the reformed world, except England; where the
violence of the ill advised princes did keep it up for the perpetual trouble
of that land, till now at last it has well near kicked down to the ground
there, The Scots were never injurious to their King.
both Church and Kingdom. As for the point in hand we deny all unkindnes to
our King whereof any reasonable complaint can be framed against us. Our first
contests stand justified this day by King and Parliament in both Kingdoms.
When his Majesty was so ill advised as to bring down upon our borders an
English army for to punish our refusing of a world of novations in our Religion
contrary to the laws of God and of our country, what could our land do less
then lie down in their arms upon Dunce law for their just and necessary
defense? when it was in their power with ease to have dissipat the opposite
army, they show themselves most ready upon very easy conditions to go home in
peace, and gladly would have rested there, had not the furious Bishops moved
his Majesty without all provocation, to break that first peace and make for a
second invasion of Scotland, only to second their unreasonable rage: was it not
then necessary for the Scots to arm again? when they had deseate the
Episcopal Army and taken Newcastle though they found nothing considerable to
stand in their way to London, yet they were content to lie still in
Northumberland, and upon very mean tearnes to return the second time in
peace. For all this the praelats could not give it over, but raised a new Army
and filled England with fire and sword, yea well near subdued the Parliament
and their followers and did almost accomplish their first designs upon the
whole Isle. The Scots then with most earnest and pitiful entreaties were
called upon by their Brethren of England for help, where unwilling that their
brethren should perish in their sight and a bridge should be made over their
carcasses for a third war upon Scotland, when after long trial they had
found all their intercessions with the King for a moderat and reasonable
accommodation slighted and rejected they suffered themselves to be persuaded to
enter in covenant with their oppressed and fainting brethren, for the
mantainance of the common cause of Religion and liberty, but with express
Articles for the preservation of royalty in all its just rights in his Majesty
and his posterity; what unkindnes was here in the Scots to their King?

When by Gods blessing on the Scotes help the opposite faction was fully
subdued, his Majesty left Oxford with a purpose for London, The Scotes selling
of the King is a most false calumny.
but by the severity of the ordinances against his receivers, he diverted
toward Linn, to ship for Holland or France; where by the way fearing a
discovery and surprise, he was necessitate to cast himself upon the Scotes
army at New-wark; upon his promise to give satisfaction to the propositions of
both Kingdoms, he was received there and to New Castle: here his old oaths to
adhaere unto Episcopacy hindered him to give the expected satisfaction. AT that
time the prime leaders of the English army were seeking with all earnestnes
occasion to fall upon the Scots, much out of heart and reputation by James
Grahame and his Irishes incursions, most unhappy for the Kings affairs:
Scotland at that time was so full of divisions that if the King had gone
thither they were in an evident hazard of a present war both within among
themselfes, and without from England: our friends in the English Parliament
whom we did, and had reason to trust, assured us that our taking the King with
us to Scotland, was the keeping of the Sectarian Army on foot, for the wrack
of the King, of Scorland, of the Presbyterian party in England; as the sending
of his Majesty to one of his houses near London,, upon the faith of the
Parliament of England, was the only way to get the Sectaryes disarmed, the King
and the people settled in a peace, upon such terms as should be satisfactory
both to the King and the Scots and all the well-affected in England. This being
the true case was it any, either unjustice, unkindnes or imprudence in the
Scots to leave the King with his Parliament of England? was this a selling of
him to his enemies? the monyes the Scots received at their departure out of
England had no relation at all to the King, they were scarce the sixth part of
the arreares due to them for bygon service; they were but the one half of the
sum capitulat for, not only without any reference to the King, but by an act
of the English Parliament excluding expressly from that Treaty of the armies
departure all consideration of the disposal of the Kings person. The
unexpected evils that followed in the Armies rebellion, in their seasing on
London, destroying the Parliament, murdering the King, no mortal eye could
have forseen. The Scots were ever ready to the utmost of their power to have
prevented all these mischiefs with the hazard of what was dearest to them;
notwithstanding of all the hard measure they had often received both from the
King and the most of their friends in England. That they did not in time and
unanimously stur to purpose for these ends they are to answer it to God, who
were the true Authors; the innocence of the Church is cleared in the following
treatise. Among the many causes of these miseries the prime fountain was the
venom of Episcopal principles which some serpents constantly did infuse by
their speeches and letters in the ears and heart of the King to keep him of
from giving that satisfaction to his good subjects which they found most
necessary and due; the very same cause which ties up this day the hands of
covenanters from redressing all present misorders could they have the King to
join with them in their covenant, to quit his unhappy Bishops, to lay aside
his formal and dead Liturgy, to cast himself upon the counsels of his
Parliaments it were easy to prophecy what quickly would become of all his
enemies: but so long as Episcopal and malignant agents compasses him about
(though all that comes near may see him as lovely hopfull, and promising a
prince for all natural endowments as this day breaths in Europe or for a long
time has swayed a Scepter in Britain) yet while such unlucky birds nest in his
Cabin and men so ungraciously principled do daily besiege him, what can his
good people do but sit down with mournful eyes and bleeding hearts, till the
Lord amend these otherwise remediles and insuperable evils? but I hold here
least I transgress to far the bounds of an Epistle?

I account it an advantage to have your Lordship my judge in what here and in
my following treatise, The reason of the dedication.
I spoke of Religion, the liberties of our country and the Royal Family: I
know non fitter then your Lordship, both to discern and decerne in all these
matters. Me thinks I may say it without flattery (which I never much loved
either in my self or others) that among all our Nobles for constancy in a
zealous profession, for exemplary practice in public and private duties; the
mercy of God has given to your Lordship a reputation second to none. And for a
rigid adhaerence to the Rights and Privileges of your Country, according to
that ancient disposition of your most Noble Family, noted in our Historians,
especially that Prince of them Georg Buchanan, the Tutor of your Grandfather,
I know none in our Land who will pretend to go before you, and for the affairs
of the King, your interest of blood in the Royal Family is so well known, that
it would be a strange impudency in me, if in your audience I durst be bold
wittingly to give sinistrous information. Praying to God that what in the
candid ingenuity and true zeal of my spirit, I present under your Lordships
patrociny unto the eye of the World, for the vindication of my mother Church
and Country, from the Sicophantick accusations of a Stigmatized incendiary may
produce the intended effects,

I rest your Lordships in all Christian duty, R. B. G.
Hague this 28 May / 7 Iunie. 1649.
CHAP. I.
The praelaticall faction continue resolute, that the King and all his people
shall perish, rather then the praelats, be not restored to their former places
of power, for to set up Popery, Profanity, and Tirranny, in all the three
Kingdoms.

WHile the Comissioners of the Church and Kingdom of Scotland, The
unseasonablenes of Doctor Brambles warning.
were on their way to make their first addresses to his Majesty, for to
condole his most lamentable afflictions, and to make offer of their best
affections and services for his comfort, in this time of his great distress;
it was the wisdom and charity of the praelaticall party, to send out Doctor
Bramble, to meet them with his Fair Warning. For what else? but to discourage
them in the very entry from tendering their propositions, and before ever they
were heard, to stop his Majesty's ears with grievous praejudice, against all
that possibly they could speak; though the world sees that the only apparent
fountain of hope upon earth, for recovery of the woefully confounded affairs
of the King, is in the hands of that Antipraelaticall nation: but it is the
hope of these who love the welfaire of the King and his people, of the Churches
and Kingdoms of Britain, that the hand of God, which has broken all the
former devices of the Praelats, shall crush this their engine also. The
irrational way of the warners writing.


Our warner undertaketh to oppugn the Scotes discipline in a way of his own,
none of the most rational. He does not so much as pretend to state a question,
nor in his whole book to bring against any maine position of his opposites,
either Scripture, father or reason, nor so much as assay to answer any one of
their arguments against Episcopacy; only he culs out some of their by-tenets,
belonging little or nothing to the maine questions, and from them takes
occasion to gather together in a heap all the calumnies which of old, or of
late their known enemies out of the forge of their malice and fraud, did
obtrude on the credulity of simple people: also some detorted passages from the
books of their friends, to bring the way of that Church in detestation without
any just reason.

These practices in our warner, The most of his stuff is borrowed and long
ago confuted.
are the less pardonable, that though he knows the chief of his allegations,
to be but borrowed from his late much beloved Comerads Master Corbet in his
Lysimachus Nicanor, and Master Maxewell in his Issachars Burden, yet he was
neither deterred by the strange punishments, which God from heaven inflicted
visibly on both these calumniatores of their mother Church, nor was pleased in
his repeating of their calumnious arguments, to releeve any of them from the
exceptions under the which they stand publicly confuted, I suppose to his own
distinct knowledge, I know certainly, to the open view of thousands in
Scotland, England and Ireland; but it makes for the warners design to
dissemble here in Holland, that ever he heard of such books as Lysimachus
Nicanor, and Issachars Burden, much less of Master Baylies answer to both,
printed some years ago at London, Edinburgh and Amsterdam, without a
rejoinder from any of that faction to this day. The contumelious bitterness of
the warners spirit.


How ever let our warner be heard. In the very first page of his first chapter,
we may taste the sweetness of his meek Spirit: at the very entry, he
concludes but without any pretense to an argument there or else where, the
discipline of the Church of Scotland to be their own invention, whereon they
dote, the Diana, which themselves have canonized, their own dreams, the
counterfeyt image which they feign has fallen down from Jupiter, which they so
much adore, the very quintessence of refined popery, not only most injurious to
the civil Magistrate, most oppressive to the subject, most pernicious to both;
but also inconsistent with all forms of civil government, destructive to all
sorts of Policy, a rack to the conscience, the heaviest pressure that can fall
on a people. So much truth and sobernes does the warner breath out in his very
first page.

Though he had no regard at all to the clear passages of Holy Scripture,
whereupon the Scotes do build their Anti-Episcopall tenets; nor any reverence
to the harmony of the reformed Churches, which unanimously join with the
Scotes in the maine of their discipline, especially in that which the Doctor
hates most therein, the rejection of Fpiscopacy: yet me thinks some little
respect might have appeared in the man to the authority of the Magistrate, and
civil Laws, which are much more ingeminated by this worthy divine over all his
book, then the holy Scriptures.

Can he so soon forget that the whole discipline of the Church of Scotland, as
it is there taught and practiced, The warner stricks at the Scotes discipline
through the Kings sides.
is established by acts of Parliament, and has all the strength which the King
and State can give to a civil Law? the warner may well be grieved, but hardly
can he be ignorant, that the Kings Majesty this day does not at all question
the justice of these sanctions: what ever therefore be the Doctors thoughts,
yet so long as he pretends to keep upon his face the mask of loyalty, he must
be content to eat his former words, yea, to burn his whole book: otherwise he
lays, against his own professions, a slander upon the King, and His Royal
Father, of great ignorance, or huge unjustice, the one having established, the
other offering to establish by their civil laws, a Church discipline for the
whole nation of Scotland, which truly is the quintessence of Popery, pernicious
and destructive to all forms of civil government, and the heaviest pressure
that can fall on a people.

All the cause of this choler which the warner is pleased to speak out; In the
threshold he stumbles on the Kings conscience.
is the attempt of the Scotes, to obtrude their discipline upon the King,
contrary to the dictars of his own conscience, and to compel foreign
Churches to embrace the same. Ans. Is it not presumption in our warner, so
soon to tell the world in print what are the dictats of the Kings conscience,
as yet he is not his Majesty's confessor, and if the Clerk of the Closet had
whispered some what in his ear, what he heard in secret, he ought not to have
proclaimed it without a warrant; but we do altogether mistrust his reports of
the Kings conscience: for who will believe him, that a knowing and a just King
will ever be content, to command and impose on a whole Nation by his Laws, a
discipline contrary to the dictats of his own conscience. This great stumble
upon the Kings conscience in the first page, must be an ominous cespitation on
the threshold.

The other imputation had no just ground: The Scots never offered to impose any
thing upon England.
the Scotes did never meddle, to impose any thing upon foreign Churches, there
is question of none, but the English; and the Scotes were never so
presumptuous, as to impose any thing of theirs upon that Church. It was the
assembly of divines at Westminster, convocat by the King and Parliament of
England, which after long deliberation, and much debate, unanimously concluded
the Presbiterian discipline in all the parts thereof, to be agreeable to the
word of God: it was the two Houses of the Parliament of England without a
contrary voice, who did ordain the abolition of Episcopacy, and the setting up
of Presbyteryes and Synods in England and Ireland. Can here the Scotes be said
to compel the English to dance after their pype, when their own assembly of
divines begins the song, when the Lords and Commons assembled in the Parliament
of England concur without a discording opinion, when the King himself for
perfecting the harmony offers, to add his voice for three whole years
together?

In the remainder of the chapter the warner lays upon the Scotes three other
crimes: first, The elder praelats of England were Erastians, and more, but the
younger are as much anti-Erastian as the most riged of the Presbytery.
That they count it Erastianisme to put the government of the Church in the
hand of the Magistrate. Answ. The Doctors knowledge is greater then to be
ignorant, that all these go under the name of Erastians, who walking in
Erastus ways of flattering the Magistrate, to the prejudice of the just rights
of the Church, run yet out much beyond Erastus personal tenets; I doubt if
that man went so far as the Doctor here and else where, to make all
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, but a part of the Magistrates civil power, which
for its execution, the supreme Governors of any state may derive out of the
fountain of their supremacy to what ever hands civil or Ecclesiastic
themselfes think fit to commit it. Let the Doctor add to this much knowledge,
but a little ingenuity, and he shall confess that his Brethren the Later
Bishops, who claim Episcopacy by divine right, are all as much against this
Erastian Caesaro-papisme, as any Presbiterian in Scotland. The elder Bishops
indeed of England and all the Laws there for Episcopacy seem to be point
blank according to the Erastian errors: for they make the crown and royal
supremacy the original, root and fountain whence all the discipline of the
Church does flow: as before the days of Henry the eight it did out of the Popes
head-ship of the Church under Christ. How ever let the Doctor ingenuously
speak out his sense, and I am deceived, if he shall not acknowledge, that how
gross an Erastian so ever himself and the elder Bishops of England might have
been, yet that long ago, the most of his praelatical friends have become as
much opposite to Erastianisme, as the most rigid of the Presbiterians.

The other crime he lays to the charge of the Scotes is, The Scotes first and
greatest crime is irreconciliablenes with Rome.
that they admit no latitude in Religion, but will have every opinion
afundamentall article of faith, and are averse from the reconciliation of the
Protestant Churches: Ans. If the warner had found it seasonable to vent a
little more of his true sense in this point, he had charged this great crime
far more home upon the head of the Scotes: for indeed though they were ever
far from denying the true degrees of importance which do clearly appear among
the multitude of Christian truths, yet the great quarrel here of the warner
and his friends against them, is that they spoiled the Canterburian design of
reconcealing the Protestant Churches not among themselfes, but with the Church
of Rome. When these good men were with all earnestnes proclaming the greatest
controversies of Papists and Protestants, to be upon no fundamentalls but only
disputable opinions, wherein belief on either side was safe enough, and when
they found that the Papists did stand punctually to the Tenets of the Church of
Rome, and were obstinately unwilling to come over to England, their great
labor was that the English and the rest of the Protestants, casting aside
their needless belief of problematick truths, in piety, charity and zeal, to
make up the breach and take away the shisme, should be at all the pains to
make the journey to Rome. While this design is far advanced and furiously
driven on in all the three Kingdoms, and by none more in Yreland then the
Bishop of Derry, behold the rude and plain blewcapes step in to the play and
mar all the game: by no art, by no terror can these be gotten alongs to
such a reconciliation. This was the first and greatest crime of the Scotes,
which the Doctor here glances at, but is so wise and modest a man as not to
bring it above board.

The last charge of the chapter is, The Scotes were ever anti episcopal.
that the Scotes keep not still that respect to the Bishops of England, which
they were wont of old in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's reign. Ans. In that
letter cited by the warner from the general assembly of Scotland. 1566. Sess.
3. there is no word of approbation to the office of Episcopacy: they speak to
the Bishops of England in no other quality or relation, but as Ministers of the
word, the highest style they give them is, reverend Pastors and Brethren; the
tenor of the whole Epistle is a grave and brotherly admonition to beware of
that fatal concomitant of the most moderat Episcopacy, the troubling of the
best and most zealous servants of Christ for idle and fruitles Ceremonies. How
great a reverence the Church of Scotland at that time carried to praelacy, may
be seen in their supplication to the secret counsel of Scotland, in that same
assembly the very day and Session wherein they write the letter in hand to the
Bishops of England. The Archbishop of S. Andrews being then usurping
jurisdiction over the ministry by some warrant from the state, the Assembly was
grieved, not only with the popery of that Bishop, but with his ancient
jurisdiction, which in all Bishops, Popish and protestant, is one and the same:
That jurisdiction was the only matter of their present complaint; and in
relation thereto they assure the counsel in distinct terms, that they would
never be more subject unto that usurped tyranny the^ they would be to the
devil himself: So reverend an opinion had the Church of Scotland at that time
of Episcopal jurisdiction.

But suppone that some fourscore years ago, the Scotes before they had tasted
the fruits of Protestant Bishops, The Praelates lately were found in the act of
introducing Popery, into the Church, and Tyranny into the Kingdom.
had judged them tolerable in England, yet since that time by the long tract of
mischiefs, which constantly has accompanied the order of praelacy, they have
been put upon a more accurat inspection of its nature, and have found it not
only a needles, but a noxious and poisonous weed, necessare to be plucked up by
the root, and cast over the hedge. Beside al its former malefices, it has been
deprehe^ded of late in the very act of everting the foundations, both of
Religion and government, of bringing in Popery and Tyranny, in the Churches
and States of all the three Kingdoms, ( Canterburian self conviction cap. 1.)

And for these crimes, it was condemned, killed, and buried in Scotland, by the
unanimous consent of King, Church and Kingdom: when England thereafter both in
their Assembly and Parliament, without a discording voice had found it
necessary, to root out that unhappy plant, as long ago with great wisdom, it
had been cast out of all the rest of the reformed Churches, had not the Scotes
all the reason in the World, to applaud such pious just and necessary
resolutions of their English Brethren, though the warner should call it the
greatest crime?

CHAP. II.
No controver sie in Scotland betwixt the King and the Church, about the
convocating of Synods.
The Presbiterians assert positively, the Magistrates right to convocat Synods,
to confirm their acts, to reform the Churches within their dominions.

IN the second Chapter the warner charges the Scotes presbytery, with the
overthrowing the Magistrates right in convocating of Synods. When he comes to
prove this, he forgets his challenge: and digresses from it to the Magistrates
power of choysing elders and making Ecclesiastic laws, avowing that these
things are done in Scotland by Ecclesiastic persons alone, without consent of
the king or his counsel. Ans. It seems our Warner is very ignorant of the way
of the Scotes discipline, the ordinary and set meetings of all assemblies both
national and provincionall since the first reformation are determined by acts
of Parliament, with the Kings consent, so betwixt the King and the Church of
Scotland, there is no question for the convocating of ordinary assemblies, for
extraordinary, no man in Scotland did ever controvert the Kings power to call
them when and where he pleased: as for the inhaerent power of the Church to
meet for discipline, alswell as for worship, the Warner falls on it hereafter,
we must therefore pass it in this place.

What he means to speak of the Kings power in choysing elders or making
Ecclesiastic Laws, himself knows: The warners Erastian and Tirannick
principles, hated by the King.
his Majesty in Scotland did never require any such privilege, as the
election of elders, or Commissioners to Parliament, or members of any
incorporation, civil or Ecclesiastic, where the Laws did not expressly
provide the nomination to be in the crown. The making of Ecclesiastic Laws
in England, alswell as in Scotland, was ever with the Kings good contentment,
referred to Ecclesiastic assemblies: but the Warner seems to be in the mind
of these his companions, who put the power of preaching, of administering the
Sacraments and discipline in the supreme Magistrate alone, and derives it out
of him as the head of the Church to what members he thinks expedient to
communicate it: also that the legislative power alswell in Ecclesiastic as
civil affairs, is the property of the King alone. That the Parliaments and
general assemblies are but his arbitrary counsels, the one for matters of the
state, the other for matters of the Church, with whom or without whom he makes
acts of Parliament and Church cannons, according to his good pleasure, that all
the offices of the Kingdom, both of Church and State are from him, as he gives
a Commission to whom he will to be a sheriff or justice of peace, so he sends
out whom he pleases to preach and celebrate Sacraments by virtue of his regal
mission. The Warner and his Erastian friends may well extend the royal
supremacy to this largenes, but no King of Scotland was ever willing to accept
of such a power though by erroneous flaterers, sometimes obtruded upon him,
(see Canterburian self conviction. cap. ult.)

The Warner will not leave this matter in general, The Warners ignorant and
false report of the Scotes proceedings.
he discends to instance a number of particular incroatchments of the Scots
Presbiters upon the royal authority: we must dispense in all his discourse
with a small peckadillo in reasoning, he must be permitted to lay all the
faults of the Presbiterians in Scotland upon the back of the Presbitery it
self, as if the faylings of officers were natural to, and inseparable from
their office: mis-kenning this little mote of unconsequentiall argumenting, we
will go through his particular charges, the first is, that King James anno
1579, required the general assembly, to make no alteration in the
Church-Policy, till the next Parliament, but they contemning their Kings
command, determined positively all their discipline without delay, and
questioned the Arch-Bischop of Saint Andrews for voting in Parliament
according to the undoubted Laws of the Land, yea twenty Presbiters did hold
the general assembly at Aberdeen after it was discharged by the King. Ans. The
Warner possibly may know, yet certainly he does not care what he writes in
these things to which he is a mere stranger: the authentic registers of the
Church of Scotland convinces him heir of falsehood. Bishops were abolished and
Presby teries set up in Scotland with King James consent.
His Majesty did write from Stirling to the general assembly at Edinburgh
1579, that they should cease from concluding any thing in the discipline of
the Church, during the time of his minority; upon this desire the assembly did
abstain from all conclusions, only they named a committee to go to Striveling
for conference which his Majesty upon that subject. What follows thereupon?
I. Immediately a Parliament is called in October 1579, and in the first act
declares and grantes jurisdiction unto the Kirk, whilk consistes in the true
preaching of the word of Jesus Christ, correction of manners, and
administration of the true Sacraments, and declares that there is no other face
of Kirk, nor other face of Religion then is presently by the favor of God
established within this realm, and that there be no other jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical acknowledged within this realm then that whilk is, and shall be
within the samen Kirk, or that which flows therfra, concerning the premises.
II. In Aprile 1580. Proclamation was made ex deliberatione Dominorum Consilii
in name of the King, charging all Superintendentes and Commissioners and
Ministers serving at Kirkes. To note the names of all the subjectes alsweel men
as women suspected to be Papists or -- and to admonish them -- to give
Confession of their faith according to the Form approved by the Parliament,
and to submit unto the discipline of the true Kirk within a reasonable space
--: and if they fail -- that the Superintendents or Commissioners present a
role or catalogue of their names unto the King and Lords of Secret Counsel
whereby they shall be for the time, between and the 15 day of Iulie nixt to come,
to the end that the acts of Parliament made against such persons may be
execute. III. The short Confession was drawn up at the Kings command, which
was first subscrived by his royal hand, and an act of Secret Counsel
commanding all subjectes to subscrive the same; as is to be seen by the Act
printed with the Confession, wherein Hierarchy is abjured, that is (as has
been since declared by National assemblies and Parliamentes both called and
held by the King) episcopacie is abjured. IV. In the assemblies 1580 and 1581
that Confession of faith and the second book of discipline (after debating many
praeceding years) were approved (except one chapter de diaconatu) by the
Assembly, the Kings Commissioner being always present, not find we any
thing opposed then by him: yea then at his Majesty's special direction about
fifty classical Presbyteries were set up over all Scotland which remain unto
this day, Was there here any contempt of the roy all authority?

About that time some noble men had got the revenues of the Bisshop-rickes for
their private use; and because they could not enjoy them by any legal right,
therefore for eluding the Law, they did effectuate that some Ministers should
have the title of this or that Bishopric; and the revenues were gathered in
the name of this titulare or tulchan Bishop, albeit he had but little part: e.
g. Robert Montgomerie Minister at Sterline was called Archbishop of Glasgow:
and so it can be instanced in other Bishop-rickes and abbacies. Now this kind
of praelats pretended no right to any part of the Episcopal office, either in
ordination or jurisdiction: when some of these men began to creep in to vote
for the Church in Parliament, without any Law of the State, without any
commission from the Church, the general assembly discharged them, being
Ministers, to practice any more such illegal insolences, with this ordinance
of the Church, after a little debate, King James at that time did show his good
satisfaction.

But the Warner here jumps over nolesse then twenty seven years time from the
assembly at Edinburgh 1579, The innocence of the much maligned assembly of
Aberdeen.
to that at Aberdeen 1605, then was King James by the English Bishops
persuasion resolved to put down the general assemblies of Scotland, contrary
to the Laws and constant practice of that Church, from the first reformation
to that day. The act of Parliament did bear that once at least a year the
assembly should meet, and after their business was ended they should name time
and place for the next assembly. When they had met in the year 1602, they were
moved to adjourne without doing any thing for two whole years to 1604, when
then they were conveened at the time and place agreed to by his Majesty, they
were content upon his Majesty's desire without doing any thing again to
adjourne to the nixt year 1605, at Aberdeen, when that diet came his Majesty's
Commissioner offered them a Letter: To the end they might be an Assembly and so
in a Capacity to receave his Majesty's Letter, with the Commissioners good
pleasure they sat down, they named their Moderator and Clark they received
and read the Kings letter commanding them to rise, which they obeyed without
any farther action at all but naming a diet for the nixt meeting according to
the Laws and constant practice of Scotland, hereupon by the pernicious counsel
of Archbishop Banckroft at London, the King was stirred up to bring sore
trouble upon a number of gracious Ministers. Christmas and other superstitious
festivals abolished in Scotland, both by Church and State.
This is the whole matter which to the Warner heir is so tragic an insolence,
that never any Parliament durst attempt the like. See more of this in the
Historical vindication.

The nixt instance of our Presbiteryes usurpation upon the Magistrate is their
abolition, (before any statute of Parliament thereupon) of the Church festivals
in their first book of discipline. Ans. Consider the grievousnesse of this
crime, in the intervall of Parliaments, the great counsel of Scotland in the
minority of the Prince entrusted by Parliament to rule the Kingdom, did charge
the Church to give them in write their judgment about matters Ecclesiastical:
in obedience to this charge the Church did present the counsel with a write
named since the first book of discipline: which the Lords of counsel did
approve, subscribe and ratify by an Act of State: a part of the first head in
that write was that Christmas, Epiphany, purification, and other fond feasts of
the virgin Mary, as not warranted by the holy Scriptures, should be laid
aside. Was it any encroachment upon the Magistrate for the Church to give this
advice to the privy counsel when earnestly they did crave it? the people of
Scotland ever since have showed their ready obedience to that direction of the
Church founded upon Scripture, and backed from the beginning with an injunction
of the state.

His third instance of the Church of Scotlands usurpation upon the Magistrate
is, The friends of Episcopacy thryves not in Scotland.
their abolition of Episcopacy in the assembly 1580, when the Law made it
treason to impugn the authority of Bishops, being the third estate of the
Kingdom. Ans. The Warner seems to have no more knowledge of the affairs of
Scotland, then of Japan or Utopia, the Law he speaks of was not in being some
years after 1580, how ever all the general assemblyes of Scotland are
authorized by act of Parliament, to determine finally without an appeal in all
Ecclesiastic affairs: in the named assembly Lundie the Kings Commissioner did
sit and consent in his Majesty's name to that act of abolition, as in the nixt
assembly 1581, the Kings Commissioner Caprinton did erect in his Majesty's name
the Presbiteryes in all the Land; it is true, three years thereafter a wicked
Courtier Captain James Stuart, in a shadow of a closse and not summoned
Parliament, did procure an act to abolish Presbiteries and erect Bishops, but
for this and all the rest of his crimes that evil man was quickly rewarded by
God before the world, in a terrible destruction: these acts of his Parliament
the very nixt year were disclaimed by the King, the Bishops were put down,
and the Presbitry was set up again, and never more removed to this day.

The Warners digression to the perpetuity of Bishops in Scotland, to the acts
of the Church and State for their restitution, is but to show his ignorance in
the Scotes story: what ever be the Episcopal boastings of other Nations, yet
it is evident that from the first entrance of Christian Religion into Scotland,
Presbiters alone without Bishops for some hundred years did govern that
Church: and after the reformation their was no Bishop in that Land, but in
tittle and benefice till the year 1610; when Bancroft did consecrat three
Scotes Ministers, all of them men of evil report, whom that violent
Commissioner the Earl of Dunbar in the corrupt and null assembly of Glasgow,
got authorized in some pairt of a Bishops office; which part only and no more
was ratified in a posterior Parliament. Superintendents are no where the same
with Bishops much less in Scotland where for a time only till the Churches
were planted, they were used as ambulatory Commissioners, and visitors to
preach the word, and administer the Sacraments for the supply of vacant and
unsettled congregations.

The fourth instance is the Churches obtruding the second book of discipline,
without the ratification of the State. Ans. The second book of discipline why
not al ratified in Parliament.
For the Ecclesiastic enjoining of a general assemblyes decrees a particular
ratification of Parliament is unnecessary; general acts of Parliament
commanding obedience to the acts of the Church, are a sufficient warrant from
the State, beside, that second book of discipline was much debated with the
King, and at last in the general assembly 1590, his consent was obtained unto
it: for in that assembly where unanimously the subscription of the second book
of discipline by all the ministers of the Kingdom was decried, his Majesty
some time in person and always by the chancellor his Commissioner was present,
and in the act for subscription Sess. 10. Augusti 8. it is expressly said that
not only all the Ministers but also all the Commissioners praesent did consent,
among which Commissioners the chancellor, his Majesty's Commissioner was chief.
But neither the King nor the Church could get it to pass the Parliament in
regaird of the opposition, which some Statesmen did make unto these parts
thereof, which touched on their own interest of unjust advantage, this was the
only stick.

The next instance of the Churches encroachement is their usurpation of all the
old rents of the clergy, The Warners hipocrisy, calling that a crime, which
himself counts a virtue.
as the Churches patrimony, and their decerning in anassembly that nothing in
the nixt Parliament should pass before the Church were fully restored to her
rents. Ans. Consider here the Warners hypocrisy and unjustice, he challenges
the Presbiterians for that which no praelate in the world did ever esteem a
fault, a mere declaration of their judgment that the Church had a just right
to such rents, as by law and long possession were theirs, and not taken away
from them by any lawful means. What if here they had gone on with the most
of the praelaticall party to advance that right to a jus divinum? what if they
had put themselves by a command from Court, into the possession of that right,
without a process, as diverse of the Warners friends were begun lately to do
in all the three Kingdoms? but all that he can here challenge the Scotes for,
is a mere declaration of their simple right, with a supplication to the Regent
his grace, that he would endeavor in the nixt Parliament, to procure a ninth
part of the Churches patrimony, for the mantainance of the ministry, and the
poor of the country: for all the rent that the Churches then could obtain or
did petition, was but a third of the thirds of the benefices or tithes. That
ever any assembly in Scotland did make any other address to the Parliament for
stipends then by way of humble supplication, it is a great untruth.

The last instance is, the erecting of Presbyteries through all the Kingdom, by
an act of the Church alone. Ans. I have shown already the untruth of this
alleadgeance; the proof here brought for it, is grounded only upon an
ambiguous word which the Warners ignorance in the Scottish discipline and
Presbitery (though the maine subject of his book) permits him not to
understand. The Presbyteries were set up by the King after the assembly 1580,
but the second book of discipline of which alone the citation speaks, how ever
enjoind by many assemblies, yet it could never be gotten ratified in any
Parliament, only because of these parts of it which did speak for the
patrimony of the Church, and oppugn the right of patronages.

How well the Warner has proven the Presbiterian practices to be injurious to
the Magistrate we have considered, The Warner a gross Erastian.
possibly he will be more happy in his nixt undertaking, in his demonstrations
that their doctrinall principles do trample on the Magistrates supremacy and
Laws; their first principle he takes out of the second book of discipline.
Cap. 7. That no Magistrate nor any but Ecclesiastic persons may vote in Synods.
Ans. Though I find nothing of this in the place cited, yet there is nothing in
it that crosses either the Laws or the Kings supremacy: for according to the
acts of Parliament of Scotland both old and late and the constant practice of
that Church, the only members of Presbyteries are Ministers and ruling elders.
Is it the Warners mind to vent here his super-Erastianisme, that all
Ecclesiastic assemblies Classical, Provincial, national are but the
arbitrary Courts of the Magistrate for to advise him in the execution of his
inhaerent power about matters Ecclesiastical; and for this cause, that it is
in his arbitrament to give a decisive voice in all Church assemblies, to whom
and how many so ever he will? Though this may be the Warners mind, as it
has been some of his friends, yet the most of the praelaticall party will not
man taine him herein. How ever, such principles are contrary to the Laws of
Scotland, to the professions also and practices of all the Princes and
Magistrates that ever have lived there.

But the Warner here may possibly glaunce at another principle of his good
friends, Praelatical principles impossibilitate alsolid peace, betwixt the King
and his Kingdoms
who have been willing lately to vent before al Britain in print their
Elevating the supremacy of Sovereigns so far above Laws, that what ever
people have obtained to be established by never so many assemblies and
Parliaments and confirmed with never so many great seals of ratification, and
peaceably enjoyed by never so long a possession, yet it is nothing but
commendable wisdom and justice for the same Prince who made the first
concessions or any of his successors when ever they find themselfes strong
enough, to cancel all and make void what ever Parliaments, Assemblies, royal
ratifications, and the longest possession made foolish people believe to be
most firm and unquestionable. To this purpose Bishop Maxwel (from whom much of
this warning is borrowed) does speak in his Sacro-Sancta regum Majestas. Though
this had been the Cabine divinity of our praelats, yet what can be their
intentions in speaking of it out in these times of confusion, themselves must
declare: for the clear consequente of such doctrine seems to be a necessity
either of such Warners perpetual banishment from the Courts and ears of
Sovereigns, or else that subjects be kept up for ever in a strong jealousy,
and fear that they can never be secure of their liberties, though never so
well ratified by Laws and promises of Princes any longer then the sword and
power remains in their own hand to preserve what they have obtained. Such
Warners so long as they are possessed with such maxims of state, are clear
everters of the first fundations of trust betwixt Sovereigns and subjects,
they take away all possibility of any solid peace of any confident setlement in
any troubled state, before both parties be totally ruined or one become so
strong that they need no more to fear the others malcontentment in any time to
come.

Our second challenged principle is that we teach the whole power of
convocating assemblies to be in the Church. Erastian praelats evert the legal
foundations of all government.
Ans. The Warners citations prove not that we maintain any such assertion, our
doctrine and constant practice has been to ascribe to the King a power of
calling Synods, when and wheresoever he thought fit, but that which the Warner
seems to point at is, our tenet of an intrinsicall power in the Church to
meet, as for the word and Sacraments so for discipline; in this all who are
Christians, old and late, the praelaticall and Popish party as well as others,
go along with us to mantaine in doctrine and practice, a necessity even in
times of persecution, that the Church must meet for the worship of God and
execution of Ecclesiastic discipline among their own members. In this the
doctrine and practice of the Scots is according to their settled laws,
uncontroverted by his Majesty. If the Warner will mantaine, that in reason and
conscience all the Churches of the world are oblidged to dissolve and never more
to meet when an erroneous Magistrate by his Tyrannous edict commands them to do
so, let him call up Erastus from the dead to be disciplined in this new
doctrine of the praelats impious loyalty.

The third principle is that the judgment of true and false doctrine of
suspension and deprivation of Ministers belongs to the Church. The final
determination of all Ecclesiastic causes by the Laws of Scotland, is in the
general assembly.
Ans. If this be a great heresy it is to be charged as much upon the state as
upon the Church, for the acts of Parliament give all this power to the Church,
neither did the laws of England or of any Christian state, popish or
protestant, refuse to the Church the determination of such Ecclesiastic
causes; some indeed do debate upon the power of appeals from the Church, but
in Scotland by the law, as no appeal in things civil goes higher then the
Parliament so in matters Ecclesiastic none goes above the general assembly.
Complaints indeed may go to the King and Parliament for redress of any wrong
has been done in Ecclesiastic Courts, who being custodes religionis may by
their coercive power command Ecclesiastic Courts to rectify any wrong done by
them contraire to Scripture, or if they persist take order with them. But that
two or three praelats should become a Court of delegats, to receave appeals
from a general assembly, neither Law nor practice in Scotland did ever admit,
nor can the word of God or any Equity require it. In the Scotes assemblies no
causes are agitat but such as the Parliament has agreed to be Ecclesiastic
and of the Churches cognizance: no Process about any Church rent was ever
cognosced upon in Scotland but in a civil Court: its very false that ever any
Church censure, much less the highest of excommunication did fall upon any for
robbing the Church of its patrimony. The divine right of discipline, is the
tenet of the most of praelats.


Our fourth challenged principle is that we maintain Ecclesiastic
jurisdiction by a divine right. Ans. Is this a huge crime? is there divine in
the world, either Papist or Potestant, except a few praelaticall Erastians, but
they do so? If the Warner will profess (as it seems he must) the
contradiction of that which he ascribes to us, his avowed tenet must be that
all Ecclesiastic power flows from the Magistrate, that the Magistrate himself
may execute all Church censures, that all the Officers appointed by Christ for
the government of his Church, may be laid aside, and such a kind of governors
be put in their place, as the Magistrate shall be pleased to appoint: that the
spiritual sword and Keys of heaven belong to the Magistrate by virtue of his
supremacy, als well as the temporal sword and the Keys of his earthly
Kingdom: our difference here from the Warner will not (I hope) be found the
greatest heresy.

Our last challenged principle is, All the power of the Church in Scotland is
legal, and with the Magistrates consent.
that we will have all our power against the Magistrate, that is, although he
dissent. Ans. It is an evil comentare that al must be against the Magistrate,
which is done against his consent: but in Scotland their is no such case: for
all the jurisdiction which the church there does enjoy, they have it with the
consent of the Magistrate: all is ratified to them by such acts of Parliament as
his Majesty does not at all controvert. Concerning that odious case the Warner
intimats, whither in time of persecution, when the Magistrate classheth with the
Church, any Ecclesiastic discipline be then to be exercised; himself can
better answer it then we, who with the ancient Christians do think, that on
all hazards (even of life) the church may not be dissolved, but must meet in
dens and caves and in the wilderness for the word and Sacraments and keeping it
self pure by the divine ordinance of discipline. The prelates rather then to
lay aside their own interest, will keep the King and his people in misery for
ever.


Having cleared all the pernicious practices and all the wicked Doctrines,
which the Warner lays upon us, I think it needles to insist upon these
defenses which he in his abundant charity brings for us, but in his own way,
that he may with the greater advantage impugn them: only I touch one passage
whereupon he make injurious exclamations: that which Mr. Gilespie in his
theoremes wryts; when the Magistrate abuses his power unto Tyranny and makes
havoc of all, it is lawful to resist him by some extraordinary ways and
means, which are not ordinarily to be allowed: see the principles from which
all our miseryes and the loss of our gracious Master have flowed. Ans. We
must here yield to the Warner the great equity and necessity that every
doctrine of a Presbyter, should be charged on the Presbytery it self, and that
any Presbyter teaching the lawfulness of a Parliaments defensive arms is
tantamont to the Churches taking of arms against the king. These small
unconsequences we must permit the Warner to swallow down without any stick,
however we do deny that the maxim in hand was the fountain of any our
miseryes, or the cause at all of the loss of our late Sovereign. Did ever his
Majesty or any of his advised counselors declare it simply unlawful for a
Parliament, to take arms for defense in some extraordinary cases, however the
unhappines of the Canterburian Prelates did put his Majesty on these courses,
which did begin and promote all our misery, and to the very last these men were
so wicked as to refuse the lousing of these bands which their hands had tied
about his misinformed conscience, yea to this day they will not give their
consent, that his Majesty, who now is, should lay aside Episcopacy, were it
for the gayning the peaceable possession of all his three Kingdoms, but are
urgers of him night and day to adhaere to their errors, upon the hazard of all
the miseries that may come on his person, on his family and all his people: yet
few of them to this day durst be so bold as to print with this Warner, the
unlawfulnes of a Parliaments arms against the Tyranny of a Prince in any
imaginable case, how extraordinary soever.

CHAP. III.
The Laws and customs of Scotland admit of no appeal from the general
assembly.

IN this chapter the challenge is, Appeals in Scotland from a general assembly
were no less irrational then illegal.
that there are no appeals from the general Assembly to the King, as in
England from the Bishops Courts to the King in Chauncery, where a Commission
uses to be given to delegats, who discuss the appeals. Ans. The warner
considers not the difference of the Government of the Church of Scotland from
that which was in England. what the Parliament is in the State, that the
general assembly is in the Church of Scotland: both are the highest courts in
their own kind. There is no appeal any where in moderat Monarchies to the
Kings person, but to the King in certain legal courts; as the Warner here
confesses the appeal from Bishops lies not, to the King in his person, but to
the King in his court of Chauncery. As no man in Scotland is permitted to
appeal in a civil cause from the Lords of Session; much less from the
Parliament; so no man in an Ecclesiastic cause is permitted by the very civil
Law of Scotland to appeal from the general assembly. According to the Scots
order and practice, the King in person or else by his high Commissioner sits
als usually in the general assembly, as in Parliament. But though it were not
so, yet an appeal from a general assembly to be discussed in a Court of
delegats, were unbeseeming and unreasonable, the one Court consisting of above
two hundred, all chosen men the best and most able of the Kingdom; the other
but of two or three, often of very small either abilities or integrity, who yet
may be more fit to decerne in an Ecclesiastic cause then a single Bishop over
his official, the ordinary trusted in all acts of jurisdiction for the whole
dioces. But the Scots way of managing Ecclesiastic causes is a great deal
more just, safe and Satisfactory to any rational man then that old popish
order of the English, where all the spiritual jurisdiction of the whole dioces
was in the hand of one mercenary official without all relief from his
sentence, except by an appeal, as of old to the pope and his delegats, so
thereafter to the King, though never to be cognosced-upon by himself, but as it
was of old by two or three delegats, The Churches just severity against
Montgomery and Adamson was approven by the King and the parties themself.
the weakest of all courts, often for the quality and ever for the number of
the judges.

Two instances are brought by the Warner to prove the Church of Scotlands
stopping of appeals from the general Assembly to the King, the cases of
Montgomery and Adamson: if the causes and events of the named cases had been
well known to the Warner, as he made this chapter disproportionally short, so
readily he might have deleted it al together. Both these men were infamous not
only in their Ministerial charges but in their life and conversation; both
became so insolent that contrary to the established order of the Church and
Kingdom, being suborned by wicked statesmen, who in that day of darkness had
well near brought ruin both to King and country, would needs take upon them the
office of Archbishops. While the assembly was in process with them for their
manifold and high misdeameanors, the King was moved by them and their evil
patrons, to show his high displeasure against the assemblyes of the Church.
they for his Majesty's satisfaction sent their Commissioners and had many
conferences; whereby the pride and contempt of these prelates did so increase,
that at last they drew the sentence of excommunication upon their own heads:
the King after some time did acknowledge the equity of the Church proceedings,
and professed his contentment their with: both these unhappy men were brought
to a humble confession of their crimes, and such signs of repentance, that
both after a renunciation of their titulare Bishopriks were readmitted to the
function of the ministry, which they had deserted. Never any other before or
after in Scotland did appeal from the general assembly to the King: the late
excommunicat praelats in their declinatour against the assembly of Glasgow, did
not appeal as (I remember) to the King, but to another general assembly to
be constitute, according to their own Popish and Tyrannical principles.

CHAP. IV.
Faulty Ministers in Scotland are less exempted from punishment, then any
other men. The pride of prelates lately, but never the Presbitery did exempt
their fellows from punishment for their civil faults.


THE Warner in his fourth Chapter offers to prove, that the Scottish discipline
does exempt Ministers from punishment for any treason or sedition they can act
in their pulpits. Ans. This challenge is like the rest, very false. The rules
of the Church discipline in Scotland obliges Churchmen to be subject to
punishment, not only for every fault for which any other man is liable to
censure, but ordaines them to be punished for sundry things, which in other
men are not at all questionable: and what ever is censurable in any, they
appoint it to be much more so in a Minister. It is very untrue, that the
pulpits in Scotland are Sanctuaries for any crime, much less for the grievous
crimes of sedition and treason. Let the Warner remember, how short a time it
is, since an Episcopal chair or a canonical coat did privilege in England
and Ireland from all censure either of Church or State, great numbers, who were
notoriously known to be guilty of the foulest crimes. Was ever the Warners
companion Bishop Aderton challenged for his Sodomy, so long as their commune
patron of Canterbury did rule the court? did the warner never hear of a
prelate very sibb to Doctor Bramble, who to this day was never called to any
account for flagrant scandals of such crimes as in Scotland are punishable by
the gallows? the Warner does not well to insist upon the Scots Clergy
exempting themself from civil punishments: no where in the world are
Churchmen more free of crimes deserving civil cognizance then in Scotland: and
if the ears and eyes of the world may be trusted, the popish clergy this day in
Italy and Spain are not so challengeable, as the praelaticall divines in
England and Ireland lately were for many gross misdemeanors.

But why does the Warners anger run out so far as to the preachers in
Holland? The Warner is injurious to the Ministers of Holland.
is it because he knows the Church discipline in Holland to be really the same
with that he oppugnes in the Scots, and that all the reformed Churches do
join cordially with Scotland in their rejection of Episcopacy? is this a
ground for him to slander our Brethren of Holland? Is it charity for him a
stranger to publish to the world in print that the ministers in Holland are
seditious orators, and that they saucily control the Magistrates in their
pulpits? Their crime seems to be, that for the love of Christ their master,
they are zealous in their doctrine, to press upon the Magistrate as well as upon
the people the true practice of piety, the sanctification of the sabbath day,
the suppression of heresy and shisme, and repentance for the sins of the time
and place wherein they live. This is a crime whereof few of the Warners friends
were wont to be guilty of: their shameful silence and flattery was one of the
great causes of all the sins and calamities that have wracked the three
Kingdoms: the stream of their sermons while the enjoyed the pulpit, was to
encourage to superstition and contempt of piety, to sing asleep by their
ungracious way all, that gave ear unto them. The man is impatien, t to see the
Pastors of Holland or any where, to walk in another path then his own, and for
this cause would stir up their Magistrates against them: as it was his and his
Brethrens custom to stir up the Magistrates of Britan and Ireland to
imprison, banish, and heavily vex the most zealous servants of God, only for
their opposition to the praelats profanity and errors. The Warner (I hope) has
not yet forgotten, how Doctor Bramble and his neighbor Lefly of Down did cast
out of the Ministry, and made flee out of the Kingdom, men most eminent for
zeal, piety and learning, who in a short time had done more good in the house
of God, then all the Bishops that ever were in Ireland, I mean Master Blaire,
Master Levingston, Master Hamilton, and Master Cuningham, and others.

The Warner needed not to have marked as a singularity of Geneva, that there
all the Ecclesiastics, qua tales, are punishable by the Magistrates for civil
crimes; for we know none of the reformed Churches, who were ever following
Rome in exeeming the Clergy from saecular jurisdiction, except it were the
Canterburian Praelats: who indeed did skarre the most of Magistrates from
medeling with a canonical coat though defiled with drunckenesse, adultery,
scolding, fighting, and other evils, which were too common of late to that
order.

But how does he prove, The pretended declaration of King James, was Bishop
Adamsons lying libel.
that the Scots Ministers exempt themselves from civil jurisdiction? first
(says he) by the declaration of King James 1584. Ans. That declaration was not
from King James, as himself did testify the year thereafter under his hand,
but from Master Patrike Adamson, who did acknowledge it to be his own upon
his death bed, and professed his repentance for the lies and slanders,
wherewith against his conscience he had fraughted that infamous libell.

His second proof is from the second book of discipline Chapter II, Though
always in England yet never in Scotland had Commissarie any jurisdiction over
Ministers.
It is absurd that Commissaries having no function in the Church, should be
judges to Ministers to depose them from their charges. Ans. Though in England
the Commissary and official was the ordinary judge to depose and excommunicat
all the Ministers of the diocese, yet by the Laws of Scotland no Commissaries
had ever any jurisdiction over Ministers. But though the officialls
jurisdiction together with their Lords the Bishops were abolished, yet does it
follow from this, that no other jurisdiction remains whereby Ministers might
be punished either by Church and State, according to their demerits? is not
this strongly reasoned by the Warner?

His third proof is the case of James Gibson, James Gibson was never absolved
by the Church from his Process.
who had railed in pulpit against the King, and was only suspended, yea
thereafter was absolved from that fault. Ans. Upon the complaint of the
Chancellor the alleged words were condemned by the general assembly: but
before the man's guiltines of these words could be tried, he did absent
himself: for which absence he was presently suspended from his Ministry: in
the nixt assembly he did appear and cleared the reason of his absence to have
been just fear and no contumacy, this he made appear to the assemblyes
satisfaction, but before his process could be brought to any issue, he fled
away to England, where he died a fugitive never restored to his chardge, though
no tryell of his fault was perfected. Master Blacks appeal from the counsel
cleared.


The fourth proof is Mr. Black his case: hereupon the Warner makes a long
and odious narration. If we interrogat him about his ground of all these
Stories, he can produce no warrant but Spots-woods unprinted book: this is no
authentic register whereupon any understanding man can rely, the writer was a
professed enemy, to his death, of the Scottish discipline, he spent his life upon
a Story for the disgrace of the Presbytery and the honor of Bishops: no man
who is acquainted with the life or death of that Author will build his belief
upon his words. This whole narration is abundantly confuted in the historical
vindication, when the Warner is pleased to repeat the challenge from Issachars
burden he ought to have replied something after three years advisement to the
printed answer.

The matter (as our registers bear) was shortly thus, in the year 1596 the
Popish and malignant faction in King James his court grew so strong that the
countenance of the King toward the Church was much changed, and over all the
Land great fears did daily increase of the overthrow of the Church discipline
established by Law. The Ministers in their pulpits gave free warning thereof,
among others Mr. Black of Saint Andrews, a most gracious and faithful Pastor,
did apply his doctrine to the sins of the time; some of his Enemies delated him
at Court for words injurious to the King and Queen: the words he did deny and
all his honest hearers did absolve him by their testimony from these calumnies:
of himself he was most willing to be tried to the uttermost before all the
world, but his Brethren finding the libelled calumnies to be only a pretense
and the true intention of the Courtiers therein was, to stop the mouths of
Ministers, that the crying sins of the time should no more be reproved in
pulpits, they advised him to decline the judgment of the counsel, and appeal
to the general assembly, as the competent judge according to the word of God
and the Laws of Scotland, in the cause of doctrine; for the first instance they
did never question, but if any thing truly seditious had been preached by a
Minister that he for this might be called before the civil Magistrate and
accordingly punished but that every Minister for the application of his
doctrine according to the rules of scripture to the sins of his hearers for
their reclaming, should be brought before a civil court at the first instance,
they thought it unreasonable and defired the King in the nixt assembly might
cognosce upon the equity of such a proceeding. The Ministers had many a
conference with his Majesty upon that subject, often the matter was brought
very near to an amicable conclusion, but because the Ministers refused to
subscribe a band for so great a silence as the Court required against his
Majesty's countenancing of treacherous Papists, and favoring the enemies of
religion, a seveer Sentence was pronounced not only against Master Black, but
also all the Ministers of Edinburgh.

In the mean time malcontented Statesmen did add oil to the flame, The
tumult of the seventeenth day of December was harmless and no Minister guilty
of it.
and at the very instant while the Ministers and their friends are offering a
petition to his Majesty, they subborne a villane to cry in one part of the
streets the Ministers are slain, and in another part of the streets that the
King was killed: whereupon the People rush all out to the streets in their
arms, and for half an howr at most were in a tumult, upon mere ignorance
what the fray might be, but without the hurt of any one man: so soon as it was
found that both the King and Ministers were safe, the people went all peaceably
to their houses. This is the very truth of that innocent commotion, whereupon
the Warner here and his fellows elsewhere make all their tragedies. None of
the Ministry were either the authors or approvers thereof, though diverse of
them suffered sore troubles for it.

CHAP. V.
No Presbyterian ever intended to excommunicat any supreme Magistrate.

THE Warner in his fifth chapter chardges the Scotes for subjecting the King to
the censure of excommunication and bringing upon princes all the miseries which
the popes excommunications of old wont to bring upon Anathematised Emperors.
Ans. The praelats ordinarily, but the Presbytery never were for rash
excommunications.
It does not become the Warner and his fellows to object to any the abuse of
the dreadful sentence of excommunication, no Church in the world was ever more
guilty of that fault then the praelats of England and Ireland, did they ever
censure their own officialls for the pronouncing of that terrible sentence most
profanly against any they would, had it been for the non-payment of the
smallest sums of money. As for the Scotes, their doctrine and practice in the
point of excommunication is as considerat as any other church in the world,
that censure in Scotland is most rare and only in the case of obstinacy in a
great sin: what ever be their doctrine in general with all other Christians
and as I think with the praelaticall party themselves, that the object of
Christian doctrine Sacraments and discipline is one and the same, and that no
member of Christ, no sone of the Church, may plead a highness above admonitions
and Church censures, yet I know they never thought it expedient so much as to
intend any process of Church animadversion against their Sovereign. To the
worlds end I hope they shall not have again greater grievances and truer causes
of citation from their Princes then they have had already. It may be
confidently believed that they who upon so pregnant occasions did never so much
as intend the beginning of a process against their King, can never be supposed
in danger of any such proceeding for time to come. How ever, The Praelats
flatter Princes to their ruin.
we love not the abused ground of the Warners flattering of Princes to their
own great hurt: is it so indeed that all the sins of princes are only against
God, that all Kings are not only above all laws of Church and State but when
they fall into the greatest crimes that the worst of men have ever committed,
that even then their sins must not be against any man or against any law? such
Episcopal doctrine spurrs on princes to these unhappy praecipies, and oppressed
people unto these outrages that both fall into inextricable calamities.

CHAP. VI.
It grieves the Praelats that Presbyterians are faithful Watchmen, to admonish
Princes of their duty.

THE sixth Chapter is spent on an other crime of the Presbytery; The Scots
Ministers preaching for justice, was just and necessary.
it makes the Presbiters cry to the Magistrate for justice upon capital
offenders. Ans. What hes Presbytery to do with this matter were it never so
great an offense: will the Warner have all the faults of the praelaticall
faction, flow from the fountain of Episcopacy? this unconsequentiall reasoning
will not be permitted to men below the degrees of Doctors. But was it a very
great crime indeed for Ministers to plead the cause of the fatherless and
widows, yea the cause of God their Master and to preach unto Magistrates, that
according to Scriptures murderers ought to die, and the Land be purged from
the stain of innocent blood? when the shameful impunity of murder made
Scotland by deadly fends, in time of peace a field of war and blood, was it
not time for the faithful servants of God to exhort the King toexecute
justice, and to declare the danger of most frequent pardons drawn from his
hand often against his heart by the importunity and deceitful information of
powerful solicitors, to the great offense of God against the whole land, to
the unexpressible grief and wrong of the suffering party, to the opening also
of a new floodgate of more blood which by a legal revenge in time easily might
have been stopped? Too much pity in sparing the wilful shedders of innocent
blood ordinarlie proves a great cruelty, not only to wards the disconsolat
oppressed who cry to the vicegerents of God the avenger, for justice in vain,
but also toward the soul of him who is spared and the life of many more who
are friends either to the oppressor or oppressed.

As for the named case of Huntly let the world judge, Huntlyes notorious crimes.
whether the Ministers had reason often to give Warning against that wicked man
and his accomplices. Beside his apostasy and after-seeming-repentance his
frequent relapses into avowed popery, in the eighty eight he banded with the
King of Spain to overthrow the religion and government of the whole Island and
after pardon, from time to time did renew his treasonable plots for the ruin
of Britain: he did commit many murders, he did invade under the nose of the
King, the house of his Cousin the Earl of Murray, and most cruelly murdered
that gallant Nobleman, he appeared with displayed Banner against the King in
person, he killed thereafter many hundreds of the Kings good people, when these
multiplied outrages did cry up to the God of heaven, was is not time for the
men of God to cry to the judges of the earth to do their duty, according to
the warrant of many Scriptures? what a dangerous humor of flattery is this in
our Praelats, not only to lull asleep a Prince in a most sinful neglect of his
charge, but also to cry out upon others more faithful then themselves for
assaying to break of their slumber by their wholesome and seasonable
admonitions from the word of God?

The nixt challenge of the Scotes Presbyters is that they spoil the King of
his Tithes, Never any question in Scotland betwixt the King and the Church, for
Tithes and patronages.
first fruits, patronage and dependence of his subjects. Ans. The Warner
understands not what he writes, the Kings Majesty in Scotland never had, never
craved any first fruits: the Church never spoiled the King of any Tithes, some
other men indeed, by the wickedness most of Praelats and their followers, did
cousin both the King and the Church of many Tithes: but his Majesty and the
Church had never any controversy in Scotland about the Tithes: for the King,
so far as concerned himself, was ever willing that the Church should enjoy
that which the very act of Parliament acknowledges to be her patrimony. Nor
for the patronages had the Church any plea with the King: the Church declared
often their mind of the iniquity of patronages, wherein they never had from
the King any considerable opposition, but from the Nobility and gentry the
opposition was so great, that for peacesake the Church was content to let
patronages alone, till God should make a Parliament lay to heart what was
incumbent for gracious men to do, for liberating congregations from their
slavery of having Ministers intruded upon them by the violence of Patrones.
Which now at last (blessed be God) according to our mind is performed. As for
the dependence of any vassals upon the King, King James avowes himself a hater
of Erastianisme.
it was never questioned by any Presbyterian in Scotland.

What is added in the rest of the Chapter, is but a repetition of that which
went before, to wit, the Presbyters denying to the King the spiritual
government of the Church, and the power of the keys of the Kingdom of heaven:
such an usurpation upon the Church, King James declared under his hand (as at
length may be seen in the Historical vindication) to be a sin against the
Father, Son, and Holy Ghost, which puts in the hand of the Magistrate the power
of preaching and celebrating the Sacraments: a power which since that time no
Magistrate in Britain did assume, and if any would have claimed it, none would
have more opposed, then the most zealous patrones of Episcopacy. The injurious
invectives, which the Warner builds upon this his Erastian assertion, we pass
them as Castles in their air, which must fall and evanish for want of a
foundation. Only before I leave this Chapter, let the Warner take a good
Sentence out of the mouth of that wise Prince King James, to testify yet
farther his mind against Erastianisme. His Majesty in the year 1617 having
come in progress to visit his ancient Kingdom of Scotland, and being present
in person at a public disputation in Theology in the Universitie of St.
Andrews, whereof also many both Nobles and Churchmen of both Kingdoms were
auditors; when one of those that acted a part in the disputation, had affirmed
and went about to maintain this assertion that the King had power to depose
Ministers from their Ministerial function. The King himself as abhorring such
flattery, cried out with a loud voice, Ego possum deponere Ministri caput, sed
non possum deponere ejus officium.

CHAP. VII.
The Presbytery does not draw from the Magistrate any paritie of his power by
the cheat of any relation.

IN the seventh chapter the Warner would cause men believe many more of the
Presbyteries usurpations upon the civil Magistrate. The Presbytery cognosceth
only upon scandals, and that in sewer civil things then the Bishopscourts were
wont to meddle with.
The first is that all offenses whatsoever are cognoscible in the consistory
upon the case of scandals. Ans. First the Presbytery makes no offense at all
to come before the consistory, but scandal alone. Secondly these civil
offenses (the scandal whereof comes before the Presbytery) are but very few,
and a great deal fewer than the Bishops official takes notice of in his
consistoriall court. That capital crimes past over by the Magistrate should
be censured by the Church, no society of Christians who have any discipline,
did ever call in question. When the sword of the Magistrate hes spared a
murderer, an adulterer, a Blasphemer; will any ingenuous, either praelaticall
or popish divine, admit of such to the holy table without signs of
repentance?

The Warners second usurpation is but a branch of the first, that the
Presbytery draws directly before it self the cognizance of fraud in
barganing, false measures, oppression and in the case of Ministers, brybing,
usury, fighting, perjury, etc. Ans. Is it then the Warners mind, that the
notorious slander of such gross sins does not deserve so much, as an
Ecclesiastic rebooke? Shall such persons without admonition be admitted to the
holy communion? Secondly the named cases of fraud in barganing, false measures,
oppression, come so rarely before our Church-judicatories that though these
thirty years I have been much conversant in Presbyteries, yet did I never see,
nor do I remember that ever I heard any of these three cases brought before
any church assembly. In the person of Ministers, I grant, these faults which
the canons of the Church in all times and places make the causes of deprivation
are cognosced upon in Presbyteries, but with the good liking (I am sure) of all
both papists and praelats, who themselves are free of such vices. And why did
not the Warner put in among the causes of church men's deprivation from office
and benefit, adultery, gluttonny and drunkenness? are these in his, etc. which
he will not have cognoscible by the Church in the persons of Bishops and
Doctors?

The Warners third challenge amounts to an high crime, that Presbyterian
Ministers are bold to preach upon these scriptures which speak of the
Magistrates duty in his office, or dare offer to resolve from scripture any
doubt, which perplexeth the conscience of Magistrates or people, of Husband or
Wife, of Master or Servant, in the discharge of their Christian duty one to
another. What ever has been the negligence of the Bishop of Derry, yet I am
sure, all the preaching Praelats and Doctors of England pretended a great care
to go about these uncontroverted parts of their ministerial function, and yet
without meddling with the Mysteries of State, or the depths of any man's
particulare vocation; much less with thejudgement of jurisdiction in
political or aeconomicall causes.

As for the Churches declaration against the Late engagement; The Churches
proceedings in the late engagement cleared from mistakes.
did it not well become them to signify their judgment in so great a case of
conscience, especially when the Parliament did propone it to them for
resolution, and when they found a conjunction driven on with a clearly
malignant party, contrary to solemn oaths and covenants, unto the evident
hazard of Religione and them who had been most eminent instruments of its
preservation; was it not the churches duty to give warning against that sin,
and to exhort the ring leaders therein to repentance?

But our Warner must needs insist upon that unhappy engagement, and fasten
great blame upon the Church for giving any advice about it. Ans. Must it be
Jesuisitisme, and a drawing of all the civil affairs to the Churches bar in
ordine ad Spiritualia, for an assembly to give their advice in a most eminent
and important case of conscence, when earnestly called upon in a multitude of
supplications from the most of the Congregations under their charge; yea when
required by the States of the Kingdom in several express messages for that
end? It seems, its our Warners conclusion, if the Magistrate would draw all the
Churches in his jurisdiction to a most unlawful war, for the advancement of
the greatest impiety and unjustice possible, wherein nothing could be expected
by all who were engaged therein but the curse of God; if in this case a
doubting Natione should desire the assemblies counsel for the state of their
souls, or if the Magistrate would put the Church to declare what were lawful
or unlawful according to the word of God, that it were necessary here for the
servants of God to be altogether silent, because indeed war is so civil a
business, that nothing in it concerns the soul, and nothing about it may be
cleared by any light from the word of God.

The truth is, the Church in their public papers to the Parliament, declared
oftener then once, that they were not against, but for an engagement, if so that
Christian and friendly treaties could not have obtained reason, and all the
good people in Scotland were willing enough to have hazarded their lives and
estates, for vindicating the wrongs done, not by the Kingdom of England, but
by the sectarian party there, against God the King, covenant and both
Kingdoms: but to the great grief of their hearts, their hands were bound and
they forced to sit still, and by the over great cunning of some, the erroneous
mis-perswasions of others and the rash praecipitancy of it, that engagement was
so spoiled in the stating and mannaging, that the most religious with peace of
conscience could not go along nor encourage any other to take part therein.
The Warner touches on three of their reasons: but who will look upon their
public declarations, shall find many more, which with all faithfulness were
then propounded by the Church, for the rectifying of that action, which, as it
stood in the state and managment, was clearly foretold to be exceeding like to
destroy the King and his friends of all sorts in all the three Kingdoms. The
irreparable losses and unutterable calamities which quickly did follow at the
heels, the misbeleefe and contempt of the Lords servants and the great danger
religion is now brought unto in all these Kingdoms, hes, I suppose, long ago
brought grief enough to the heart of them whose unadvised rashness and
intemperate fervor did contribute most for the spoiling of that design.

The first desire about that engagement which the Warner gives to us, concerns
the security of religion. In all the debate of that matter, it was aggreed
(without question upon all hands, that the Sectarian party deserved punishment
for their wicked attemptes upon the Kings person, contrary to the directions
of the Parliamentes of both Kingdoms, and that the King ought to be rescued
out of their hands, and brought to one of his houses for perfecting the treaty
of peace which often had been begun: but here was the question; Whither the
Parliament and Army of Scotland ought to declare their resolutiones to bring
his Majesty to London with honor, freedom and safty, before he did promise
any security for establishing Religion; The Parliaments of both Kingdoms in
all their former treaties had ever pressed upon the King a number of
propositions to be signed by his Majesty before at all he came to London: was
it then any fault in the Church of Scotland to desire the granting but of one
of these propositions concerning Religion and the covenant, before the King
were brought (by the new hazard of the lives and estats of all the Scottish
nation) to sit in his Parliament in that honor and freedom which himself did
desire? There was no complaint, when many of thirty propositions were pressed
to be signed by his Majesty for satisfaction and security to his people, after
so great and long desolations: how then is an outcry made, when all other
propositions are postponed, and only one for Religion is stuck upon, and that
not before his Majesty's rescue and deliverance from the hands of the
sectaries, but only before his bringing to London in honor freedom and safety?
This demand, to the Warner, is a crime, and may be so to all of his belief,
who takes it for a high unjustice, to restrain in any King the absolute power
by any condition: for they do mantaine that the administration of all things
both of Church and state does reside so freely and absolutely in the mere will
of a Sovereign, that no case at any time can fall out, which ought to bound
that absolutnesse with any limitation.

The second particular the Warner pitches upon, is the Kings negative voice;
behold how criminous we were in the point; When some (most needlessly) would
needs bring into debate the Kings negative voice in the Parliament of England,
as one of the royal praerogatives to be maintained by our engagement: it was
said, that all discourse of that kind might be laid aside as impertinent for
us: if any debate should chance to fall upon it, the proper place of it was, in
a free Parliament of England; that our Laws did not admit of a negative voice
to the King in a Parliament of Scotland; and to press it now as a prerogative
of all Kings, (besides the reflection it might have upon the rights of our
Kingdom,) it might put in the hand of the King a power to deny all and every
one of these things, which the Parliaments of both Kingdoms had found
necessary for the settling the peace in all the three dominions. We marvail
not, that the Warner here should tax us of a great error, seeing it is the
belief of his faction, that every King has not only a negative but an
absolute affirmative voice in all their Parliaments, as if they were nothing
but their arbitrary counsels for to persuade by their reasons but not to
conclude nor impede any thing by their votes; the whole and entire power of
making or refusing Laws being in the Prince alone, and no part of it in the
Parliament.

The Warners third challenge against us about the engagement is, as if the
Church had taken upon it to nominate the officers of the army; and upon this he
makes his invectives. Ans. The Church was far from seeking power to nominate
any one officer: but the matter was thus; when the State did require of them,
what in their judgment would give satisfaction to the people, and what would
encourage them to go along in the engagement? one and the last part of their
answer was, that they conceived if a War shall be found necessary, much of the
peoples encouragement would depend upon the qualification of the commanders, to
whom the mannaging of that great trust should be committed: for after the right
stating of the War, the nixt would be the carrying on of it by such men who
had given constante proof of their integrity. To put all the power of the
Kingdom in their hand, whose by past miscariadges had given just occasion to
suspect their designs and firmness to the interest of God before their own
or any other man's, would fill the hearts of the people with jealousies and
fears, and how wholesome an advice this was, experience has now too clearly
demonstrate.

To make the world know our further resolutiones to meddle with civil affairs,
the Warner is pleased to bring out against us above 80 years old stories, and
all the stuff which our malicious enemy Spotsewood can furnish to him: from
this good author he alleges that our Church discharged merchants to traffic
with Spain, and commanded the change of the market days in Edinburgh. Ans.
Both these calumnies are taken of at length in the Historical Vindication.
After the Spanish invasion of the year eighty eight, many in Scotland kept
correspondence with Spain for treacherous designs: the Inquisitors did seduce
some, and persecute others of our merchants in their traffic, the Church did
deal with his Majesty to interceed with the Spanish King for more liberty to
our country men in their trading: and in the mean time while an answer was
returned from Madrile, they advertised the people to be warry, how they
hazarded their souls for any worldly gain which they could find about the
inquisitors feet.

As for the market days, The Church meddled not with the monday market but by
way of supplication to Parliament.
I grante, it was a great grief to the Church, to see the fabbath day profaned
by handy labor and journeying, by occasion of the munday-mercats in the most
of the great tounes: for remedy heerof, many supplications have been made by
the Assembly to the Parliament: but so long as our Bishops satte there, these
petitiones of the Church were always eluded: for the praelats labor in the
whole Island was to have the sunday no Sabbath, and to procure by their Doctrine
and example the profanation of that day by all sorts of plays, to the end
people might be brought back to their old licentiousnes and ignorance, by which
the Episcopal Kingdom was advanced. It was visible in Scotland, that the most
eminent Bishops were usual players on the Sabbath, even in time of divine
service. And so soon as they were cast out of the Parliament, the Churches
supplications were granted, and acts obtained for the careful sanctification
of the Lords day, and removing of the mercats in all the land from the Monday
to other days of the week.

The Warners nixt challenge of our usurpation is, the assembly at Edinburgh
1567 their ratifying of acts of Parliament, and summoning of all the country to
appear at the nixt assembly. The Church once for safty of the infant Kings
life, with the concurrence of the secret counsel did call an extraordinary
meeting.
Ans. If the Warner had known the history of that time, he would have choysed
rather to have omitted this challenge, then to have proclaimed to the world the
great rottenness of his own heart; at that time the condition of the Church
and Kingdom of Scotland was lamentable, the Queen was declared for popery,
King James's Father was cruelly without any cause murdered by the Earl of
Bothwell; King James himself in his infancy was very near to have been
destroyed by the murderer of his Father, there was no other way conceivable of
saftie for Religion for the infant King, for the Kingdom, but that the
Protestants should join together for the defense of King James against these
popish murderers. For this end the general assembly did crave conference of
the secret counsel: and they with mutual advise did call for a meeting of the
whole Protestant party: which did conveen at the time appointed most frequently
in an extraordinary and mixed assembly of all the considerable persons of the
Religion, Earls, Lords, Barrons, Gentlemen, Burgesses and Ministers, and
subscribed a bond for the revenge of King Henryes death, and the defense of
King James his life: This mixed and extraordinary assembly made it one of the
chief articles in their bond to defend these Acts of the Parliament 1560
concerning religion, and to endeavor the ratification of them in the nixt
ensuing Parliament. As for the assemblies letter to their Brethren for so
frequent a meeting at the nixt extraordinary assembly, it had the authority of
the secret counsel; it was in a time of the greatest necessity, when the
Religion and liberties of the land were in evident hazard from the potent and
wicked counsels of the popish party, both at home and abroad; when the life of
the young King was daily in visible danger from the hands of them who had
murdered his Father, and ravished his Mother. Less could not have been done
in such a juncture of time by men of wisdom and courage, who had any love to
their Religion, King and country: but the resolution of our praelats is to the
contrary, when a most wicked villain had obtained the connivance of a Queen to
kill her husband, and to make way for the killing of her Son in his Cradle, and
after these murders to draw a nation and Church from the true Religion,
established by Law, into popery; and a free Kingdom to an illegal Tyranny; in
this case there may be no meeting, either of Church or State, to provide
remedies against such extraordinary mischiefs. Believe it, the Scotes were
never of this opinion.

What is subjoined in the nixt paragraph of our Churches praesumption to
abolish acts of Parliament; By the laws and customs of Scotland the Assembly
praecieds the Parliament in the reformation of Ecclesiastical abuses.
is but a repetition of what is spoken before. Not only the laws of Scotland
but equity and necessity referres the ordinary reformation of errors and
abuses in Religion to the Ecclesiastical assemblies: what they find wrong in
the Church, though ratified by acts of Parliament, they rectify it from the
word of God, and thereafter by petition obtaines their rectification to be
ratifyed in a following Parliament, and all former acts to the contrary to be
annulled. This is the ordinary Method of proceeding in Scotland and (as I take
it) in all other States and Kingdoms. Were Christians of old hindered to leave
paganism and embrace the Gospel, till the imperial laws for paganism and
against Christianity were revoked? did the oecumenicall and National Synods of
the ancients stay their reformation of heresies and corruptions in religion,
till the laws of State (which did countenance these errors) were cancelled?
Was not popery in Germany France and Britain so firmly established, as civil
laws could do it? It seems, the Warner here does join with his Brother
Issachar, to proclaim all our Reformers in Britain France and Germany, to be
Rebels for daring by their preachings and Assemblies to change these things,
which by acts of Parliaments had been approven, before new Parliaments had
allowed of their reformation. Nevertheless this plea is foolishly intended
against us, for the Ministers protestation against the acts of Parliament 1584,
establishing (in that hour of darkness) iniquity by a law, and against the acts
of the Assembly of Glasgow declaring the unlawfulness of Bishops and
ceremonies; which some Parliaments upon Episcopal misinformation had
approven: both these actions of the Church were according to former Laws and
were ratified afterward by acts of Parliament yet standing in force which for
the Warner (a privatman, and a stranger) to challenge, is to contemn much more
grossly the law, then they do, whom here he is accusing of that crime.

By the nixt Story the Warner will gain nothing, The Church part in the road
of Ruthven cleared.
when the true case of it is known. In King James minority, one Captain James
Stuart did so far prevail upon the tender and unexperienced years of the
Prince, as to steal his countenance unto acts of the greatest oppression; so
far that James Hamelton Earl of Arran (the nixt to the King in blood, in his
health a most gallant Prince, and a most zealous professor of the true
Religion) in time of his sickness, when he was not capable to commit any crime
against the State, was notwithstanding spoiled of all his livelihood and
liberty: his Lands and honor with the dignity of high Chancellor of Scotland
were conferred on that very wicked Tyrant Captain James, a number of the best
affected and prime nobility impatient of such unheard of oppressiones, with
mere boasts and no violence at the road of Ruthven chased away that unhappy
chancellor from the Kings person, this his Majesty for the time professed to
take in so good part that under his hand he did allow it for good service, in
his letters to the most of the Neighbor princes: he dealt also with the
secret counsel and the chief judicatories of the land, and obtained from them
the approbation of that act of the Lords as convenient and laudable, promising
likewise to ratify it in the nixt ensuing Parliament. When the Lords for their
more abundante clearing required the Assemblies declaration there upon, the
Ministers declined to meddle at all with the case; but the Kings Majesty sent
his Commissioners to the Assembly, entreating them withal earnestness to
declare their good liking of that action, which he assured them was for his
good, and the good both of the Church and Kingdom: for their obedience to the
Kings importunity they are here railed upon by the wise Warner. It is true,
Captain James shortly after creept in again into Court, and obtained a sever
revenge against the authors of that action, before a Parliament could sit to
approve it, but within a few months the same Lords with some more did at
Striveling chase again that evil man from the Court: whither he never more
returned, and this their action was ratified in the nixt Parliament, and so
stands to this day unquestioned by any but such as the Warner, either out of
ignorance or malice.

I am weary to follow the Warner in all his wanderings; The interest of the
general assembly of Scotland, in the reformation of England.
at the nixt loupe he jumps from the 1584 to the 1648, skipping over in a
moment 64 years. The articles of Striveling mentions that the promoving of the
work of Reformation in England and Ireland, be referred to the general
assembly, upon this our friend does discharge a flood of his choler: all the
matter of his impatience here is, that Scotland when by fraud they had been
long allured, and at last by open violence invaded by the English Praelats,
that they might take on the yock of all their corruptions, they were contented
at the earnest desire of both the houses of Parliament, and all the
well-affected in England, to assist their Brethren, to purge out the leaven of
Episcopacy, and the Service book with all the rest of the old corruptions of
the English and Irish Churches; with the mannaging of this so great and good an
Ecclesiastic work, the Parliament of Scotland did entrust the general
assembly. No mervaile that Doctor Bramble a zealous lover of all the
Arminianisme, Popery and Tyranny, of which his great patron Doctor Lade stands
convicted yet without an answer to have been bringing in upon the three
nations, should be angry at the discoverers and dis-appointers of that most
pious work as they wont to style it?

What here the Warner repeats, it is answered before, The violent apprehension
of Mass Priests Priests in their act of idolatry reproved by the Warner.
as for the two Stories in his conclusion, which he takes out of his false
Author Spots-wood, adding his own large amplifications; I conceive, there
needs no more to be said to the first, but that some of John Knocks zealous
hearers understanding of a Mass Priest at their very side committing idolatry
contrary to the Laws, did with violence break in upon him and sease upon his
person and Masse-cloathes, that they might present him to the ordinary
Magistrate to receave justice according to the Law; This act the Warner will have
to be a huge rebellion, not only in the actors, but also in John Knocks, who
was not so much as present thereat.

What first he speaks of the Assemblies convocating the people in arms to be
present at the trial of the popish Lords and their avowing of that their deed
to the King in his face we must be pardoned to mistrust the Warner heerin upon
his bare word without the relief of some witness, and that a more faithful one
then his Brother in evil, Mr. Spotswood, whom yet here he does not profess
to cite. Against these popish Lords after their many treasons and bloody
murders of the lieges, the King himself at last was forced to arm the people;
but that the general assembly did call any unto arms we require the Warners
proof that we may give it an answer.

CHAP. VIII.
The chief of the Praelats agree with the Presbyterians about the divine right
of Church discipline.

THE Warners challenge in this chapter is that we mantaine our discipline by a
Iure divino, and for this he spewes out upon us a sea of such rhetoric, as
much better beseemed. Ans. Mercurius Aulicus then either a Warner or a
praelate. In this challenge he is as unhappy as in the rest, it is for a matter
wherein the most of his own Brethren (though our Adversaries) yet fully agree
with us that the discipline of the Church is truly by divine right, The Warner
and his Praelatical Erastian brethren are obliged by their own principles to
advise the King to lay aside Episcopacy and set up the Praesbytery in all his
dominions.
and that Jesus Christ holds out in scripture the substantials of that
Government whereby he will have his house to be ruled to the worlds end;
leaving the circumstantials to be determined by the judicatories of the Church
according to the general rules, which are clear also in the word for matters
of that nature. In this neither Papists nor the learndest of the Praelats find
any fault with us; yet our Warner must spend a whole Chapter upon it.

It is true as we observed before the elder Praelats of England in Edwards and
Elizabeth's days, as the Erastians now, did mantaine that no particular
Government of the Church was jure divino, and if this be the Warners mind, it
were ingenuity in him to speak it out loud, and to endeavor to persuade his
friends about the King of the truth of this tenet, he was never employed about
a better and more seasonable service: for if the discipline of the Church be
but humano jure then Episcopacy is kept up upon no conscience, conscience
being bottomed only upon a divine right, so Episcopacy wanting that bottom may
well be laid aside at this time by the King for any thing that concerns
conscience since no command of God nor warrant from scripture ties him to keep
it up. This truly seems to be the maine ground whereupon the whole discourse
of this Chapter is builded. Is it tolerable that such truths should be
concealed by our Warners against their conscience, when the speaking of them
out might be so advantageous to the King and all his Kingdoms, how ever we
with all the reformed Churches do believe in our heart the divine right of
Synods and Presbyteries, and for no possible inconvenient can be forced to deny
or pass from this part of truth, yet the Warner here joins with the elder
Praelats who till Warner Banckrofts advancement to the sea of Canterburry did
unanimously deny Episcopacy to be of divine right, and by consequent affirmed
it to be moveable, and so lawful to be laid aside by princes, when so ever
they found it expedient for their affairs to be quyte of it, why does not the
warner and his Brethren speak plainly their thoughts in his Majesty's ears?
why do they longer dissemble their conscience, only for the satisfaction of
their ambition, greed, and revenge? sundry of the Praelaticall divines come yet
further to join fully with Erastus in denying not only Episcopacy and all
other particular forms of Church government to be of divine institution, but
in avowing that no government in the Church at all is to be imagined, but such
as is a part of the civil power of the Magistrate. The Warner in the Chapter
and in diverse other parts of his book seems to agree with this judgment: and
upon this ground if he had ingenuity he would offer his helping hand to untie
the bonds of the Kings conscience, if here it were straytened, by
demonstrating from this his principle, that very safely without any offense to
God and nothing doubting for conscience sake, his Majesty might lay aside
Episcopacy and set up the Presbytery so fully as is required in all his
dominions though not upon a divine right which the Presbyterians believe, yet
upon Erastus royal right which the Warner here and elsewhere avouches.

What the Warner puts here again upon the Presbytery, The praelaticall party
were lately bent for Popery.
the usurpation of the temporal sword in what indirect relation so ever, its
probation in the former chapter was found so weak and naughty, that the
repetition of it is for no use: only we mark that the Warner will have the
Presbitery to be an absolute papacy, for no other purpose but to vent his
desire of revenge against the Presbyterians, who gave in a challenge against
the Praelats, especially the late Canterburians, among whom Doctor Bramble was
one of some note, to which none of them have returned to this hour an answer;
that their principles unavoidably did bring back the pope. For a Patriarch
over all the western Churches, and among all the Patriarchs of the whole
Catholic Church a primacy in the Roman, flows clearly out of the fountain of
Episcopacy, according to the avowed doctrine of the English praelats: who yet
are more liberal to the pope in granting him beside his spiritual
super-inspection of the whole Catholic Church, all his temporal jurisdictions
also in the patrimony of St. Peter, and all his other fair principalities
within and without Italy. There is no ceremony in Rome that these men stick
upon: for of all the superstitious and idolatrous ceremonies of Rome, their
images and altars and adorations before them are incomparably the worst; yet
the Warners friends without any recantation we have heard of, avow them all;
even an adoration of and to the altar it self. As for the doctrines of Rome
what points are worse then these which that party have avowed in express
terms, a corporal presence of Christ's body upon the Altar the Tridentine
justification, free will, final apostasy of the Saints: when no other thing
can be answered to this our sore challenge, it is good to put us off with a
Squib that the Presbytery is as absolute papacy as ever was in Rome.

The Presbyterian position which the Warner here offers not to dispute but to
laugh at, that Christ as King of his Church according to his royal office and
Scepter hes appointed the office bearers and laws of the house, is accorded to
by the most and sharpest of our adversaries, whether English or Romish, as
their own tenet: howbeit such foolish consequences, that all acts of Synods
must be Christ's Laws, etc. neither they nor we do acknowledge.

His declamations against the novelty of the Presbytery in the ordinary style
of the Jesuits against Protestants, The Praelats profess now a willingness to
abolish at least three parts of the former Episcopacy.
and of the pagan Philosophers against the Christians of old, who will regard:
our plea for the Praesbyterie is, that it is scripturall; if so; it is ancient
enough: if not; let it be abolished. But it were good, that here also the
Warner and his friends would be ingenuous, to speak out their minds of
Episcopacy. Why have they all so long deceived the King, in assuring him that
English Episcopacy was well warranted both by Scripture and antiquity. Be it so
(which yet is very false) that something of a Bishop distinct from a Presbyter
had any footing in Scripture, yet can they be so impudent, as to affirm, that
an English Bishop in his very flesh and blood, in his substantial limbs was
ever known in the World till the pope was become Antichrist? A Bishop by
virtue of his office a Lord in Parliament, voycing in all acts of State, and
exercising the place of a high Thesaurer, of a Chancellor, or what ever civil
charge the favor of a Prince did put upon him; a Bishop with sole power of
ordination and jurisdiction, with out any Presbytery; a Bishop exercising no
jurisdiction himself in any part of his dioces, but devolving the exercise of
that power wholly upon his officials and Commissaries; a Bishop ordaining
Presbyters himself alone, or with the fashionall assistance of any two
Presbyters, who chance to be near; a Bishop the only Pastor of the whole
dioces, and yet not bound to feed any flock, either by word or Sacrament, or
government, but having a free liberty to devolve all that service upon others,
and himself to wait at court so many years as he shall think fit. This is our
English Bishop not only in practice but in law, and so was he defended by the
great disputants for praelacy in England.

But now let the Warner speak out, The portion of Episcopacy, which yet is
stuck to, cannot be kept up upon any principle either of honor or conscience.
if any such treasure can more be defended or was ever known in scripture, or
seen in any Christian Church for 800. years and above, after the death of
Christ. I take it indeed, to be conscience, that forces now at last the best of
our Court-divines to divest their Bishop of all civil employment in Parliament
court or Kingdom, in denying his solitarines in ordination, in removing his
official and Commissary courts, in taking away all his arches, Archbishops,
Archdeacons, deane and Chapter and all the, etc. in erecting Presbyteries for
all ordinations and spiritual jurisdiction. It is good that conscience moves
our adversaries at last to come this far toward us: butwhy will they not yet
come nearer, to acknowledge that by these their to lately recanted errors they
did to long trouble the world; and that the little which yet they desire to
keep of a Bishop is nothing less then that English Bishop but a new creature
of their own devising never known in England which his Majesty in no honnour
is obliged to mantaine for any respect either to the laws or customs of
England, and least of all, for conscience?

While the Warner with such confidence avowes, The smallest portion of the most
moderat Episcopacy is contrary to scripture.
that no text of Scripture can be alleged against Episcopacy, which may not
with more reason be applied against the Presbytery; behold I offer him here
some few, casting them in a couple of arguments, which according to his great
promises, I wish, he would answer at his leisure.

First I do reason from Ephesians 4.11: all the officers that Christ has
appointed in his Church for the Ministry of the word, are either Apostles,
Evangelists, Prophets, Pastors or Doctors: but Bishops are none of these fyve:
Ergo they are none of the officers appointed by Christ for the Ministry of the
word. The Major is not wont to be questioned: the minor thus I prove; Bishops
are not Apostles, Evangelists, nor prophets: for its confessed, all these were
extraordinary and temporary officers: but Bishops (say you) are ordinary and
perpetual: our adversaries pitch upon the fourth, alleging the Episcopal
office to be pastoral; but I prove the Bishop no Pastor thus; no Pastor is
superior to other Pastors in any spiritual power: but according to our
adversary, a Bishop is superior to all the Pastors of his dioces in the power
of ordination and jurisdiction. Ergo. The doubt here is only of the Major,
which I prove Argumento a paribus: no Apostle is superior to an Apostle, nor an
Evangelists to an Evangelist, nor prophet to a prophet nor a Doctor to a
Doctor in any spiritual power according to scripture. Ergo no Pastor to a
Pastor. Again I reason from 1. Tim. 4.14. Math: 18.15. 1. Cor. 5.4.12.13, What
taks the power of ordination and jurisdiction from Bishops, destroys Bishops:
as the removal of the soul kills the man, and the denial of the form takes
away the subject; so the power of ordination and jurisdiction the essential
form, whereby the Bishop is constitute and distinguished from the Presbyter
and every other Church officer, being removed from him, he must perish: but the
quoted places take away clearly these powers from the Bishop: for the first
puts the power of ordination in the Presbytery, and a Bishop is not a
Presbytery; the second puts the power of jurisdiction in the Church; and the
third in a company of men which meet together: but the Bishop is not the Church
nor a company of men met together: for these be many, and he is but one person.

When the Doctors learning he; satisfied us in these two, he shall receave more
scripturall arguments against Episcopacy. The Praelats unable to answer their
opposits.
But why do we expect answers from these men, when after so long time (for
all their boasts of learning and their visible leisure) none of their party hes
hade the courage, to offer one word of answer to the Scriptures and Fathers,
which in great plenty Mr. Parker and Mr. Didoclave of old, and of late that
mitacle of learning most noble Somais, and that Magazin of antiquity Mr.
Blondel have printed against them?

What in the end of the Chapter the Warner adds of our trouble at King James
his fifty and five questions 1596, and of our yielding the bucklers without
any opposition till the late unhappy troubles; we answer that in this as every
where else the Warner proclaines his great and certain knowledge of our
Ecclesiastic story: the troubles of the Scots divines at that time were very
small, for the matter of these questions, all which they did answer so roundly,
that there was no more speech of them thereafter by the propounders: but the
manner and time of these questions did indeed perplex good men, to see Erastian
and Prelaticall counselors so far to prevail with our King, as to make him
by captious questions carpe at these parts of Church Discipline, which by
statuts of Parliament and acts of Assemblyes were fully established.

Our Church at that time was far from yielding to Episcopacy: Prelacy was ever
grievous to Scotland.
great trouble indeed by some wicked Statesmen was then brought upon the
persons of the most able and faithful Ministers, but our land was so far from
receiving of Bishops at that time, that the question was not so much as
proposed to them for many years thereafter, it was in Ann. 1606 that the
English Praelats did move the King by great violence to cast many of the best
and most learned Preachers of Scotland out of their charges, and in Ann. 1610,
that a kind of Episcopacy was set up in the corrupt assembly of Glasgow; under
which the Church of Scotland did heavily groan till the year 1637, when their
burdens was so much increased by the English praelaticall Tax-masters, that all
was shaken of together, and divine justice did so closly follow at the heels,
that oppressing praelacy of England as to the great joy of the long oppressed
Scotes, that evil root and all its branches was cast out of Britain, where
we trust, no shadow of it shall ever again be seen.

CHAP. IX.
The Commonwealth is no monster, when God is made Sovereign, and their
commands of men are subordinated to the clear will of God.

HAving cleared the vanity of these calumnious challenges, where with the
Warner did animate the King and all Magistrates against the Presbyterians, let
us try if his skill be any greater, to inflame the people against it. He would
make the World believe that the Presbyterians are great transsubstantiators of
whole Commonwealths into beasts, and Metamorphosers of whole Kingdoms of men,
into Serpents with two heads; how great and monstrous a Serpent must the
Presbytery be, when she is the Mother of a Dragon with two heads. But it is
good, that she has nothing to do with the procreation of the Dragon with seven
heads, the great Antichrist, the Pope of Rome: this honor must be left to
Episcopacy: the Presbytery must not pretend to any share in it.

The Warners ground for his pretty similitude is, There is no Lordship but a
mere service and ministry in the Pastors of the Church
that the Presbyterians make two Soveraignities in every Christian State, whose
commands are contrary. Ans. All the evil lies in the contrariety of the
commands: as for the double Soveraignity, there is no show of truth in it: for
the Presbyterians cannot be guilty of coordinating two Soveraignities in one
State, though the Praelats may well be guilty of that fault; since they with
there Masters of Rome mantaine a true hierarchy, a Spiritual Lord-ship, a
domination and principality in their Bishops above all the members of the
Church, but the Presbyterians know no (...), no dominion, no Soveranity in
Church officers, but a mere ministry under Christ. As for the contrariety of
commands, its true: Christ's Ministers must publish all the commands of their
Sovereign Lord, whereunto no command of any temporal Prince needs or ought to
be contrary; but if it fall out to be so, it is not the Presbytery; but the
holy Scriptures, which command rather to obey God then man. Dare the Warner
here oppose the Presbyterians? dare he mantaine a subordination of the Church
to the State in such a fashion, that the clear commands of God published by the
Church ought to give place to the contrary commands of the State? if the Warner
must needs invert and contradict Christ ruling of this case, let him go on to
preach doctrine point blank to the Apostles, that it is better to obey men then
God. It falls out as rarely in Scotland as any where in the world, that the
Church and State run contrary ways; but if so it happen, the commune rules of
humane direction toward right and wrong judgment must be followed: if a man
find either the Church or the State or both command what he knows to be wrong
(for neither the one nor the other has any infallibility) their is no doubt
but either or both may be disobeyed, yet with this difference, that for
disobedience to the Churches most just commands, a man can not fall under the
smallest temporal inconvenient without the States good pleasure, but for his
disobedience to the most unjust commands of the State he must suffer what ever
punishment the law does inflict without any relief from the Church.

Two instances are brought by the Warner, of the Church and States contrary
commands: the first the King commanded Edinburgh to feast the frensh
Ambassadors, but the Church commanded Edinburgh to fast that day when the King
desired them to feast. Ans. Here were no so contrary commands, but both were
obeyed, the people did keep the humiliation, and some of the Magistrates that
same day did give the banquet to the frensh Ambassadors as the King commanded;
that for this any Church censure was intended against them it is a malicious
calumny, according to the author of this fable his own confession, as at
length may be seen in the unloading of Issachars burden.

As for his second instance, The Warner is full of calumnious untruths.
the difference of the Church and State about the late engagement we have
spoken to it in the former chapter at length: the furthest the Church went was
by humble petitions and remonstrances to set before the Parliament the great
danger, which that engagement (as it was stated and managed) did portent to
religion, the Kings Person and whole Kingdom, when contrary to their whole some
advices the engagement went on, they meddled not to oppose the act of State
further then to declare their judgment of its unlawfulness, according to the
duty of faithful watchmen Ezekiel. 33. It is very false that the Church has
chased any man out of the country, or excommunicated any for following that
engagement, or have put any man to sackcloath for it, unto his day. Neither did
ever any man call the freedom of the late Parliament in question, how
unsatisfied soever many were with its proceedings.

When the Warner heaps up so many untruths in a few lines, in things done but
yesterday before the eyes of thousands, we shall not wonder of his venturing to
lie considently in things past long before any now living were borne: but there
are a generation of men who are bold to speak what makes for their end upon
the hope that few will be at the pains, to bring back what hes flowne from their
teeth to the touchstone of any solid trial.

CHAP. X.
The Nature of the Presbytrie is very concordant with Parliaments.

IN the tenth chapter the Warner undertakes to show the antipathy of
Presbyteries to Parliaments; albeit there be no greater harmony possible
betwixt any two bodies, then betwixt a general assembly and Parliament, a
Presbytery and an inferior civil court, if either the constitution or end or
daily practice of these judicatories be looked upon: but the praelaticall
learning is of so high a flight, that it dare undertake to prove any
conclusion: yet these men are not the first, that have offered to force men to
believe upon unanswerable arguments though contrary to common sense and and
reason that snow is black and the fire cold and the light dark. The eight
desires of the Church about the engagement were just and necessary.


For the proof of his conclusion he brings back yet again the late
engagement: how often shall this insipide colwort be set upon our table? Will
the Warner never be filled with this unsavory dish? The first crime that here
the Warner marks in our Church against the late Parliament in the matter of the
engagement is, their paper of the eight desires: upon this he unpoureth out all
his good pleasure, not willing to know that all these desires were drawn from
the Church by the Parliaments own messages, and that well near all these
desires were counted by the Parliament it self to be very just and necessary:
Especially these two which the wise Warner pitches upon as most absurd for the
first a security to religion from the King upon oath under his hand and seal:
where the question among us was not for the thing it self, but only about the
time, the order and some part of the matter of that security. And for the
second, the qualification of the persons to be employed, that all should be
such who had given no just cause of Jealousy; no man did question, but all who
were to have the managing of that war should be free of all just causes of
Jealousy, which could be made appear not to half a dossen of Ministers, but
to any competent judicatory according to the laws of the Kingdom. The Warner
has not been careful to inform himself, where the knot of the difference
lay, and so gives out his own groundless conjectures for true Historical
narrations, which he might easily have helped by a more attentive reading of
our public declarations.

The second fault he finds with our Church is, that they proclaim in print
their dissatisfaction with that engagement as favorable to the malignant
party, etc. Ans. The Warner knows not that it is one of the liberties of the
Church of Scotland established by law and long custom to keep the people by
public declarations in their duty to God, It is one of the liberties of the
Church of Scotland to publish declarations.
when men are like to draw them away to sin according to that of Esaias. 8. v.
12.13. What in great humility piety and wisdom was spoken to the world in the
declaration of the Church concerning that undertaking, was visible enough for
the time to any who were not peremptor to follow their own ways: and the
lamentable event since has opened the eyes of many, who before would not see,
to acknowledge their former errors: but if God should speak never so loud
from Heaven, the Warner and his party will stop their ears: for they are men
of such gallant Spirits, as scorn to submit either to God or men, but in a
Roman constancy they will be ever the same though their counsels and ways be
found never so palpably pernicious.

The third thing the Warner lays to the charge of our Church is, The leavy was
never offered to be stopped by the Church.
that they retarded the leavies. Ans. In this also the Warner shows his
ignorance or malice: for how sore soever the Levy (as then stated and managed)
was against the hearts of the Church, yet their opposition to it, was so
cold-rife and small, that no complaint needs be made of any retardment from
them. So soon as the commanders thought it expedient, there was an Army gotten
up so numerous and strong, that with the ordinary blessing of God was
abundantly able to have done all the professed service: but where the aversion
of the hearts of the Church and the want of their prayers is superciliously
contemned, The Church was not the cause of the gathering at Mauchlin Moore.
what mervaile, that the strongest arm of flesh be quickly broken in pieces?

The fourth charge is most calumnious, that the Church gathered the country
together in arms at Mauchline moor to oppose the expedition. Ans. No Church
man was the cause of that meeting a number of yeomen being frighted from their
houses, did flee away to that corner of the Land, that they might not be forced
against their conscience to go as soldiers to England: while their number did
grow, and they did abide in a body for the security of their persons, upon a
sudden a part of the Army came upon them: some Ministers being near (by
occasion of the communion at Mauchlin the day before) were good instruments
with the people to go away in peace. And when the matter was tried to the
bottom by the most Eagle-eyed of the Parliament, nothing could be found
contrary to the Ministers protestation, that they were no ways the cause of
the peoples convening or fighting at Mauchlin.

The parallel that the Warner makes betwixt the general assembly and
Parliament is malicious in all its parts. The assembly is helpful and not
hurtful to the Parliament.
For the first, though the one Court be civil, and the other Spiritual, yet
the Presbyterians lay the authority of both upon a divine fundation, that for
conscience sake the Courts civil must be obeyed in all their Lawful commands,
alsewell as the assemblyes of the Church; God being the author of the politic
order as well as the Ecclesiastic, and the revenger of the contempt of the one
alswell as of the other. But what does the Warner mean, to mock at Ministers
for carrying themselves as the Ambassadors of Christ, for judging according to
the rule of Scripture, for caring for life eternal? is he become so
shamefullie impious, as to persuade Ministers to give over the care of life
eternal, to lay aside the holy Scripture, and deny their embassage from Jesus
Christ? behold what Spirit leads our praelats, while they jeere the World out
of all Religion, and chase away Ministers from Christ, from Scripture, from
eternal life.

Of the second part of the parallel, that people are more ready to obey their
Ministers then their Magistrates what shall be made? all the power which
Ministers have with the people is builded on their love to God and religion:
how much so ever it is, a good Statseman will not envy it: for he knows that
God and conscience constrain Ministers to employ all the power they have with
the people to the good of the Magistrate, as the deputy and servant of God for
the peoples true good. The Warner here understands best his own meaning, while
he scoffs at Ministers for their threatening of men with hells fire. Are our
Praelats come to such open proclamations of their Atheism, as to printe their
desires to banish out of the hearts of people all fear not only of
Church Censures, but even of hell it self? whither may not Satan drive at last
the instruments of his Kingdom?

The third part of the parallel consists of a number of unjust and false
imputations before particularly refuted.

What he subjoines of the power of the general Assembly to name Comittees to
sit in the intervalls of Assemblies, The appointment of comittees is a right of
every court as well Ecclesiastic as civil.
it is but a poor charge: is it not the daily practice of the Parliaments of
Scotland to nominat their Comittees of State for the intervalls of Parliament?
Is it not ane inhaerent right to every Court to name some of their number to
cognosce upon things within their own sphere at what ever times the court it
self finds expedient; how ever the judicatories of the Church by the laws of
the Kingdom being authorized to meet when themselves think fit both ordinarily
and pro re nata, their power of appointing Comittees for their own affairs
was never questioned: and truly these Comittees in the times of our late
troubles when many were lying in wait to disturb both Church and State, have
been forced to meet oftener then otherwise any of their members did desire:
whose diversion from their particular charges (though for attendance on the
public) is joined with so great fashery and expense, that with all their heart
they could be glade to decline it, if fear of detriment to the Church made not
these meetings very necessary.

CHAP. XI.
The Presbytery is no burden to any honest man.

THE bounds and compass of the Warners rage against the Presbytery is very
large; There is no rigor at all in the Presbytery.
not being content to have incensed the King and Parliament against it, he
comes down to the body of the people, and will have them believe the special
enimity of the Scots discipline against them, first because it inflicts Church
censures upon every one for the smallest faults. Ans. The faults which the
Warner mentions may well be ane occasion of a private advice in the ear, but
that any of them did ever procure the smallest censure of the Church, it is a
great untruth: no man who knows us will complain of our rigor, heerwe wish
we were able to refute upon as good reason the charge of our slaknes in the
mouth of sectaries as we are that of our strictnes in the mouth of Erastianes.
We would know of the Warner, what are these Sabbath recreations, which he
says are void of scandal, and consistent with the duties of the day; are they
not the stage plays and the other honest pastimes, wherewith his friends were
wont to sanctify the Lords day, as no more a Sabbath then any other day in the
year, and much less then diverse popish festivalls? An Aposteme in the lowest
gutt will show it self by the unsavory vapors, which now and then are eructat
from it. That ever in Scotland there was one word of debate about starch and
cuffs, is more then the Warner can prove.

The second oppression, Crimes till repented of ought to keep from the holy
table.
whereby the Presbytery trods the people under foot is a rare cruelty; that
persons, for grievous crimes whereof the Magistrate takes notice, are called to
Ecclesiastic repentance. Will the Doctor in his fury against us, run out upon
all his own friends for no appearance of a fault? Will either the English or
popish praelats admit murderers, whoores or thieves to the holy table without
any signs of repentance? Is not the greatest crime the ground of the greatest
scandal? Shall small scandals be purged away by repentance, and the greatest be
totally past by? The Doctor here may know his own meaning but others will
confess their ignorance of his mind.

The third grievance he would have the people conceive against the Presbytery
is, Excommunication in Scotland is not injurious to any.
the rigor of their excommunication; in this also the Warner seems to know
little of the Scots way, let excommunication be so seveer in Scotland as is
possible, yet the hurt of it is but small: it is so rare an accident, men may
live long in Scotland, and al their life never see that censure execute; I have
lived in one of the greatest Cities of that land and for forty seven years
even from my birth to this day, that censure to my knowledge or hearing was
never execute there in my days but twice; first upon ane obstinat and very
profaine Papist; and nixt on some horrible scandalous praelats. Again when any
is excommunicated by the Church, we go no further with them then Paul's
command: 2. These. 3.14. only they who are not tied to them by natural bonds,
abstain from familiar and unnecessary conversation, to bring them by the sense
of this shame to repentance for their fins.

Thirdly the civil inconvenientes which follow that censure come along from
the State and the acts of Parliament, for which the Church ought not to be
challenged; especially by praelats who wont to allow their officials to
excommunicat whole incorporations of people for a small debt of money, and to
press the contemners of that frivolous and profane sentence, with all the
civil inconvenientes they could. Fourthly what ever be the laws in Scotland
against them who continues long in the contempt of Excommunication, (which are
not inflicted but for great sins and after a long process) yet certainly their
execution is very far from all cruelty, as they who know the proceedings of
that land, will bear witness.

What he objects about fugitives; it is true, when a process is begun, a
fugitive may have it concluded, and sent after him; but we count not that man a
fugitive from discipline or contumacious as the Warner quarrels us, who upon
just fear to hazard his life does not compear.

CHAP. XII.
The Presbytery is hurtful to no order of men.

PRaelaticall malice is exorbitant beyond the bounds of all show of moderation:
The Warners outrage against the Presbytery
was it not enough to have calumniat the Presbytery to Kings, Princes and
Sovereigns, to Parliaments and all Courts of Justice, to people and all
particular persons, but yet a new chapter must be made to show in it the
hurtfullnes of Presbytery to all orders of men: we must have patience to stand
a little in the unsavory air of this vomit also. The Praelats were constant
oppressors: of the Nobility and gentry.


Unto the nobility and gentry the Presbitery must be hurtful, because it
subjecteth them to the censures of a raw heady novice and a few ignorant
artificers. Ans. Its good that our praelats are now turned pleaders against the
oppression of the Nobility and gentry: its not long since the praelatical
clergy were accustomed to set their soul feet on the necks of the greatest
peers of the three Kingdoms with to high a pride and pressure; that to shake
of their yock, no suffering, no hazard has been refused by the best of the
Nobility and gentry of Britain: but natures and principles are so easy to be
changed, that no man now needs fear any more oppression from the praelats,
though they were set down again and well warned in their repaired throns.

But to the challenge we answer, The way of the Scotes Presbytery is
incomparably better then that of the English Episcopacy.
that the meanest Eldership of a small Congregation in Scotland consists of the
Pastor, and a dozen (at least) of the most wise pious and learned that are to
be found in the whole flock; which yet the Warner here makes to be judges but
of the common people in matters of smallest moment. But for the classical
Presbytery, to which he referres the Ecclesiastical causes of the Nobility and
gentry, and before whom indeed every Church process of any considerable weight
or difficulty does come, though it concern the persons of the meanest of the
people, this Presbytery does consist ordinarily of fifeteen Ministers (at least)
and fifeteen of the most qualified noblemen, gentlemen and Burgesses, which the
circuit of fifteen parishes can afford, these (I hope) may make up a
judicatory of a great deal more worth then any official court, which consists
but of one judge, a petty mercenary lawyer, to whose care alone the whole
Ecclesiastic jurisdiction over all the Nobility and gentry of diverse shyres
is committed, and that without appeal as the Warner has told us, except it be
to a Court of delegats; a miserable relief that all the Nobility, gentry and
Commons of a Kingdom, who are oppressed by Episcopal officials, have no other
remedy but to go attend a Committee of two or three civilians at London
deputed for the discussing of such appeals.

The Presbyterian course is much more ready, solid and equitable: if any
grievance arise from the sentence of a Presbytery, a Synod twice a year does
sit in the bounds, and attends for a week, or if need be, longer, to determine
all appeals, and redress all grievances: now the Synod does consist of all
the Ministers within the bounds, which ordinarily are of diverse whole shyres as
that of Glasgow, of the upper and nether ward of Clidsedaile, Baerranfrow,
Lennox, Kile, Carrick and Cunninghame; also beside Ministers, the constant
members who have decisive voice in Synodes, are the chief Noblemen, Gentlemen
and Burgesses of all these shyres, among whom their be such parts for judgment
as are not to be found nor expected in any inferior civil Court of the
Kingdom, yet if it fall out so, that any party be grieved with the sentence of
a Synod, there is then a farther and final appeal in a General assembly,
which consists of as many Burgesses and more Gentlemen from every shire of the
Kingdom then come to any Parliament: beside the prime Nobility and choicest
Ministry of the land; having the Kings Majesty in person, or in his absence,
his high Commissioner to be their praesident. This meeting yearly (or oftener,
if need be) sits ordinarily a month; and if they think fit, longer: the number,
the wisdom, the eminency of the members of this Court is so great, that
beside the unjustice, it were a very needless labor to appeal from it to the
Parliament, for (as we have said) the King or his high Commissioner, sits in
both meetings albeit in a different capacity: the number and qualification of
knights and Burgesses is ever large as great in the assembly as in the
Parliament: only the difference is, that in the Parliament all the Nobility in
the Kingdom sit without any election and by virtue of their birth, but in the
Assembly only who for age, wisdom and piety are chosen by the Presbyteries as
fittest to judge in Ecclesiastic affairs: but to make up this odds of the
absence of some Noblemen, the Assembly is always adorned with above ane
hundred of the choifest Pastors of the whole land, none whereof may sit in
Parliament: nothing that can conciliate authority to a Court, or can be found
in the Nation, is wanting to the general assembly; how basely so ever our
praelats are pleased to trample upon it.

The second alleged hurt which the Nobility have from the Presbytery, All
questions about patronages in Scotland are now ended.
is the loss of their patronages by congregations electing their Pastors. Ans.
Howsoever the judgment of our Church about patronages is no other then that of
the Reformed divines abroad, yet have our Presbyteries always with patience
endured patrons to present unto vacant Churches, till the Parliament now at
last has taken away that grievance.

The Nobilities last hurt by the Presbytry is their loss of all their
impropriations and Abey-lands. The possessors of Church lands were ever feared
for Bishops, but never for the Presbytery.
Ans. How Sycophantick an accusation is this? for who knows not, how far the
whole generation of the praelaticke faction do exceed the highest of the
Presbyterians in zeal against that which they call Sacrilege? never any of
the Presbyterians did attempt either by violence, or a course of Law, to put
out any of the Nobility or gentry from their possessions of the Church Lands,
but very lately the threats and vigorous activity of the praelats, and their
followers were so vehement in this kind, that all the Nobility and gentry who
had any interest, were wackned (to purpose) to take heed of their rights. In
the last Parliament of Scotland when the power of the Church was as great as
they expect to see it again, though they obtained the abolition of patronages,
yet were the possessors of the Church Lands and tithes so little harmed that
their rights thereto were more clearly and strongly confirmed, then by any
praeceding Parliament.

The fourth hurt is that every ordinary Presbyter will make himself a Noblemans
fellow. Ans. No where in the World does gracious Ministers (though mean borne
men) receive more respect from the Nobility then in Scotland: neither any where
does the Nobility and gentry receive more duly their honor then from the
Ministers there. That insolent speech fathered on Mr. Robert Bruce is
demonstrat to be a fabulous calumny in the historical vindication.

However the Warner may know that in all Europe where Bishops have place, it
hes ever, (at least these 800 years) been their nature to trample under foot
the highest of the Nobility. As the Pope must be above the Emperor, so a
little Cardinal Bellarmin can tell to King James, that he may well be counted
a companion of any Ilander King: were the Bishops in Scotland ever content,
till they got in Parliament the right hand and the nearest seats to the
throne, and the door of the greatest Earls, Marquesses and duks? was it not
Episcopacy, that did advance poor and capricious pedants to strive for the
white staves and great Seals of both Kingdoms, with the prime Nobility; and
often overcome them in that strife? In Scotland I know, and the Warner will
assure for England and Ireland, that the basest borne of his brethren hes ruff
led it in the secreet counsel, in the royal Exchequer, in the highest courts
of justice, with the greatest Lords of the Land: its not so long, that yet it
can be forgotten, The praelats continue to annull the being of all the reformed
Churches for their want of Episcopacy.
since a Bishop of Galloway had the modesty to give unto a Marquise of Argile,
tanta mont to a broadly in his face at the counsel table. The Warner shall do
well to reckon no more with Presbyters for braving of Noblemen.

The nixt he will have to be wronged by the Presbytery are the orthodoxe
clergy. Ans. All the Presbyterians to him (it seems) are heterodoxe;
Episcopacy is so necessary a truth that who denies it, must be stamped as for a
grievous error with the character of heterodox. The following words clear
this to be his mind, they loss (says he) the confortable assurance of
undoubted succession by Episcopal ordination: what sense can be made of these
words, but that all Ministers who are not ordained by Bishops, must lie under
the confortlesse uncertainty of any lawful succession in their ministerial
charge, for want of this succession through the lineall descent of Bishops from
the Apostles; at least for want of ordination by the hands of Bishops, as if
unto them only the power of mission and ordination to the Ministry were
committed by Christ: because of this defect the Presbyterian Ministers must not
only want the confort of an assured and undoubted calling to the Ministry, but
may very well know and be assured that their calling and Ministry is null. The
words immediately following are scraped out after their printing: for what cause
the author lest knows: but the purpose in hand makes it probable, that the
deletted words did express more of his mind, then it was safe in this time and
place to speak out: it was the late doctrine of Doctor Brambles prime friends,
that the want of Episcopal ordination did not only annull the calling of all
the Ministers of France, Holland, Zwit-zerland, and Germany, but also did
hinder all these societies to be true Churches: for that popular Sophisme of
the Jesuits our praelats did greedily swallow; where are no true Sacraments,
there is no true Church; and where is no true Ministry, there are no true
Sacraments; and where no true ordination, there is no true ministry; and where
no Bishops, there is no true ordination: and so in no reformed country but in
England and Ireland where were true Bishops, is any true Church. When
Episcopacy comes to this height of elevation, that the want of it must annual
the Ministry, yea null the Church and all the Reformed at one strock, is it any
mervaill, that all of them do concur together for their own preservation, to
abolish this insolent abaddon and destroyer? and notwithstanding all its ruin
have yet no disconfort at all, nor any the least doubt of their most lawful
ordination by the hands of the Presbytry.

After all this was written, is here it stands, The Praelats are so baselie
injurious to all the reformed Churches that their selfs are ashamed of it.
another copy of the Warners book was brought to my hand wherein I found the
deleted line stand printed in these distinct terms, and put it to a dangerous
question whither it be within the payle of the Church, the deciphering of these
words puts it beyond all peradventure that what I did conjecture of the Warner
and his Brethrens mind, of the state of all the reformed Churches, was no
mis-take, but that they do truly judge the want of Episcopal ordination to
exclude all the Ministers of other Reformed Churches, and their flocks also
from the lines of the true Church. This indeed is a most dangerous question:
for it stricks at the root of all. If the Warner out of remorse of conscience
had blotted out of his book that error, the repentance had been commendable:
But he hes left so much yet behind unscraped out, as does show his mind to
continue what it was, so that fear alone to provoke the reformed here at this
unseasonable time, seems to have been the cause of deleting these too clear
expressions of the praelaticall tenet against the very being and subsistence of
all the Protestant Churches, which want Episcopacy, when these me^ do still
stand upon the extreme pinnacle of impudency and arrogance, denying the
Reformed to be true Churches, and without scuple averring Rome as she stands
this day, under the counsel of Trent, to be a Church most true, wherein there is
an easy way of salvation, from which all separation is needless, and with
which a reunion were much to be desired? That gracious faction this day is
willing enough to persuade, or at least to rest content without any opposition
that the King should of himself without and before a Parliament, (though
contrary to many standing Laws) grant under his hand and seal a full liberty
of Religion to the bloody Irish, and to put in their hands, both arms, Castles
and prime Places of trust in the State; that the King should give assurance of
his endeavor, to get all these ratified in the nixt Parliament of England,
these men can hear with all moderation and patience: but behold their furious
impatience, their whole art and industry is wakned, when they hear of any
appearance of the Kings inclination toward covenanting Protestants: night and
day they beat in his Majesty's head, that all the mischieves of the world does
lurk in that miserable covenant, that death and any misfortune, that the ruin
of all the Kingdoms ought much rather to be embraced by his Majesty, then
that prodigious Monster, that very hell of the Covenant, because forsooth it
does oblige in plane terms the taker to endeavor (in his station) the
abolition of their great Goddess, praelacy.

The nixt hurt of Ministers from the Presbytry, The generality of the Episcopal
clergy have ever been covered with ignorance, beggary, and contempt.
is, that by it they are brought to ignorance, contempt and beggary. Ans.
Whither Episcopacy or Presbytry is the fittest instrument to avert these
evils, let reason or experience teach men to judge. The Presbyteriall
discipline does oblige to a great deal of severer trials in all sort of
learning requisite in a divine before ordination then does the Episcopal: let
either the rule or practice of Presbyterian and Episcopal ordination be
compared or the weekly Exercises and monthly disputations in Latin upon the
controverted heads be looked upon which the Presbytry exacts of every Minister
after his ordination all the days of his life: for experience let the French,
Dutch and Scots divines who have been or yet are, be compared with the ordinary
generation of the English Clergy, and it will be found, that the praelats have
not great reason so superciliously to look down with contempt upon their
Brethrens learning. I hope, Cartwright, Whitaker, Perkins, Reynolds, Parker,
Ames, and other Presbyterian English were inferior in learning to none of their
opposits: some of the English Bishops has not wanted good store of learning,
but the most of them (I believe) will be content to leave of boasting in this
subject, what does the Warner speak to us of ignorance, contempt and Beggary?
does not all the world know, that albeit some few, scarce one of twenty, did
brook good benefices, yea plurality of them whereby to live in splendour at
Court, or where they listed in their non-residency, nevertheless it has been
much complained, that the greatest part of the priests, who had the cure of
souls through all the Kingdom of England, were incomparably the most ignorant,
beggarly and contemptible clergy, that ever have been seen in any of the
reformed Churches? neither did we ever hear of any great study in the Praelats
to remeed these evils, albeit some of them be provident enough for their own
families. Doctor Bramble knows who had the skill before they had sitten seven
year in their charge to purchase above fifeteen hundred pounds a year for
themselves and their heirs what somever.

The third evil which the Ptesbytery brings upon Ministers is that it makes
them prat and pray nonsense everlastingly. Ans. The Praelats continue to hate
preaching and prayer but to idolize a popish service.
It is indeed a great heartbrake unto ignorant, lazy and unconsciencious
Ministers to be put to the pains of preaching and prayer, when a read service
was wont to be all their exercise: but we thought that all indifferently
ingenuous men had long ago been put from such impudence. It was the late
labor of the praelats by all their skill to disgrace preaching and praying
without book, to cry up the Liturgy as the only service of God, and to idolize
it as a most heavenly and divine piece of write, which yet is naught but a
transcript of the superstitious breviary and idolatrous missall of Rome. The
Warner would do well to consider and answer after seven years advisement Mr.
Bailie his pararell of the service with the missall and Breviarie, before he
present the world with new paralels of the English liturgy, with the
directories of the Reformed Churches. Is it so indeed, that all preaching and
praying without book is but a pratting of nonsense everlastingly, why then
continues the King and many well minded men to be deceived by our Doctors,
while they affirm that they are as much for preaching in their practice and
opinion as the Presbyterians, and for prayer without book also, before and
after sermon, and in many other occasions? it seems these affirmations are
nothing but gross dissimulation in this time of their lowness and affliction,
to decline the envy of people against them for their profane contempt of divine
ordinances; for we may see here their tenet to remain what it was, and
themselves ready enough, when their season shall be fitter, to ring it out loud
in the ears of the World, that for divine service people needs no more but the
reading of the liturgy, Vide la^^^ium. cap. 7.
that sermons on week days and Sundays afternoon must all be laid aside, that
on the Sabbath before noone Sermon is needless, and from the mouths of the
most Preachers very noxious; that when some learned Scholars are pleased on
some festival days to have an oration, it would be short and and according to
the Court pattern, without all Spirit and life for edification; but by all
means it must be provided, that no word of prayer either before or after be
spoken, except only a bidding to pray, for many things even for the welfare of
the souls departed; and all this alone in the words of the Lords prayer. If
any shall dare to express the desires of his heart to God in private or public
in any words of his own framing he is a gross Puritan, who is bold to offer
to God his own nonsense rather then the ancient; and well advised prayers of
the holy Church.

The Warner is here also mistaken in his belief, that ever the Church of
Scotland had any Liturgy, they had and have still some forms for help and
direction, but no ty ever in any of them by law or practice: they do not
condemn the use of set forms for rules, yea nor for use in beginners, who are
thereby endeavoring to attain a readiness to pray in their family out of
their own heart in the words which Gods spirit dytes to them; but for
Ministers to suppress their most confortable and useful gift of prayer by
tying their mouth unto such forms which themselves or others have composed we
count it a wrong to the giver, and to him who has received the gift, and to the
gift, and to the Church for whose use that was bestowed.

In the nixt place the Warner makes the Presbytry injurious to parents,
Episcopal warrants for clandestin marriages, rob Parents of their children.
by marying their children contrary to their consent, and forcing them to give
to the disobedient as large a portion as to any other of their obedient
children, and that it is no mervail the Scots should do these things who have
stripped the King the father of their country of his just rights. Ans. By the
Warners rule all the actions of a nation where a Presbytry lodges must be
charged on the back of the Presbytry. II. The Parliament of Scotland denies,
that they have stripped the King of his just rights; while he was stirred up
and kept on by the praelaticall faction to courses destructive to himself
and all his people; after the shedding of much blood, before the exercise of
all parts of his royal government, they only required for all satisfaction and
security to religion and liberties, the grant of some few most equitable
demands. The unhappy Praelats from the beginning of our troubles to this day
finding our great demand to run upon the abolition of their office, did ever
press his Majesty to deny us that satisfaction, and rather then Bishops
should be laid aside they have concluded that the King himself, and all his
family and all his three Kingdoms shall perish: yet with all patience the
Scotes continue to supplicat and to offer not only their Kingdom, but their
lives and estats and all they have for his Majesty's service upon the grant of
their few and easy demands; but no misery either of King or people can overcome
the desperate obstinacy of Praelaticall hearts.

As for parents consent to the marriage of their children, how tenderly it is
provided for in Scotland it may be seen at length in the very place cited. It
was the Bishops, who by their warrants for clandestine marriages, and
dispensations with marriages without warrant have spoiled many parents of their
dear children: with such abominations the Presbytery was never acquainted;
all that is alleged out of that place of our discipline is, when a cruel
parent or tutor abuses their authority over their children, and against all
reason for their own evil ends perversely will cross their children in their
lawful and every way honest desires of marriage; that in that case the
Magistrates and Ministers may be entreated by the grieved child to deal with
the unjust parent or tutor, that by their mediation reason may be done. I
believe this advice is so full of equity, that no Church nor State in the world
will complain of it: but how ever it be, this case is so rare in Scotland that
I profess, I never in my life did know, nor did hear of any child before my
days, who did assay by the authoritative sentence of a Magistrate or Minister
to force their parents consent to their marriage. As for the Warners addition
of the Ministers compelling parents to give portions to their children, that
the Church of Scotland haths any such canon or practice its an impudent lie,
but in the place alleged is a passage against the sparing of the life of
adulterers, contrary to the Law of God: and for the excommunication of
Adulterers, when by the negligence of the Magistrate their life is spared, this
possibly may be the thorn in the side of some which makes them bite and spurn
with the heel so furiously against the Authors and lovers of so severe a
discipline.

The Presbyteries nixt injury is done to the Lawyers, Synodes and other
Ecclesiastic Courts revoke their Sentences. Ans. No such matter ever was
attempted in Scotland; frequent prohibitions have been obtained by curtisan
Bishops, against the highest civil judicatories in England, but that ever a
Presbitry or Synod in Scotland did so much as assay to impede or repeal the
proceedings of any the meanest civil court, I did never hear it so much as
alleged by our adversaries.

The nixt injury is against all Masters, Serious catechizing is no Episcopal
crime.
and Mistresses of families, whom the Presbytery will have to be personally
examined in their knowledge once a year, and to be excommunicat, if grossly and
wilfully ignorant. Ans. If it be a crime for a Minister to call together
parcels of his congre gation to be instructed in the grounds of Religion, that
servants and children and (where ignorance is suspected,) others also may be
tried in their knowledge of the Catechism; or if it be a crime that in
family-visitations oftener then once a year the conversation of every member
of the Church may be looked upon; we confess the Ministers of Scotland were
guilty thereof, and so far as we know the generality of the Episcopal
faction may purge themselves by oath of any such imputation: for they had
somewhat else to do, then to be at the pains of instructing or trying the
Spiritual State of every sheep in their flocks: we confess likewise, that it
is both our order and practice to keep off from the holy table, whom we find
groslly and wilfully ignorant: but that ever any for simple ignorance was
excommunicat in Scotland, none who knows us will affirm it.

The last whom he will have to be wronged by the Presbytery are the common
people, Church fessions are not high commissiones.
who must groan under a high commission in every parish, where ignorant
governors rule all without Law, meddling even in domestical jarres be twixt man
and wife, Master and Servant. Ans. This is but a gybe of revenge for the
overthrow of their Tyrannous high Commission-Court, where they were wont to
play the Rex at their pleasure above the highest subjects of the three
Kingdoms, and would never give over that their insolent domeneering court, till
the King and Parliaments of both Kingdoms did agree to throw it down about
their ears. The thing he jeares at, is the congregation all Eldership, a
judicatory which all the Reformed do enjoy to their great confort as much as
Scotland. They are far from all arbitrary judications; their Laws are the
holy Scripture and acts of superior Church-judicatories, which rule so clearly
the cases of their cognizance, that rarely any difficulty remains therein: or
if it do, immediately by reference or appeal it is transmitted to the Classes
or Synod. The judges in the lowest Eldership (as we have said before) are a
doszen at least, of the most able and pious who can be hade in a whole
congregation to join with the Pastors one or more as they fall to be: but the
Episcopal way is to have no discipline at all in any congregation: only where
there is hope of a fine, the Bishops official will summon before his own
learned and conscientious wisdom, who ever within the whole dioces have
fallen into such a fault as he pleases to take notice of: as for domestic
infirmities, Presbyterians are most tender to meddle therein; they come never
before any judicatory, but both where the fault is great, and the scandal
thereof flagrant, and broken out beyond the walls of the family.

These are the great injuries and hurts which the Church discipline has
procured to all orders of men in the whole reformed world, when Episcopacy has
been such an innocent lamb, or rather so holy an angel upon earth, that no
harm at all has ever come by it to any mortal creature: a misbeleeving Jew
will nothing misdoubt this so evident a truth.

CHAP. ULT.
The Warners exceptions against the covenant are full of considence but
exceeding frivolous.

THough in the former Chapters the Warner has showed out more venom and gall
then the bag of any one man's stomach could have been supposed capable of, yet
as if he were but beginning to vomit, in this last Chapter of the covenant a
new flood of blacker poison rusheth out of his pen. His undertaking is great,
to demonstrat clearly that the covenant is merely void wicked and impious. His
first clear demonstration is, that it was devised by strangers, imposed by
subjects, who wanted requisite power, and was extorted by just fear of unjust
suffering, so that many that took it with their lips, never consented with
their hearts. Ans. This clear demonstration is but a poor and evil argument:
the Major, if it were put in form, would hardly be granted, The Covenant was
not dishonorable to union.
but I stand on the minor as weak and false for the covenant was not devised
by strangers, the Commissioners of the Parliament of England together with the
Commissioners of the Parliament and general assembly of Scotland were the
first and only framers thereof, but they who gave the life and being to it in
England were the Lords and Commons assembled in Parliament at West-Minister by
the Kings call, and at that time acknowledged by his Majesty without any
question about the lawfullnes of their constitution and authority: these men
and that Court were not I hope great strangers in England. The covenant was not
imposed upon the King: but the Parliaments of both Kingdoms made it their
earnest desire unto his Majesty, that he would be pleased to join with them
in that Covenant, which they did judge to be a maine piece of their security
for their Religion and liberties in all the three Kingdoms. As for their
imposing of it upon the subjects of England, an ordinance of Parliament (though
the King consent not) by the uncontroverted laws of England, is a sufficient
authority to crave obedience of all the subjects of England, during the
continuance of that Parliament.

The last part of the demonstration is dishonorable indeed to the English
Nation if it were true, it was no dishonor to England to join with their
brethren of Scotland in a Covenant for mantainance of their Religion and
Liberties: but for many of the English to swear a covenant with their lips,
from which their heart did dissent and upon this difference of heart and mouth
to plead the nullity of the oath, and to advance this plea so high as to a
clear demonstration, this is such a dishonor and dishonesty, that a greater
cannot fall upon a man of reputed integrity, Especially when the ground of the
lie and perjury is an evident falsehood: for the covenant was not extorted from
any flesh in England by fear of any unjust suffering; so far was it from this,
that to this day it could never be obtained from the Parliament of England, to
enjoyne that covenant upon any by the penulty of a two pence.

The Warners second demonstration is no better then the first, the ground of it
is, Covenanters were not deceived, but understood what they swear.
that all oaths are void which have deceit and error of the substantial
conditions incident to them. This ground had need to be much better cautioned,
then here it is, before it can stand for a major of a clear demonstration: but
how is the minor proved? behold how much short the Warners proofs are of his
great boastings. His first argument is grounded upon an evident falsehood, that
in the Covenant we swear the lately devised discipline to be Christ's
institution. Ans. There is no such word nor any such matter in all the
Covenant: was the Warners hatred so great against that piece of write, that
being to make clear demonstrations against it, he would not so much as cast
his eye upon that which he was to oppugn, Covenanters swear to endeavor the
reformation of England, according to the word of God and the best reformed
Churches, but not a word of the Scotes Presbytery, nor of any thing in any
Church even the best reformed, unless it be found according to the pattern of
Gods holy word.

The second ground of his demonstrantion is also an evident error, The Warner
unwittingly comends the Covenant.
that the covenant in hand is one and the same with that of King James. Ans.
Such a fancy came never in the head of any man, I know; much less was it ever
written or spoken by any: that the Covenant of King James in Scotland 1580,
should be one and the same with the Covenant of all the three Kingdoms 1643,
whatsoever identities may appear in the matter and similitude, in the ends of
both; but the grossest errors are solid enough grounds for praelaticall clear
demonstrations. Yet here the Warner understands not how he is cutting his own
vines; his friends in Scotland will give him small thanks for attributing unto
the national Covenant of Scotland, (that Covenant of King James) these three
properties, that it was issued out by the Kings authority, that it was for the
maintenance of the Laws of the realm, and for the maintenance of the
established Religion: time brings adversaries to confess of their own accord
long denied truths. But the Characters, which the Warner inprints upon the
solemn league and Covenant of the three Kingdoms, we must be pardoned to
controvert, till he have taken some leisure to try his wild assertions. First
that the league is against the authority of the King, secondly that it is
against the Law; and thirdly that it is for the overthrow of Religion. The man
cannot think, that any should believe his dictats of this kind without proof,
since the express words of that league do flatly contradict him in all these
three positions.

His gentle memento, that Scotland, when they sued for aid from the crown of
England, had not the English discipline obtruded upon their Church, might here
have been spaired: was not the English discipline and liturgy obtruded upon us
by the praelats of England with all craft and force? did we ever obtrude our
discipline upon the English? but when they of their own free and long
deliberate choice had abolished Bishops and promised to set up Presbytery, so
far as they had found it agreeable to the word of God, were we not in all
reason obliged to encourage and assist them in so pious a work?

In the nixt words the Warner for all his great boasts finding the weakness of
all the former grounds of his second demonstration, The King did not clame the
sole and absolute possession of the militia.
he offers three new ones: which doubtless will do the deid: for he avowes
positively that his following grounds are demonstrative, yet whosoever shall be
pleased to grip them with never so soft an hand shall find them all to be but
vanity and wind. The first, after a number of prosyllogismes rests upon these
two foundations, first that the right of the militia resides in the King alone:
secondly that by the covenant the militia is taken out of the Kings hands; and
that every covenanter by his covenant disposes of himself and of his arms,
against the right which the King has into him. Ans. The Warner will have much
ado to prove this second so, that it may be a ground of a clear demonstration:
but for the first that the power of the militia of England does reside in the
King alone, that the two houses of Parliament have nothing at all to do with
it, and that their taking of arms for the defense of the liberties of England
or any other imaginable cause against any party countenanced by the Kings
presence against his laws must be altogether unlawful; if his demonstration
be no clearer, then the ground where upon he builds it, I am sure, it will not
be visible to any of his oppofits: who are not like to be convinced of open
rebellion by his naked assertion, upon which alone he lays this his mighty
ground. Believe it, he had need to assay its relief with some color of ane
argument; for none of his own friends will now take it of his hand for ane
indemonstrable principle, since the King for a long time was willing to
acknowledge the Parliaments jointe interest in the militia, yea to put the
whole militia in their hands alone for a good number of years to come: so
far was his Majesty from the thoughts, that the Parliaments meddling with a
part of the militia, in the time of evident dangers, should be so certainly
and clearly the crime of rebellion.

The Warners second demonstrative ground we admit without question in the
major, that where the matter is evidently unlawful, the oath is not binding;
but the application of this in the minor is very false. All that he brings to
make it appear to be true, is that the King is the supreme Legislator, that
it is unlawful for the subjects of England to change any thing established by
Law, especially to the prejudice of the Praelats without their own consent,
they being a third order of the Kingdom; otherwise it would be a harder measure
then the Friars and Abbots received from Henry the eight. The change of laws
in England ordinarily begin by the two houses without the King.
Ans. May the Warner be pleased to consider how far his dictats here are
from all reason, much more from evident demonstrations. That the burden of
Bishops and ceremonies was become so heavy to all the three Kingdoms, that
there was reason to endeavor their laying aside, he does not offer to dispute;
but all his complanit runs against the manner of their removal: this (say I)
was done in no other then the ordinary and high pathway, whereby all
burdensome Laws and customs use to be removed. Does not the Houses of
Parliament first begin with their ordinance before the Kings consent be sought
to a Law? is not an ordinance of the Lords and Commons a good warrant to change
a former Law during the sitting of the Parliament? The Laws and customs of
England permit not the King by his dissent to stop that change. The King did
really consent to the abolition of Bishops.
I grant for the turning an ordinance to a standing Law, the Kings consent is
required, but with what qualifications and exceptions we need not here to
debate, since his Majesty's consent to the present case of abolishing Bishops
was obtained well near as far as was desired; and what is yet lacking, we
are in a fair way to obtain it: for the Kings Majesty long ago did agree to
the rooting out of Episcopacy in Scotland, he was willing also in England and
Ireland to put them out of the Parliament, and all civil courts, and to divest
them of all civil power, and to join with them Presbyteries for ordination and
spiritual jurisdiction; yea to abolish them totally name and thing, not only
for three years but ever till he and his Parliament should agree upon some
settled order for the Church, was not this Tantamont to a perpetual abolition
for all and every one in both houses having abjured Episcopacy by solemn oath
and Covenant, the Parliament was in no hazard of agreing with the King to
re-erect the fallen chaires of the Bishops: so there remained no other, but
that either his Majesty should come over to their judgment, or by his not
agreing with them, yet really to agree with them in the perpetual abolition of
Episcopacy, since the concession was for the laying Bishops aside ever, till
he and his houses had agreed upon a settled order for the Church. If this be
not a full and formal enough consent to the ordinance of changing the former
Laws anent praelat^, his Majesty, who now is, easily may and readily would
supply all such defects: if some of the faction did not continually, for their
own evil interests, whisper in his ears pernicious counsel, as our Warner in
this place also does by frighting the King in conscience from any such
consent, for this end he casts out a discourse, the sinshews whereof are in
these three Episcopal maxims. The Praelats would flatter the King into a
Tyranny.
First that the legislative power is sollie in the King, that is according to
his Brethrens Co^mentary, that the Parliament is but the Kings great counsel of
free choice, without or against whose votes he may make or unmake what Laws
he thinks expedient; but for them to make any ordinance for changing without
his consent of any thing that has been, or instituting any new thing, or for
them to defend this their legal right and custom (time out of mind) against
the arms of the Malignant party, no (...) may deny it to be plain rebellion.

II. The praelats takes to themselves a negative voice in Parliament.
That the King and Parliament both together cannot make a Law, to the
praejudice of Bishops without their own consent, they being the third order of
the Kingdom: for albeit it be sacrilege in the Lords and Commons, to clame
any the smallest share of the legislative power, (this in them were to pyck the
chiefest jewel out of the Kings Crown) yet this must be the due privilege of
the Bishops, they must be the third order of the Kingdom, yea the first and
most high of the three, far above the other two temporal States of Lords and
Commons; their share in the Legislative power must be so great, that neither
King nor Parliament can pass any Law without their consent, so that according
to their humble protestation, all the Laws and acts, which have been made by
King and Parliament, since they were expelled the house of Lords, are clearly
void and null.

That the King and Parliament in divesting Bishops of their temporal honor
and estats, The Praelats grieve that Monks and Friars, the Pope and Cardinals
were easten out of England by Henry the eight.
in abolishing their places in the Church, do sin more against conscience then
did Henry the eight and his Parliament, when they put down the Abbots and the
Friars. We must believe that Henry the eight his abolishing the order of Monks
was one of the acts of his greatest Tyranny and greed: we must not doubt, but
according to Law and reason, Abbots and priours ought to have kept still their
vote in Parliament, that the Monasteryes and Nunryes should have stood in their
integrity, that the King and Parliament did wrong in casting them down, and
that now they ought in conscience to be set up again, yea that Henry the eight
against all reason and conscience did renounce his due obedience to the Pope,
the Patriarch of the West; the first Bishop of the universe, to whom the
superinspection and government of the whole Catholic Church in all reason does
belong. Though all this be here glaunced at by the Warner, and elsewhere (...)
prove it to be the declared mind of his Brethren, yet we must be pardoned not
to accept them as undeniable principles of clear demonstrations. (...)
supremacy of Kings is not prejudged by the Covenant.


The last ground of the Doctors demonstration is, that the covenant is ane oath
to set up the Presbyterian government in England at it is in Scotland and that
this is contrary to the oath of Supremacy; for the oath of Supremacy makes the
King the only supreme head and governor of the Church of England, that is,
the civil head to see that every man do his duty in his calling; also it gives
the King a supreme power over all persons in all causes: but the Presbytery is
a political papacy, acknowledging no governors but only the Presbyters: it
gives the King power over all persons as subjects, but none at all in
Ecclesiastic causes. Ans. Is there in all this reasoning any thing sound?
First what article of the covenant bears the setting up of the Presbyterian
government in England as it is in Scotland? II. If the oath of supremacy import
no more then what the Warners express words are here, that the King is a civil
head, to see every man do his duty in his calling, let him be assured that no
Presbyterian in Scotland was ever contrary to that supremacy. III. That the
Presbytery is a papacy, and that a political one, the Warner knows it ought
not to be granted upon his bare word. IV. That in Scotland no other governors
are acknowledged then Presbyters, himself contradicts in the very nixt words,
where he tells that the Scots Presbytery ascribes to the King a power over all
persons as subjects. V. That any Presbyterian in Scotland makes it sacrilege
to give the King any power at all in any Ecclesiastic cause; it is a
senseless untruth.

The Warners arguments are not more idle and weak, The Warners insolent vanity.
then his triumphing upon them is insolent: for he concludes from these wise
and strong demonstrations, that the poor covenant is apparently deceitful,
unvalide, impious, rebellious, and what not? yea that all the learned divines
in Europe will conclude it so, and that all the covenanters themselfes who have
any ingenuity, must grant this much; and that no knowing English man can deny
it, but his own conscience will give him thely. Ans. If the Warner with any
seriousness has weighed this part of his own write, and if his mind go
along with his pen, I may without great presumption pronounce his judgment to
be none of the most solid.

His following vapors being full of air we let them evanish, only while he
mentions our charging the King with intentions of changing the Religion and
government, we answer, that we have been most willing always to ascribe to the
King good intentions but withal we have long avowed that the praelaticall
party have gone beyond intentions to manifest by printed declarations and
public actions their former design to bring Tyranny upon the States, and
popery upon the Churches of all the three Kingdoms: and that this very write
of the Warners makes it evident, that this same mind yet remains within them
without the least show of repentance. So long as the conscience of the court is
managed by men of such principles, it is not possible to free the hearts of
the most understanding, from a great deal of Jealousy and fear to have
Religion and laws still overturned by that factione.

But the Warner commands us, The covenant is not for propagating of Religion by
arms.
to speak to his Dilemma, whither we think it lawful or unlawful for
subjects to take arms against their prince merely for Religion. We answer,
that the reasons whereby he thinks to conclude against us, on both sides are
very poor, if we shall say, it is unlawful; then he makes us to condemn our
selfs, because our covenant testifies to the world, that we have taken up
arms merely to alter Religion, and that we bear no alleadgance to our King
but in order to Religion, which in plain terms is to our own humors and
conceits. Ans. There be many untruthes here in few words, first how much
reality and truth the Warner and some of his fellows believes to be in that
thing which they call Religion, their own heart knows; but it can be no great
charity in him to make the Religion of all covenanters to be nothing but their
own humors and conceits. Secondly it is not true that Covenanters bear no
alleadgance to the King but only in order to religion. III. The Parliament of
England denied that they took up arms against their King, though to defend
themselves against the popish praelaticall and malignant faction, who were
about to destroy them with arms. IV. They have declared, that their purpose
was not at all, to alter Religion but to purge it from the corruptions of
Bishops and ceremonies that to long had been noxious unto them. V. They have
often professed that their arms were taken for the defense of their just
liberties, whereof the preservation and reformation of Religion was but one.

The other horn of his Dilemma is as blunt in pushing as the former. If we
make it lawful (says he) to take up arms for Religion, we then justify the
independents and Anabaptists; we make way for any that will plant what ever
they apprehend to be true Religion by force, and to cut the throat of all
Magistrates, who are in a contrary opinion to them; that it is a ridiculous
partiality for any to privilege their own Religion as truth and Gospel. Ans.
The Warners black Atheism.
Whether will these men go at last, the strength of this reason is blak
atheism, that their is no realty of truth in any Religion, that no man may be
permitted to take his Religion for any thing more but his own apprehension,
which without ridiculous folly he must not praeferre to any other man's
apprehension of a contrary Religion: this is much worse then the pagane
Scepticisme, which turned all reality of truth into a mere apprehension of
truth, wherein their was no certainty at all: this not only turns the most
certain truths, even these divine ones of Religion, into mere uncertain
conceptions; but which is worse, it will have the most orthodoxe believer so to
think, speak and act, as if the opinions of Independents, Anabaptists, Turks,
Jews, Pagans or gross Atheists were as good, true and solid as the belief of
Moses or Paul, were of the truths revealed to them from heaven. Secondly we
say that subjects defense of their Religion and liberties established by Law,
against the violent usurpation of Papists, Praelats or Malignants, is not the
planting of Religion by arms; much less is it the cutting of the throats of al
Magistrates who differ in any point of Religion. The Praelats condemn the
defensive arms of the Dutch and Frensh Protestants.
III. In the judgment of the praelaticall party, the defensive arms of the
Protestants in France, Holland, and Germany, must be als much condemned as the
offensive arms of the Anabaptists in Munster, or of the sectaries this day in
England. Can these men dream that the World for their pleasure will so far
divest themselves of all Religion and reason, as to take from their hands so
brutish and Atheistical maxims.

The Praelats decline the judgment of counsels.
He concluds with a wish of a general counsel, at least of all protestant
Churches for to condemn all broatchers of seditious principles. Ans. All true
covenanters go before him in that desire, being confident that he and his
fellows as they have declined al ready the most solemn assemblies of their
own countries, upon assurance of their condemnation; so their tergiversation
would be als great, if they were to answer to an oecumenick Synod. The Praelats
overthrow the foundatio^s of Protestant Religion.
What (I pray) would the Warner say in a counsel of protestants for the
practice of his party pointed at in his last words? I mean their purging the
Pope of Antichristianisme, of purpose to make way for a reconciliation, yea for
a return to Rome, as this day it lies under the wings of the Pope and
Cardinals. The Praelats are still peremptory to destroy the King and all his
Kingdoms if they may not be restored.
Also what could they answer in a Christian counsel unto this charge, which is
the drift of this whole Book, that they are so far from any remorse for all
the blood and misery, which their wickedness (most) has brought on the former
King and all his Kingdoms these eleven years, that rather then they had not
the Covenant and general assembly in Scotland destroyed as an Idol and
Antichrist, they will choose yet still to imbroyle all in new calamities? This
King also and his whole Family, the remainder of the blood and Estats in all
the three Kingdoms, must be hazarded for the sowing together of the torn
mytres, and the reerecting of the fallen chayres of Praelats. If Bishops must
lie still in their deserved ruins, they perseveer in their peremptory
resolution, to have their burials sprinkled with the ashes of the royal
Family and all the three Kingdoms.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
GOod Reader, the Authors absence from the Press the whole time of the
impression, and the Printers unacquaintance with the English language, has
occasioned not only many mispunctations and literal faults, but also diverse
grosser Errata such as the following which thou art entreated to mend with thy
Pen:

Page 4. lin. 23. for had read has. page 9. lin. 8. for Provincionall read
Provincial. p. 11. l. 30 for whereby r. where. p. 15. l. 19. for pairt r.
part. p. 20. l. 19, for can r. does. l. 30. for potestant r. Protestant. page
22. l. 19. for these r. the. p. 23. l. ult. for over r. or. for trusted r.
trustee. p. 27. l. 4. for impatien, t r. impatient. l. 18. dele, and. p. 28. in
marg. for commissarie r. commissaries. l. 14. for and r. or. l. 29. for chardge
r. charge. p. 31. l. 1. for chardges r. charges. l. 25. for citation r.
irritation. p. 32. l. 10. for praecipies r. praecipices. p. 35. in tit. of
chap. 7. for paritie r. part. p. 36. l. 2. for scandals r. scandal. p. 37. l.
2. for benefit r. benefice. p. 38. l. 10. for nation r. soldier. l. 11. for
their souls r. his soul. p. 48. c. 8. l. 4. dele Ans. p. 49. l. 18. for Warner
r. Doctor. p. 51. l. 13. for the r. his. p. 52. l. 16. for treasure r. Bishop.
p. 55. in tit. of chap. 9. for their r. the. p. 56. l. 31. for Christ r. Christ
his. l. 32. for point blank to r. point blanck. contrare to. p. 59. l. 1. dele
and. l. 1. for unpoureth r. vapoureth l. 17. for where r. here. p. 65. l. 5.
for continues r. continue. l. 6. for are r. is. p. 66. l. 3. for to r. so. l.
9. for warned. r. warmed. p. 67. l. 16. for in. r. to. p. 68. l. 5. for or. r.
which. l. 16. for last. r. nixt. p. 70. l. 18. for lest. r. best. l. ult. for
null the Church and r. the very being of. p. 71. l. 1. for Reformed r.
Reformed Churches. p. 73. l. 23. for charge r. chair. p. 74. l. 6. for service
r. service book. l. 28. dele, and. p. 75. l. 16. dele, and to the gift. p. 76.
l. ult. for haths. r. has. p. 78. l. 24. for doszen r. dozen. p. 82. l. 5. for
inprints. r. imprints. p. 84. l. 9. for complanit r. complaint. p. 85. l. 7.
for aside ever r. aside for ever. l. 16. for sinshews r. sinews.


