A Brief and True NARRATION Of the Late WARS RISEN IN New England: Occasioned
by the Quarrelsom disposition, and Perfidious Carriage OF THE Barbarous, Savage
and Heathenish NATIVES There.

Licensed

November 16. Roger Lestrange.



LONDON Printed for J. S. 1675.

BOSTON SEPTEMBER 7th. 1675. SIR,
It Is not to be doubted but that Fame ere this has sounded in your Ears that
the Indians in New England, have, by a late Rupture disturbed the long and
orderly Peace, that has been enjoyed by us in these Flourishing Plantations of
English in New England. And to the intent you might, without aggravating or
diminishing of our Troubles here, have a true Natrative of those Indians Stirs,
I have taken the care to commit this following Relation to Paper.

In the South parts of New Plymouth Collony in New England, is a Promontory of
Land, about twelve miles long, called by the English Mount Hope, inhabited by
Indians, whose Chief is named Metacon; by the English called King Philip; whose
Grandfather Massasoit in King James's time was Sachem, i. e. Chief Lord of
almost all the Lands in the said New Plymouth Collony: but has been since at
several times sold by the Indian Sachems and people to the English, who by
their great industry, have of a howling Wilderness improved those Lands into
Corn fields, Orchards, enclosed Pastures, and Towns inhabited; which has
confiderably advanced the value of Lands: which possibly makes some Indians
repent the sale of them, and particu^arly Sachem Philip, of his confining
himself unto so narrow a Territory: Therefore about five years ago be took
occasion to quarrel with the Inhabitants of the next English Town, called
Swansey, adjoining to his Tract of Land, about Bounds and Fences; and being a
Brother of his, about five years since died in an English Town, he said, not
without suspicion of poison, by an English Chyrurgeon, though there was n^
ground for it; which he said be would by force revenge upon them. But by the
^tion of the M^ssathusets Colony all differences were fairly and ^^^ceably
compos^^ between the said Philip and the Plymoutheans; and Philip obliged
himself to be personally present with two Wolves heads at the yearly Court of
Election in Plymouth Collony. The last Winter a Christian Indian Scholar, named
Sosomon, went to preach the Gospel to Philip and h^s Indians, by his and their
permission; but after some time Sagamore Philip grew discontent with Sosomon:
wherefore Sosomon returned from them to go to the Governor of New Plymouth
Josiah Winslow Esquire but in his return three of Philips Indians set on him and
murdered him. These three Caitiffs were soon after apprehended by Governor
Winslow, and upon clear Evidence and a legal Trial, had Judgment of Death; two
of them soon after were executed, but the third breaking his Halter, was
carried back and reserved for Execution. This not a little displeased Philip,
who feared (happily through his own guilt) that the English would not rest
there, though they did not any way molest h m by Trial or otherwise; upon which
Philip secretly sent his Messengers to several Indian Sachems, to enter into a
strict Confederacy with him against the English; and himself arms about 700 of
this men, and obtains 1000 more of his Confederates: and what others besides
these he has engaged to his party, is to the English unknown, though it is
shrewdly suspected this Cruel subtle Fellow has engaged most of the Indians in
the Country to espouse his Quarrel as a Common Cause All this Spring Philips
soldiers (who were well, fitted with Guns, Powder, Shot^, etc. which they had
long since gotten of the Dutch, French, yea, and of some English themselves)
were seen marching in their Arms even at the planting their Corn; of which
unnecessary preparations, the neighboring English of Swansey and Rehoboth were
very apprehensive: and discoursing with the Sagamore about it, he said some had
threatened him that he should be hanged at Plymouth; but if he must die, he
would die on his own land. June the 20th. seven of Sagamore Philips men came
armed to a Swansey man's house to grind a Hatchet, the man told them it was the
Lords Day; they salt they cared not for that, they would do it for all him or
his God. They then went to another House and asked for Victuals and Tobacco,
some was given them and some they took, but hurt no man; she same day they took
a Swansey man, traveling from, Road Island, through the Land, and kept him
prisoner all night, used him, kindly and sent him home the next day with this
Caution, That he should tell no lies. Upon these Jealousies Swansey men sent to
Plymouth and the Bay for aid, and accordingly 600 Volunteers Horse and Foot,
were sent under the Command of Major General Thomas Savage, a very active
person. But before these Succors came, Swansey men deserted their houses and
drew all their Inhabitants into three Garrison houses. In this month of June
the Election was at Plymouth, and Sagamore Philip came not with his Tribute of
two Wolves heads, according to his League last made. June 23. An Englishman
seeing an Indian entering a deserted Swansey house shot at him. June the 24th.
the Indians shot at several men traveling through Rehoboth, but slew none
there; but at Swansey they killed six men, going with a Cart; and set on one of
the Garrison houses, and there killed two more and wounded other two; and
likewise killed two that were traveling for a Chyrurgeon. Thus war began. The
Indians have killed several Swansey people, burnt 21 houses in that Town,
destroyed hundreds of Cattle, pulled down Fences, ruined much Corn and Hay in
Plymouth Collony. The Indians lie lurking and sculking in hideous woody Swamps,
and thence let on travellors or men at their labors. At New Dartmouth (a Town
in Plymouth Collony, most of them Quakers) they burnt all their houfes but one,
viz 29, and slew several persons. In Middlebrough the Indians burnt 21 houses.
In Taunton thty burnt ten houses and killed ten persons. In Rehoboth they have
destroyed eight houses, but killed none of the Inhabitants. While they were a
firing Rehoboth; a Troop of English chased the Indians thence, and killed four
Indians, one of which was Sagamore Philips Brother; and the English had one
Trooper slain. At Mendam a Town in the Messathusets, 30 miles from Boston, the
Indians killed three men, a woman and two children: And at Dorchester, on a
Sabbath Day an Indian shot at a Maid in a lone house, but missed ber; she with
a generous courage charged and discharged a Pistol at the Indian, and so
wounded him, that he had much ado to escape by flying away. The English Forces
at the first attempt drove Sagamore Philip out of his Country, seized his Fort
with 200 bushels of Corn, his Saddle and some of his Horses; where they found
four English heads on poles, which they took down, placing four Indian heads in
their places. Thence they pursued the Indians into a Swampe, and tired at the
Indians, and lost six men besides nine wounded; but how many Indians we killed
we cannot tell: for so thick were the bushes, that hardly one was to be seen.
Night overtaking the English, they having first forced Sagamore Phillips men
from their Wigwams, they returned out of the Swampe. A p^rty of our men engaged
400 Indians, and forced them over a Bridge, where we found two of Sagamore
Phillips chief men dead; but the rest immured themselves in a Swampe near
Pocassit, 7 miles long. Thus July ended, but in the beginning of August, the
English having increased their numbers, resolved to begirt the Swampe, and fall
upon Philips Camp, which second attempt being began, Sagamore Philip rushes out
of the Swampe with his whole people, men, women and children, in sight of the
English Army; making a direful outcry. But our men resolutely fell on them,
and in an hour or two dissipated the Indians and slew about twenty of them; one
of whom was Sagamore Philips Lieutenant General, without the loss of one of us.
But Sagamore Philip, with most of his people, fled away again through the
Swampe, clear out of that side of the Country, and all his Wigwams and Baggage
was possessed by the English.

Vncas a Southern Sachem, sent 49 at the first of his men well armed to the
Massathusets, to aid the English against Philip, and the English ordered them
to march with their Head Army. After the last Skirmish, 40 of Philips Indians
yielded themselves to the English at discretion, by whom we hope to have a full
discovery of the Indians plots, numbers, confederacies, and their hiding places.

All the Indians quite through the Country are in Arms, yet pretend favor to
the English; however we trust them not, as knowing they wait a fit occasion
against us: to prevent which the Conecticut Collony sent 300 men to the
Naraganset Sachem, to force him to declare himself. On their approach he
concluded a peace with the English, gave Hostages, and sent 100 of his men
against Philip. The English, to encourage them, have promised them 20 Coats for
Philip, and one a piece for each of his men, that they shall kill: but a double
reward if they can catch and bring Philip or his men alive; for the Englishes
design is rather to subject than to destroy the Indians: there being 120 Indian
prisoners in the Governor of Plymouths Custody, reserved to be made servants of.

Three Sachems of the Nipmug Country came to Quab^ug, alias Brookfield, an
English Town about sixty miles from Boston, subscribed to be faithful to the
English; and in regard many of the Su^j^cts of those Sachems were praying
Indians, the inhabitans of Brookfield, were the more confident of their
fidelity. The Council sent Captain Hutchison and Captain Wheeler, with thirty
horse, into the Nipmug Country, to treat with the Indians there, and get a
clear demonstration of their affection to the English, by delivering their Arm
and Hostages. Captain Hutchinson with some Townsmen of Brookfield, (viz. Coy,
Prichet, Aires, etc. who had so much affiance in the Indians as not to carry
weapons with them) went to treat with the Sachems, August 2. 75. at a place
appointed by them: But the Indians not appearing there, the Captain went near
to a Swampe thereby, out of which the Indians furiously rushed on Captain
Hutchinson's party in great numbers, and killed six persons, and wounded eight
more, of which Captain Wheeler and Captain Hutchinson were two. The Captains
with their remainders hasted to the Town, and immediately go all the
inhabitants of Brookfield into one house, being about seventy in number. The
Indians in two hours space fired all the deserted houses in the Town, viz.
twenty; and came with most hideous yellings, in way of triumph, and besieged
Captain Hutchinson and the Towns people, shooting day and night for three days
together; and attempting to set the Garison-house on fire, which two or three
times had likely to have been done, but that they within quenched it; and once
a great shower of rain put out the fire. The Indians provided an Engine with
thirty two pair of wheels, to fire the Garrison house at fourteen rods distance:
The English within used their utmost diligence to make their defense, and lost
only one within, and one killed, that occasionally stepped out. In the midst of
this exigent two English women were safely delivered in Childbirth in the
English house.

Major Willard being near Lancaster, hearing of the distress of those at
Brookefield, marched with fifty or sixty Dragoons to their relief, and came in
the night, and forced their way through the Indians into the yard of the
Garison-house; securing their horses, they fired several volleys on the
Indians, who in a little while fled all away. Thus all these persons (blessed
be God) were saved out of the hands of these barbarous and treacherous Enemies,
when they were at the last gasp, their powder being at it were spent, and all
help failing, a mercy not to be forgotten. Captain Hutchinson lived about three
weeks, and then died of his wounds, in the sixty third year of his age; this
worthy Gentleman being the fifth or sixth of his Family who perished by the
Indians; for his Mother, Brother, Sister, and Brother-in-law, were murdered by
the Indians about thirty seven years since, at or near Long Island, etc. Now
about this time Philip with about forty men came ^^ying from his Country to
these three Sachems, and highly applauded them, and gave them three pecks of
Wampampeag (i. e. Indian Money) to encourage them against us; and having
re-inforc'd himself, in about a fortnights time, as well by Piscataqua,
Penecock, as from the Southern Indians, invaded a Town called Squakeag, about
30 miles from Hadley, and then the Indians that marched with our forces, showed
themselves to be our faint friends, and we suspected they would turn r^al
enemies in time of danger, because they did not effectually pursue Ph^lip
according to Orders given them. Capt. Beers and Capt. Lothrop marched with 150
soldiers to an Indian Fort near Hadley, and required the In^ians to yield up
their Arms; the Indians promised to answer them in the morning: that night they
killed their Dogs and Swine, and fled to a Swamp; the Captains pursued them,
fired and killed eight or ten, and in a few days after besets another place in
those parts. Capt. Beers marched with 35 soldiers to fetch off the English of a
Town called Deerfield being an outskirt Town of the Massathusets Collony where
the Indian^ had burnt 20 houses, was encountered by the way at first with 100
Indians, which the English worsted, killing 40 of them, with the loss of three
English. But 300 more came to their fellows rescue, and killed Cap^ain Beers
and 18 more, with great shouts; and the 15 escapt. The In^ians are there
increased to, as is said, a 1000; our Foces are ma^ching to those parts, and
100 more men from the Bay under Capt. Mosely, also 100 from Connecticut, under
Major Treat, with Mr Whiteing a Minister of Hartford; and we every day expect
to hear of their good success, which we pray God grant. We are told that
Sagamore Philip begins to repen^, and is fled to the French at Canada for
succor; and that several of his men are gone to the Naraganset Sachem of whose
kindness to us we are not so well assured as we desire; and some fears there
are likewise that Philip also will make the protection of the Naraganset Sachem
his Refuge: so that we know not when this War will end. There is a Declaration
published by the Council of the Massathusets That those Indians who profe^^
(...) be in amity with the English, forthwith repair to five places appointed
them; if they or any Indian appear one mile from the place, he shall be looked
at a^ an enemy.

Three hundred Indians were in arms at Kenibe^k 60 miles east of P^s^aqua,
Capt. (...) of Boston being there with 100 men, demanded the reason of the
I^d^ans arming? ^hey said news was brought them that the English were resolved
to root out all the Indians; but they being informed that it was only Phi^ip
and his obstinate Confede^ates, that the English had declared against: this
pacified them, and some brought in their arms, and Captain Lake has secured
six of their Princes as it is said; and at Pascataqua most of the Indians have
brought in their arms, and Captain Lake has secured six of their Princes as ^t
is said; and at Pascataqua most of the Indians have brought in their arms, and
are resolved to be quiet. Our heathen enemies, what men or women they take
alive, they massacre in a cruel manner, as fleaing the skins over their heads,
cutting ^ff their hands, etc. We confess our sins, now we are grown fat Jesurun
like, has caused this Judgment; the good God pardon them, cure us, and then we
hope he will remove his heavy hand. Amen.

FINIS.

