A BRIEF HISTORY OF PRESBYTERY AND INDEPENDENCY, From their first Original, to
this Time. SHOWING, I. Wherein, and the Reasons why they Separate from the
Church of England. II. Wherein they differ from each other.
WITH Some Remarks on the late Heads of Agreement, Assented to by the United
Ministers of both PERSUASIONS.

Written at the Request, and for the Satisfaction of a Private Friend, and now
made public for General Information.

LONDON, Printed for Edward Faulkner, 1691.

A BRIEF HISTORY OF PRESBYTERY AND INDEPENDENCY, etc.
CHAP. I.
TO give a full History of Nonconformity to the Church of England, since the
first Reformation, is both impracticable and impossible, in so small a
Treatise; take here only an Essay to it, in a Compendious Epitome: Begin we
with that Reformation transported from that of Luther's in Germany, unto our
King Edward the VI. into England.

Remark 1.
He is truly styled a second Josiah, whom Cardan, though a Papist, yet had so
much of a Philosopher in him, as to Admire for a Nonesuch in Accomplishments,
saying, in a Transport, of him [ Not only England, but the World has reason to
lament the loss of such an hopeful Blossom, so early Blasted. [Whereas a
Prelatical Doctor of our Country, and a pretended Protestant, seemed to rejoice
at it, rather than bewail it as an Infelicity, [That he was so soon Succeeded
by Q. Mary, a Bloody Popish Queen,] Characterizing him as one ill principl'd in
himself, and easily inclined to embrace such Counsels, as would have proved
pernicious to the Church, so slanders him with Sacrilege, etc. Heyline Hist.
of Ref. Preface and page 131. etc. no Reason can be rendered why Cardan should
out shine Heylin, in Admiring this Young King, but because such a Spirit of
Reformation began to bud in him, as if it had blossomed, and become Fruit,
would in all probability have Reformed the Church thoroughly, according to her
primitive Pattern, and so dear was the Diana of the Churches Splendor and
worldly Pomp in that Day, that a Popish Queen who would Establish it, was more
welcome than such an hopeful King, whom they feared, would Reduce it to the
first Institution: Non erat sic ab Initio. It was not so from the Beginning,
though such profound Piety shone forth in this Illustrious Prince in so
convincing a luster, as Mother Church her self could not bribe that Popish
Foreign Philosopher, but he was constrained to afford this Royal Enemy his due
Encomium: Yet his Regal Dignity, or Innocent Piety cannot secure him from
Severe Censures, out of the Mouths of English Divines, under a Tincture of
Prelacy: Nor was this all, but that King's Godly Uncle the Duke of Somerset,
did suffer hard things, and at last Death it self, by such as were sowred by
the like Leaven: In both which cases, the venom of a Persecuting Spirit, had a
preposterous Operation, working upwvrd, both against a Pious Prince, and
against a Pious Protector: They both were Spewed upon by Men of this Brann,
whereas when there is a possession of Power in their hands, then this poisonous
Principle is for working Downward, casting forth Cart Loads of Excrements upon
such as under their power, as the Sequel will sufficiently demonstrate, etc.

Remark 2.
It Is well observed, that the shortness of K. Edward's Life, prevented him of
an opportunity for a thorough Reformation. [ Notwithstanding the high Places
were not yet Removed,] as it is often said in the Books of Kings, and Chronicles
of the Kings of Israel and Judah: Mr. Martin Luther has this Passage in his
History, etc. p. 283. That Edward VI. was a Storm that tore up Popish Prelacy
by the Roots, yet a top Root remained entire with the Stock which bare of the
old Soil of Papacy, yet transplanted into the new Mold of Royalty, began to
flourish again, etc. and may it not be said, that he had not time nor
opportunity to do little more than to lop off the Branches of Popery, because
he dyed when but Sixteen Years old, so leaving the Root, it presently sprung up
again when his Sister Mary Succeeded him in the Throne.

Remark 3.
Dr. Thomas Fuller, an Episcopal Divine, in his History of this Edward the VI.
has this Passage, [For this Young King to Reform all at once, had been the
ready way to Reform nothing at all; but now (says he) there is more Light,
more number of Protestants, less fear of Papists, therefore a thorough
Reformation may now be more probable and practicable; instead whereof, shall we
still run back to Rome: Hinc illae lachrimae, etc.

Remark 4.
It Is true, King Henry the VIII. broke the Ice for his young Son, by Injoyning
the Lord's Prayer, the Creed, and the Ten Commandments, to be translated into
the English Tongue, and to be taught unto the Parishioners by all the Parsons
and Vicars: Even this small step cost a Rebellion at Lincoln, York, Hull, etc.
Tanta molis erat Romanam condere gentem: The Work of Reformation is a Work of
great difficulty.

Remark 5.
Pass we over Queen Marys Reign, which was a Reign of Deformation, etc. and
come to the Reign of our English Deborah, Famous Queen Elizabeth, who renewed
and revived K. Edward's Reformation again, but so retarded she was by so many
Remora's in her Reforming Work, that she could not step up to the Pattern in
the Mount, the Sacred Scriptures, the Word of God, which is [ Regula Regulans
and Regulata,] the Rule Ruling, as well as the Rule Ruled: It Is Index sui and
obliqui, giving the truest Indication both of its own straightness, and of
others crookedness: But alas, Prudentials, and Politics of State, then
prevailed against that weaker Royal Sex, the over-toping Vogue was then, [ New
Wine must be gently poured into old Bottles,] least the strength of the Liquor,
being advantaged by the violence of the Infusion, break the Vessel, etc.
Reformation (cried the Grandees of that Day) must be made by degrees, and
State-Politicians must deal with the Body-Politick, (when sick, and swollen
with Distempers) as the Skilful Chyrurgeon deals with an Hydropick Person,
whose Body is almost drowned with a Deluge of Water; the Cure is done by
degrees, some Tap or Sluice must be opened, yet not to let go all at once, least
the violent Effluvium, or flowing forth of the natural Spirits (together with
the Peccant Morbisick Humor, constantly consequent) should destroy the
Patient, and endanger him upon dry ground more than in those almost drowning
Waters; but the Method is a (...), the opening of a small Tap or Hole in the
Skin, which may so run as to drain the Body gradually of its Dropsy, and by
insensible degrees drawing out not above a Pint at a time, and never more at
once, though many Gollons be designed for Evacuation: So Politicians will not
make over large leaps at once.

Remark 6.
It Is an excellent Observation of Famous Mr. Fuller concerning these first
Reformers, whom he compares to the Patriarch Jacob, who would not over drive
his Tender Flock, saying, [ I dare not march my Lord Esau 's pace.] It may be
easily presumed, that Jacob looked upon his Brother as one very nimble of foot,
because he so delighted to lead an Huntsman's Life, and lived so much in
Hunting his swift Game: Though Jacob himself could have lift up his feet (as he
did when refreshed with the Vision of the Ladder, Genesis 28.12. and 29.1 Hebr.)
and walked Esau's pace, yet would he not force his feeble Flocks to keep pace
with Esau: Even so (says Mr. Fuller) those first Reformers found England
settled upon the Lees, having been long nouzell'd up in Superstition, etc. so
could not be looked upon as capable of a sudden and perfect Alteration, etc.
Fuller 's Church Hist. Cent. 16. B. 7. page 374. Notwithstanding all this,
these Reformers have Right to a due Veneration for that most excellent
Reformation they made in the Doctrine of the Church, considering what Anakins,
and what Goliahs they had at that time to contend with, and how the whole World
almost in that Day did wonder after the Beast, Revel. 13.3. Yea, and a long and
continued Custom for many Ages (saving the short Parenthesis of K. Edward's
Reign) of training up every Generation in Idolatry, etc. had made it a Law or
Prescription, yet were these Reformers most eminent Instruments in God's Hand,
to carry on so courageously a Doctrinal Reformation, wherein they threw down
the Walls of Jericho, by the sounding of Rams Horns, and put to flight the
Armies of the Aliens, etc.

Remark 7.
It must evermore be acknowledged to the Eternal Honor of those choice and
chief Champions of the true Church in that Day. How they knocked down the prime
Pillars, or rather Catter pillars of the Romish Church, with their look beyond
Luther, etc. who, when the Romanits asked them, Where, was your Religion before
Luther? Answered, it was in the Sacred Scriptures, where their Romish Religion
could not be found, which they demonstrated to them by undeniable Arguments,
insomuch, that when the Romanists were sensibly foiled, and beaten out of the
Holy Scriptures, they cried for their only Reserve, saying. [Let us forsake
that Field wherein we are defeated with Scriptum est. it is written in Gods
Word, etc. and let us rally all our Forces in the Field of the Ancient Fathers,
wherein we may master them.] Here again the Battle was renewed, and here again
the Romanists were beaten out of their strong hold of Tradition, for the first
Six Hundred Years after Christ, which is the whole term of time that deserves
the Title of Antiquity: In this Controversy our Learned Whittaker acted so
eminently, that his Antagonist Bellarmine had his Picture in his Study, with
this Inscription upon it, [ Quanquam Haereticum, Doctum tamen habeo
Adversarium:] Though this Whittaker be an Heretic, yet I find him a Learned
one.

Remark 8.
Besides him many more Famous Worthys shone forth in their Orb in that day, as
the Queens Jewel, Bishop Juel and others, who all did excellently as to the
Doctrinal Reformation, from the Corruptions of the Romish Church; but as to the
Discipline of a Gospel Church, they did not so much meddle with, perhaps,
looking upon it as not pertaining to the (...) or Being, but only to the (...),
or well being of the Church; and hence it came to pass, that so much Romish
Rubbish still remained unremov'd, etc. whereby a Foundation was laid among the
tenderest part both of Pastors and People, for Nonconformity from those
Altitudinarian Conformists, who had writ upon their Pillars, a [ Ne plus
Ultra,] being resolved not to stir one step farther into the Work of
Reformation: Whereas this seemed a Sullenness much differing from the practice
of their Piously Learned Predecessors; as ( 1st.) Holy Father Latimer had not
rested in the Reformation made by K. Henry VIII. only Englishing the Lords
Prayer, Creed, and Ten Commandments to the People, but he persuaded K. Edward
VI. to step farther, that the People might have the whole Divine Service in
their Mother Tongue, etc. Nor were blessed Bucer, and holy Hooker so fully
satisfied with the first Purgation of the Liturgy, after it was extracted out
of the Popish Mass Book by K. Edward's Divines, they could not rest contented
so, but persuaded the King to a second Purgation, as the second Edition of the
Service Book shows: Nor was Q. Elizabeth willing to rest in that second
Edition, of K. Edward's, but Reformed diverse things in it, though her Royal
Brother had given it a second refining: Nor did this Queens Divines ( Juel,
Bentham, Pilkinton, etc.) bring in their Edition with any such high
Commendatory Character, as [ Omnia been,] All are so well, as needs no
Amendment, when they brought it to her Majesty for Authorizing it by her Royal
Authority, etc.

Remark 9.
Besides all this, I might mention many more Amendments, which Reverend Mr.
Hugh's computeth, were it not that it would too much swell this small
Discourse, I refer only to it, etc. from whence we may mark, That as there was
a [ plus ultra,] or a steping farther all along, in Reforming the means of Gods
Worship, taken for granted; so there was a kind of Nonconformity found first in
those Royal Persons, namely K. Edward, not conforming to that Reformation made
by his Royal Father K. Henry the VIII, and Queen Elizabeth's not conforming to
that of her Royal Brother K. Edward the VI: Nor ought we to Despise that Day of
small things, Zach. 4.10. but rather Adore Divine Goodness that revealed so
much to them in their (...) step out of Popery. As we say of Luther, God is
more to be Admired (...) ^vealing so much of the Mystery of Divine Truth, to
him more (...) that main Fundamental point of Justification, etc. (wherein he
is (...) ^lent in his Comment upon the Epistle to the Galathians) than for
leaving him to his own Mistakes about Consubstantiation: But the first grand
Nonconformist to the Established Church of England, under that Protestant
Queen, was Mr. Tho. Cartwright, who had her Royal Approbation at a Commencement
in Cambridge, and after became Professor of Divinity there, and in his
Lectures, he being occasioned to discover his Nonconformity about Church
Discipline, the Heads of the University took it heinously, as dangerous to the
Hierarchy, and for which, notwithstanding his Universally admired Merit and
Veneration, they got him at last Expelled the University, when Dr. Whitgift was
Vice Chancellor. Now when his Ministry was thus obstructed in England, he
traveled beyond Sea, where he Conforted with Famous Beza, who gave him this
Character, [ The Sun never shone upon a more Learned Man,] in a Letter Beza
wrote to his Friend in England, Secondly, Many more Nonconformists appear after
upon the Stage, as Mr. Deering, Mr. Fox the Martyrologist, with others, who
drew up an Admonition to the Parliament, for the Reformation of the Church,
which Dr. Whitgift (then made Archbishop of Canterbury) Answered, to which a
Reply was made.

CHAP. II.
THIS Chapter is a more particular History of the first Separation from the
Church of England as it was then constituted, in the Reign of Q. Elizabeth, by
the Non-conformists of that time, who were partly of the Presbyterial, and
partly of the Congregational Judgment, which the sequel may demonstrate.

The first Remark is, the Nonconformity of Mr. Cartwright, in these following
Propositions, under his own handwriting were,

As (1.) That the Names of Archbishops and of Archdeacons ought to be
abolished with all their Offices and Exercises of Power.

(2.) That the Names of the Legitimate Ministers in the Church, such as are
Bishops and Deacons, so far as they are separated from those Functions that are
simply set down in the Word of God, ought to be removed, and reduced to their
first Apostolical Institution; namely, That the Deacons should serve the Tables
of the Poor, and the Bishops give themselves to the Word and Prayer.

(3.) That the Government of the Church ought not to be committed to the
Chancellours of Bishops, or to the Officers of Archdeacons, but to a fit
Ministry and Presbytery of the same Church.

(4.) That no Minister ought to be a Wanderer, or running at random, but every
one should be fixed to his own proper place.

(5.) No Man ought to make himself Minister of any People by a Mandamus from
the Sovereign to the Electors of such to officiate, etc.

(6.) Ministers ought not to be made by the Authority and Power of Bishops
only, much less in the Bishop's Study, or any private place; but should be
chosen by the Church it self, etc. Concluding thus, That every Man is bound by
his Calling to reform those Deformities; to wit, Magistrates by their Power,
Ministers by their Preaching, and People by their Prayers. All jointly must
promote this aforesaid Reformation: These were the Crimes for which Doctor
Whitgift, then Vice Chancellor, expelled Mr. Cartwright out of Cambridge,
after which, K. James, then King of Scotland, sent for him, profering to make
him Professor of Divinity in the University of St. Andrews; and the Archbishop
of Dublin also sent for him into Ireland, profering him Preferment in that
Kingdom: but the Earl of Leicester fixed him (after his Return from Travel
beyond Sea) making him Master of the Hospital at Warwick, at which time that
pestilent piece the Rhemish Testament came forth, and looked on of such
dangerous consequence, that it required the ablest Pen to answer it. Hereupon
Sir Francis Walsingham (the Queen's right hand and eye) courted Mr. Cartwright
to the Undertaking, sent him an Hundred pound (few such gifts now a days to
Non-conformists) to furnish him for the Work. Yea, the Learned Doctors of
Cambridge and the Ministers of London and Suffolk exhorted him to undertake it
Notwithstanding all this Arch bishop Whitgift sent him a politive Prohibition,
fearing, says Dr. Fuller, lest any of his Dry Blows and Distasteful Passages
shot at Rome, might glance at Canterbury, Chapter Hist. Cent. 16. page 171.

The second Remark is, I, to avoid prolixity, am constrained to omit the many
Stories of Nonconformity form Henry the VIII's Reformation, in his abolishing
the Pope's Supremacy, and the abolishing of Abbeys, etc. And of that under
Edward the Sixth, which I have by me from Stow, Dr. Heylin, Sir Richard Baker,
etc. but beg leave to insert one or two Stories out of peevish Peter Heylin,
saying, The People might have rested in the Reformation of Edward the Sixth, if
Calvin's pragmatical Spirit (as he styles it) had not interposed: He first
began to quarrel at some Passages in the Liturgy, and afterward never left
soliciting the Lord Protector and the Universities, till he had laid the first
foundation of the Zuinglian Faction, to which they were encouraged by the
Indulgence granted to John Alasco, who, bringing with him a mixed multitude of
Poles and Germans, obtained the Privilege of a [ Non conformist] Church, for
him and his people, distinct from the Church of England in Government and Form
of Worship: This much animated (says he) the Zuinglian Gospellers to practice
first upon the Church, and, being countenanced by the Earl of Warwick, then
quarrelled with Episcopal Habits, against Copes, Tippets, Surplices, etc. but
at last fell upon the Altars which were left standing (as they had been in
times of Popery) by the Rules of the Liturgy: Then were some rude People
encouraged (says he) underhand by the Grandees of the Court to beat down some
Altars, which made way for an Order of the Council Table to take down the rest,
and set up Tables in their places: Hereupon the costly Coverings of the Altars,
together with their rich Priestly Grarments (made of Cloth of Tissue, Cloth of
Gold and Silver or embroidered Velvet, the meanest of them being made of Silk
or Satin, with some decent trimming) were handsomely converted to private use,
for Carpets, Cushions, Coverlids, etc. for the Court Lords: This change (says
he) drew on the Alteration of the former Liturgy, but almost as unpleasing to
the Zuinglian Faction (so he brands the Puritans of that day by this Name) as
the former was. In which conjuncture of Affairs K. Ed. died, whose death, says
he, I cannot reckon for an Infelicity to the Church of England, for he, being
ill-principled in himself, and easily inclined to embrace such Counsels, would
have put down Bishoprics also, and left the Church to her natural Nakedness.
Dr. Heylin's Preface to his History of Reformation.

The third Remark is from Dr. Helyn, page 72, 75, 79, etc. After he had made
the Lord Protector a most sacrilegious person, in pulling down Churches
wherewith to build his Somerset House in the Strand, etc. He brings in this
Story of the bringing in of Presbytery into England; the Archbishop Cranmer
sent for Martin Bucer and Peter Martyr, who were more addicted to the Zuinglian
than the Lutheran Doctrines; the former was placed in the Doctor's Chair at
Cambridge, holding correspondency with Calvin, but soon died; but the latter,
Peter Martyr, in his Divinity Lectures at Oxford, declared himself a Zuinglian,
and no fast friend to Ceremonies, (I add this to Dr. Heylin) saying, [ Ego, cum
Canonicus Oxoniae essem, super-polliceis uti non auderem;] I, while Canon of
Christ's Church in Oxford, durst not wear a Surplice But the Dr. proceeds in
his Story, how much the Zuinglian Gospellers were against the Book of Homilies,
etc. and how Dr. Hooper, being designed Bishop of Gloucester, refused to be
consecrated by Archbishop Cranmer in such Habits as Bishops are required to
wear by the Rules of the Church, which Refusal put a stop to his Consecration;
but he, repairing to his Patron the Earl of Warwick, obtained his Letter to the
Arch bishop, desiring a forbearance of these Habits; adding also that it was
the King's desire as well as his own; and requested farther, that he would not
charge him with any Oath burdensome to his Conscience, namely, the Oath of
Canonical Obedience: yea, the King likewise wrote to the same effect, and so
the matter was composed with some moderation. Thus Dr. Heylin. And many more
Non-conformities the Dr. complains of too long to rehearse

The fourth Remark is, the History of Nonconformity in Q. Elizabeth's Reign,
who had bravely repulsed Temptations of turning Papist in Q. Mary's time, with
saying, [ My Soul is the Lord's, and as to my Faith, as I cannot change it, so
neither will I dissemble it.] This good Queen, finding all the Land lay fallow
and overgrown with the Brambles of her Sister's Popery, was forced to this
Resolve, Not to reform all at once, but by little and little: This slow
progress therein brought up and introduced a Medley of Calvinists (as Dr.
Heylin styles the Non-conformists at that time) in his Hist. of Reform. p 115.
saying, Those Ministers that had been banished in the Reign of Q. Mary, and had
followed (beyond Sea) the Platform of Geneva, returned so disaffected to
Episcopal Government, and to the Rites and Ceremonies here by Law established,
as not long after filled the Church, as he expresses it, with sad Disorders.
On which account, he says, we find the Queen's Professor at Oxford to pass
among the Non-conformists, though somewhat more moderate than the rest; and
Cartwright at Cambridge (he does not call him Doctor, nor so much as Master
Cartwright) who proved, says he, an unextinguishable Fire brand to the Church
of England: beside him, there was Whittington (the chief Ringleader of the
Frankford Schismatics) preferred to the Deanery of Durham, and from thence
encouraging Knox and Goodman, in setting up Presbytery in the Kirk of Scotland,
and Sampson was advanced to the Deanery of Christ's-Church, but turned out
again, for an incorrigible Nonconformist; as likewise Hardiman, one of the
first twelve Prebends of the Church of Westminster, who was soon after
deprived, for throwing down the Altar and defacing the Vestments of the Church,
etc.

The fifth Remark, Dr. Heylin proceeds in his Complaints, page 124. saying, The
Queen having settled Ecclesiastic Affairs, the same Settlement of the Church of
England might have longer continued, had not her Order been Confounded by some
Factious Spirits (as he calls them,) who, having had their Wills at Frankfort,
or otherwise Ruling the Presbytery when they were at Geneva, thought to have
carried all before them with the like facility when they were in England. And
again, page 131, 132. Some friends they had about the Queen, and Calvin was
Resolved to make use of all his Power both with the Queen and with Cecill (as
appears by his Letters to both) to Advance their Ends; and he was seconded by
Peter Martyr, who thought his Interest in England to be greater than Calvin's,
though his Name was not so eminent in other places; but the Queen had fixed her
self to keep up some outward Splendor of a Church, etc. No sooner those
Schismatics of Frankfort saw Episcopacy settled and the Liturgy imposed, etc.
but they Revive the quarrels raised in King Edward's time, etc. Grindal the new
Bishop of London was known to have a great Respect for Calvin and they two, by
the help of their friends they had about the Queen, got liberty for a French
Church, as John Alasco had in King Edward's time: But what was this (says he)
but setting up Presbytery to confront Episcopacy, and a Commonwealth in the
midst of a Monarchy, or (as the phrase is now) Imperium in Imperio. Calvin
gives Grindal thanks for this favor, upon which many French and Dutch repaired
into England, planted themselves in Sea-Towns, as well as in London openly
professing the Reformed Religion. Again, page 144 he goes on, saying, Now
nothing would satisfy our Non-conformists at Home, (being thus encouraged with
that liberty thus procured for those abroad) but the Nakedness and Simplicity
of the Zuinglian Churches, the new fashions taken up at Frankfort, and the
Presbyteries at Geneva; and they drove on so fast upon it, that they took down
the Steps where the Altar stood, and brought the Table into the midst of the
Church in some places; they laid aside God fathers and Godmothers in Baptism;
and Lent they looked upon as Superstition and Festival days, etc. This Faction
(says he page 154) could not touch Episcopacy nor Liturgy, because established
by Law; but Caps, Tippets, Rochets, Lawn-sleeves and Surplices, etc (all having
no better foundation than Supersritious Custom, or some old Popish Canon, etc.)
they Assaulted: And when the book of the Thirty-nine Articles was published,
they boggl'd at the Twentieth about the Authority of the Church, and at the
Thirty-sixth about the Consecration of Archbishops, etc. the book of Homilies
they called beggarly Rudiments, and other things not consisting with their
Independency. The Doctor proceeds, [ Of this factions Number, none so much
Remarkable, as Father John Fox the Martyrologist, etc.] it was thought by the
Conformists that the Opinion which was had of his Parts and Piety might much
Advance Conformity, if the Heads of the Church could cause him to come over to
them and subscribe the Thirty-nine Articles; hereupon he was Summoned for his
Subscription: He appeared before the Bishop with his New Testament in Greek,
holding it in his hand, he said, [ Unto this book I will Subscribe; and if this
will not Serve, take my Prebendary at Salisbury, the only Preferment which I
hold in the Church of England, and much good may it do you.] But
notwithstanding this Refractory Answer (says the Doctor) so much kindness was
showed to him, that he both kept his Resolution, and his Prebendary together:
This was more favor than is shown to any Nonconformist in this our Days. And
to this the Doctor adds, That those Genevians (as he styles them) for the
greater Countenancing of their Nonconformity, stirred up the most Eminent
Divines of the French and Zuinglian or Helvetian Churches to Declare in favor
of their Doings, etc.

The sixth Remark is, the Doctor tells us many long Stories, too large to
transcribe. After his Invectives against the Puritans, so called (he says) for
pretending to a greater Purity in God's Worship, and against Geneva Notes upon
2 Chronicles. 8.15, 16, etc. and against the Sawciness of Knox, and the bold
Activities of Beza for upholding this Puritan Faction. He comes to Cartwright,
against whom he exclaims for sowing his Seed of Nonconformity in Cambridge it
self, and so that it could never be Rooted out to this Day. Who exceeded (he
says) in Acting more than any of the Puritan Faction: He preached All the
Fellows and Scholars of his College out of their Surplices, etc. Heylin's
Hist. of Presbytery, page 263. He set up a Presbyterial Church at Wandsworth by
the Water side, near London, November. 20. in the Year 1572. He introduced his
Discipline into the Islands of Jersey and Gernsey, and in the English Church at
Middleburgh in Zealand, and in the Dutch Church here in London; yea he
prevailed so far (with the Assistance of the Earl of Leicester, Lord-Treasurer
Burleigh, etc.) that a Meeting of Sixty Ministers out of Essex, Cambridge and
Norfolk was Held at Corkhill. where Knewstubbs was Minister, May the 8th. in
the Year 1582. and the like Meeting was Held at Cambridge, etc. After this
(says he) their book of Discipline being published, was nowhere more welcome
than in London, the Wealth and Pride of which City was never wanting to support
such, etc. page 213. The several Churches they had in the City they Reduced
into one general Classis, in which either Cartwright, or Egerton, or Travers
were for the most part Moderatours. This was their chief Tribunal and supreme
Consistory they held for the whole Nation: But in the Country none appeared
more forward, than those of Northampton, Daventry and Nottingham and the Device
(as he calls it) is taken up in most parts of England, but especially in
Warwickshire, Suffolk, Norfolk, Essex, etc. In these Classes they Determined
Points of Doctrine, Interpreted hard places of Scripture, Delivered their
Resolution in such Cases of Conscience, as were brought before them; Decided
Doubts and Difficulties touching Contracts of Marriage, etc. And whatsoever was
coucluded by such as were present, (yet still with Reference to the better
Judgment of their London-brethren) became forthwith binding to the Rest; none
being admitted into any of the aforesaid Classes before he had promised under
his Hand, that he would Submit himself, and be Obedient unto all such Orders
and Decrees, as were set down by the Classis to be observed. At these Classes
they enquired into the Life and Doctrine of all that had subscribed unto them,
Censuring some, and Deposing others as they saw occasion. Unto every Classis
there belonged a Register, who took the Heads of all that passed, and saw them
carefully entered into a Book for that purpose, that they might remain upon
Record. This is Dr. Heylin's Relation in full of the progress of Presbytery in
this Nation.

Moreover, Dr. Heylin observes that in Q. Elizabeth's 7th. Year of her Reign,
the Calvinists began first to be called Puritans; and in her 8th Year the
Government of the Church by Archbishops and Bishops was Confirmed, which when
the Presbyterians saw settled, they began (says he) to play their Game; and the
more, because the Presbyterians prevailed now in Scotland.

I have been the larger in Quoting Dr. Heylin, because the Testimony of an
Adversary [to Non-conformists] is always looked upon as a double, and so the
strongest Testimony.

The seventh Remark take here in few words. Sir Richard Baker's Testimony also,
who says, That in the Eleventh Year of Queen Elizabeth's Reign there arose a
Sect, openly Condemning the Received Discipline of the Church of England,
together with the Church Liturgy and the very Calling of Bishops.

This Sect (says Baker) so mightily increased, that in the Sixteenth Year of
her Reign the Queen and whole Kingdom were extremely troubled with them: And
again, in a Parliament held the 26th Year of her Reign, the Puritan Party
labored to have Laws made in order to the Destroying of the Church of England,
and the setting up of their own Sect: And again, in her 28th Year the Queen
gave a Special Charge to Whitgist, Archbishop of Canterbury, to settle an
Uniformity in the Ecclesiastical Discipline, which now almost lay a gasping;
and at this time the Sect of Brownists (derived from one Robert Brown, who
Patronized the most Rigid sort of Separation from the Church of England) did
much oppose the National Church. Again, in her One and Thirtieth Year, the
Puritan flames brake forth again; and in her Thirty-sixth Year the severity of
the Laws were executed upon Henry Barrow and his Sectaries for Condemning the
Church of England as no Christian Church. Thus Sir Richard Baker, etc.

The eighth Remark is, This Severity of the Conformists against the
Non-conformists in Depriving them of their Benefices and other Preferments in
the Church, (beside their later Cruelty to them) went as Alarming news, flying
both into France and Scotland. Hereupon (says Dr. Heylin in his History of
Presbytery, page 252.) both Beza out of France, and Knox with his Comrades out
of Scotland interpose themselves in behalf of their Brethren: As to Knox (says
he) a Letter was wrote by him and sent in the Name of the General Assembly of
the Kirk of Scotland, wherein the Church-Vestments are called Trifles and Rags
of Rome, etc. But Beza (says he) writes with more Authority from France, as
being the greater Patriarch, unto Grindal of greater Matters than Caps and
Surplices, but complains of Suspending these Men from their Ministry for not
Subscribing to some new Ceremonies imposed upon them, and that the Bishops had
too much power, and excepts against many other things. So good a foundation
(says he) being laid, the Building could not choose but go on a-pace. In the
Course of which Fabric, they have continually a Recourse to this Beza, as to
their Master Workman, answering all their Scruples And the Dr. adds, the
Presbyterians had many powerful Friends at Court, as the Earl of Leicester,
Lord North, Knolls, and Walsingham, which so encouraged them, that they met
together in Houses, Woods, Barns, and common Fields, where they kept their
Conventicles, page 252, 259, 262, 263. until at last (says he page 271.) They
resolved against the Episcopal, and endeavored to erect the Presbyterial
Government, concluding their Vote thus, [Whereas diverse Books have been
written, and sundry Petitions have been exhibited to her Majesty, the
Parliament and their Lordships to little purpose, every man should therefore
labor by all means possible, to bring the Reformation into the Church] and
'twas then and there resolved, [That for the better bringing on of the said
Holy Discipline, they should not only as well publicly as privately teach it,
but also by little and little as well as possible they could, draw the same
into practice.] Hereupon a Presbytery was erected at that small Village in
Surry called Wandsworth, as is aforesaid, and Grindal being translated from the Sea of York unto that of Canterbury, gave great hopes to the Presbyterians, who
soon found how plyant he was like to prove unto their expectation, which
happened accordingly, for he sought in all things to promote their Designs, and
made great Alterations in the Church of England, etc.

The 8th. Remark. The Commissaries Court, that had been so severe against the
Nonconformists all along began to learn more mildness in the latter end of
Queen Elizabeth's Reign, as appears by that instance of Mr. Richard Sedgwick,
the Minister at Battersey in Surry, who was persecuted by one Mr. King
Churchwarden of the place, and was presented by him into the Bishops Court, and
cited to answer there the Articles he had to object against him, principally
for his exclaiming against those Corruptions that then were in the Church of
England; the good Minister courageously appeared, to defend what he had
preached; but appearing before the Commissary, beyond his expectation, he me
with courteous Usage, and was friendly dismissed; The Reason is rendered,
because those kind of high flown persecuting Conformists feared some remarkable
change to be brought in by K. James's coming to the Crown, who had been trained
up by the Kirk of Scotland in the Presbyterial way: See Mr. Rich. Sedgwick's
Life writ by Mr. Clark, page 397. in Fol. N. B. Thus might I carry on this
History of Nonconfermity, both through K. James the First, and K. Charles the
First, yea, and Charle: the Second, and James the Second; but this would make a
Volume All that can be contained here, is the History of the Infancy of it in
the first Reformers.

CHAP. III.
Remark 1st.
UPon K. James's Reign in the year 1605. at Hampton Court, he calls an Assembly
of Divines to confer about the Liturgy and Church Government, where he told
them, that his End of calling them together was not to make any Alteration,
which was not requisite, seeing he found all things so well settled already, but
like a wise Physician, he would search into the supposed Diseases, and remove
the occasion of Complaints, whereupon the Prelates of his Privy Council were
dismissed, and the Monday after he calls in the complaining Doctors, telling
them, he meant not to alter the Church Government, so well settled already, but
to settle Uniformity and Unity, etc. Dr. Reynolds the Foreman, reduces their
Grievances to these four Heads. First, For preserving true Doctrine. Secondly,
For placing Good Pastors. Thirdly, For sincere Church Government. And,
Fourthly, For explaining some passages in the Service Book. Of this Conference,
etc. I must refer my Reader to Mr. Fuller's Church History, who (according to
his Name,) gives a fuller Account, than this small Treatise is capable of: Some
brief touches make,

Remark the Second. Mr. Fuller says, that Dr. Barlow, (then an opposite to the
Nonconformists,) does not give an impartial Relation of this Conference:
Whereupon he wittily says, If the Israelites be forced to whet their Tools
with the Philistims, no wonder if the Thilistims set a sharper edge on their
own, and a blunter upon their enemies Weapons, he was a Party and so was
partial in favoring the Conformists, etc. But Mr. Fuller. Cent 17. Book 10.
page 21. etc. Says, here was great odds; only these four ( Reinolds,
Knewstubbs, Spark, and Chaderton,) called to cope with 8 Bishops, 8 Deans, and
two Doctors, beside the King and his Privy Council: Nor were they called to
have their Scruples satisfied, but his Pleasure propounded; the King called
them not, that he might know what they could say, but that they might know what
he would do in the matter. For tho they petitioned for a full Reformation of
Church Service, Livings, Ministers, and Discipline, and that with a Millenary
Petition, subscribed with about a thousand Ministers hands, yet got they not
the Kings Ear, but he cried to them [ No Bishop no King, and as they dealt with
my mother, so would they deal with me. I Will make you conform, or banish you,
etc.] But he ordered a new Translation of the Bible (differing from that of
Geneva,) charging the Translators to keep the old Ecclesiastic words, as
Church and not Congregation, and Easter, etc. and not to make any marginal
Notes as were in the Geneva Bibles, against which he much exclaimed, and more
especially its Notes upon Exodus 1.19. which allows Disobedience to Kings; and
on 2 Chronicles. 15.16. saying, Asa should have killed the Queen, and not deposed
her only.

Remark the Third. Mr. Fuller says further, when Dr. Reynolds w^ complaining
against Arminian Doctrine, lazy Ministers bad Government of the Church and
Common Prayer, etc. saying, It was t^ cry of the People, Such a Church, etc.
will bring the Souls of the Nation into a faint and feeble condition, having no
warm meet provided for them, save only the cold Homilies, and the
Starve-us-Book, and^ Bishop Bancroft at this Hampton Court Conference, answered
only with urging that old Canon ( Schismatici contra Episcopos non sunt
audiendi,) Schismatics ought not to be heard in their complaining against the
Bishops, and said, He was beholden to the King to suffer him thus to speak
against the Laturgy, contrary to the Statute in the first year of Q. Elizabeth;
and that probably he was of the same mind with Mr. Cartwright, who would
conform in Ceremony, rather to the Turks, than to the Papists. Book. 10. page
11. Cent. 17. And the same Bishop Bancroft bade K. James remember the Speech of
the French Ambassador Rognee, who said, That if the Reformed Church in France
had kept the same Order both in Service and in Ceremonies, there would have
been a thousand more Protestants than there be in that Land, intimating, That
if the Protestants there had embraced the same Service and Ceremonies with the
Prelates in England, (which they could not do, but differed from them,) the
Popish Party in France would have been pleased with them; and their Conformity
would have preven^ed the Parisian Massac^e. page 15. The same Bishop said
likewise, That in a Church newly planted, Preaching is most necessary; but it
is not so in a Church long established as ours is, whereby his Design was to
thrust out Sermons as unnecessary, by the more necessary Service Book page 15.

Remark the Fourth But the Lord Chancellor said at that same Hampton Court
Conference, that Church Livings at that time wanted rather Learned-men, than
Learned men any Church livings. Many such pining for want of Places through
their Nonconformity; and to this Complaint he added, That he wished every
Learned man were supplied with a single Coat, to wit, one Church-Benefice,
before that others be thatched on with double and treble Coats, in their
Pluralities, etc. p. 16. Mr. Knewstubb the Nonconformist at the same Conference
said, (Put the case, That the Church has Power to add any significant Signs,
it may not add them where Christ has already ordered them. This derogates from
the Authority of Christ, as much as if any should presume to add any thing to
the Great Seal of England, etc.) These few instances I have inserted in this
small Tract out of Mr. Fuller, who was a famous Episcopal Divine, etc.

Remark the Fifth. Tho King James was looked upon by the Prelates, as no better
than an Arrant Puritan, when he came first to the Crown of England, and was the
first King that ever was proclaimed K. of Great Britain, France, and Ireland,
yet Cluverius testifies of him, That he left the Church of England as he found
it at the Death of Q. Elizabeth, without any Reformation or Redress of
Grievances therein; insomuch, that some (severely enough) describing his Court
and Character, discover much of his King craft, even such as were Eye
witnesses, or Ear-witnesses thereof, and so making good his own Motto ( Qui
nescit dissimulare, nescit Regnare,) He that cannot Dissemble ought not to
Reign. Mr. Fuller tells us, That in his time Archbishop Abbot's stiffness about
the Earl of Essex's Divorce, etc. though it was to his eternal Honor in not
complying with the Bawdy Bishops, yet the King and Court were his Foes for it
ever after; and above all, Bishop Laud (whom he calls Filius ante diem,) sets
himself against him, and as if not content to succeed him, he endeavored to
supplant him, as if a falling Tree stood in need of felling, he being now
exceeding old. Fuller. Chapter Hist. Cent. 17. B. 11. p. 128.

CHAP. IV.
BUt leaving K. James, as he lest his Throne to K. Charles the First, a few
Remarks upon his Reign: As, First, Mr. Fuller tells us, how Bishop Laud (that
grand Master of Ceremonies, etc.) had entered into his Diary, that the
Parliament in the fourth year of Charles the First, Anno Dom 1628. did earr
estly endeavor his Destruction. Cent. 17. Book 11. page 132. In which
Parliament Mr. Pryn charges Dr. Manwaring that he taught (The Consciences of
Subjects are bound to obey illegal Commands, etc. yea, and damns them in case
of Disobedience, etc.) Relating likewise, how Dr. Cozens set up in Durham a
marble Altar with Cherabims, which cost Two thousand Pound, and he made a Gaudy
Cope with the Trinity Embroidered upon it, whereon was God the Father in the
figure of an Old Man, and another with a Crucifix and Christ's In age having a
Red Beard, and a Blew Cap upon his Head, etc. And how this same Dr. lighted two
hundred Wax Candles about his Altar upon Candlemass-Day: And how he forbad
singing of Psalms, but Commanded Anthems to be Sung, and among the Rest, an
Anthem of the three Kings of Colain, Gaspar, Belthazar, and Mclchior, etc. And
how this Dr. procured a Consecrated Knife wherewith to cut his Sacrament Bread,
etc. Ibidem. page 173.

The 2d. Remark. Is that of Mr. Fuller's saying, those high Prelates call (the
Bp. of Armagh. Dr. Usher, D. Morton, Dr. Hall, Dr. Sanders, Dr. Brownrigg, Dr.
Holdsworth,) all those famous Doctors, a Company of Puritanical Bishops, that
were Doctrinal, though not Disciplinary Puritans, who said that the Doctrine of
the Council of Trent, was preached by these Bishops. Fuller. Chapter Hist. page
174.175.

Remark the third. Mr. Fuller relates how the grievances of Archbishop
Williams did much hasten, if not chiefly cause the Suppression of that
Ecclesiastic Court, the Star Chamber, the two Archbishops being therein
engaged against each other, page 159. and likewise how the Convocation in the
Year 1640. had full Commission from King Charles the 1st. either to alter the
old Canons, or to make new ones; which Royal Power had not been granted for
many Years before. Fuller, ibidem. page 168. And how (after that Parliament was
dissolved) the Convocation still sat, wherem to fewer than thirty six of
themselves were Dissenters among them; but their Oath obliged them, that none
should ever give consent to the altering of the Church Government; which Oath
seemed to Abridge the Liberty and Authority of both King and Parliament, who
had a power of alteration when they saw cause for it. Beside, this Oath ( says
he) had a Windy,, [ Et caetera] in it, a Cheverel word, which like a Cheverel
point, might be stretched out at pleasure: This same figure [ etc.] in the
Oath, the Witty Poet Cleveland (my Contemporary in the University) called the
Curled Lock of Antichrist: And tho time was given for Conforming to this ( Et
caetera Oath) until the twenty ninth of September, to deliberate upon it, yet
some over active Bishops (says Mr. Fuller) did presently press the Oath upon
some Ministers, yea, and to take this Bishop's Oath kneeling, which is a
Ceremony (says he) that is never exacted nor observed in taking the Oath of
Allegiance and Supremacy to the King. page 171. And how Dr. Turner in his
Convocation Sermon blamed some Bishops for their being too meek and moderate,
and bidding them, that with equal strictness they would press forward an
Universal Conformity: And indeed they did as he bad them, pushing End-ways this
matter of Conformity, until they set all the Kingdom into a Flame, in the late
Civil Uncivil Wars, etc.

Remark the Fourth. By all the aforesaid (though it be not the Tenth part of what
Mr. Fuller says, etc.) It cannet be wordred at, that so many Nonconformists
(both of the Presbyterial and Congregational Judgment) have separated
themselves from such a Church of England, so Characterized not only by Dr.
Ames, in his fresh suit against Ceremonies; and Mr. Robinsons Justification of
a separation from the Church of England, and the Remonstrance of Mr. Cartwright
Subscribed by a thousand Ministers here in England; beside Zarchy's Epistle to
the Queen at large, all which and many more Authors of that Subject I have by
me: To say nothing of Calvin, Beza, etc. This Mr. Fuller being an Episcopal
Divine, tells Tales enough out of his Church, for which doing, he could rise no
higher than a poor Preb ndary. Let him be Instar omnium, etc.

Remark the Fifth. If any enquire more after the particular Reasons of the
Nonconformists Separation from the Church of England, take this brief Account
as this Tract will admit of, etc.

Reason the 1st. Upon the same ground that the Church of England separateth
from Rome, do we separate from them. Dr. Stillingsteet in his Dialogue for
justifying their Separation from home, says, page 165. [ We think the
Requiring of doubtful things for certain, false for true, new for old, absurd
for Reasonable, is ground enough for us not to embrace communion with that
Church, unless it may be had upon better terms.

Now let the Mouth of this battering Cannon be but turned against the Church of
England, as it is there against the Church of Rome, it will assuredly give as
loud a Report, and do as much Execution for us in justifying our Separation as
well as theirs; Seeing there are Imposed on us, Doubtful things for certain,
etc. And we think this is ground enough for us, as well as for themselves, not
to Embrace the Communion of such a Church: Why may not our ( we think so) be as
good as their ( we think so?) Why may not our Rouland be as good as their
Oliver? What is good Sauce for a Goose, may be as good Sauce for a Gander, etc.

Reason the 2d. A Comparison betwixt the Primitive and the Present English
Church: The Nonconformists find a great many Humane Inventions in the latter,
that were never Divine Institutions in the former; Such as Cathedral Music,
with Organs, Chancellours, Commissaries, Officials, Pompous Prelates, with sole
Power of Ordination and Excommunication, Calling of Ministers without the
express consent of the Congregations, over which they are placed; Ministers
going to Law for their Places, Pluralities, Non Residents, Dumb Curates Simony,
Profane Contemners of Religion made Members of the Church; Carnal proceedings
in Spiritual Courts; Bribes for Ordinations, Citations, Absolutions, and many
more such Additionals of the same Brann, whereof there was not the least show
or shadow allowed in the Primitive Church* Now the Noncons Argue with their
Lord and Master, [ Non erat sic ab initio, nec ab instituto] It was not so from
the Beginning, nor Christ's Institution, therefore our [ we think] steps higher
into [ We are sure] Such Devised Ceremonies as Surplice, Crossing, Kneeling,
etc, ought not to be Embraced, having none of Christ's Mark, but rather of Anti
Christ's upon them, it is a Symbolizing with Rome, etc.

Reason the 3d. A free Assent and Consent cannot be given to such Innovations
wherewith the mere Prudentials of Byassed-Church Governors have spoiled the
naked Truth, and simplicity of the Gospel. What was it but Humane Prudence in
those Corrupter times succeeding the Apostles, that formed new Churches, new
Officers, etc. Wholly differing from those Instituted by Christ and his
Apostles; for then it was pretended, that to keep Peace among the Pastors of
particular Churches, they devised a Bishop to be set over them, and to keep the
Bishops from falling together by the Ears, they Invented an Archbishop, and
because those Metropolitans might possibly quarrel, they found out a Patriarch
to keep them in peace; and lastly, because Patriarchs were subject to the same
Passions with other Men, they from the like Prudentials Instituted a Pope, and
placed him in the Infallible Chair, to overtop them all, and to Hector them
with his Bulls into a due Decorum. The same may be said of all other
unscriptural Additions and Innovations in the Worship of God, both as to
Service and as to Ceremony, etc. Which we cannot have Faith for, being the
Devices of Men, and not the Appointments of God; Now without Faith it is
impossible to please God, Heb. 11.6. and whatever is not of Faith is Sin. Romans
14.23. We may not offer to God, what we think will displease him, and is a sin
against him.

Reason the 4th. The Law of Love and Charity, commanded by God to be the Temper
and Character of the True Church, is by the Church of England changed into a
Law of Uncharitable Compulsion, Severity, and Persecution, which are evermore
the Marks of the false Church; as of the Church of Rome, which by their
mischievous Impositions upon the Consciences of Men, their mere Pretensions,
has filled most Nations of Europe with Bloody Massacres and Martyrdom. Ten
times more Blood of the tenderest Christians has been shed by that false
Church, than was shed in all the ten Primitive Pagan Persecutions: All that
dissent from them, may say, Quae Regio in Terris nostri non plena Cruoris? Is
there any Nation in Europe, that is not filled with our Blood? Now wherever
this Spirit of Persecution turns up Trump, and is Regnant, Raging and
Triumphant, there is like Mother, like Daughter, an Evil Spirit from the Devil
himself, that Envious and Evil one, the Spirit of Cain, who, (as Luther says)
will be clubbing his Brother Abel to the end of the World; it is the Spirit of a
Pharisee that Compels Saints to Blaspheme. Act. 26, 11. and says to that See
of Knowledge (which the Lord has promised shall fill the Earth as the Waters
cover the Sea, Isa. 11.9.) Toms far then shall go in Conformity and no further,
which is only God's Prerogative, Job 38.11. How can we give the Right Hand of
Fellowship to such a Persecuting Church? etc.

CHAP. IV.
REason the Fifth. O here be too many High-flown Churchmen, that do assert
Arminianism to be the Doctrine of the Church of England, thinking thereby to
force all into an Embracement of it: And some do hold up all Canons, not only
made in England, but in Rome it self (if not repugnant to our Law)s laboring
to possess the People, that all these are settled by Law, and therefore to be
continued and imposed without Alteration; and that all who seek a Reformation
of them, do violate the Established Laws of the Land; as the Rigor of
Conformity to those Canons, did cost the casting forth of many able, godly and
useful Ministers, in Queen Elizabeth's Reign, and of many more under King James,
notwithstanding the Conference at Hampton Court; yet many Illegal Canons were
made and Enforced so far to be subscribed unto, that within the space of two
years, 70 worthy Ministers were Deprived ab Officio and Beneficio; and 113 were
Suspended and not suffered to Preach, and about 94 more were under Canonical
Admonition, the next door to Deprivation. I need not add the horrible Effects
which Canonical Obedience, and severe Conformity produced under the Reign of
King Charles the First, such Confusions as turned England into an Aceldama, a
Field of Blood in the Civil Wars, abhorred to be mentioned, and trembled at to
remember, wherein Father was against Son, and Son against Father, etc. -- Quis
talia fando
Temperet a Lachrymis? --


It Is fresh in some of our Memories. Nor need I mention the Reign of King
Charles the Second when the black Bartholomew Act for Uniformity, turned out
about three thousand Ministers from their Ministry, omitting the Exile of many
Ministers and People into America before: Many more Reasons might be added,
which this small Tract is not capable to comprehend; I shall add only one more.

Reason the Sixth. The great Growth of Popery has been ushered in at this
Door, as Adam Contzenus the Jesuit directs, for restoring Popery, before the
People be awake: In his Politics, lib. 2. cap. 16, 17, 18. etc.

His Sixth Rule is, to make use of the Protestant Dissensions, forcing the
Puritans to approve of Bishops, the Magistrate joining with the Conformists,
easily overturns the Nonconformists; as Paul did by the Dissension between the
Pharisees and Sadducees, joining to one Side, he escaped. Discords 'wixt
Lutherans and Calvinists, 'twixt Arminians and Anti-Arminians, are the best
Music to Romanists. These are the finest Tools out of Julian's Shop, and
refined in Machiavels, with his [Divide and Rule:] As the Imposing of Creeds
ushered in the Pope at the first, to end Controversies; so the Imposing of
Ceremonies may again usher in Popery; As bloody Bonner said, If they like our
Pottage so well, we will make them eat our Beef also, etc.

CHAP. V. The Differences betwixt the Brethren of the Presbyterial and
Congregational Judgment, come next to be discoursed.
REmark the First is, when the Reduction of Episcopacy to its Primitive Form,
by that Learned, Humble, Holy, Peaceble and Reverend Bishop Doctor Usher was
tendered, and consented to by Dr. Holdsworth, Dr. Brownrigg, Dr. Reynolds, and
other Learned Doctors; It was greatly hoped, that this would have given
Content: But the high-flown Prelate, neither so Gracious, nor so Learned, nor
such Lovers of the Church's Peace, as was that Learned Primate of Ireland,
broke all the Measures for Accommodations, both at the latter end of K. Charles
l's Reign, and at the beginning of K. Charles Il's Restoration: Hereupon the
Brethren both of the Presbyterial and of the Congregational Way were
constrained to shift, as well as they could, for themselves.

Remark the Second is, at or toward the end of K. Charles I's Reign, before
the Civil Wars broke forth, the Brethren of both those Persuasions, made their
Joint and Humble Applications to the Parliament, that then sat at Westminster,
for Protection and Peace; which though Nonconformity had been for former Ages a
Napthali, wrestling continually for it, but could never obtain it at the
Prelate's Hand, yet now obtains it by God's Graciousness at the Hands of this
Healing Parliament, who indeed did not look upon those two Persuasions, as two
distinct Parties, (This is a mere Misrepresentation of them by capricious
Conformity) they being really and in Truth but one and the same Party, having
only made use of differing Expressions, to declare their own Minds each to
other, and that without Schism, or setting up of Churches against Churches, but
holding Communion one with another in their Members, as they had occasion so to
do, etc.

Remark the Third Dr. Stilling fleet does indeed make the Breach wider betwixt
those Brethren, than it really was, saying, [in his Sermon of the Mischief of
Separation] that the Assembly of Divines urged their Dissenting Brethren to
comply with their Rules of Government, and charged them with Schism if they
refused to do it. All which is a mere Mis-report out of the Papers of
Accommodation, betwixt the Brethren of those two Persuasions: For in Truth it
was not the Assembly of Divines themselves, but only (as one wittily calls
them) a Subter Sub-Committee, who declared something that tended toward the
Allegation, as the private Opinion of some of them (wherein they might be
mistaken) but did not deliver it as the final Determination of the whole
Reverend Assembly. And the Dr. has mis-teported the matter of Fact; for the
Order of Parliament, Nov. 6. 1645. which empowered the Committee to Act,
instructed them ( to endeavor an Union, if possible, of the different Opinions
of the Assembly in point of Church Government; and in case that cannot be done,
to sind out some way that tender Consciences, not submitting in all things,
might be born with, etc.) and the then Dissenting Brethren professed a plenary
Subjection to the Substance of God's Worship, though they differed in some
Punctilio's or small Circumstances of Church Government only. Yea, and after
all the Alterations and Debates, between these two Persuasions in that
Sub-Committee, it was at last resolved, that the Brethren Dissenting in small
points of Discipline, should be Indulged.

Remark the Fourth. As it may not be denied, That some single Persons of both
Persuasions were sometimes too rigid and stiff in their Private Sentiments,
such as Mr. Edwards was in his Gangrena, etc. on the one hand, and such as Mr.
Sterny was in his Deliverance from the Northern Presbytery, on the other hand:
So it cannot but be confessed, There were many more of both Persuasions that
were very learned, and more wisely moderate, instancing only in two of great
Figure among Presbyters, namely Reverend Mr. Thomas Coleman, a Member of that
Assembly, who has this Passage, ( The Presbyterian way, and those that walk
therein, I embrace and love: The congregational way, and those that practice
it, I approve and honor, both are alike to me) See his Epistle to the House of
Commons, to whom he preached upon Job. 11.20. July 30.45. and reverend Mr.
Charles Herle, the Prolocutor to the Assembly of Divines, says thus, ( The
Difference between us and our Congregational Brethren is not so wide as some
suppose; we do but, with Abraham and Lot, take several ways, we are (as Abraham
speaks) Brethren still, and (as they were) ready to rescue each other on all
Occasions from the Common Enemy; our Difference, it is such as does at most but
ruffle a little the Fringe, not any way rend the Garment of Christ; it is so far
from being Fundamental that it is scarce material, etc.) See his Epistle before
his Treatise of Independency. And on the other side, the Prudence and
Moderation of D. Thomas Goodwin, Mr. Jeremy Burroug^, etc. is too well known to
be here inserted.

Remark the Fifth, more particularly, both those Persuasions do agree, (1) in
having only such Officers as Christ himself has appointed, namely, Pastors and
Teachers, Elders and Deacons. (2) Such Spiritual Censures of Admission,
Admonition, etc. for guarding God's Ordinances, and for guiding his Flock, etc.
(3) In liberty of electing their own Church Officers, etc. (4) In a Power to
keep their own Congregations from being leavened, and the Ordinances of Christ
from being polluted by Officers within themselves; and so in many more material
Points, too long here to relate, as may amply appear in the Heads of Agreement
assented to by both. The only main Difference, wherein they disagree, is about
the last Appeal, Whether their Classes or Synods be Authoritative for Censures,
or only Suasory and Consultative, and in Case Advice be not followed, a
Non-communion only proceeds, in Cases too difficult for single Congregations:
This Difference, Reverend Mr. Herle, in his Preface before quoted, most
excellently qualifies and extenuates, as neither a material, nor so much as a
formal Difference; It Is, (says he) but the better or the worse way for the
Exercise of the same Form of Discipline, that is the Question: The [ that it
be] and [ what it be] and [ which it be] is agreed on among us: It Is but the [
whose it be] we differ in; and herein too, not so much [ whose it be] neither,
as [ where it be] whether in every Congregation apart, or of the same Men,
joined with the like of other Congregations in a Synod, etc. And Mr. Herle
there concludes thus, Whatever our Differences be, let not the Devil hold the
Perspective-glass, either to magnify or multiply them: Let us pray them less,
but not argue them more, etc. Unto which let me add from another Hand, That
this Difference about the last Appeal may be compared to that betwixt two
Citizens of London, who contested in Discourse, Which of them two should go
first into the Gates of some Foreign Remote City, as Venice, when possibly
neither of them might ever have any Occasion or Opportunity to go thither, so
far from Home, at all: Accordingly the Churches of Christ may not for many Ages
have any Occasion for this last Appeal; and therefore Disputes about it ought
not to disturb Public Peace.

CHAP. VI. Some General Remarks upon the Heads of this Late Happy Agreement
betwixt the Ministers of both those Persuasions, now Unanimously United in the
transcendent Bond of Peace and Unity of Spirit.
THE First Remark is, Long has this Unity been labored after, even for many
Years, both in City and Country; and tho those Unhappy Differences have been
most happily composed in some Countries, in this Nation, and amicable
Agreements have been solemnly consented unto, and comfortable Communion has
been carried on by Ministers of both Persuasions; as in those two remote
Counties of Cumberland and Westmerland, in the Year 1656. And likewise in
Yorkshire and Lancashire afterward, the former giving Light to the latter:
Wherein, to my own personal Knowledge, that old Rule was not observed, ( If the
Bank will not come to the Boat, the Boat will not come to the Bank, that they
might never meet) for there were mutual Condescensions on both the Bank's-Side
and on the Boat's-Side, etc. Nor may I omit what Light was given to both these
aforesaid by that Christian Concord managed by Reverend Mr. Baxter in
Worcestershire, before either of them, in the Year 1653. Likewise must I
mention that candid Spirit in Apollonius, the Presbyter at Meidulburg in
Zealand, manifested in his Learned and Loving Letter, to the five Authors of
the Apologetical Narration, Tho. Goodwin, Phil. Nigh, Guil. Bridge, Jer.
Burrows, Sydrach Simpson, in the Year 1644. And Mr. John Norton's friendly
Answer to Apollonius in the Year 1645. from New England. Thus this Spirit of
Union has been striving and struggling a long Time for Unity among Brethren, in
the Country, both Foreign and Domestic, and some time has prevailed; but now
( Deo Gratias) it has prevailed in this great City, which, I trust, does bode
better things than Lewis Maimburgh's Method of re-uniting Protestants and
Papists did, first writ in French, and made to speak English in this Day, when
we were upon the very brinks of Popery and Slavery.

Remark the Second. Seeing in Matters of Religion so little is got by wrangling
Disputation, therefore, for the avoiding of that Inconvenience, there ought to
be an Agreement of some Principles on both Sides, wherein they do convenire in
tertio, meet unanimously, as in a Third: Sure I am, such a Cordial and
Christian Concord in all those most Material Heads of Agreement, is the gaining
of a grand Point against the Common Adversary, who depends upon their own
Harmony and our Discord and Distractions.

I cannot find any Reason why I may not, without Vanity, prognosticate good
Things to come from this Happy Unity, considering,

1. How God commanded his Blessing in David's Day, when the two Houses of Saul
and David came up, after eight Years Unnatural Intestin Wars, to dwell together
as Brethren in Unity; it is supposed that at the End of that Discord David
penned his 133 Psalm; after which the Kingdom of Israel flourished more than
ever before.

2. How the two Sticks ( Judah and Israel, which had been a Cleft-Stick ever
after Rehoboam's Reign) became one Stick again, and clave close together in the
Hand of the Lord; tho this was but a poor Stick in it self still, yet God was
pleased to use so slender a thing to very great purpose, as was fulfilled, when
the Jews and many of the ten Tribes returned from the Captivity into their own
Country under Zerubbabel and Ezra, etc. Ezekiel. 37.16, 17, to 28. After which
Unity Gog and Magog (Turk and Pope) are destroyed, Ezekiel. 38, and 39, etc.

3. How that old Fewd betwixt Jews and Gentiles was laid aside by the Kingdom
of the Gospel, the Partition Wall thrown down by Christ's coming: As there was
no Noise of Axe or of Hammer, in the Building of Solomon's Temple, 1 Kings 6.7.
So nor ought to be in the erecting the Gospel Church; and indeed there was no
Noise of Division at its first Plantation, for the Builders thereof were all of
one accord, Act. 4.22. There was Vnitas cordis, oris and operis, Unity of
Heart, Mouth and Practice, etc. Oh how plentifully was the Spirit of Gifts and
Graces poured forth, and what abundance of Converts came in to the Church
daily, and the Gospel ran like a Sunbeam into all Parts of the World, etc. Dr.
Lightfoot notes well, That at this Time all dividing Names were laid aside; in
his Comment upon the Acts, p. 293. I wish, with all my Soul, all dividing Names
might be done away in our Day; as those distinguishing Titles of Presbyterians
and Independants, were Nicknames from Adversaries; let them lay buried in
Everlasting Oblivion: Then may we hope a fresh Vein of Election (the want of
which being so much complained of) might break forth as Life from the Dead, etc.

Remark the Third. I do cordially concur with Reverend Mr. Baxter (whose Parts
and Piety deserve due Veneration) in his desire that Episcopal Men likewise
would lay aside their Prejudices, etc. and come into this Christian Concord,
saying, The distance is not so great, but all these three ( the Episcopal,
Presbyterian and Independent) were they but heartily willing and forward for
Peace, they might agree: I know they might do it, having spoken with some
Moderate Men of all the three Parties, and do perceive by their Concessions, it
were an easy Work, etc. It Is the Shame (says he) of all our Faces, that this
is not done for public good, etc. Mr. Baxter's Gildas Salvianus, or Reformed
Pastor, p. 187. etc. Again (he says) The First has been too fierce upon the
Second, and the Second too severe against the Third, whereas the Truth perhaps
must be gathered from the several Parties, who each of them hold a part of it
in peculiar. See his Christian Concord, p. 95, 96. And again, when God restored
Peace to his Church, All the three shall see their own Miscarriages, and lament
them before the Lord, yea loath themselves for their Emulations, page 101. And
again, excellently, While God is my Master, his Word my Rule, his Work my
Business, and the Success of it in saving of Souls my End, I cannot be silent
to see Souls undone by the Discord of Ministers, etc. See his Reformed Pastor,
p. 199. To which I add, no doubt but there be godly Ministers of that
Persuasion, who are right Protestants, and not tinged with Arminianism,
Socinianism, etc. Not differing from us in Fundamentals, but in Circumstantials
only; Now when the day of Christ's Power comes, that will make all Parties
willing, Psalm. 110.3. this would cause the Concord to be so much the stronger;
for a threefold Cord is not easily broken.

Remark the Fourth. Unity without Verity is rather a Conspiracy, as in the
Builders of Babel, Genesis 11.1, 4. which ended in Confusion; there is no lasting
Concord but in Truth. Herod and Pilate were two Wood-Sticks that were made one
in the Devils Hand ( not in Gods, as Israel and Judah above) to beat Christ to
Pieces. The Union Papists boast of is rather Politic than Real, having vast
Vari^ among them in their most Potent Orders, as Franciscans, Dominicans, etc.
but the Unity which Christ came to establish, does not depend upon Uniformity,
but upon Charity in a Christian, and Candid Forbearance of one another in
Circumstantials: Where there is an Agreement in the Essentials of Worship,
Indisterent things are dispensed with for Unity, Acts 21.24. And this Holy
Unity is called the Consolation, Acts 15.31. The Lord bless us with more of
this Blessed Consolation.

FINIS.

