A Brief Discovery Of a threefold estate of ANTICHRIST Now extant in the world:
viz. A description of 1. The true and false Temple, 2. The false Ministry, and
3. The false Churches. Whereunto is added The Trial of one George Fox in
Lancashire, with his Answer to eight Articles exhibited against him; being sent
in a Letter from Kellet to some friends in Yorkshire. Also, Certain Queries
upon a Petition lately presented to the Parliament from diverse Gentlemen and
others in Worcestershire; necessary to be answered by the Petitioners, who are
said to be 6000 in number.

London, Printed for Giles Calvert, at the black Spread-Eagle at the West End
of Paul's. 1653.

An Epistle to the serious sober Christian, To the Reader.
Christian friend,
THou art not hereby courted into a likeing of this ensuing Treatise, before
thou read it; but rather desired in trying all things, to hold fast that
which is good: it is a small Treatise, wherein some things in it may appear
unsavory to some, and strange to others; yet considering thee to be both sober
and serious, thou know a day of small things is not to be despised; for who
can tell, but thou may find some thing that may be worth thy pains, if thou
read this little book through with an impartial eye? for it cannot receive any
judicial sentence till it be read over: I know it will be exposed to more
enemies then friends; yet what ever thou art, if thou have union with Christ,
or partakest of the Spirit that dwells and appears in the Authors of this
Teatise, then thou will easily discern, and see much of the Scriptures
fulfilled in them; for without controversy the great mystery of Godliness is
manifested and made plain and easy, and is no mystery to all them whose
teacher (in spiritual things) is God alone, by his Spirit that dwells in
them; but it is a mystery still to them that heap up to themselves Teachers,
having itching ears; and yet have not ears to hear what the Spirit says to
their Churches: but the Lord Jehovah will overturn, overturn, overturn this,
and every whole Nation in whatsoever is against and contrary to himself, he
will overturn every false Ministry, and every Hypocritical formal professor*
and he will overturn and throw down the crown of pride in the corrupt
Magistrate, who give commission to, and uphold and maintain the devouring
Lawyers to devour widows houses, by their long suits at the Law, who compel
men to swear and forswear themselves by Law. But now behold the righteous Judge
of all the earth is coming, to plead with the unrighteous judges of the earth,
and will call them to an account for imprisoning his servants, and beating
their fellow servants, and will restore to his people Judges as at the first,
and Counselors as at the beginning, Isa. 1.26. The Lord Jehovah is fulfilling
the Scriptures, in a poor weak despised people, such as the Authors of this
ensuing Treatise be, and will overturn the wisdom of the wise and prudent, by
some weak ones, whom he does stir up to reprehend the greatest and richest
without respect of persons: wherefore marvel not if thou find in this Treatise
sharp reprehensions against a conjuring Ministry, and a hypocritical company
of formal professors, and against an ungodly corrupted Magistracy; but stand
still and see the salvation of the Lord, who will save his people from a seed
of evil doers; for they have forsaken the Lord, and provoked the holy one of
Israel to anger, they are gone away backward, Isa. 1.4. Wherefore the Lord has
a controversy with all these people, and is coming to plead wih them; now
turn and repent O ye false Ministers for your Logic and Sophistry will not
justify you, when Christ will terribly shake the earth (yea and the heavens
also) nor will the gilded forms of the best professors avail at that day: nor
will the unlimited power of the Magistrate avail at that day; for the Almighty
Magistrate Christ is coming to take the government upon his shoulders, and of
the increase of his government and peace there shall be no end upon the throne
of David, and upon his Kingdom to order it, and to establish it with judgment
and with justice from henceforth even for ever; the zeal of the Lord of hosts
will perform this, Isa. 9.6.7.

And thus Reader thou have a taste of the ensuing Treatise. Farewell.

A faithful friend to the faithful, and an affectionate lover, of all that love
the appearing of the Lord Christ in them. Samuel Buttivant.

A Description OF The true and false Temple.
GOd that made the world and all things therein, does not dwell in this Temple
made with hands. Rev. 1.13.
Act. 17.24. neither is he worshipped here, verse 25. he is not worshipped with
men's hands; this is the Idols Temple made with hands, where the worship of the
Beast is upheld, all the beasts of the field they meet here, the night-birds
and the screech-owles; this house is desolate, Rev. 11.9, 10
the Lord is not in it, and your preaching, and praising, and praying, are not
accepted; you offer them up in the first nature (which is Cain-like) living in
envy and wrath one with another; Cain was a murderer, you murder the seed of
God in you, and you will not suffer Christ to have any room at all in your
hearts, Isa. 1.
but there is room for pride, that takes place, there is a room for
covetousness, that takes place, there is a room for lying, that takes place,
Isa. 3.11, 12, etc.
there is a room for swearing, that takes place, there is a room for
backbiting, that takes place, there is a room for double-mindedness, that
takes place, there is a room for foolish feasting, that takes place, and
foolish talking, and pleasure, and wantonness, these take place, Mat. 5.40.
there is a room for malice and revenge, these take place, there is a room for
drunkenness, that takes place with every one, Jer. 15.12.
either to be drunk with wine or strong drink, or to be drunk with iniquity,
drunk in pride, drunk in covetousness, drunk in malice, drunk in oppression,
drunk in scornfulness, drunk in wantonness, drunk in envy, drunk with hatred,
peevishness, and perverseness, and hastiness, and crosness one toward another;
backbiting, lying, and swearing, and earthly mindedness, Ephesians. 5.23.
whatsoever your heart is overcome with it, is drunk; says Jesus Christ, take
heed that your hearts be not overcome with surf fitting and drunkenness, and
cares of this life, all these are fruits of the Devil; and so you sin against
the Lord, and come hither to offer up a little lip-service: James 5.5.
see if something within you, do not tell you, God does require your hearts,
and not your lips; but you live in envy one with another, and the Scripture
says, He that hates is a murderer, and no murderer has eternal life abiding
in him; all these are deeds of the old man, fruits of darkness and
unrighteousness; and know you not, that the unrighteous shall not inherit the
Kingdom of heaven, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. all these are deeds of the Devil,
arising out of the first nature, and every man by nature is worse then a beast;
then your worships in the first nature must needs be heathenish, beastial, and
brutish, all guided by their own wills, Rev. 21.8.
and worship you know not what. John the fourth says, See what reformation is
wrought in you, and what you are changed from, the Lord does require your
hearts; but see when you are here, that your hearts be not in your chests and
coffers, and amongst your cattle, Rer. 22.15.
and in your fields among your corn, and herds', and flocks of sheep, and your
thoughts roving abroad, and then you are serving the Devil, Ephesians. 5.1, 2.
and not the Lord, and your Priests do bewitch you with those things God never
commanded, as to hold up these Idoll-Temples, and tell you it is a house of
God. There was a Temple built, Rev. 14.9, 10, 11.
God commanded Solomon to build him one, but it was but one, and it was but to
serve for a time, a figure for the time then present, and likewise that was
outward; was but to serve for its time, till Christ came which was the
substance, and then the shadow was to be done away; afterward, they who were
made the Temple of the living God, denied all outward Temples, and said that
God did not dwell in them, as Steven did witness, Act. 7.27, 28.29. and he that
professes to be sent of God, and holds up those things that God does forbid,
he is a liar, and lying is of the Devil, he is the Father of lies; likewise
Paul witnesses the same, says, God did neither dwell there, neither was he
worshipped there, Act. 17.24, 15. Paul after calls it an Idols Temple, Amos 8.
1 Cor. 8.10. and Amos said, that the songs of the Temple should be turned into
howling; and Jesus said to the woman of Samaria, John 4.
that they should neither worship at Jerusalem nor at the Mount; which had been
the chiefest places of worship, but said he, ye shall worship at neither of
them, but said he, they that worship the Father, shall worship him in Spirit
and truth; but see what you worship, even the works of your hands; afterward
Jesus said, Mat. 24.
that there should not be one stone left upon another, that should not be
thrown down of the Temple Matthew. 24. That was commanded to be built, and there
was never any other commanded to be built; but these were set up in the time of
darkness by the Papists, and are now upheld; but come out of them, lest ye be
partakers of the wrath of God: for Gods dwelling is in the Saints; the
Corinthians were made the Temple of the living God, 1 Cor. 16.17 etc. Come out
of the Idols Temple, and cease from all your Idol shepherds, that feed
themselves with the fat, Isa. 66.12.
and clothe themselves with the wool, but the Lord will feed them with
judgment; read the 34 of Ezekiel, 2 Cor. 6.17, 18, 19.
and Jeremiah 23. they bear rule by their means, and preach for hire.

A filthy abominable thing, Jer. 5. toward the latter end, Mal. 2. cha.
as these false teachers of Israel did, so do they, and they look for gain
from their quarter now, as they did then, Mic. 3.11. And they are hirelings,
that Christ spoke of John 10. and they act in the same state, as the Scribes
and Pharisees did, which were enemies to Jesus Christ, Isa. 56.10, 11.
they have the chiefest seats in the Assemblies, as they had, and the upermost
rooms at feasts, and greetings in the Markets, as the Scribes and Pharisees
had, which were enemies to Jesus Christ, Mat. 23.
and they are called of men Masters as they were Mat. 23. But Christ did forbid
his to be called Masters; and there was no Masters, Peter no Master, Paul no
Master: and he that professes Jesus Christ, and acts contrary to Christ, he
shows himself to be an Antichrist: there is not a word in the Scriptures of
sprinkling Infants; and these Deceivers call it an Ordinance of Christ, when it
is but a Mark of the Beast. There is not a word that speaks of a Sacrament;
nor to put David's condition into time and meeter, to sing them to the dishonor
of God, not understanding what you do, they are deceivers and blind guides;
cease from them all, and hold them not up. There is not a word in the
Scripture, to put David's condition into rhyme and meeter: sometimes he quaked
and trembled, and lay roaring all the day long, that he watered his bed with
his tears: and how can you sing these conditions (but dishonor the Lord) and
say all your bones quake, and your flesh trembles, and that you water your bed
with your tears? when you live in pride, and hautiness, and pleasure, and
wantonness; hold not up these abominations for shame, as to sing his prayings,
praisings, and prophesyings in a meeter, and to sing lies in hypocrisy, and
say, O Lord I am not puffed up in mind, I have no scornful eye; when thou art
puffed up in scorn and derision, that you can scarce one look at another with any
love in reality, but dissimulation; for you profess love to day, and if your
will be crossed, you will envy and hate to morrow; for shame give over deceiving
and dissembling, God will not be mocked, he is of purer eyes then to behold
iniquity; cease from all your false Teachers, they deceive you, and you will
never be profited by them, and mind your Teacher within, Ier. 31.34. all shall
be taught of God, and Isa. 54.13. Io. 6.46. 1 John 2.27. all the children of
the Lord, are taught of the Lord in righteousness, and they are established in
righteousness, and free from oppression; mind the light within, that shows you
sin and evil, and the vanity of your mind, and your roving thoughts, and
wandering desires, and cheks you when you lie or swear, or do any wrong to any,
and it will not suffer you to do amiss; if ye love that, and yield obedience to
it, it will turn your minds within, and set a watch over all your thoughts,
words and actions, and it will cross your wills; and being led by that light,
it will lead you out of all the ways of the world, and out of all the worlds
vanities, and worships, and delights, and being obedient to the light within,
that does discover darkness, it will lead you up to purity, to holiness, to
uprightness, without which none shall see the Lord (profess what you will) and
there is your Teacher present with you, that light obeying is your salvation,
and disobeying that light is your condemnation.

Houle you proud Priests, the Lord is coming to beat up your quarters, you must
all be called to an account; the son of Thunder is coming abroad to sound
Trumpets, to call to battle against the great day of the Lord, it is coming on
a pace, your Kingdom must be taken from you; the Lord is coming to plead with
all flesh, in the valley of Iehosaphat, by his sword and by fire, and great
shall be the slain of the Lord. Repent, repent, and give over deceiving of the
people, and make restitution to whom you have robbed, in taking tithes* gifts,
and rewards, contrary to the mind and will of the Lord: Alas alas, poor poor
Priests, your downfall is near at hand.

Published by Thomas Aldam. Benjamin Nicholson. John Harwood.


The Idols Temple, where the Beast is Worshipped.
THis is the Idols Temple where the worship of the Beast is upheld, and all the
beasts they meet here, Amos 8.3. Rev. 13.8, 9. Rev. 14.9, 10.11. 1 Cor. 8.10 1
Co. 6.19. 2 Cor. 6.16, 17, 18. Isa. 66.1. Rev. 21.2, 3.
to the dishonor of the only true God, that dwells in Temples made without
hands, who is worshipped in his Temple at new Jerusalem, the City of the living
God, by those who have their Fathers name written in their foreheads, Rev.
14.1. ver. to worship him in Spirit and in truth, for he seeks such to
worship him, Ioh. 4.23.24. verse. Rev. 15.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. verses. Cease from this
hireling, that stands up to deceive you all by his imaginations, Isa. 2.22.
Ioh. 10.

The Lord is coming to beat up your quarters, all ye proud Priests; God that
made the world, dwells not in Temples made with hands, neither is worshipped
with men's hands, Act. 7.27, 28.29.
Act. 17.24, 25. verses; and all the children of the Lord are taught of the
Lord, and shall be taught of the Lord, Isa. 54.13. Jer. 31.34. Heb. 8.10. 1
John 2.27. verses. Down with this Idols Temple, the Saints are made the true
Temples of the living God, 1 Cor. 3.16. Act. 17.24, 25. Jer. 5.30. Jer. 23.
Ezekiel. 54. Isa. 56.9, 10, 11.
Down with this Deceiver, Tythe-monger, and Robber, stealing the words of the
Prophets and the Apostles to sell them for money, to uphold them in pride, and
covetousness, lusts, and excess. Away with them for shame, come down thou
Deceiver, and give over deceiving the people and God, Mic. 3.11.
and make restitution to whom thou have robbed, by taking gifts, and rewards,
and tithes, and confess thy faults to the people, Mal. 2.1, 2, 3 9.
the Lord does require it, sit down and lament in dust and ashes.

Ezekiel. 13. Mat. 23. Joh. 10. Romans 1.29, 30, 31, 32. Ephesians. 5.3, 4, 5. Romans 6.16.
Isa. 1.24. Isa. 3.13, 14. Isa. 6.15, 16. 1 Cor. 6.9, 10, 11. Rev, 21.8, 22.15.
All people that meet here live in pride, and hautiness, covetousness, and
oppression, lying, and swearing, scoffing, and mocking, and drunkenness,
hypocrisy and dissimulation, pleasures, and wantonness, gameing, and sporting,
and all manner of unrighteousness, these are the fruits of the Devil, and his
servants ye are to whom ye do obey: Repent and amend your lives, and forsake
the evil of your doings, the great day of the Lord is near, he is coming to
plead with all flesh, by his sword and by fire, sit down in dust and ashes, and
lament, for the misery that is coming; know ye not that the unrighteous shall
not inherit the Kingdom of heaven? worship not the Beast, fear the Lord God,
and lay aside pride, and covetousness, and drunkenness, lying, and swearing
sports, and pastimes; lay aside your hoods and vails* ye careless daughters
that are at ease; woe is to you, lay aside your silks and velvets, and your
rings, and gaudy attire; and feed the hungry, cloth the naked, and let the
oppressed go free; sit down and lament, the Lord has sent to forwarn you of
his judgments that are to come upon you except you repent, and turn to him
with speed, the Lord is coming to judgment, the glittering sword is drawn* it
is furbished and made fit for the slaughter, to cut down to the ground all
fruitless Trees; he is coming to plead with all flesh by his sword and by fire,
upon all the Children of disobedience, the wrath of God is to be revealed from
heaven in flames of fire, upon all the children of disobedience. Now the
Scriptures is to be fulfilled, Mat. 7.19, Isa. 66.15.16.
iniquity is grown to the height; awake, awake, and stand up to the judgment,
let the time past of your lives seem sufficient, that you have wrought evil,
and now forsake the evil of your doings; pride is abomination to the Lord, away
with it for shame, lay aside your bare necks, Romans 1.18. Romans 2.5, 6 1 Pet.
3.11, 12. Mat. 5.32, 33, 34.
and bracelets, your tricks and toys, and changeable suits of Apparel, that you
make, to make your selves appear beautiful in the eyes of the world, and fear
the Lord God Almighty, Rev. 18.20, 21, 22. Rev. 19.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Isa.
3.18, 19, 20, 21, 22.

Lay aside your curious minds, that feeds upon novelties and dainty dishes,
Dives-like, forget the poor that are in wants, seek them out and feed them, and
cloth them, suffer them not to want; Exo. 9.29. Isa. 24.1. Isa. 26.1, 2. Amos
6.1. Isa. 5.18.
the earth is the Lords and the fullness thereof; lay aside hauking and hunting,
and seek the Lord while he may be found; woe to the crown of Pride says the
Lord God, woe to all drunkards, woe to the swearer and vain talkers; woe unto them
that draw iniquity, as with cart-ropes, adding sin unto sin* lying to swearing,
swearing to foolish talking, adding foolish talking to drunkenness, and
revenge, pevishness and perverseness, gameing and sporting, pleasure and
wantonness, nourishing your hearts as in a day of slaughter: repent, Jam. 5.5.
repent, and have to meet the Lord, by yielding obedience to him, least his
judgments come upon you at unawares, and destroy you all at once; take heed of
making a scoff at this, as you will answer it before the great Judge of heaven
and earth.

Written from the Spirit of the Lord,

Of the false Ministry.
THe Priests of the world are,

1. Conjurers, raising dead Doctrines, dead Reasons, dead Uses, dead Motives,
dead trials out of the Letter, which is death; raising death, out of death: not
able Conjurers, speaking a divination of their own brain. Heb. 7.16. 2 Cor.
3.6, 7. Ier. 14.14. Ezekiel. 13.6, 7, 8.9. Mic. 3.11.

2. Thieves and Robbers, John. 10.1. He that enters not through the door into
the sheepfold, but climeth up another way, the same is a thief and a robber;
such as never came through sufferings in the flesh, through the death of
Serpentine power within, to life, viz. Ier. 28.30, 32. Romans 10.8 9, 10, 11.

3. Antichrists, 1 Ioh. 4.3. such as in words profess the Scriptures to be
their rule, and walk contrary to the Scriptures, A declaration of the eternal
word, are Antichrists; but the Priests of Baal cannot show any
Scripture-command, or example for their heathenish ways, and beastial worships.

4. Witches: such as draw poor creatures from dwelling in waiting upon the pure
light within them, to follow the dreams and fancies of blind guides without
them, bewitch and beguile poor creatures Gal. 3.1.

5. Devils: such as abide not in the doctrine of Christ are Devils, the Serpent
is head in them; but where light is manifested, it does discover the Priests of
the world, that turn their backs from the pure doctrine of Christ, not living
in the life and power of the Scripture, as they did that gave them forth, John
8.24. Rev. 2.10.

6. Liars: such as seemingly preach the truth, not having the faithful witness
ruling in them, are liars: he that says he is sent, and is not called
internally by the Lord, is a liar. The commission and call of Baals Priests
come from Oxford and Cambridge, which they call the Wellhead of Divinity; but
I am sure many corrupt streams issue from thence, and then the fountain cannot
be good: that I can witness, fetching the same commodities, drinking a cup of
the same poisonous fountain: the fountain is filthy, the streams are no better.
Simon Magus would have purchased the holy Ghost with money, the great gift of
the Father; but he missed of his end. Even the Sir Simons of our days run to
Cambridge or Oxford; there they give a large price for something which is a
thousand times worse then nothing, as mountains and bulwarks to keep the pure
seed in bondage. O infinite folly of men, in thinking to buy that Pearl with
money! when as the Lord plainly says, that it cannot be bought with money, Job
28. neither shall it be exchanged for gold: but they not regarding the Lord,
nor what is spoken by him, run with Simon to buy this imbuyable Pearl. Alas,
this University-spirit has no power to open as much as one of the seven Seals:
whatever they can purchase makes them but seemingly pure, but really impure;
notionary creatures, naturals; and the natural man is not acquainted with the
pure language which such speak as are redeemed from the earth. Plainly, such as
these that have no call, but what they fetch and purchase are not Ministers of
Jesus Christ, but Stewards of the devils Magazine, dissemblers and liars, Ier.
5.2. 1 Cor. 12.3. Ier. 23.25. Ezekiel. 13.22.

7. A Viperous and Serpentine generation, going about to murder and strangle
the child Jesus where he is manifested. Herod, under a pretense of worshipping
Christ, sought to murder him: even these bloody Herodians profess love to him
in words, but when he is born and utters his voice, they would devour him;
because he discovers their villainy, holding up a wormeaten beastly form, and
persecuting the power of godliness, Mat. 23.33.

8. Blasphemers, living in the Kingdom and government of the Prince of the
Air, strangers to the guiding of the eternal Spirit in them, speak evil of it
in others, calling it a Spirit of error, of giddiness, yea of the Devil,
fearful blasphemers, John 8.4 8. 1 Pet. 1.4. Rev. 13.1, 5.6, 7. Isa. 5.20.

9. Scarlet-colored beasts, trimmed and painted with the Saints words,
inwarldly full of deceit and self ends, a wel-favoured harlot; having a golden
cup in her hand full of abominations, and filthiness of her fornication, Rev.
14.5.6.7. Rev. 9.2.

10. Babylons Merchants, selling beastly wares for a large price, all the week
time heaping up a rabble of notions into the brain, and comes into the Pulpit;
a penysome market place, where they have good sale for bad ware; this they like
wondrous well, only the first day, called the Lords day, but the Lords day is
a Mystery, they know nothing of it, they sell the report of other men's riches,
the letter which is dust and death, a declaration of the inheritance of these
Saints that spoke forth the Scripture; and likewise of all such as come into
the Saints condition; but the Priests have nothing to do to take the word in
their mouths, but that they must needs be busybodies, that the Scriptures may
be fulfilled, meddling with that which belongs not unto them, for filthy lucre
sake. A cup of trembling and astonishment is their portion, and they must drink
the dregs thereof; long have they had good sale, may be 10, 20, or some 40. s.
a sermon, then sermon making was worth something, when one may buy a better in
Print for 4 d. And they will with their good will compel all men to buy their
wares, take it as it is, not questioning it: and if any man refuse to buy their
wares, and take it as it is, they cry out against them* and brand them to be
Heretics, Schismatics, or New lights. Everlasting praise be to the most High;
he is riding on conquering and to conquer, and coming to grind to powder all
opposing powers, to cleave the rocks asunder, to make the earth tremble, and
the hellish powers quake: the day is coming, when these Idol-merchants, these
costly Sermon-makers, shall howl and cry, Alas, alas, none will buy their wares
any longer: they have been traffiquers too long. Rejoice, O heavens, the
pillars of their kingdom are reeling and shaking, Mic. 3.11. Rev. 18.9, 10, 11.
Jer. 5.30, 31.

11. Whited walls, painted sepulchers, professing something, possessing
nothing, but poisoned stuff fetched out of old Commentators and Heathenish
Authors into their brains; out of that Storehouse they give out such gear as
they have, Matthew. 23.25, 27.

12. Ravening Wolves, evermore persecuting the pure Truth that the Saints live
in. Never was persecution raised against the true Prophets, Christ, or his
Apostles, but the Priests have had a mighty hand in it, and were ringleaders
in that wicked design: and they are as tyrannical now, as ever their
predecessors could be. Where light is manifested, the truth of this will not be
questioned. Ezekiel. 22.17. Jer. 5.30, 31. Matthew. 7.15, 16. Ezekiel. 34.4.

13. Greedy dogs, always contending and striving about great Parsonages, fat
Benefices, large Augmentations: if they have threescore or fourscore pounds per
annum at a place* yet ten pounds more per annum at another place, is a
sufficient call to draw them thither. Really they are bloodhounds, still
hunting and gasping after their prey; like the mouth of hell, never satisfied;
witness their gasping after earthly things: money is their Diana, which makes
them to toss and seek many old Commentators and Heathenish Authors; still
barking and raging like Sodomites against any that delight in purity, and love
the naked Truth, that unmasks their deceits and subtle twistings and windings.

14. Eminent and ambitious Pharisees, living in the same Antichristian steps
that the Pharisees did. That Christ cried out against Pharisees, there are none
can deny it justly; witness their practices, that are unsavory, and
unbeseeming men of such high profession: but as it has been, so it is now; the
highest profession is of the devil: they love to be called of men Masters, not
willingly owning lesser titles: they love the uppermost seats at feasts, to be
pearking in the chiefest places of the Synagogues; they love the greetings in
the Markets; wear long Robes or Gowns, and all to be accounted great, to be
petty Kings, and Rulers over Gods heritage; they lay heavy burdens upon men's
shoulders. Woe, woe, woe, was the portion of those Pharisees then, and woe, woe, woe,
is their portion now, and woe and misery is the portion of the upholders of that
treacherous crew, and deceitful generation; who are the only maintainers of
the seven heads and ten-horned beast. Wherefore, dear friends, dwell in that
which is pure; and come from amongst these Babylonish Merchants, and hear the
voice of Christ within; and I will be your God and you shall be my people,
says the Lord.

Thomas Lawson, one which was a Priest in Lancashire.

Witnessed by the Prisoners of the Lord, at York Castle. Thomas Aldam. Benjamin
Nicholson. John Harwood.


A Copy of a letter to some friends concerning George Foxes trial.
DEar friends and brethren in the Lord Jesus Christ, my dear love unto you all,
desiring you may be kept steadfast in the Lord Jesus Christ, and in the power of
his love, boldly to witness forth the truth as it is revealed in you by the
mighty working of the Father. To him alone be everlasting praise and honor for
evermore.

Dear friends, the Lord does much manifest his love and power in these parts.
Upon Monday last so called, my brother George and I were at Lancaster; there
were abundance of friends from all parts, and a great sort which sided with the
Priests, giving out they now hoped to see a stop put to that great work which
had gone on so fast, and with such power, that their kingdom is much shaken. We
were called before Judge Fell, Colonel West, and Justice Sawer, there to answer
what was charged against George. There were three Witnesses to eight
particulars; but they were much confused in themselves, which gave much light
to the truth, whereby the Justices did plainly see that it was envy; and they
diverse times told them so. One Witness was a young Priest, who confessed he had
not meddled, had not another Priest sent for him, and set him awork. The other
were two Priests sons. It was proved there by many, that heard one of them say,
that if he had power, he would make George deny his profession, and that he had
the Spirit, and that he would take away his life; and this was a single Witness
to one of the greatest untruths that was charged against George. And the
Justices told him, that they saw, because he could not take away his life, he
went about to take away his liberty. There was one Priest made out of the whole
number, as an Orator to plead against us; who spared no pains to show forth his
envy against the truth: and when he could not prevail, he went down in a rage,
and there came up a pack of them into the room, amongst whom was one Iacus.
George being speaking in the room, one of the Justices having wished him, if he
had any thing to say, he would speak: at which the said Iacus was in such a
rage, that he broke forth into many high expressions against the truth spoken
by my dear brother George; amongst which, this was one, That the letter and the
spirit were unseparable: at which, the Justices stood up, and bid him prove
that, before he went any further: but he seeing himself fast, would have denied
it; and the rest of the Priests would have been giving the meaning of his
words: but the Justices would have no meaning, but told him he had laid down a
Position, and it was fit he should prove it: whereat, the Priests were
silenced, and went down in a greater rage then before. And some of them were
asked at night, What they had done? And they lied and said, They could not get
into the room; thereby to hide their shame, and keep the people in blindness.
The Justices, Judge Fell and Colonel West, are much convinced of the truth, and
do much set up justice and equity, and have silenced the rage of the people.
Many bitter spirits were at Lancaster to see the event, but went home and cried
the Priests had lost the day. Everlasting praises be to him who fought the
battle for us who is our King for ever. There were friends called, who the
Witnesses confessed were in the room when the things charged upon George were
spoken: But they all as one man denied that any such words were spoken: which
gave much light to the Justices: for they knew many of them (as they said) to
be honest men, and they durst trust what they witnessed. There was a Warrant
granted out against us at Appleby; but Justice Benson told them it was not
according to Law, and so it ceased: as I hear he is a faithful man to the truth.

The Priests began to preach against the Justices, and say they were not to
meddle in these things; but to end controversy betwixt neighbor and
neighbor; and are not pleased with the Law, because it is not in the Stature
to imprison us, as the Priest that pleaded against us said; and the Justices
bad him go put it into the Satute, if he could: he said it should want no will
of his. They are much afraid that they shall lose all; they are much discontent
in these parts, and some of them cry all is gone. Dear friends, dwell in
patience, and wait upon the Lord who will do his own work, look not at man in
the work, nor at man who opposes the work, but rest in the will of the Lord,
that so ye may be furnished with patience, both to do and to suffer what you
shall be called unto, that your end in all things may be his praise, and take
up his cross freely, which keeps low the fleshly man, that Christ may be set up
and honored in all things, and so the light advanced in you, and the judgment
set up, which must give sentence against all that opposes the truth in ye,
that the Captivity may be led Captive, and the Prisoners set free to seek the
Lord, that righteousness may rule in you, and patience and joy may dwell with
you, wherein consists the Kingdom of the Father, to whom be all praise for
ever.

Dear, friends meet often together, and take heed of what exalts it self
above its brother; but keep low, and serve one another in love; for the Lords
sake let all friends know how it is with us, that God may have the praise of
all.

My dear love to my friend James Nayler.
Written from Kellet October 27. 1652. George is at Lancashire.



George Foxes Charge and his Answer.
1. THat he did affirm that he had the Divinity essentially in him.

Answ. For the word Essential, it is one of your own, but that the Saints are
the Temples of the Holy Ghost, 2 Cor. 6.16 Ephesians 4.6. 2 Pet. 1.4.
and that God does dwell in them, then the Divinity dwells in them, the
Scripture says, they shall be partakers of the Divine nature; and this I
witness, but where it is not manifest, it cannot be witnessed.

2. That both Baptism, and the Lords Supper are unlawful.

Gal. 3.27. 1 Cor. 10.23. Joh 6.34.55.
Answ. As for the word Unlawful* it was not spoken by me, but the Baptism of
Infants I deny; and there is no Scripture that speaks of a Sacrament; but the
Baptism that is into Christ, with one Spirit into one Body, that I confess;
and the Cup which they drink is the blood of Christ, and this I witness.

3. That he did dissuade men from reading the Scriptures, teaching them that
they were carnal.

Answ. For dissuading men from reading the Scriptures, it is false; for they
are given forth to be read as they are, but not to make a trade upon, Heb.
2.11. Ephesians. 5.30.
but the Letter is carnal and kills, but that which gave it forth is eternal,
spiritual, and life, and this I witness.

4. That he was equal with God.

Answ. That was not spoken by me; but he that Sanctifies, and he that is
Sanctified is one, it is God that Sanctifies, and the Saints are all one in
the Father and the Son, they are of his bone and of his flesh* and the Father
and the Son are one, and they are the Sons of God, and they that are joined to
the Lord are one Spirit, and they that are joined to an Harlot are one flesh,
these the Scriptures witness, and I witness.

5. That God taught deceit.

Answ. That is false, and was never spoken by me.

6. That the Scriptures were Antichrist.

Answ. That is false, I spoke it not; but that they which profess the
Scriptures, and live not in the life and power of them, as he did that gave
them forth, this I witness to be Antichrist.

7. That he was the Judge of the world.

Answ. That the Saints shall judge the world, 1 Cor. 6.7, 2, 3.
that the Scripture witnesses; whereof I am one, and do witness the Scripture
fulfilled.

6. That he was as upright as Christ.

Answ. These words were not spoken by me; but that as he is, 1 John 4.17. 2
Cor. 2.21 Ephesians. 4.11, 12.13.
so are we in this world, that the Saints are made the righteousness of God,
that the Saints are one in the Father and the Son, that we shall be like him,
and that all teaching which is given forth by Jesus Christ, is to bring up the
hearers to perfection, even to the measure stature and fullness of Christ, this
the Scripture witnesses, and I witness the Scripture fulfilled in me.

Certain Queries, to the substance of the Worcestershire Petition; very
necessary to be answered by the Petitioners thereof, said to be 6000.
1. THey say we know he granted their Commission (speaking of the Ministers of
the Gospel, taking the Ministers of England in with them) upon the reception of
his Plenipotency; and upon his Ascension gave them for the perfecting of the
Saints, and the edifying of the body, till they come to his fullness, etc. as in
Ephesians. 4.9. to the 15. and has promised to be with them to the end of the world,
to keep them steadfast, that they may not be tossed about with every wind of
doctrine, etc.

Querie I.
Whether ever any of the Ministers now in England, have received the power to
bring up the Saints of God to perfection, as in the 12 verse of the 4 of the
Ephesians. And whether by the Spirit of God dwelling in them, any by them have
been brought up to such a full unity of the faith, and of the knowledge of the
Son of God, even unto a perfect man, and unto the measure of the stature of the
fullness of Christ, yea or no, as in verse. 13.

Querie II.
Whether they think Christ lied, when he said he would be with them to the end
of the world: or do they mistrust Christ, when they petition men to maintain
and uphold them?

2. They say, The labourer is worthy of his hire; and the holy Ghost says, Who
goes a warfare at his own charge? They that minister about holy things, live
of the things of the Temple: even so has the Lord ordained, that they which
preach the Gospel, should live of the Gospel, as quoted by them, 1 Cor. 9. to
the 15.

Querie III.
Whether the Ministers of England, pretending to fight Christ's battle, ought
not to stand to such wages as Christ agreed with them when they were received
into his service, or otherwise give over fighting for him? And whether they
take the good counsel of John to the soldiers, Be content with your wages, as
in Luke 3.13, 14.

Querie IV.
Whether now Jesus Christ has let out his Vineyard only to the Ministers of
England, yea or no?

Querie V.
Whether now Christ only has resigned over his flock to be fed by the
Ministers of England, and they to have all the profit thereof, and rule the
Lambs of Christ at their own wills, yea or no?

Querie VI.
Whether they have any further hope of any thing, but carnal things, for
plowing, sowing, and threshing out their spiritual things (as they call them?)
And whether they will stand to Christ to provide for them, or forsake Christ,
and cleave to the world for relief, seeing none can serve two masters, but they
must forsake the one, as in Luke 16.13.

Querie VII.
Whether these Ministers, and their partakers who go about to establish Tithes
or as great maintenance in their own hands by a Law, are not of a quite
contrary spirit to the Apostle Paul, who says, We have not used this power;
but suffer all things, left we should hinder the Gospel of Christ.

Querie VIII.
Whether the Temple and Altar were not figures of, and shadowed out Jesus
Christ, the substance of all good things? And whether the Gospel of God and
Jesus Christ be not all one? And whether all who serve about Christ, taking him
for their Master, ought to take more from him then he gives them freely,
without being guilty of theft, and put out of their service?

Querie IX.
Whether they ought not to follow Paul, as he followed Christ? And whether or
no Paul followed Christ, when he said, I have used none of these things,
(taking any thing but what was freely communicated to him) neither did he write
to the Corinthians that they should do so unto him; but said, It were better
for me to die, then that any should make my glorying void. And whether these
care for either Christ or his Gospel declaring, so they can but have their own
desires fulfilled with Tithes or yearly stipends of money?

3. They say God has always broken those powers that have disobeyed and abused
their Ministers, quoting 2 Chronicles 36.15, 16, 17. and has severely dealt in
England before our eyes, with that generation of men that silenced, reproached,
and persecuted them.

Querie X.
Whether the late Bishops, and the greatest of the Clergy in England, that
took the late King's part against the Parliament and subjects of England, were
not esteemed the only Orthodox men, by these Petitioners? And whether many of
them that are alive now, be not the only promoters of this Renting Petition
put up in the names of six thousand Worcester-shire-men?

Querie XI.
Whether the Petitioners (if God should bring to condignity their Town-clerks)
would not bestir themselves to raise a new War to uphold them?

Querie XII.
Whether those Messengers and Prophets of God whom the Lord sent, and the world
evil entreated, did ever petition the Powers of the world to maintain and
uphold them? And whether they did at all persuade the Rulers to suppress all
but themselves? or did they ever persecute any? but suffered patiently, and
were persecuted of all.

4. They say, We offer but the same request to you in your places, which Christ
has commanded us to offer to God himself, That where the harvest is great, and
the laborers are few, more laborers may be sent into the harvest.

Querie XIII.
Whether those fools and unwise, think that the Parliament of England be the
Lord of the harvest, which Christ speaks of, Mat. 9.38.

Querie XIIII.
Whether it be not high Blasphemy to take honor from God and to give it to
men? when the Lord says he will not give his honor to any but himself; and
how can those who blaspheam God, ever think to be prospered by him? and whether
for suchlike Practices God will not soon cut off all such false Messengers?

Querie XV.
Whether it be not below the Saints privilege, to Petition or make address
unto Counselors of men, seeing they have privilege make address unto and ask
counsel of the Lord? or whether those who ask counsel of men* believe that God
would hear them, or know what God is?

Querie XVI.
Whether God having sent many Laborers into his Vinyard, they asking nothing
but the Lords wages, a Penny, and not desire it until they have finished their
work, ought to be rooted out of the Vineyard, by the Blasphemous Clergy (as
will be made appear they are) who will not work without the worlds wages? And
whether they can have both the wages of God and of the world, seeing one is
pure and the other polluted and cannot agree together, and whether they can be
once called the Ministers of Christ, which dare not trust him for their wages?

By Ben. Nic.
In the World are Gods many and Lords many, so called; but thou only art our
Lord, and we seek for salvation at none else, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. and in vain is
salvation looked for from the hills, etc. Ier. 3.23.

Farewell.
Mend with your Pen in Letter what is amiss,
Mend by the Spirit in life what Error is.

FINIS.

