A BRIEF and MODEST REPRESENTATION OF THE Present State and Condition OF
IRELAND. 1. March: 1688/9.
Licensed, Febr. 27. 1688/9.

IT is manifest, and well known to all the World, that Ireland (which is
subordinate to, and part of the Dominions of England) has for many years been
kept in Obedience to the Crown of England, by a constant and great Expense of
English Blood and Treasure, the frequent Rebellions of the Irish, and their
many Attempts wholly to extirpate the English, necessarily requiring a
continual supply of Men and Money from England, to support the British Interest
in that Island, which could not be effected without a standing English Army
there.

And it is as plain, that the Irish taking the Advantage of the Reducing the
English Army there to too small a number, and of the Civil Discords at that
time in England, did on the 23 of October 1641, (without cause or provocation)
enter into the most barbarous and bloody Rebellion that ever was known, in
hopes to rescue themselves from subjection to the Crown of England.

And although when that Rebellion was suppressed, the English Government did not
inflict National Punishments for those National Crimes, as in justice it might
have done, but on the contrary, restored near five Millions of English Acres of
Land, to the Irish Papists, which to this day are in their actual possession.

Nevertheless England did not so far forget its proper Interest of keeping
Ireland in subjection, and of protecting and encourageing the English
Plantations in that Kingdom, but that (amidst all the Mercies and Favors it
dispensed to the Irish Papists) a considerable Protestant Army was still kept
on foot, and all Power Civil and Military was put into the Hands of English
Protestants; and herein England was so careful, as to incert a Clause, in all
the Chief Governors Commissions, (even in the Earl of Tyrconell's) not to
dispose the considerable Offices of Trust, except to such as were de Stirpe
Anglicana.

By these Means Ireland grew capable to make some returns to England for its
great Concern and Charge, and the Public Revenue which Anno 1641, did not much
exceed 6000 l. improved to that Degree, that it was farmed at 240000 l. in the
year 1679. and since that time yielded 300000 l. per Annum in some years after,
insomuch, that besides several Considerable English Pensions that were paid out
of that Revenue, King Charles the Second, and the late King James had 30000 l.
per Annum paid to the Privy-Purse for several years together.

But of late, all those solid and Fundamental Maxims have been subverted, the
Conquering English have been put under the power of the Conquered Irish, both
the Civil and Military Government of that Kingdom have been put into the Hands
of Irish Papists, even of such forfeiting Papists as cannot be restored, but by
the expulsion of the English, and whose Interest as well as Inclination, drives
them to endeavor the Ruin and Extirpation of all English Protestants; The
English Army was Disbanded, and the Militia Disarmed, and all the Power of that
Kingdom was under the Administration of such as were Irreconcilable Enemies to
England, and the Protestant Religion, (which, it was much to be feared, was the
Model designed for another place) by those means the flourishing Protestant
Interest was exposed to the Mercy of such Enemies as had given but too many
Instances of their Implacable Cruelty. But as if all this was not enough to
destroy the Protestants, the Irish have of late been let loose, vast quantities
of Arms and Ammunition have been given them out of the Stores, they are every
where Arrayed and Listed, so that there are at least 50000 of them at this time
in Arms, and under Discipline, in Troops, Companies, and Regiments.

This Numerous Army could not be supported without Rapine, Free Quarter, and
all the Exhorbitancies incident to such a Licencious Multitude.

The Consequences whereof are, that Trade in that Kingdom is extinguished, and
that Multitudes of the Miserable English have already been forced to fly to
England, others to flock together in Cities, Towns, and Castles, leaving their
Cattle and Personal Estate exposed to the Mercy of that Ravenous Army, which
have already seized all the Castle in the County of Longford, and above 12000
Head of Black Cattle in the County of Cork, besides infinite Numbers in other
parts of the Kingdom.

In this deplorable Condition are the English Protestants in most parts of
Ireland at this day, every Minute expecting to be Massacred, by their Numerous
and Inveterate Enemies, who are Garrisoned in the very Towns and Cities the
Protestants are fled to for Sanctuary, nor is their danger less of being
starved, though they should escape the Sword, and they are without Question
beggered and undone, though they should, by the miraculous Providence of God,
escape the dangers both of Sword and Famine.

Nevertheless, this Miserable People, even as they are few in Number, in
Comparison of their Adversaries, and destitute of Arms and Ammunition, and
other Means of Defense, have not totally disponded, but rather (like true
Englishmen and Protestants) have raised their Courage as their Distresses
increase, and will not believe but their Brethren in England will send them
seasonable Relief.

And they well hope, that even moderate Assistance from England, if sent before
it be too late, would put them in a Capacity to Live and Defend themselves, and
the Places they are possessed of, until greater Supplies can be sent, which may
enable them to reduce that Nation to a perfect and entire Obedience to the
Crown of England, since the Irish, how insolent soever they are at this
Conjuncture, are nevertheless the same People they have so often Conquered.

And though the Province of Vlster (where the british are more Numerous and
Strong) is in a far better Condition than the rest of that Kingdom,
nevertheless, the Irish not Considering that, nor the Ruin, Desolation and
Famine, that will be the Natural Consequence of their Rashness, do daily
threaten the Destruction of the Protestants, and many of them have proceeded to
that degree of Folly and Insolence, as to Menace, even Invasion of England it
self.

And therefore, I could heartily wish, that that unfortunate Island were buried
in the Sea, but since God and Nature have placed it above Water, in a situation
that may render it so disadvantageous to England, (lying as it does in the Line
of Trade) I must use my utmost Endeavors (as every good Englishman ought to
do) that Ireland may not be a Thorn in our Side, nor prove so fatal to the
Trade and safety of England, as it would certainly be, if the Harbors of that
Kingdom were in an Enemies Hands.

Printed for W. Not in the Pall Mall, 1688.


