A BRIEF RELATION OF THE MOST REMARKABLE FEATS AND PASSAGES Of what his most
Gracious Majesty's Commanders has done in England against the Rebels, and of
His several glorious Victories over them, sithence January 1641. till December
1643. And from the first of May 1644. till the fifth of this present July.

Collected out of several papers printed at Oxford, 1644. And diverse letters
written from His Majesty's Camp to Chester, Bristoll, etc.

I F

RESPICTE VOLATILIA COELI ET FVLLOS CORVORVM



Printed at Waterford by THOMAS BOV^^^ 1644.

IANVARY.
Upon the tenth of this Month 1641 His Majesty, with the Queen, Prince, and
Duke of York, left White Hall, and went to Hampton Court to avoid the danger
of those frequent tumults, then hazarding the safety of his Royal Person.

Upon the 19. of this Month, 1642. a great victory was obtained by the Lord
Hopton near Bodmin, in the County of Cornwall, where was slain in the
pursuit 200. of the Rebels, and 700. taken prisoners (amongst whom was Sir
Shilston Colm^dee) and 8. Colors, good store of Ammunition, and five excellent
brass guns, and one of iron.

Upon the 22. day following, the Lord Hopton assaulted Saltash, forced the
Town, where he took ten pieces of Ordnance, seven hundred more Prisoners,
four thousand Arms, and a Ship with sixten pieces of Ordnance.

Upon the 27. of this Month, 1642. certain of the Rebels under the command,
of Master John Hampden, to the number of 1800. foot, and 7. or 8. Troops of
Horse, with two pieces of Ordnance, came before Brill, and made an assault upon
it: But were so bravely repulsed by His Majesty's Forces there, under the
command of Sir Gilbert Gerrald (the then Governor thereof) that they made all
possible have away, His Majesty's horses having the pursuit of them for above
4. miles, about eighty of them being found dead, and betwixt forty and fifty
men wounded, which they had left together in a private house.

FEBRVARY.
Upon the second of this Month, 1642. Cyrencester, or Cycester) in
Gloucestershire, was taken by his Highness Prince Rupert, with the loss of
less then twenty men of his Army, there being above three hundred of the
Rebels slain, and above twelve hundred taken prisoners, of colors taken, one
Coronet, two of Dragoons, and 14 foot Ensigns, together with all their
Ordnance, Arms, and ammunition.

Upon the 13. of this Month, 1642. the Queens Majesty left the Hague, and went
to Sciveling. And on the 16. day Her Majesty embarked again in the Princess
Royal of Great Britain. And on the Sunday after came within sight of
Flamborough-head.

On Monday, (being the twenty-of-this month) She cast Anchor in the Harbor of
Burlington bay. And the two and twenty day following (upon sight of thousand of
his Excellency the Earl of Newcastles Horse) landed at Burlington Key.

The 24. day in the morning, four Ships and a Pinnace, in the Rebels service,
(which came overnight into the Road) made above one hundred great shot at the
houses in the Key, for two hours shooting Crosse-barre-shot, and bullets of
twelve pound weight, all of them aiming so near as they could, at the house
where the Queen lay. Insomuch that Her Sacred Majesty was forced to make what
have. She could out of Her Bed, and to get under an hill to save Her life from
the fury of these bloody Rebels, who endeavored to murder Her. But God
Almighty preserved Her Majesty both by Sea and Land.

MARCH.
On the eighteenth and nineteenth of this month 1642. was a great battle on
Hopton-heath in Stafford shire, wherein Gell and Brereton (two cowardly Rebels)
were routed by His Majesty's Forces under the command of the Right Honorable
Spencer, then Earl of Northampton, in which fight, above three huddred of the
Rebels were taken and killed; at the least 500. more wounded; above 300. of
their horse taken, eight pieces of Canon, with a great deal of their
Ammunition; and the most Noble and valiant Earl of Northampton unfortunately
slain.

Upon the 23. of this month, 1643. Gramham was taken in, by some of His
Majesty's Forces under the command of Colonel Charles Cavendish: wherein was
taken three hundred and sixty prisoners withal the Captains, and Officers,
three foot Ensigns, two Cornets, together with three loads of arms and
ammunition. And afterward the works demolished.

APRIL.
Upon Monday the third day of this month, one thousand six hundred forty
three, Prince Rupert entered, and possessed that seditious Tower of Burmingham,
wherein was three hundred foot, and two Troops of Horse, who being gallantly
charged by the Welsn-men, in less then half an hour, forsook their
Breast-works, and retired to their Barricadoes within the Town, wherein they
found such slender defense, that they took them to their heels, and that so
fast, that though they were pursued as soon as the Prince had possessed the
Town, yet few of their Horse were overtaken, only about eighty of the Rebels
were killed, and as many Prisoners taken; together with about one hundred and
fifty muskets, and betwixt four and five hundred swords, and three Colors.

Upon the eleventh of this month 1643. there was a fight near unto Ancaster
in the County of Lincoln, betwixt the Kings Forces under the command of
Colonel Cavendish, and the Rebels of that County, under young Hotham (their
General; in which fight the most part of the Rebels were slain, and taken
prisoners, their General put to flight, and their whole body totally routed.

On the one and twentieth day (being Friday) the Close at Lichfield was yielded
up to Prince Rupert, together with the Ordnance and Ammunition, all sorts of
arms (except the Horse-mens arms, and a certain number of Muskets) and all
such Treasure which had been formerly conveyed in thither and did not properly,
belong to the Soldiers there. These soldiers were part of those Forces under
the command of the late Lord Brook (a great Leader in this Rebellion, and a
malicious enemy to the Church) who was killed in his assaulting this Church by
a shot into the eye, on Saint Chads day who was the first Bishop of this See,
in memory of whom this Cathedral was built, and called Saint Chads Church.

Upon Sunday (the last of this month, 1643.) his Excellency the Earl of
Newcastles Forces, encountered with, and totally routed a whole Body of the
Rebels (consisting of above three thousand men) which were going to relieve
the Town of Leedes, killed fifteen hundred of them in the place, took two
hundred and forty prisoners, three pieces of Ordnance, together with all their
victual and Ammunition.

MAY.
Upon Saturday being the 6. of this moves, 1643. James Earl of Northampton,
the true heir of his fathers loyalty and valor, encountered with a Body of
the Rebels in Middleton-Cheney, Town field near Banbury (consisting of (...)
hundred foot, and five Troops of Horse) where he wholly routed their Foot^
(...) two hundred and seventeen upon the plain, took above three hundred
prisoners, all their Ordnance, and Ammunition, 416 Muskets, 150. piques, and
above 500. swords, pursued the fugitive horse, and killed, and took many of
them: the rest made what have they could to Northampton. In this fight his
Lordship lost but three men, and those not of any note: Nor had above one
Officer so much as hurt.

Upon the 16. of this month, 1643. the Lord Hopton assaulted the great
rebellious Body then entrenched near Straton, on the borders of Devonshire,
fought with them full ten hours; and having spent his ammunition, insomuch
that he had not Powder left to serve one hour longer, fell upon the Rebels
with Swords, Piques, and Musquet-stocks: And? with unexpressible valor) wholly
routed the Rebels Army, killed many hundreds of them in the place, wounded many
more; took 1700. prisoners, whereof above thirty Commanders, all their canon,
being eleven pieces of brass Ordnance, and four of iron; two mortar pieces;
75. barrels of powder, with shot and match proportionable; betwixt two and
three thousand arms: and three thousand pound in money; there being not above
46. of the Kings Forces killed and hurt, and amongst those not any one
Commander or Gentleman of quality.

Upon the 20. of this month, 1642., it was voted by both Houses, That the King
intended to levy war against the Parliament: which they did on purpose to
excuse themselves, for raising a Rebellion against His Majesty, as appeared
within few days after.

JUNE.
Upon the eighteenth of this month, 1643. His Highness Prince Rupert beat up
the Quarters of the Rebels at Postcomhe and Chinner in Oxfordshire, killed
some fifty of the Rebels there Quartered, took about 120. prisoners, almost
all their horses and arms, and three of Sir Samuel Lukes Dragoon-Cornets:
obtained a great victory in Chalgrove field, and utterly defeated the Rebels
horsemen and dragooners, slew diverse of their Commanders, especially Colonel
John Hampden (one of their five Members accused of High Treason) who in this
fight received his mortal wound in this very Chalgrove field, where he first
mustered, and drew up men in arms to put in execution the Rebellious Ordinance
for the Militia.

On Friday the last day of this month, 1643. his Excellency the Marquess of
Newcastle obtained a great Victory against the Northern rebels, under the Lord
Fairefax, upon Aderton heath, within the County of York. In which fight, my
Lord, soon put the rebels into such confusion, that they could not be reduced
again into any Order; until he had gained all their five pieces of Canon;
which he presently turned against them; the sight whereof did so terrify them,
that they made what have they could toward Leedes. But finding that his
Excellencies Horses had intercepted that passage; their last shift was to
recover Bradford, which was done in such a disorderly manner, that his
Excellency in the pursuit of them killed and took above two thousand, whereof
above fiften hundred prisoners. As for their General Fairefax, he with much
ado made shift with one poor Troop of Horse to get (at night) into Leedes,
leaving the rest to the mercy of the Victor.

IVLY.
Upon the first of this month 1643. the Marquess of Newcastle besieged
Bradford, (...) upon it above forty shot from his great Artillery; and the
morrow after (...) himself master of the Town. In which he took ^000.
prisoners, with all the horse, arms, and ammunition, which either the Rebels
found in the Town, or brought thither with them.

Hereupon the Rebels deserted the Town of Halifax, and presently after Sir
Hugh Cholmley fell upon Beverley, and took it for His Majesty.

Upon the second of July 1642. the Kings ship called the Providence, landed in
the Creek of Kenningham, till which time His Majesty had not a barrel of
powder, nor any arms, or ammunition whatsoever.

July the fifth 1643 there was a fight on Landsdowne-hill, betwixt His
Majesty's Forces under the command of the Marquess of Hertford, and the Rebels
under Sir William Waller; who (after eleven hours fight) stuck their
lighted matches in the hedges, and ran quite away; leaving behind them above
five hundred muskets, fourteen barrells of powder, a whole Stand of Piques,
with good store of all sorts of arms. Their Foot were absolutely routed, and
all dispersed: his loss of Officers and Horse very great, many hundreds of his
men killed; His Majesty's Forces having the Pillage of the Field. And here was
that most valiant Knight Sir Bev^ll Greenvill unfortunately slain in the Front
of his men.

July the twelfth 1642 the pretended two Houses Voted, That the Earl of Essex
should be General of their Army, and that they would live and dye with him.

The thirteenth of this month, 1643 about four of the clock in the
afternoon the King and Queens Majesty met at Edgehill, where the Rebels had
received their maine overthrow: and the same day and hour His Majesty's Forces
under the command of the Lord VVilmot Lieutenant General of the Horse, the
Earl of Carnarvon, the Earl of Craford, and the Lord Byron obtained another
great and strange Victory upon Round way-downe, with fifteen hundred Horse, and
two small pieces of Canon only: wherewith they totally routed the Rebels army
under the Command of that old-beaten Soldier Sir William Waller, consisting
of above 2500. Foot. and 2000. Horse, besides 500. Dragoners, with eight pieces
of brass Ordnance: slew six hundred of them in the place, took above nine
hundred prisoners, all their canon arms, ammunition, wagons, baggage, and
victual 28. foot-ensignes, nine Coronets, and left not one Rebel, but what
was either killed, taken prisoners, or narrowly escaped.

Upon the fourteenth day of this month, 1643. his Highness Prince Rupert
having joined his Forces to his Brothers, and the whole body of their strength
being brought together, they sat down before, Bristol, and began their
Batteries. And the 26. day (with unexpressible valor) they gained the
Outworks. And the 27. day following the City and Castle were delivered up to
His Sacred Majesty, with all the Ordnance, arms and ammunition.

AUGUST.
The first of August, 1642. the Earl of Essex caused all the men then raised
(being in number about 10000 to be committed to Officers, and divided into
Regiments, which men had been raising ever since the 12. of July 1642. at which
time he was made General of the Rebels.

Upon the third of August 1643. Corf-Castle in the Isle of Purbecke (which had
been so often before besieged by Sir Walter Earl) but had always beaten off
the Rebels, and killed their Canoniers, was once more fallen upon by the
rebels, who were so bravely received by Captain Laurence, that sixty of them
were killed in the place: the rest hearing of the most valiant Earl of
Carnarvons approach, ran away.

Soon after, the Earl of Carnarvon summoned Dorchester, which was thereupon
delivered up to his Lordship, with all the arms, ammunition, and canon: which
were disposed of, for his Majesty's use.

About the ninth of this month, 1643. the Castle and Isle of Portland were
reduced again under His Majesty's command; And the Town and Haven of
Weymouth, and Melcombe, submitted to His Majesty.

August 20. 1643. Colonel John Digby defeated the Rebels of Biddeford and
Barnstable, killed 100. of their Foot, took 211. Officers and common Soldiers
Prisoners, (most of which were miserably wounded) two pieces of Ordnance, six
barrels of powder, 400. weight of bullet, 200. and a half of match, and above
300. arms; besides all the Foot-Officers horses: Pursued their Horse to the
very works of Biddeford, and returned victoriously, without the loss of more
then one man, not one of the rest of his Soldiers being so much as hurt all
that day.

August 22. 1642. The King set up his Standard Royal at Nottingham, for
raising of Forces to suppress the Rebels then marching against him.

About the latter end of this month, 1643. The Inhabitants of Tenby in
Pembrook-shire, having but newly made an agreement amongst themselves, in which
they declared their loyalty to His Majesty, and that they would submit to His
Majesty's Authority, placed in, the Earl of Carberie, etc. Eight Ships rode
before the Town, and made at least 100. shot thereat: whereupon one of the
Haven-Canon was fired, which shot one of the best of the eight through and
through, and so set the rest a packing; whereby the good people of Tenby
received no harm. And soon after the whole County was reduced, so as all
Wales is absolutely in subjection to His Sacred Majesty.

SEPTEMBER.
Upon the second of this month 1643. the Towns of Biddeford and Appleford
delivered up their several Garrisons to His Majesty's Forces, under the
command of that Noble Colonel John Digby* And about the same time the Garrison
of Barnstaple submitted themselves unto His Majesty, and dismissed all their
Forces formerly raised for the defense of that place.

Upon the third of this month, 1643. his Highness Prince Maurice gave a very
not assault upon the City of Excheter, battered the walls, and fired a great
part of the Suburbs, whereupon the Rebels desired Parley in which the Prince
offered them such Conditions, as had been given before to Bristoll, which they
denied. The assault was afterward eagerly pursued, and the next day after won
the great Sconce, ^urned the Ordnance there against the Town. Whereupon the
Rebels craved to be admitted to those Conditions which before they rejected,
and obtained the same, delivered up the Town and Castle to the Prince his
Highness, with all the Ordnance, Arms, and Ammunition.

upon the 17. of this month, 1643. The rebels Army (stealing out of
Gloucestershire toward London) were overtaken by Prince Rupert with his
Majesty's Horse, near Auburne in Wilt-shire, where he gave them two charges,
the one by a commanded party under Colonel Vrrey, the other by the Queens
Regiment, commanded by the Lord Iermyn, who performed it so well on the Rebels
whole Army, that many great bodies of Foot were routed, and many of them slain
in the place without any loss to His Majesty's Forces, save two common
Soldiers killed, and the Marquess de la Vieu-ville taken prisoner, (who was
afterward murdered by the Rebels in cold blood) and the Lord Digby and Lord
Iermyn lightly wounded: by which two charges the Rebels Army was so retarded,
that His Majesty had time to overtake them with his Foot. And on Wednesday
after (the 20. of this month) upon an Hill near Newbury and Enborne heath)
His Majesty fought with the Rebels who were seated in the most advantageous
place imaginable: yet in despite of (...) their Canon, Foot, and Horse, His
Majesty beat them from their ground; gained the hill, and one piece of their
brass Ordnance, and quickly routed all their Horse upon the Heath. The most
that were killed in this fight of His Majesty's Forces exceeded not the number
of 300. though above 600. of the Rebels were slain, and a very great number
wounded. In this fight were slain the most Noble and Valiant Earl of
Carnarvon, the Earl of Sunderland, the Lord Viscount Faulkland, with diverse
other Gentlemen and Commanders. After this fight the Rebels were further
pursued, and routed again, so as they fled into Reading, where they durst not
stay but left the Town for His Majesty, in whose possession it is.

OCTOBER.
Upon the 18. of this month, 1643. the Prince of Harcourt Lord Ambassador
Extraordinary from the French King and Queen Regent, (after he had been most
barbarously used in his Passage by the rebels) came safe into Oxford, where he
had entertainment more suitable to the worth of so great a personage.

The 21. day following (being Saturday) His Majesty attended by the Prime
Nobility of England) gave him Audience in Christ-Church-Hall.

Upon the 23. day of this month, 1641. was that signal great battle fought
between Keynton and Edgehill by His Majesty's Army, and that of the rebels
led by the Earl of Essex: wherein the rebels lost above 70. Colors of
Coronets and Ensigns, and His Majesty but only 16. Ensigns, and not one
Coronet. The exact number that were slain on both sides in this Battle is
not known: But it is certain that the rebels lost above three for one. Men of
eminency, of his Majesty's Forces, who were slain in the battle were the two
Noble and Valiant Lords, Rober^ Earl of Lindsey Lord High Chamberlain of
England, and George Lord d'Aubigney brother to the Duke of Richmond and Lenox,
Sir Edmund Verney Knigt Marshall to His Majesty, with some other worthy
Gentlemen and Soldiers, but besides these three named, there was not one Noble
man or Knight killed, which was an extraordinary mercy of Almighty God,
considering what a glorious sight of Princes Dukes Marquesses, Earls,
Viscounts, Barons Knights and Gentlemen of all Orders, were not only present,
but engaged themselves against the Rebels as much or more then Common
Soldiers, which they most cheerfully did by example of His Sacred Majesty,
whose Royal undaunted courage put life into every man, exposing His Sacred
Person to so much danger as all good men do tremble to remember. His Royal
Sons CHARLES Prince of Wales, and JAMES Duke of York, being also in the
field in very much danger, if God (whose cause it was) had not covered their
heads in the day of battle. The Rebels as they had few men of quality to
lose, so those they had, were sensible of their guilt which then they expressed
by their slight some sculking into holes and Saw pits, and others running out
before they were well in the field.

NOVEMBER.
Upon the 12. of November, 1642. His Majesty after 4. hours fight forced the
Town of Brainceford, killed and took prisoners all the Rebels Forces, which
were there lodged in Works, Ditches, Houses and Hedges, to hinder the passage
of His Majesty's Army.

The morrow morning after (being Sunday) certain of the Rebels had come down
the Thames from Kingston, with 13. pieces of Ordnance which (so soon as they
could see) they fired against Sion house, and His Majesty's Train of
Artillery; but did little or no harm. Whereupon Order was presently given for
drawing down some Pieces into the Meadow, and to the Riverside against them;
which was accordingly done: and likewise a Demi-canon planted near the South
end of the Town. All which were so judiciously plied, that they shot through
their Boats and Barges, and at last fired the Powder in one of them, which blew
up diverse of the Rebels. Those Rebels which escaped, took them to their
heels, leaving behind them their mangled Boats and Barges, with all their
Ordnance, and the remainder of their Ammunition, on which His Majesty presently
seized, and afterward made an honorable and safe retreat to the City of
Oxford.

DECEMBER.
On monday the 5. of this month, 1642. His Majesty's Forces, under the command
of the Lieutenant General VVilmot, having his own Regiment of Horse, with the
Lord Grandisons, and Lord Digbeys, and Sir William Pennymans, and Colonel
Blagues Regiments of Foot, and Colonel Vshers, and Colonel Grays, of
Dragoones, took the Towns of Marlborough, defended by Robert Ramsey (a
Scottish man) and about 500. Foot; Ramsey and diverse of the chief Rebels
brought Prisoners to Oxford; all their Arms taken, and four Colors.

Here thou have the first fruits of my endeavors, expect the pursuance
shortly. For a close, I desire all his Majesty's most loyal Subjects to take
notice, that the Rebels having given Order to counterfeyte the GREAT SEAL OF
ENGLAND, did on Friday the 29. of September last, cause this forged Seal to be
brought into their House of Commons, at which time it was approved by them, and
caused to be put into a purse, and left with the Mace, till they could get
their Lords to pass it, who no doubt ere long (by the Lord Says diligence)
will Vote it in their House also. For since they have expressed their impudence
to accuse Her Sacred Majesty of no less then high Treason, only for
endeavoring to preserve the Kings Majesty, whom they labored to Murder, we
cannot imagine they will stick at any thing. But that all good people may know
this counterfeit Seal, they may please to take notice, that though it has His
Majesty's Image and superscription, yet it has the year 1643. which figures
do distinguish it from the true Seal now with His Sacred Majesty at Oxford.

S. MATTHEW. 22.20, 21. And he said unto them, whose is this Image and
superscription? They say unto him Caesar's. Then says he unto them, Render unto
Caesar the things which are Caesar's.


FINIS.
A CONTINVANCE OF THE ENGLISH NEWS, And especially what noble exploits has
been acted by His Majesty's Army, but chiefly in the months of May and June,
1644. taken out of se verall letters written from Chester, the eighteenth of
June, 1644.
Sheusburys Rendezvous.
SIR,
On the 16. of May, Prince Rupert advanced with his Army toward Lancashire,
consisting of 2000. horse and 6000. foot, or above (as is supposed) drawn out
of the Counties, of Hereford, Worster, Stafford, Shrop shire and Chester; After
ten days march, by reason of the roughness of the ways and weather, we came
to Stopford a large village in the confines of Lancashire, manned with the
enemy, with fortifications, saving a river with banks and a bridge deviding
Cheshire from Lancashire, there the Prince intended to quarter that night,
which after a little dispute from hedges and ditches upon an universal assault
was abandoned by the enemy, who fled toward Manchester some six miles distant,
and by rea son the Sun was down the night made way to their escape, though
they were pursued a great way and as was belieeved no man lost of either side,
the goods of the Town was the Soldiers reward. Upon the 28. of May, the Army
marched toward Bolton, a large Country Town in Lancashire some 16. miles
from Stopford as we marched, manned Likewise with 4000. men (as was informed)
there the Prince intended to quarter that night only; gates and highways
fortified lightly; the rain was so immoderate that it cost an hour or two to
dispute, but being (...), it was taken with the (...) a thousand men of the
enemy, in the streets and fields, above twenty Coulors, six hundred prisoners,
fifty Officers, twenty barrells of Powder; March and Arms a great quantity;
the Town, the Soldiers reward. As we lay in the Country about Bolton
General Goring with his Northern Army partly from the Marquess of Newcastle,
partly from Newarke consisting of five hundred horse, and eight hundred foot,
not so well appointed as was expected, with a great drove of Cattle out of the
enemies quarters, as they marched; all this while great number of horse and
foot resorted to the Prince, brought in by the Earl of Darbie's means, and
Sir Thomas Tinsley, but unarmed most of them. Wigin a large town some twenty
miles from Bolton received the Prince and his Army with great tokens of joy;
the streets being strowed with rushes, flowers and boughs of trees.

June 7. We pitched before Leverpoole with our whole Army, having beleaguered
it with our horse the day before, it had made walls with bars and gates;
foureten pieces of Ordinance, a thousand Soldiers (as was supposed) the matter
was disputed very hotly until the tenth of June, with musket and great shot
without measure out of the town, and from the ships, upon whch day our line
approached within a quoites cast of the gate, where our great shot had almost
filled the ditch with the ruins of the sodd wales, and about noone a furious
assault was made by our men where a terrible fight was on both sides about the
space of an hour upon the works, the enemy resolute, ours not seconded
retreated with some loss, the enemy whether dispairing of relief or of their
own strength against so great power, at mid night shipped themselves, the
chief of their men and goods and left twelve Colors on the works, hoised
sail and rod within half a league of the town, which Colonel Tiller
perceiving, having the guard next the sea, supposing the enemy to be gone,
entered the Town with little or no resistance, found about 400. of the meaner
sort of men whereof most were killed, some had quarter: foureten pieces of
Ordnance left upon their carriages at their batteries, whatsoever was desirable
was the Soldiers right for their hard service: twenty and six vessels without
tacklings were left in the harbor.

June the eight, Colonel Goring and Colonel Marrow cut off a party coming
from Warrington to Leverpoole ^wo Scotts Majors taken, many killed.

Chester the second of June, 1644.
SIR,
The first letter from the Governor assured us of the Princes taking Stopford,
where he dispersed two thousand of the Rebels forces being Cheshire and
Lancashire men, and gave the plunder to his Soldiers, slighted their works,
and the next day marched into Lancashire without any opposition, the other
letter Dicke Green brought who came from Latham yesterday wherein the
Goveruour assured us of the Princes taking Bolton, wherein were three thousand,
which upon the Princes coming into Lancashire raised from Latham, and came
thither under the Command of Righy, His Highness sent to summon it and they
basely put to the sword his messenger, whereupon he charged into the town
himself with his ^ of some sixty men, the greatest of any quality being a
Captaiue Lieutenant to Robin Ellis, took the town, killed dead upon the place
above twelve hundred, took seven hundred Prisoners, and two thousand Arms, it
being a very rainy day the Soldiers went up to their very works, and beat them
off with their swords and their but-ends of muskets, the Foot behaved
themselves very well, having been beaten off twice, and took it the third
time, we took two and twenty Collors from the Rogues, Sir Thomas Tyldesly the
very day after his coming into Lancashire recruited his Regiment from three
hundred foot to twelve hundred, which came unto him well armed. My Lord of
Derby upon Friday had a muster at Ormes-Church, wherein came above three
thousand men, and most of them Armed, and tendered their services to live and
dye with him. Sir Gilbert Haughton being high Sheriff of the County, the
County comes in great numbers to him. My Lord Mullineux daily recruites his
Regiment about Leverpoole.

Sir Thomas Tyldesley got leave of his Highness to go to Preston with 2000.
Foot and five hundred Horse where he does not doubt but to cut off the File
where his own and great many other that are Roman Catholics have estates
upon Friday the Prince received an express from my Lord Marquess of
Newcastle intimating that he sallied out of York, beat up a Quarter of the
Scotts, killed and took many and amongst the rest the chief officer next in
Command to Leasly and farther assured his Highness that he had execution of
them for some miles, and had so scattered their whole body that there was not a
thousand to be seen in a place. Hull stands neuter, they will neither deliver
up their town to the Lord Marquess of Newcastle, nor to the Scots, these two
are only Dicke Greenes news, and that the Prince intends to stay till he
reduces Lancashire, being my Lord Newcastle has no present occasion for his
Highness that may countervaile the service he may do His Majesty in
Lancashire; I should have been very glad the Governor had but touched on it in
his letter, but howsoever take it as I have it, and his oath and credit that it
is true.

From Oxford, Essex is at Abington with 10000. horse and foot, and Waller at
Farrington in Barkshire with 7000. horse and foot, they come up to the very
walls of Oxford, and skirmishes daily, yet it is conject^^ed they will have
nothing to do with Oxford, but intend for Bristoll and the Welt, whether my
Lord Hopton is gone. Denbigh is before Rushon-house and all our forces in
Namptwitch are drawn out to him, they say he intend, either to fall on,
Sherewsbury or Bridge-North, Wemn Forces the other day took all Sir Foulkes
Hunckes carriages, upon the Prince declaring Sir Abram Shipman Governor of
Osestery, Colonel Loyde and all the forces quited the Town and disbanded,
whereupon the Townsmen and Wemn forces were upon some terms, and certainly
we had lost the Town, had not Colonel Marrow marched thither as he did,
four hundred foot and horse of the enemies being three miles of Wemn and the
Townsmen stood above an hour considering whether to let Marrow in or no, but
at the last received him, he stayed some three days there, and has settled Sir
Abraham Shipman and his Regiment, and brought yesterday two Lievtenants, and
about forty common Soldiers prisoners which he took of Wemn since he went,
besides many that he killed.

The present state of the Armies in England.
PRince Ruport has in Lancashire besides the taking of Bolton and Leverpoole,
taken Colonel Shutlerworth prisoner with him, and defeated about 1000. men who
followed the rear of his Army as it marched, he is now at Sheffield expecting
the coming of Sir Philip Musgrove with the Cumberland men. The Marquess of
New Castle is drawn out of York into the field, and Goring is gone with 3000.
horse, to join with him till the Princes coming up; The Scots are admitted to
Hull, and the loss which was of men fell only upon Fairefax, and Manchester,
the Robells have taken Oswaldstree, and the Castle there, but the Kings Forces
are come before it with 2500. men, and more are drawing against it daily: the
Lord Denby is in it with about 1000. men they sent away the plunder with a
Convoy to Wenm which was intercepted by Colonel Marrow and the convoy cut off,
and the news goes they having discovered the word by some of the prisoners,
marched thither, and passing the sentinel, forced the guard, and have taken the
town of Wenm which they have burned.

The King is now at Oxford: in his return to Oxford he was set upon by Waller
at Burham on wednesday the 20. of June he having about 5000 horse and
dragooners Sir Arthur Ashion was drawn thither with about 3000. foot to
assist His Majesty, and there fighting with Waller, they have routed him and
killed 1000 upon the place, Waller and the rest retreated to Gloucester Waller
had before that time attempted Worchester and stayed before it two days, but
was beaten off, with loss only, gave occasion by his sitting down there to
the Governor to burn the suburbs of the City where many fair buildings were.

Essex is drawn down toward the West with the foot and canon where we hear
for certain my Lord Hopton is ready to receive him with a good Army, and
Prince Maurice who is yet before Line is ready to join with him, but we
hearing nothing as yet of their proceedings: Colonel Gerret has beat the
Rebels out of Carmarthenshire, and Pembrockeshire into the the Towns, of
Pembrocke and Denby.

Sir Thomas Lunsford, and Colonel Gage, wh^^en the King was at Worcester
marched into Bukinghamshire plundered all the County, and have driven all the
cattle to Oxford, Sir John Mences is drawing out all the forces of the
Counties of Anglesy, Carnarvon, and means to march and join with Marrow, for
the regaining of Oswaldstree.

July the third, We hear since by certain intelligence, that Colonel
Shutlerworth is killed and was not taken prisoner, that the Scotts are not
admitted to Hull, and that Colonel Marrow has taken the Church of
Oswaldstree, but the Rebels hold the Town, and Castle yet, and that the Earl
of Denby is not there. Brereton, and the other Rebels about Cheshire,
Staffordshire are drawing all into a body, but for what design is not yet
known, unless it be for the relief of Oswaldstree, the last news says,
that Marrow has 6000. men before it.

The King is with an Army at Bedford, and from thence is marching toward
Norfolk and Suffolk. Waller is with his forces about Husham and these parts.
A great Treason was discovered in Bristoll for the yielding of the Town to the
Parliament which caused Essex and Waller to draw out of London a month sooner
then they intended: there are 25, of the principal men there committed, for
being privy thereunto.

Essex is with his Army at Dorchester and Colonel Apernam has quited Weymouth
with the Ship and Garrison upon what reason is yet unknown considering that
little Warham-close by it, holds out still and has repulsed the enemy. Prince
Maurice is risen from before Line, has a good Army and is drawn near
Bristoll, to join with the Lord Hopton, and so to fight with Essex, but he
they say is called back, and is highly displeased with his masters at London,
but is not like to bring up all his Army with him for that one whole Regiments
of Kentish-men have left him, and are come over to the Lord Hopton.

July the fifth, Sir Lewys Dives is come from Court, who left the King the 21.
of the last at Dunstable and marching to S. Albans, from whence he intends to
summon the City in the absence of their trained bands, and their two Generals,
Oswaldstree is relieved by the Rebels, and our siege raised.

FINIS.

