A Brief RELATION OF The Proceedings OF Our Army in IRELAND, since the Tenth
of June to this present July 1642.

TOGETHER With the Petition of the Parliament there Assembled, To the Lords,
Justices, and Counsel.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON. Printed by R. Oulton. and G. Dexter for Benjamin Allen. An. D. 1642.

A Brief Relation of the Passages of our ARMY.
TVESDAY the 10. of June, about 12 a clock at noone, our Army departed from
Dublin: There went 6. companies under the command of Lieutenant Colonel Monk,
50. of my Lord of Ormonds: Four under the command of Sir Francis Willowbie:
Five under my Lord Lamberts: under the command of Sir Georg Thylock: Four of
Collonell Crafford, under his own command: Nine of my Lord Jones Regiment: 9 of
Sir Michaell Herles Regiment: and 9. of Collonell Cromwells regiment: Of Horse,
there was my Lord Lieutenants Troop, my Lord of Ormonds Troop, my Lord Burlase
Troop: Sir George Wentworths Troop; Sir Thomas Lucas Troop, Captain Mawhs
Troop: Captain Villers Troop, Sir Richard Greenvills Troop; Captain Armstrongs
Troop; Captain Masons Troop, and two other Troops, whose Captains names I
have forgot: we had like wise 7 Brass Pieces, The first night we marched
about 7. miles from Dublin, where we quartered that night: and the next
morning being Wednesday, there was sent from the Army Captain Garners Troop,
and my Lord of Ormonds Troop; Captain Marrowes Troop; Captain Stuerfi^lds
1000 Compan^, and three Pieces of Ordinance that carried about 6 pound bullet;
we left the Army, and marched with the foresaid Company to a Castle wide of
Trym, a garrison place, a Castle called K^ock Linch: belonging to one Mr.
Linch, there we found about 1500 of our men that had besieged the Castle 2.
days before, and had been very fiercely at it, we found at our coming to
them that they had lost about 40. men; along with the foresaid companies we
came with the Ordinance, there came also 200 Firelocks, who at our
firstcomming, placed themselves round about the Castle in the Trenches and
Dikes till the orduance were planted: which in two hours were planted: and
played upon the Castle, for the space of 6 or 8 hours, the Rogues within the
Castle, still defying us, saying, Be gone ye Parliament Rebels, you that
fight against your King, and many upbraiding words, they had fortified the
Castle very strongly; the Castle likewise being a strong stately place,
amongst the rest of our men, Lievt. Colonel Kirk was shot very dangerously
with two Bullets in the back; but whether he be since dead, we know not
certain; for he was left in the Surgeons hands at Trime; About 6 a clock
at night our men entered one part of the Castle very courageously, rushing
through great dangers, with their beating and throwing down of stones from out
the Castle, at last, when they had no shot left, they fell a throwing of
stones, and left not so much as the Tiles upon the house, and at even, when the
Castle was most part all on fire, they got into a Tower, where was a strong
Battlement; and there did stand the chiefest of them; whereof one, as we
hear, was one Matthew Plunket, who stood up, and asked if there would be
quarter granted to them, it was replied, there would; no says he, I will
believe none of you, Let some Honorable man speak, as my Lord Lambert, or the
like; or says he, where is Captain Grace, that I may speak with him, he
likewise fetched Mistress Boothes Child, and showed it to him alive; no
persuasion could bring them down; although they had put a great rope out to
come down by: they were very timorous, the Common Soldiers would fall upon
them; and so drove away the time till it was dark; that night the Soldiers
lay about the Castle, and next morning did do as good as dwell with them; it
was thought there was about 600. in the Castle, which were put to the sword;
very stout fellows there were; Our Army lay that night hard by Trim, where
our Forces, that lay before the Castle, did likewise draw themselves.

Thursday, our men took another Castle, called Tremellstowne, where the Rogues
stole away, and left all within to them.

Friday we marched through Athboie, a Fair Town, which the Rogues had burned
to the ground, to prevent us from leaving any Garrison there that night we came
to the Earl of Westmeaghes: the Foot quartered a Mile of this side the Earls
house.

The Earl of ORMOND and many of the Chiefest Commanders lay there that night,
he bestowed Bear, Bread and Meat very plentifully, on our Soldiers.

The next morning we marched and not three miles from the Earls house: our
Dragoneirs going before, came to a Castle which the Rogues had strongly
entrenched and cut off the way and made a redoubt or 2 to hinder our passage,
but our men beat them off, and killed about 14. of them: the Rogues did run
still before us and burnt all the Towns before us, that we might have no
houses to lie in: Burnt MOLLINGER where the FOOT was to Quarter the next Night:

So the Foot were feign to lie in the Field, and the Horse lay in Mollinger
that night, the Towns people ran all away, and got all their goods unto on
Island hard by. The next Day being Sunday morning, we marched from Mullinger,
and about 5 miles beyond Mollinger, we came to a Castle belonging to one Mr.
Tinte which we found very strongly Fortified and entrenched with mighty
Trenches, our Men entered the Castle and found no body in it, but store of
provision and abundance of good Beer, this Tintes Brother was taken hard by
the Castle and killed, our Men ransacked the Castle and so left it: The same
Night we came to a place called Ballimore, which the Rogves had likewise burnt
that day: next morning following Forces were drawn out to go for Athlove, my
Lord President of Connagh Castle, my Lord Jones Regiment Sir Michael Herles,
there went along the Earl of Ormond my Lord Lile Sir George Wentworth and many
more: And within 5 miles of Ahchalon, we met my Lord President of Connagh, who
came to meet the Earl with about 50 Horse and 200 Foot, which was his greatest
strength and presently after came young Sir Charles Coote with his Troop of
complete men: after an hour or two stayed in the Field the Earl of Ormond
took leave of the President, and left with him the 2 foresaid Regiments, the
Lord of Ormond returned that night to our Army, and my Lord Lile with 5 Troop
of Horse accompanied my Lord President to Athalon. There we found good store
of every thing: for Sir James Dillon who had lai^ siege before Athlove ever
since Christmas, and left the siege 2 days before we came there, they run
away and left all; hearing the English Army was coming that way. Them in
those parts applauding young Sir Charles Coot very much, having done a great
deal of good service in the County of Rosecomon and those parts and for
releiving Athlove twice whilst it was besieged.

At Ballimore where our Army lay, the Lord Nevtervill had entrenched Kymkelfe
in a fair Castle very strong, but hearing of our coming left it and fled
away. And a prisoner whom we took there, did confess the Lord Nutervill had
given order for the burning, if all those Towns be for the English Army: In
Ballunore we found great store of Salt, and there is now too much with the
Rebels which they have from Galloway, do now buy it for two quarts a penny,
and some of them acknowledged not long since it was worth 5. pence a quart. The
same day some of my Lord Lamberts Regiment brought away the English were in
Kilbegan. We likewise left two small pieces at Athlove: the next day my Lord
Lile came from Athlove. And we came to Ballimore, we found the Army gone, and
instantly met with Sir Richard Greenvill and his Troop, who went with us to
the Army, who quartered that night in the fields, so we marched next day
without any thing remarkable, The next day we came to a place called Killmkin
which place belongs to (Judge) Donellan and about 2. miles of this side we
were to pass a way which lies between 2 Bogs, which we found so strongly
entre^ched with redouts and many strong Fortifications, these works were made,
thinking that we would take our way to Athalon through that part of the
Country. But coming home, we came by the back part of it. And were feign to
stand there at least three hours, before we could cast it down, to get passage
through: that night we were quartered in the Fields by a wood side; our men got
that Night at least a 1000 Cowes, about Sun, set we had an Alarm, there comes
2 Rogves out of the wood to Coronell Craffords quarter, thinking it had been
there own Colors, so were instantly slain. That night was a cruel night
raining with extreme cold killed some of our men, and many lies sick in their
garrisons, next day we marched to Kilrock and so to Dublin.

The humble Declaration and Petition of the Lords Spiritual and Temporal, and
Commons in PARLIAMENT assembled.
Humbly declares
THAT the Religion now professed by the Church of Rome (which in fundamental
points is Antichrististian) has of late years extraordinarily overspread this
Kingdom, and has the more increased by the forbearing, to put in execution
the wholesome Laws, and Statutes of force in this Kingdom, against Recusants
and others of the Romish Religion, who have of late time more then formerly
extremely swarmed in this Kingdom, and whereas it evidently appears that the
said Antichristian and Heretical Religion, and the not putting of the said
Laws in execution, has as the fruits and effects thereof, produced a general
confederacy of the Papists in this Kingdom, to destroy and extirpe the
Protestant Religion, and all English, Scottish and Irish in this Kingdom
professing the same, wherein they have actually proceeded to execrable
cruelties (without any provocation given them by his sacred Majesty, by the
State and Government, or any Acts of Protestants or any others (the intending
utterly to cast of the English Government, and most Royal authority of our
Sovereign Lord the King, and where diverse of the Romish Religion, have in all
parts of this Kingdom since the two and twentieth day of October last,
inhumanely used most bloody and unheard of barbarous Actions against the
persons, as well of the Clergy as of most of the Protestant Religion, within
their power not only while life lasted, but even after death digging some of
them out of their graves, cutting them in pieces and casting them into ditches,
defiling of Churches, and setting up the abominable Idol of the Mass in stead
of Gods true worship and service, and in scornful and reproachful manner,
trampling under foot the Holy Bible, and disdainefully burning it, and have by
the said cruelties already destroyed many thousand Protestants, and of those
that remain and escaped their fury, most of them have been enforced to fly
into England or Scotland for relief, or to beg the charity of well disposed
people here.

The said Lords and Commons duly considering the Premises, and the great
dishonor done to his Majesty, to the English Nation, and indeed to all his
Majesty's Kingdoms by the said most wicked Rebellion, plotted and enacted by
Titular Bishops, Abbots, Jesuits, Friars, Priests, Monks, and others of the
Remish Religion, do humbly express their detestation (thereof, and their
humble desire of a thorough Reformation of Religion may be had in this
Kingdom, to the glory of God and the honor of his Sacred Majesty, and to that
end humbly pray that a present and effectual course may be taken, for putting
in execution the Laws and Statutes of force in this Kingdom, against
Recusants, and all others of the Popish pretended Religion in all parts of this
Kingdom, where the Laws do or may run and for suppressing the usurped power,
and Jurisdiction of the Sea of Rome, and particularly in the City of of Dublin,
which is now the City of Refuge for most of the distressed and dispoyled
Protestants of this Kingdom who are not without just fears of imminent dangers
by reason of the multitude of popish inhabitants, and they do pray that it may
be given in charge to all his Majesty's Officers, whom it may concern
faithfully, and without delay to proceed therein, and that monthly Sessions be
held for that purpose in the said City of Dublin, That Bills may be forthwith
transmitted into England, concerning all such Laws as are now of force there
against all Jesuits, Priests, Eryers, Monks, and other superstitious Orders,
and societies of the popish pretended Clergy, and their relievers, and against
Recusants, and other Papists to be enacted in this Kingdom.

And such further Laws as are or shall be needful in that behalf, and that
such necessary expressions and provisions may be therein made, as may be
agreeable with the constitution of this Kingdom, and may give hopeful and
comfortable assurance to your Suppliants and their Posterity, and to all other
of the Protestant Religion, who are or shall be in this Kingdom.

That it may not be in the power of any Governor or Governors, of this
Kingdom to suspend inhibite or connive at the execution of the said Laws, or
any of them, and to this end that your Lordships, who are entrusted by his
Majesty, with the Government of this Kingdom, and must one day give an account
thereof, before the Tribunal of Gods Justice, will give present order for
performing your suppliants requests herein expressed, and although since this
most hideous and bloody Rebellion begun, we have some succors out of England,
which we ascribe to the great mercy of God, in the great wisdom and piety
of his sacred Majesty, and in the careful and chargeable endeavors of the
Parliament and Kingdom of England, which his Majesty's grace and goodness,
we with the duty and loyalty of faithful Subjects, do most humbly and
thankfully acknowledge to his Koyall Majesty; and do also render to his
Parliament of England: hearty thanks for their said care and endeavors for
us, yet we find with inward sorrow and grief of heart that for want of such
powerful and speedy succor of Men money Victual, Clothes, Arms,
Ammunition, and other requisites of War necessary to be sent hither out of
England this War, for Gods cause, and the cause of his servants in this
Kingdom, has hitherto had but a slow proceeding. They therefore most humbly
beseech your Lordships, to represent to his sacred Majesty their humble
desires and supplications, that it may stand with his Princely pleasure: that
an effectual and speedy course may be taken by his Majesty's high Wisdom, the
care of the Parliament for hasting those needful succors, which the said
Lords and Commons humbly conceive have been hitherto retarded, longer they
doubt and fear can well consist with the safety of this his ancient Rightful
Crown and Kingdom and so by the high wisdom and great goodness of his
Majesty, our great grief and sorrows converted into joy and gladness, Gods
true Religion may be the more firmly established, his Majesty in wisdom and
power magnified his good Subjects comforted and his enemies, and the enemies of
Gods truth disapointed.

FINIS.

