Abrief MEMORIAL of what has been done in former Times, concerning the Making
and repairing of DOVER HARBOR, and the present state thereof.
ALthough the first defense of Dover Harbor was a round Tower made by a
private person, one John Clarke Priest, Master of the Maison de Dieu, about the
year 1500, in which he made many Rings to fasten and moore Ships, and for the
safety and pleasantness of it was called, Little Paradise. Yet when the making
a formal and regular Harbor came into consideration, and that it was the
opinion of all skilful Mariners of that time, that a mean Harbor at Dover
would be more beneficial than an excellent Harbor in any place else about the
Coast of England: Sir John Thomson, Parson of St. James in Dover, stirred up
the Townsmen to entertain the project of obtaining a Harbor, and represent the
design to King Henry the 8th. who unanimously joining together, did employ the
said Sir John Thompson to the King for that purpose, allowing him for his
support in his addresses, and following the business, 4. l. -- 10 s.

The King liked the design so well, that he forthwith ordered 500 l. out of his
own Coffers to make a beginning of the work, and gave the Mastership of the
Maison de Dieu to Sir John Thomson, an Hospital valued at 120 l. per an.
founded for relief of poor Soldiers from beyond Sea, fourteen days gratis) and
appointed the said Sir John Thompson to be principal Surveyor of the Works, and
under him four others to be Overseers.

Sir John Thompsons design was to erect a Wall, which he called a Peer, from
Hacliffe Chapel (being the South-west part of the Bay) directly toward the
East, about 131 Rods in length. But this Peer was not finished, by 350 Foot so
far as the Foundation was laid, (called the Mol^-Head) consisting of great
Rocks, brought from Hacliffe, the Castle Roy, and Folk-stone. This Peer was
begun on St. Anns day, Anno 1533.

A poor man one John Young, who first with a Nut-shel, then with an Egg-shel,
and lastly with a small Vessel, made proof what weight those things could raise
and bear in the water, first found out the carrying huge Stones of 20 Tuns
apiece and more, by tying Iron Chains to them at low Water, and then buoying
them up with empty Vessels, and so dragging them up to the Peer where they were
to sink them, the Chalk and filling for the Peer being carried thither in great
Boats, called a Gaboth, which had nine Keels. The King gave this man in reward
of his invention, a Pension for his Life of 4 d. per diem.

The King spent 50 thousand pounds upon the Works, and several times in person
viewed them, often employing the Counsel and direction of all skilful men in
Waterworks, both at home and abroad: But by reason of the Kings absence at
Bullen, his sickness at his return, his Death, and Nonage of Edward the 6th.
there was no Provision made for maintenance of the Works which had been done
about the Peer. And they coming once in state of decay, nothing was done
toward it till Queen Mary's time, when for two years some matter was
attempted, the Mayor of Dover and his Brethren having got license under the
Great Seal to gather moneys throughout England; but the Workmen being ill paid,
all was given over again.

Before the end of the Work a South-West wind brought a marvelous quantity of
Beach and Boulder-stone, never seen before on that Coa^^ that by this, and the
Peer decaying through want of Provision for its support and maintenance, and
especially by the poorer sort disorderly pulling the Timber and Iron of that in
pieces, was not looked after; the Haven was so lost, that a Boat drawing but
four foot water could not enter into the mouth thereof.

Thus the decay of the Haven at Dover, and the loss of Calais, happening both
about one time, made such an utter desolation there, that of ^ brave rich and
populous Town, it became presently a poor and desolate Village: But still there
remained a strong opinion in all men, for renewing the Haven in that place.

Queen Elizabeth therefore granted to the Town of Dover toward repairing their
Harbor, free Transportation of 30000 quarters of Wheat, 10000 quarters of
Barley and Malt, and 4000 Tun of Beer, free of Custom and Impost; which Patent
of the Queen was sold to John Bird and Thomas Wats Merchants, at (...) -- A.d.
for Wheat, and 2 (...) -- 8 d. for Barley and Malt; and the License of Beer
being fold to others, came to longer, and afterward 35 Eliz. 7. continued
after the time limited aforesaid, till the end of the Parliament then next
ensuing; and 43 Eliz. 9. continued yet further till the end of the first
Session of next Parliament; and 1 Jac. 32. from the end of that Parliament for
7 years; after which time it only expired, having so many years enjoyed the
benefit of so great assistances. The 14 Car. 2. An Act was passed for the
raising of 22000 l. for the repairing of Dover Harbor by a Tax of 3 d. per Tun
on the Lading of every Vessel not exceeding 250 Tuns, except Vessels laden with
Coals, Culme and Purbeck Stone which were to pay but 1 d. (...) per Tun, which
Act was to continue for 7 years. By all which it is evident, how it has been
the immediate Care of the Kings and Queens of this Realm, and of the
Parliaments thereof, to protect and preserve this Harbor at Dover, tending so
much to the Honor of the Crown, safety of the Nation, and advantage of Trade.

For, 1. It is seated on the Narrow, between England and France; so that
Foreign Ambassadors, and other Great Personages, and Strangers do usually Land
there; where they find all good accommodations for their travel to London. 2.
It is the principal seat of all Jurisdiction within the Ports, the Courts of
Admiralty and Chancery being constantly held here. 3. It is a great Storehouse
of Provisions for his Majesty's Navy, there being in this Port one of his
principal Victualling-Offices for the Fleets when they shall be at Sea: And in
the late War was seen to be of great use and benefit to his Majesty's Service.
4. In time of War the Harbor of Dover is a great protection and safeguard to
his Majesty's Ships of the lower Rate, when they find the Enemy too strong for
them at Sea: And a great advantage at other times, when they may take liberty
to Cruise the Channel at pleasure, and secure their Prizes in sew hours; of
which in the late War with Holland and France there was sufficient experience.
5. The Harbor of Dover being in its situation the chiefest Port in the
Southern part of England, between Harwich and Portsmouth, is of great
importance to the Ships of Merchants in time of Peace; where upon accident of a
Leak or other damage, they may presently put in here, and be fitted for their
intended Voyage. 6. The Customs of this Port have in times of Trade, before the
late Civil Wars, (peculiar only to this Port) amounted to Fifty Thousand pounds
per annum. 7. His Majesty's Frigates of the 4 or 5 Rates, and under, out of the
Downs and Channel, may and have used to come into this Harbor, and there
Victual, Wash, and Tallow, and go to Sea again in few Tides. 8. This Port is
and always has been a great Nursery for able Mariners, and a proper station
for Pilots to conduct Ships through all the Flats and Sands, either in his
Majesty's Service, or Merchants. 9. That the moneys payable by the said Act of
the 14. Car. 2. was by the Act to be Collected by his Majesty's Officers of the
Custom-house, and by them to be paid to the Commissioners of Dover Harbor, who
received only 9300 l. thereupon. Which not being sufficient to perfect the
work, the said Harbor is since much impaired, and by the many Storms that have
lately happened, the Sea has gained much upon it. So that unless some speedy
Remedy be taken, not only the said Harbor, but the whole Town is like to be
lost inevitably, to the Ruin of many hundred Families, and the Universal
damage of the Nation.


It is therefore humbly recommended to the Wisdom of the Parliament, to make
such provision for remedy thereof, as the necessity of the Work requires, and
has always been the care of former times.


