THE LIFE OF Monsieur DES CARTS, Containing the HISTORY OF HIS Philosophy and
Works: AS ALSO, The most Remarkable Things that befell him during the whole
Course of his Life.

Translated from the French, By S. R.

LONDON, Printed for R. Simpson, at the Harp in St. Paul's Churchyard,
MDCXCIII.

An Abridgement OF THE LIFE OF Monsieur DES CARTS.
BOOK. I.
THE Family of Des Carts has ever been reputed as one of the best in all
Tourain, there was never observed in it any unfit Matches or wrong Alliance,
that might alter its Nobility, and we find no date of its being made noble that
can determine and fix the antiquity thereof, the branch of the Eldest Brothers
having diffused it self into the House Lillette, and then again into that of
Maille, the branch of the Puinees, or Younger Brothers increast very much, and
extended it self into the upper Poictou, yea and it even past as far as Berry
and Anjou by means of its Alliances and Matches, until at last, at the time of
the League it was reduced on the Males side to but one single person Peter Des
Carts Grandfather to the Philosopher whose Life we are here about to undertake
to write.

Peter Des Carts, after having with good success served in the War against the
Enemies of the Religion of his Country, and against those of the state of his
Prince, quitted the service pretty early, on purpose that he might the longer
relish the fruits of repose, that he procured himself; he had no more but one
Son of Claudia Ferrand Sister to Anthony Ferrand, principal Lieutenant
particular of the Chastelet of Paris; and Sister to Michael Ferrand who was
Father to M. Ferrand Dean of Parliament.

This Son by name Joachim was the first of the Family who was of the Long Robe
or followed the Law, who went to settle in Britaigne, after he had got the
place of Chancellor of the Parliament of Rennes on the 14th of Feb. 1586. upon
the resignation of D'Emery Reynald; he Married afterward by a Contract bearing
date 15. Jan. 1589. Jane Brochard Daughter to the Lieutenant General of
Poictiers, who bore him three Children during the little time she lived with
him: the Eldest named Peter Des Carts Sieur dela Bretailliere Counselor of
the Parliament of Bretaiyne, was Father to Monsieur Des Carts Jeachim.
seur de Kerleau, who is at present Subdean to the same Parliament. The second
was a Joane.
Daughter, Married to Mr. Roger de Crevis, and Grandmother to Monsieur the
Count de Villeneave alive at this day.

II. The last was Renatus Des Carts our Philosopher, His Birth.
who was born at La Hay, or the Hague in Turaine upon the River of Creuse on
the 31th day of March, in the year 1596. in the seventh year of Henry the Great
or Hen. 4. in the beginning of the fifth year of the Pontificat of Clement the
eighth, He showed himself very ill satisfied in the course of his Life,
afterward, that any one should take notice of his Birthday from the Baptismal
Register of the Parish, and from the Genialogical Archives, or Pedigree of his
Family; his Reason was, because He had a great aversion to your Calculaters of
Nativity, whose error one seems to promote when he publishes the Birth of any
one. But it is not so much a reason as a pretense which he alleged to those
who were willing to make use of this Circumstance to make him known to the
public.

III. His Baptism.
He received Baptism the third day of April ensuing in the Parochial Church of
St. George of La Hay, and they gave the Surname of Du Perron which was a
Lordship belonging to the Family, that he might be distinguished from his
Eldest Brother in the family.

His Mother being brought to Bed and lying in, pretty fortunate for him, was
followed with a sickness that hindered her up sitting: she had been ill all
along from the very time of her being big, of Pulmonic distemper, occasioned to
her by some displeasure, that came not to our notice: her Son who told us this
particular, only informed us that she died shortly after she was delivered of
him.

The cares of the Father may well defend the Child from those inconveniences
which are to be feared from the loss of the Mother, The condition of his health.
yet they cannot for all that, secure him from those infirmities that attend
the weak disposition he brought into the World with him. A dry cough and pale
color were hereditary to him from his Mother, which he kept until he was above
twenty years of age: and all Physicians whoever looked on him before that time,
condemned him to dye young. But amongst all these first rubs, he received one
advantage which he remembered all his Life time, that is, that of being
entrusted to a Nurse who omitted nothing at all, that her duty could possibly
require of her, which he was willing generously to acknowledge by a Pension he
settled upon her for the remainder of her life, as soon as ever he found
himself in a capacity to enjoy and manage an Estate.

The Death of his Mother did much contribute to the taking his Father off from
his acquaintance he had in Poicto^, Second Marriage of his Father.
and to the changing his inclinations he found for Touraine.

His residing in these Provinces, in some of his Houses, or in some place where
his Estate lay thereabouts, wonderfully pleased him till that time, and he took
great delight in going thither to pass away that time which his six months
service in Parliament could spare him. But a few years after he reduced himself
wholly to Britaigne, and there he fixed the rest of his days, by a new Marriage
which he contracted with Anne Morin, Daughter to the chief President of the
Chamber of Accounts at Nants. He had by her a Son and a Daughter. The Son was
Counselor in Parliament, Seigneur de Chavagnes by name, Father to Monsieur de
Chavagnes now living, a Counselor in the same Parliament, who has turned
Priest since the death of his Wife. The Daughter was Married to one Louis d'
Avangour Seigneur dubois de Kergrais.

IV. His inclinations to Study.
The cares of this new family did not cause Joachim des Carts to divert his
cares he owed to his Son du Perron whom he was wont to call Philosopher because
of the insatiable curiosity that appeared in the Child to demand the reasons
and effects of whatsoever entered, by his senses.

The weakness of his disposition, and unconstancy of his health obliged the
Father to leave him along time under the tuition of Women. Yet at the time they
were but busy about his body, and endeavor to procure him a good strong
constitution, he afforded almost every day instances of the beautifulness of
his genious. He showed, in the midst of these his infirmities such promising
dispositions for study; that his Father could not choose but procure him the
first exercises suitable to the design he had of cultivating his stock of
parts, maugre the resolution he had taken to make sure of the corporeal health
of his Son, before he attempted any thing upon his mind.

To this effect they carried on the business, that nothing was spoiled. So that
a Man may say these first studies were nothing but slight Essays, and but
superficial rude draughts and delineations at those they intended to make him
perform when he was of Age.

His Father considering he was going into his ninth year, They send him to La
fl^che to Study.
thought it behoved him to take the advantage of the new foundation of that
famous College of La fleche in favor of the Jesuits, he admitted him, and put
him into Commons there Anno 1604. after Winter was over, and recommended him
particularly to the care of Father Charlet his Kinsman. This Father, who was
along time Rector of this College, before he proceeded to the chief
employments of the Company, conceived such a tender affection for young Des
Carts du Perron, the willinger took upon him all the care in reference to his
Body as well as his Mind. He was like both a Father and Governor to him above
eight years together that he stayed in the College, and helped him to Father
Dine^ for a tutour, who was since Provincial and Confessor to our Kings. Both
of them perceiving our young Scholar pretty sensible of all their kindnesses,
were not long before they joined to them some esteem and affection for him, and
after that had been his directours as to his Studies, Conduct and Behavior, so
they made him their Friend, and continued so to be till death, whom also they
were careful to discourse with and entertain, by a mutual commerce of Lett^^^
and Recommendations.

Young Des Carts, The proficiency in Latin and Greek.
whom we shall no longer call du Perron, but only at such time as there is need
to distinguish him in His Parentage, Had brought along with him at his first
coming to the College a more than ordinary Passion to acquire the Sciences,
and this Passion being backed with a solid understanding, yet quick, lively, and
free withal, he evermore answered the intentions of his Father, and diligence
of his Tutors beyond expectation; in all the course of his Humanity which was
five years and an half, none ever perceived in him the least affectation of
singularity, except that which emulation produced, for he took some Pride, to
outrun such of his companions who had out-stript others. Being of a very good
nature, of an easy complying humor, he never found himself uneasy at the
submission he paid to his Masters Will; and his diligence in plying his
business and performing his task, both of the Class and Chamber, cost him
nothing.

With these two hopeful dispositions he made great proficiency in the knowledge
of the two Tongues, the importance and necessity whereof for understanding
ancient Authors he early apprehended. He loved Poetry a great deal more than
those, who look upon him but as a Philosopher, can possibly imagine. Nay he had
even something of a Talent for Poetry; he has made it plainly appear that he
was not astranger to the phancies and niceties thereof. He found moreover a
great deal of pleasure in the Fables of the Ancients, not so much because of
some mysteries of natural and moral Philosophy that was couched under them, as
that they roused his Spirit by their genteil phancies.

In recompense of his faithfulness and exactness wherewith he discharged his
duty, he obtained liberty, not to keep close to Lectures, nor compositions
which otherwise were enjoined him in Common with his associates. Now his
business was to make use of this liberty to satisfy his passion, which he felt
to increase in him to acquire a clear and certain knowledge of wha^^oever
conduces to the profit and advantage of Life, which they had put him in hopes
to attain by means of humanity; upon this account not taking up with that which
is taught in the College, he run over, If a man may believe him, all the Books
that treat of Sciences, that men account the most rare and curious, which you
must understand only of what could at that time come to his hands. I shall add,
for the undeceiving those who have suspected, that in the whole series of his
life, that he had but small inclination, or value for Books: that we meet with
but very few sentiments more advantageous than those he past upon them in those
days, He was fully persuaded that reading of good Books, is as it were the
conversing with the greatest wits and honestest persons of former ages, who
were Authors of them, but withal that it was a studied conversation, in which
they discovered to us their best thoughts only.

V. His friends in the College.
Besides emulation of study, behavior and genteil breeding, Colleges do yet
produce another advantage, of which Monsieur Des Carts would not be deprived,
that is to say, the advantage of friends and acquaintance, which one does there
contract with those of his own age, and humor, and which prove the Seeds of
the strongest and most durable friendship; the antientest of his Friends were
without doubt those he got acquaintance with in the College of La fleche. But
besides Renatus le clerc, since Bishop of Glandave, and the Sieur Chauveau of
Melun, who afterward became a grand Mathematician, and a zealous Cartesian; we
know no more, besides, in those days, but Father Marinus Marsennus, a Minim,
who past for Monsieur Des Carts his Resident at Paris, amongst Learned men,
and for the Dean, of his friends and followers, notwithstanding, he was near
upon eight years older than he, and albeit he was in his Rhetoric, when the
other did but begin his Accidence.

M. The carrying Hen. 4. Heart to La fl^ch^.
Des Carts was in the first year of his course of Philosophy, when the news of
the Kings Death, slain upon Friday May 4. 1610. made a Non term in the
College, this Prince upon bestowing his house of La fleche upon the Jesuits,
desired his Heart, that of the Queen, and his Successors might be carried
thither after their Death, and kept in their Church, so that all the time that
past between that fatal news, and the removing the Kings Heart to La fleche,
was spent in public Prayers in the College, in funeral compositions, both in
Verse and Prose, and in preparations for the reception of this depositum. It
was performed on the first of June with a great deal of Ceremony, and it was
constituted and agreed upon in the Townhall of La flesche, that upon the
aniversary day their should be performed every year a solemn Procession, with
Service suitable thereto for the Kings Soul, and that the said day should be
observed thence forward just as Holy days are, in shutting up all Courts of
Indicature, in making vacation in the several closses, and causing all shops to
be close shut up.

Monday following of June the term begun again for performing the usual
exercises in the College, The fruits he reaped of his logic and Ethics.
and Monsieur Des Carts continued his Study of Ethics. The Logic he studied
the Winter foregoing, was the only one of all the parts of Logic, whereto, as
he afterward declared, he applied himself the most in the College. From that
time he perceived that Syllogisms, and the greatest part of the other
instructions of your School Logic, serve not so much to understand things
which one would fain know, as to explain those one knows to others: or else to
prate without judgment of those whereof a man is ignorant, which is the effect
they ascribe to Ramond Lullies Art. Of all the dictates he received from his
Masters, he retained none but the four Rules, which served afterward whereon
to ground his new Philosophy, the first is, Not to admit any thing for truth,
that he did not clearly and distinctly know to be so. The second, To divide
things as far as possibly one could, the better to resolve them. The third, To
regulate a Man's Thoughts orderly, beginning with the most simple objects, on
purpose to come up by degrees, to the knowledge of the most compound ones. The
fourth is, To omit nothing in the anumeration of the things whose parts he is
to examine. But at that very time he compiled a singular method for himself of
disputing in Philosophy, which mightily pleased his perpetual director Father
Charlet, as it did likewise his Tutor Father Dinet, although it put him that
moderated to his Trumps. When they came to propound an argument in the
disputation, he, at first, asked several questions de definitione nominum; then
he asked if they did not agree about certain received truths known, of which he
made them agree and consent to. Thereupon he composed only one argument, from
which it was very hard to get clear without pussing.

The Study of the Morality of the Schools stood him in stead, chiefly to make
him distinguish that of the Heathen, and of the Moral honest man of the World,
from that of a Christian, but we are at a loss to know certainly whether or no,
he was beholding to his Masters Papers, for the four Maxims wherein he makes
all his particular Morality to consist. The first of these Maxims was To obey
the Laws and Customs of his Country. sticking close to the Religion in which
God was pleased he should be born. The second, to be steadfast and resolute in
his actions, and to adhere as constantly to the most dubious opinions, when he
should once be determined to follow them, as if they were most certain. The
third, to labor rather to conquer himself than Fortune. To change his desire
rather than the Order of the World, and to persuade himself that nothing is
absolutely in our power, but our Thoughts. The fourth, To determine and propose
something to himself, without blaming other Men in their Employments and
different occupations, to determine and propose to himself the business of
improving his reason; and to search out the truth of all things all his Life
long. The year following which he spent in the Study of Metaphisicks was less
satisfactory to him, than the Study of Logic and Ethics. At that very time he
perceived himself perplexed with errous and doubts, instead, of that clear and
distinct knowledge of whatsoever conduces to the benefit of Life, which they
bore him in hand he should discover in his Studies. The further he proceeded,
the more he discovered his own ignorance, he saw by the Lectures of his Masters
and the reading of their Books, that Philosophy had been cultivated and
improved from all antiquity by the men of the most excellent parts that ever
appeared in the World, and yet for all that, there was not any thing in the
World, of which men did not dispute, and call in question, and consequently
nothing but what was doubtful. All the esteem he had put upon his Masters,
could not stock himself with presumption to hope that he could hit on it better
than others; considering the diversity of opinions maintained by learned
persons touching the same subject matter, there being never more than one of
them that could be true, he had already accustomed himself almost to repute
whatsoever was but probable, for false. If he had never had but one Master, or
if he had never been acquainted with these different opinions amongst
Philosophers, he protests he should never have had occasion to sequester
himself, and withdrawn from the number of such who must be content to follow
other men's opinions, rather than to find out others themselves. But having
learnt even when he was in the College, (they are his own expressions) that
one cannot imagine that thing so uncouth and wild that has not been advanced
by some Philosopher or other, he pretends he could by no means make choice of
any one guide, whose opinions could appear to him much to be preferred before
the opinions of others: this was that which put him upon cutting out himself a
new road in process of time, and to undertake the conducting and manageing
himself.

In despite of all the rubs his towering Spirit met with in the pursuit of his
Philosophy, yet was he to come to the end of his course, in the same time as
the rest of his fellow Students did, that never found any quaeries to put, nor
any difficulties to remove in the transcripts of their Masters; they made him
proceed after that, to the Study of Mathematics, to which he alloted his last
years residence at La flesche, the delight he took therein, paid him with
interest for the vast trouble and pains the School Philosophy had put him to;
and the progress he made therein was so extraordinary, that the College of La
flesche has acquired it self by his means the glory of having produced the
greatest Mathematician they ever yet saw. Amongst the parts of Mathematics, he
chosed the Analysis from Geometry, and Algebra to make the subject of his
particular application, on purpose to purge them from what was unprofitable and
hurtful in them, and to bring them to perfection, this is that he labored
about at the very time he was in the College, without depending either upon
his Master or fellow Collegians, if we give credit to those who would make him
the Author of that sort of Algebra which they call the Key of all the Liberal
Arts and of all Sciences. Which they esteem as the best method, that ever saw
the light, to discern truth from falsehood.

The dispensation he had obtained from the Father Principal of the College not
to be obliged to practice every punctilio of the School Philosophy, supplied
with an opportunity and means to follow it as closely as he could reasonably
desire. Father Charlet Rectour of the College had conceded to him amongst
other privileges, that of lying long in Bed, as well by reason of his weakness
of disposition as for that he observed in him a mind naturally inclined to
meditation, Des Carts finding when he awaked all his Spirits recollected, and
his Senses much composed and sedate after his Nights rest improved all these
favorable conjunctures for to meditate; this practice turned so into a second
nature, that it was his usual manner of Studying all his Life after. And one
may safely say, that the World owes to his Morning Meditations in Bed, all
those fine important productions of his Brain both in Philosophy and
Mathematics.

VII. He leaves the College.
Having finished the course of his Studies in the Month of August 1612. He
quits the College of La flesche after eight years and half being Resident
therein, and returned home to his Fathers House, with the accumulated Praises
and Good Word of his Masters or Tutours. There remained to him all his whole
Life after, a great stock of thankful acknowledgment for the obligation they
laid upon him, and he had a great kindness and esteem for the College, which
he was wont to extol above all others, whether it was because his own
experience had afforded him a more particular knowledge of it, or else because
we are natural and commonly induced to commend the Place of our Education
equally with that of our birth, and to boast of our Masters as of our Parents.

But although, he might be satisfied with his Masters upon his leaving the
College, yet was he by no means satisfied with himself. Small satisfaction in
his Studies.
It seemed to him that he had got nothing by his Studies, but a greater
knowledge of his ignorance, all the advantages he had gained, in the Eyes of
the World, and which were bragged of as so many wonders, were all reduced,
according to his own opinion, to embarras and perplexity, to doubts, and
troubles of mind. The Laurels wherewith his Masters crowned him, thereby to
distinguish him from his fellow Students, appeared to him but Thorns.

If we do not belie nor undervalue the judgment of those who were well
acquainted with those times, we should not deny but that he abundantly
deserved, a stripling as he was, that Rank, the Public bestowed on him even at
that time, amongst the Able Learned Men of the Age. But it was never a more
dangerous time to be lavish of the quality of a Wise and Knowing Person; for he
was not content only to reject this quality which Men would have fastened upon
him: but willing to measure other Men's Corn by his own bushel, it was ten to
one but he had taken those who bore the same quality, for no real Knowing
Learned Men, and his undervaluing of whatsoever, Men Term, Sciences, was very
like to have discovered it self.

The displeasure he conceived to see himself disabused of the mistake wherewith
he flattered himself to be able to acquire, A clear and assured knowledge of
whatsoever is profitable to life. Was like to have precipitated him into
despair, seeing, besides, that the Age he lived in was as flourishing as any of
the preceding, and phancying with himself that all the Men of Parts, of which
this Age was very fruitful, found themselves in the same predicament he was in,
although peradventure they were so sensible of it as himself; he had a shrewd
Temptation to believe, that there was no such thing as a Science in the World
in every respect, such an one as they made him hope for.

The result of all these tedious, He discards Books and Sciences, and why.
vexatious Deliberations, was that from the year 1613. he would forsake and
discard all Books, and totally rid himself of the Study of Learning. By this
kind of forsaking, he seemed to imitate the greatest part of your Sparks of
Quality, who are not necessitated to Study whereby to subsist, or to get
Preferment in the World. Yet there is this difference, that these in bidding
adieu to Books, dream of nothing else but to shake off that Yoke which the
College had rendered insupportable to them, whereas Monsieur Des Carts would
not have packt off his Books, for which, he had otherwise a great love for; but
only because he found not in them what he sought for, upon the Credit of those
who engaged him to ply his Study. Although he was sensible how much he was
obliged to his Masters, who omitted nothing within the verge of their power,
for to satisfy him; Nevertheless he did not believe himself at all beholden to
his Studies, for what he afterward effected for tra^ing of Truth in Arts and
Sciences; he did not stick to say to some Friends, that although his Father had
not brought (...) up a Scholar, yet he would not for all that, have forborne
writing in his Mother Tongue, the self same thing he has written in Latin.

VIII. His stay at Reimes and then at Paris.
He spent the Winter at the latter end of 1612. and beginning of 1613. in the
City of Reimes or Rennes, in paying visits to his Family, to learn to ride the
gaeat Horse, to learn to Fence, and other such like Exercises suitable to his
quality, one may guess by a little Treatise of his concerning Fencing^, whether
or no he misspent his time in that Exercise.

His Father who had already caused his Elder Brother to apply himself to the
Law, seemed to have some thoughts of designing him for the Service of his King
and Country in the Army; but his tender years, and the weakness of his
Constitution, would not permit him to expose him so early to the Toiles of War.
He judged it adviceable, first to let him see the World, to that purpose he
resolved to send him to Paris toward the Spring, but perhaps it was a great
oversight in him, to Abandon him to his own Conduct, and leave him to himself,
without affording him any other Governor but a valet de Chamber, and not any
to inspect him besides a Lacquey or two: he relied too confidently upon the
wisdom of a Youth of 17. years, void of Experience, and of all helps, but his
own proper strength to wrestle against all occasions of undoing himself.

Yea, and he had power enough to guard him from grosser Debauches, not to be
overtaken by the Disorders of Intemperance; but he found he was not proof
against Companies that hawled him away, to take a walk now and then to Gaming,
and other Divertisements that pass in the World for indifferent in themselves:
that which contributed much to make him more particularly addicted to Gaming,
was, that he came always off with great Fortune, especially in those Games that
depend more upon industry than chance.

But the worst improvement he made during this idle time, was the renewing his
Acquaintance with diverse persons, whom he had seen at La Flesche, and the
Friendship he Contracted with some Persons of worth; who served a little to
reclaim him from that aversion that had seized him for the Study of Books.

The most considerable of his new Friends, His Friendship with M. Mydorg^.
was that Famous Claudius Mydorge Treasurer of France, and of the generality of
Amiens, Son to a Counselor of the great Chamber, and Successor to Vieta, in
his Reputation of the chief Mathematician in France, during some time; M. Des
Carts, who was younger by almost eleven years, found, I know not, what in this
Acquaintance: Whether for his humor, or the Character of his Mind, which
united them so close in such strict bonds of Friendship, that nothing could
have separated them, but Monsieur Mydorge his Death.

It was about the same time also, that he light again upon Marcinus Mersennus
at Paris, With Father Mers^^nus.
^ut as to his Exterior Garb, quite different from that he had known him at La
Flesche, Mersennus had turned Minim after his leaving the Sorbon-School, this
renewing of their acquaintance, was so much the more acceptable to the Monk,
because Monsieur D. Carts was not so much below him, as when he saw him a Lad
in the College. On the other side, the Meeting proved Advantageous for
Monsieur Des Carts; forasmuch as it served to deliver him from his being given
to Gaming, and other unprofitable pastimes: They began to relish the sweetness
of their innocent acquaintance, and to solace one another in the research of
truth, when Father Mersennus was about the year 1614. sent to Nevers, there to
read Philosophy to the young Monks of his Order.

This Separation went to Monsieur Des Carts his Heart. His Retirement, and his
return to his Study.
But in stead of occasioning him^ any thoughts to return to his sports and
idleness, it made him come the better to himself, than the presence of his
Virtuous Friend did, it inspired into him the Resolution to retire from the
World, and forsake even his usual Friends and Companions, on purpose to set
himself again to the Study that he had Relinquished. He made choice of a place
of Retirement in the Fauxbourg St. Germain, where he hired an House out of the
Noise, and shut himself up, with only one or two Servants, without so much as
giving his Friends or Kinsmen notice thereof. Having in this manner recovered
his gusto for Study, he was over Head and Ears in the Study of Mathematics, to
which he bestowed all that Leisure he had but now procured himself, which
continued near upon two years.

Such of his Friends which were good for nothing else but to pass away the time
and divertisement, soon grew weary, that they see him no more: They sought him
up and down, but all in vain, in the City, at Court, and in his Country; he was
so wise at the beginning of his Retirement, to prevent the chance of meeting
any, that he might not fall into the Hands of these Troublesome Persons, when
he was obliged to go abroad about his occasions; the business had no bad
Success for near two years together; but he afterward relied but too
confidently upon the luckiness of his Solitude, for not being vigilant enough
about his regress and ingress, and not cautious of his ways, and turnings as
before, he was met with by one of his Friends, whom he could not get quit off,
till such time as he should discover the place of his Abode.

This cost Monsieur Des Carts his Liberty, He is found out and interrupted.
to say no worse, the Friend did so far prevail by his frequent reiterated
visits, and by his importunity, that he first troubled his Repose, and then
Diverted him from his beloved Solitude, to bring him again upon the Stage of
the World; and to plung him again into Divertisements as before.

But he soon perceived he had changed his Relish for Pleasure, Games, and
walkings were not so Charming to him, as once before; and the Enchantments of
Worldly Delights, had but very weak effects upon him, against the Charms of
Philosophy and Mathematics, from which his Jovial Friends were not able to
free him. They made him spend the Christmas holy days Anno 1616. and the
beginning of the next year, till Shrovetide, as merrily as they possibly could.
But they could not make him take delight in any thing but Music, by a Consort
of which he could not choose but be much taken, considering the skill he had in
Mathematick's.

He no longer could hope from the importunate companions of his Age and
Quality, He goes into Holland to bear Arms.
to have the liberty of retrieving and improving his retirement, and beside
seeing himself one and twenty years of Age, he deemed it his duty to enter upon
Service; He departed for Holland in the Month of May, and Listed himself in the
Prince of Orange his Troops, in quality of a Voluntier, doing in this as many
other younger Brothers of the French Nobility did: who flockt thither, to learn
the Trade of War, under the Conduct of that great Captain.

But as his Heart was already prepossessed by a stronger passion for the
research of Truth, ^is design in it.
to which he was fully resolved to apply himself sooner or later, his design
was not to become a great Warrior in this Prince his School, so that in
determining to bear Arms, he resolved never to appear any way forward as an
Actor, but every where to be but as a Spectator of what is played in all sorts
of Commonwealths and States, upon the Stages of the World. He turned Soldier
for no other end, but only to Study the different natures of men more according
to nature, and to endeavor to make himself proof against all the accidents of
Life. That he might not be uneasy under any Superior Power, he refused upon
his first entrance all Command and all Engagements, and always maintained
himself at his own charges. But pro forma to keep up the custom he was to
receive once at least his Pay, and had the curiosity to preserve that piece of
Money he had for his Pay all his Life, as a Testimony of his having served in
the Army.

He did really take delight in War at that Age, but this inclination was but
the effect of the heat of his Liver, which was assuaged in process of time.
Although, the City of Breda where he lay in Garrison, enjoyed at that time the
quiet which was procured it by the Truce concluded upon, between the Spaniard
and Hollander, yet for all that he always showed himself an utter Enemy of
Idleness and Libertinism. Whether you consider him in his Military Occupations,
wherein he was assiduous and careful as any of the hottest forwardest
Soldiers, or be it you look upon him at the leisure hours he could spare from
his Duties, which he employed in Study, when others spent it in Debauchery.

At that time it so happened, that an Anonymus person caused a Problem of
Mathematics to be affixt up and down the streets of Breda, to be propounded to
the Learned, and to require the solution of it. Monsieur Des Carts beholding
the concourse of Passengers stopping before the Note affixt Writ in Dutch,
desired the next Man he found by him, that he would please to tell him either
in Latin or French, the substance of what is contained. The Man, as good luck
would have it, to whom he addressed himself, was willing to satisfy him, yet
upon this condition, that he on his part would be obliged to solve the Problem,
which he judged it self to be very difficult. Monsieur Des Carts accepted of
the condition with such a resolute Air, that the Man little expecting such a
thing from a young Cadel in the Army, gave him his name in Writing, together
with the Place of his Abode, to the intent he might bring him the solution of
it when he should find it out. Monsieur Des Carts understood by his Note, that
his Name was Isaac Beekman, and that he was Principal of the College at Dort,
no sooner was he returned to his Quarters, but setting himself to examine the
Problem of the unknown Person, after the Rules of his Method, he found out the
solution of it with much ease and readiness, as Vieta once did in resolving in
less than three hours, that famous question propounded by Adrian Romain to all
Mathematicians under the Cope of Heaven. Not to fail of his Word, away he goes
next day to Beckmans Lodging, brings him the solution of the Problem, nay and
offers to give him the construction of it, if he desired so much, Beckman
seemed surprised, but his wonder increased when beginning to discourse, on
purpose to pose him, and sound the parts and capacities of the Young Man, he
found his Abilities much beyond his own in the Sciences wherein his whole time
had been taken up for several years. He craved of his amicable correspondence,
and offered him his, and be^eecht him to consent that they might maintain a
mutual commerce of Studies, all the remainder of their Life. Monsieur Des
Car^es answered all those Civilities with all the effects of unfeigned amity,
notwithstanding ^e was younger than he by near thirty years, and that he might
give him evidences of the confidence he reposed in him, he cheerfully consented
that he should be his correspondent for Holland, as he desired he might.

Whilst Count Maurice came to be P. of ^range upon the Death of his Brother, He
composes his Treatise of Music.
which happened the 20th. of Feb. 1618. and was just going through the
Provinces and Cities with ^ome Troops, to reduce the Armenians: Monsieur Des
Carts had a mind to stay at Breda, where he employed his time in compo^ing
some Writings, amongst which, that which is best known, is his Teatise of
Music, ^e composed it in Latin, for he had acquired a notable knack of
Conceiving and Writing ex tempore, whatsoever came into his Mind. He was
willing to entrust him with the Original, at whose request he had composed it,
^ut with this Proviso that he should let no body see, because, judging it very
imperfect, he feared lest it should become public, either by Printing it, or
by Multiplication of some Copies. Beeckman who was reckoned amongst the prime
Mathematicians of the Age, found it not too imperfect for him, and thinking
Des, Carts had disowned and laid no claim to it, he thought fit to get some
credit by it, as though he had been the Author of it. Monsieur Des Carts
believed he was obliged to bring down his Pride, and to let him understand what
a base thing it is to acquire himself a little reputation at the expense of
prejudicing the Truth.

His Friends could never get his consent to publish this Treatise whilst he was
alive; his Enemies having come by a Copy of it not so perfect as should be,
sought for an occasion to be revenged of him after his Death. But they labored
to their own shame, and were so far from disgracing his Memory, that they drew
upon him the admiration of all who knew that it was the composure of a Youth of
22 years old. To tell you Truth, the public does not at this time judge it
such a mean piece, as the Author would make them believe it to be: the
multitude of Editions, and the Translations into English and French, warrants
its being approved on.

XI. Other Works begun.
Beekman leaving to the Ministers and Divines the care of holding their
National Council in his City comes to Breda to spend the best part of his Time
with Monsieur Des Carts to exercise himself in the Mathematics with him, and
to propound questions to be resolved by him; Monsieur Des Carts did not
acquiesce in the answers he made to them. He left behind him also diverse pretty
works, that would have past their Word that he spent his time well, if he would
but have let them see the light; Amongst this juvenile Works, one finds his
opinion concern^ng the Souls of Brutes, or, of Machines: Writ, twenty years
before he published his ^rinciple touching the distinction between a Thinking
Substance, and a Substance extend^d. He had not so much as perused at that Age
St. Augustine, or Pereira, nor any other Author that was capable to afford him
any ^^sight into this Sentiment, nay, it moreover ^ppears, that he never in all
his Life had seen ^ereira, and that it was from some of his Friends, and some
who envied him, that he ^ad the news that they found some resem^lance between
his opinion and that of this ^paniard.

Nevertheless Monsieur Des Carts not find^^g that variety of occupation under
the Prince ^f Orange, that he promised himself upon his ^aving France, sought
for an opportunity to ^emove from the Low Countries to serve ^omewhere else.
The news that was brought ^o Breda of the great Commotions of Germany, ^wakened
his Curiosity of being Spectatour of the most considerable affair that past in
Eu^ope. They talked of a new Emperor, they talked of the States of Bohemia's
Revolt against their King, and of a War commenced between the Papists and
Protestants: upon this ^ccount Monsieur Des Carts having a mind to leave
Holland, made use of this pretense, viz. The little exercise the Cessation of
Arms afforded him, which was agreed on between the Prince of Orange his Forces,
and those of Marquess Spinola, which was to continue two years longer,
conformable to the Conventions of Truce. His resolution was to pass into
Germany, that he might serve in the Papist Armies, yet before he would determine
to enter into any engagement, he longed to be present at the Coronation of the
new Emperor which was to be performed in the City of Francford.

XII. He departed from Breda in the month of July, Anno 1619. he got to
Madstricht, and from thence to Aix la chapelle, where he learnt the State of
Affairs of Germany; and the preparations that City were accustomed to make for
the Coronation of the Emperors. Being come to Mentz he understood that John
Schwichart the Elector, had summoned all the other Electors of the Empire
according to the usual manner, and had ordered them to meet at Francford on the
20th of July to proceed to the Election of a new Emperor.

He was in this last City against the time that Ferdinand II. He was present at
the Coronation of Ferdinand. II.
arrived there, as King of Bohemia and Elector of the Empire: this Prince was
Elected King of the Romans the 28th of August, and was Crowned Emperor the
30th of the said month, according to the old style, that is to say, the 9th of
September according to our account. Monsieur Des Carts did not appear at the
first Ceremony, that respected the Election of the King of the Romans, by
reason that an order was issued out to all Foreigners and Strangers, that is
to say, to such that neither belonged to the place, ^^or to the Electors
retinue, to void the Town, yet was he present at the second Ceremony that
concerned the Coronation of the Empe^our, and he had the curiosity to behold
once ^or all, what past at it; To the end he might not be ignorant of what the
principal actours of this World do represent of most pompous and glorious upon
the Theater of the Universe.

Before he went to Francford; he deliberated with himself what side he was to
be on, He gets into the D. of Bavaria's Army.
when he informed that the Duke of Bavaria ^levy'd Forces. This news produced a
design in him to list himself therein, without knowing precisely against what
Enemy they were to march; all that he understood of it came to thus much, that
he was not ignorant of the noise the troubles of Bohemia made throughout all
Germany. As he did not much matter the entering into the interests of States and
Princes, under whose dominion Providence had not ordained him to be born, so he
did not pretend to bear a Musket to promote the concerns of the one, nor yet
to destroy those of the other. He listed himself therefore in the Army of the
Duke of Bavaria, only as a private Voluntier, not being willing to accept any
employ. And at that time the report went that they were designed against
Mansfield the Bastard, and the other Generals of those that had revolted in
Bohemia, but the Duke of Bavaria gave them to understand a little while after,
that they were to March against Frederick V. Elector Palatine of the Rhine,
whom the States of Bohemia, had chosen for their King, but four days before the
Coronation of the Emperor Ferdinando the Second, whom they intended to exclude
from that Crown by this Enterprise.

BOOK II.
From 1619. to 1628.
MOnsieur Des Carts not intending to serve otherwise under the D. He goes into
Winter Quarters.
of Bavaria, then he had done under the Prince of Orange; began the Campain,
with putting into Winter. Quarters in the Duchy of Newbourg, upon the Banks of
the Danube, in the Month of October, An. 1619. He found himself in a place so
remote from Communication, and so little frequented by people, whose
Conversation might afford him any Diversion, that he even procured himself such
a privacy, as the condition of his Ambulatory Life could permit him.

Not being secure abroad, His privacy.
and not having by good luck any anxieties, nor passions within, that were
capable of disturbing him, he staid withal all the Day long in his stove, where
he had leisure enough to entertain himself with his thoughts; at first they
were nothing else but preludiums of imagination, and became daring by degrees,
by passing from one Cogitation to another, proportionably as he perceived the
de^ght of his Mind to increase by their Concate^tion. One of the first that
presented it self, ^as, that we do not usually meet with so ^uch perfection in
works Composed of seve^eral pieces, and made by the hands of seve^al Artists,
as in those in which only one has ^ade it his business; it was not an hard
task ^or him, to find wherewithal to Foment and Maintain this thought, not only
in Arts, where^ one may observe, how much difficulty there (...), in bringing
any thing to perfection, if you ^and only upon another Man's shoulders, work^ng
only according to the Model of another; ^ut even in politics, which respects
the Go^ernment of People, yea, and in the Esta^lishment of Religion, which is
the Handi^ork of God alone.

And then he applies this notion to Sciences, ^e knowledge of which, or its
precepts, are ^ntrusted to Books, he supposes that Sciences ^t least those,
the Reasons, whereof are only probable, not being backed by any Demonstra^ions,
having swelled by little and little, by the Opinions of diverse particular
persons, and being only Composed by the reflections of several persons of
different Intellects, do not approach so near Truth, as the down right
Reasonings, that a Man of indifferent good Sense, uses naturally concerning
things which present themselves to him.

From thence he undertakes to proceed to Human Nature, He endeavors to rid
himself of his prejudices.
with the same thought. He will consider, that because we have been Infants and
Children before we were Men, and because we have let our selves be a long time
governed by our Appetites, and by our Masters and Tutors, who have oftentimes
contradicted one another; it is in a manner impossible, that our Judgments
should be so clear or so solid, as they would have been, put the Case, we had
had the perfect use of our Reason, so soon as ever we were born, or if we had
never been governed by any thing but it.

The liberty he gave to his Reason not meeting with any Obstacle, led him
insensibly to the Subverting of all the ancient Systems; yet he refrained doing
so, taking notice of the indiscretion he should have been apt to have blamed in
another Man, who should have gone about to have pulled down all the Houses of a
City, under pretense to rebuild them after another manner. Nevertheless, as one
cannot find fault with a private Person for, causing his own to be pulled down
at such time as it threatens him with unavoidable ruin, that he may rear it up
again upon more solid and substantial Foundations: So he was persuaded that it
would have been taken for a piece of rashness in him to desire the reforming of
Sciences, or the Order settled in the Schools for the teaching of them; but no
body could reasonably blame him for making trial of it upon himself, without
incroaching upon any other.

So that he fully resolved once for all to get quit of all the Opinions he had
received and embraced, till that time; but it was his in^ent not to exclude
them quite out of his Be^ef, but only that he might substitute others ^terwards
in their room, that should be bet^r, or even to take up the same again if need
^quired, after he should have verified them: and, he believed, he could find
out in this ^articular, some means or other that might ^ave that Effect as to
regulate the Conduct ^f his Life a great deal better, than if he ^ould pretend
to rear a Fabric upon old ^oundations, upheld only by a Company of ^rinciples
which he had suffered to be in^ll'd into him in his Youth, without ever ^ving
examined whether they were true, (...) no.

He foresaw notwithstanding, that so daring ^^d Novel a Project, could not be
laid ^^t with some difficulty; yet he was apt to ^^tter himself, that these
difficulties were not ^^uperable, but might admit of a remedy. ^esides, he did
look upon them no ways ^omparable to those that occur in the Refor^ation of the
smallest Matters relating to the ^ublick; he made a vast difference between
^^at, he went about to destroy in himself, ^^d those Public Establishments we
observe (...) this World, which he compared to huge ^odies, whose fall must
needs be very sad, which besides are abundantly more difficult (...) be erected
again after they are battered ^own, than to be propt up and made to stand, ^hen
they shake and totter. But without ^^tending to carry on his Designs as far as
the Interests of the Public, he cared only to reform his own proper Thoughts,
and did no^ mean to Build upon any Ground to which he had not a good Title. In
case of bad Success, he thought he should not be much (...) loser by the
Bargain, since that the worst that could happen thereupon, could but be the
loss of his time and pains, when all came (...) all; which he did not judge
very necessar^ to the Benefit of Mankind.

In the new Heat and Career of his Resol^tions, His Pains and Encumbrances.
he undertook to put in Practice the Fir^^ Part of his Designs, which consisted
only (...) Destroying and Pulling down. This without doubt was the easiest of
the two, but (...) quickly perceived that it was not quite so eas^ for a Man to
get quit of his Prejudices, as (...) set Fire on his House; he had already
prep^red himself for this abjuring and renounci^^ from the very time he left
the College. H^ had practiced some Attempts to that purpos^ first of all, in
his Retirement in the Fauxbou^ St. Germain in Paris, and after that; whilst
(...) sojourned at Breda. With all these Dispo^tions he had no less to undergo,
than if he (...) been to unman himself.

He believed nevertheless, that he had a^complish'd his design, and to speak
the tru^^ it was enough that his Imagination did repr^sent to him his Intellect
quite naked, for (...) make him believe that he had effectual^^ brought it to
this condition, there was n^thing left him but love for truth, the pu^suit
whereof was to make up for the futur^ ^^e whole occupation of his life; this
admi^stred the only matter of torment he suf^red in his Spirit; but now the
means ^hereby to come to this happy Conquest ^casioned no less trouble and
perplexity ^an the end it self. The Enquiry he inten^ed to make after these
means, threw his ^ind into such violent Agitations increasing ^ore and more by
a continual Contest where^ith he kept it intent, without so much as ^^ving
leave to his walking abroad, or Com^^ions to divert it from what it was about.
^e wearied it out to that degree that his ^ain took fire, and he falls into a
spice of ^nthusiasm which disposed his Mind, already ^ite spent, in such a
manner, that it was (...) to receive the Impressions of Dreams and ^^sions.

He acquaints us, That on the Tenth of No^^mber 1619. laying himself down
Brim-full of (...) Enthusiasm, and wholly possessed with the ^ought of having
found that day the Founda^^ons of the wonderful Science, he had Three ^reams
one presently after another; yet so ^^traordinary, as to make him fancy that
^ey were sent him from above; he supposed ^e discerned through their shadows
the tracks ^f the Path which God had chalked out for ^^m, to perform his Will
in his choice of ^ife; and inquiry after truth, which was the ^ccasion of all
his disquiet; but the Divine ^piritual Air, which he took a Pride to give (...)
the Explanation of these Dreams, was so ^ar a kin to that Enthusiasm wherewith
he believed himself to be warmed, that a Man would have been apt to have
believed that he had been a little Crack-brain'd, or that he might have drank a
Cup too much that Evening before he went to Bed. It was indeed, St. Martin's
Eve, and People used to make Merry that Night in the place where he was as they
do in France; but he assures us, that he had been very Sober all that Day, and
that Evening too and that he had not touched a drop of Wine for Three Weeks
together.

Whatever was the matter with him, I cannot tell; but the impression of these
Agitation^ made upon him, caused him to make several reflections the next day
what course he should take. Without presuming too much upon the favorable
Construction he had put upon his Dreams* he had recourse to God afresh, to beg
of him to give him some Intimations o^ his wi^^, without an Aenigma; That he
would vouchsafe to enlighten him, and direct him (...) his research of Truth.
He endeavored also to interest the Virgin Mary in this Business which he
judged as the most weighty important one of his Life, and taking occasion from
a Journey he thought to take into Italy, he made a Vow of Pilgrimage to our
Lady o^ Loretto, which he was not capable to Perform till some Years after.

He got quit of his Enthusiasm a few days after, but although his Mind was
reduced to its former Station, and reinstated in its usual^ calmness, yet was
he no more Positive thann before, touching what he should resolve^ upon.

II. His searching after the Society of the Rosacrusians.
His Solitude during this Winter was wholly without interruption, especially by
Persons who were not capable of starting Questions in order to discourse, yet
did he ^ot debar any one from his Chamber who was inquisitive, or understood
how to discourse of Sciences or Philosophical Transactions. By Conversing with
such sort of Persons* he understood there was a Fraternity or Club of Learned
Men, settled in Germany some Years since, under the Name of Brethren of Rosy
Cross, they gave them wonderful Commendations often to him, they buz'd in the
Ear that they were a sort of Men which understood every thing, and that they
promised to help Men to a new-Wisdom; that is to say, a new Science not
hitherto discovered, adding all the Prodigies which every private Person told
him concerning it, to the rumor that was spread abroad through Germany, about
these Fellows; He found himself so much the more concerned at it, because he
received the News at the very time when he was the most busy concerning the
Mediums he was to propound to himself for the finding out of Truth.

He thought he was engaged not to be unconcerned upon the account of the Rosa
Crusians, because, (says he to a Friend of his) if these should prove
Impostures, it had been unlawful to let them run away with so much Reputation,
ill-gotten, at the expenses of the Peoples Credulity; and if so be they were
able to produce any new thing into the World which is worth knowing, it had
been a most base unworthy thing in him to under-value all Sciences amongst
which he might find one, of whose Foundation, he might have been ignorant. It
was his Business therefore to find out one of these new Virtuoso's, that he
might understand what they were, upon his Knowledges, and also confer with
them. But seeing one of their Statutes was, not to appear, what really they
were; not to be distinguished from other Men, neither by their Garb nor manner
of Living; nor to discover themselves in their Discourse, you need not wonder
if all his Pains and Curiosity came to nothing.

It was not possible for him to find out one single Man, who would really own
himself of that Fraternity, or that was but so much as suspected to be of it:
It was an hundred to one but he had put the Society out of the Predicaments,
and rankt them amongst Chimaera's; but that which made him forbear to do so,
was the great show the numerous Apologetical Pamphlets made, in favor of these
Rosacrusians, as well in Latin as High Dutch. Yet he thought it not safe
referring himself to all these Apologies, whether it was because his
inclination induced him to take these new Virtuoso's for Impostures, or else
because renouncing all Books, he had a mind to inure himself to judge of
nothing but upon his own proper Experience. And this is the reason why he was
free to say some few Years after, that he knew nothing of the Rosacrusians: he
was likewise surprised that his Friends should tell him, returning to Paris
1623. that the Reputation he had got of being one of the Fraternity of the
Rosacrusians was well worth ^is Sojourning in Germany.

Seeing himself thus frustrated of his hopes ^e had entertained to find some
body or other ^apable of encouraging him in the enquiry after Truth* He goes
into Suabia, and gets acquaintance with Faulhaber.
he relapsed into his former Trou^le and Encumbrance; He spent the rest of ^he
Winter and Lent without resolving on any thing; thinking himself, upon the
whole, ^o have had a good Deliverance from the Pre^udices of his Education,
still entertaining a ^design of Building all de novo; yet although, this
^incertainty with which his Mind was agitated, made the difficulties of
accomplishing his design, more sensible to him, than if he had forthwith
resolved upon it; yet for all that, he never was discouraged; he still kept up
his Spirits with the Success he experienced in adjusting the Secrets of Nature
to the Rules of Mathematics, according as he made any new discovery in
Physics. These Occupations secured him from Melancholy Fits, and other
effects of Idleness: and they took up his time till the D. of Bavaria ordered
his Troops to advance toward Suabia.

He laid hold on this Opportunity to be at Vlm, an Imperial City, in which the
French Ambassadors were to hold an Assembly for Redressing the Disorders
committed in the Empire. He arrived there only in the Month of June 1620, but
there he spent the whole Winter. There he got abundance of Acquaintance with
the most Creditable Persons in that place, and particularly with those who were
in any Reputation for their Abilities in Philosophy and Mathematics: No Body
was ever more esteemed for his acquaintance, in that Country, than John
Faulhaber, nor did ever any one more than he approve of the capacity of a young
Soldier, who presently made him mend his pace in Mathematics. Some suppose,
that then by means of a Parabole, he found out the Art of the Construction of
all sorts of solid Problems in general, reduct to an aequation of three or four
Dimentions: Which occurs plainly, Demonstrated in the third Book of Geometry.

Toward the end of September, He was at the Siege of Prague.
he left Suabia, to return to Bavaria, and so to pass into Austria, where the
Ambassadors of France were gone, after concluding the peace at Vlm, to meet the
Emperor once again, to proffer him their Meditation, in respect of the
Malcontents of Hungary and Bethlem Galer, Pr. of Transylvania: But having
learnt, that the D of Bavaria had ordered his Troops to march into Bohemia, in
stead of following the Ambassadors into Hungary, he went from Vienna, straight
to his Camp, and was in person, in the Expedition of the Imperial Catholics
and Bavarians, and above all, at the Famous Battle of Prague, into which he
entered, together with the Victors. Some Authors dare suppose, that he made use
of this opportunity, to visit those Famous Machines of Tyco-Bra^^e the
Astronomer: But were plundered above a year before, and either broken in
pieces, or ^ut out of order by the Elector Palatins Ar^y, and the great
Caelestial Globe of Brass, ^he only one they had the good fortune to save ^as
Transported to Neice in Silesia, and depo^ed at the Jesuits College.

After the taking of Prague, He past into Hungary under the Count de Bucquoy.
M. Des Carts ^ame to pass the Winter Quarters with a par^y of the Troops the
Duke of Bavaria had ^eft upon the extremities of South-Bohemia, ^here he sets
himself again to work upon his ^sual Meditations upon Nature, exercising
himself in the praeludiums of this great design, and improving the advantage he
had in his Hand, to live alone amongst those, whose liberty of Drinking and
Playing, he could not ^easonably envy, so long as they left him to his ^iberty
of Studying.

Nevertheless, he found himself hard put to it, in not resolving upon
something, besides he knew not what to determine in respect of his choice of a
way of living, answerable to his Designs: He deferred the deciding of it till
another time, and on purpose to give some diversion to his Troubles, he
resolved once more to take a Musket, and to weather out another Campaign. The
desire to be acquainted with other Countries, and other Manners, caused him to
quit the Duke of Bavaria's Service toward the end of March, 1621. that he
might List himself into the Troops of Count of Bucquoy, passing out of Hungary,
into Bohemia; April ensuing, he was with him at the Seige of Presbourg, Tinaw,
and several other places, wherein some suppose, he Signalized himself; but the
raising of the Siege of New-Hausell, which had not been so successful to the
Imperalists, as the others, added to the loss of his General, who was Slain
there, put him so out of humor, that he had no stomach to the profession of
Arms.

It will be to no purpose, But he did not serve against the Turks.
to take notice of the mistake of those who, pretend he went after that into
the Service against the Turks, nay, and that his Personal Courage too, acquired
him Notable Reputation against those Infidels, it may suffice to acquaint you,
that quitting the Imperial Service on the 28th. of July, the very next Day
after the Raising of the Siege of Newhausell, he came back to Presbourg, in
Company with certain Walloons, who were exceeding numerous in the Count of
Bucquoy's Army.

IV. He forsakes the profession of Arms.
His Design was not to come back into France so soon, whether by reason of the
War the Hugunots had but just began, or else because of the Plague that Raged
particularly in the City of Paris, for near a year together, which ceased not
till 1623. He betook himself therefore to Travel into that part of the Northern
Country, that remain't to be seen by him. Yet one may avouch, that it was
without changing his condition: For what he undertook, was nothing in a manner,
but a Continuation of Travels, which he intended to perform hence forward,
without being bound to follow Armies, supposing he had sufficiently pryed into,
and discovered Mankind, by way of its Hostilities. He always mentioned this
Military Profession, in such a cold and indifferent manner; that Men judged
thereby, that he looked upon his Campaigns as mere Travels, and that he made
use of the Bandolier, but as (...) Passport, which facilitated his access,
even ^o the innermost recesses of Tents, and to the ^ottom of Trenches, the
better to satifie his Curiosity.

Wherefore choosing for his future Voyages, His Northern Travels.
such Countries that were not* pestered with War, he applied himself
particularly, to see and examine Princes Courts, to frequent the company of
persons of different conditions, and contrary humors. He Studied moreover to
make a Collection of several Experiments, as well upon the natural Productions
of several Climats he past through, as upon politic matters, which he observed
amongst People, in respect of their Customs, Manners of Lives, and
Inclinations. This is what he calls the Great Book of the World: Wherein he
makes account to find out true Science, dispairing to find it any where else,
except in this Volum opened to every ones view, and in himself, according to
his persuasion, that the Seeds which God has Sown in us, are not so totally
stifled by ignorance; or other effects of sin.

According to these principles, he intended that these Voyages and Travels,
should serve him to make trial upon himself, in the Accidents and Occurrences
fortune should propose to him, and that they might put him upon making
Advantageous reflections upon every thing that presented it self, and became
profitable to him, for the Conduct of his Life; For he flattered himself with
the hopes of finding more of truth in the reasoning private persons use,
touching their own concerns; than in those which a great Scholar shut up in
his Study, uses upon Speculations, which ordinarily produce no other effects,
than Vanity and Haughtiness, and sometimes he prides himself the more in them,
by how much they are for the most part more dissonant to common Sense, after he
has labored and set all his Wits upon the Rack, to make them probable.

But to speak the truth, when he applied himself only, narrowly to survey the
manners of other Men, he found very little in them, whereby he could make
himself sure of any thing. He perceived in a manner, as great a diversity in
them, as he had before met with, in the Opinions of Philosophers: So that the
greatest Advantage that occurred to him by that inquiry, was, that seeing
several things, how extravagant and ridiculous soever they may appear to us,
yet do not cease for all that, to be commonly received and approved of by other
People; he learnt at last, not to believe any thing upon slight grounds, and
not stiffly and peremptorily to stand up for that which both Example and Custom
had formerly persuaded him to be right.

Leaving Hungary, he took another turn into Moravia, where he joined the
Emperors Forces, under the Count Bucquoy. He visited Selesia, the utmost parts
of Poland, Pomerania, ^he Coasts of the Baltic Sea, the Marquisate of
Brandenbourg, and descended into Holstein; from whence, after he had turned off
his re^^nue, he Embarked, but with one Man-Ser^ant for East-Freez-Land: when
he had examined it in a few days, as he had done the other Provinces of
Germany, he put again to sea, with a Resolution to go a shore in
West-Freez-Land, the principal places of which he ^ong'd mightily to see
likewise; that he might do it with the more freedom, he hired a small Boat for
himself, and so much the rather, because it was a short cut from Embden, to the
first Landing place of West-Freez-Land.

But this putting things in order, He was in danger of his Life.
the better to provide for his own Convenience, was like to have proved fatal
to him; he had to do with a crew of the most Clownish, Barbarous Mariners, that
ever Man see amongst People of that profession. It was not long before he
understood, that they were a pack of wicked Rogues, but after all, they were
Masters of the Boat. M. Des Carts, had no other to converse with, but his
valet, with whom he spoke French. The Mariners who took him rather for a
foreign Merchant, then a Cavallier, thought he must have good store of Money
about him; this made them take a Resolution, which was by no means favorable
to his pocket, and that they might deprive him of means to tell Tails, they had
thoughts of making him away: They perceived he was a Stranger, come from some
remote Country, who had small acquaintance in the Country, and that no Body
would prosecute them, if he chanced to be missing, they found him of a very
sedate, very patient humor, and judging by the mildness of Countenance, and
the Civility he showed them, that he was a person of no Experience in the
World, from these circumstances, they concluded they should have his Life at
(...) cheaper rate; they made no scruple to hold their Counsel before his Face,
not knowing that he understood any other Language besides that, in which he
Discourst with his valet de Chamber; at last, the result of their Deliberation,
was to knock him on the Head, to fling him into the water, and divide the Spoil.

Monsieur Des Carts seeing they were in earnest, starts up all on a sudden,
puts on another Countenance, draws his Sword with that stearness they little
expected, speaks to them in their own Tongue, but with such a Tone, that
frightened them out of their Wits; and withal, threatening to run them through,
if they durst but hold up a finger against him. It was upon this occasion, that
he perceived what resoluteness of a Man may do, upon your pitiful Low-spirited
Souls. Such a resoluteness as is above a Man's power to execute, a resoluteness,
which upon other occasions, might pass for a mere Bravado, such an one as he
showed upon this occasion, produced a wonderful effect upon the Spirits of
these wretches, the cruel fright they were seized with, was followed with
amazement, that they knew not how to make use of their Advantage, but brought
him without any more ado, to the ^lace whither he was bound, as peaceably as
^e could wish.

V. From West-Friez-Land, He goes back to his own Country.
he stepped into Holland, where he past a good part of the Vinter, expecting the
event of the two Sieges of Juliers and Sluise, formed by the Spaniard or
Fleming, who had taken up Arms again, against the Hollanders, five Months after
the Truce was expired: In the Month of February ensuing, he past into the
Catholic Netherlands, whose principal Cities, he had a great mind to see, from
whence, getting into France, he went straight way to Rennes in Britany, to his
Fathers House, toward the middle of March.

He was at that time 26 years of Age Complete, and his Father seeing him
present, took occasion of his being at Age to settleupon him his Mothers
Jointure, of which he had given two Portions to Monsieur La Bretailliere, and
to Madam du Crevis, that were elder than he, seeing that all his Estate was in
Paictou, he had the curiosity to go view it, on purpose to see how he could
improve it to the best advantage, he departed for that Province in May, and at
that time, fain would have a good Chapman to have bought it, that with that
Money, he might buy some place suitable to him, he returned about the latter
end of Summer to his Father, the year slipped away before any one of his kindred
could make him any overtures concerning what kind of life he should betake
himself to.

Having little or nothing to do at his Fathers House, He goes to Paris.
it made him have a huge desire to take a turn to Paris, toward the beginning
of Lent, the next year. People began to suck in a purer Air in this City, then
they had done for^ near three years, that the Contagion had corrupted it. At
his Arrival, the Affairs of tha^ unfortunate Prince Palatin of the Rhine,
elected King of Bohemia, the inroads, the Expeditions of Bastard Count
Mansfield, and the conferring the Prince Palatins Electorat to the Duke of
Bavaria, ratified at Ratisbon, the 25th. of February aforegoing, furnished
matter enough, for public Discourses. He was well stockt with matter,
where-withal to satisfy his Friends, as to that point, but in requital, they
imparted to him some news, that created them a great deal of sorrow. It was but
the other day, that Men began to speak of the fraternity of the Rosacrusians at
Paris, which he sought up and down in Germany, and all to no purpose, in 1619.
in Winter, and some began to spread abroad a report, as if he had admitted
himself into that fraternity.

He was so much the more surprised at this News; He takes of the slander of
being a Rosacrusian.
because it did not at all suit with the Character of his Genius, nor to the
Inclination he ever had, to look upon these same Rosacrusians, as a company of
Impostors and Visionaries, they were called in Paris, the Invisible, and they
published that of thirty six Deputies, that the Head of the Society had sent
throughout all Europe; six of them were come into France, in the Month of
February, ^^d lodged au marais du Temple Paris, but that ^^ey could not
Communicate their concep^^ns to the World, neither could any Com^nicate his to
them, but by their thoughts ^n'd with their Will, that is to say in a man^^
imperceptible by sense.

Chance, that had made their pretended ar^al in Paris to jump with that of
Monsieur (...) Carts, would have produced very ill ^^ects in reference to his
reputation, had he ^ne about to abscond, or had he but retired to some solitude
in the City, as he had done ^^fore his Travels, but was so happy as to confound
those thoughts, to improve this con^^cture to confirm their calumny. He
ap^^ar'd before the face of the World, but es^^cially to his Friends, who
desired no other ^^gument to be persuaded that he was not a ^ember of the
Fraternity of the Rosacrucians (...) Invisibles, yea, and made use of the
reason (...) their Invisibility to excuse himself to his ^riend, in as much as
he had not been able (...) discover any one of them in Germany.

His presence above all things was a means (...) calm the agitation, wherein
his Friend Fa^^er Mersennus was in, whom they sent for ^ack again to Paris at
the end of 1619. this ^lse report had so much the more easily ^ext and troubled
him, as he was less apt to ^elieve that the Rosacrucians were Invisible, ^^r
the Spring of a Chymaera, considering that several Germans, together with
Robert ^ludd an Englishman had delivered in favor of them.

VI. His (...) for his (...) of Livelihood.
The great Concourse of People Mr^ Des Carts saw in Paris, was not capable o^
filling up all the vacancies of his stay there* nor yet to keep him always
busied out of himself. Whenever he was with himself, h^^self always his
disturbance coming upon him concerning his choice of a way of livelihood
agreeable to his vocation, and that might b^ convenient for the executing some
designs h^ had in his head concerning finding out Truth* The settlement wherein
he saw the most par^^ of his Friends, each of them placed in advan^tagious
Posts for their Life, signified nothin^ for the fixing his resolutions.

His own experience had convinced him along time ago of the small benefit of
Math^ maticks, He declares against (...) and Physics.
especially when Men study them only for themselves, without applying them to
other things, since the year 1620. he had wholly laid aside the rules of
Arithmetick^ the great delight he had for Geometry continued yet a little
longer in his affection, because the Mathematicians of Holland and Germany he
had met with during his Travels^ had contributed much to his retaining them by
reason of their Queries and Problems they propounded to him to solve. But yet
we must confess, that his esteem of them wa^ ^efiened from the year 1623. if it
be true tha^ in 1638. it was above 15 years that he professe^ he had quite laid
aside Geometry, and would never more me^^le with the solution of any Problem,
b^^ only at the request of some friend.

He sees nothing less solid than for a Man to busy himself about pure simple
numbers, and ^maginary Figures, without having any fur^er design, nay he found
something in it ^ore than unprofitable, and he knew very ^ell it was of
dangerous consequence to ap^^y ones self too seriously, to these superficial
^^emonstrations which hazard supplied us with, ^ftner than industry and
experience, and are ^ather to be judged of by the Eyes and Imagi^ation, than by
the Understanding. His Maxim was that this same serious application ^oth
insensibly accustom us, not to make ^se of our Reason, and evidently exposes
us ^o loose the high Road, that its Light Chalks ^ut for us.

But we may acknowledge that he did not ^ive over the particular Study of
Arithmetic and Geometry, The Study of Universal Mathematics.
but to give himself up entirely ^o the research of that general, and withal,
^nfallible Science the Greeks judiciously style Mathesis, of which all
Mathematics are but ^arts. He pretended that for these particular Knowledges
to deserve the name of Mathematics, it was necessary they should have
references, relations, proportions and measures ^or their object, upon that
account he judged that there was a general Science designed on purpose to
explain all the questions that one could put, touching Relations, References,
Proportions and Measures, considered as separated from Matter, and that this
general Science might justly claim the title of Mathesis, or Universal
Mathematics, since it comprehends whatsoever can possibly put other knowledges
in a condition to deserve the name of Science or Mathematics.

Now that is the ridling of the difficulty, He falls upon Ethics and sets to
Physics again.
to believe that Monsieur Des Carts had quite and clean forsaken Mathematics,
at such a time that it was no longer in his choice to be ignorant of them, he
practiced likewise some attempts upon himself to discard the study o^ Physics
or Natural Philosophy. Finding abundance of discouragement in the little
certainty he took notice of in his Observations. Being resolutely bent to apply
himself to nothing but the Art of living well, he set himself again to the
Study of morality, for which he had testified already, before he went to
Travel, a great predilection, and one may lawfully say he was as good as his
Word, for he loved it to his latter end. But it was without ostentation, and
more for the regulating his own behavior than that of others. Yet it was not
long before he was persuaded that the study of Natural Philosophy, was not
altogether useless in tha^ of Morality, and that the Progress he could make, in
discerning of true and false, would stand him in great s^ead for regulating his
actions. That caused him to return to his Observation upon Nature, being
persuaded, That the most certain means to know how we ought to live, is to know
before hand what kind of Creatures we are, what kind of World it is we live in,
and who is the Creator of this Universe which we inhabit. He has oftentimes
since declared, That the insight he had acquired into Physic, had been very
serviceable to him in establishing certain Foundations in Morality or Ethics.
And that it was abundant more easy for him to find the satisfaction he looked
for in this point, than in several others that related to Physic or Medicine
although he had employed more of his time therein -- So that after all these
inquiries he might boast, ^ot so much that he had found out the means ^o
preserve Life, but, that, of not being ^fraid of Death, and that he prepared
himself for it, exempt from the disquiet common to those whose Wisdom is
derived from other Men's indoctrinements, grounded upon Foundations, that depend
only upon the Prudence and Authority of other Men.

Monsieur Des Carts was two months and upward in Paris entertaining his
Friends with the Discourse of this elusion that had possessed him, He goes into
Britany and Poictou where he sells his Estate.
touching his pretended renouncing Mathematics and Physics.

He sometimes took much pleasure in dissembling his Resolutions, and the least
occasion they presented him with, to resolve a Problem, or to make an
experiment, were unavoidable snares for him. The perplexity of his Mind, joined
to the necessity of regulating his affairs, made him go back into Britany
toward the beginning of May, thence he goes into Poictou, and in June and
July, during his sojourning there, he sold the greatest part of his Estate with
his Fathers consent; he had it from his Mother, and especially the Lordship of
Perron, which was his Title he bore to satisfy his Relations.

VII. His Voyage into I^aly.
Coming to Paris in August, and no^ finding an occasion to put out his Money to
the best advantage, he resolved at last to undertake a journey into Italy,
which he had still deferred thitherto, before he had procured him a place which
deprived him of the means to accomplish it. He departed, after that he had sent
Word to his Friends, That a journey beyond the Alps, would be much to his
advantage for the instructing him in business, and gain some experience in the
World, and get acquaintance with men verst in Worldly affairs, which he had not
yet done, adding, that, though he might not return Richer, yet at least he would
come back from thence more capable for business.

He took his Way through Switzerland, resolving to visit what he had not yet
seen in high Germany in his first Travels. It had been an easy matter for him
to have found at Basil, Zurich, and other Cities store of Philosophers and
Mathematicians capable to entertain him in Discourse: but he was more curious
to see Waters, Minerals, Mountains, the Air of every Country with its Meteors,
and generally what was at the greatest distance from frequenting Men's Company,
that he might know the Nature of things which appear to be least known to the
Vulgar Learned; when he passed through any City he saw your Learned Men but
just as others, he observed their actions no less than their discourse.

In July he past into the Country of the Grisons amongst which the commotions
in the Valtoline retained him some time. He continued his Journey through the
County of Ty^ol, from whence he came to Venice toward ^ogation time, there to
behold the Ceremony of the Doge or Dukes Marrying the Adriae^ick Sea, from
Venice, he thought of discharging his duty he imposed upon himself in Germany
in Nov. 1619. of paying his Vow to the Lady of Loretto, which he could perform
at that time. His Vow fulfilled, he had Leisure, before he went to Rome, to
think of some Domestic business, which served him amongst his Friends for a
pretense to Travel. The pretense was to try if he could get to be Intendant of
the French Army in Piedmont under the Constable Les diguieres in which he had
no good success.

The occasion of a Jubilee of 25 years the opening of which was to be performed
on Christmas Eve, to continue the whole year after, produced in his Mind some
stirrings of Devotion, although his prime motive was nothing else at first but
the curiosity of seeing Rome, and the Popes Court. There arrived in the City
about the latter end of November, a prodigious concourse of People flocking
thither from all parts of the Popish Europe, this appeared so favorable to the
passion he always had to know Mankind by his own proper knowledge, that instead
of spending his time in examining Edifices, Statues, Paintings, Antiquities,
Manuscripts and other rarities of Ancient and New Rome, he betook himself
particularly to the Study of Inclinations, Manners, Dispositions, and
Characters of Mind in the Crowd and Medly of so many different Nations. This
convenience gave a dispensation of traveling further, and stayed his longing
to go even to the very Heart of Sicily and Spain, there to find out the People
that remained to be seen by him.

VIII. His return unto France.
He departed from Rome to go back into France just at the time when Cardinal
Joseph Barberini the Pope's Nephew (whose esteem and friendship he had won)
embarked in order to be Legate at the Court of the most Christian King; but for
his part he desired to return home by Land, not to lose the opportunity of
seeing a Country he was overjoyed to know. He past through Tuscany, where he
did not fail to render a visit to the renowned Gallilaeus, if we may give
credit to those who have mentioned his Journey into Italy; but that was writ
only upon false Relations, and we are obliged to acknowledge upon his own
confession that he had never seen that Mathematician, and that he had no
correspondence with him.

Men did nothing but talk of the Expeditions the Duke of Savoy, and the
Constable Les Diguires were going to make upon the Genueze and Spaniard, which
afforded M. Des Carts the Curiosity just as he went out of Tuscany to go take
a view of the Army of the Constable, whom he found very busy at the Siege of
Gavi, when he arrived in his Camp, the City taken the last of April, he had
still a mind to be eyewitness to one part of the wonderful progress ^he D. of
Savoy's Army made. Thence he went (...) Turin toward the month of May, but
passing through the Country of Suza to re-enter France, he turned aside toward
Savoy to exa^ine the height of the Alps. It was upon this ^ccasion that after
some observations made upon Snow, first heated, and then made hea^ier by the
heat of the Sun, which the least motion of Air make to fall one upon another
with an huge noise, that he was confident he guessed at the cause of Thunder,
and found out the reason why it Thunders seldomer in Winter than Summer.

IX. He comes to live in Paris.
He came Post between Lions and Poictou, where understanding that his Father
was at Paris, he departed about the latter end of June to join him, and beg his
Advice touching the place of Lieutenant General of Chastelreaut, which was
proffered him, with a pretty good composition. Being come to Paris, he found
that his Father was gone for Britany, which being joined with the Entreaty of
his Friends, who wished to see him settled in Paris, did not a little contribute
to the causing his business of Chastelreaut to prove abortive, and put him out
of conceit with the Country.

Taking Lodgings at the house of Monsieur le Vasseur d'Etoiles, His manner of
Life.
Father to Mons. de Vasseur now living, Councellor in the Grand Chamber, he
procured himself a kind of Settlement in Paris; where drawing up a Model of
deportment or conduct concerning the manner of living, which all gentile
well-bred men of the World are wont to prescribe to themselves he embraced the
most plain, simple kind o^ life, the most remote from singularity and
affectation he could possibly think on. Ther^ was nothing in his house but what
was prett^ common, his Furniture and Table very clea^ and neat, but without
superfluity: He was served by a few Valets: He marched the streets without any
at his heels, with a Suit (...) single Taffity, which was Alamode in thos^
days, not wearing a Plume of Feathers, Sca^^ and Rapier but as badges of his
Quality; for no Gentlemen at that time could be dispens (...) with to wear
otherwise.

He had put off till he had finished his Travels, his pitching upon a stable
profession for the remainder of his days. But as he appeared not at all to have
mended his pace in deliberating, and was as much to seek as at the beginning,
yet for all that he did insensibly confirm himself in the thoughts of not being
subject to any employ, not but that be made a second serious review of the
several occupations that Men of this World follow, on purpose to try if he
could find one, which he could handsomely manage, and might be conformable to
the dispositions of his Spirit. But having examined every thing by the
touchstone of Reason, he found at length that he could do nothing better than
to continue in that Occupation which he then actually followed, since he had
got shut of all the prejudices of his Education. This occupation did solely
consist in employing his whole Life to ^ultivate and improve his Reason, and to
make the greatest progress he possibly could (...) the knowledge of Truth,
conformable to ^he method he had prescribed to himself.

He did not find himself, A maxim for regulaeting himself.
God be praised, any way a Slave to any of those passions which ^ause young men
to become vicious. He ^ound himself perfectly cured of the strong ^^clination
for gaming they had formerly in^pired him with, and also of the indifference
for mispending his time, the irresolution that might still remain touching the
general aims of his state and condition, had no effect upon his particular
actions. He lived and acted, without ever taking notice of the incertainty ^e
found in the judgments he past upon Sciences, According to the maxims that he
framed to himself of Morality, he intended to ^^mbrace the most moderate
opinions, the most commonly received in practice, and the farthest from excess,
for the regulating his conduct and demeanor. Doing himself besides the justice
not to prefer his private opinions to those of other persons, whom he judged
more Wise and more Sensible than himself.

He appeared upon all occasions so very jealous of his Liberty, that he could
not dissemble the aversion he had conceived, for all the engagements that are
apt to deprive us of our indifference to our actions, not that he would pretend
to find fault with the Laws, which are for remedying the inconstancy of weak
Spirits, or for settling sureness in the commerce of Life, permit men to make
Vows or Contracts obliging those who voluntarily and lawfully make them, to
persevere in what they undertake. Yet seeing nothing that continues in the same
state and condition, and promising to himself to perfect his judgment still
more and more, he thought he should have trespas^ against Sense and Reason, if
he had taken upon him to take a thing for good, when it ceased so to be, or to
appear to him to be such* upon pretense that he might have found i^ good
another time.

In respect of these actions of his Life which he believed could not admit of
delay, when he was not in a condition to discern the truest opinions, he always
stuck close to those that were probable. If it so happened that he met not with
more probability in some of them, than he did in others, yet did he not cease
to determine upon one, and not to consider them afterward, as dubious in
respect of practice, but as very true and certain, because that he found that
the reason he had to determine and pitch upon one, was such as by this means he
acquired the habit of delivering himself from repentings and remorses, which
usually rack the Consciences of weak and unstable Spirits, who are induced but
too rashly to practice as good, the things which they judge afterward to be
evil. Being persuaded that his Will never inclined him to pursue or avoid any
thing, but so far forth as his understanding did represent it to him good or
evil, he thought it sufficed him, to judge well for to do well, that is to say,
to acquire all Virtues, and all the benefits they are able to produce.

With these inward dispositions he lived in (...) appearance after the same
manner as they (...), who being out of employment, think of ^^thing else but to
live a sweet peaceable in^^cent Life in the Eyes of Men, studying to (...)
their leave of the pleasures that attend ^ice, and that they may enjoy their
leisure ^^me, without thinking it tedious, have re^ourse now and then to honest
divertisements. ^o that his deportment having nothing that ^mell'd of
singularity in it, capable of produ^ing ill effects in the Eyes or Imagination
of others, no body contrived to put an obstacle to the continuation of his
designs, and he, for his part proceeded day by day, in his inquiry into Truth
in relation to natural things.

X. His reputation gains him friends and is tired out with visits.
and XI. Albeit Monsieur Des Carts had procured himself a kind of settlement
in Paris, yet was he not so constant in his residence, during his year and half
abode there, but that he afforded himself from time to time, the liberty to
take a walk into the Fields, and even sometimes to undertake Journeys into his
Country.

Some few weeks after his return from Italy, the desire of seeing the Court of
France again, made him take a turn to Fontainbleau where he met with an
opportunity to salute the Legate, whom he had not seen since his departure from
Rome. He made use of his credit he gained at Court with him, to recommend to
him some learned persons of his friends, namely Monsieur Balzac, whose cause he
defended before this Cardinal against Father Gorela General of the Feuillans.

After a Journey he took the year following with Monsieur Vasseur his Landlord
and Relation, he went and took him a Lodging in the Fauxbourg St. Germain, to
live more retired and private, but it was not such an easy matter as it was
before, in the days of his leisure: his old acquaintance, especially Monsieur
Mydorge and Father Mersennus, had so far spread abroad his Reputation, that in
a short time he found himself worn out with frequent visits, and the place of
his retirement changed into a Rendezvouse of Conferences. He could by no means
hinder the number of his Friends from multiplying, yet nevertheless He was his
own Master as to the choice He made of them.

The chief of his Friends, besides Monsieur Balzac whom we but just now
mentioned, was M. Hardy a Counselor in the Chastelet, a very able Man in
Mathematics, and abundance of Languages; M. de Beaune, Sieur de Gouliou
Counselor in the Presidial of Blois, one of the greatest Wits of his Time, in
respect of Mathematics; M. Morinus Regius Professor of Mathematics in Paris,
Doctor of Physic, Father Gibeuf Doctor of the Sorbonne, Priest of the Oratory,
one of the greatest Divines of his Age; Father dela Barde; Father de Sancy;
Father de Goneren, all of the same Congregation, besides Cardinal de Berulle
who was head of it; M. Des Argues a Gentleman of Lions, an able Mathematician,
and Mechanic; M. de Boissate, a Gentleman ^f Dauphine, whom he saw at the
Siege of ^avi; M. de Serizay Comptroller of the house of the D. de la
Rochefoucault; M. Sarazin Se^retary to the Prince of Conty; M. Silhon, a
Gentleman of Gaseoigny; M. Frenicle Sieur de ^essy; M. Jumeau, Prior of St.
Cross, who ^ent for one of the greatest Arithmeticians of that Age, as did M.
Frenicle, Jumeau had ^een Tutor to M. the Duke de Vernevil; M. de Marande.
Recorder of the Court of Aides. M. the Abbot de Launay; M. de Barreau; M. the
Abbot de Touchelaye the Elder; M. de Gandais; M. de Ville Arnou; M. de Ville
Bressieux, a Physician of Grenoble, and a great many more besides; of whom we
shall name none besides M. de Picot Prior of Rouvre, who would fain have been
his correspondent afterward, and his agent concerning his Domestic affairs.

XII. His cutting Spectacle Glasses and Looking Glasses.
But of all his Friends, there was none at that time, next to Father Mersennus,
that he see oftener, nor more constantly than Monsieur Mydorge, neither was
there any one whose Company was more Beneficial, or whose Services were more
Cordial and Sensible to him; which he particularly experienced in respect of
the Glasses he got cut in Paris, in the year 2627, 1628. when they enjoyed one
another Company at leisure. Nothing appeared to him more Serviceable, than
these Glasses, for the Apprehending and Explaining the reflection and refraction
in vision, Mr. Mydorge caused some concave ones to be made for him, as also
Hyperbolick Oval, and Elliptick ones* and having an Hand as sure and fine, as
hi^ Wit was quick and subtle, he was willing to describe these Hyperboles and
Ellipses himself.

Monsieur Des Carts himself, Ferrier a Mathematical Instrument maker.
proved to be a great Master in the Art of cutting Glasse^ in a short time: Now
since the Mathematicians industry oftentimes signify nothing, for want of
Workmen, whose dexterity does not always answer the ingenuity of those th^^
set them a work, he therefore applied himself particularly to direct the Hand
of some Turners, that he found the most expert and best capable of performing
this sort of Workmanship. Which he did particularly in favor to the Famous
Monsieur Ferrier, Mathematicial Instrument-maker; who was nothing else but a
plain downright Artificer, that could only move his Hand, he was likewise
master of the Theory of his Profession, and not altogether ignorant in
Mathematics. He stuck closs to Monsieur Des Carts, who took a particular
affection for him, not being content to employ him after a way that might raise
his Fortune, was moreover willing to instruct him, after what manner he might
perfect himself in his Art.

Nevertheless he perceived himself up to the ears again in abstruse Sciences,
Mr. Des Carts is quite out of love with Company.
which he had declined; he retires once again, seeing how few People there was
in Paris, with whom he might Communicate his Notions. But sets himself again
with more earnestness, than ever to the Study of Man, in which he had made so
^dvantagious progress during his Travels: This Study let him sufficiently
understand, that these ^bstracted Sciences, are not too necessary and
^onvenient for us, and he himself in diveing in^o them, was more at a loss,
than they who were ^gnorant of them; he thought to have found (...) least,
amongst so many generous Souls, ma^y Companions in his Study of Man, since it
is that Study that is most convenient, and agrees ^est with us; but he found he
was mistaken, and he observed, that in that great City which ^asseth for the
Epitome of the World, as well ^s Rome and Venice, or any other place where ^e
had been, that there are fewer persons who study Man, than study Geometry.

That made him resolve once more to ^eny himself, as much as possible, and be
content with a small number of choice Friends, for the Comfort of his Life, but
his Reputation was a great hindrance to his Resolution. This Reputation had
made Monsieur Vasseur's House, whither he was returned from the Fauxbourg St.
Germain, a kind of an Academy, by drawing thither abundance of People, who were
introduced into his Chamber by the favor of his friends; those that had a
curiosity for ingenious Learning, were forward to slip in amongst the rest, and
accompanying such of his Friends as took delight in spreading his Reputation,
they ventured to propose to him to put Pen to Paper to make the Public a
sharer of his fine conceptions. The very Booksellers who always seek to make a
Trade of the reputation of Authors, seemed also as if they had a mind to be in
the Plot with those that lay close Siege to him at Mons. Vasseur's. He
acquaints us, that from that very time, one or other of that Profession, caused
Presents to be offered to him to engage him to Promise them the Copy of what he
should Compose, not being ashamed to desire to buy the honor of serving him.

This was it that made his Sojourning in Paris very tedious and burthensom to
him, He lies hid and is discovered.
and made him feel his own Reputation to be an insupportable Load for him. He
could not bethink himself any Remedy for it but Retirement, and to begin to
deliver himself from the Importunities of those haunted too often, he once
again quitted the House of Monsieur Vasseur, and withdrew to the Extremity of
the City, where he might have chused whether he would let himself be seen or
no, except only to a few of his intimate Acquaintance who knew of his Privacy.
Mr. Vasseur, to whom he judged it not convenient to disclose, was a good while
troubled at it* till such time as by mere chance calling to mind our
Philosopher's valet, he see five or six Months after, he obliged him to inform
him concerning his Master's abode, and carry him thither, it was past Eleven a
Clock when he found him just getting up; After he had a little observed his way
of Studying and Writing in Bed, by means of his Valet, who had declared to him
his Master's Secret.

XIII. He goes to the Siege of Rochelle.
Mons. Des Carts finding himself thus discovered, it was in vain to regret the
sweetness of his Retirement, and to seek means to repair the loss of his
Liberty; he could not divert the course of his ill Fortune, and he relapsed
again in a few days into the same inconvenience he had freed himself from in
absconding. His Vexation at the Discovery, beat up his Quarters, and produced
in him the desire to go see the Siege of Rochelle.

He came into the Country d' Aunis toward the latter end of August 1628. only
to be an Eyewitness of the Siege which was already far advanced, that he might
Survey, as a Mathematician, the famous Ditch of Card. Richelieu, with the Line
of Communication; but he could not handsomely forbear serving in quality of a
Voluntier, beholding the Activity wherewith the King in Person ordered his Army
by Sea and Land. In which particular he was soon followed by diverse Gentlemen
of his Age, who came only to the Siege out of a Curiosity like his.

He entered the Town with the King's Army upon All Saints Day, which was on a
Wednesday, he assisted the next day, being All Souls, at the Solemn Procession
of the Host performed in the Streets; now there being nothing more to be done
after the Consummation of this famous Siege; He came back to Paris by Post,
where he was against Martinmass. He was present at a famous Assembly at the
Nuncio's House.


XIV. Some few days after, he was at an Assembly of learned and curious
inquisitive Persons at the Pope's Nuncio's House, who was called Monsigneur
Bagne, created Cardinal shortly after, who honored our Philosopher with his
acquaintance a good while ago. Monsieur Des Carts was invited thither, and
carried along with him Father Mersennus and Mons. de Ville Bressieux to hear
the Sieur Chandoux, who was there to debate concerning some new Opinions in
Philosophy.

Chandox made a long Discourse for to refute the way of teaching Philosophy,
used in the Schools. He proposed moreover, a pretty common System of Philosophy
which he pretended to introduce, and had a mind to make it pass for a new one.

The Pleasantness wherewith he accompanied his Discourse, did so impose upon
the Company, that he received from it an almost Universal Applause, except from
Monsieur Des Carts, who was not forward to demonstrate outwardly any signs of
Satisfaction which indeed he had not received from the Discourse of the Sieur
de Chandeux. Cardinal Berulle, who was one of the Assembly, took special notice
of his Silence; which put him upon demanding his Opinion touching what he had
heard, which appeared so excellent to the Company.

Monsieur Des Carts did all that he could to excuse himself from delivering
his Mind declaring that he had nothing to say against it after the Approbation
of so many knowing Men. They make him explain his meaning in his Philosophy.
This shuffling accompanied with a certain tone, which somewhat suspicious,
made the Cardinal conjecture he did not judge of the Discourse altogether as
the others did; which moved him still the more to urge him to declare what he
thought of it. Monsieur the Nuncio, and other most remarkable Persons in the
Assembly joined their Entreaties to those of the Cardinal, to urge him to speak
his Mind. So that not being able to recoil without being incivil, he told the
Company, that the truth of it was, he had never yet heard any one that could
boast of speaking more to the purpose than Monsieur de Chandoux had done. He
first of all commended the Eloquence of his Discourse, and his great Talent he
was endowed with for quaint words and expressions. He commended withal that
generous Liberty he demonstrated for endeavoring to deliver Philosophy from
the Perplexity of the Schoolmen. But he took occasion from this Discourse, to
observe to them the Power of very similitudo, taking the upper hand of Truth,
which upon this occasion seemed to have triumphed over the Judgment of so many
grave, judicious Persons. Adding withal, that at such time as one has to deal
with People easy enough to take up with very similitude or likelihood, as the
illustrious Assembly before which he had the honor to speak had done, it was
not difficult to put off false Ware for true, and interchangeably make Truth
pass for Falsehood by means of appearing so.

For to give them an instance of it upon the spot, he demanded of the Assembly
that some body in the Company would give himself the trouble to propose to him
such a Truth as he pleased, that might be in the number of those that appear
the most incontestable and irrefragable: they did so; and with a Dozen
Arguments every one more probable than another, he proved to the Company that
it was False. Then he bid them propose to him a Fallacy or Falsehood, such an
one as Men commonly take for a most evident one; and by means of another Dozen
of probable Arguments, he forced the Auditors to acknowledge it to be plausible
Truth. The Assembly was surprised at the extent of the Genious Monsieur Des
Carts showed in his Reasoning; but it was still more astonishing to see
themselves too plainly convinced of the easiness with which our Mind becomes
Cully'd by very Similitude.

Then they asked him, If he could think of no infallible Expedient to avoid
Sophisms? He replied, That he knew none more certain than that he himself made
common use of; adding withal, That he had fetched it from Mathematics; and
that he did not believe that their could be any Truth, that he could not
clearly demonstrate by this means according to his own Principles.

This way was nothing else but his Universal Method, which he calls otherwise
his Natural Method, according to which he tried and squared all sorts of
Propositions. The first benefit of this Method was to demonstrate at the first
sight, whether the Proposition was possible or no; the other benefit consisted
in making him infallibly to sound the difficulty of the said Proposition.

There was not any Person in the Company that did not appear much taken with
his Reasonings, The Cardinal makes him resolve to Publish his Philosophy.
but no body took greater Satisfaction in them than Cardinal de Berulle, who
declared to Monsieur Des Carts, that he could wish to hear him once more upon
the same Subject in private. Monsieur Des Carts, very sensible of the Honor a
Person of his Dignity did him, paid him a visit some days after, and discoursed
with him concerning the first Notions he conceived about Philosophy, after he
had perceived the small benefit that flows from the means commonly used to
treat of it. And by the way, he showed him the consequences his Thoughts might
produce, if they were rightly guided, and the benefit and advantage that would
accrue to the Public, if they would but apply his way of Philosophy to
Medicine or Physic and Mechanics; one whereof would produce the recovery and
preservation of Health, the other the lessening and relieving Labors.

The Cardinal had not much ado to apprehend the importance of the design, and
judging him the most proper Person to put it in execution, he made use of the
Authority he had upon his Spirit to induce him to undertake this great Work.
Nay, he made it case of Conscience, he gave to understand that having received
from God Strength and Penetration of Mind, and withal was so enlightened to
this effect which was not granted to others, it behoved him to render an exact
account how he improved his talent, and that he would be responsible before the
Supreme Judge of all the World, for the injury he should do to Mankind, in
depriving them of the benefit of his Meditations. Yea, and went so far as to
assure him, that considering the capacity of his genius, so vast as he knew it
to be, God would not be wanting to him in bestowing his Blessing upon his
Labor, and granting him all the Success he could possibly expect.

The impression that Pious Cardinal made upon him, seconded with what his own
good Nature and Reason dictated to him long before, won him over to resolve
upon it. Till that time he had been of no Party in Philosophy, and had made
choice of no Sect, as he himself acquaints us. He persisted in his resolution
to keep his Liberty, and to work upon Nature it self, without insisting much
upon seeing in what he might come nearer, or be further off from those that
treated of Philosophy before him.

The earnest requests his Friend renewed to him for to hasten him to
communicate his clear Notions to the Public, did not permit him any longer to
go back with his word, He now only deliberates about the means how he might
most commodiously execute his design; having observed two main Obstacles that
might prevent his succeeding, to wit, the heat of the climat, and crowd and
hurly-burly of People: he resolved to retire for good and all from the place of
his Friends and Acquaintance, and procure himself a perfect Solitude in a
Country indifferent cold, where he might not be known.

BOOK III.
From 1628. to 1637.
HAving made choice of Holland for the place of his Retirement, He retires into
the Country, and then into Holland.
as the most favorable Country for his Designs executing: He appointed Father
Mersennus to be his Correspondent for his Commerce of Letters which he was to
keep on foot in France, and committed the management of his Domestic Affairs
to Ab^^ot Picot. Going out of Town about the beginning of Advent, An. 1628. he
thought it not convenient to go straight into Holland, that he might not
suddenly expose his Health to the rigor of the Season: But he retired into a
place in the Country, where he spent the Winter at a distance from the
convenience of Cities, on purpose to accustom himself by degrees to Cold and
Solitude.

After an Apprentiship of near Four Months to get the knack of it, away goes he
for Holland, about the latter end of March, An. 1629. He was at that time just
33 Years of Age; scarce was he arrived at Amsterdam, but he received an account
of the discontent of some who muttered against his resolution, who blamed his
retirement. The Complaints that were made of it, to speak the truth, had no
other Sourse but the Respect and Kindness of some Persons of his Acquaintance,
believing themselves quite forsaken and forlorn.

The reproaches were reduced to three sorts, First of all, for leaving France,
where his Gratitude and Education seemed to have obliged him to tarry, and for
having chosen Holland before all other places in Europe; and last of all, for
having forsaken Humane Society by avoiding Company.

As he had prepared his Spirit for all Events, so had he likewise hardened his
Heart against all false Kindness and Tenderness, and being persuaded that his
deportment needed no Apology, he did not trouble him much to stifle the
Complaints of Friends and near Relations; yet seeing that time had di^^^pated
their resentments, which reason perhaps was not able to accomplish all on the
sudden, it came into his Mind to give some account of his Proceedings and
Conduct, for the satisfaction of those who would be moved at these sort of
reproaches. As to the reason that made him quit France, he alleged the hurry
and importunity of the Crowd of People that he must have been obliged to see
and endure in his own Country to the prejudice of his Studies. Besides, the
heat of the Climate, which he experienced no ways favorable to his
Constitution in respect of the freeness of his Mind. For to justify his
preferring Holland, he urged the Tranquillity the Heart of this Country enjoyed,
being surrounded with Armies that served to preserve it; the Conveniences of
Life that Trade and Commerce produced, the opportunity of leading a Solitary
and unknown life there, amongst a People taken up with their own, and last of
all, the quality of the Climate to be preferred in respect of his Health, to
the hot Air of Italy, which he should otherwise have pitched upon for his
Abode, upon Consideration of the Catholic Religion; but as for what they lay
to his charge, that he declined the Company of Men, he was persuaded, that it
was not so much his particular case, as that of all great Philosophers, who,
that they might procure liberty to apply themselves closely to their Studies
and Meditation, have abandoned the Courts of Princes, and staying in their own
dear Country.

II. His ambulatory hidden Life in Holland.
Arriving in Holland, he gave out at the very first that he would look upon
himself but as a Foreigner there, who did not aspire to the Rights and
Privileges of a Free Denizon, and desired to take Lodgings, only with a
resolution of changing his abode ever now and then; the space of Twenty Years
that he past in Holland which he called his Inheritance, was as unsettled and
fleeting as the sojourning of the Israelites in Arabia the Desert,
notwithstanding he bragged that he could preserve his Solitude in the greatest
crowd of People, as easily as in the midst of a Wilderness; yet did he shun
the throng of great Cities, and it was always his way to lodge in the remotest
part of their Suburbs. He evermore preferred to them Villages and lonesome
Houses far in the Country, provided he could find them convenient for his
purpose, and pretty nigh Cities, whereby to be provided the more easily with
all sorts of Provision.

Seldom or never did he cause his Letters or Pacquets that were directed to him
to be sent right to the place of his abode, the better to keep himself
concealed, sometimes they were received at Dort by Mr. Beckmen, at Harlem by
Monsieur Bloemaert, at Amsterdam by Mademoiselle Reiniers, or Mr. Van Sureck de
Bergen, at Leiden by M. Hoogheland, and at other times at Vtrecht by Regius, or
Mons. Schu^man's Brother, an ingenious learned Lady of that Name; commonly
there was no body beside Father Mersennus who was privy to his Secrets upon
that account, and he kept it so close, that several learned and inquisitive
Persons of France, who traveled during all that time in Holland, were deprived
of the Satisfaction of seeing him, because they could not possibly find out his
haunts. For his part whenever he writ to his Friends, especially before he
settled at Egmond, he generally dated his Letters, not from the place of his
abode, but from the City, as from Amsterdam, Leiden, etc. where he was sure no
body could find him; when he became too well known in one place, and that he
was too frequently visited by Persons, impertinent and useless, he never
delayed to decamp, that he might break off his Acquaintance, and so retire to
some other place where he might not be known. Which succeeded very well all
along, till such time as his Reputation was a means to discover him in all
places, where it followed him as his Shadow.

From Amsterdam, He goes to live in Friezland, where he sets upon his
Metaphysical Meditations.
where he stayed at first, ^e passed into Friezland, retiring to a place near
Franeker, he lodged in a little Castle separa^ed from the City but by a small
Ditch. He ^udged this place so much the more convenient ^or him, because they
said Mass there with much security, and because one found there ^erfect Liberty
for all the other exercises of ^he Catholic Religion.

There it was he renewed his old Protesta^ion before the Altar, not to Labor,
but on^y for the glory of God and benefit of Man^ind, and therefore intended to
begin his Meditations concerning the Existence of God and Immortality of our
Soul. But that he might undertake nothing which had any affinity with Divinity,
he did not intend to look upon God otherwise, but as the Author of Nature, to
whom he made account to consecrate all his Talents. It was not Natural
Theology, but only that of Revelation that he excluded from his Designs.

III. Metaphysics or Natural Theology, His Notion touching Dioptricks.
did not so much take up all his time but that he reserved some Portion of it
for Experiments in Physic; and particularly for those of Dioptricks, whereunto
he had mightily addicted himself in France. Scarce was he settled in Friezland,
but he called to mind that he had left Monsieur Terrier at Paris; he who was
the famous Workman in Mathematical Instruments, whom he had employed for
Cutting of Glasses. He thought he was not yet discharged of the care he had
taken some time before of his Fortune and Instruction; but the Proposals he
made of receiving him into hi^ House, and to receive him as his Brother i^ an
equal Communication of his Substance and Studies, became all of none effect,
for want of management in Ferrier, whose Negligence occasioned his falling into
diverse Miseries since, which Monsieur Des Carts, who had foretold him what
would come on him, could not help, but by halves at that distance.

The unresolvedness of Ferrier, He returns to Amsterdam.
made him change his measures he had taken for several Laboratories he had
already prepared in his House near Franeker, that he might get him to Work
about making Instruments and Glasses. At the end of Six Months, he forsook this
abode to return to Amsterdam, where he spent Three Months more upon his
Mathematical Meditations: But the Treatise of it which he had begun, was
interrupted by his other Studies at the Beginning of the next Year, and he set
not about it again till Ten Years after.

IV. He was still in Friezland, The occasion of his Treatise of Meteors, the
Phenomena of Parhelias.
when he was solicited to put out his Reflections upon the famous Phenomena
Parhelias or false Suns, observed at Rome in March, An. 1629. the Observation
was sent him by Father Mersennus, and before that by Sieur Henry Reneri, or
Renier, a new Acquaintance he had got at his arrival in Holland, who was since
looked upon as one of his Chief Disciples or Followers that ever publicly
taught his Philosophy; Reneri received it from Monsieur Gassendus then ^n
Holland, who Composed a Dissertation upon it in his Travels, before Monsieur
Des ^artes.

It Is to these Observations of Parhelia's that ^he World is beholding for that
excellent Treatise of Meteors, which Monsieur Des Car^es presented it with,
some Years after. He ^roke off his Metaphysical Meditations, that ^e might
examine in order all Meteors, and ^e labored several times upon this Subject,
before he could find any thing in it wherewithal to satisfy himself; but at
last being capable, by reason of several Observations very exact, to render a
Reason of the most ^art of Meteors, especially concerning the co^ours of the
Rainbow, which puzzled him more than all the rest, he resolved to Compose a
Treatise of it, which concludes at the Dissertation of Parbelia's.

V. At his return from Friezland, The Death of his Director Card. Berulle.
he lost an excellent Director and most sincere Friend in the Person of
Cardinal de Berulle, who died suddenly in Paris the Second of October. He had
always a great Veneration for his Merit, and mightily valued his Advice, he
looked upon him, next to God, as the principal Promoter and Author of his
Designs. He had the Satisfaction, after his decease, to meet with some of his
Scholars; I mean, some of the Priests of the Oratory, in whose hands he might
entrust the direction of his Conscience all the while he remained in Holland.

No sooner was he settled in Amsterdam, but (not being able to forget the End
and Scope of his Philosophy, His Study of Physic, Anatomy and Chemistry.
which was only the benefit of Mankind) he seriously undertook the Study of
Physic, applying himself more particularly to Anatomy and Chemistry. He
imagined that nothing was more capable to produce the temporal Felicity of this
World, than an happy Union of Physic with Mathematics; But before he was in a
Capacity to contribute any Comfort or Relief to Men's Labors, or could multiply
the Conveniences of Life by Mechanics, he thought it necessary to find out
some way or other to secure Humane Body from Evils that might disturb its
Health, and deprive it of power and force to Labor.

Upon this Persuasion, he began to put his designs in execution by Study of
Anatomy; wherein he employed all the Winter he spent at Amsterdam. He declares,
That he had so much eagerness for the Knowledge of this, that it made him go
almost every day to a Butcher's Shop to see him Kill Beasts, and from thence he
caused the Parts of such Animals to be brought home to his Lodging, as he
designed to Anatomize at his own leisure. This was his common Practice,
frequently in other places where he was since, thinking that there was no
disgrace for him, nor any thing unbeseeming his Condition in the practice of a
thing that was in it self very innocent, and might prove very serviceable in
its effects.

He joined the Study of Chemistry to that of Anatomy, from the latter end of
the Year 1629. and he assures us, that he learned daily in this Science, as he
did in other, something that did not occur in Books; but before he would apply
his Mind to the finding out Diseases and Remedies, he had a desire to know
whether or no there was any means to find out a Medicine that might be grounded
upon infallible Demonstration.

VI. VII. These Beginnings were abundance more Prosperous to him than he durst
hope they would have been, The ill Conduct of Beeckman and Ferrier.
and there could be nothing wanting to his Satisfaction to see the first
success of his Studies, but the assurance of seeing the issue of them; the
great delight he took in them, made him more and more relish the sweetness of
his retirement; and nothing disturbed his repose this Year, but the ill
behavior of Beeckman and Ferrier toward him.

The first, above Thirty Years elder than he, seeing his Reputation to increase
in the eyes of the World, discovered a Pedantick Itch to make People believe
that he had been formerly his Master: although he himself had learnt of Monsieur
Des Carts that of which he bragged up and down he had taught him; thereupon he
took him to task, Doccumentized him handsomely to make him know himself; and
although he was willing to forego something he had given him formerly upon
Algebra, Dioptricks, and Geometry; yet he made him restore him the Original of
his Treatise of Music, that he might at least keep his Vanity within Bounds.

The other, acknowledging his Fault he had committed the foregoing Year, in
refusing to go along with Monsieur Des Carts, to live with him in Friezland,
and being willing to make amends, at a time when M. Des Carts was no longer in
a capacity to such like advantageous Kindnesses, made, as if he complained of
his bad Fortune to frame real Complaints against Monsieur Des Carts his
Benefactor. He carried his Complaints every where, where there was any
considerable Persons that knew him, several of which writ to Monsieur Des
Carts in his behalf. Now he, that he might not become suspected of hard
dealing, see himself obliged to argue the case with them, and to justify the
distance and impossibility that there was for him to grant at that time those
Conditions he had urged him to accept of, when he entreated him to come live
with him at Franecker. Nevertheless, after he had convinced him in particular,
that he might take himself only for all the hardships he suffered and
complained of, he was willing to take up his former thoughts of good will
toward him, as he had done in respect of Beeckman. Visit of Father Mersen. The
Book of Father Gibeuf.
But to comfort him for those petty Causes of being vexed, that these two Men
had administered, there happened two things in relation to two other of his
Friends, which he reckoned amongst the good Fortunes of this Year. The first,
was a Visit Father Mersennus went to make him as far as Amsterdam. The second,
was the publishing of Father Gibeuf's Book concerning the Liberty of God and of
the Creature, wherein he had the pleasure to find where-withall to authorize
what he conceived of Indifference and Free Will.

VIII. It was at the same time the Count de Marcheville, He resuse^h to go into
the Levant.
nominated by the King to go Ambassador to the Port, got some to desire him
that he would be pleased to accompany him, together with Monsieur de Chasheil,
M. Bouchard, M. Holstein, M. Gassendus, Father Theoph. Minuti, with diverse
other Learned Men he intended to carry along with him to Constantinople, and
into the Levant; he would have heartily wished such another opportunity had
presented it self 4 or 5 Years before, but being of a Condition not to Travel
any more, he excused himself upon the account of his Occupations not permitting
him to leave the place of his retirement.

Yet for all that, He goes into England.
he made a Voyage into England a little while after, and he made, somewhere,
not far from London, some Observations touching the Declinations of the Magnet,
which do vary in England; this Voyage which he terms but a mere walk, was but
short. At his return, He was thinking of easing himself and Father Mersennus of
part of the Importunities which his reputation brought upon him, upon the
account of some Mathematicians, to the end, He would propound no more Questions
to any body, and stints himself not to resolve any but those they had
propounded to him.
that both might husband the leisure they had for more important studies.

Some particular Persons knowing there was no other way of Communication but by
Father Mersennus, by which they might get their Consultations conveyed to
Monsieur Des Carts, and to receive Answers of them, flocked to his Convent to
bring him their Questions, and returned to fetch the Solutions and Explanations
of Monsieur Des Carts. This Concourse put him to a trouble he had the goodness
never to complain of; and not satisfied to exhort Monsieur Des Carts to answer
all the Questions that were propounded to him, in the Pacquets he sent him; He
challenged him also to send him some of his own Problems to propound to others,
of which he undertook to send him the Solutions. Monsieur Des Carts put him in
mind that he had utterly discarded the Study of Mathematics for several Years
last past, that he was fully resolved not to lose his time in those jejune
Operations of Geometry and Arithmetic, that at the long run there was nothing
material or important got by it. But upon the whole he acquainted him, that his
design was, not any longer to propound Problems to any one whatsoever; and that
he thought he had taken a hard task upon himself, to be reduced for the future,
not to resolve any but those of others, wherewith he professes besides that he
was quite tired.

IX. Of a great many Friends in France, He receives Ville Brissieux into his
House.
to whom his Absence seemed difficult to bear, who declared their great
Passion, they should have had to come and lived with him, we know none but
Monsieur Balzuc, whom he could like, to have lived with him; but the Obstacles
that thwarted Monsieur Balzac's good intent, must needs be such as were not
easily to be surmounted, if all be true that he Protests very seriously, That
he had a longing desire to be reunited to him, and never more to forsake him.

Monsieur de Ville Bressieux had much better luck than he in this particular,
and his presence was by so much the more acceptable to Monsieur Des Carts, as
he knew there was in him a vast Genius for Mathematics, and a strong
Inclination for Chemistry, accompanied with a great deal of affability and
sweetness of disposition: Ville Bressieux was not content to become his
Disciple; he would fain have been his Domestic Crony, to have learned his
Deportment as well as his Opinions.

Henry Reneri, He goes to reside at Deventer.
whom we told you was one of the fir^^ Admirers of Monsieur Des Carts, who had
publicly professed his Philosophy, that is to say, his Principles according to
his Method, being made Professor in Philosophy at Deventer, swayed much with
Monsieur Des Carts to go live in that Town; which he did in the Year 1633. in
the Spring: there he he busied himself to continue diverse works he had broke
off the preceding Year, particularly his Dioptricks, and his Treatise of the
World; he applied himself likewise afresh to the knowledge of Celestial
Matters, and his Astronomical Observations made him quickly understand the
necessity of studying the Natures of Comets to the purpose.

He took occasion from this sort of Study, to draw up the Model of the
Histories of Celestial Appearances, for Father Mersennus, just such as he
conceived it to be, for the assistance and furtherance of those, whom the
Father had sent him word, took wonderful delight in sparing no pains for the
advancement of Sciences, even to be willing to make Experiments at their own
Cost and Charges.

X. During this Year's Summer, His Treatise of the World.
he finished his Treatise of the World, long looked for by Father Mersennus and
his Friends with great impatience. He called it his World, because it was the
Idea of a World that he had imagined answerable to the World we live in; and he
comprised in an Abridgment all his Physics, I mean, all that he could come to
the knowledge of, concerning material things, saving only that which relates to
Light, which he intended to explain in its full Extent and Latitude.

That he might not be engaged to follow or refute the Opinions commonly
received amongst the Learned, he was willing to give over this same World to
the exercising of their Brains in disputing about it; and to speak only of that
which might happen in a New World, put the case God did create sufficient
matter on the imaginary spaces to Compose such. He supposed God would diversely
and confusedly agitate the parts of this matter, so that he would Compose of it
a Chaos, or an indigested confused Mass, and that in process of time, he should
only send his Ordinary Concourse to Nature, and let her act conformable to the
Laws and Ordinances he has established.

Upon this Supposition he describes you this matter at the very first, he made
appear what kind of Laws of Nature these were; he demonstrated afterward, that
the greatest part of the matter of this Chaos ought, consequently in obedience
to these Laws, dispose and range themselves after such a manner, that would
make it resemble our Heavens, etc.

From the description of all Bodies imaginable that could be composed of this
matter, he was pleased to proceed to the Explanation of the reasonable Soul,
upon which he judged it convenient to expatiate more at large. He demonstrates,
that it cannot be deduced from the power of the matter, as were other things he
handled; but that it is expressly to be created.

XI. He revised his Treatise of the World, Gallilaeus his Condemnation makes
him keep this Treatise locked up.
for to send it to Father Mersennus, to get it Printed in Paris with the King's
Privilege, at such time as he heard the News of what befell Gallilaeus. This
Mathematician had been obliged by the Inquisition of the Holy Office, publicly
to abjure his Sentiment of the Earth's Motion, as a rank Heresy; ay, and he
hampered in the Prison of the Inquisition.

This Adventure did so much the more surprise Monsieur Des Carts, as he, on
one side had a more than ordinary Submission to the Holy See; and because on
the other side he was persuaded that the Opinion of the Earth's motion is by
much the most probable, and withal the most Commodious for the explaining all
Phenomena's. Upon this Hypothesis he had Built the greatest part of this World;
Insomuch, as not being able to destroy it without rendering all the rest
defective* he thought it more advisable to suppress and conceal his Treatise,
than to send it abroad lame and imperfect, or to expose himself to that scurvy
humor of the Inquisitors of Rome, by publishing that Hypothesis they had
condemned without understanding it. Yet he was resolved to have the other touch
at it, and new model his Explanation of the Earth's motion, to show which way
one may deny this motion, in opposition to Gallilaeus, although in truth, it may
really be carried about, and though the Hypothesis of Copernicus remain in full
force, which he did not so much out of Crossness to stupifie the Inquisitors,
as for to explain those Passages of Scripture which are commonly alleged
against this Opinion.

XIII. M. Des Cartes's stay at Deventer, He returned to Amsierdam.
where he had remained from April, An. 1633. occasioned him an entire peaceful
Solitude, enjoying no no other Company in that place, but that of his Friend
Reneri, who Professed Philosophy in that place; yet seeing it somewhat too
distant from the Carriers Roads, for to maintain his Correspondence with Father
Mersennus, and other knowing Persons, he quits this abode the next Year
ensuing, to remove to Amsterdam again.

A little while after, He goes into Denmark with M. Ville Bressieux.
he took a Journey into Denmark, and the Lower Parts of Germany, in Company of
Monsieur Ville Bressieux, who profited no less by his Instructions upon their
Road, than in his House at Amsterdam. It was upon these Precepts, and chiefly
upon his grand Maxim, That the most Plain and Simple things are usually the
most Excellent, That Monsieur de Ville Bressieux invented so many pretty neat
Machines beneficial for the use of Life.

He inculcated to him diverse other Principles, upon which this Man made several
Experiments since, which has gotten him a name of being an extraordinary
Virtuoso in Chemistry, Mechanics and Optics.

At the time Monsieur Des Carts left the City of Deventer, Reneri likewise
went thence for Vtrecht, whither the Magistracy had drawn him by fair words to
Read Philosophy in the College, which was very speedily to be changed into an
University. This ingenious Man, who had at his leisure quite exhausted Monsieur
Des Carts his Philosophy at the very Fountain Head when he enjoyed his
presence, laid hold on such a favorable Conjuncture as this, to bring the
whole University over to be Cartesians, that it might be illustrious at its
very birth; which he effected with so much Prudence and Discretion, that there
would never have been occasioned any disturbance there, had not the
Precipitated Zeal of him that succeeded him, quite snared his fine economy.

The Winter following afforded Monsieur Des Carts matter for those
Observations he made upon Snow of six Points or Angles; An Observation upon
Snow of an hexagonal figure.
and, upon that occasion, to make some upon Hail and Rain. He since Compiled a
Sixth Discourse of them, which is to be seen in the Treatise of his Meteors.
But above all, he seemed so much satisfied with the Observations the Snow that
fell that Winter gave him occasion to make, that he could have desired that all
the Experiments that he was necessitated to try for the rest of his Physics,
might have dropped from the Clouds in that manner; and that he might have stood
in need of nothing but his Eyes to know them.

Remembering his delightful abode at Deventer, he was moved to return to that
City, to avoid the frequent Visits his Sojourning at Amsterdam drew upon him.
Five or Six Months after, viz. toward the latter end of Autumn, Anno 1635. he
passed into Friezland and retired to Lewarden, the Principal City of the
Province, two Leagues from Franeker, where he remained till the Year 1629.
there he Composed, or rather that I may make use of his own Expression, he
Broached his small Treatise of Mechanics, for M. de Zuitlechem, his Friend and
Correspondent, a Gentleman of great Worth, Counselor and Secretary to the
Prince of Orange.

He came back to Amsterdam about the beginning of March, Observation upon the
Circles about Candles.
and made a great many Curious Observations concerning the Crowns or Circles of
Candles, in relation to our Eyes. Understanding at his return, that one of his
Acquaintance was busied in putting out a Treatise of Spectacles, he most
frankly and generously sent him his, that was made upon the same Subject. His
Friend took out of it what he thought fit for his purpose; now that Part of the
Treatise, relating particularly ^o the Practice, served his turn. The rest was
^ot quite lost, some of it saw the Light, and was since found digested and
inserted in Monsieur Des Carts his Dioptricks.

Toward the latter end of the same Year, he lost one of the best and
ancientest Friends he had acquired in Holland, by the Death of Isaac Beeckman,
Principal of the College of Dordrecht or Dort.

BOOK IV.
From 1637. till 1638.
I. and II. AFter the resolution Monsieur Des Carts had taken to suffer his
Works to be Printed in his Lifetime, He causes the Essays of his Philosophy to
be Printed.
one would have thought that all the Business had been to kill him, to put the
Public in Possession of a Benefit that was to be their own; His Friends made
him reflect upon the Injustice of this Proceeding, and snatched him out of
harms way; that is, from the danger of being Sacrificed to the Public Danger,
in causing him to conclude upon Publishing what he had put in a Condition to
come abroad.

He reduced what was contained in his Papers to Four Treatises, for which he
desired they would crave the Privilege of the King, which was granted, with
Testimonies of esteem and respect for him, the 4th of May 1637. to cause to be
Printed not only the Four Treaties there specified; but also whatsoever he had
written till that time, and whatsoever else he might write, during the whole
Course of his Life, in what Part (...) thought most convenient, within or
without (...) Kingdom of France, etc.

These Four Treatises that he would have (...) pass, for the Essays of his
Philosophy, were Printed at Leyden, Entitled, A Discourse of (...) Method for
the well-governing ones Reason, and (...) find out truth in Sciences. Moreover,
Dioptric^ Meteors, and Geometry, with certain Essa^ (...) this Method.

His design was not to teach all his Metho^ in the first of these Treaties. But
not to propose any but what he deemed sufficient to mak^ a Man judge, that the
new Opinions that should appear in the Dioptricks, and Meteors were not
conceived at Random, or a la Legere, and that it would be worth the while
strictly to examine them.

He begun his first Treatise or Discourse of Method, with diverse Considerations
upon Sciences; Then he proposes the Principal Rules of Method which he sought,
for his particular use in the manner of conducting or governing a Man's Reason.
After that, he produces some Maxims of Morality, that he has drawn from this
Method; Then he deduceth some Reasons, by which he evinceth the Existence of a
God, and of the Humane Soul* which make up the Foundations of his Metaphysics.
One may there see further the order (...) Questions of Physics, and that he
has in^ired into together with the difference be^ixt our Soul and that of
Beasts. In the last ^ace, he makes a deduction of things, he sup^osed requisite
to proceed farther in the re^arch of Nature, than any one had hitherto ^one. He
concludes, solemnly protesting ^at his chief scope and aim tended only to ^e
Advantage and Profit of his Neighbor; ^ut that he was altogether averse from
de^^ring ever to apply himself to what might be of ^o Advantage to some,
without doing wrong to ^hers.

He did not pretend by this Treatise to Prescribe any Method to any Man, but
only ^o make known to all, that Method he himself had followed, by the right
which the li^erty of conducting himself according to those Natural Lights he
received from God, allowed ^im.

III. The first Essay of this Method, His Dioptricks.
is the Treatise of Dioptrick^, divided into Ten Parts, which make so many
Discourses, or very short Dissertations concerning Light, Refraction, ^he Eye
and Senses; concerning the Images that are formed at the bottom of the Eye, and
concerning Vision, Spectacles, and cutting of Glasses.

The design of the Author in this Treaty, was to show us that one may proceed
pretty far in Philosophy, to arrive by means of it to the Knowledge of Arts
profitable to Life.

The Treatise that he makes upon the second Essay of his Method, His Meteors.
is that of Meteors, divided into as many parts as that of Dioptricks. He
treats therein of Terrestrial Bodies; of Vapors and Exhalations, of Salt, of
Winds; of Clouds, Rain, Snow, and Hail; of Tempests, Lightning and other Fires
kindled i^ the Air, and of the Rainbow; of the colou^ of Clouds, of Circles or
Crowns appearin^ now and then round about the Stars; of Pa^helia's or
Apparitions of many Suns.

The last of the Essays of his Method, His Geometry.
is his Treatise of Geometry, containing Three Books; where is handled chiefly
the Construction of Problems; the Author's design in these Works, was, to show
the way of Demonstration, that he had discovered abundance of things not known
before him, and to hint by the by, that one may find still a great many others;
to the end he might more effectually excite all Men to the research of Truth.

But a Man would be mistaken to believe that Monsieur Des Carts intended to
deliver the Elements of Geometry in this his Work, which requires othergates
Readers than Scholars in Mathematics. He studied in the Three Preceding
Treatises to make himself understood by every body, because the main Business
was to make those things to be comprehended that were never taught before, or
whose true Principles by none was ever yet delivered; but perceiving that there
was a great number of Works of Geometry, against which he had nothing to say,
he thought he was not obliged to repeat in his Treatise, what he had found
good, and very well demonstra^ed in others; so that, so far was he from
ren^ring them unserviceable, that he labored that he could to make them
necessary, begin^ing where they left off: Insomuch, that it (...) expedient to
have read them, to compre^end his Geometry. He suppressed the Prin^iples of the
greatest part of his Rules, with their Demonstrations. He foresaw also, that
^everal who might have read other Geome^ries, yet who might have acquired but a
com^on insight into this Science, might most ^asily attain to the Knowledge of
his Wri^ings.

IV. Although the subject matter of these Four Treatises seem at first view to
have no Rela^ion to one another, Connection and Relation between these Four
Treatises.
yet has he so used his ^kill, that the Three last should have some Connection,
and that a very strait one with ^he first; to this intent, after having
proposed (...) Model or Pattern of a general Method which ^e adopted; yet
without pretending to ob^rude it upon others for their Instruction, he ^ath
chosen in his Dioptricks a mixed Subject of Philosophy and Mathematics; in his
Meteors one, of pure Philosophy without mixture; and in his Geometry one, of
pure Mathematics; ^o show you that there could be nothing in whatsoever
Natural Knowledge he might ^ave, that he had not a design to refer and reduce
to this Method; and nothing wherein ^e did not hope to have good Success,
provided he might have the Experiments that might be necessary to that effect,
and time to discuss and examine them.

As for his way of arguing, In what manner they are writ.
it seemed, that it was looked upon by others after a quite different manner,
from what it really was according to him. He did by no means agree with those,
upon this Subject, who published that the explication of things he has given,
may be very well rejected and waved, but tha^ they cannot be opposed nor
refuted by reason; for not admitting of any Principles which he did not believe
most manifest, and considering nothing besides, Greatnesses, Figures and
Motion, after the manner of Mathematicians; He excludes himself from all
retreat^* which Men usually reserve for themselves to escape to, as need shall
require; and debar'^ himself of all the Subtersuges of Philosophers^ so that
the least Error that shall slip into hi^ Principles, will be easily perceived
and confuted by a Mathematical Demonstration. But on the contrary, if there be
any thing found therein that may appear so true and certain, that one cannot
overthrow it by such like Demonstration, that cannot, without doubt be
undervalued without a fault, at least, by those whose Profession it is to Teach
and Instruct. For although he makes as if he did nothing else throughout his
Discourses, but barely propose what he says, without proving it^ nevertheless,
it is not difficult to fetch Syllogisms from his Explications, by means of
which he believed that other Opinions touching the same Subject Matters, might
manifestly be destroyed, and that those who should defend them, would have much
ado to answer those who defend his Principles.

The liberty he took to Publish these Treatises in his French Tongue rather
than in that of the Learned, and to conceal his Name in it, put him to no
trouble, notwithstanding he had all the reason in the world to fear it from the
Critics; but it did not fare so well with the distribution of the Copies he
caused to be made. Whence proceeded Roberval's animosity against Des Carts.
It was more pernicious to him not to give Monsieur Roberval one of them, whom
he did not know, though he Professed Mathematics in Paris; than it would have
been to his advantage to have presented a great number of them to the Court of
France and Rome. Mons. Roberval held himself wronged by this ^omission; and
although it was occasioned by Father Mersennus, rather than Monsieur Des Carts,
yet did he from thenceforward prepare to Criticize upon Des Carts his
Geometry; such was the rise of that inveterate, immortal Animosity he conceived
against him. The Precence of it he had not so much as the discretion to
dissemble to some Friends whom he knew otherwise to be Monsieur Des Cartes's,
as well as his own.

To take breath ali^tle after the Encumbrance the Publication of his Essays had
occasioned him, he was desirous to take a turn to the Siege of Breda; a City
not altogether indifferent to him, by reason of his quartering there two Years
together when he bore Arms. After the taking of this City by the Prince of
Orange, he took a Journey into Flanders, and went to see Mounsieur de la
Basse's Court, Governor or Commander in the City of Douay for the King of
Spain; This Gentleman, who was one of his best Friends; omitted nothing whereby
to regale him nobly: he procured him for Eight days together, amongst other
things, the Conversation of Dr. Sylvius. Sylvius was one of the ablest Divines
of his Age, and after Estius his Death, the principal Ornament of the
University of Douay. He seemed very much satisfied with Monsieur Des Carts;
but he had not cause to be so with a Politic Gentleman, that the Philosopher
had brought along with him, who oftentimes put the Dr. to a Nonplus in the
Conferences which were held after Meals at M. Bassecourt's.

Monsieur Des Carts at his return went to sojourn in Egmond, He goes to live
at Egmond.
the prettiest Village of all North-Holland, where the exercise of the Roman
Religion was undisturbed and Public. Scarce was he settled there, but he
perceived the fruit the reading of his Book produced.

One of the first that appeared to render him an account of it was Dr. He
ans^^^s Fromondus, (...) and Ciermans.
Fromondus, Regius Professor of the Holy Scriptures in the University of
Louvain, he propounded to him diverse Objections against several Passages of his
Method, Dioptricks, and more especially of his Mereors, of which himself had
published a Treatise in 1631. that had been highly esteemed; Monsieur Des
Carts answered him, and they were very well satisfied one with another for to
continue their Friendship the remainder of their days.

He answered also about the same time, the Objections of an Holland Physician
who had Preferment at Louvain named Plempius, who was one of his Acquaintance
some Years before. These Objections related chiefly to what he had writ
concerning the Motion of the Heart. They contained, according to his Opinion,
whatsoever one was able reasonably to object against him upon this Subject.
Plempius, who declared that he had not made these objections, but with a design
to be better informed, and for the better discovering of truth; let Monsieur
Des Carts at that time know, that he was very well pleased that he had
answered him.

The Answer he gave Monsieur Ciermans, Professor of Mathematics in the
College of Jesuits at Louvnin, had no worse success. He found this Father's
Objections very judicious and solid, the main hinge they turned upon was
Geometry and Meteors, and especially in reference to the Rainbow. The Father
on his part seemed so well satisfied with the Answer Monsieur Des Carts gave,
that he freely gave his consent that they might Print his Objections with the
Answer. He could not forbear declaring, that what he chiefly liked in Monsieur
Des Carts, was that boldness, that made him turn aside out of the beaten Paths
and Common Roads; and that he was endued with the Confidence to enquire after
new Lands, and make new Discoveries.

Monsieur Des Carts, having no other Passion in all he writ, but that of
finding out Truth, and believing that he was not capable of accomplishing it
alone, fought for, if one may so say, Adversaries, rather than Approvers; to
the end that the Obligation to answer them, and sift their Objections, might
render him more and more exact, and might be a means to make him open his Eyes
upon that he was not able to know before. In order to this he hopefully
expected the Objections the Jesuits of La Flesche, Louvain, Lifle, and some
other places had promised him by their Letters; but he was somewhat surprised
to learn by some of them, that they wonderfully approved of him, that they
desired nothing as to what he was pleased to explain, but only in that which he
would not write; and that they demanded of him his Physic, and Metaphysick
with great Importunity. The good Offices of M. Mydorge.


VI. In France the reading of his Book operated upon the Spirits of Men,
according as they were well or ill prepared. There were but few things in all
that he had writ that did not appear dubious to some, and Novel in respect of
others; the true knowing Persons did not boggle at all they found new, which
could not render the Author odious, but to such who were fond of their own
Prejudices; yet they took an occasion from what seemed dubious to make some
Objections against him.

M. Mydorge had been one of the most fit Persons in that respect, if so be he
had not been beforehand of the same Opinion with him in several things, from
the very first time they saw one another in Paris. He might have been able at
least to propound some difficulties to him concerning diverse Passages in the
Sixth Book of his Dioptricks, where he treats of Vision in a quite different
manner from that he was wont himself, to explain this matter: he was content to
mention such a business to Father Mersennus, who gave Monsieur Des Carts
notice of it in Writing. He did not take ill some Advices the Philosopher gave
him in his Answer to this Father. After that, he had no other Objections to
start to his Friend; nay, he was so far from fatigueing him with many others
upon that score, that one may say* he played the Des Carts in Paris, in taking
upon him to answer, for his absent Friend, all the Objections which they had
not a mind to send into Holland.

He was not alone in studying to render him friendly Offices in Paris. The good
Offices of M. Des Argues.
Monsieur Des Argues, who already was very busy with Father Mersennus to make
the Privilege of his Book effectual against the disobliging Practices of the
Sieur de Beaugrand, was wanting in nothing wherein he could be serviceable to
him with Cardinal Richelieu, and to give Credit to his new Speculation of
Dioptricks, amongst those who were about his Eminence; He let him understand by
Father Mersennus, that the Cardinal was pleased to give ear to the Propositions
they had made to him, of endeavoring to make Spectacles and Prospectives
according to the Rules he had Prescribed in his Dioptricks.

Monsieur Des Carts thought it stood him upon to cross this Understanding, and
to that effect, he desired Father Mersennus to declare to M. Des Argues, and
others, that had an hand in this Business; that he was extremely obliged to
them for the good Opinion they had given to the Court of his Dioptrical
Inventions; but that he did not believe that the Cardinal's thoughts ought to
stoop so low as to a Person of his Rank. It was not out of an unseasonableness
that he resisted the purposes of these Gentlemen; it was out of timerousness,
lest they might not successfully compass their End in his Absence, and lest
they might lay the Workmens fault at his door; for he judged his presence
necessary to direct the hand of Turners, and to give them new Instructions,
according as they proceeded, or failed.

VII. Mons. de Fermat's Objections against the Dioptricks.
Amongst the Virtuoso's of France, that would fain have tried a touch with
Monsieur Des Carts, there was none of them found more diligent than, nor more
capable to do it, than M. de Fermat, a Counselor of the Parliament of
Thoulouse, one of the Chief Men in the Age for fine Endowments of Mind, and
especially in respect of Mathematics. The Month of November, he sent to Father
Mersennus some Objections against M. Des Carts his Dioptricks; and this Father
received an Answer to them in the Month of September, notwithstanding the
distance of places, that might have afforded a pretense for delays.

At the same time, Mons. Petit his Objections.
Monsieur Petit, then Commissioner of the Artillery and the King's Ingeneer,
who was since Surveyor of the Fortifications, started likewise some Objectious
against the Treatise of Dioptricks, which Monsieur Fermat found to come but
little short of his own.

Mr. A Paper of M. Fermat. upon Geometry.
Fermat, before he had received an Answer to his Objections, caused to be
dispatched to Monsieur Des Carts by Father Mersennus, a Pamphlet of Geometry
of his Composing. De Maximis and Minimis, i. e. of the greatest and least
quantities; and that he might conceal his Name again from Mons. Des Carts, he
made use of that of M. de Carcavi, one of Lions, a Friend of his, being then
his Colleague in the Parliament of Toulouse.

This Present Monsieur de Fermat sent to Monsieur Des Carts, The Original of
the Dispute between M. de Fermat, and M. D. Carts.
was not only a Token of his esteem and grateful acknowledgment, but also an
Advertisement of what he believed Monsieur Des Carts had omitted unawares, or
forgotten unseasonably in his Geometry. That occasioned a new difficulty to
arise, in the clashing Mons. Fermat begun, which he believed to be in a
capacity to decide in a few days.

But it was no such easy matter to extinguish these first sparks; the fire of
the Dispute got ground by the Zeal of those who were willing to enter upon it;
at length two material Points, one relating to Dioptriques, the other to
Geometry, became the main Subject of their Debate. Here you may take notice of
the cause of that famous Quarrel, which continued even after Monsieur Des
Carts his Death; this is that Monsieur de Fermat styled, his Skirmish with
Monsieur Des Carts, or sa petite guerre contre Mons. Des Carts, and that
which Monsieur, Des Carts calls, son petit process de Mathematique contre Mons.
de Firmat.

VIII. Whilst Monsieur de Fermat, (amidst his great business in pleading Causes
and Domestic Affairs) applied himself tooth and nail to the Answer Monsieur
Des Carts made to his Objections about Dioptriques; Mons. Pascal and Roberval
(...)spouse Mr. de Fermat's Quarrel.
Father Mersennus receives Monsieur Des Carts his Observations and
Animadversions upon his Treatise de Maximis and Minimis; but instead of sending
them directly to Monsieur de Fermat, in conformity to Monsieur Des Carts his
intent, he thought it convenient to show them to a couple of this Magistrates
particular Friends in Paris; the one was Monsieur Pascal the Father, heretofore
President in the Court of Aides in Auvergne; the other was Monsieur Roberval,
Mathematique Professor in Paris.

These Gentlemen supposed themselves obliged to espouse the Qurrel of their
Friend; and seeing him busy upon his reply about Dioptriques, they dispensed
with him from prosecuting the Quarrel about Geometry, and undertook the
answering Monsieur Des Carts his Observations against his Treaty de Maximis
and Minimis. Monsieur Des Carts reading their Answer before he received
Monsieur Fermat's Reply, commended their Zeal; approved their cordial
dispositions, and looked upon Monsieur Fermat as an happy man, for having been
prevented by such great Assistance at such a hard pinch as that was; nay, and
he had much ado to forbear conceiving much esteem for their Abilities; some
proofs of which he had observed in their Writing; yet he found that albeit they
had performed all the Punctilio's of Friendship in respect of Monsieur, yet
that they very scrrily acquitted themselves of the Commission they had taken to
discharge him from the trouble, and defend him.

This Writing, Mr. Des Carts answers them.
which could be no other than the style of Monsieur Roberval, was refuted by
Monsieur Des Carts before the end of February; and Monsieur de Fermat's Reply
coming out at last, touching Dioptriques in the same month, he made several
Answers to it, which he directed to Monsieur Mydorge, another to Monsieur
Hardy, a third to Father Mersennus, his chief Friends.

IX. Proceedings of the Difference between Mr. Des Carts and Mr. Fermat.
Perceiving that there was no necessity that could oblige Monsieur de Fermat to
send him his Treatise de Maximis and Minimis, to examine, he took this action
for a defiance; the manner of sending the Challenge added to the Merit of the
Person who sent, prevailed with him to avoid this occasion; the Paper he sent
to Father Mersennus against his Treaty de Maximis, was next door to accepting
of it. The City of Toulouse, and the Village of Egmond, were the utmost bounds
of the List, where it seemed very difficult for the Parties to try their Skill;
and they were both too stout, and stood too much upon their Pantofies to
advance one step, one in favor of the other. Providence ordered a place
between, and disposed matters in such a manner, that Paris, where were their
acquaintance, friends, and foes, became insensibly the Randezvouse where their
difference was to be decided; Father Mersennus, without ever dreaming of such a
thing, gave occasion for this disposing of matters, by putting into Monsieur
Roberval's and Monsieur Pascal's hands-at Paris, the Paper of our Philosopher,
which he should have sent directly to Monsieur de Fermat at Toulouse. Monsieur
Des Carts on his part thinking he was bound to answer these two Gentlemen,
seemed to give way that his business should come to Trial at Paris.

But now since these two Gentlemen had thought fit to appear in his Cause as
Advocates, Mons. Mydorge, and Mr. Hardy on Mr. Des Carts side, Mr. Pascal and
Mr. Roberval on Mr. Fermat's.
he desired they would be pleased not to be his Judges, or that they would
except against those that were appointed, with others of Monsieur de Fermat's
friends; the other Mathematicians that might have been engaged to have sit
Judges in the Cause, without doubt were not a few; but some of them were not
capable of understanding Monsieur Des Carts his Geometry, and others were not
well enough known by him, except two worthy Geometricians, to whose Judgment he
might safely have referred himself; they were Monsieur Mydorge, and Monsieur
Hardy, who past generally for his two intimate friends. This consideration
rendered them no less liable to be excepted against by Monsieur Fermat, than
Monsieur Pascal and Monsieur Roberval were by Monsieur Des Carts, by reason of
their great acquaintance with Monsieur Fermat: Therefore it was his best way to
resolve to choose them not so much his Judges, as Advocates; or to speak in the
Language of the Cartel or Challenge presented by Monsieur Fermat, Monsieur
Mydorge, and Monsieur Hardy were retained by Monsieur Des Carts for his
Seconds, to oppose Monsieur Pascal and Monsieur Roberval, who had offerr'd to
second Monsieur Fermat in the Combat. Father Mersennus was desired to stand
Neuter, and be content with the office of a bare Spectator, on purpose that he
might not be suspected by either Party, to hold with the Hare, and run with the
Hound.

Monsieur Des Carts immediately produced the Writings, sent them with the
Instructions necessary in order to the hearing of his Process or Cause of
Mathematiques to Monsieur Mydorge and Monsieur Hardy, and recommended to them
withal to forget or suspend the Sentiments of friendship, to adhere to the
Rules of Justice and Truth. If Monsieur de Fermat had taken three Advocates on
his side, Monsieur Des Carts would have been sure to have taken Monsieur Des
Argues for his third, being no way inferior in Learning, nor less affectionate
for him than Monsieur Mydorge and Monsieur Hardy. He entreated Father Mersennus
to communicate all things to him however, and to let him have the perusing of
all the Writings if he should desire it.

Amongst other Pieces, he sent directly to Monsieur Mydorge, Monsieur Pascal
and Monsieur Roberval's VVritings. Monsieur Mydorge caused it immediately to be
conveyed to Monsieur Roberval, by Father Mersennus. Monsieur Roberval, without
letting the heat whereinto this Answer had put him, forthwith drew up a Reply
under the name des deux amys de M. de Fermat, of Monsieur de Fermat's two
friends* that is to say, of Monsieur Pascal and his own* but in that he imposed
upon Monsieur Pascal, who had passed his word to carry on the Dispute of
Monsieur de Fermat in his name against Monsieur Des Carts. Monsieur Pascal was
not at Paris at that time; he withdrew out of the City upon the occasion of
some Troubles that arose upon the account of one of his friends; and Monsieur
Roberval was a trusty Steward in the mean time to signify his absence, by
subscribing their common Reply alone. Monsieur Pascal scarce took any more
cognizance of this Dispute, because at his return he was preferred to be
Intendant of Justice in Rouen. The clownishness and moroseness that Monsieur
Des Carts observed in the style the Reply was writ in, made him imagine
Monsieur Pascal was absent indeed; or that he had no hand in Composing this
VVriting; wherefore being soon disheartened by the unpoliteness of Monsieur
Roberval, and his precipitation, he sent word to Father Mersennus, that he did
not resolve to answer him, because he stood upon his points, and was out of
humor, instead of imitating that gentle sincerity and moderation wherewith
Monsieur Pascal and Monsieur de Fermat treated him; he entreated him
notwithstanding to assure Monsieur Roberval, that he was his most humble
Servant, and that he was no more offended at what was in his ^riting, than men
are commonly in playing, at the ^nger of those that lose. Monsieur Roberval in
^espite of the singularity of humor he affect^d, would, without all question,
have been satisfied with so much civility: But Father Mer^ennus, who had a
peculiar Talent of setting Learned men by the Ears, and to prolong Disputes,
fearing to see them make an end of ^his so soon, could never be at rest till
Monsieur Des Carts should promise him to make a rejoinder to this second
Paper; he sends it him in April, but he took special care to let nothing slip
that might move Monsieur Roberval's spleen.

X. In the mean time Monsieur de Fermat grew weary with disputing; Mr. Fermat
makes his peace with Mr. Des Carts; and becomes his friend, and so does Mr.
Pascal.
and fearing lest Monsieur Roberval's Zeal might not cause him to prolong it,
he did not only leave that which Monsieur Des Carts writ against his last
Reply touching Dioptriques; without a rejoinder, but also writ to Father
Mersennus to beseech him to comply with Monsieur Des Carts, and withal to
procure him his acquaintance. On the other hand, Monsieur Mydorge and Monsieur
Hardy could not abide to see a person of that worth and quality Monsieur Fermat
was of, should to such little purpose be at odds with Monsieur Des Carts; set
all their Wits a work to find a way to reconcile them, and to change their
Dispute into a perfect amity and correspondence; the benefit whereof they might
reap in a mutual Communication of their Humors. They mentioned it to Father
Mersennus, who being solicited on the other hand by the Overtures and
Concessions of Monsieur de Fermat, was prevailed upon to write to Monsieur Des
Carts about it, notwithstanding the great desire he might have to see them
continue.

Monsieur Des Carts received the proposa^ of it with no small joy; and having
thanked Monsieur Mydorge and Monsieur Hardy for the good success of their
friendly Offices, he charged Father Mersennus to signify to Monsieur de
Fermat, his esteem for him, and his cordial affection toward him. Monsieur de
Fermat receiving from Father Mersennus all the assurances he could possibly
desire on the part of Monsieur Des Carts, gave himself the satisfaction at
last to write to him straightways* to offer him his friendship and services.
The Acquisition of such a friend as that, might be numbered amongst Monsieur
Des Carts his best Fortunes: He perfectly understood the value of so important
a friendship; he appeared so sensible of it, that there were no expressions
passionate enough to thank him for it.

To the end he might not be satisfied with this Reconciliation by halves, he
was willing to extend it likewise to the other two friends of Monsieur Fermat,
who had undertaken the defense of his Geometrical Piece de Maximis and Minimis;
he earnestly entreated Father Mersennus to signify to them that he desired
nothing so much as the friendship of honest persons; and upon this
consideration he put an high value upon theirs. Monsieur Pascal made answerable
returns, like an honorable person; but Monsieur Roberval quick^y discovered
that he bore no great good will ^o Monsieur Des Carts, but only from the ^eeth
forward; but it was not so with Monsieur Fermat. But as it is usual amongst
friends ^f different humors and designs; the truth (...) their minds did not
always keep pace with their hearts. Monsieur Fermat persuaded, as before, of
the rightness of his method (that is ^o say, of the Rule he had contrived to
find ^ut the greatest and least quantities in Geometry) found much ado to grant
the Exceptions Mons. Des Carts had brought in, and to make (...) hold water.
He maintained many Contests about it, not with Monsieur Des Carts himself, who
could not allow precious Time and Talents for Disputation, but with young
Guillot, who had been Monsieur Des Carts his Domestic, with Monsieur de
Chauveau, who had been his Fellow-Collegian at La Flesche, Monsieur des Argues,
and other Mathematicians, who since this bustle declared themselves Cartesians
day by day, maugre Monsieur Ro^erval's Jealousy.

As for Monsieur de Fermat's other Dispute concerning Dioptriques, Mr. Rohault
and Mons. Clersellier did the business in convincing Mr. Fermat.
he did not judge it advisable to revive it in Monsieur Des Carts his
lifetime; but after his death explained his meaning about it, after such a
manner, as though he had had a mind to make us doubt whether or no the
Philosopher had satisfied him. Now because he seemed from time to time to
invite some of Monsieur Des Carts his friends to renew this ancient Quarrel;
Mons. Rohault answered immediately; after which Monsieur Clersellier offered
himself, and put an end to the Controversy, to the glory of Monsieur Des
Carts, and to Monsieur Fermat's satisfaction* who threw down his Arms and
surrendered.

XI and XII. M. Petit did not demur so long upon yielding, A Dispute with Mons.
Petit.
touching some difficulties (...) Dioptriques he had propounded to Monsieur Des
Carts; he improved the advantage he (...) over Monsieur de Fermat upon the
account (...) his Experiments, which agreeing to a ha^ with the Doctrine of
Monsieur Des Carts, were very instrumental to him to get himself disabused,
and to seek to procure his friendship before it was too late. Yea and he turned
some few years after, one of the most zealous Proselites to his Philosophy;
when the perusing of his Metaphysical Meditations ha^ delivered him of some
difficulties wherewith he labored, concerning the Existence of God* and the
difference between Soul and Body in Men.

The Controversy that was a foot between him and Monsieur Morinus, And with
Mr. Morinus
Regius Professor of Mathematics in Paris, put him harder to it, than that he
maintained with Mons. Petit; it commenced the 22th of February 1638. with the
Objections Mons. Morinus made against Light. Mons. Des Carts valued them as
much, as Objections, which he looked upon the most substantial of all those that
had been hitherto raised against his new Opinions, could deserve. This esteem
of his Objections did so puff up Mons. Morinus, who must needs show by a Reply
to his Answer, that he was altogether unworthy of it. Monsieur Des Carts makes
a second Answer, wherewith Monsieur Morinus pretended to be fully satisfied;
but endeavoring to procure the honor to write last, he makes a new Reply, to
which he declares, he desired no Answer. Monsieur Des Carts, by this instances
the Character of Mons. Morinus his spirit, and what he would be at; he did not
stick to grant him that satisfaction he desired, since it cost him so little.

The occasion he had about that time to refute a dangerous Book, With M. de
Beaugrand.
caused him to compile a dissertation of Geostatiques; that is to say, upon the
Query, to know whether a body weighs more or less, being near the Center of the
Earth, than when it is at a distance from it. The Book that had given occasion
to the writing of it, had for its Author Mons. Beaugrand, Secretary to the
King, indifferently skilled in Mathematics, but who did not do himself Justice
enough in this point: He was Mons. de Fermat's friend, enemy to Mons. Des
Argues: The considerable respect he had for this last, had prevailed with him
to render but ill Offices to our Philosopher occasioned by the Zeal wherewith
he perceived Mons. Des Carts apply himself to serve him; nay, and he could not
forbear letting slip some strokes of his bitterness and ill will in his Book.
Mons. Des Carts might perhaps have done very well to have withstood the desire
of those who induced him to refute it, that he might not have made himself
suspected of resentment: But he was quickly recovered of this weakness, by
revoking his permission of Printing this Refutation, and by separating it from
his small Piece of Geostatiques, the publication of which he did not intend to
prohibit.

XIII, XIV, XV. It was at the same time that there was started a Question
amongst the Mathematicians of France, Of the Roulette, and what part M. des
Carts had in the Question.
the famous Question de la Roulette, whereof one could not trace the least
footsteps, neither among the Ancients, nor in the Books of any of the
Mathematicians that lived till that time; notwithstanding nothing is more
common than this Line, and no less frequent in the business o^ motion than the
right and Circular Lines.

La roulette, the rolling, is nothing else but the way in the Air, the Nail of
a Wheel describes by its ordinary motion, from the time the Nail begins to rise
from the Earth, till the continued motion of the Wheel has brought it back
again to the Earth, after having finished a whole entire round: Yet in this
definition it must be supposed for the convenience of Geometrical operations,
that the Wheel is a perfect Circle, that the Nail is a point marked in the
circumference of the Circle, and that the Earth which touches this point,
beginning and ending its round, be perfectly even or plain.

Father Mersennus was the first that took notice of it, and who gave it the
name of Roulette: He had a mind afterward to understand the nature and
properties of the same; yet not being so fortunate, in resolving your fine
Questions, as framing them; so had he not ^enetration enough to compass this.
This put ^im upon propounding to others. Monsieur Roberval was the first that
demonstrated the ^he space of the Roulette is triple of the Wheel that
describes it. After that Monsieur Fermat and Monsieur Des Carts demonstrated
it; and their respective Solutions are not only found different from one
another, but also from that of Monsieur Roberval. Father Mersennus having
acquainted Monsieur Des Carts that Monsieur Roberval found his demonstration
too ^oncise to be good, he thereupon received ^uch Elucidations as he desired.
Monsieur Des Carts sending him an ample explication of his demonstration of La
roulette, advertised him, that there was nothing to be altered in this
demonstration, and withal that the Elucida^ions that he adjoined thereto, were
not spun ^ut to that length, but only that they might ^e understood by those
who did not make use ^f Analysis; others needing no more but three ^rokes of
their Pen to find it out by calculation.

Amongst diverse Questions depending upon that of the Roulette, there were a
great many things whereof Monsieur Roberval professed himself in a manner
ignorant. Now for his Instruction Father Mersennus must hye to Monsieur Des
Carts his ordinary Refuge, and received all the Solutions he and Monsieur
Roberval could wish or desire. With the help of this, the latter made two more
Solutions; one of which was, The dimension of the solid of the Roulette round
about the basis: The other, The finding out of the Tangents of this Line: But
for all these kindnesses of Monsieur Des Carte he was not so obliging or
grateful as on^ might have expected. His dissimulation, a^ the indirect
proceedings of his behavior, did (...) disgust Monsieur Des Carts, that he
would (...) longer concern himself in what past since touching the Roulette. At
the end of September he did all he could to get himself dise^gaged for good and
all; and without eve^ pretending to the glory of this Invention, which with all
his heart he relinquisht to Monsieur Roberval, that he might apply himself
(...) somewhat else; he writ to Father Mersenn^ to the end he might acquaint
all the Mathematicians, that had hand in the business, th^^ he would desist.

XVI. He leaves Geometry.
The reason he alleges for desiri^^ to be dispensed with, for laboring any
mo^^ about the Roulette was, that he had bid adi^ to Geometry in earnest. These
Mathematicians of Paris, that were of the number (...) his friends, were not
pleased at these news And Monsieur Des Argues, above all, could not forbear to
testify his dissatisfaction for the same. Monsieur Des Carts took it kindly
at his hands, and that he might deliver hi^ from his trouble, he gave him to
understan^ by Father Mersennus, that his leaving off wa^ only in respect of
abstracted Geometry: Bu^ that he would persist in improving another sort of
Geometry, conversant about Phoem^mena's of Nature, as he had done in that (...)
had writ of Meteors, etc.

He studied to show more precise marks of esteem for this friend; His respect
for M des Argues.
for understanding that ^he passages of his Printed Geometry, where^n he had
affected to be obscure, did a little ^uzzle him; he was pleased himself to give
explanation of them in a Book, that he writ expressly to that intent, to let him
know how far his Zeal for to serve him had transported ^im.

Besides these explanations upon some hard passages propounded by Monsieur des
Argues, An Introduction to his Geometry.
he gave his consent that an Holland Gentleman, one of his friends, should draw
up a regular Introduction followed by his Geometry, on purpose to facilitate
the understanding of it to ^all sorts of Readers. It was so excellent and
concise, that most believed he was the Author of it. Those that complained of
the brevity of this Writing, were desired to consider it was an Introduction,
and not a Comment; yet one might afford the Title of Comment to the excellent
Notes Monsieur Beaune, Mons. de Beaunt's Notes.
Councellor in the Presidial of Blois, made this year upon Monsieur Des Carts
his Geometry. There was nothing in it but what was exactly conformable to the
Author's Notion, and according to his Intention. The joy Monsieur Des Carts
conceived at it, increased yet more when he perceived the profound penetration
wherewith Mons. de Beaune was able to tell the meaning of things that he had
only inserted in his Geometry in a very obscure manner.

Moreover, Exercises of Arithmetic with M. de St. Croix, and M. Frenicle.
one may reckon in the number of the chief Occupation of Mons. Des Carte^ this
year, the Exercise which the two mo^ eminent Arithmeticians M. de St. Croix,
and M. Frenicle put him upon, touching several Questions of Numbers. But the
Answer he gave to those M. de St. Croix put, in June, did so much fatigue him,
that he conjured Father Mersennus to send him no more of that nature, be they
what they would: He endeavored also to rid himself of the Problems and barren
Objections of others, under the most plausible pretenses he could possibly
imagine.

Thus wearied out by bearing the burthensom Title of an Oracle, He gives over
answering Problems.
he dispensed to answer more before the latter end of the year 1638. and was
content to draw up a Trinity of the best Objections that had hitherto been put
to him, and of the most curious Problems that had been propounded, for to have
them Printed, together with his Answers, when it should please him, whose
Prerogative it is to dispose of all things.

BOOK IV.
From 1638 till 1641.
I. Regius became one of M. D.C. Disciples and Professors at Vtrecht.
WHilst they fatigued Mons. Des Carts in France with Objections and Problems,
they did nothing almost in Holland but think of discarding the old Philosophy,
and follow his. The University of Vtrecht, which one would, had been Cartesian
from its Cradle: After they had made Reneri come from Deventer to anticipate
its erection; it was insensibly filled with the Disciples of our Philosopher
under the Discipline of this able Professor.

He that stickled most was a young Physician named Henry de Roy, alias Regius.
to whom Reneri communicated this excellent Method he received from Monsieur Des
Carts, whereby to guide and conduct his Reason in the research of all sorts of
Truth. Regius would not limit his knowledge by Reneri, but went up as high as
Des Carts, for whom he now conceived an high esteem. These were but the fruits
of having conversation with Mons. Des Carts. This Book at length came to
appear. Regius showed himself the forwardest to read it; and the esteem he had
conceived for Monsieur Des Carts, soon turned to a true passion.

He satisfied of getting the Principles of his new Philosophy deeply imprinted
on his mind, the Essays of which he found to jump with what Reneri had taught
him before, and adopting them in lieu of those had been already taught him in
the Schools; He betook himself to digest and model them for the use of others.
He had a College where he actually read Philosophy and Physic to some private
Students in the City: And that he might not be diverted from the Study of M.
Des Carts his Philosophy, he thought fitting to set it down in Sheets, and so
distribute it amongst his Scholars under the name of Physiology, according as
he comprehended it.

The simpleness of the Hypothesis, the pretty concatenation of Principles and
Reasonings, the neatness, clearness, and easiness wherewith he made them deduce
the Truth from them, did transport them to that degree, that without remaining
within the bounds of ordinary acknowledgment to a Master, they perceived
themselves so extremely obliged, that they framed a kind of a League amongst
themselves to lay their heads together to procure his advancement, and use
their utmost to get him some place, either in the University, or in the Council
of the City: A little while after there was a great talk of settling a new
Professorship of Physic for Botanny and Theory. Regius his Scholars, most of
them Youths of good Families, thought then that the occasion they sought for
was at hand, and they spared neither their Relations nor Friends to obtain the
plurality of Votes in the Senate in favor of him. Regius had powerful
Competitors, but the approbation his Physiology gained, accompanied with the
difference that men observed in the manner of arguing, that distinguished his
Disciples from those of the Public and Vulgar Scholars, extorted belief that
he must have a particular Philosophy, and that he must needs be an excellent
Master in the Art or Method of Instructing. This was the business that
prevailed with the Magistrates to prefer him before others worthy to fill the
Chair; and so they caused all the Professors of the University, whose minds
Reneri had disposed, willingly to receive him for their Colleague.

Regius believed himself particularly obliged to Monsieur Des Carts, for the
success of this business, whose Philosophy had produced in him that desert,
that had made him carry it before his Fellow-Candidates. He assumed the liberty
by his first Letter bearing date the 18th of August, to give him many thanks
for that important Service he had rendered him, without knowing of it. He
conjured him next not to forsake his own bandy-work, and not to refuse him the
Assistances necessary to keep up this new acquired Reputation; he promised on
his part to do whatsoever was within the sphere of his Activity, that he might
deserve the quality of his Disciple, which he preferred to all the advantages
of his Life; and that he would tread in Reneri's steps as close as he possibly
could.

To put himself forth with Impossession of the Privileges and Rights annexed
to this Quality, he sends him his Essays of Physic, that he might examine and
correct them with all the severity of a Master; and he demanded of him all the
Objections that had been lately made against the Circulation of Blood, together
with his Answers.

II. He begins to receive Instructions from Mr. Des Carts.
Monsieur Des Carts, who had been informed of what had past at Vtrecht by
Reneri, who came to Egmond to visit him in the month of August, granted Regius
his Friendship, with all the Benefits it might produce. He had but little
violence to do his will, to give him what he demanded concerning Physic,
because it was actually his Profession, and because he was apprehensive of what
great importance it was prudently to manage the Zeal of so well-affected a
Disciple. He just made an end of his abridged Medicine, Compendiu^ Medecinae,
which he had fetched partly from Books, and partly from his Reasonings; and he
judged he might lay up this Work in store, to serve him to obtain some delay of
Nature, and to retard gray hairs which began to grow upon him.

Reneri and Regius were not the only two Friends he had in Holland, M. Des
Carts his Friends in Holland.
or that his Philosophy had for Admirers in and about Vtrecht. He could reckon
besides of the Professors, Antonius, Emilius, Cyprianus, Regneri; and amongst
the Magistrates of the City, Mr. Vander Hoolcks, Van Leew, Parmentier, etc.
besides the two Van Dams Physicians, the two Waessinaers Mathematicians,
Mademoyselle, Ainna Maria Scharmans, and her Brother John Alphons^, Officer in
the Army, Godfrey de Hoestrech, a Gentleman of Liege retired near Vtrecht.
There is no fewer of them at Amsterdam, Leiden, and the Hague, where all
Persons of worth and reputation took it for an honor to be acquainted with
him. Yet the Idea we have of the Country, should not make us suppose that his
Friendship did terminate in Protestants. All the Catholics whatsoever, of
never so little Note, were his Friends; we may reckon in the upper rank of his
chief Friends Cornelius de Hoogheland a Gentleman of Leiden, Bannius and
Bloemart Popish Prietis.
as also two Priests of Harlem, one of which was John Albert Bannius; the
other, Augustine Aelstein Bl^emart, who had a huge Estate by Inheritance, great
Almoner for the Poor, his Correspondent as to Letters and Pacquets that were
directed to him; They were both good Mathematicians, Lovers of Peace and the
Liberal Sciences, Virtuous, of a frugal and exemplary Life amongst the
Protestants, whose respect and affection they had almost generally won.
Monsieur Des Carts sallied sometimes from his retirement at Egmond to go see
them at Harlem, or else in a Country House not far from thence. Seeing they
were no better Drinkers nor Gamesters, then the Collation they had amongst
them, was only a Consort of Music, whereat Bannius did use to Entertain them.
Monsieur Des Carts, whose Friendship never proved barren or useless, rendered
them about the end of this Year very considerable Service with the P. of
Orange, and High and Mighty State, by the Mediation of M. Zuitlechem, and other
Lords, his Friends, who were in repute.

III. The Death of Reneri chief Cartesian Dr.
It did not please God to let Monsieur Des Carts long enjoy the double
pleasure to see his Principles publicly taught in the Philosophy and Physic
Schools at Vtrecht, by the two Ablest Professors in the University. Scarce was
Regius settled in his new Professorship, but they lost Reneri at the middle of
March 1639. upon his very Wedding Day, after he had lived 45 Years.

His Funeral Rites were performed with a great deal of Splendour and
Magnificence in the great Church of that City, at which appeared in a Body the
Senate, or Magistrates with the University. The Funeral Oration was pronounced
the next day in the Name of the University by Antonius Emilius, Professor of
Rhetoric and History. They admired the Eloquence of the Discourse; and the
Orator sensibly moved them by his pertinent Reflections: But they presently
saw that it tended no less to the making a Panegyric on Monsieur Des Carts
then alive, The Panegyric of M. Des Carts, pronounced public^ly at Vtrecht,
by order of the Senate.
than to be the Funeral Oration of the deceased Reneri. The chief praise that
Emilius gave to the illustrious Defunct, which they respected as the principal
support, and fairest Ornament of this Infant University, was, for that he
showed Courage enough to pack off the Ancients, and free himself from their
Authority, and that of the Moderns too who preceded him, to the end he might
possess the Liberty that God has granted to our Reason, to govern and conduct
it self in the research of Truth, which is the only Mistress we are obliged to
Court; This was an Heroic resolution incident only to highborn Spirits of the
first rank. But Monsieur des Carts must needs be the Director of this
Enterprise, who first inspired it into him, as he did into some others who had
closely adhered to him from the very beginning of his Retirement in Holland.
Emilius extolled with wonderful Eloquence, the great Progress Reneri had made in
the knowledge of Nature, under a Leader of this Quality. He magnified with the
liveliest Colors of Rhetoric, the benefit both City and University had reaped
from the disposition of Reneri, that he was capable to reach there the
Principles of true Philosophy, which he pretended did remain unknown to Mankind
till Des Carts his time.

The Auditory seemed persuaded of it; and the Magistrates after they had
honored this fine discourse with their Approbation, gave order it should be
printed, and publicly distributed under their Authority, as well to honor the
Memory of their Professor, as to demonstrate convincing Proofs of their
acknowledgment for the signal Service Monsieur Des Carts had rendered in
forming such a Disciple. Emilius that had long sought an opportunity to gain
Monsieur Des Carts his Acquaintance, received, as a Piece of Providence, the
Order that the Magistrates sent him, to make an Encomium upon him, and upon the
new Philosophy in his Funeral Oration for-Monsieur Reneri.

After he had spoke it, he sent him a written Copy of it with a Letter full
fraught with Respect and Esteem, upon pretense that this discourse personally
relating to him, and the Magistracy having ordered the Publication of the same,
it was but convenient that he should see what ought to be corrected therein,
before it went to the Press. Monsieur Des Carts was put to the blush upon
reading so many and great Elogiums; but since he had nothing to do to
contradict the Judgment and Conduct of the Chief Magistrate, he durst not
meddle with it.

Some time after, he gave out that he had not suffered these Elogiums, but
because it was not in his power to suppress them. For Emilius sending him a
Copy of Verses with too much Confidence that he had composed upon the same
Subject, to desire to know how he liked them; and demanding them again of him,
because he had not kept a Copy of them, desiring to Print them: Monsieur Des
Carts sought for an Excuse for not sending them back; and he took his revenge
as well as he could by this Suppression for offending his Bashfulness and
Modesty in Monsieur Reneri's Funeral Oration.

The loss which Regius in particular had sustained of an excellent Director of
his Studies in the Death of Reneri, made him have fresh recourse to Monsieur
Des Carts. He conjured him that he would please to afford him that place with
him, that the deceased possessed; adding moreover, That if so be he would grant
his request in this particular, he should esteem himself as happy as if he were
wrapped up to the Third Heavens.

It Is most certain, Regius becomes his first Disciple.
that next to Reneri, no body at that time could boast with better right than
Regius to deserve the Quality of the first Disciple of Monsieur Des Carts; he
was endowed, as to his Qualifications of Mind, with Talents fit to maintain his
rank with the Dignity and Abilities necessary for it; his Profession of
Medicine joined with Physics, afforded him a good opportunity for it, and the
advantage that neither of the other Philosophers of Holland and France had, who
did not ^ead and teach publicly, and were Philosophers for none but for
themselves; yet it might have been wished for his own particu^ar reputation,
that Reneri when he instructed him in the Method and Principles of this
Philosopher, had known how withal to have ^nspired him with his Modesty and
Prudence.

After Reneri's death, they augmented his Sallery by so much more than it was,
and ^nnexed his Professorship, to a new Employment, which consisted in
explaining Problems ^n Physics at such time when he was not busy about
Botanny, that is to say, in explaining the Nature of Plants and Simples. He
communicated to Monsieur Des Carts the Joy he had conceived at this new
Commission, because ^t presented him with new opportunities of ^eaching and
understanding his Philosophy; he had underhand cunningly sued for this
Employment, which passed for a piece of Super^rrogation in the University; and
M. Voetius had been very serviceable and instrumental to him in prosecuting
this design, he was Professor in Divinity, and at that time a great Promoter of
his Interests. But that which he had an Eye most upon as a considerable
advantage to make his parts appear, and to make pass for Current the new
Opinions of Physics and Medicine, which the ancient Peripaticians and
Gallenist^ would not suffer with their good will, that they should be taught in
the School^ where they were Lords Paramount, became afterward a pretense to
the very same Voetius, of somenting a troublesome Dissension; (...) little
Conduct he was Master of, was the cau^^ of much perplexity and encumbrance that
(...) heavy upon Monsieur Des Carts, and occasi^^ at length of a tedious
Process he was oblige^ to carry on very prejudicial to him, and (...) ways
comporting with his Solitude and Tra^ quillity of his Life.

IV. No body at that time was more promoted nor looked upon than Voetius in the
University of Vtrecht; What Voetius was. His Design.
he was Professor Primari^ in Divinity, besides Chief Minister or Past^^ in the
City; He assumed, wherever he went such a triumphant huffing Air, that he
broug^^ with him from the Synod of Dordrecht or (...) where he chanced to be of
the Victorio^^ Party; that is to say, of those, who being assisted with the
Sword, and Authority (...) P. Maurice, had accomplished their aim in condemning
the Party of the Remonstrants, an^ he had acquired in the City a sort of
Authority over Men's Spirits, by I cannot tell what reputation of Gravity and
Sufficiency; He ha^ a Spirit naturally prone to contention an^ wrangling, and
spoiled by reading the Polemicks of the Controvertists of his Party, and of
Books of Irreligion, and Boufonnery, where in he had spent a great deal of
time. He wa^ of a very Whimsical maggotish Humor, bu^ of an ordinary mean
Judgment and Superficial Learning.

The good Qualities that he might challenge for his own, were supported with a
spice of Love for himself, accompanied with an inward scorn of all those he was
not Master of. Insomuch, that being accustomed by a long habit not to esteem
what he did not understand, and not understanding in Philosophy whatsoever was
not comprehended within the limits of trivial Scholasticism, one might have
pardoned him the little relish and aversion that he had had at first sight for
Monsieur Des Carts his Works, if he had not been alarmed ^t it, as a
pernicious Novelty, which it beho^ed him to exterminate.

The reverence that was due to Reneri, had stopped his Mouth till his Death; but
going prepossessed to his Funeral Oration, the unexpected Encomiums he there
heard of Monsieur Des Carts, filled him with so much jealousy, that he came
from it with a resolution to set ^work all that ever his Industry could supply
him with, to destroy this Novelty. Nevertheless, the Approbation wherewith the
Magistracy backed these Encomiums, obliged him to slacken his Career that he
might not unseasonably come to Daggers-drawing with his Superiors; wherefore
setting aside what was within the Verge of Philosophy, against which it was not
safe nor becoming to show his teeth, he reduced his intent only to heap
together what might any-ways relate to Divinity, in the Discourse and Method of
Monsieur Des Carts; as the subject matter of his censures, endeavoring by
this means to banish his Philosophy out of the University, as destructive to
the Protestant Religion and Tranquillity of the States of the United Provinces.

He began his Hostilities with some Theseses he composed in June, An. 1639.
concerning Atheism, and for the observing some order in the Productions of his
ill will, he refrained from nominating at first dash the person he had a design
upon, and contented himself only to lay the foundation of his Calumny wherewith
he thought he must load him, that he might have his end, to ruin him.

This Calumny, in which he has still persisted since, consisted in making M.
Des Carts pass for an Atheist: and to the end that one should not be deceived
in taking another for him, he scattered up and down in his Theseses amongst the
Criterians of Atheism, all the things he knew to be ascribed to Mr. D. C. by
the common report.

V. These first steps of Voetius opened Regi^^ his Eyes, Regius precautions and
secures himself against Voetius.
and he perceived it behoved him to practice dissimulation if he meant to keep
in with him: that put him in mind to secure himself in the Physic Chair more
than hitherto he had done, and to reserve the principal Business of New
Philosophy for the Problems he read upon certain days in the Week by the by,
out of the hours appointed for public Lectures; in which he seemed to rely
upon the consent of the Professors, not excepting Voetius, who had even been
serviceable once more in the Petitioning for this New Commission.

But, although he left his Auditors to their liberty of believing, or not
believing Problems; yet did he not refuse occasions to demonstrate the
ridiculousness or weakness of ancient Opinions. This Cunning way, contrived
insensibly to destroy the Principles of the vulgar Philosophy in vogue in the
Schools, proved yet more dangerous to it, than his open and Sincere manner of
teaching Des Carts his Principles in his Lectures of Medicine. This is that
which put his Colleagues to their trumps, who conserved some value for that
Philosophy which had been taught them; who thought it was very much for them to
grant Regius the Permission to teach the new Opinions together with the old.

Regius not submitting enough (out of his Writings and Lectures) to cape the
meaning and drift of Monsieur Des Carts, His Indiscretion.
being of a mild and moderate Spirit, administered a fresh occasion of
discontent to his Colleagues, by a piece of weakness that he showed in an Act
of Philosophy on the 9th of July, kept under Professor Senguerdius, by one
Florentius Schuyl, who proved a notable Cartesian afterward, for all that. The
Opponent that disputed, had composed his Arguments according to the Opinions of
the New Philosophy, and he had chosen the Nature and Properties of the
Loadstone for the subject of them -- The Respondent, notwithstanding otherwise
well verss'd in his Dictates, and Papers of his Master, seemed a little
gravelled; but the Professor interposing to bring him off, up starts Regius,
and without respecting either the Assembly; or Professors Duty, interrupts him,
very indecently insults over him, and would fain have adjudged the Victory to
the Opponent, which Civility and Custom might have obliged him to suffer the
Respondent to bear away. This Action which we have had an account of, from none
besides his Enemies, did offend the Professors of the University in general,
and made them willing to hearken to what Voetius could hint to them against the
Innovations.

The Exercises a few days after put an end to this Thesis, and Regius writing
to Monsieur Des Carts the 14th of July, when Vacation begins, would be sure to
acquaint him what he had done at the Act. He only gave him to understand, That
he had finished his Public Course of Medicine for that Year, that he still
strictly adhered to his Principles and Method; and passionately desired he
might conser with him about the best way of making a new Course the ensuing
Year, which begun after the Fair in August, according to the regulation of the
University.

Although his measures to go for Egmond were broken, What Instructions M. Des
Carts gives him.
by the need that his Wifes bigness had of his presence, yet did he not for all
that spare Mons. Des Carts his time -- He scarce did any thing else all along
September and October, but answer the Consultations of this Professor. How
tedious and how frequent soever these Letters of this Zealous Disciple were,
yet did he not grudge his time to Instruct him; because he thought he should
not be sorry for it as ill spent. The Importance of the Queries and
Difficulties he propounded to him, hindered him to take care to put him in a
condition of establishing his Principles. Their main hinge was, of the
difficulty of the nature of Angels, upon the nature of man's Souls, of its
Union with the Body, of the Soul of Beasts and Plants, of Life, Motion of the
the Heart, and upon the Circulation of the Blood.

Monsieur Des Carts had brought this last Question into great request amongst
the learned, Plempius his ill Behavior.
and he had wonderfully established the credit of Harvey upon this account,
having been basely abused and decry'd by the Satyrs of diverse Physicians in the
Low Countries, the most part ignorant, or fondly valuing themselves upon the
ancient Maxims of their Faculty: that which could be plausibly brought against
this Opinion, was objected 18 Months before to Monsieur Des Carts, by his
Friend Plempius, a Physician of Louvain. Now although this last seemed to remain
satisfied with his Answer, yet did he afterward an Action unworthy of their
Friendship; he thought fit for the inhancing the splendor of his own
Reputation to mention in a Book that he was (...) going to put out, what had
passed between Monsieur Des Carts and he, touching the two Questions of the
Motion of the Heart, and of the Circulation of Blood; He, to this effect, gave
all the gloss that was necessary to the Objections he had made to him, but when
they came to the Answers to them that he received, he was so far from behaving
himself toward Monsieur Des Carts as a Friend who deserved to be respected,
that he was not so faithful to these Answers as is requisite even in
Adversaries that confu^c one another, and look upon one another as Enemies.

Regius was exasperated at such unhandsome Carriage, and having confronted his
Book with the Answers Monsieur Des Carts had made to his Objections, he could
no longer smother the indignation that made him snatch up his Pen to signify
his resentments to Des Carts. He set out the ingratitude and deceitful dealing
of Plempius in such lively Colors, that one cannot express in any Language as
he spoke them, without running into the like transports of Anger against such a
dirty, smooty Behavior. He says, That as for the places where Monsieur Des
Carts discovers the most hidden Secrets of Nature, wherein consisted the main
stress of his Answers; Plempius has been so malicious as to play the Mute, or
at least to pass by the greatest part of them: and as for those which he does
relate, he so maims them, that he quite spoils the sense of them. That in the
place where he treats of the Circulation of Blood, he is content only barely to
relate the difficulties, as if no body had answered them; although the Answers
Monsieur Des Carts made to them were very convincing ones. That in the place
where Monsieur Des Carts relates several Causes, which being joined together,
produce the beating of the heart; Plempius introduces but one of them, which is
heat. If Monsieur Des Carts, after he has alleged Reasons necessary for the
evincing a thing; add thereto some others less convincing in order to a great
Illustration of the Point; Plempius is so treacherous and unfaithful as to
insist only upon this last Reason, as though it had been produced for an
Essential or Fundamental one; and leaving you to suppose that this might be the
only one, that could have been alleged by Monsieur Des Carts, he labors to
make him ridiculous, which he goes about to do in places he does not understand.

Plempius has now forgotten what formerly he writ, that he did not believe one
could be able to charge Mons. Des Carts, of having ever uttered any false
thing, or but an idle trifle. But if he thought good to revoke the Praises he
gave him, it was sorry pitiful retraction to blot them out with injuries.
Mons. Des Carts seemed not at all concerned at such uncouth behavior, and was
once of the mind only to oppose them by silence. Regius did not judge so; he
revenged his Masters Cause in such a manner, that probably made Plempius open
his Eyes; seeing he has altered his Opinion about the Circulation of Blood, to
embrace that of Mons. Des Carts.

VI. In the Month of November, The Coniqu^ of young Mr. Pascal at Sixteen years
of Age.
in the same Year, Father Mersennus being returned from some Journeys, gave
Advice of a Prodigy that lately appeared in Paris. This Prodigy was, that a
young Lad of Sixteen years had Composed a Treatise of Coniques, that was matter
of astonishment to all the old Mathematicians that ever were shown it. This
Youth was Son to Monsieur Pascal, Intendant of Justice at Rouan: And men
thought it no piece of flattery to publish that he had been more successful
than Apolonius in some Points. Mons. Des Carts, that admired almost nothing,
dissembling his purpose, answered, that he did not think it such an admirable
thing, that some should be found that could demonstrate Coniques more easily
than Apolonius; but, that one might propose some other things about Coniques,
that a Child of Sixteen would have much ado to resolve.

Not having a mind to refer himself to any concerning the matter of fact, but
to the Testimony of his own Eyes; for Mersennus was to send him a Copy of the
Treatise; He had not read the half of it, but he judged that Monsieur des
Argues had share in Composing it, upon pretense that he was there quoted:
Understanding after clearing of some doubts touching the matter in hand, that
there was no likelihood that his friend Monsieur des Argues had the least hand
in it; he rather believed that Monsieur Pascal the Father was Author of it,
than be persuaded that a Boy of Sixteen Years could be capable of Composing
such a strong Piece of Work. This great Man's doubt proved much more glorious
to this Prodigy in Nature, than the admiration of all those who are certain of
the matter of fact.

His Incredulity was not only grounded upon the want of Age and likelihood; it
had another foundation still, even the Project of a brave Design about
Coniques, that Monsieur des Argues had lately got Father Mersennus to send him.
But he did not in the least suspect Monsieur Mydorge to have contributed his
Assistance or Name to young Monsieur Pascal, although they see his four Books of
Coniques come out of the Press that same year; and though he was ignorant what
this friend had already done upon the same Subject some years before.

At the same time Monsieur de Beaune, His Exercises with M. de Beaune.
who was no less one of his friends than Monsieur Mydorge, and Monsieur des
Argues, put him upon the Solution of diverse Questions that he propounded to him
about Mathematics; and under a pretense to discourse with him upon his own
designs, he endeavored to pump out the Communication of his, in one of the
Answers Monsieur Des Carts gave him. This saying chanced to escape from him,
that his Physics were nothing else but Mechanics; and he declared something
to him as his Confident, that he would not otherwise have told, because that
the proof of it depended upon his World. Monsieur de Beaune suffered this
Advertisement to persist: He used many instant Entreaties to prevail with him
to publish his World, which the accident that befell Galilaeus, had made him to
keep close under Lock and Key: But not being able to accomplish his desire,
although he was at that very time the only He of all his friends, to whom he was
mos^ unlikely to refuse any thing.

Monsieur Des Carts had quitted his abode at Egmond some time ago, and was
retired (...) Haderwick. Regius finding he was still too (...) distant from
him, thought with himself tha^ if he did but once peep out of his Solitude
(...) North-Holland, any other place would be indifferent to him: Wherefore he
begged (...) him that he would please to come neare^^ Vtrecht, as well for the
satisfaction of several of his friends in the City, as for another great
convenience he should have of consulting him nearer hand.

He came therefore some few Months after to lodge in a Country House near that
City, He goes to sojourn at Harderwick near Vtrecht thence to Leiden.
in the Neighborhood of the Castle Renoud, the dewlling place of Monsieur de
Haestrecht his friend: But whether it was by reason the Winter was vehement in
the Country, or that he apprehended Voetius practices, I know not; but away
goes he at the beginning of the Year after, to live at Leiden, where he had yet
more friends than he had at Vtrecht. Besides Monsieur de Hooghland, a Catholic
Gentleman, and some Magistrates; he might have well reckoned the half of the
Professors, the chief of which was Golius, Schuchen and Salmatius, Son to a
Councellor in the Parliament in Bourgundy, without forgetting Rivet, who was of
Poictou, with another Minister of the place called Abraham Heide, alias
Heidanus.

This last, His acquaintance with Heidamus.
who was in high reputation in the Country, was not subject to usual faults of
other Protestant Ministers: And although Monsieur Des Carts professed to be a
friend to none of them, the extraordinary merit of Monsieur Heidanus made him
presently except him out of the number: He was not only satisfied to be a
follower of his Philosophy, as others were, but he was also the Protector and
Supporter of it; having the name of the most Eloquent Preacher in the Country,
so he most advantageously improved it, to instill into his Auditors the value
he himself put upon this Philosophy, from which he deduced his Arguments,
Comparisons and Explanations, that made him be cried up and admired.

It did not fare so with Rivet, Rivet's friendship, and Stampion's quarrel.
who cracked to be a Cartesian, without understanding the Wriings of Monsieur
Des Carts. All his friendship consisted in nothing else in a manner, but in a
kind of an itching humor he had to speak of him continually in his Letters,
and in his Company: The least Toys in the World were Subjects good enough for
him to write to Father Mersennus, to Monsieur Gassendus, and other Virtuoso's
of France, provided he could but bring Monsieur Des Carts in by head and
shoulders. He it was that informed them concerning the so much talked of wager
about Mathematics, between young Wasseneur and Stampion, where Monsieur Des
Carts was present, drawn in by the indiscretion and ill will of the latter;
notwithstanding Wasseneur's Victory was very glorious; for our Philosopher, who
went publicly for his Master, yet he managed this business but as a piece of
Merriment, which was not worthy of Rivet's disturbance, nor the curiosity of
the Mathematicians of France.

In the mean time there was a Book past the Press at the Hague, A Book against
Mr. Des Carts.
writ against Monsieur Des Carts; it was the first of all the Works that had
ever been undertaken to ruin his Philosophy. That the Author should come off
well in the matter, was a business of great consequence, to the end that other
Adversaries that were to bring up the Rear, might from thence take a good Omen.
The Author run a risque in appearing first in the Combat: Yet had he the
discretion to conceal his Name, that he might not expose himself as a
Laughing Stock in case of bad success. The Event justified his Prudence: The
Book came abroad for a New-years-gift in the year 1640. The great Name of the
Man that he attaqued, provoked the curiosity of some to see it; and it was not
long before it was in the hands of the ingenious in France and England; the
business proved the Glory and Renown of Monsieur Des Carts; they dispensed
with the Author as to his Name, only they took it very ill to see that this
Anonymous Fellow had not answered the Expectation of those, that required
something besides idle Stories against a Philosopher, who was brought in
question, and was to be confuted in good earnest. Mons. Des Carts seemed to be
the same Man he was for all that, and even let this Mist vanish of it self.

Voetius in the interim cast about in Vtrecht, Regius his Thesis, the
underhand dealing of Voetius against him.
how he might accomplish his design to undo Monsieur Des Carts as to his
Reputation, and to have him declared an Enemy to the Reformed Religion and
Protestant Churches; ^ay and by those too that honored him most with their
kindnesses. He had caused Acts to be kept a second and third time, wherein he
had rubbed up the old Sore, reviving the Scandal of Atheism against him, on
purpose by little and little to prepare the Spirit of the People, and to cause
the Magistrates at length to change their good disposition toward him. But now
to effect this design, Regius was marked out for Ruin; this is what he mainly
labored after, canvassing his Lectures and Writings to find something that
might bear an Action.

He begun at the Examination of the new Opinions which Regius vented in his
Chair, where he read Physic, and laid to his charge before his Colleagues
whatsoever was amiss, and not conformable to the Ancient Physicians and
Philosophers established and allowed on in the Universities of Holland; his
Complaints broke out at (...) upon the account of an Act or Public Disputation
the Professors were to keep the Tenth day of June concerning the Circulation of
Blood, which he taught according to the Hypothesis of Harvey and Des Carts,
which still past but for an Heresy amongst the ignorant and opinionative: He
went so far as to make the most part of the Professors to revolt from this
Sentiment: Insomuch that the magnificent Rector Bernard Scotanus who otherwise
was one of Monsieur Des Carts his Friends, and Regius his particular Friend*
could not withstand the earnest Entreaties to hinder him from reading in favor
of these Innovations.

The Rector laid the matter before hi^ in such a manner, as if he meant only
barely to exhort him to look about him, take some course to prevent the
murmuring of his Colleagues, and not to disturb the peace of the University.
Regius set before his Eyes what a business of Consequence it is, not to reject
or betray a Truth upon this pretense only, that it is Novel; and not to adopt
Errors under the Masque of Venerable Antiquity. It came to this result, That
there was a Congregation to be called, to deliberate about the Refusal he
seemed to persist in, to acquiesce in the desires, and award of his Brethren
the Professors. It was there resolved, that Regius should take up some other
Subject, less different from the commonly received Opinions in vulgar Medicine;
or if he remained refractory, and would still retain that of the Circulation of
Blood in Harvey's sense, he should do it only by the by, in the nature of a
Corollary, or Addition to his Theseses, with this usual Formula, Exercitii
causa defendemus.

Voetius, in the Manifesto he caused to be Printed in the Name of the
University, pretends that Regius in stead of acquiescing in this deliberate
Verdict, got them Printed without any other Expedient for remedying ^he matter,
than that of having got them looked ^ver and corrected by Monsieur Des Carts,
^o put them beyond Exception. Regius receiving these Corrections, took occasion
to ^hank him for them, and withal to desire him that he would please to honor
these Positions with his presence. Monsieur Des Carts passed his word he
would, upon condi^ion it might be in the Auditory or Tribune of Madam
Schurmans, because he had not a mind to be seen. But the business proved
ineffectual, by reason that this Act being put off ^ill the Month of June, he
made the best of a bad Market, and complied with this ill management of
business, to go from Leiden to Amersfort, three little Leagues from Vtrecht.

The great Success of Regius his Thesis, did mightily displease Voetius;
besides, the Physicians of the antiquated Doctrine did a little grumble at it;
nay, and some of them went about to confute it; amongst others, Primrose and
Sylvius, whom he judged convenient to Answer. The outrageous and injurious
manner of their proceeding against him, so raised his Choler, that without
ever dreaming of securing himself from the bad effects of their Example; he
sometimes was bitter against them; by and by he uses a pleasant jocular way,
when as the business was only to be done by a serious moderate confutation.

Monsieur Des Carts, to whom Regius sent his Answer in October, to correct it
after his usual manner, began to take upon him, and so much the rather made he
use of his right, because this Professor told him, it concerned him so to do.
He corrected several things that smelt too much of Precipitation, he adds
several others to it; and retrencht others, amongst which were those bitter
Expressions which he made him forbear, representing to him, how much it
concerns a man to treat a^ Adversary with a great deal of mildness and civility.

In this Juncture, the Overseers of the University of Utrecht, solicited by
Voetius and some other Professors, to redress the Disturbance that they
pretended the Theses and the private Opinions of Regius had begun to raise
amongst them, published an Order to Prohibit the introducing of Novelties, or
any Maxims contrary to the Statutes of the University: The business was
something Equivocal. This induced Monsieur Des Carts to unravel it, and to
draw up an Explanation of the Curator's Orders in form of an Answer. M. Vander
Hoolck, one of the principal Magistrates of the City; nay, and a Consul to the
year following, found this Answer very ingenious and judicious: and he was
wonderfully pleased with M. Des Carts his design of letting Regius continue in
his way of Reading Lectures in new Philosophy, if he would but moderate his
heat, and reform what should be too bold and adventurous in his Opinions.

Regius was not the only Man of his Disciples that was to take, His Opinion
concerning the Seat of the Soul.
to Instruct; there were presented day by day new ones, who were no less real
and passionate than he, in their Inquiry after Natural Truths; but they came
not to our Knowledge, by reason of the indifference they showed to make
themselves known to any other besides Monsieur Des Carts. It Is to one of these
newly admitted that we are beholden, for the explanation of his Sentiment
touching the Seat of the Soul in the Brain; which he confined to the Glandula
Penialis, called Conarion; the same unknown Person, one of no mean quality,
declared to him at the same time the Species that serve for the Memory, which
he supposed extended into all the substance of the Body, which is resembled to
the folds that remain in a Sheet of Paper, after it has been once folded.

It was about this time that Monsieur Des Carts had notice of a Project on
foot, His Project of settling in England, his acquaintance with Mr. Cavendish.
without his knowledge, for settling him and Monsieur Mydorge in England, under
the protection and by the Munificence of King Charles the First; Monsieur Des
Carts did not appear backward, especially considering what they had assured
him, That the King was a Catholic in his heart. The Promoter of this Design
was an English Lord, named Charles Cavendish alias Candish, Brother to the Duke
of New Castle, both of them acquainted with our Philosopher. Candish was an
excellent Mathematician; he became moreover desperately in love with Monsieur
Des Carts his Philosophy. He looked upon this Method as an incomparable means
to bring Mathematics to their perfection; one may judge by that, what joy
possessed him to perceive Des Carts make no Objections, nor hindrances against
the designs of his Settlement in England. Monsieur Mydorge, tied by the heels
in Paris by reason of his Family, was harder to move. King Charles might have,
peradventure removed all his Obstacles by the goodness he had to promise
Monsieur Candish to make ample Provision, and take care for all. But the
beginning of the Troubles of Great Britain, making him and Monsieur Des Carts
to apprehend lest these vast Sums that the King would set apart for Natural
Experiments, might be laid out in the Expenses of the War, and lest they
themselves might be deprived of that repose they flattered them withal,
together with other Effects of that Prince's Clemency: they remained, one in
Holland, the other in Paris; and continued the exercise of their Friendship
with Mr. Candish as before.

The Amity Monsieur Des Carts entertained with Monsieur Salmasius, His
acquaintance with Salmasius.
would have been no less to his Advantage; if he had professed Philosophy or
Mathematics. This defect nevertheless did not hinder him from being reckoned
amongst the Cartesians, and he willingly embraced Monsieur Des Carts his
Friendship. The Correspondence between them, was not confined to the Exercises
of Mathematics and Philosophy alone; The ill humor of Salmasius.
but as it was a piece of fatality that attended those that were acquainted
with Salmasius, and deserving to Experience his ill Conditions: as good luck
would have it, Monsieur Des Carts was involved in their destiny, lest
detraction some time or other should reckon him amongst some of Monsieur
Salmasius his Friends, who were of such a low spirit, as to prize the faults of
this learned Man, or so great Cowards as to adore him. It is true, he never had
but one occasion in all his life to incur his displeasure, but it was but a
trivial occasion: and he was beholden to his own Prudence that made him almost
ever have an aversion from conversing with him, even when he staid at Leiden,
where Salmasius resided. I say, a trivial occasion, but it should never have
been an occasion to a just equitable Person to fret himself. Monsieur Salmasius
suspected Mons. Des Carts a Friend to Heinsius, whom he did not love. It was
besides a pitiful mean Jealousy, and much below a Gentleman and a Scholar. But
now this suspicion of his was ill grounded, seeing Monsieur Des Carts had
never in all his life spoken to Heinsius, and although a Man well deserving, and
of great account in the University of Leiden, by reason of his Employ and
Learning, yet had he never so much as interchanged a word with him. Nay, and
what is more, He could nto be ignorant that Heinsius could not abide him for a
long time, because he was Mr. Balzac's Friend who had censured his Tragedy of
Herod.

X. Yet the Consequences of M. Salmasius his ill humor signified in respect of
the Consequences of a bad Business, He falls out with the Jesuits.
that had like to have set him at odds with a whole Society, wherein he
flattered himself to have some Friends All things as to his Philosophy seemed
to smile upon him; when, some time after he had triumphed at Vtrecht in the
public Act of Regius, his Philosophy was assaulted at Paris at other Acts,
kept in the College of Clermont.

He supposed at first, Thesis of M. (...)
this Conduct was only the fulfilling of the Requests to the Jesuits, that they
would vouchsafe to examine his Works; but according to the Idea that he had
framed in his mind of Correspondence, Agreement, there is amongst all those of
the Order of Jesus, He was presently alarmed at what was done against him by
the Mathematick Professor in that College, supposing that might have been
contrived and concerted with his Superiors or fellow Collegiates.

This Professor was Father Bourdin, who going about to confute two of the
places in Monsieur Des Carts his Dioptriques, instead of sending him his
Objections, as Monsieur Fermat, Petit, Morin, and other Mathematicians had
dealt with him; he goes and inserts them (for the use of his Scholars) into the
Theses or Propositions defended the 30th of June and 2d of July, by one Charles
Potier, who some while after turned Cartesian, maugre his former Impressions.

Father Mersennus, not content to defend his Friend's opinions against the
Scholar and Professor, sent him an Extract of the Position that referred to him,
together with the Preamble or Preliminary Discourse composed by the Professor
for the opening of the Dispute, because it was point blank against him;
signifying by the by, that it was the Professor himself that sent it him, by
him.

Monsieur Des Carts having forgotten the manner of Comportment in Colleges,
The Custom of the College in Disputes.
seeing the Preliminary Discourse and the Points of the Thesis, imagined they
designed to set upon him publicly; he thought that the Jesuits instead of
giving him notice before hand of his Faults, did study to expose him to the
laughter of the greatest Wits of Paris; that made him lose the unconcernedness
he had declared upon so many occasions for whatsoever passed to his Prejudice:
And he was vexed to the purpose, when he saw that the Professor, under pretense
of Composing a Subject of Disputation for his Scholars, had fathered upon him
certain Opinions that he was not of, that he might the more easily confute
them. Perhaps he did wrong not to consider, that on such like occasions, the
Masters are sometimes forced to forge Chimera's to their Scholars to accustom
them to wrangle; that, as for what is performed in these Public Acts, is but a
sport and divertisement of Mind; that what is there spoken is of little
consequence against the truth of an Author's Opinions that they there oppose;
that according to the Custom of the Schools, the Master's and Respondent's
Honors are concerned to appear at least to come off victorious in the
Disputation; that these petty Triumphs last but a Day, and that the Applauses
concern neither the Master, nor his Opinions, but only the Scholar; whom they
Applaud, when he has but repeated an Argument, and responded (well or ill)
suitable to the Dictates and Lectures of his Mr.

The Union that he supposed to be amongst the Members of the Company of Jesus,
He declares War with the Jesuits.
made him conclude from the Example of Father Bourdin, that he had pulled an
old House over his head, and that he should have all the Jesuits upon his back,
and represented just then this Society as a formidable Army that advanced
toward him. He was not a whi^ daunted nor discomposed for all that, but
plucking up his Courage, he resolved to march alone, against them all, without
staying to Combat, either Father Bourdin, or any other in particular.

In order to this strange resolution, he addresses himself to the Father Rector
of the College of Clermont, to whom he writ in Latin, a Letter dated 22 July,
very pithy, pertinent, and full of respect. He begged of him to interpose his
Authority to engage the Fathers of the Society to disclose to him once for all
what they had to find fault with in his Works, to the end he might either
Correct himself or Answer them; This was a generous Declaration of War against
the Jesuits in his Name, which he judged fit to entrust with some wise discreet
Person; in order hereunto, he pitched upon his Friend Monsieur Mydorge, charging
him to go deliver it immediately to the Rector, and let him understand that
there was no rashness in making his Addresses directly to his Reverence; since
Father Bourdin had commenced a formal War, not by his Thesis, which he should
take no further notice of; but by a Velitation or Skirmish which he dispatched
to him since.

He answered this Velitation, expecting the Effect of his Letter to the Rector,
who received it, not from M. Mydorge his hands, who was afraid to draw the
Tempest upon his Friend by this proceeding, but by the hands of Father
Mersennus, who was not so scrupulous when the business was to foment
differences amongst the Learned, and breed Quarrels conducing to the
advancement of Sciences.

XI. The Rector seemed not a little satisfied with the Reasons and real
Sentiments of Monsieur Des Carts; A Personal Quarrel with Fath. Bourdin.
but he did not believe that the Society was bound to concern it self in a
difference wherein it was not a party concerned. He thought it sufficient to
permit Father Bourdin to decide his Controversy in person, as well as he could
with him, and instead of answering his Letter, he ordered this Father to Answer
it himself, and to render a reason of his Proceedings to Monsieur Des Carts.

Father Bourdin declared positively to him in his Letter, That he had not, nor
should ever undertake a particular War against his Opinions. Yet he promised
him to send him his Treatise within a Week; that is, the Reasons he made use of
not to approve his Sentiments. The term of eight days, at the end of which
Monsieur Des Carts expected these Treatises, being expired over and over, he
began to despair of them, when he received some Letters from some other Fathers
of the Society, by which they demanded of him Six Months delay longer. He made
no question but this was a Stratagem to Correct these Writings at leisure, and
to put them in such a condition no longer to fear his censure. He conjectured
by these Fathers Letters, that notwithstanding the assurances they had given
him of a pure personal Quarrel with Father Bourdin, yet that he was going to
detach from the main Body of the Society, a powerful Party of Jesuits against
him, to back their Fellow-Collegian.

Knowing that their chief Strength consisted in the Art of Logic, He prepares
for the Jesuits.
of which they perform many Exercises in the Society, to make them handle their
Arms the better in their Disputes against all sorts of Adversaries, he thought
likewise he was to look about him, and have recourse to Scholastic Arms,
which, he thought he had laid aside this many years, not so much as ever
dreaming he should have any more occasion for them.

He communicated his purpose to Father Mersennus, who expected him in Paris
toward the end of this Year, and he writ to him about it in these terms: I
shall not yet take my Journey this Winter; for, being I am to receive the
Objections of the Jesuits within four or five Months; I believe I must be in a
posture ready to expect them; in the interim, I have a great desire, a little
to peruse their Philosophy (which I have not done this Twenty Years) on purpose
to see if I like it better now, than I did heretofore. To this effect, I
beseech you to send me the Names of the Authors who have writ a Body of
Philosophy, which are most followed amongst the Jesuits, and whether or no they
may have any new ones. I remember none but Collegium Conimbricense.

He desired him also to inform him, He undertakes to confute the
School-Philosophy
if they had not compiled some Abridgment or Compendium of all Philosophy of
the Schools that was much read; (to spare him the labor of turning over the
Schoolmen;) such a one as that of Eustachius.

Father Mersennus could tell him of none but de Raconie, which was not so fit
for his purpose as Eustachius; but he forceably urged and exhorted him, not to
neglect the Philosophy of the Schools, such as was at that time taught in the
College, supposing that the time of Sacrificing of it to truth, was come;
letting him understand by the way that he was the only man, from whom the
Lovers of Truth and Wisdom expected this piece of Service.

Monsieur Des Carts writ back to him the Eleventh of November, That he did not
believe the School-Philosophy so hard to be confuted, because of the diversity
of Opinions that it contains; He declared to him at the same time the aims he
had upon Philosophy in reference to that of the Schools.

His intent was to write in order, a whole course of Philosophy in the nature
of Positions; or without any superfluities of Discourse; he would put down only
all his Conclusions, with all the Reasons, from whence he deduced them; which
he hoped to be able to do in few words. In the same Book, according to his
Project, he did get a course of Vulgar Philosophy printed, such an one as that
of Eustachius, with his Notes at the latter end of each Question, where he
intended to add the various Opinions of Authors, and what a man was to believe
of them all according to him. In a word, he put us in hopes (for to serve for a
Conlusion to his Work) that he would make a Parallel or Comparison of two
Philosophies, that is to say, of his own; and that of others. He was only
sollicitous to know if Eustachius were yet alive; because having no design,
neither on his Person, no^ Writings in particular, he had a desire to keep a
fair Correspondence with him; and use all sort of Civilities toward him. As
for the Collegium Conimbricense (i. e. the Courses of Philosophy of the Jesuits
of Conimbra in Portugal) in his Opinion they were too long. But he could have
wished they had writ as succinctly as Eustachius; because having to do with the
Jesuits, he should have preferred their course to all others.

XII. This Year proved fatal to our Philosopher by the loss, The Death of his
Father and Daughter.
not only of three or four of his Friends, Mathematicians, or Philosophers, but
especially of two Persons the dearest to him in all the World, viz. his
Daughter Francina, and his Father, Dean of the Parliament of Britain, who
departed this Life in October, 78 years of Age.

Francina died on the 7th of September at Amersford, only 5 years of Age. He
publicly owned her for his Daughter, although we cannot learn who her Mother
was, having not any proof of his being Married; He lamented her Death with that
passionate affection that forced him to Experience, that true Philosophy cannot
stifle Natural Affection. The Sorrow and Grief that overwhelmed him for this
loss, makes us apt to believe she was his only Child: But those that speak ill
of him, have not stuck to father more upon him. The Calumny, although supported
by the Authority and Writings of a grave Minister amongst the Reformed at
Vtrecht, seemed to him so ill-grounded, that he only laughed at it; and answered
his Enemy that cast it in his teeth, that not having made a Vow of Chastity,
and not being exempt from Humane Frailties; he should make no scruple at all to
own them before all the World, if he had any; but albeit he had none; yet he
agreed not to pass for a great Saint, with a Minister that had no good opinion
of the Gift of Continency in the Ecclesiastics of the Roman Church, who live
in Celibacy.

He staid not long to repair the breach that was made in integrity of his life,
wherewith he honored his solitude, and the profession of his Philosophy, and
restored his Celibacy to its pristin perfection, ever before he had acquired
the Name of Father. Upon the whole, the Public had never come to the knowledge
of this humbling Circumstance o^ his life; if he had not made a Public
Confession of it himself by writing the History of his dear Francina, upon the
first Leaf of a^ Book that was to be seen by many.

Three weeks after the death of this Child, The trick Voetius played with
Mersennus, against him.
he quitted the Town of Amersford to return to his abode at Leiden. He was
quite out of conceit with the Neighborhood of Vtrecht, because of Voetius his
Intrigues, that alarmed all the Country, making as if Regius was a Pestilent
Fellow, good for nothing but to trouble the Schools; as for his Des Carts, he
would have him pass for an Enemy of the Protestant Religion, a Spy sent out of
France against the Interest of the United Provinces: not judging the Writers of
his Religion in his own Country sufficient to exterminate him, he thought good
to find out some amongst the Catholics, and that too in the middle of France.
To find such, it was necessary to change his Language. He went about to
persuade them that they had to deal with a common Enemy, and in all their
concerns to defend Religion in general against a Sceptique and an Atheist;
wherein the Catholics were no less interested than Protestants. He went to
solicit Men of Parts as far as the recesses of Cloisters in Paris, and had
even the Confidence to attempt Father Mersennus, upon pretense that this Father
was already trained up and versed in making his party good against Atheists and
Deists, with whom he had entered the lists ^y diverse Works; he represented to
this Father, that being besides a good Philosopher and Geometrician; an
undertaking of this nature, was worthy his eminent Learning and Sub^lty. And to
engage him the deeper by more ^revalent Expressions, he tells him, That ha^ing
showed himself all along, the Defender of Truth in his way of Treating of
Divinity; He ^eeded not to question but the same truth ^all'd for his
assistance, to secure it from the ^exatious insults of this new Philosopher.
This is perhaps the first time that ever any ^ody heard the Protestant
Ministers congratulate the Roman Catholics, and what is more, even the Monks
for having successfully stood up for and guarded truth in matter of Theology.
The thing was yet something the more remarkable, because Voetius, a man would
have thought, should have been the ^ast from whom one might have hoped to have
heard such a like Confession, having without any cause taken a great liberty to
oppose the Roman Church upon other occasions; yea, and falling out with some
Ministers, who were not able to endure his excessive flyings out and
impostures; But considering the Catholics conn'd Voetius but little thank for
this Confession, and because the Protestants did not lay it to his charge: Men
looked upon it as the consequence of his disorderly Spirit, to which the one,
and the party were pretty well accustomed; there needs no other sign of this
irregularity than the malignity wherewith he affects to make Monsieur Des
Carts pass for an Savage Jesuit, tha^ he might decry him, and render him
odiou^ another way.

Father Mersennus feigned that he let himself be allured by the Charms of
Voetius hi^ Discourse; and to demonstrate that he wa^ still more a Friend to
Truth than to Monsieu^ Des Carts, he promised him the service of hi^ Pen,
provided they could supply him with Matter and Reasons sufficient to attack the
Opinions of that Philosopher.

Some pretend the Monk spoke in earnest^ Voetius was so far persuaded of it,
that immediately he noised it abroad that Mersennus was a writing against Des
Carts. Afterward he sought up and down for Materials, and wa^ very
importunate with all his Friends to dispatch relief to Father Mersennus; yet a
whole year was spent without being able to get the Father to make his words
good, save only in a Comparison that he made between Monsieur Des Carts and
Vaninus; desiring him to make much of this, as an important Piece, and to
display the Parallel of the new Philosopher with that Impious Wretch who was
Burnt at Toulouse.

Without doubt they had a better opinion of Monsieur Des Carts at the Court of
France; The King invites him to Court upon honorable Conditions but all in
vain.
Seeing King Lewis the 13th commanded to send him word at the latter end of
this Year, that he would publicly gratify his Merit. This Prince informed by
Card. Richelieu, or by those that presented him with his Book, that this
Ornament to the Kingdom would ^e always out of its Element, so long as he
should be out of his Realm; had thoughts of preferring him to some eminent
place, either (...) Court, or in the Parliament, thereby to ^ender him
conspicuous to all his Subjects; and to grant him a great Pension suitable ^o
his rank, and able to support it; But ^here were no solicitations powerful
enough ^o wean him from his retirement. He regarded the Delights and Pleasures
of Court, and the most glorious Occupations of Counsels and Parliaments, as
equally prejudicial ^o the repose and leisure that were requi^re to serve
Mankind in the Profession he ^ad chosen, and putting infinitely a greater value
upon his King's good will toward him, than upon all the Honors and Riches
that ^e would have pleased to heap upon him, ^e wished rather to live alone,
content with the perpetual acknowledgment of his gracious offers, than to
expose himself to hatard of losing the advantages of his Philosophy, under
pretense of being desirous to bear the heavy weight of those Honors, and to
justify the choice of so great a Prince.

BOOK VI.
From 1641 till 1644.
I. The publishing of his Metaphysical Meditations
IN the Year 1641. began to appear in public the second Works of Monsieur Des
Carts, with the privilege of the King, and approbation of the Doctors of
Paris, entitled, Meditations touching the first Philosophy, wherein is
discovered the Existence God, and the Immortality of the Soul. But you must
observe, tha^ it was not the Author's intent* that they should insert the word
Immortality instead of that of Immateriality.

This Work, the publication of which he pretends to be purely owing to his own
Conscience, was of a more Ancient Composing than his Essays, being the very
first fruits of his retirements in Holland. The importance of the subject
matter prevailed with him, before it went to the Press, to let the most able
Divines of the Roman Church see it; nay and other Learned Men too of other
Communions, who past for the most subtle Wits in Philosophy and Metaphysics,
to the end that he might profit by their Censures, answer their Difficulties,
and cause their Objections and his Answers to be Printed together at the same
time with his Treatise.

His Manuscript was, in order hereunto above a year in the hands of Father
Mersennus; who had a Commission from him to find out Censurers or Approvers for
this Book, of all faculties, whilst he in the mean time did the same in the
Catholic and Protestant Netherlands. Yea, and he had some intensions to
dedicate it to the Doctors of the Sorbonne; that is, to all the Faculty of
Divi^ity of Paris, because, says he, the cavils of some persons had made him
resolve to guard himself henceforward with the Authority of others, since Truth
is so little regarded when it is alone. He recommended this business to Father
Gibeuf, Father of the Oratory, his friend, who by his great Capacity had gained
a great Esteem and Credit (...) the Sorbonne, and amongst Men of Wit and
^ngenuity, and left Father Mersennus to order all the rest.

II. An Abridgment of what it contains.
Whilst this Father searched for Censurers for his Book, whilst he collected
the Objections of Divines and Philosophers, he could possibly find in Paris; he
received an Abridgement of it, concerning the chief Points about God and the
Human Soul, which served for an introduction to the whole Work, which he
divided into six Meditations.

In the first he propounds the Reasons why we may doubt of all things in
general, and especially of material things, until such time as we have
established a better foundation in Sciences than those we have had hitherto: He
^^akes it appear that the advantage of this general doubt consists in
delivering us from all sorts of prejudices to loosen our Minds from Sense, and
so to bring it about that we cannot any longer doubt of the things which, we
shall afterward know and acknowledge to be true.

In the second he demonstrates that the Soul making use of its own liberty in
supposing that the things of whose Existence there may arise the least doubt,
do not exist at all, in effect^ does acknowledge that it is impossible but that
at the same time it exists it self; which serves to make it distinguish the
things that belong to it, from those that belong to the Body.

In the third he produces and displays the best Argument he has for the
Existence of a God, without using any comparison dra^ from corporeal things.

In the fourth he proves that all things we have a clear and distinct notion
of, are true; he there explains also the nature of the Error that is in the
Judgment, and the discerning of true from false.

In the fifth he explains the nature of a Body in general; he does there
likewise demonstrate the Existence of God in a new manner; and he makes appear
that the certitude of demonstrations themselves depend upon the knowledge of
God.

In the sixth he makes a difference between the action of the understanding,
and that of the imagination. He there evidently shows that the Soul of Man is
really distinct from the Body, and that nevertheless it is so nearly joined to
it, that it composeth as it were but the same thing with it. He explains also
all ^he several Errors that proceeds from Sense, ^ith the means to avoid them.
Last of all, he ^here brings in the Reasons from which one ^ay conclude the
Existence of things material.

We must observe that the Author does not ^ind himself up to follow the Order
of matters ^hroughout this Work, After what manner they are written.
but only the Order of Reason. I mean, that he has not under^aken to speak of
whatsoever appertains to ^he same Subject, in the same place, because (...)
would have been often impossible to prove (...) well, inasmuch as there were
Reasons, some ^hereof were to be fetched a great deal fur^her off than others.
But in reasoning in or^er, that is to say, beginning at the most ea^e things,
and so passing after that to things ^ost difficult, he has deduced from thence
what he could possibly, sometimes for one, ^atter, and sometimes for another;
which was in his Opinion the true way to find Truth ^recisely, and to explain
it aright. He judged his Order only profitable to those whose Reasons are free
and unbiassed, who can say ^s much of one difficulty as of another.

And this is the reason why he thought it ^ot convenient, nor yet possible to
insert into the Text of his Meditations, the Answer to ^he Objections one might
give, because that would have interrupted all the Series, nay and might have
invalidated the force of his Reasons, which depends chiefly on the necessity of
diverting ones thought from things sensible, from whence most part of the
Objections might be drawn. But yet he set down those. that were already come to
his hand from the Low Countries at the end of his Treatise, to serve for a
Model to others, if there chanced to come any, and to show how they might come
in course, and follow, in the impression by inserting his Answers at the end of
each Objection.

These first Objections were sent by their Author Monsieur Caterus or Catters,
Doctor of Lounvain, First Objections.
employed in the Missions of Holand: He accompanied them with all the
Civilities and Modesty that ordinarily sway learned lovers of Truth; they were
directed to two of his friends Bloemart and Bann^^ who knowing very well the
capacity of this Doctor, had desired them of him, and tha^ too as strong and
pertinent as possible he could make them, that they might be suitable to our
Philosophers Intentions: The two friends sent them to Monsieur Des Carts just
as they received them; and he in like manner directed his Answer he made to
them, he endeavored especially not to come short in Testimonies of Esteem and
Civility of Monsieur Caterus, who became a new Accession to his friends all his
life after.

Fath. Mersennus, Second Objections.
that he might perceive some Effects of his Commission, sent him in January the
Objections he was able to pick up by word of mouth from off Divines and
Philosophers he consulted in Paris: Their difficulties were neither
considerable, nor in great number, notwithstanding this Father offered some of
his own, and though he had done whatsoever lay in his power to start some from
his Answer to the first Objections which he had conveyed to him, with a design
to have him to examine them, with the rest. Monsieur Des Carts seemed to
believe that these several Objections had been made by persons sincere and
honest, and persuaded of the solidity of his Principles, and drew up an exact
Answer to them. Now, for as much as the Authors of these Objections-had
signified by the Pen of Father Mersennus, that it would be very proper and
useful, if, at the end of his Solutions, after having first of all presented
some definitions, demands and ^xioms, he would wind up all according to the
Method of Geometricians, so that at one glance, Readers might find wherewith
they should be satisfied; he was exceeding glad that he had made him a
proposition so agreeable to him, and so easy to be put in Execution; he
therefore accompanied his Answer for their satisfaction, with another Writing
containing the reason for proving that there is a God, and the difference there
is between Spirit or Soul, and Human Body, couched after a Geometrical manner.

He had not quite finished his answering the second Objections, Third
Objections by Mr. Hobbs.
but he received those of the famous Hobbs, an English Philosopher, who had
long sought an occasion to get acquain^ance with him. Father Mersennus had
augmented his desire when he begun the reading of the Manuscript of
Meditations, for to make Animadversions thereupon; but he declared to him, that
the only way to deserve his friendship, was to be plain with him, and not spare
him. M. Hobbes took it for granted; the Father upon sending these Objections to
Monsieur Des Carts, accompanied them with a word or two in behalf of his
Friend, to the end he might be acquainted with his desert and might know what
kind of Philosophy it was, whereof he made Profession.

Monsieur Des Carts, overjoyed to learn that the number of true Philosophers
was increased by such an ingenious person as M. Hobbes, had a mind to study the
Genius of the man in his Objections; but he found them not proper to let him
judge of his Solidity and Profoundness. He inserted into the very Body of these
Objections, the Answer he made to each Point. This is what we exhibit under the
title of Third Objections.

Notwithstanding all Monsieur Des Carts his Entreaties to Father Mersennus to
send him no more Objections, Other Objections of M. Hobbes.
but such as related to his Metaphysical Meditations; yet this Father could not
forbear communicating to him the Marks M. Hobbes had made upon his Dioptriques,
nor could Monsieur Des Carts forbear answering his Friend. Mr. Hobbes shot
wide of the mark in his writing, by a beginning that had no relation at all to
Dioptriques. He talked in it of God and the Soul as things Corporeal; he
discoursed concerning his Internal Spirit, which he established as the
principal of all things; we meet with abundance of other stuff, no way relating
to Mons. Des Carts his Dioptriques -- For although he pretended that Materia
subtilis was the same with his Intern Spirit -- yet he might as well have said,
The Moon is made of green Cheese; the one was not discernable in the other; Mr.
Hobbes made a tedious reply, which was conveyed to Monsieur Des Carts the 7th
of February; but all the business of this peaceable Discourse centered in
Father Mersennus. M. Hobbes, nor Monsieur Des Carts never writing to one
another immediately, their Communication extended no further; and although
Monsieur Des Carts sent his last Answer to Mr. Hobbes his Reply, he begged of
Father Mersennus either to keep it to himself, or to disperse it at discretion,
that it might not be discovered by M. Hobs, nor no body else, that it came
farther, than from the Convent of Minims in Paris.

He signified withal to this Father, the Reasons that induced him to have no
more to do with this English Philosopher, that he might preserve his Commerce
for those Friends who love one another without Communication. He gave him a
fresh account of what he judged of this Man's Intellect, which he looked upon
as very obstinate, and dangerous in its affecting singularity, although it might
not be endued with an exactness fit for judging aright, nor with any strength
for arguing.

IV. In the whole Society of the Sorbonne, there was not found one Censor of
Monsieur Des Carts, notwithstanding the great pains Monsieur Gibeuf and Father
Mersennus were at to procure some; we must except one young Doctor or
Licenciate, who having heretofore read the Essay of the Method of our
Philosopher with no small delight, did acquiesce in Father Mersennus his
desire, hoping to meet with the like pleasure in the reading of the
Meditations; This Doctor was the famous Monsieur Arnaud, at that time near 29
years of Age, not being able to obtain of the Father to peruse it Gratis
without costing him some Reflections, he thought himself obliged to act two
Parts in the Examen they required of him; At first, he appeared like a
Philosopher, to represent the principal Difficulties that might be objected
against Monsieur Des Carts, touching those two grand Questions; concerning the
Nature of our Soul and the Existence of God. Then again, he acted the part of a
Divine, to take notice of the things that he judged apt to offend ears
accustomed to the usual Expressions of his Theology.

Monsieur Des Carts had never yet any more rational, or more able Adversary
than this young Doctor, who not taking up with rendering himself very Profound
in all sorts of Knowledge, made a perfect Geometrical Spirit to reign in all
his Argumentations; but instead of mispending his time in admiring him; he sets
all his Wits on work to Answer him; which troubled him more, and put him harder
to it, because he was to satisfy a Spirit upon which it was impossible to
impose, and that the business was to solve withal certain most solid and most
sublimely propounded Difficulties.

He sent back word to Father Mersennus, that he could not have desired a more
quick^ighted penetrating, nor yet a more fair and officious Examiner than he
was; That he had been treated with so much Candor and Civi^ity, that he could
scarce imagine that it was ^n Adversary that writ against him: But that ^e had
examined what he had opposed with so much diligence, that he could wish nothing
might have escaped him. And that his lively penetrating manner of urging, and
pushing things that he could yield his Approbation to, made him confident that
he was void of the the complaisance to dissemble with him.

He sent his Answer to Father Mersennus upon Easter Day, with many thanks to
Monsieur Arnaud, for two friendly offices he had rendered him by writing
against him; the first was for having proposed the Reasons of his Book, in such
a manner, that he seemed to ^e afraid lest others should not find them
sufficiently strong and convincing. The other was for having fortified him with
no small Succors in backing him with the Authority of St. Augustine, whose
Philosophy had the same Principle as his, for its Basis and Supporter.

Having a pretty while weighed the force of Monsieur Arnaud's Arguments about
Philosophy, he judged, that endeavoring to solve those which respect the
Nature of the Soul or Humane Spirit, it behooved him to alter his Method,
fearing he might not be able to resist the force of those, he had propounded to
him touching the Existence of God. That Is the reason why, instead of taking
upon him to bear up against all his Efforts, as hitherto he did, he would
imitate those who are to defend themselves against an Adversary that has the
advantage, and studied nothing more tha^ cunningly and skilfully to parry his
blows rather than expose himself downright to the violence of them.

When he was as far as the Answer that he was to make to the Difficulties that
might baffle, and nonplus Divines, he declared, That he opposed Monsieur
Arnaud's first Reasons (concerning the Humane Soul) that he had labored to
elude the second Reasons concerning the Existence of God) but that he had done
his best into the third, except to the last concerning the Eucharist; to which
he undertook to answer.

Monsieur Arnaud gave Monsieur Des Carts several Advices as important as
judicious to obviate that wrangling that might be feared in ill-disposed Minds.
Monsieur Des Carts desiring to demonstrate the deference he had to his
Judgment, and esteem for his Counsels, sent to Father Mersennus, the Places or
Passages, by themselves, separate from his Answer, which this young Doctor
judged convenient to run over again, and alter in his Meditations. He desired
the Doctor to set down the Additions or Corrections in the very Text of his
Work, by separate By-marks like Parenthesis, to show how he desired to be
instructed by the advice of another, without aiming to ascribe the Glory of it
to himself, and to excite by such a generous Modesty, all his Examiners; nay,
and his Antagonists too, to afford him the like advice, in hopes of having the
same Justice done them.

He wished Monsieur Arnaud might see his Answer, that he might pass his judgment
of it, and that he might communicate to him his replies, or give him new
advice; but we heard no more of it: And Monsieur Arnaud signified to Father
Mersennus, that he remained fully satisfied. He added, That he himself held,
and openly maintained the very same Philosophy in part, that it had been stiffly
opposed in a full Congregation by several Learned Persons, but that it could
not be beat down, nor so much as staggered.

This disposition begot in Monsieur Des Carts a Prejudice for his Philosophy
so much the more advantageous, The esteem M. Des Carts had for M. Arnaud.
as he judged this Doctor an Adversary less capable of Mistakes in what he
knew, and less dissimulation in his demeanor. He did not stick since to
acquaint the Fathers of the Oratory, that as young a Doctor as Monsieur Arnaud
was, yet did he esteem his Judgment more, than, that, of half of the Old ones
of the whole Faculty.

Of all the Objections that were made against his Meditations, there was not
one of them to whom the Public bestowed more honor than to those of the young
Doctor, and M. Des Carts, who judged them preferable to all the rest, was not
ashamed to honor himself particularly by it, as a new support for his
Philosophy. It was not his fault that he did not hold up this growing
acquaintance, and amicable correspondence with a Friend of that importance. But
Monsieur Arnaud, notwithstanding a great Philosopher and excellent
Geometrician; had at that time so much dedicated his time to Theology, that
there was left him but a very small Portion of it for exercises of Humanity, or
study of Classick Authors: Insomuch that they had a Kindness one for another
since, without much Communication; yet nevertheless, Monsieur Des Carts
expressed so much sympathy for him, that he had cause to fear that Monsieur
Arnaud's Enemies were his also.

V. Besides the Objections of Mons. Hobbes and Monsieur Arnaud, Fifth
Objections by M. Gassendus.
he received also those of Monsieur Gassendus, who was come from his Country
Habitation to Paris, very opportunely in order thereunto. They were old
Cronies; yet their amity never proceeded to the degree of Friends, loving one
another, without ever discovering, or reproving what is amiss in one another.
Whatsoever it was at the beginning, Monsieur Des Carts always preserved it in
an equal poise: but now as for Mons. Gassendus, it was not so with him, since
our Philosopher's Edition of his Treatise of Meteors. The original cause of the
falling out of M. Gassend. and M. Des Carts.
Monsieur Des Carts had not omitted in this Treaty the Phenomina of
Parhelia's, or Mock-Suns that appeared at Rome. An. 1629. of which Monsieur
Gassendus had composed a Dissertation. But his silence bred the occasion of
being vexed at him, and showing a great deal of indifference for him, who took
it very ill that Monsieur Des Carts should not make the least mention of him
upon this occasion.

This ill disposition of Mind in M. Gassendus, attended with a secret
Jealousy, which the reputation or designs of our Philosopher begot in him, was
a sovereign Preservative against his natural sweet disposition and mildness,
that one might have feared he would have used in his Objections against the
Metaphysical Meditations, where Monsieur Des Carts needed all the severity of
the most able Animadverters. He was very careful to acquit himself handsomely of
the Confutation he had undertaken; yet toward the Conclusion, taking up his
wonted Complaisance that he endeavored to suspend awhile, in the Body of the
Writing, he protested that his chief design in Writing against Monsieur Des
Carts was nothing but maintain himself in the honor of his friendship. He
added moreover, That if any thing too rude had escaped his Pen, he would disown
it upon the spot; and gave his consent, that whatsoever might displease
Monsieur Des Carts, should be razed out of his Writing.

His Civilities did not tend to so good an end. He writ also a particular
Letter full of Commendation, not only of Monsieur Des Carts great parts; but
also of the that very Work he undertook to Animadvert upon. But what he adds
afterward touching the necessity Father Mersennus had driven him to send him
his doubts and scruples, touching his pretended Incapacity, touching the
weakness of his Arguments, was the product of such a cunning Dissimulation, and
so near akin to Modesty, that many did not stick to prefer them to the plain
and austere sincerity of Monsieur Des Carts, and to disapprove that blunt
disobliging downrightness of the latter, wherewith he thought fit to answer him.

This affected Language of M. Gassendus, was only for Monsieur Des Carts; he
changed his note for those whom he handled without Dissimulation; such as M.
Daille in France, and M. Rivet in Holland, where he was not ashamed to confess
to the last, That he had not so strictly examined Monsieur Des Carts his
Metaphysics, but only because he had not received from him all those
Civilities that he expected upon a certain occasion.

Yet although his revenge was groundless, and most unjust in it self,
nevertheless it was very profitable to Monsieur Des Carts, who received his
Writing by way of Father Mersennus, under the Title of Disquisitio Metaphisica
seu dubitationes, etc. he answered in a less affected manner doubtless than
that of Monsieur Gassendus was; the style of which, seemed to him very Eloquent
and Delightful; although he was pleased to be persuaded that he had not so much
made use of the Reasons of a Philosopher to confute his Opinions, as the shifts
of an Orator to evade them; but the desire of managing his Adversary a little
more, hindered him from maintaining the Character of his ordinary plainness;
for a Crotchet coming into his Pate, to make the Spirit answer ^he Flesh, as if
they had been two Persons that ^e had a mind to bring upon the Stage, he ^ave
M. Gassendus an occasion to know that ^y the Flesh, he meant him. It was in
vain, after he had taken off the Mask to expatiate upon M. Gassendus his
Praises. Gassendus sup^osed that he would have paid his Comple^ents in kind: He
fell out with him about (...), which some of his Friends, and some tur^ulent
Spirits, had a special care to foment by ^alse Reports and Scandals, that
destroyed in ^ome measure a part of that Charity these two Christian
Philosophers owed one to another. The writing of Gassendus, with the Answer of
Monsieur Des Carts, makes up the Fifth Objection in the Book of Meditations.

In the mean time, Sixth Objections.
Father Mersennus picked up whatsoever he could possibly gather from the
Objections in Paris, and in the Country, and dispatched them to Monsieur Des
Carts, according as he received them, besides those that he was about, to
frame himself by the reiterated Study of his Meditations. Monsieur Des Carts
seeing them of diverse pieces and different Compositions did his utmost to
reduce them into order. Then he sent them back again, together with the Answer
he gave Father Mersennus about them, who called them the Sixth Objections;
after which he made them finish the Impression of the Book of Meditations.

VI. Voetius comes to be Rector of the University of Vtrecht.
Whilst Monsieur Des Carts was taken up with his answering the Objections they
made against his Metaphysick Meditations; Voetius the Minister, procured a
great reinforcement to his Faction by the Rectorship of the University of
Louvain; to which he got himself preferred 16th of March, An. 1641.

Regius beholding him in this manner invested with all the Authority that was
needful for the executing his designs against Monsieur Des Carts, and him;
sought all occasions to curry favor with him, or at least to prevent the dire
Effects of his ill will. The Rector at first was overjoyed to observe his
Submissions, and seeing he did so handsomely by him, as to offer him his Thesis
to Correct, he was content only to make some Notes upon it, to save the honor
of the ancient Philosophy, and left the Paradoxes and new Opinions alone to him
by way of Corollaries; together with the permission to put Monsieur Des Carts
his Name at the top of his Thesis.

The first dispute of these Theses was performed on the 17th of April, A Thesis
of Regius.
Regius moderated, and he that kept the Act was the Sieur Johanes de Roey,
still alive, who has gotten himself a great Name by his great Writings and
Learning. The great Abilities of the Moderator and Respondent to make the new
Opinions Triumph, soon made Voetius repent of all his Condescentions; he took
occasion upon a Tumult, and the Peripatetique Professors making their Scholars
to hiss Regius to take up his resolution again, of making him lose his
Professors Chair, and to Expel him ^he University.

Regius to stand upon his own Defense, cau^ed a plain Exposition of this first
Dispute to ^e Printed. He demanded withal, some re^ef from Monsieur Des Carts;
and sent him ^ll the Theses or Positions in order as they ^ere to be disputed
on the 5th of May, ^ith the Remarks the Rector had made upon ^em before he
would let them pass. Monsieur Des Carts found nothing too unreasona^le in the
Rector's Remarks; but having fielded to the request, Regius preferred to examine
his Theses without favor or affection: He corrected diverse things which he
should ^ave been sorry, to have been ascribed to ^im; for it was commonly given
out and be^eved that Regius had no other Opinions but ^ose of Monsieur Des
Carts. So that people ^ot being any longer capable of shaking off ^is Opinion,
it was expedient that Monsieur Des Carts should pass nothing over to Regius,
^ut what he would adopt for his own, and of which he could not advantageously
under^ake the Defense.

He began at that very time to observe some ^eeds of Error in that which
Regius imagined of his own head, and chiefly in what concerns ^e reasonable
Soul; but he was still Master of his Mind, and he had no cause to complain of
his docibility.

The second Theses disputed on the 5th of May, made as great a stir as the
former; ma^y other disputes followed them all the Summer long, which served
only to heighten his Reputation, and to exasperate the Spirits of the
Professors already prejudiced against him, insomuch that they were resolved to
oppose the Progress of these Novelties, and to enter an Action in the Name of
the University against him and Monsieur Des Carts. Voetius who outwardly was
pacified by the submission of Regius, plucked off the Mask at last, and
declared himself the Chief of his Adversaries, upon pretense that in some
places of his last Theses he had let fall some Expressions, different from the
common Language of the Schools, that he had not shown him.

This Protestant Minister, (having no more to expect from Mersennus) who, (for
all he expected a Consutation from him) sent him nothing but a grave Reprimand
for the Injustice of his Carriage; undertook to attack Monsieur Des Carts in
two places, first of all by Dispute, setting his Theses against those of
Regius; and then again by his Pen, by confuting his Writings. In quality of
Rector, he ordered Stratenus Professor in Physic, and Ravensperger Professor
of Mathematics, to refute all these Novel Opinions in all the Public Acts of
November and December. As for himself, he reserved the care to oppose in the
Theological Act kept under him, what he judged prejudicial to Religion.

The last Thesis of Regius being stufft with diverse Questions that had no
relation nor coherence one with another, The Thesis of Voetius against Regias.
and being they were Composed according to the Fancy of them that responded,
rather than to that of the Moderator: One of the Respondents had unadvisedly
put into one of his Assertions, that of the Union of the Soul and Body there
did not result a being per se, but only per accidens; ^alling a being per
accidens whatsoever was composed of two Substances quite different, without
denying for all that the Substantial Union, by which the Soul is joined to the
Body; nor yet that Aptit^^^ or natural Inclination that both these parts have
for this Union. Regius seeing these Expressions displeased Monsieur Des Carts,
as being too harsh, tried to excuse himself to Voetius, but ^o no purpose; This
Minister took occasion from thence to have him declared an Heretic, and to get
them to proceed to the turning him out of his place. In the Name of the Faculty
of Theology; that is to say, of himself, his two Colleagues Carolus Dematius
and Mainardus Schotanus, and of the Pastors of the City, he ordained that the
Students in Divinity should abstain from the Lectures of Regius, as from
Dogma's and Tenets pernicious to Religion. Then he causes some Thesis to be
Printed, which were to be maintained in December against the Paradoxes of the
esse per accidens in Man; of the Motion of the Earth, and against the Opinion
that disallows Substantial Forms. His Design was to get them signed beforehand
by the two other Professors in Divinity, and by all Divines whatsoever, who
were either Ministers or Preachers in the City, and then to depute some Persons
to the Magistracy, to give them notice that Regius should be condemned by a
Consistory or Ecclesiastical Assembly; to the end, that the Magistracy might
not lawfully dispense with his not being removed from the Chair.

Regius having had an inkling of what they were contriving against him, goes
presently to tell Monsieur Vander Hoolck of it, who was one of the Consuls that
protected him, and an intimate Friend of Monsieur Des Carts: The Consul sent
word to the Rector Voetius, ordered him to Correct his Theses, to leave out the
Title, and whatsoever might concer^ the reputation of Regius. The Rector, who
was to sit Moderator at these Theses, being (...) a quandary at the Consul's
order, spoke not one word more either of the Consistory, or signing; yet
because the Passages of the Theses's that related to Regius and Des Carts were
already Printed, and because they were to be defended the next day; he made use
of this pretense to Cloak his Disobedience and ill Intensions.

These Theses's were defended the 18th, 23th, and 24th of December. The
Respondent whose Name was Lambert Waterlaet, signalized himself full as much as
the Professor in opposing these new Opinions, defended with an equal heat by
the Opponents; who were almost all Regius his Disciples. The Professor seeing
himself toward the end a little too much put to it by one of the Opponents who
urged the Argument home, and would not be put off with his Responses; was not
able to extricate himself, but by saying out of spite. That those who did not
like the ordinary way of Philosophy, might expect another Monsieur Des Carts,
as the Jews expected their Elias, who should teach them all Truth.

VII. A Storm raised against Regius.
Voetius seemed to triumph over the new Philosophy, during the Three days of
the Public Act. But Regius foreseeing that if he should hold his tongue, many
would think him conquered indeed, and on the other hand, that ^f he went about
to defend himself by Pub^ick Theses and Acts, they would not fail to drown his
Voice by Hissings, Hummings, and Clapping of Hands, as they did at his last
Theses of the 8th of December; engaged to Answer in writing Voetius his
Theses's. He ^ends his Answer to Mons. Des Carts to be examined, informing him
by the way, that the Spirits were more and more incensed against him; and that
Consul Vander Hoolck's advice was, that he had better be silent.

Monsieur Des Carts being informed by Co^onel Alfonso of what had happened at
Vtrecht, M. Des Carts his advice to Regius.
^et Regius understand that he was of the Con^ul's mind; That his opinion ever
was, that ^e should by no means propound new Opinions, as New, but by retaining
the name and appearance of old; one should be content to introduce new Reasons,
and use all means, fit to make them be liked. What signified it, says he, for
you to go so publicly to reject Substantial Forms and Real Qualities? Don't
you call to Mind that I did declare in express terms in my Treatise of Meteors,
that I did not reject^ them, and that I did not pretend to deny them (...) but
only that they were not necessary to explain^ my Conception, and that I could
without them make my Reasons be apprehended? If you had taken this course, none
of your Auditors would have revolted to the contrary side, and you should not
have procured you any Adversaries.

But setting aside blaming what cannot be helped, you must think of redeeming
your time, and improve what is to come; it is incumbent upon you now to defend
with the greatest Modesty you are capable of that which is true in what you
have proposed, and to Correct without being wedded (...) your Opinion, that
which did not appear so to be, or what is ill expressed, being persuaded that
there is nothing more Commandable, nor more becoming a Philosopher, than a
sincere Acknowledgment of his Faults.

These Remonstrances, backed by the advice of Consul Vander Hoolck, Counselor
Van Leew, Colonel Alfonso, and Professor Emilius could not alter the resolution
of Emilius; who thought, that if his Answer did no good to the Public, yet it
would at least be of great use to his Scholars. M. Des Carts being concerned
at his obstinacy, thought it necessary to make use of some Condescension not to
discourage him, and having corrected his Writings upon his reiterated
Entreaties, he drew up a new Project of an Answer full of obliging Expressions,
and Praises of Voetius, he flourished with formula's of respect for others, and
modestly for himself; this Model of an Answer, with Matter, Reasons, and Means
and Manners of filling it up, are still remaining amongst his Letters, as one
of the fairest Monuments of his Meekness and Prudence; yet although he had
observed to him afresh that his silence would stand him in more stead than all
the Answers in the World, yet he must go and publish his Writing; the success
whereof answered the fears and apprehensions that men had of it.

They made people believe it was no better than a Libel in effect, Voetius
causes the new Philosophy to be forbid.
Printed without the Magistrates Order, distributed by a remonstrant
Bookseller, against the honor of the Rector of the University in general, and
of the Protestant Religion it self. Voetius obtained, that the Judge of the
City Government should seize all the Copies of them; which making the Book more
scarce, and to be more eagerly inquired after, did so provoke the Rector, that
having got on his side the greatest part of the Professors of the University,
and Senators of the City Counsel, he obtained a Decree from the Magistrates,
and after that a Judgment of the University against the New Philosophy;
strictly to charge and forbid Regius not to read or teach publicly any thing
but Physic or Medicine, and not to hold any private Conferences.

Regius dispatched all these Proceedings to Monsieur Des Carts the 31st of
March 1642; sending him the Decree of the Magistrates of the 15th of the said
Month, together with the Judgment and Definitive Sentence of the University,
and the Theses of young Voetius the Rector's Son. Monsieur Des Carts sent him
word back again, That as for the Theses they might be waved, nay, and the
Judgment of the University too, being an Act both contrary to the due Course of
Law, and irregular: But as for the Decree of the Magistrate, it was not the
same case; for the Senate had issued it out only to be freed from the
Importunities of Voetius and his Colleagues; he advised him to stick close to
the Decree accordding to the Letter, and to teach nothing but Medicine
according to Galen and Hippocrates; adding. That Truth would not be long before
she would have some or other to enquire after her, wheresoever she was.

Notwithstanding, Voetius ill-satisfied at these Proceedings, writ, made his
Son and Disciples write against Regius. His Son published his Theses in favor
of Substantial Forms, and Waterlaet Printed a Pamphlet entitled, Prodromus; as
if it had been the forerunner of that he prepared for the Press, though Fortune
was not so favorable to him as to succeed his Design. For seeing that all
Honest Men were but ill satisfied with his Behavior at Utrecht, and that
sending it to Leiden, to get it Printed there, under the Directions of a
Renegado Monk; the Rector of that University, Golius by Name, suppres'd it
before it was quite finished, and the Monk took him to his heels.

VIII. The good News that Monsieur Des Carts received at that time touching
the good success of his Philosophy in France, The favorable sentiments of the
Fathers of the Oratory and Jesuits, for M Des Cart. philosophy.
and especially amongst the Fathers of the Oratory, the universal approbation
of whom he had gained, served a little to blow over the Mortification he met
with at Vtrecht.

The Jesuits seemed and appeared somewhat more divided amongst themselves.
Some of them were content to like his Principles and Reasonings, or to praise
his good Intentions and Endeavors without going any further. Others there
were, who without more ado, embraced his Philosophy, and declared that they
were followers of the same. No man ever went farther than Father Vatier, who
told him in plain terms, that he did wonderfully, approve of whatsoever he had
writ, without excepting his Explanation of the Eucharist; and Father Mesland to
do honor to his Philosophy, Composed an Abridgment of his Metaphysical
Meditations, put them into a Scholastic style, and intelligible to the meanest
Capacity:

Cartesianism made mighty progress in the Company of the Jesuits, not only in
Flanders, but in France it self, under the Protection of two Principal Persons
of that Order; I mean, of Father Charlet, French Assistant to the General at
Rome; and of Father Dinet, Provincial of the Jesuits at Paris, afterward
Confessor to King Lewis XIII. who honored Monsieur Des Carts with their
Esteem and Friendship, and encouraged him to go on with his Work.

But amongst so many Friends and Admirers that he might reckon amongst the
Jesuits, Fath. Bourdin writ against the Meditations.
you cannot choose but imagine but there must be some envious Person that spoke
ill of his Writings, and decry'd him, and whispered their dislike of his Works.
Father Bourdin behaved himself more cordially and sincerely toward him, ever
since his dispute upon Dioptriques have made him his Antagonist.

He was pleased to attack him openly; by certain Objections he framed against
his Meditations; yet protesting nevertheless, That he would not infringe the
Laws of Friendship that was between them, nor yet the Rules of Decorum and
Civility that is practiced amongst the Learned.

Monsieur Des Carts pretending he had not strictly performed his Conditions;
besides the Answer he gave to his Objections, writ to Father Dinet, who was
still Provincial, a long Letter in the nature of a Dissertation, to complain of
them: Wherein also he gave a description of the Troubles which happened at
Vtrecht; and laid open Voetius in all his subtle Intrigues; The colors he made
use of to Paint him, proved seeds of new Discontent, which he was likely to
reap in process of time upon the account of Voetius and his Cabal. But the
trouble he received from Father Bourdin, issued in a fair reconciliation,
accompanied with a solid lasting friendship.

Father Bourdin's Piece against the Meditations; with Monsieur Des Carts his
Answer and Letter to Father Dinet, was Printed under the Title of the Seventh
Objections, at the end of the Second Latin Edition of the Meditations, which
was put out at Amsterdam, ^in 1642.

IX. M. Des Carts lives at Eindegeest, where Sorbiere gets acquaintance with
him.
From Easter of the year foregoing, Monsieur Des Carts sojourned in the Castle
of a Village called Eindegeest or Endegest, half a League from Leiden, by the
Seaside, one of the most pleasant Situations in all Holland. There he received
Visits more willingly than he had done elsewhere; whether because his Age and
Disputes had humanized more than formerly, or because it became him to grant
something to the report of his reputation, and yield to the delightsomness of
his abode, is not much material; but he was there visited in the year 1642. by
Samuel Sorbiere a Provincial, a man of parts, and very inquisitive to
understand the Virtues and Vices of the Learned of his time. He thought he must
study and practice Monsieur Des Carts more in his Conversation, then Books;
But our Philosopher being a man of few words, spoiled his design; and albeit he
has spoken very well of him, yet after all, we must confess that his great
desire to do M. Gassendus a Kindness, and to set them at odds together, has
made him commit abundance of Injustice in respect of Monsieur Des Carts.

Regius was not of that Spirit; Regius and Picot see one another at Eindegtest.
he had other concerns that made him render frequent Visits to Mons. Des Carts
at Eindegeest, which he took for his School. There it was he got acquaintance
with Abbot Picot, who at the latter end of the year was come to see our
Philosopher, in the company of the Abbot Touchelay the younger, who was a kind
of Secretary to him, in Answering for him the Questions of Phisicks and
Mathematics that were put to him.

In the mean time the Duke de Luineo, The French Translation of the Meditations.
for the benefit of all Frenchmen, translated Monsieur Des Carts his
Meditations into the vulgar Tongue. Monsieur Clerseiier, one of the most
zealous and virtuous Friends of Monsieur Des Carts, encouraged by this
Example, translated another, of the Objections and Answers annexed: These two
Translations were sent to Monsieur Des Carts to be Perused and Corrected a long
time before; which he did with that exactness, that he made them even better
than his Latin.

X. Voetius his Books against Monsieur Des Carts.
Whilst Monsieur Des Carts his Friends that were in France came in Crowds to
Eindegeest, where they knew he made himself more visible than in other places;
the Enemies to his Philosophy, carried on their design at Vtrecht. Voetius now
grown weary in writing Libels and Pamphlets against it, and his Person, and
Regius, did corrupt a young Professor of Groninguen, called Schoockius, who had
formerly been one of his Scholars, to put Pen to Paper, or at least to lend him
his Name, with a design to make the World believe, that Monsieur Des Carts had
other Enemies besides him.

He had a new Book in the Press at Vtrecht against him, and finding that they
sent all the Sheets to Monsieur Des Carts to be refuted according as they
Printed them, he put the Copy of it into the hands of Schoockius, desiring him
to take care of it, and caused him to put his Name to it, on purpose to cause
Monsieur Des Carts to be condemned of Precipitation; and that then he ^ight
handle him as a Slande^er and an Impostor that fathered other men's Books upon
him.

In the Interim there happened an accident that made a diversion to this Libel
and its refutation, Against the Society of our Lady at Haertoghenbosch.
by another Libel that Voetius writ, in the interval of the Impression, against
the Burgesses of Bosleduc or the Busse; that is, against the Fraternity of our
Lady of the Rosa^y, which since the reducing of this City, became common to
Protestants and Papists, by an Agreement of State Policy. Desmarets the
Minister, confuted it by an Order from the Burgesses of Bosleduc; but, seeing
he writ rather for them, than against Voetius, Monsieur Des Carts took upon
him to supply this last Point; and by that means gained the Esteem of the Chief
Men of Bosleduc, and the particular Acquaintance of Desmarets, albeit his
intent was not to court the Protestants, but to do a piece of good Service to
the Catholic Religion. He never put himself to the trouble, to make a Treatise
of it apart; but he put this Writing just after the refutation of the other
Libel, which was to bear Schoockius his Name, and he went on with the
refutation after the writing concerning the Fraternity, just as if it had been
but one and the same Work.

XI. The Book of Voetius and Schoockius against M. Des Carts.
The Book that Schoockius caused to be Printed by the Order and Directions of
Voetius, did not appear in Vtrecht till March 1643. under the double title of
Philosophia Cartesiana, sive admiranda method^^ Renati Des Carts. The Author
affected an Equivocation in both Titles, that he might the more securely
deceive those, by whom he was afraid he should be refuted. The Book was ushered
in by a long Preface, against Monsieur Des Carts his Letter to Father Dinet,
which Voetius had got to be condemned in the Consistory, as being very
injurious to the Reformed Religion, and to the Principal Minister of the City.

A few days after, M. Des Carts his Answer.
there was seen at Amsterdam Monsieur Des Carts his Answer, entitled,
Epistola Renati Des Carts ad Celeberrimum virum D. Gisbertum Voetium, in quo
examinantur duo libri nuper pro Voetio Vltrajecti simue editi, unus de
Confraternitate Mariana, alter de Philosophia Cartesiana. The Book, tho pretty
short, was divided into Nine Parts, which the Author did not judge necessary to
connect by any rational sequel. The First, Third, Fifth, Eighth and Ninth,
contains the Answer to the Book of Cartesian Philosophy, or of the admirable
Method. The Sixth, is the Examination of a Book against the Fraternity of our
Lady of Bosleduc; The Second and Seventh, are a kind of particular Information
concerning Voetius his Carriage and Conduct. The Fourth is the Judgment passed
upon his Books and Doctrine.

This Work was by Voetius carried to the Magistrates, Proceedings at Vtrecht
against M. Des Carts.
together with the Letter to Father Dinet, as two Libels, scandalous and
in^urious to a Minister of the Gospel. He ob^ain'd an Act of the Magistrates,
June the 23d, which he caused to be proclaimed at the ring ^of a Bell. Monsieur
Des Carts perceiving by his same Act, that not only his two Writings were
condemned; but that he himself was summoned in publicly to justify them
before Persons that were not competent Judges, ^nswer'd this Publication by a
Dutch Paper, ^lated July 6. at Egmondehoef, whether he went to sojourn the
First of May, quitting ^he Neighborhood of Leiden. He offered ^orthwith to
justify whatsoever he had advanced in his two Writings; although he thought not
himself liable to be judged by that Court. Voetius that could prove nothing
else against him, saving only that he had fathered the Book that bore
Schoockius his name upon him, suborning five Witnesses all exceptionable by
Monsieur Des Carts, and to depose upon an Action of Calumny and Defamation,
obtained a Sentence against Monsieur Des Carts the 23d of September, ten days
after he caused him to be warned in before the Magistrate as Guilty.

Monsieur Des Carts had no warning of all these Proceedings till toward the
middle of October, Schocckins is summoned to appear at G^oninguen.
now not knowing that they had gone so far in the business; nor that they had
violated all the forms of Justice in the Cause, as he learnt afterward; he
made use of the Authority of the P. of Orange, by means o^ Monsieur De la
Thuillerie the French Ambassador, to redress this disorder. The Prince of
Orange caused the Proceedings of the City Magistrates to be stopped by the States
of the particular Province of Vtrecht. Now Monsieur Des Carts, understanding
that Schoocki^^ for to favor Voetius, had declared himself sol^ Author of the
Book that went under hi^ Name, took occasion to cite him to appear personally
at Groninguen, before his own natural Judges, there to Answer in his own Name,
for the Calumniating Monsieur Des Carts, that was laid to his Charge, and
wherewith this Book was stufft.

XII and XIII. The Vexation that seized Voetius for the bad success of his
Intrigues, produced a new Libel he put forth shortly after against his
Metaphysical Meditations, under the counterfeit name of Theophilus Cosmopolita;
the Piece died so soon as it was born, the reason was, because the Public was
terrified not only at the extravagancy of the Style, and the grossness of the
Abuses; but also, because of the Cheat and Impos^ure that conspicuously reigned
from the beginning to the ending.

It fared quite otherwise with the new Piece Gassendus had lately Composed,
Instances or Reply of M. Gassendus.
under the title of Instances for making a Reply to the Answer Monsieur Des
Carts had made to his Objections touching the Meditations. The Author had
divulged it, and sent it from hand to hand in Paris, before he sent (...) to
Monsieur Sorbiere, to get it Printed in Amsterdam.

Monsieur Des Carts had timely notice of it, ^ut not being endowed with the
Gift of Diffi^ulation; he goes, without thinking any harm, (...) discover to
Monsieur Sorbiere what his ^houghts were concerning suchlike dealing as his;
little thinking he spoke to M. Gassendus ^is Spy, whom he took into his House
as his friend; he declared to him somewhat too ^rankly, that he had Monsieur
Gassendus in ^is thoughts, when he complained of some, ^ho let his Enemies
secretly read, what they writ against him. Sorbiere who was the Solicitor ^f
the Cause, snatched at this Declaration, and ^utting the worst Construction he
could be^hink himself of upon it, whereby to blast ^assendus his reputation; he
sent it him, signi^^ing to him by the by, that whereas Des Carts took it ill
that he should conceal his ^^stances or Reply; it was but meet he should ^fford
him the Satisfaction to see them appear (...) public.

Thereupon Gassendus sends him his Copy, and left the disposing thereof wholly
to his ^iscretion, without obliging him to any thing ^ut only to call to mind
that his writing was only intended for such of their Friends who could not
abide that Monsieur Des Carts ^ould brag for having had Adversaries. Monsieur
Sorbiere caused the Work to be printed (...) Amsterdam, together with the
disquisition (...) first Objections against the Meditation and Answer of
Monsieur Des Carts. Nay, and he Composed a Preface to boot, in the Printer
Name, wherein he bespattered our Philosopher as much as he thought good,
without exposing himself openly to his displeasure.

Regius incensed at this so disobliging carriag^ of Sorbiere, did what in him
lay to animat^ Monsieur Des Carts against Monsieur Gasse^dus his Instances,,
and to persuade him tha^ they were full of rancour and affront. The^^ were
reproaches otherwise contrary to the Character of this Author's Spirit.

Monsieur Des Carts did all he could to ^^dervalue these Instances, and to
forbear reading them, for fear lest he might there me^ with matter for an
Answer, and by the means, an occasion of prolonging the Quar^^ he had had
enough of. Having learnt from one of his Friends, that the Piece deserve^ an
Answer, he was willing to promise on^ yet he deferred the performing it, till
aft^ the Edition of his Principles then in the Pres^ his Voyage into France,
and after his new su^ at Groninguen, which was to be tried and d^cided at his
return.

He had hopes to see the finishing of the Impression of his Principles,
Sorbiere puts M. Gassendus and M. Des Carts at variance.
before he took h^ Journey. But the tediousness of those the Graved the
Figures, obliged him to leave the to M. Schooten, and depart in Company (...)
Monsieur de Ville Bressieux the First of May putting his Cause depending at
Groninguen (...) to such a posture, that it was not likely (...) create him the
least trouble or surprise: From Egmond de Hoef he came to Leiden, from thence
to Amsterdam, and then pas'd through the Hague, to take leave of his Friends.

Monsieur Sorbiere, who feigned himself to be one of that Number, expected him
there supplied with such Arms as he had required of M. Gassendus, to assault
him about his opinion of a Vacuum. Monsieur Des Carts was armed with the
patience to Answer all his Difficulties, without complaining of the
unseasonableness of the time, whereby he was straightened. M. Sorbiere having
spent his whole stock of Ammunition against him, could not for shame beg any
new Arguments touching a Vacuum of M. Gassendus, but sought out other Subjects
to plague and quite weary Monsieur Des Carts out of his Skin; applying himself
rather to find what to object, than to comprehend what Answer was given him.
The next day he writes to M. Gassendus, to give him an account of whatever he
had performed against Monsieur Des Carts to be serviceable to him; yea, and he
set them so very much at variance, that they were very shy of one another
Company, and treated one another with a great deal of indifference for a pretty
while, without so much as careing to see one another when they were both in
Paris.

XIV. Elziver perceiving the Impression of Mons. Des Carts his Principles to
be brought almost to a Conclusion; The Latin Translation of the Essays by
Curcellaeus.
entreated the Author to permit him at the same time to Print the Latin
Translation of his Essays, which Foreigners that had no knowledge of the French
Tongue earnestly longed for. Mons. Curcellaeus was Author of this Translation;
who desired Monsieur Des Carts to review it, before he gave leave to publish
it. He did so, and withal took occasion to take another touch at some of his
Notions, and to make some. Alterations in his Original. Insomuch that these
Translations have as great an advantage as that of his Principles, which
surpasses the Originals in goodness. Now M. Curcellaeus translated nothing but
his Discourse de Methodo, and the Treatise of Dioptriques and Meteors. He did
not meddle with Geometry; whether he judged it above his reach, or whether he
had notice that M. Schooten had undertaken to translate it, we know not.

Monsieur Des Carts embarked and set sail from Holland, A Voyage iuto France.
to the great sorrow of his friends, fearing the great Obstacles that might
hinder his return; but especially they feared the resentment of the Indignities
committed in respect of him, by the Magistrates and Professors of Vtrecht. He
arrived at Paris toward the latter end of June, and went to lodge at Abbot
Picet's in the Rue des Ecouffes. He departed from thence for Orleans the 12th
of July, from whence he went down the Loire to Blois, to Monsieur de Beaune's
House, who was a Counsel in the Presidial; from thence to Tours, to Abbot de
Touchelay Junior's House, in the Absence of the Elder Brother. There he see a
great many of his Friends and Acquaintance, and some of his Relations. After
that he passed to Nantes, and so to Rennes; from whence, accompanied with his
two Brethren, Counselors in Parliament, he went to Crevis in the Diocese of
St. Malo, to his Brother-in-Law Monsieur Rogiers a Widdower, who married his
Sister Jane Des Carts; there they all laid their heads together, how to settle
and accommodate their Domestic Affairs. He was to go from thence to Kerleau
near Vannes, to his Eldest Brother's House, and then to Chavagnes in the
Diocese of Nantes to his Younger Brother's. After that he went as far as
Poictou, upon no other Errand than he did in Britagne, to visit his Friends and
Relations; and so came back to Paris toward the middle of October.

BOOK VII.
From 1644 till 1650.
I. and II. AT his Arrival, An Edition of his Principles of philosophy.
he found the Edition of his Principles, and the Latin Translation of his
Essays finished, and the Copies come out of Holland. The Treatise of Principles
did not come out, neither did that Piece he called his World, nor his Course of
Philosophy, both of which were suppressed. He had a mind to divide them into
other Parts: The First of which contains the Principles of Humane Knowledge,
which one may call the first Philosophy or Metaphysics: wherein it has very
much relation and connection with his Meditations.

The Second contains what is most general in Philosophy, and the Explanation of
the first Laws of Nature, and of the principles of natural things, the
Proprieties of Bodies, Space, and Motion, etc.

The Third contains a particular Explanation, of the System of the World, and
more especially of what we mean by the Heavens and Celestial Bodies.

The Fourth contains whatsoever belongs to the Earth.

That which is most remarkable in this Work, is, That the Author after having
first of all established the distinction and difference he puts between the
Soul and the Body, when he has laid down, for the Principles of corporeal
things, bigness, figure and local motion; all which are things in themselves so
clear and intelligible, that they are granted and received by every one
whatsoever; he has found out a way to explain all Nature in a manner, and to
give a reason of the most wonderful Effects, without altering the Principles;
yea, and without being inconsistent with himself in any thing whatsoever.

Yet had he not the presumption for all that to believe he had hit upon the
explication of all natural things, especially such that do not fall under our
senses, in the same manner as they really and truly are in themselves. He
should do something indeed, if he could but come the nearest that it was
possible to likelihood or verisimilitude, to which others before him could
never reach; and if he could ^o bring the matter about, that, whatsoever ^e had
written should exactly agree with all ^he Phenomena's of Nature, this he judged
sufficient for the use of Life, the profit and benefit of which seems to be the
main and only end one ought to propose to himself in Mechanics, Physic, or
Medicine; and in all Arts that may be brought to perfection by the help of
Physic or natural Philosophy.

But of all things he has explained, there is not one of them that does not
seem at least morally certain in respect of the profit of life, notwithstanding
they may be uncertain in respect of the absolute Power of God. Nay, there are
several of them that are absolutely, or more than morally certain; such as are
Mathematical Demonstrations, and those evident ratiocinations he has framed
concerning the existence of material things. Nevertheless, he was endued with
that Modesty, as no where to assume the authority of positively deciding, or
ever to assert any thing for undeniable.

Although what he intended to offer, under the Name of Principles of Philosophy,
was brought to that Conclusion, that one could not lawfully nor reasonably
require more for the perfecting his design; yet did it give some cause to his
Friends, to hope to see the Explication of all other things, which made people
say, That his Physic was not complete. He promised himself likewise to explain
after the same manner, the nature of other more particular Bodies, that belong
to the Terrestrial Globe; as, Minerals, Plants, Animals, and Man in particular;
After which, he proposed to himself (according as God should please to lengthen
out his days) to treat with the same exactness of all Physic or Medicine, of
Mechanics, and of the whole Doctrine of Morality or Ethics; whereby to
present the World with an entire Body of Philosophy.

He dedicated his Book of Principles to his most Illustrious Disciple,
Elizabeth Princess Palatine of the Rhine, one of his Disciples.
the Princess Palatine Elizabeth, Eldest Daughter to that Unfortunate Prince
Frederick V. Elector Palatine, chosen King of Bohemia. The Princess had been
Educated in the Knowledge of abundance of Languages, and in whatsoever Learning
is comprised under the name of Litterae humaniores, or Politiores; but the
elevation of, and profoundness of her genius and natural parts, would not
suffer her to dwell long upon these Arts, by which the greatest Wits of her
Sex, who are satisfied with desiring to seem somebody, are commonly limited.
She desired to proceed to those parts of Learning, that the strongest
Application of Men had advanced, and accomplished her self with, and became a
great proficient in Philosophy and Mathematics; till such time as seeing the
Essays of Monsieur Des Carts his Philosophy, she conceived such high esteem
and affection for his Doctrine, that she looked upon all she had learned till
that time as good as nothing; and so put her self under his Tuition for to
raise a new Structure upon his Principles.

Thereupon she sends to him, to come and see her, that she might drink in the
true Phi^osophy at the Fountain Head; and the great desire to do her Service
nearer, was one of the reasons that drew him to Leiden and to Eindegeest. Never
did Master more happily improve the docibility, aptness, penetration, and
withal the solidity of a Scholar's Mind. Having accustomed her insensibly to
the profound Meditation of the grand Mysteries of Nature, and sufficiently
exercising of her in the most abstracted Questions of Geometry, and the most
sublime ones of Metaphysics. There was no longer any thing abstruse or
mysterious to her; and he ingeniously confesses and owneth, that he had not
yet met with any besides her (he excepted Regius in another place) that ever
arrived at a perfect understanding of the Works he had published till that
time. By this Testimony that he bore to the extraordinary Capacity of the
Princess, he intended to distinguish her from those who were not able to
apprehend his Metaphysics, although they might have some insight into Geometry;
and from those that were not able to understand his Geometry, although they might
be pretty well versed in Metaphysical Truths.

She continued to Philosophise with him Viva voce, till a certain Accident
obliged her to absent herself from the Presence of the Queen of Bohemia her
Mother, and to quit her abode in Holland for Germany; then she changed her
Acquaintance into an Intelligence by Letter, which she kept afoot with him, by
the Ministry of the Princesses her Sisters.

III. According to the measures M. Des Carts had taken upon his return from
Poictou, His abode in Paris, where he sees his Friends.
to reach Holland before the Frost, he reduced himself to the necessity of
staying no longer than Ten or Twelve days in Paris. They were all taken up in
continual Visits that he was fain to pay his Friends he had never seen since
the Siege of Rochelle, and to those his reputation had acquired him in his
absence.

His greatest care was, to be sure to visit the Jesuits of the College of
Clermont, where was performed the last Ceremonies of his reconciliation to
Father Bourdin, his old Adversary; who, that, his friendship might be active,
and not consist in a parcel of words, offered to be his Correspondent for the
Letters he should send to the Fathers of the Company in any Province of the
Realm, and into Italy, and also for those that he was to receive from them.

He visited also, besides the Duke de Luines, and Monsieur Clerselier who
translated his Meditations, Monsieur Chanut, whose desert had reached his Ear,
by the Commendations of Father Mersennus. This Friend was pleased to introduce
him into the Chancellor's Company, who received him with all Testimonies of
respect, that one could possibly expect from a Magistrate who favored Men of
Parts and Learning, that loved the Sciences, and was already advantagiously
prepossessed with a good opinion of our Philosopher, by the read^ng of his
Essays of Philosophy.

He entertained likewise frequent Conferences with Sir Kenelm Digby, an English
Catho^ick, then in Paris, and reckoned in the number of one of his chief
Friends for many years together; but although he confined himself to see those
Friends, he had never seen, the number of them was too great, and the term he
had prescribed for his abode too short, to give them all the Satisfaction he
could have wished. Yet he thought himself obliged not to pass by Monsieur
Robervall unsaluted; he desired to assure him how much he valued him, offered
him his friendship afresh, and declar^^ to him Viva voce, that all the
Impression of their petty Paper-scuffles were perf^^^ly razed out of his
Spirit. Monsieur Robervall strained hard to Answer the honor Monsieur Des
Carts did him; and he protested freely how much he was disposed to pay what he
ought to his Worth, and to his Quality; but the small Coherence Monsieur Des
Carts observed in his Discourses, gave him quickly to understand the truth of
that Idea he had conceived of his Interiours: it was no hard matter to judge
that the amity of this Geometrician was a benefit that would soon perish.
Nevertheless, he did him the justice to believe that there was less malice and
affectation, than nature and disposition in his unpolite, rough-hewn,
disobliging Behavior; and he received his friendship however, the best that he
could give, without taking his Bond to warrant it, either more solid, or
durable than it was.

Leaving what Copies of his Principles he had to Abbot Picot's disposal, at
whose House he lodged, who had already translated the better part into the
French Tongue, he departed for Holland about the end of October. And Father
Mersennus, that had nothing le^^ at this departure that could retain him in
Paris, took a Journey into Italy, which he was obliged to do for the matter of
Eight or Nine Months.

IV and V. The News of Monsieur Des Carts his return, He retires to Egmond.
dissipated the trouble he had put his Friends in Holland to, about some
suspicions they had that he should be retained in France. Upon his Arrival
about the 15th of March, he went directly from Amsterdam into North-Hollan^ to
his retiring place at Egmond de Bearnen, with a resolution to shut himself up
more closely than ever in his old beloved Solitude, and at a distance from the
importunities of his Neighbors, and visits of Friends, having resolved wholly
to apply himself to the knowledge of Animals, Plants, and Minerals.

That he might procure himself the ease and quietness necessary to his Studies,
he presently had thoughts of putting an end to that process or suit that he had
depending at Groninguen against Schoockius, Professor and Rector of the
University; which was partly the cause of that which Voetius had commenced
against him at Vtrecht. The face of this Vtrecht affair changed to his honor
at last; although by the ill will of the Judges Voetius ^ad bribed, he got but
little advantage by it. But it was enough for him that their irregu^ar
Proceedings contrary to the Course of Law, turned to their confusion; the great
noise their Injustice made, stood the Judges of Gro^inguen in no small stead,
for the regulating their Proceeding in the Judgment they were ^o pass between
the Professor and Monsieur Des Carts.

The Business was depending in the Senate ^r Counsel of the University, which
is the ^ight Court of Judicature where Schoockius his Causes were to be tried:
and the Action against him was, to make a public amends and reparation for the
Calumnies, and Slanders, ^hereof the Latin Book was full, entitled,
Philosophia Cartesiana, or, Admiranda Methodus, which was composed and
published by Voetius, ^n Schoockius his Name, who declared himself Author of
the same; and consequently to be ^esponsible for it. Upon a Letter Monsieur Des
Carts writ about it the 7th of February, to Tobias Andraeus one of the
Professors of the University, and one of the Judges that sit upon the Cause;
Schoockius was warned into Court; upon his appearance, without holding it
necessary to hear the Cause, they gave Sentence in favor of Monsieur Des
Carts the 10th of April, 1645. yea, and they dealt very favorably with
Schoockius (because he was Colleague to the Judges) being content only, that he
should acknowledge and confess his Errors, and that he had been but only the
Instrument and Broaker of Voetius his Calumnies and Excesses.

The surprizal that his Cause came to an^ Hearing in his absence, even before
he had produced his Writings, made Monsieur Des Carts look upon this quick
expedition, as (...) pure effect of the Evidence that his Cause was good. The
Judges of Groninguen sending him a Copy of the Judgment, together with all the
Acts that served to the prosecuting the Cause, he judged it convenient to
dispatch them to the Magistrates of Vtrecht, with five Letters of Voetius their
Minister, written to Father Mersennus, on purpose that they might open their
Eyes, and behold the Impostures and Malignity of this Hypocrite; But instead of
repairing the loss, and making amends for what was past, their confusion turned
into their being ashamed at it; which produced nothing but an Act to Prohibit
the Impression and dispersing whatsoever was for, or against Monsieur Des
Carts.

Notwithstanding this Order, Voetius taking on like a Madman for what had past
at Groninguen, did nevertheless Print a Letter in Schoockius his Name against
the Author's consent, who disowned it: and his Son falls foul upon the Judges
of Groninguen, by a most insolent Libel, entitled, Tribunal Iniquum: it was
but requisite Monsieur Des Carts should take upon him to defend these
Gentlemen and their Judgment.

Nevertheless, Voetius the Father, and Dematius his Colleague, branded in the
Sentence as Forgers and Slanderers, did complot and contrive an expedient how
to punish Schoockius his Ingratitude, who had been Scholar and Confident to
Voetius. They termed the Obligation that lay upon him to prefer Truth to
Falsehood, before the Tribunal of his Judges, ingratitude. But because he was no
longer under the lash; they entered an Action of Scandal against him, as though
he had done wrong. Nevertheless, the threatenings Schoockius thundered out
against Voetius, that he would discover all his Roguery in Court, caused the
latter to surcease his Process just when it was upon the point of being tried
at Vtrecht, and they never really pardoned one another after.

The disposition of Monsieur Des Carts in respect of them was quite otherwise.
The Storm once blown over; he scrupled not to discover his heart: and had the
generosity to facilitate their reconciliation, and freely tendered them his
friendship; but Voetius seemed not to be sensible of all these Courtesies.

He boasted that he had reserved another Action still against him, that he
could make use of when occasion served. This put Monsieur Des Carts upon
drawing up an Apologetical Manifesto for the Magistrates of Utrecht, to the
intent he might once for all bury all the whole Affair in Oblivion. He made for
them an Historical and rational Compendium of what past in their City from the
Year 1639* touching his Philosophy and Person: He laid before them the justice
of the Cause, and the injustice of his Enemies to prevail with them at last to
do him right, for the wrong they had done to his reputation, out of the favor
they bore to Voetius.

However the reading of his Principles produced good or bad effects in men's
Minds, according as they found themselves inclined an^ disposed in respect of
the Author of them Accordingly Monsieur Des Carts could hope for nothing but
what was favorable to hi^ from Rivet, who called himself his Friend, (...) and
an Admirer of his Doctrine too, that (...) might imitate several Cartesians
with wh^^ he was to live. Yet not so well understanding it, he thought he put
an acceptable Complement upon M. Gassendus, in propounding to him to make the
same Reflections upon his Principles, as he had done upon his Meditations.

M. Gassendus excused himself thereupon, first of all, upon pretense that he
would rub up an old Sore; and then, upon pretense that he undervalued his
Principles, and was pleased to let, fly some injurious Expressions against him
for to discharge his Mind. The Jesuits carriage was quite contrary to his, in
the Judgment they past upon his last Work. He received exceeding advantageous
Testimonies thereof from the Heads of their Body, even to the making him
believe that the Society would take his part.

The Progress of his Philosophy was no less in Holland than in Paris:
Hereeboord teaches Cartesianism at Leiden.
In the Month of February, M. Hoogheland sent his three different Positions
lately defended at Leiden, containing nothing but his Opinions. They were
pretty fortunately introduced into this University by the Industry of Adrian
Heereboord, Professor of Philosophy, and Sub-principal of the Theological
College, by leave of Heydanus Minister and famous Preacher, of Golius
Schoolen, and of some other Professors, who were themselves become strenuous
maintainers of this new Philosophy. Heereboord's Zeal in ^is first Lessons was
not perhaps heated to that ^egree as was that of Regius at Vtrecht, yet it
^eemed to be more circumspect, cautious, and ^etter regulated. So was it also
of a longer continuance, and an answerable success.

It had been very well for Monsieur Des Carts, The Schism and Ingratitude of
Regius.
Regius had followed the same course, ^r that he had persevered at least in the
same first tractableness and docibility in respect of Monsieur Des Carts:
since he has ventured ^o dogmatize upon his own head concerning ^he Union of
the Humane Soul with the Bo^y and upon some other nice Points, he put Monsieur
Des Carts to a great deal of trouble, who by his particular Exhortations,
Corre^tions of his Theses's and other Works, en^eavoured to keep his Spirit
within due ^ounds. Regius, since that, fell away strangely and insensibly: and
either because he had re^overed his first Genius, or that he searched out ^ome
middle way to get again into the favor ^f his Friends of Vtrecht; and by that
means, ^ecure himself of the peaceable possession of ^is Professor's Chair; he
drew up, during Monsieur Des Carts his Travails certain Essays ^f a Philosophy
of his own making, to which he pretended to give the name of Fondemens de
Physique, the Foundations of Physics.

The Experience he had of Mons. Des Carts his Kindnesses, made him believe
this Work would have gone down with him. Just as he had composed it, he ^ends
it him to peruse and examine, rather, not to give over his old Custom all on a
sudden, than to make any advantage by his Mr's. reading of it. Monsieur Des
Carts was not so complaisant, as he flattered himself to find him; he observed
in this last Writing of his, more License than he had observed in all the rest;
and instead of sending Regius the Corrections of the places that required them,
as his constant practice was formerly, he writ to him and told him roundly,
That he could not, nor would not afford a general Approbation to this Work. He
added withal, That if he doted so much upon his own private Sentiments, not to
follow the advice he had given him to suppress or reform it, that then he
should be obliged to disown it, and so undeceive the World, who thought all
along that he entertained no other Sentiments but his.

Regius, who had already taken his part, and obstinately stood it out against
all sorts of Remonstrances, did nevertheless thank Monsieur Des Carts for his
advice: but instead of following it as formerly, he did what he could to excuse
his Work, and to show the neat Contrivance and Excellency of it to his Master;
as if these particulars had escaped his Reflections. He commended to him more
especially his Method of Analysis, and that curious ^way of his to define and
divide. But to avoid the inconveniences Monsieur Des Carts had given him
notice of, he sent him this Model of an Advertisement to the Reader, with which
he intended to conclude the Preface of ^is Book. For to undeceive those who
might be ^pt to imagine that the things contained in this Work might be the
mere Sentiments of Monsieur Des Carts, I am willing to give notice to the
World; that there are, indeed, several Passages, wherein I do, ex professo,
adhere to the Dictates of that excellent Person; but that there are others
^lso, wherein I am of a quite contrary Opinion; and some others again, upon
which he has not ^hought good to explain his meaning. That he might endeavor
to prevent the public dissa^isfaction and disowning of it, wherewith he
^hought himself threatened by Monsieur Des Carts: He offered him to add
moreover in his Preface whatsoever he should judge convenient; because he
apprehended this disown^ng, as a Confutation of his Work, capable of ^tifling
or decrying it, at its very birth; but, at the bottom, he talked not a word of
altering or mending it.

Monsieur Des Carts sent him word that he mightily approved of his manner of
treating of Physics by way of Definitions and Divisions, provided he would
adjoyn thereto the necessary proofs: But let him understand withal, that he did
not appear to him sufficiently versed in Metaphysics nor in Divinity, to
undertake to publish any thing about them: And, that if he were fully bent upon
the Publication of of his Foundations or Grounds of Physic, he should do well,
at least to re^rench what related to the Soul of Man and Divinity, and not to
falsify any thing he borrowed from him: In a word, that he should do him a
kindness not to make him a partaker in his mistakes and extravagant notions in
Metaphysics, nor in his Visions in Natural Philosophy and Medicine.

This last Letter caused Regius to pluck off his Mask: and being resolved to
Sacrifice his Master's Honor to his own; he quite and clean renounced his
Discipline by a Declaration written 23d of July 1645. after such an hectoring
huffing manner; that, what they tell us of Aristotle's ingratitude to Plato,
and of Maximus the Cynick's insolence to Gregory Nazianzen is not incredible;
Regius went far beyond them by this insult, and lost by his Schism that Glory
which involved him in such Dangers and Persecutions that had like to have made
him the Proto-martyr of the Cartesian Sect. Nay, and he joined Injustice and
Unfaithfulness to his Revolt, for retaining the best part of his Master's
Doctrine, thereby to get the same Honor as he did before, he disfigured and
spoiled it, as he pleased. And under pretense that Monsieur Des Carts refused
so long as he lived, to acknowledge it to be his, because of that foreign
outside: He seized upon it after his Death; suppressing even his Name so
unworthily and basely, that men look upon him as much to be the first Plagiary
of his Doctrine, as the first Schismatic of his Sect.

Monsieur Des Carts answered all the affronts and outrages of Regius; with so
much wisdom and sweetness, that might have been capable to have made an Apology
for him if he had needed one; and he would not make an end of keeping a
Correspondence with this ungrateful Wretch, until he had given the most
wholesome advice that one could possibly expect from a good Master and
true-hearted Friend.

VII. The Treatise of Animals stolen by Regius.
The most odious part of the Robbery which denominated Regius Plagiary of
Monsieur Des Carts, consisted in certain Memoirs that he had composed ever
since the Edition of his Principles, with a design to make a Trea^ise of
Animals: the Copy which Regius, by what ^unning took, I know not, was very
deficient: and out of a piece of indiscretion that helped to ^etray him, he had
almost inserted it all into ^is Book of the Grounds of Physics, or Natu^al
Philosophy; without being able to understand the meaning, as well because the
Figures were wanting, as because what Monsieur Des Carts had done, was not
quite fi^ished.

In effect, what Regius intended to produce, was nothing else but a very
imperfect rough^raught of that which Monsieur Des Carts ^esign'd to perform
upon this Subject. After ^he winning of his Cause at Groninguen, the desire of
putting his grand design in execution, made him set about Anatomical Operations
with fresh Application. At this time of being thus busied, he was visited by a
Gentleman, who desired to see his Library; he showed him nothing but a Calf,
which he was going to dissect.

From the Knowledge of Beasts, His Studies and Treaty of Anatomy.
he proceeded to that of the Humane Body by the help of his Experiments, and
begun in the Autumn of this Year 1645. his single Treatise de l'homme, of Man:
And also that De la formation du foetus; although he had not finished his piece
of Animals.

He gave a little diversion to this Study, Questions about the Quadrature of
the Circle.
by reason of his being engaged with the most eminent Mathematicians in Europe
to make one, in that famous difference that arose this same Year, between
Longomontanus and Pellius touching the Quadrature of the Circle. He had been a
long time convinced that it was impossible; and after he had tried it by means
of his Method and Analysis, he would have nothing more to do with this
Operation, as a thing impracticable and of no use.

At the beginning of October, He sees M. Chanut and M. Porlier at Amsterdam.
he sallies out of his solitude to go embrace his Friend, who passed by
Amsterdam for Swedeland, in quality of Resident of France. There he got
Acquaintance with Monsieur Porlier, who belonged to M. Chanut's Company; who,
during the Four days he sojourned at Amsterdam, took singular delight to hear
the recital of diverse particulars, fit to destroy the Slanders of our
Philosopher's Enemies.

Monsieur Des Carts returned very much satisfied the Tenth of the Month to
Egmond, where he passed the Winter being very severe that Year; then he
composed two little Works to pass away the time; because the Plants in his
Garden were not yet in a Condition to supply with Experiments necessary for the
Continuation of his Physics.

The first of these Works was the Answer, He answers M. Gassendus his instances.
he at first refused to the Book of Monsieur Gassendus his instances,
translated by M. Clensellier into French, with softer Expressions in behalf of
the last, whom he desired to bring to an Agreement with our Philosopher; the
other was a small Treatise of the Nature of the Passions of the Soul. His
design was not to make a thing that was in all Points so complete as to deserve
to see light, but only to exercise himself upon Morality for his own
Edification, and to try if his Physics or Natural Philosophy might be as
serviceable to him as he hoped, for the establishing of sure and certain
Foundations in Morality.

VIII. His dispute with M. Roberval about Vibrations.
In this interim, Mons. Roberval forgetting by little and little the resolution
he had taken up to live in good intelligence with Monsieur Des Carts, after
the honor he had received from one of his Visits in Paris, returned insensibly
to his restless Genius. He spoke, hit he, miss he; of what he knew, and what he
knew not, with very little precaution. Monsieur Des Carts had notice of it by
some who peradventure represented Monsieur Roberval more in the fault than he
really was, without ever considering that there was more of weakness than
malice in his behavior and deportment.

He had advice at the beginning of 1646. of two main Points, concerning which,
M. Roberval boasted he could baffle, and run him down. The first, was
concerning the Question of Pappus; of which he proposed no new difficulty at
that time. The other was about Vibrations; that is as much as to say, what
bigness every body of what figure soever, must have, being suspended in the Air
by its extremities, to make its turns and returns equal to those of a Plummet
hanged at a thread of a length given.

The Question of Vibrations was propounded to him by Father Mersennus, which he
answered the 21st of February, and the 2d of March; and after that by M.
Cavendish then at Paris. He sent the Solution of this Question to that Noble
Person the 30th of March: whereupon Monsieur de Roberval made some
Observations, which M. Cavendish did not fail to dispatch to Monsieur Des
Carts. He received an Answer to them some time after. Now Monsieur Des Carts
seeing that M. Roberval relied chiefly upon his Experiments, he sends Father
Mersennus word that he durst not presume of himself to undertake at first dash,
to give a sufficient Reason, for all that one might have experimented. But,
that he believed all the Cunning in examining Experiments, consisted in
choosing such that depend least upon diverse Causes, and such whose true Reasons
might be the most easily discovered.

Monsieur Des Carts could have heartily wished to see a timely end of this
Dispute, which he perceived degenerate at last into unprofitable needless
Questions: But M. Roberval was pleased to prolong them beyond the Years end.
This Conduct of his, together with his Fopperies about Pappus his Question,
brought an old house upon his head, by the censure of his Aristarchus; that is
to say, (a Book of his touching the System of the World) together with a
Judgment upon the Intellect and Capacity of this Geometrician, which Monsieur
Des Carts sent to Father Mersennus.

Much what about the same time that he examined Seneca's Book, A Commerce of
Moral Philosophy with the Princess Elizabeth.
De vita Beata, of an Happy Life, in favor to the Princess Elizabeth his
Scholar, who had desired him to furnish her wherewithal to divert her, being
out of favor at the Spa; where her Physicians had debarred her of all Study,
and serious application of Mind: the judicious reflection the Princess made
upon the said Work, engaged him afterward to handle diverse of the most
important Questions of Morality with her, touching Summum bonum, or Sovereign
Good, the Liberty of Man, the State of the Soul, the use of Reason, the use of
the Passions, of virtuous and vicious Actions, and touching the good and bad
things of Life.

Nothing at that time interrupted the Joy he received from that happy
Communication of Moral Philosophy with this Princess, He disowns Regius and his
Book.
except Regius his Book, Entitled, The Grounds of Phisicks; he believed he was
obliged publicly to disown them for the Reasons we have mentioned. Therefore
he inserted his disowning them utterly in the French Edition of his Principles,
which came out shortly after.

IX. At the very time that Regius broached his Schism against Monsieur Des
Carts, M. Hoogheland a Popish Gentleman, renowned for his Virtue and Charity,
A Coherence between Mr. Hoogheland and M. Des Carts.
his Landlord (...) Leiden, and his Correspondent, gratified the Public with
tokens of his strict alliance with him; which he made appear by his publishing
a Book that he dedicated to him concerning the Existence of God, the
Spirituality of the Soul, and its Union with the Body; besides the economy of
the Body of the Animal mechanically explained.

The Civility and Courtesy of the Author in acknowledging how much he was
beholding to Monsieur Des Carts, made him point blank against Regius, which
made him stand upon his Pantofles. My Friend, says he, M. de Hoogheland, has
acted in Opposition against Regius, in as much as he has Writ nothing that he
did not borrow from me, and upon that account contrary to me; whereas the other
has writ nothing which is properly mine, yet there is nothing against me;
forasmuch as he has followed the selfsame Principles.

But the World would not be put off with a Declaration they suspected to be
made only the more generously to recompense the honor this Friend had done him
the very Front, and through the whole Body of his Book; nay, they were so far
persuaded of the contrary in Rome, that upon the relation of the Business two
or three Years after, by Father Magnanus to M. Carcavi, some were apt to take
the Name of Hoogheland for a Stalking-Horse, by which Monsieur Des Carts had a
Mind to make surer of his Game, to publish a new Piece.

The Condition of other Friends with whom Monsieur Des Carts kept
Correspondence, The dispersing of his Friends at the Hague, and retirement of
the Princess.
especially at the Hague, was somewhat discomposed and put out of order at that
juncture of time, by the retirement of the Princess, his most Illustrious
Scholar. Several of those who were Retainers to her, got out of the way of
their own accord; very few of them were permitted to accompany or follow her in
her Journey. Some again were retained by their Settlement and Employment about
the Prince and Princess of Orange. M. Becklin staid to wait upon the Princesses
Sister to the Lady Elizabeth. M. de Pollot was preferred to a Chair of
Philosophy and Mathematics at Breda, in the P. of Orange's New College; as
was M. John Pell, heretofore Professor at Amsterdam. M. Sampson Johnson that
passed at Paris for Princess Elizabeth's Tutor, but, was only Chaplain to the
Queen of Bohemia her Mother, was also admitted into the same College to be
Professor of Divinity. All these Professors who took a Pride to follow the
Cartesian Doctrine, made their University otherwise called Schola illustris,
all over Cartesian at its very birth, by the good likeing and favor of the
Curators. Mons. Rivet Almoner, and Chaplain to the Prince, and Mons. Huyghens,
second Son to Monsieur Zuitlichem, educated in the Principles of Monsieur Des
Carts.

Amongst those that continued at the Hague, there was none more considerable
than Mons. de Brasset, a French Gentleman, his Correspondent, and since that
Resident of France to the States General with M. de Burggrave de de Dhona the
younger, Governor of the City of Orange, who for all that persisted in the
exercise of the Cartesian Philosophy with the absent Princess.

Besides so many subjects of satisfactions, The condition of his friends
amongst the Jesuits and elsewhere.
Monsieur Des Carts received also, all the year long, diverse Complements from
the Jesuits of France, and the Low Countries. The business was so much the more
delightful to him, because these Fathers seemed to be the persons in the World,
who should think themselves concerned in the publication of a new Philosophy;
nay, and who, according to him, should have pardoned him the least, for so
doing, if so be they had found any thing to blame in it. He was likewise much
pleased to perceive some of those in Germany and Italy to be recovered of their
prejudice, and particularly Father Athanasius Kercherus* who entreated him to
grant him his friendship by the intercession of Father Mersennus. He was also
informed by the reading of two Tracts of Physic, that Father Stephen Noel,
Rector of the College of Clermont in Paris, presented him with, That the
Fathers of the company of Jesuits did not so much tie themselves up to Ancient
Opinions, as not ^o dare to propose new ones likewise. Father Noel was so much
his friend, that the next year he thought himself obliged to undertake his
defense against young Paschal, before ever he was quite brought over to the
Cartesian Party.

Much about the same time he received the Philosophy of Father Fabri, the
Jesuit Mathematical Professor at Lions; this Philosophy had much reputation to
be a good one, notwithstanding it was contrary to that of M. Des Carts. Men
past the like Judgment in a manner upon another Piece of this Father's, that
came to light that year, concerning Local Motion. Monsieur Des Carts upon the
receipt of these two Pieces had advice, that the same Author had some thoughts
to Compose a Course of Philosophy to oppose his; that which moved him to the
resolution of contradicting his Notions, was, in case he might be backed by his
Society, and, that it should appear that the Jesuits would be pleased to adopt
his Doctrine. But the Event let him understand that Father Fabri had not then
got the approbation of his Society.

In September, that year M. Des Carts lost a friend by the death of Father
Niceron, a Minim; but he gained another in the person of M. Le Comte,
Controuler General of the War, who was already friend to M. Clersellier, Chanut
and Porlier; he deserved his acquaintance by some Objections he started
concerning his Book of Principles, which Abbot Picot and his second self were
pleased to Answer.

X. Scarce had Monsieur Des Carts done with his new Friends M. le Comte and
Monsieur Porlier, He answers the Q. of Sweden and M. Chanut touching some
Questions in Morality.
but he was necessitated to Answer M. Chanut about one of the most material
Questions in the World; and prepare to satisfy the Queen of Sweden's desire,
suitable to the high opinion of him, wherewith this Resident had possessed that
Princess. The last Letter he writ from Stockholm concerning the rare
Perfections of Christina; The discourse he held upon the same Subject with M.
de la Thuillerie at his return from his Ambassy of Sweden, and the example of
his illustrious Scholar the Princess Elizabeth, suffered him no longer to
question the possibility of all these wonders that Fame had published of that
great Queen, not yet above 19 years of Age.

The gusto M. Chanut had already inspired into her for his Philosophy, made her
demand his opinion concerning a Question of Morality, that was bandied about
between her and this Resident in November 1646. The Question was, to know, when
a Man makes a bad use of love or hatred, which of these two irregularities, or
bad uses is the worst: M. Chanut in beseeching Monsieur Des Carts in the
Queens behalf to send her his Sentiment upon the Question, sent him word, that
the Queen and he were of two different opinions, without telling him which was
the Princesses, which his.

Monsieur Des Carts, that he might afford Queen the Satisfaction she demanded,
drew ^p presently (that is, at the beginning of the ^ear 1647.) a fine
Dissertion upon Love; which we have in the first Volume of his Letters; in that
Tract he discussed three things (...) his usual Method; First, what Love is.
Secondly, Whether or no pure Natural Light ^eaches us to love God. Thirdly,
Which of ^he two Irregularities of Love or Hatred is the worst. This Piece was
sent into Sweden in February, the reading of it made the Queen judge that
whatsoever M. de Chanut had told her concerning Monsieur Des Carts, came short
of the real Truth. She seemed so abundantly pleased with it, that she was never
^eary of commending the Author, and began to inquire into some particulars of
his Person, Life and Conversation. Monsieur Des Carts, (says she to M. Chanut)
as far as I perceive by his writing, and by the Character you give me of him,
is the most happy man alive, and his Condition seems to me to deserve envying:
you will do me a Kindness to assure him of the great esteem I have for him. She
consented to all that was contained in the writing, except one word, that
showed, by the by, that Monsieur Des Carts was not of their opinion that hold
the World to be finite; she signified her doubting whether or no one can admit
the Hypothesis of an infinite World, without doing Injury to Christian
Religion. M Chanut was required to signify so much to him, and demand his
Explanation of this difficulty, to which he answered, that he did not hold the
World infinite but, indefinite; as much as to say, that he had no Reasons to
prove it to b^ finite. And withal, he satisfied M. Chanut who had added
another, of his own head touching the true Rule that we ought to follow in
dividing and sharing our Inclination^ concerning friendship in the exchange of
mutual offices of Benevolence, and in the distinguishing of esteem and respect
from Affection.

XI. The pleasure Monsieur Des Carts tasted in his Communication with the
Queen of Sweden and M. Chanut about Moral Philosophy, The trouble Regius and
Triglandius put him to in Leiden.
was disturbed at the beginning of this year 1647. by certain Leiden Divines,
who did their utmost to put him to some trouble in their University. Revius,
Principal of the College of Divines suborned, (as is credibly given out) by
the secret Artifice of Voetius, who could not endure that Cartesianism that he
labored to root out at Vtrecht, should get ground at Leiden; thought good to
cause Four different Theses against Monsieur Des Carts, to be disputed on in
January and February. Revius his intent was to pervert the sense of the
Metaphysical Meditations of our Philosopher. In which business he was seconded
by Triglandius the Minister, Head-Professor of Divinity in the University.
Their design was to have him condemned by their Classes and Consistory* as a
blasphemer, an impious Person, and a Pelagian: Monsieur Des Carts being
acquainted that these new Slanderers did not oppose any one of his true
opinions, but only that they charged him with false ones, which had never
entered into his thoughts: writ to the Curators of the University, to demand
Satisfaction for the same. The Curators having ^ited the Rector and Professors
to know what was the matter, issued out a Decree in all ^aste on the 20th of
May, to forbid them to make any mention of Monsieur Des Carts and ^is Opinions
in their Lectures for the future. Whereupon they write to Monsieur Des Carts,
^o give him notice, That having satisfied him, to their Power in what he
demanded of them, they hoped that on his part, he would likewise answer their
Desires. That to this effect they entreated him, that he would forbear to
debate any longer that question which he said had been opposed by the
Professors of their University; to prevent the inconvenience that might ensue
to both Parties.

Monsieur Des Carts was very much dissatis^y'd with their Carriage toward
him, and ^ound nothing commendable in it, but the ci^ility of terms. He wrote
to them to let them understand, how much he was astonished that he was able to
comprehend their mean^ng; or that he had not made his plain enough (...) to
make them understand what it was he ^esired of them. These Gentlemen were
^istaken to think that the Business was about (...) Question that had ^een
opposed by the two Divines, Revius and Triglandius. It was only about giving
him satisfaction for a Calumny whose dangerous Consequences were to be ^eared,
because of the rank and credit of the Calumniators.

Monsieur Des Carts seeing the niceness of the Curators, who were afraid to
put a b^^t upon the (...) of their University, and knowing besides that Revius
and Trigland^^ (...), who had (...) brought over to their side the (...) of the
Ministers, Divines and Professors, (...) went to get him condemned (...) their
Consistories or Synods; thought (...) best to make use of the Prince of (...)
Authority, as he had done in the business of (...)

To that purpose, he writes to M. (...) Plenipotentiary for the Peace of
Munst^^; who supplied the place of an Ambassador for some time at the (...).
The purport of this Letter was, that the Divines might be made to hold their
peace, and that the Faculty of Divinity might be Judges in this case; yet they
took (...) care not to do any thing that mi^ht offend or discourage the
Ministers and Profess^^rs in their Funetions and Zeal they showed for the
Service of their Religion.

Nevertheless, the Divines very sorry to siee Monsieur Des Carts and his
writings snatched out of their clutches, wreaked their Malice upon (...) of
their Colleagues whom they knew followers of his Philosophy. The Storm fell
heaviest upon Professor Heerebord and du Ban. and also upon Heydanus the
Minister, whom they accused to be a favourer of the Popish Religion, because he
Preached like a Cartesian; But they durst not meddle with either Golius, or the
two (...), nor with young Dr. de (...), who professed Physic in private.

XII. These new Troubles were not capable to make him any longer put off his
Journey into France, His second Voyage into France.
which de designed at the beginning of them. He departed from the Hague the 7th
of June, and got to Paris, with a resolution to pass into Bretaign at the
beginning of July, to regulate his Affairs that furnished him with a pretense
for his Journey. But the French Edition of his Principles which was finished,
in the hands of Abbot Picot the Translator, gave him an occasion to defer a
little longer, as well to put a Preface before it, as to see a man who was to
be his Companion in his Journey freed from this business; he see no body during
this interval but Father Mersennus, Monsieur Mydorge, who he was never to see
more, as also M. Clersellier, who, after a tedious Sickness had some Months
before that, procured the publishing the Meditations in French, translated by
the D. de Lucines and himself.

When he had settled his Affairs in Bretaign and Poicton, he came back through
Tourain, where M. de Crenan, a Gentleman of his Acquaintance detained him for
some time. At his return, he found a great deal of disorder in his
Acquaintance. Father Mersennus sick, Monsieur Mydorge dead about a Fortnight
before.

Yet he had some other Friends at Court who thought of him, (...)
though he never dreamt of them; they made their interest with Cardinal
Richelieu, to procure him a Pension from the King; it was granted him in
Consideration of his great (...), and the Profit and Advantage that his
Philosophy and the Inquiries of his long Studies procured to Mankind; as also
to help him to pursue his mode Experiments that required much expense, etc. He
was surprised to see the Expedition of the Letters Patents, importing the
Donation of a ^ension of 3000 Livres, Sealed March the 6th before he had so
much as heard of the Proceedings his Friends had made to that (...) and he
found Marshal de (...) then Governor of the Finances, who honored him with
(...) particular Acquaintance, a Person very punctual and careful to see it
paid him.

The next day he thought upon his return into Holland, (...)
just as he met, near the Place Royal, M. Paschal the Son, who had a great
desire to see him, from the time he knew him to be in France. Monsieur Des
Carts was much taken with his Discourse about the Experiments he (...) his
Father's, in Rouen, of a Vacuum^^ matter of 15 Months before. He found these
Experiments pretty conformable to the Principles of his Philosophy;
notwithstanding M. Paschal was still averse to it, by reason of the engagement
and uniformity of his Sentiment with M. Roberval, and others, who hold a
Vacuum; but yet that he might make some part of amends for his Conversation, he
advised him to try other Experiments upon the Mass of Air to whose Gravitation
he referred that which vulgar Philosophers vainly ascribe to the fuga v^cui. He
assured him of the good success of his Experiments, although he himself had not
made them, because he discoursed of them, conformable to his Principles. M.
Paschal who was not yet persuaded of solidity of his Principles, who also
promised some Objections against his Materia subtilis, perhaps would have had
no respect to his advice, if he had not been informed about the same time of
such a like Notion, that Torricel^ius a Mathematician of Florence entertained.
The Experiments he made upon this advice, and which he also caused M. Perrier
his Brother-in-Law to make in 1648. were very successful. But methinks, he
looks upon himself beholding rather to Torricellius than Monsieur Des Carts
for them.

He departed as soon as ever he had received the Letters Parents for his
Pension. His return to Holland.
He arrived in Holland toward the end of September with Abbot Picot, who kept
him Company in his beloved solitude till the middle of January of the ensuing
year. They spent the three last months of the year in enjoying one another, in
cultivating Philosophy in a profound tranquillity being chiefly busied in
diverse Experiments of a Vacuum, which they found more and more agreeing with
his Principles; improving to their best advantage the mildness of the Winter,
which was extraordinary that same year.

These Occupations were interrupted by a Letter of the 9th of November, He
sends his opinion of summum bonum and Treatise of the Passions, to the Q of
Sw^den.
that Monsieur Des Carts received from M. Chanut, who beseeched him in the
Queen of Swedens name, to explain to her his opinion concerning summum bonum.
He acquitted himself as well as he could reasoning upon matters of Faith;
forasmuch as the Queen acquainted him that she only considered summum bonum in
the sense of your ancient Philosophers. He accompanied his writing with some
Letters which he had heretofore directed to the Princess Elizabeth, upon the
same Subject, together with his Manuscript Treatise of Passions. The Queen was
so well satisfied with them, that she was pleased to write to him with her own
Hand to give him thanks, thinking at that very time to have him near her.

XIII. Toward the end of the year, Writings of (...) and Regius.
there appeared in Holland two Latin Pieces; as to which Monsieur Des Carts
was not likely to show himself unconcerned. Nevertheless, he thought to have
slighted the first, as being directly against him, entitled, Consideration sur
la Method de la Philosophy Cartesienne, Consideration upon the Method of the
Cartesian Philosophy. I say, he thought to have slighted it, because the Author
of it was Revius his Enemy, and because it was stufft with needles Ca^ils, and
gross calumniating Abuses.

The other touched him more to the quick, although it did not meddle with him but
indirectly; The Author, was his old quondam Disciple Regius; the Title of it
was, An Explanation of Humane Spirit, or, of the Soul of Man. Monsieur Des
Carts took notice of several Opinions therein, which he judged false and
pernicious: And because men were generally persuaded that Regius had still the
same Sentiments be inspired him with, he thought himself obliged to discover
the Errors of this writing, for fear they might be imputed to him, by those,
who not having read his Works, especially his Meditations, might accidentally
fall a reading this writing; the Confutation of it, writ in Latin, was
entitled, Remarks upon a contain Placart, etc. was (...) without his
knowledge, Regius answered it, not that Des Carts cared a straw for his
Answer. But it was confuted afterward by Tobie d' Andre.

He made no more account of two other Libels that appeared against him about
the same time: and his undervaluing of them was followed by that of the
Public, that suffered them to perish unregarded.

Scarce was the Winter over before he received a kind of Order from Court, A
third Voyage into France not succes^ful.
and that too, as if it had been in the King's Name, to command him to come
back into France upon advantageous offers; they consisted in proposing the
acceptance of a new Pension and a considerable place, which was to procure him
more honor than trouble; that so he might have leisure to continue his
Studies, he showed an extraordinary backwardnes^ to undertake this tedious
Journey; for he suspected the success, by representing to himself the posture
of the Affairs of the Kingdom. But receiving a brief of his new Pension, that
an Officer at Court, a friend of his, sent him by M. Martigny; He was no longer
in a condition to be at his own disposal.

He departed therefore in May: but scarce was he arrived at Paris, but the
state of Public Affairs afforded him a fair Prospect of the incertainty of
Humane things; and showed his own easiness to let himself be overcome; troubles
unexpectedly coming on, were the cause why, instead of effects and performances
that they had made him hope for, by their promises, he found that they had made
one of his Relations pay for the Letters they sent him, and that he stood
indebted to him for the Money they cost. So that, it was just as if he had come
to Paris upon no other Errand but to buy a Scroll of Parchment; ay, and the
dearest and most insignificant one, that ever came to his hands. That which he
most took pet at, was, that none of those who were the occasion of his coming
up to Court, did declare that they had any other business with him, but only to
stare him in the face, as if he had been some Elephant or Leopard.

This so unexpected adventure, taught him never more to undertake a sleeveless
Errand only upon bare Promises, though they may be writ upon Parchment. Nay, he
would have scamper'd off immediately, and no body the (...) to return as he
came, that his presence might not increase their Shame that sent for him. But
his friends, after they had let him take his leave of the Court, detained him
at Paris near three Months, and omitted nothing that he might make this time
seem short and pleasant.

During this Interval, (...)
the Abbot d'E^r^^, since Bishop, Duke of (...), at present a Cardinal, was
pleased amicably to reconcile him to M. Gassendus. Which was done in the
presence of several persons of worth and account, to the great satisfaction of
these two Philosophers, and their Friends.

XIV. That day they were reconciled was remarkable for Roberval's first
undertaking to demonstrate the impossibility of Motion without admitting a
Vacuum. Roberval's wrangling.
Monsieur Des Carts, who was personally pointed at, by this pretending
Mathematician; found it no hard task immediately to Answer all his Objections:
But he did it with all the respects due to the presence of the Abbot d'Etrees
and his Company, without ever changing the face of so noble and peaceable
Conversation.

M. Roberval's humor, which had always need of grains of allowance from those
that had to deal with him, did by no means agree with that Phlegm, which
usually accompanied the Discourses of Monsieur Des Carts. So that he was not
long before he grew hot: and upon all occasions during the remainder of his
stay at Paris, Roberval made him sensible of the effects of this heat, and
animosity that no Consideration was capable of extinguishing or abating.

The Persecutions of this man, His return into Holland.
who took a Pride not to be absent from any Assembly, where he knew the other
would come, together with his wrangling and twitting him with his taciturnity,
did contribute as much as his public Troubles, to the making him out of love
with the City; he took occasion from its being barac^doed, to make a shift to
get out of it next day, through all the Confusion. He got safe into Holland on
the 4th day of September: After some short stay at L^^de^ with M. (...), and at
Amsterdam, he went on the 9th of the aforesaid Month to his dear Egmond, to
sequester himself there, as i^ a Port, secure against all the Tempests, whose
Preludes he had already seen in his Voyage.

XV. Scarce had he tasted the first fruits (...) his repose, Death (...) Fath.
M^sennus.
but he receives the News of the death of Father Mersennus, whom he left
dangerously sick at his departure from Paris. This was the ancientest of his
friends and followers, who always stuck to him by a constancy and faithfulness
that endured all Tests. Nothing could more sensibly affect him, than the loss
of such a friend: yet to demonstrate that affliction had not bereaved him of
Judgment, he begged of Abbot Picot to know what was become of all the Letters
he sent to this Father for near upon 19 Months, because he was sure they were
carefully preserved: He granted also a Commission to try to get them out of the
Minims hand, for several very weighty reasons. But his foresight being a little
too ^ardy, proved useless and of none effect, through the negligence of the
Monks, who had lost a great company of them, and crafty diligence of M.
Roberval, who had already got a good part of them into his Custody.

In the mean time, The Q of Sweden turns Cartesian.
the Q. of Sweden disintantangled from the Negotiations for the Peace of Europe
concluded at Munster the 24th of October. betook her self to the Study of the
lit^^e Treatise of Monsieur Des Cartes's Passions, and the good opinion of
them, that was instilled unto her, made her resolve to proceed to the Study of
all his Philosophy. She forthwith ordered Freinshemius* her Liberary-Keeper, to
Study his Principles, to the end he might prepare the way for her, to come to
the understanding of that Philosophy: the Resident of France Monsieur Chanut*
had a Commission also to be assisting to him in this Work.

Monsieur Des Carts was then much taken up in satisfying the first heats of a
new Disciple that his Philosophy had gained him in (...) (...) of (...)
Cartesian, (...) then his Adversary.
this was Dr. Henry More, whose (...) and Reverence for our Philosopher, had
almost proceeded to Idolatry. Monsieur Des Carts, without giving much heed to
his elaborate Encomiums, applied himself only to instruct him, and to remove
his difficulties, according as he let him understand what they were. This
correspondence continued till the death of M. Des Carts, after which, More's
Ardor for Cartesianism appeared much abated, by reason of his being diverted by
other urgent Occasions: until one single Letter of M. Clersellier, revived it
in him, in the year 1655. and made him give fresh proofs of his affection for
his Doctrine.

XVI. The year 1649. supplied the Princess Elizabeth with several considerable
occasions to put his Moral Philosophy in Practice; His affection for the
princess Elizabeth.
and supplied Monsieur Des Carts, her dear Master, with occasions to comfort
her, concerning the Accidents of this Life, and Phantasticalness of this
World's Catastrophes. These occasions caused the Distemper the Princess had
upon her. 1. The Regicide committed by the English on the person of her Uncle
by her Mothers side. 2. The indifference and haughtiness of the Q. of Sweden
toward her. And then, the small Satisfaction her Brother the Elector Palatin
had received by the Peace of Munster.

The Princess residing at that time at the Court in Berlin, had often
entertained him with the mighty Satisfaction she should have to enjoy his
Company in the Palatinate, whether she made account to retire, after the
reinsta^ing of her Brother: And he on his part assured her of the delight he
should have to go live near her, in a Country he had been acquainted with ever
since 1619. which he took for one of the finest and most commodious in Europe.

All places were indifferent to him at that time. His fickleness as to the
place of his abode.
Although he might think he was on the lap of repose in North-Holland, and though
he might enjoy his thoughts in his Solitude at Egmond. as peaceably and sweetly
as ever he he did, yet he earnestly desired, that the Storms of France might
shortly be calmed, that he might there settle himself. But the Continuation of
his Countries Troubles, accompanied with the apprehension of never taking
another Journey, seemed to incline him to resolve to pass the rest of his days
in Holland; that is to say, in a place, that had not now the ^ame Charms it
formerly had, to detain him; and which did not seem commodious for him, ^ut
only because he knew no other, where he ^ould be better.

When he argued the case thus; The Q. of Sweden would draw him to Stockholm.
he was still ^gnorant of the Lot Providence had designed ^or him. But it was
not long before it made ^im Conjecture that it disposed of him other^ise than
he thought it would. In March he ^eceived some Letters from M. Chanut, by which
he was given to understand the desire ^he Q. of Sweden had to see him at
Stockholm, ^o learn his Philosophy from his own Mouth* ^ust as he was devising
Expressions how to ex^use himself from taking this Voyage, he re^eived a
second, and then a third Letter very ^rgent in the Queens Name. Insomuch, that
^^augre all the Apprehensions and Difficulties, that presented themselves, in a
Voyage that ^e judged very dangerous to his health; he ^ignified to M. Chanut
his inclination to obey ^he Queen toward Mid-summer, provided she ^ould please
to give him leave to come back ^gain to Egmond within three Months, or toward
the latter end of Winter following at ^urthest.

The Queen presuming upon his good Inten^ions, even before M. Chanut had
received ^is last Answer, gave order to Admiral Flem^ing to go take him on
Board at Amsterdam, and bring him thither before the end of April. The Admiral
went as far as Egmond, ^ut by the Name of an ordinary Officer of ^he Swedish
Fleet to offer him his Service, and thereupon shows the Queens Order, adding
withal, that he might consult his ow^ convenience and take his own time, that
h^ would cause the Vessel to wait for him (...) long as he thought convenient.

Monsieur Des Carts was surprised at thi^ Visit, and excused himself as
civilly as possibly he could, to this effect, that having w^^^ back to the
Resident of France, he expecte^ an Answer of his Letter, that would explai^^
the Queens Will and Pleasure more precisely to him, and would determine his
Resolution^ upon a Voyage. The Officer returning to Amsterdam without making
himself known (...) Monsieur^ Des Carts received from Monsieur Chanut some
Letters that had miscarried (...) matter of a Fortnight, that gave him notic^
that the Queen had given to Admiral Flemming all necessary Orders for his
Transportation into Sweden.

Upon reading of them, he perceived the mistake the stoppage of these Letters
had made him commit, in taking one of the Admirals of the Kingdom for a private
Officer* who had done him the honor to give him (...) Visit, and bring him the
Queens Orders himself; fearing lest the refusal of his Service might not be
misconstrued to the prejudice^ of his good Intentions, he forthwith got ready*
his Bag and Baggage and little Equipage, that he might be no longer surprised,
when he should receive orders to depart, in case he could not obtain three
Months longer stay, as he had demanded.

A little time after Monsieur Chanut took his leave of the Queen of Sweden, to
go to give an account of Residence to the Court of France. He arrived in April
in Holland, where he was prevented by the King's Brevet, who made him his
Ordinary Ambassador to ^he same Queen. He goes to find out his Friend in
Hermitage of Egmond, and left him no more difficulties to be removed as to his
Voyage. He left him, directing his Course for Paris, resolving to take him at
his return, and carry him along with him to the Queen of Sweden, in case he
could obtain a Dispensation from his new Ambassy, and Permission to bring his
Family back into France, from the King ^his Master.

XVII. A Latin Edition of his Geometry.
Toward the Month of March, came out the First Edition of Monsieur Des
Cartes's Geometry in Latin, translated by Schooten, Ancient Mathematick
Professor of the University of Leiden. He added a Commentary to it of his
making, together with the excellent Notes of Monsieur de Beaune; whereof we
have already given you an account, who died some Months after this Edition.

Sch^oten, like all the rest of Monsieur Des Carts his Translators, desired
him to revise his Version, and render it in every respect conformable to his
original Conceptions, as he had done other; but chose rather to let it pass
untouched, than Correct it by halves. And to show that he had no hand in the
Work, he was pleased to call it, La Geometry de M. Schooten, without so much
as claiming the Groundwork of it. This unconcernedness was not approved of by
those who could have wished it might have had the advantage of other
Translations: yea, and M. Carcavi complained to him of it, as, in the Name of
some Virtuoso's of Paris.

This man exercised on this occasion the Office of the late Father Mersennus,
M. Carcavi M. Des Carts his Correspondent.
in whose place he got himself substituted by Monsieur Des Carts, for the
Correspondence touching Philosophical Transactions, and New Books. He began at
telling the success of the Experiment upon the Gravitation of Air, performed at
Puy de Domme near Clermont in Auvergne, by M. Perrier and M. Pascall. He sent
him likewise two small Books come from Rome, concerning Physics; according to
the new Opinions. In one of the two, there was mention made of the Principles
of Monsieur Des Carts, with abundance of esteem: but some were of opinion at
Paris, that the Author did not well understand them; he acquainted him moreover
by the same means, that at Rome there was a French Minim called Father Magnan,
more knowing and more profound than Father Mersennus, that put him in hopes of
some Objections against his Principles.

Monsieur Carcavi, Lets M. Roberval govern him.
that was all one with Monsieur Roberval, was not wanting in his care to send
him diverse of this Geometrician's Objections, using his endeavors withal, to
bring him into a good conceit of him, pretending that he was not out of his
favor, but only through Fath. Mersennus his Indiscretion: Monsieur Des Carts,
thought it stood him upon to vindicate the memory of this Father: but yet for
all that he took it in good part from Carcavi, that he testified his love for
Peace, and Uniting Affections. And he was willing upon his account, to answer
the Objections of Monsieur Roberval, just as if they had been pro^ounded to
him, by a Person that ^ore him no ill Will.

M. de Roberval who took always delight to be Objecting, and not to receive, or
admit of Solutions; making as if he knew nothing of the Answers Monsieur Des
Carts had given to his Difficulties, was willing to make use of Monsieur
Carcavi's Name, to Object them to him afresh; this counterfeiting did no ways
please Monsieur Des Carts, who made nothing of discerning Roberval's Spirit,
under Monsieur Carcavi's hand, therefore instead of wri^ing back to the latter,
he addressed himself to Monsieur Clerselier, being still in Swedland, and
^ntreated him to signify to Monsieur Carcavi, that he was his humble Servant,
and that he should not fail to Shape him an Answer, whenever he should Write
him his own proper Thoughts.

XVIII. Some trouble about his Voyage into Sweden.
The Summer Season drew on, and Monsieur Des Carts waited for the return of
Monsieur Chanut, the French Ambassador ^t the Court of Sweden, to make his
Voyage ^n his Company. But understanding on one ^and that he could not depart
from Paris before November, and then again, that the Queen of Sweden daily
expected him, he intended to prevent the first rigours of the Winter: only he
longed to understand beforehand, whether the envious persons, that his
Philosophy had procured him, had not been too quick for him at the Court of
Sweden, to endeavor, to render him some ill office or other, in prepossessing
the Queen's mind. He was not ignorant of the aversion the Swedish Nobility, and
the best part of the Officers of that Court, testified for all sort of Science.
He knew likewise that the Queens passion for Learned Men, began to become the
object of scorn, railery and obloquy of Strangers; it was in every bodies mouth
that she assembled all the Pedants of Europe to Stockholm, and that it would
not be long ere the government of the Realm would be managed by Grammarians. He
was afraid to see himself counted as ones hail fellow well met with this sort
of Cattle, where the Natives of the Country, do not care to distinguish
Strangers. And then the business of the Catholic Religion, helped to increase
his Scruples. Now it was Freinsheinius his business, to whom he communicated
secretly his Thoughts, to dissipate them, and once more to be very earnest with
him in behalf of the Queen.

Although he began to appoint his return precisely in the Spring of the next
year, yet he was seized with, I do not know what, apprehension, and foresight
of his destiny, that swayed with him, to set all matters to rights, as though he
had been about to take a journey into the other World.

He for^ook his beloved solitude on the first day of September. And leaving his
little treatise of Passions in Elzivers hands, to be Printed in Autumn, he
embarked at Amsterdam, having no more Domestics, besides Scheuter a German, a
faithful affectionate Servant that Abbot Picot had lent him for this Voyage.

He happily arrived at Stockholm at the beginning of October, and went a shore
to Madam Chanut's, Sister to his Friend Monsieur Clerselier, where he presented
to her some Letters from the Ambassador her Husband who expected him, and had
provided him an apartment ready furnished: Which he must accept.

The next day he went to kiss the Queens hand, His reception in Sweden His
meeting the Queen. In favor with her.
who received him with such a distinction, as was observed by the whole Court,
which perhaps did not a little contribute, to augment the jealousy of some of
the Learned, to whom, his coming seemed formidable. At the second visit he paid
the Queen, she disclosed to him the design she had of getting him into Sweden
for good and all, by a good settlement. But having prepared himself from the
time he left Holland, against all sort of solicitations, he returned that with
a complement.

Afterward she contrived with him some means whereby to learn his Philosophy by
word of Mouth: and judging aright that she should have occasion for all her
Wits about her, and all her application to accomplish her design succesfully,
she pitched upon the first hour after her leve for this Study, as being the most
quiet and leisure time of all the day, when she perceived her Mind more sedate,
and her head more disengaged from the encumbrance of affairs. Monsieur Des
Carts received with abundance of profound respect the Commission she granted
him, to meet in the Closet of her Library every morning by five of the Clock,
without ever alleging the irregularity she must needs cause in his manner of
living, nor the danger to which she should probably expose his health, in this
new change of abode, yea and in a season too, that was much more severe in
Sweden, than in any other place, he had ever lived in before.

The Queen in recompense, granted him the favor that he desired Freinsheinius
to beg of her, which consisted, in dispensing with him as to the nice
Ceremonies of the Court, and to free him from all confinement, or to speak in
the Language of Philosophers, from all the miseries of Courtiers. Yet, before
they begun their Morning Exercises, it was her will and pleasure that he should
allow himself a month or six weeks to compose himself, to familiarize himself
with the genius of the Country, to make his new acquaintance take deeper root,
by which she was in hopes to make him delight in his new abode, and retain him
by her the remainder of his Life. But having fathomed the capacity of his
Spirit, that extended it self to other things besides Philosophy, she did not
demur long, before she appointed him to be one of her Privy Counsel: and the
confidence she reposed in him, prevailed on her to regulate her own particular
conduct and behavior, and even diverse points concerning the government of her
State, according to his advices. He made good use of this new favor, not only
to be serviceable to Count Bregy, and other worthy persons near her, but above
all, to obliterate out of her mind, the reasons of strangeness, aversion, and
coldness she seemed to entertain, for the family of the P. Palatine and also
the reasons of the secret jealousy she had already conceived of the parts,
learning and merit of the Princess Elizabeth in particular.

XIX. The jealousy of the Queens Grammarians.
This credit joined to some applause that he gained at Court for a Copy of
French Verses, the Queen had put him upon touching the peace of Munster,
allarmed your Gramma^ians, and other pretenders to Learning in the Palace,
notwithstanding all the precaution he used to prevent jealousy; they studied
carefully to find out occasion of doing him a diskindness, and to abate the
ardent affection she showed to her Philosopher, they rung peals of the
pretended undervaluing of Tongues, and all Humane Learning, that they laid to
his charge; at last dispairing of blasting his Reputation with the Queen,
considering the great passion she declared for the knowledge of those Sciences,
they thought they could be no better revenged of him, than to make him pass for
one, no better than themselves amongst the Lords of the Court, but especially
amongst public Ministers. They labored to persuade them, what a strange thing
it was that this new come upstart, should have all the honor of the Queens
confidence, and how dangerous it might prove to let him intermeddle with any
affairs, but such as related to Philosophy and Sciences, but they were not long
at Court, before they made a difference between Monsieur Des Carts, and those
that vainly professed to be knowing, who brought an Odium upon Sciences, to all
the Nobility of the place.

However he had news from Elziver, His Treatise of Passions.
that the Edition of his Treatise of the Passions of the Soul was quite
finished. He presents it to the Queen, not so much as dreaming to dedicate it
to her, by reason that it was chiefly composed for his most illustrious
Scholar the Princess Elizabeth, whom he would be sure not to forget. To the
intent he might make this work intelligible to all manner of persons, he
enlarged it by three parts upon Monsieur Clerselier's Advice. He divided it
into three parts, in the first of which, is treated of the Passion in general,
and by the way upon the nature of the Soul, etc. in the second, of the six
primitive Passions; and in the third, of all the rest.

The sight of this Piece, made the Queen suppose there might be amongst
Monsieur Des Carts his Papers, many more Treatises that had not yet come to
light. And having a strong desire to make him compile a complete body of all
his Philosophy, which she liked more and more, she was pleased to engage him to
reduce the rest of his works, that he had not yet published, into a method, in
order to prevail with him at length to complete them.

Monsieur Des Carts in obedience to the Queens command, His Posthumous works.
began to rummish, and ransack his Trunk, where his Papers were, which he had
bound up, hand over head, at his departure from Holland. He finds nothing
complete in them. They were all in pieces scattered up and down; of which they
have compiled Treatises since, that have been published. Amongst the most
considerable of his fragments were,

That De Homine, which Monsieur Clerselier had caused to be Printed since,
wherein the Author has laid open all the functions that belong to the body
alone, without meddling with those that belong to the Soul.

That De Formatione Faetus: whose Title does sufficiently declare the subject
matter, which has been published in the same volume with that De Homine, by
the same Author, assisted by Monsieur de la Forge, a Physician of Saumur, and
Gerard Gutichowen, Professor of Mathematics at Louvain.

That De la lumier, or du monde, of light, or of the world, which is nothing
else but a little extract, or parcel of his famous Treatise of the World, which
he suppressed upon the news of the disgrace of Gallilaeus; Monsieur Clerselier
put it out pretty well corrected.

That De l'Explication de Engines, which was missing, went astray after his
death, and which indeed, is nothing else in a manner, but his Treatise of
Mechanics.

But the most considerable of all his Posthumous Works, is his inestimable
Treasure of Letters, that were found in his Trunk, of which Monsieur Clerselier
has published a collection in three volumes.

XX. His other Manuscripts.
These Posthumous pieces, which M. Clerselier, and the other Cartesians have
obliged the public with, after the Death of their Author, were not the only
ones, that were found upon the second rifling of his Papers. There was besides
diverse works begun in several parts of Mathematics and Physics, under Titles
that had no manner of relation to those subjects, as Parnassus, Olympica,
Democritica, Thacomantis Regia, etc.

His Treatise of Algebra^, still found in the Studies of some Learned men.

An Introduction, containing the grounds and foundations of his Algebra, which
we are afraid is lost.

Diverse fragments upon the Nature and History of Metals, Plants, and Animals.

An Abridgement of Pure Mathematics not finished.

Diverse bundles of free unbyas^ed thoughts upon the Soul, upon Nature, and
framing of the Universe.

An Introduction to his Geometry, whereof we have had occasion to speak, which
was not so much his work, as that of one of his friends.

Amongst those which Monsieur Chanut's care made to fall to Monsieur
Clerseliers share, there is none of them more considerable, nor perhaps more
complete, than the Latin Treatise, that contains Rules for guiding our mind ^in
the inquiry after Truth. At least we can assure you, that there is not one of
them more beneficial to the public. Of three parts, whereof it should have
consisted, we have nothing but the first, and half of the second entire.

Another Latin piece which he had carried on a good way, of which there remains
a pretty large fragment, is that, of the study of good sense, or the art of
apprehending, which ^he styled studium bonae mentis. Which he directed to one
of his Friends, concealed under the name of Masaeus.

There was found likewise the beginning of another piece amongst his Papers in
the Trunk in Sweden, it was writ in French Dialogue-wise, under the Title of
recherche de la verite. The research of Truth by innate light, which in it
self, without borrowing any helps from Religion, or Philosophy, determines the
opinions, that an honest man should have of all things that imploys his
thoughts. This work was divided into two Books, the first of which related to
the things of the World, considered in themselves, the second, the same things
in relation to us, considered as Good or Evil, True or False.

There goes also up and down the World, diverse of Monsieur Des Carts his
little Manuscripts that were not found amongst his Papers, when he looked them
over; as, his little Treatise of the Art of Fencing: That of Socrates his
Genius, etc. for I do not mention the French Comedy, which he had but just made
in Sweden, which M. Chanut saved from perishing, contrary to his intent and
purpose.

Nevertheless, The Queen has a mind to settle him in Sweden.
the Q. of Sweden seeing the French Ambassador returned to her Court,
communicated to him the design she had entertained of keeping Monsieur Des
Carts within her Dominion: and obliged him to labor with her to obtain his
Consent. Of all his Pretenses, she would hearken to none, but that of the
coldness of the Climat; because she believed that in effect his Temperament
must needs suffer much in such a cold Country. The Expedient she proposed to
the Ambassador was, to choose him a noble and considerable Charge in the most
Southern Parts of the Crown of Sweden, acquired by the Peace of Munster, either
in the Archbishopric of Bremen, or in Pomerania, to appoint him a Revenue of a
matter of 3000 Crowns per annum, and bestow on him a Lordship of some Lands,
that it might pass by Succession to him, his Heirs and Executors for ever.

The Indisposition of the Ambassador whom the Queen had charged to put the
business in execution, conjoyntly with a Senator of the Kingdom, put a stop to
it; which proved very hurtful, not to Monsieur Des Carts, for whom God had
designed something else; but to his Heirs, who failed of being Lords in Germany.

The Ambassador fell Sick on the 18th of January, at his return from a walk
with Monsieur Des Carts; and what diligence soever he used to solicit his
Friend, Night and Day, yet for all that, he failed not to be at the Palace at
Five a Clock in the Morning to discourse with the Queen, without complaining of
the severity of the Season, which was more than ordinary that year, and which
daily impaired his health.

The Queen who dreamed of nothing less than to incommode him, The Project of an
Acadamy.
obliged him at the the very height of the Ambassador's Sickness to return
after Dinner to the Palace, to consult with her concerning a Conference or
Assembly of Learned Men, that she had thoughts of founding in form of an
Academy, of which she was to be Chief and Protectrice. She would have him to
draw up the Model or Design of it, and Compose Statutes. He brought it her
accordingly the First of February, which was the last time he had the honor to
see her Majesty. The Queen mightily approved every Article, but was somewhat
surprised at the second and third, that excluded Strangers. She questioned
whether it might not be a piece of Monsieur Des Carts his Modesty, who shut
the Gate of this Academy against himself* whom she designed to have appointed
Director.

XXI. Mons. Des Carts Sickness.
This very day coming from Court, he perceived himself, His Death.
seized with an Illness that was to put an end to his days, and the Ambassador
began to recover. The next day being Candlemass-Day, our Philosopher with other
Catholics, approached the Sacraments of Penance and Eucharist, which he
received from the hands of Father Viogue, an Augustine Friar, Missionary and
Almoner to the Ambassador; he was able to finish the Ceremonies of the rest of
the Day, standing up.

The Symptoms of his Malady, were the very same that preceded the
Ambassador's, and were followed by a continued Fever, accompanied with an
Inflammation of his Lungs, just as the Ambassador was taken. The disorder of
this regular was of living, added to the dividing of his Care between the Queen
and the Sick Ambassador, in a Season that was an Enemy to his Constitution, and
more rigid than it had been for Threescore Years, by the report of ancient
People, caused his Fever to be more Malignant than the Ambassador's was. It
was within him the first days, it possessed his Brain so far, as to make him
Rave; took away the liberty of knowing what Condition he was in* or hear the
advice of his Friends; and deprived him of all strength but only to resist
every bodies will. The Queens Chief Physician Monsieur du Ryer, by Nation a
Frenchman, and a particular Friend of his was unfortunately absent at that
time: and that Princess ordered the next in course to take care of him; he was
an Hollander, called Weulles, one of M. Des Carts sworn Enemies, ever since
the Ministers and Divines of Leiden and Vtrecht bid him defyance. The sick
Person upon sight of this Doctor, and others that the Queen sent with him, was
so obstinate as to do nothing that he ordered him, but especially he would not
hear of being let Blood, all the while the transport of his Brain lasted; which
occasioned terrible ^llarms to the Queen and Ambassador, who took great care to
send a Gentleman twice a day to see how he did.

His Brain began to be discharged at the end of the 7th day, which made him a
little more the Master of his Head, and faculties of his Reason; that was the
first time he was sensible of his Fever: He took notice of the Error he had
hitherto labored under, and now thought of nothing but to dye like a Christian
Philosopher. He got himself let Blood twice together, and in a great quantity,
but to no purpose, it was then too late. He prayed them to send for Father
Viogue his Confessor, who was about the exercise of his Mission some Leagues
distant from Stockholm: and desired those who were about him, not to discourse
with him any longer, but about the Mercy of God, and of the Courage wherewith
he was to suffer the Separation of his Soul. He remained quiet and still the
two last days; and Departed peaceably in the Arms of the Ambassador and Father
Viogue, the 11th of February, at Four a Clock in the Morning, Aged 53 Years, 10
Months, and 11 Days.

XXII. His Burial.
The Queen upon this News, soon discovered her Affliction by the true and
abundant Tears she shed for the loss of her Illustrious Master; this was the
Title she was always pleased to honor him with, and distinguish him from other
Learned Men about her. She immediately dispatched a Gentleman of her Bedchamber
to the Ambassador to assure him of her Grief and Sorrow; and to declare to him,
that she was willing to leave to Posterity a Monument of the respect she bore
to the Merit of the Deceased; and that she designed him his Sepulcher in the
most honorable Place in the Kingdom, at the feet of the Kings her Predecessors
with Magnificence answerable, besides a rich Mausolaean of Marble that she
resolved to have erected for him.

The Ambassador that had not yet been able to stir out of Doors since he fell
Sick, went in the Afternoon to pay a Visit to the Queen: and obtained of her,
(for good Reasons that he produced to her) that the Sepulcher should be after a
very plain manner at the deceased his own proper Cost and Charges, in a place
of the Foreigners Burial-place, where they laid Catholics and Children that
died before they came to the use of their Reason.

The next day the Corpse was brought out to the place of Interrment without any
great doings; yet all according to the Ceremonial of the Church of Rome, by the
special Permission of the Queen, and the Governor of Stockholm, the Body was
carried by the Ambassador's eldest Son, Monsieur de Saint Sandoux, since
Governor of Tournay; M. Picques Secretary to the Ambassy, at present Counselor
in the Court of Aids; and by M. Belen Secretary to the Ambassador, who is now
Treasurer of France.

The day following, the Ambassador accompanied with the first Gentleman of the
Queens Bedchamber Erric Spatacre, Baron of Croneberg, took an Inventory of
what Monsieur Des Carts brought with him into Sweden, and on March the Fourth
following, M. de Hoogheland took one of the things he had left in Holland, in
the presence of Monsieur Van Sureck, Seigneur de Berg, Creditor to the deceased.

The Ambassador, whom the Queen had given to understand that she persisted in
her resolution to rear him a Marble Monument, judged that beforehand, it would
be much better to erect a plain Tomb over the Grave of the deceased. He caused
it to be made an Oblong Square of Freestone cemented, the four Sides were
wainscotted outward with planed Boards; These four Sides were covered with a
course white Linen waxed, painted: and they caused to be writ upon it by the
Painter, the Curious Latin Inscriptions that the Ambassador composed in Honor
of his Friend.

Not many Months after, they caused a Medal to be Coined in Holland to the
memory of our great Philosopher, the reverse contains Magnificent Elogiums.

XXIII. The translation of his Body into France.
After the Conversion of the Queen of Sweden, wholly due to Monsieur Des Carts
and Monsieur Chanut, which was manifest some years after, by her renouncing
Lutheranism, there remains no more for us to observe concerning that
Philosopher, saving only the translating of his Ashes and Bones from Sweden
into France, Seventeen years after his Death.

It was M. d'Alibert, Treasurer General of France, who was the Chief Man in
this Enterprise, and who was at the sole Charge and Expense. He employed to
this purpose M. le Chevalier de Terlon, French Ambassador in Sweden, who was
shortly to depart from thence for Denmark in the same Quality.

The Ambassador caused the Body to be taken up in presence of M. Pompone, who
was come to Stockholm to succeed him, at present a Minister of State. He caused
it first of all to be carried to Copenhaguen, from whence he sent it into
France, in Custody of true and faithful persons, the Second day of October
1666. arriving at Paris in January the year after; it was carried to Monsieur
d' Alibert^^ House in the Rue de Beautreillis: and some days after, it was
deposited without Ceremony in a Chapel in St. Paul's Church. From thence it
was transported in a pompous manner, the 24th of June, upon Midsummer, or St.
John's Day, at Eight a Clock at Night into the Church of St. Genevieve du mont;
where it was received by the Abbot and Cannons Regular, with most splendid
Preparations.

The day following, being Saturday, they performed solemn Service; where the
Abbot, Father Blanchard, General of the Congregation officiated in his
Pontificalibus. There were a great many Persons present qualified accordingly;
Father l' Allemans, Chancellor of the University* had prepared a Funeral
Oration: But there chanced to come an Order from Court, that it should not be
pronounced.

They set the Hearse in a Vault between two Chapels on the South Side of the
Nef, or Body of the Church; where Monsieur d' Alibert has caused to be put up
a fair Marble against the Wall, representing the Philosopher's Bust, with a
very pretty Epitaph, composed of two Inscriptions; one whereof is French Verse,
Composed by M. de Fiewbet Counselor of State, heretofore Chancellor to the
Queen: the other which is in Latin, comes from M. Clerselier, notwithstanding
some would still to this day have Father Allemant to be the Author of it.

After the Service for Saturday, the 25th of June, was done, they carried the
Titles, the Verbal Process, and Certificates, which were drawn up in good Form,
into the Archives of the Abbey of St. Genevieue. Then M. d' Alibert Conducted
all the Principal Assistants to the famous Bocquet's House, where he treated
them with a most sumptuous and magnificent Banquet.

BOOK VIII.
Containing the Qualifications of his Body and Mind, his Manners, His Life and
Conversation toward God and toward Man.
I. MOnsieur Des Carts his Body was something under a middle stature, His Body.
but very delicate, and well-proportioned in all the shape and symettry of
Parts; yet he seemed to have an Head a little too big in proportion to the
Trunk of his Body. His Brow or Forehead was broad, and standing out a little;
His Complexion pale from his Infancy to his leaving the College, and then mixed
with a pretty ruddy vermillion blush till his retirement into Holland, and ever
since somewhat sallow till his dying day; He had upon his Cheek a kind of
Pimple or Push that broke now and then, and grew again; His Under-Lip stuck out
a little, a pretty wide Mouth; a Nose of a bigness answerable to its length;
His Eyes dark gray; His Sight pleasant and firm to the end of his days; His
Countenance evermore serene and calm; His Mind affable and Courteous; The Tone
of his Voice pleasant between Base and Treble; yet too feeble to carry on any
long Discourse, occasioned by an alteration of his Lungs he brought into the
World with him.

His Hair and Eyebrows pretty black, the Hair of his Chin not quite so black;
and he began to be gray at the age of 43 years. Some few years after he wore a
Perriwig, but of a fashion that resembled his own Hair; and that too upon the
account of his Health.

He followed less the Mode, then he suffered himself to be drawn into it; he
staid till it became common that he might not affect Singularity. He was never
disregarded, yet he chiefly avoided to appear in the Garb of a Philosopher. At
such time as he sequestered himself from much Company in Holland, he changed
his Sword for a Cloak.

His course of Diet was always uniform. His Diet.
Sobriety was natural to him. He drunk little Wine, and was sometimes a whole
Month together without drinking a drop yet seeming very jocund and pleasant at
Table, his frugality not burthensom to his Company.

He was neither nice nor difficult in the choice of his Victuals, and he had
accustomed his Palate to every thing that was not prejudicial to the health of
the Body. His Diet did not consist in eating seldom, but to discern the quality
of the Victual. His judgment was, that it was good always to keep the Stomach
and other Viscera a doing, as we do to Horses, but that it ought to be with
such things as afford small nourishment, as Roots and Fruits, which he believed
more proper to prolong the Life of Man, than the Flesh of Animals.

He observed that he eat more greedily and slept sounder when he was sad and
melancholy, or in some eminent danger, than he did at any other time.

He slept much, or at least his awaking was never forced; so soon as ever he
perceived himself dis-ingaged from sleep, he studied, meditating in Bed, and
rai^ed but half his Body now and then, to commit his thoughts to writing. This
is the reason why he often continued ten Hours, nay, sometimes twelve, in his
Bed. His Condescension to the necessities of his Body, never proceeded to an
Apathy, or so far as insensibility of them. He knew Nature must be supplied. He
labored hard and long. He delighted pretty much in bodily exercise, and
indulged himself therein at his time for recreation; till at length, his
sedentary life broke him off that Custom.

He was apt to believe that health of Body, was the greatest Blessing in this
life next to Virtue. He had no great share of it in his Infancy, and it was but
ill preserved whilst he was subject to the government of Physicians; he was
troubled during his Childhood with a dry Cough, hereditary to him from his
Mother, and very infirm till the Age of 13. when he was let Blood the first;
but never after till the Eve of his Death. He reckoned Phlebobotomy, extreme
dangerous to most People. At the age of 19 or 20 years, he thought he was not
so much a Fool as not to be his own Physician. Therefore he thought he was of
age to take upon him the Administration of his health, and dispensed with a
Physician 'till his mortal Distemper. He abhorred not only Mountebanks, but
even the Drugs of Apothecaries and Empericks; yea, and he required great
Caution in the administering Chemical Remedies. When he was disengaged and free
from that heat of Liver, that made him in love with a Military Life in his
youthful days, he took up a course of Life so even and uniform, that he was
never Sick with any thing, except by that Foreign Cause, that brought him to
his long home. The two grand Remedies were his spare regular Diet, and
moderation in his Exercise: yet he preferred before them, those of the Mind and
Spirit, that have a mighty influence upon the Body; as plainly appeared by the
great change; Anger, Wrath, Fear, and other Passions did excite in him.

The manner of living he prescribed himself, was founded upon the economy and
well-ordering his Family. He entertained a sufficient number of Domestics, all
picked and culled, and very neat; and he took care to get them all bandsom, both
as to Body and Mind: His House was like a School of Learning and Virtue to
them; and not content to render them knowing and honest, he thought it likewise
his Duty to meliorate and advance their Fortunes: and that was the Reason why
there was always a great deal of earnest striving, and suing who should first
get into his Service: and men always looked upon a Place amongst his Servants
as a very advantageous Post. On his part, he treated them with that Indulgence
and Mildness, that he won them over, and brought them to his beck by mere love
and kindness. As for those of an higher rank, who nearest approached him in
quality of Secretaries, or Valets de Chamber; he counted them so little
Inferior to him, that one would have taken them for his Equals sometimes. This
thing conduced much to mould and model their Heart and Mind; nay, most of them
became Persons of great Worth and Consideration in the World. Men have observed
it in the Person of M. de ville Bressieux, a Physician at Grenoble, of M.
Gutschowen, RegiusProfessor at Louvain, of the Sieur Gillot the Mathematician,
and Sieur Schluter, Auditor, or Intendant of Justice in Sweden, and of a great
many more Persons preferred to great Places, who are at this day very eminent
in Languedoc.

II. The Expenses of his House was ever well regulated, His unconcern for the
Goods of Fortune.
though his Passion was wonderful for multiplying Experiments; yet he never
affected running in Debt beyond his yearly Revenue. This Revenue was about 6000
Livres and upward per annum; if you except some few years at the latter end of
his life, wherein he had augmented it. If so be it had been not so plentiful at
the beginning, it would nevertheless have seemed sufficient for him. Monsieur
Des Carts did consider the good things of the World, not as a covetous,
indigent Gentleman; but as a rich and contented Philosopher. He carried it
always very high to Fortune, and amongst the Crowd of those that adore this
blind Goddess, his sport was bravely to scorn and laugh at her, contenting
himself to deplore the Condition of some Philosophers his Friends, who showed
so much weakness as to complain of her. So Fortune again had a mind to be even
with him seeming to be very sensible of his Disdain, she endeavored to be
revenged of him upon every occasion that presented it self of being Rich. Yet
was he not one of those whimsical Fops, and churlish Cynicks that seek all
occasions to dare her, or insult over her; no, he was never guilty of the
Vanity to triumph over her with ostentation. And indeed, one of the Principal
Maxims he prescribed himself for the guidance of his Life and Conversation, was
to endeavor rather to conquer himself, than Fortune; to change his desires
rather than the order of the World.

He was endowed with no less generosity, than unconcernedness* his heart would
give place to no man alive but to his King in point of Liberality. He was never
the man that would accept from any private person whatsoever the relief that
was offered him, to supply the expenses that his Experiments required. He
civilly refused a pretty considerable Sum of Money which the Count d'Avaux sent
him into Holland. He excused himself in like manner to Monsieur de Montmor, who
with many instant entreaties, offered him to make his best of one of his
Country Houses and Farm of 4000 Livres per annum. Other Persons of eminent
Quality, laid open their Treasures to him, but all to no purpose. He counted it
a dishonest and uncivil part in him to borrow ought of any person, that he was
not able to restore with interest: and he pretended it would have been
burdensome to him to perceive himself indebted to the Public. But although he
declared the unconcernedness of Philosophers for Riches, yet was he not pufft
up with their Pride. He did not only look upon those that make good use of
Riches with a favorable Eye, but he thought it his Duty not to neglect and
slight that Estate his Father had the kindness to reserve for him. He accounted
a lawful Patrimony as a Present of Nature, and not of Fortune: and of all the
Goods that one is capable of acquiring in this World, there is none more
innocent, or more according to that order God has appointed. This made him one
day tell his elder Brother in his Letter, That he more valued 1000 Livres by
Inheritance than 10000 Livres that came to him otherwise.

III. How you must not ascribe Monsieur Des Carts his being rich and
contented, His retired Life.
to his modest Revenue, that seemed competent; nor yet to his Frugality: It was
his choice of a solitary Sequestered Life that rendered him so. He admitted of
very few Visits at any time, and returned yet less; yet was he neither a
Mesanthropus, nor morosely Melancholy: He carried along with him to the very
recesses of his Solitude, that pleasant humor and natural briskness, that was
observed in him from his tender years; His usual cheerfulness made him do
things without straining; and if we credit him, facilitated their success; yea,
and contributed not a little to his health; for without it, he could not have
sustained the weight of his retirement with so much perseverance: that was it,
that changed his inclination for retirement, into a real doting upon a confined
Secret Life. And his desire never to relinquish it, induced him to take two
Symbolum's or Motto's very proper to hinder him from forgetting this
resolution; the first out of Ovid: Been qui latuit, been vixit. The remembrance
of which made him oftentime quite off the design of publishing his Works. The
other is taken out of Seneca's Tragedies, Illi mors gravis incubat
Qui unus nimis omnibus
Ignotus moritur sibi.
Which is a smart Condemning of such Persons who love to be known by others,
without knowing themselves.

After he had reduced himself to a private condition, His contempt of Renown.
he ever judged that the inconvenience, of being too well known was a dangerous
distraction, and taking a man off his design, never to go abroad out of
himself. But only when he had a mind secretly and seriously to converse with
Nature, and never to quit and forsake Nature, but to come home again to
himself. He looked upon the desire men are taken with, to live in the good
opinion and minds of men as a frivolous vanity: yea, and never did Philosopher
make less account, of that glory and splendor, most people find in what they
call reputation: he had not such over-weaning thoughts of himself, as to take
it ill, that, if any one thought of him, he had not a good opinion of him: but
he could rather have chosen that he should never think of him at all.

The trade of a solitary life, His habits of writing, of reading. His style.
cost him but a few months Apprentiship to learn, because the inclination he
had to it, was seconded by his temper and constitution, and a particular humor
of his. The habit of meditation that he had got ever since he left the
College, made him mighty reserved and sparing of his Tongue. But although he
spoke but very little at any time, yet he spoke always to purpose and very
naturally. His conversing was never starcht or affected, never troublesome or
uneasy. He shunned above all things to appear Learned or a Philosopher in
Discourses. He was as little inclined to commit his Speculations to writing, as
to vent them by word of mouth. He was pretty much indisposed to write, but his
small, close, straight, regular way of writing is sufficient evidence, that he
had conquered this idleness by a long habit, yet for all that he relaps't into
it from time to time, as appears not only from the great repugnance he
testified in composing his Works, but also from his usual negligence to answer
his friends.

He had not doubtless, so much listlessness and aversion for reading, as he
showed for writing. We must nevertheless grant you, that he did not read much,
and that he had a small parcel of Books. Discouraged at the unprofitableness
and errors he observed in Books, he solemnly forsook reading of them: but
that I may not tell an untruth, he did not quite and clean forsake them, nay,
he makes his forsaking even suspected of dissimulation. Some believe he made
more use of Books than he was willing every body should know; and they have
been apt to ground this opinion upon the quality of the style, and the
multiplicity of matter he treated of in his Works, but more particularly in his
Letters.

This is a judgment, or rather a conjecture fetched from the elegance of his
style; the regularity of fancy, and quaintness and exactness of his
expressions.

IV. His Wit, Memory, and judgment.
He had a mind of an almost infinite extent, and of a strength in a manner
equal to the extent; his penetration was prodigious in depth and vivacity. This
appeared more especially when the business in debate was, to fathom the depth
of man's Soul, and precisely to determine what is possible for a man to do, and
what is above his reach or power.

Never did man under the cope of Heaven, manifest that which we call, a
Geometrical Spirit; and an exactness of Wit and Solidity of Judgment in an
higher degree. He showed it I say, in his not confounding the principles one*
with another, in penetrating all the consequences that may possibly be deduced
from them, and indeed never arguing falsely upon known principles.

His Memory was neither treacherous, nor unhappy; but we don't see that it was
answerable to the greatness of his parts. If he was deficient in any thing upon
that score, it was abundantly recompensed by that other portion of the Soul,
which we call Judgment, which is the light of the humane Soul. He was solid and
judicious in all respects. He had a shrewd insight into things, very exquisite,
and a most subtle discerning of that which is in common use, which your
greatest Wits, especially Geometricians are wont to pass by and overlook.

Nothing ever contributed more to bring this excellent quality to perfection in
him, His love for Truth.
than his violent passion for Truth, that never forsook him all his life long.
The uprightness of his heart, being always attended by the rightness of sense
and understanding, his continual care was to find out Truth in all his Studies;
and to make her appear nothing but the truth and the naked truth, in all his
actions; in all his discourses, openness and candor were at all times the
particular character that made him be differenced from those, amongst men, who
seemed to resemble him in other respects: and all that polite breeding he might
receive from his Education, and frequenting the Courts of great Persons, was
never capable to make him double-minded or false-hearted; nor to persuade him,
that fawning, counterfeiting, and lying ought to be practiced. Faults that are
committed against Truth, when they proceed from ignorance or mistake, where
there is no design at the bottom to injure truth, appeared to him pardonaable;
but if he had been upon the Bench as a Judge, he would have proved inexorable
as to those that are committed against Knowledge and Love of Truth.
Notwithstanding, this kindness he bore to Truth, pusht him on to pursue her
wheresoever he suspected she might lie hid, yet he concluded that for finding
of her, he was to pitch principally upon the Sciences, in which he did usually
examine what they contained, and what solidity was in them, to the end he might
not lose his time, for that which signified nothing; and that observe to
others, what use and benefit they were likely to make of them.

V. His aptness to learn.
A great many have believed that he was not ignorant in any Science, and that
he had skill in all the Liberal Arts. But it may suffice us to believe that he
might have a competent knowledge in the Nature of all the Sciences, without
being vers't in every particular kind of them.

He showed more docibility and aptness, if a man may so say, than real Science:
this virtue in him was a jewel so much the more inestimable, as it is very rare
in the ringleaders of a Sect. The Passion he testified to correct his faults,
was always attended with a grateful acknowledgment to those who let him
understand them.

The Pride and Vanity his Adversaries have taxed him withal, His modesty.
upon some occasions, are frivolous and superficial, because they never took
place, in his heart. But in respect of suspicions of haughtiness and
presumption, that they have imputed to him, they could not hold out long
against the brightness of his Modesty, that dissipated them in a moment. This
Modesty accompanied with abundance of politeness, as the Noble Cantibrigian
Philosopher, or More has it, resided much more in his sentiments than in his
discourses. It was no where affected, but appeared, as it were, in its proper
natural places, if you consider the little account he made of himself, and his
productions, and the aversion he showed for praise and commendation.

This virtuous quality lay not dormant nor barren in him, His Me^kness.
one may say without a soelecisme that it begot one pretty like it in Regius a
Physician of Vtrecht, by that incomparable model of an answer he drew up for
him against Voetius the Minister, whom he was obliged to refute, which is no
less a masterpiece of me^kness and civility, than of modesty; this sweetness
of disposition that was dispersed through all his actions, and deportment, never
went under another name amongst his friends: but the trial his adversaries made
of it* changed its name to Moderation in respect to them; His Moderation.
it was not in its miridian against the turbulent Spirits of Gassendus and
Fermats temper: there was need of a Roberval to make it shine out. But
especially there wanted some giddy hair-brained Ministers, and wild extravagant
Philosophers to make it triumph.

The love he bore all his life long for peace and tranquillity, caused him by
times to undervalue calumny, and forget injuries. He was naturally an enemy to
dispute, especially for that which is mixed with wrangling, contestations and
troublesome heats; and thence proceeded his aversion to rip up the faults of
others, or to make them greater than they were, when he observed them in
reading, this trade seemed unworthy of a man that owed all his time to the
inquiry after truth: nay he thought he went out of his road, when he stopped to
look upon other men's wanderings.

VI. So many lovely qualities could not choose but get him the love of every
body, His friends.
so that he did not want for friends, than whom no body could boast to have
more, but tho he did not refuse any man's friendship, yet he used a great deal
of discretion in affording his, because he endeavored as much as possibly he
could, not to separate it from his esteem and respect. He never placed
confidence in any one, in whom he had not observed Wisdom; perfected and
consummated with Science and Virtue.

He was a man of the most tender Conscience in the World, even according to the
relation of those who rendered themselves the most unworthy of his friendship.
He showed a mighty kindness and faithfulness for his friends, which was proof
against the inconstancy and vicissitude of the things of this World. He was
neither distrustful nor suspicious. He easily gave credit to the good, but
hardly to the ill that was spoken of his Friends. His Maxim was to suspend his
consent always to disadvantagious reports, till such time as his own experience
or infallible demonstrations should ascertain him of the matter they reported
to him. Another maxim of his friendship was never to be troublesome to his
Friends, yet nevertheless to render them all services he was capable of.
Thinking that this good disposition that reigned in him, might be instead of a
rule whereby to judge that of another man, he raised the obligation of amity to
such an high pitch, that he pretended those that did good turns, are also the
persons obliged.

A person of his character should not have had any enemies, His Enemies and
Adversaries.
nor indeed had he any but such who were enemies to Virtue and Truth, who made
Insurrection not so much against his Person, as against his Writings. The
enmities of others never troubled him: nay, and without being too Inquisitive
to spy out what Enemies he had, he was content to be no bodies Enemy. And to be
always ready to be reconciled to those who desired to come into favor with him
again.

But he judged it not fit to pass by the enemies of his Philosophy, some
whereof became his envyers and emulators, and others open adversaries; the
little vanity that might be in him, was without doubt well enough satisfied
with the first sort, and his merit could not be more inhanced, nor set off to
better advantage, than by the envy of others. As for his Adversaries, whose
number far surpast that of his envyers, he never refused to answer those, who
notwithstanding their prejudice and ignorance, discovered to him any tokens of
honesty and sincerity.

As he had some Adversaries in his life time, who, for all that, professed, to be
his friends. So, we cannot question but he had some affections to check and
restrain them, as Adversaries and Enemies of his intent and purpose. In respect
of the first he had nothing in a manner besides his own reason to follow,
without fearing any thing from his inclination. But as for the others, where,
it seems, his reason could not come in play, it was his best way to retain his
inclination. There was rooted in him a strong affection for pur-blind people
all his Life time, and was occa^ioned from the impression made upon his
Infancy, at which time he loved a little pretty Damsel that was somewhat
pur-blind.

What some of his Enemies have given out concerning his pretended inclination
to the (...) Sex, His inclination for the Sex.
seems to have been devised but only from a passage of the Sieur Borel, who
testifies that our Philosopher was not displeased with Women's company,
because, as to the business of Philosophy, he found them more tractable,
patient, docile, and in a word, more void of prejudices and false doctrines,
that many men.

The adventure wherewith some idle spirits have asperst him, about a Lady of
Touraine, named La Menaudiere is a mere fiction, forged upon a Picture of our
Philosopher, that, she had seen at the house of Abbot de To^chelaye. He never
laid his Eyes upon this Lady, and for her part she had never seen him, but in
Picture: but now the case was otherwise as to Madam du Rosai, whom he Courted
just when his Relations had thought of marrying him, for whom he fought a Duel
with a Rival of his, encountering him upon the Road between Paris and Orleans:
yet this Lady was heard to confess at last, that Monsieur Des Carts found more
charms in Philosophy than in her: and that although she did not seem ugly to him,
yet he past a course compliment upon her, when he told her, that he found no
beauty comparable to that of Truth.

The fault he but once in all his Life committed against the honor of his
Caelibacy, is not so much a proof of his inclination for the Sex, as of his
weakness; and God having been pleased speedily to raise him up again, would
have the remembrance of his Fall, to be matter of continual humiliation to him,
and that his repentance should be a wholesome remedy against being exalted
above measure.

He recovered by this glorious reinstatement, His Virtues.
all the benefits wherewith it pleased God to honor the Virtues of his Soul.
Till that time, he never wanted any of those that are the ingredients of a
Gentleman and an Honest man: and he labored since to deserve those that are
able to make up a perfect Christian Philosopher. Those who knew him the most
intimately, have all born witness of the innocence of his Life. They found him
Religious as to his Sentiments, Wise in his demeanor, edifying in all his
discourses, giving examples of purity and integrity, that were proof against
the common corruption of the Age.

VII. His opinion of Religion.
After we have known what he was in Conversation with men, and toward himself,
it is convenient to know how he demeaned himself in his relation toward his
Creator, what his Thoughts were about Religion, wherein his Piety consisted,
which was very sincere and solid, and was not allayed with Bigottry, or
Faction, in the opinion of persons of both persuasions.

Never was a Philosopher observed to bear a more profound respect to a Deity,
than himself; He was also sober about matters of Religion, he never mentioned
God, but with a great deal of circumspection, always with abundance of Wisdom,
always in a noble and sublime manner. The fear or rather niceness he showed in
this point, made him scrupulously to decline entering upon questions of pure
divinity. Believing that it was to do wrong to Truths, that depend on Faith,
and cannot be proved but by natural demonstration, to go about to strengthen
them by humane reasons, and they only probable.

His blood rose against the boldness and rashness of certain Divines, who run
away from their guides, that is to say, from the holy Scriptures and Fathers of
the Primitive Church, that they may be their own guides, through those ways
that they are not well acquainted with. But above all he blamed the boldness of
Philosophers and Mathematicians, that dare appear so positive and peremptory,
in determining What God can, and what he cannot do; he said, it is to speak of
God as of a Jupiter or a Saturn, to make him subject to Styx, or fate, to hold
that there are some truths independent on him.

As concerning the existance of God, he rested so well satisfied in the
evidence of that demonstration he thought he had found in that matter, that
made no difficulty to prefer it to all the evidences and demonstrations of
Geometrical Truth. It was moreover his opinion that the Universal consent of
all people, is sufficient to maintain a Deity against all the injuries of
Atheists, and that no private person should ever enter upon a dispute with
them, except he were sure of convincing them.

It is not much material to call to mind in this place the calumnies of Atheism
and Skepticism, wherewithal his Enemies endeavored to brand him,
notwithstanding all the success he had, in opposing Atheists and Scepticks; one
could not possibly have opinions, that he studied to resute. By a childish
impertinence making people believe that he halted between holding, and refusing
them.

VIII. The precaution he took along with him, never to incroach upon Divinity*
went not quite so far as to deny, that humane reason may have any share in
Divine Sciences, nay, and even in those that were communicated to us only by
revelation from Heaven. He was not so ignorant of the great benefit of reason,
for the establishment of Maxims of Religion; and he was persuaded that
Philosophy well improved is one of the main helps to support and justify faith
in an illuminated mind.

Not that he pretended that a man must needs be a Philosopher, to be a good
Christian: but (...) he thought that albeit the reason of a man submits to
Faith, nevertheless, Faith makes use of humane reasoning to captivate reason,
and bring it under subjection to its author.

He was persuaded that his opinions might prove very serviceable for the
explaining of the truths of Faith. He believed that there could be nothing in
whatsoever concerns Divinity and Religion, with which his Philosophy would not
much better agree than the vulgar Philosophy does. And as for some
controversies frequently agitated in his time in the Divinity Schools, by
reason of the false principles of Philosophy upon which they were grounded, he
hoped they would cease and come to nothing of themselves. If ever it should so
happen, that his principles should be admitted to come in vogue: That which
pufft up his mind the most is, that, describing the beginning and origin of the
World, according to the principles of natural Philosophy, and reading over the
first Chapter of Genesis, he found that it could be all of it expounded
according to his conceptions, much better than by all the ways whereby your
interpreters expound it.

Nevertheless from the appearances only of his undertaking* and from his man^er
of Philosophizing, several have judged that his Philosophy was, if not
pernicions, at least very dangerous for Christian Religion, and that it was
equally contrary to the Divinity of Papists and Protestants. And that is, the
reason why some controvertists of both persuasions, would fain have ^ipt it in
the bud and suppressed it.

Men are delivered from these apprehensions amongst the Catholics, except here
and there a few Peripaticians hoodwinked by their own Prejudices. But the
Protestants that have not experienced it so favorable to their Doctrines have
been a long time without pardoning him for broaching it; because he has not
spoken as they do, of the Providence of God, and of the Liberty of Man: the
worst that they have been able to disoblige him in, is, making him pass for a
Pelagian; But their Accusation is vanished, they not being able to ground it
upon any Passage of his Writings, or upon his particular Behavior and Conduct,
where the Grace of Jesus Christ or Supernatural Glory is questioned.

IX. His manner of treating of Transubstantiation.
He was so much persuaded of the entire Conformity of his Opinions with that
which the Church teaches, concerning the Truths of Faith, that
Transubstant^ation it self, which, according to Protestants, is impossible to
be explained by the ordinary Philosophy, is, according to him, very easy, by
his Philosophy: His explanation in the Judgment of some Cartesian Catholics is
much less intricate, than that the Schools present us with: and if a man will
credit some Jesuits* He has very clearly explained the whole Mystery of the
Eucharist according to his Principles without an Entity of Accidents.

This made several Protestant Universities to judge that this Doctrine of his
was wonderful prejudicial to Calvinism: and they have had reason to respect
Aristotle, as more proper than he, for the design of maintaining their Tenets,
and to dispute against the Dogma's of the Church of Rome.

Honesty obliges us to acknowledge moreover, that the best part of other
Protestants have not been sway^d by these Considerations, when they exploded
Aristotle out of their Schools, to introduce Des Carts; who have in that Point
less considered the interest of their Divinity, than that of his Philosophy.
But he will be for ever honorable for his manner of explaining
Transubstantiation, to understand that it has been so powerful as to Convert
Huguenots to the Faith of the Church of Rome; even as his manner of speaking
about Religion has brought some Professed Atheists over to the said Church.

Nevertheless* God has suffered Calumny to attack him just in the particular
wherein consisted his deserved Praise. Some Catholics there have been, who
upon unjust, groundless Suspicions, have not stuck to accuse him of Calvinism:
and some Calvinists again, out of a piece of Malice, would fain have done
themselves the honor to count him one of them: But their Slanders have been
invalidated by the Testimonies of a great number of Persons of both
Persuasions, by the Queen of Sweden's Certificate, by that of the Princess
Elizabeth, of Father Viogue his Confessor, of Monsieur Ch^nut, Clerselier; and,
in fine, by the Justice the Church has done his Memory by a Public Burial,
which we take to be the Seal of the Communion of Saints.

This Justice was a Debt owing to such a Religious Observer of the Cannons of
the Church as our Philosopher was. His Practice of Piety.
Never did he want Zeal for her; yet was not his, a misguided, blind Zeal,
never was he ashamed, publicly to profess his Catholicism amongst Societies
separated from the Church: never did there escape from his Pen or Mouth any
term that savoured of liberty or irreverence touching certain Rites and Customs
of our Church, upon which Philosophers and Wits do usually play, and make
sport; the respect that he entertained for the Gospel Ministry of the
Protestant Divines never made him utter a word that smelled of Complaisance, or
favor for Schism or Heresy.

The Caution whereto he had confined himself upon his first entrance into
Countries professing a different Religion, had made him so discreet and
reserved, that he scarce ever opened his Mouth without edifying, nor without
causing some impressions of respect and esteem for the Religion he profes^'d.

His carriage and behavior was no less edifying than his discourse he did not
make, all the Duties requisite to a true Christian to consist, in an inward
worship only, as most part of your Philosophers do; no, he was extraordinary
careful to accompany it with all the exercises of a good conscientious
Catholic; nay, and he acquitted himself of all his Obligations, as exactly as
one of the humblest and plainest of Believers would have done. He frequented
more especially the Sacraments of Penance and Eucharist, with all the
dispositions of a contrite heart, and humbled spirit; as far as is permitted to
refer our selves to the honesty and truth of Confessors, who had the cure of
his Soul in Holland and Sweden.

His adhering so closely to the whole Body of the Church, His Submission to the
Church.
whereof himself was a Member, was kept up by a sincere submission to its
authority without any reserve. He declared no small deference for whatsoever
bore the Character, or but the Name of the Holy See; He harbored very great
esteem for the Sorbonne; that is to say, for the whole Faculty of Divinity in
Paris, that he respected as the Depository of the Key of Science; Knowing that
the Key of Power was in the hands of the Pope and of Bishops, which made him
firmly believe that his Conscience should be secure* so long as he should have
Rome and the Sorbonne on his side.

His Submission to the Holy See did extend even so far as to have some respect
for the Roman Inquisition, although he was no where in a Praemunire, whereby to
become liable to its lash. He was not ignorant of the difference one ought to
put between the Pope's Authority, and that of the Congregation established at
Rome for prohibited Books: yet did he not fail to testify respect for it, and
to say, out of Civility, that it is Authority had little less power over his
Actions, than his own Reason had over his Thoughts, and he took all measures
necessary, not to write any thing that might incurr its displeasure; it is more
than probable that this Congregation would have spared him, if it could have
got clear from the Intrigues of a particular Author who had cunningly slipped one
part of his Works into the Index Expurgatorius, amongst a Catalogue of other
Books prohibited by a Decree of the 20th of November 1663.

X. Of the Character of Novelty in his Opinions.
It is possible they could not devise a more specious pretense to censure and
reject him, than that of Novelty, which men believes might have amounted to a
Crime; this, perhaps (amongst all those they could impute to him) is the only
one wherewith they could most reasonably have charged him. To speak the truth,
he did not so much boggle at Novelty as they do, who fondly adore the Ancients;
he judged that in Philosophy, where the business is only the research of
natural Truths, that have not hitherto been Discovered, it might be pardonable
to employ new means; especially since the Ancients have had the ill luck not to
discover them to us. Besides, his Spirit was not of the temper of those upon
whom two or three Thousand years are capable to impress a Veneration for Error.
He was sure that the ancientest things that have been received by Posterity;
were new, at their first appearance: and if Novelty had been an Obstacle to
their Reception, one should never have received any thing into the World.

But, since men are engaged upon honor, not any longer to confound Novelty
with Falsehood, nor Antiquity with Truth, Envy that could not endure that
Monsieur Des Carts should pass Scot-free, has gone about to change the Scene,
and invert this order to bring him in guilty; his defenders that pleaded his
Cause, that they might retort the Objection of Novelty, did take upon them to
make appear that his Opinions were not so Novel as they would make them, and
that, several of them had been defeated before him; those that envied him, who
thought all to be new, till that time, were not wanting to make their best
advantage of this Overture, and have been ready to accuse him for having robbed
the Ancients, nay, and the Moderns too, who went before him; for it is the
opinion of some, that he stole his Method of Algebra from one Harriot, an
Englishman.

The multitude of those who seem to have had before him sorry Sentiments
resembling his, His meeting with those that preceded him.
may very well serve to inhaunce the value of his Philosophy, and serve to let
men judge of the importance of the new things he has superadded, both to
Correct or Perfect that which was but only rudely drawn, or but ventured at
before his time, without any Method, without any Principles: But this signifies
nothing to prove him to be the Plagiary of so many Authors, the most part of
which, it is well known, were utterly unknown to him. This Multitude, I say,
makes us the more inclinable to believe that he found out more than all these
Philosophers put together; and that he has been more happy and successful than
them all, in matter of Probability and Solidity, for the establishing his
Principles, and the curious Connection of his Consequences. His System is, in
all respects so complete, and so well furnished, that one must not think it
strange, that whatsoever has been the most plausibly fancied by both Ancients
and Moderns, is there couched and rectified, that there is little need of
feigning that he borrowed it from their Writings.

Monsieur Des Carts agreeing to what is commonly objected, that what he said
might possibly have been said by some other before him, judged that his Case
was the same with a man, whom they should tax for having plundered the Alphabet
and Dictionary, because he might not have made use of any Letters that were not
in the former, nor of any words that were not found in the latter; But he adds
further, That those who should please to own and acknowledge the neat
Concatenation of all his Conceptions that do so necessarily follow one another,
would be induc't presently to confess, that he might be as innocent of the
Felony laid to his charge, as an excellent Orator, that might be condemned for
a Plagiary of Calepin, or old Evander, for having borrowed Words from the one,
and Letters from the other.

The main, and only difficulty that remained to be removed out of the way by
the Cartesians, consisted, in alleging that a man comes a Day after the Fair
in his Invention of a thing, when it has been already invented to his hand.
But, pray consider, that Experience shapes us an Answer in behalf of them, (
viz.) That the very same thing, may be invented more than once at different
times and in diverse places, by Persons that might not have learnt any thing
from one another, nor might have had the least Communication together. M. Des
Carts makes it evident, that it is not much material* to his purpose for being
the first, or the last, in writing the things he writ, provided only they might
be true. He has not the vanity to boast that he was the first Inventer of any
thing he has advanced. He is content to tell us, that if he received, and
admitted of them, it was not because they were produced, or not produced by
others; but only and principally because reason had persuaded him of their
being true.

In a word, he was not one of those restless, biased Spirits that are afraid
lest some body should rob them of their Inventions: nay, his Judgment was, that
a noble generous Soul ought not to complain of Plagiaries robbing of him,
provided they do not wholly conceal and suppress their Theft; in case they do
not spoil him, and that the Public be not frustrated thereby. He has left to
Posterity very fair Examples of that Generosity and Dis-interest which he
exacted from others upon such Occasions: In respect of two Hollanders, who
turned Plagiaries of his Writings; and that, before he had Communicated them to
the Public, he thought it sufficient to take all necessary Praecautions
against the Vainglory of the one, and Treachery of the other. That done, he
committed the rest to God Almighty, as the sole Author of whatsoever good there
might be found in his Writings, without challenging any thing in them, besides
defects; which Ignorance and Humane Infirmity might there have produced.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and sold by R. Simpson at the Harp in St. Paul's
Churchyard.
THe Young Man's Duty. A Discourse showing the necessity of seeking the Lord
betimes; as also the Danger and Unreasonableness in trusting to a Late, or
Deathbed Repentance. Designed especially for Young Persons, before they are
Debauched by Evil Company, and Evil Habits. The 6th Edition, by Rich. Kidd^^ ^
D. and Dean of Peterborough.

Time and the End of Time, in two Discourses: The first about Redemption of
Time; The second about Consideration of our latter end. By John Fox.

Miscellan^^. The Second Part; In Four Essays. 1. Upon Ancient and Modern
Learning. 2. Upon the Gardens of Epic^^us. 3. Upon Heroic Virtue. 4. Upon
Poetry. By Sir William Temple Baronet. The Third Edition, Corrected and
Augmented by the Author.

The Husbandman's Calling: Showing the Excellencies, Temptations, Graces,
Duties, etc. of the Christian Husbandman. Being the Substance of Twelve Sermons
preached to a Country Congregation, By Richard Steel, M. A. and Minister of
the Gospel. The Third Edition corrected and amended.

Christ's certain and sudden Appearance to Judgment. The 7th Edition. By Thomas
Vincent, sometime Minister of Ma^dli^s Milk-street, London.

A Treatise concerning the Lord's Supper: with Three Dialogues, for the more
full Information of the Weak, in the Nature and Use of this Sacrament. By Tho.
Do^litt^l. The Seventeenth Edition.

A Communicant Instructed: Or, Practical Directions for worthy receiving of the
Lord's Supper. By Francis Roberts, D. D. Rector of the Church of Christ at
Wrington in the County of Somerset. The Fifth Edition, diligently Revised and
Corrected by the Author.

An Explicatory Catechism: Or, An Explanation of the Assemblies shorter
Catechism. Wherein all the Answers in the Assemblies Catechism are taken abroad
in under Questions and Answers, the Truths explained, and proved by Reason and
Scripture; several Cases of Conscience resolved; some chief Controversies in
Religion stated, with Arguments against diverse Errors: Useful to be read in
private Families, after Examination in the Catechism it self; for the more
clear and through understanding of what is therein Learned. By Thomas Vincent,
sometime Minister of Ma^d^^^ Milk-street in London.

A particular Account of the present Persecutions and Inhumane Oppressions of
the Protestants in France.

A True Account of the Siege of Londonderry, by the Reverend Mr. George
Walker, Rector of Donogh-More in the County of Tyrone, and late (...) of Derry
in Ireland.

The Cou^^ess of Pembroke's Arcadia, written by Sir Philip Sidney ^night, with
his Life and Death, a brief Table of (...) principal Heads, and some other New
Additions.

The whole Body of Cookery Diflected, Taught and fully Manifested,
Methodically, Artificially and according to the best Tradition of the English,
French, Italian, Dutch, etc. or a Sympathy of all Varieties in Natural
Compounds in that Mystery; wherein is contained certain Bills of Fare for the
Seasons of the Year for Feasts and Common Diers. Whereunto is annexed a Second
Part of rare Receipts in Cookery, with certain Useful Traditions. With a Book
of Preserving, Conserving and C^ndying after the most Exquisite and Newest
manner, Delectable for Ladies and Gentle-women.


