^ SANCTA SOPHIA ^

OR DIRECTIONS FOR THE PRAYER OF CONTEMPLATION etc.

Extracted out of more then XL. Treatises written by the late Ven. Father F.
AVGVSTIN BAKER, A Monk of the English Congregation of the Holy Order of S.
BENEDICT: And Methodically digested by the R. F. SERENVS CRESSY, Of the same
Order and Congregation.

And printed at the Charges of his Convent of S. GREGORY'S IN DOWAY.

VOL. I.

AT DOWAY, By JOHN PATTE', and THOMAS FIEVET, ANNO D.M.DC.LVII.

TO OUR MOST R. FATHER LAVRENCE REYNER PRESIDENT GENERAL Of our H.
Congregation of the Order of S. BENEDICT: And to all our VV. RR. FF. Superiors
in the same.
VV. RR. FF.
Such being the distemper of this Age, that only good Books, and such as are
most proper to cure, in the very root, its disorders, do stand in need of
Protection: You cannot in justice, as it seems to me, refuse yours to this,
the composing and publishing whereof at this time was an effect of your V. R.
Paternities order and commands. Now those very Commands with so much Advice and
zeal unanimously made, are a very strong Proof that this Book (for as much
as concerns the substantial Doctrine therein contained) is such an one, so
perfectly good and Medicinal, as that I need not doubt, and indeed should be
sorry it should have any other fa^e then the hatred of all those that love
darkness more then Light. As for whatsoever faults may have happened through my
want of skill in the compiling, I do not desire such Patrons to them. Yet
truly there has not been vvanting all the diligence and care that I was
capable of to provide that so excellent Instructions should not be too much
disparaged by the second copying and new fashion and dress upon them. The
pains herein taken will appear to be not very ordinary, to any one that
shall consider h^w difficult a matter it is out of such a world of Treatises,
(written upon particular subjects for the special necessities and use of
certain devout Persons, without any ^ye or design in the Author of
affording materials for an entire Body of Spirituality) to frame such a Body
not at all defective, and with p^r^s not unproportionable. Now I must confess
that though conscience alone, and duty to your VV. RR. Paternities would have
had sufficient influence on me to prevent negligence: yet I had moreover one
Motive besides to heighten my diligence, which was Gratitude: For to the
admiration and love of these Excellent Instructions I owe not only the
hastening of my Reconciliation (...) the Catholic Church (as on this very day,
being the Vi^^ile of the Feast of S. M. Magdalen, in the Office of the H.
^nquisition at Rome) but also the happiness of being a Member (through unworthy)
of your Holy Congregation. It may notvvithstanding fall out, that with all my
endeauours I may fail of giving satisfaction in the point of Art: But that I
have not been vvanting in the principal condition, of Faithfullnes, besides
the testimony of mine own conscience, I have that also of persons learned and
pious, to vvh^m the Writings of the Venerable Author have been perfectly
known and familiar.

I^ will doubtless seem strange to others, but not to your Paternity (V. R.
F. President) that so pe^f^ct Instructions for Contemplation should proceed
from one that had spen^ (...) his whole Life in the laborious Employment of
the Apostolic Mission. But your V. R. Paternity by experience know, that
those who sincerely give themselves to see^e Almighty God by pure, Spiritual
Prayer, what ever their Employments be, will without any prejudice to them,
never want opportunities to meet and converse with Him in Solitude. Now from
such Conuersations it is, that there do proceed from the Father of Lights
such Illustrations as not only give a Splendor to the Persons themselves, but
by reflection also serve to guide others.

The Solitude that our Venerable Author enjoyed, was by his own election,
among friends, Penitents and Disciples. But Gods holy Spirit lead your V. R.
Paternity into a Desert far more suit of horror indeed, but vvithall far more
instructiue: a Solitude of Prisons and Dungeons; among Enemies to Religion and
Humanity: Where yet by the Light and force not only of your Learning, but also
your Devotion etc, you could found Churches of Conuerts.

A more sufficient and proper Patron therefore and Judge could not be found,
then your V. R. Paternity, of Instructions of this Nature. So that from you it
is that all others your Religious Subjects receiving them, will through Gods
grace daily with their increasing fervor by their good practice and example
recommend them to others abroad also.

VV. RR. FF. From my Cell in the Convent of S. Gregory's in Doway this 21. of
July 1657. Your VV. RR. PP. in all Duty and Service in our Lord Br. Serenus
Cressy.

NOS Fr. LAVRENTIVS REYNER Congregations Anglicanae Ordinis S. Benedicti
Praeses Generalis, Visis testimonijs and Approbationibus RR. PP. Congregationis
nostrae, BENEDICTI STAPLETONI S. Theologiae Doctoris and Definitoris dictae
Congregationis etc. and LEANDRI a S. Augustino S. Theologiae Professoris etc.
quibus cura examinandi Librum quendam Spiritualem Anglice Scriptum, cui
Titulus, SANCTA SOPHIA, or Directions etc. a nobis demandata fuerat: Ad Dei
honorem and gloriam, Ecclesiae Sanctae Catholicae bonum, animarumque, vti
speramus, in Sancto Dei amore profectum notabilem, vt dictus liber praeli
beneficio mundo publicetur per praese^tes licentia^ damus. In cujus rei
testimonium his subscripsimus, and Sigillum nostrum apposuimus. Parisijs in
Monasterio Nostro S. Edmundi Regis and Martyris in Suburbijs D. Iacobi, Maij.
4. An. D. 1657.

Fr. LAVRENTIVS REYNER Praeses qui supra licet indignus.
De Mandato R. Adm. P. Praesidis

Locus Sigilli.

Fr. AVGVSTINVS CONSTABLE SECRETARIVS.



LEgi diligenter Librum cui titulus SANCTA SOPHIA, Or Directions etc: Anglice
scriptu^: in eoque nihil reperi quod orthodoxae Fidei aut bonis moribus
aduersetur: Testor etiam nihil in hoc libro contineri praeter regulas and
praecepta ad vitae Contemplatiuae Perfectionem ducentia: Ea vero tanta
doctrinae soliditate, perspicuitate, tamque insigni methodo tractari, vt no^
solu^ pijssimi Authoris Sa^ctitas, and in co^ductu animarum ad Perfectionis
apice^ peritia, nec non ipsius Collectoris diligentia and stili nitor abunde
comprobentur; verum etiam summo cum perfectioris vitae studiosorum fructu in
lucem emittendum nullo modo dubitem. In super Authoris mentem videtur adeo
assecutus praefatus Collector, vt qui in Authoris doctrina sunt versati
genuinum illius foecum necessario agnoscere debeant. Datum in Monasterio nostro
S. Gregorij Duaci. 21. Ap. 1657.

F. BENEDICTVS STAPLETON Sac: The. Doctor.

PErlegi librum, cui titulus SANCTA SOPHIA etc. Anglice scriptum: testorque in
eo nihil reperiri, quod orthodoxae Fideiaut bonis moribus aduersetur; aut quod
ad Statum, regimen, vel negotia cuiusvis Reipublicae quouis modo pertineat. Sed
vnaquaeque pagina solam pietatem Theoricam spirat, quam sublimi quidem,
modestissima tamen, actutusima via accurate docet; and a SS. Patrum vestigijs
nunquam recedir. Ita ^estor (in Couentu nostro S. Greg. Duaci 20. Ap. 1657.)

FR. LEANDER A S. AVGVSTINO S. Theologiae Professor in Collegio Vedastino Duaci.

CVm Liber hic cui titulus SANCTA SOPHIA, etc. Anglice scriptus diligenter
perfectus fuerit ab eximio and R. Patre Benedicto Stapleton. S. Theologiae
Doctore, and R.P. Leandro a S. Augustino, S. Theologiae in Collegio Vedastino
Duaci Professore; Ijdemque idiomatis Anglicani optime periti fidem faciant
nihil in eodem hoc libro reperiri, quod orthodoxae fidei, aut bonis moribus
aduersetur, vel quod ad Statu^, regimen, aut negotia cuiusuis regni aut
reipublicae quouis modo pertineat; sed solummodo contineri Sanctissimas
regulas, and solidissima praecepta ad vitae Contemplatiuae perfectionem
conducentia; ideo eundem hunc Librum praelo dignum esse, and publici boni causa
in lucem omitti posse censui; Duaci 28. Aprilis. 1657.

MARTINUS DENIS, S. Theologiae Doctor, eiusdemque Regius and Ordinarius Duaci
Professor.
^dem censeo.

NICOLAVS LE LONG, S. Theolologiae Doctor, Eiusdemque and regius and ordinarius
Professor.



MAny grave Authors have written of this Subject but in my opinion none more
clearly, (and with such breuity,) then the R. Father Augustine Baker of the
Holy Order of S. Benedict, sometimes Spiritual Directour to the English
Benedictine Dames at Cambray. Who in his several Treatises abridged in this
Book entitled SANCTA SOPHIA, probably out of his own experience, has
methodically, solidely, clearly and piously set forth such efficacious
Instructions for the attaining of true Perfection; that all devout souls
aspiring thereto, especially Religious persons (whole daily practice of
Meditation and continual Exercises tending to that end, will if well applied
much advance them) by their practice with great facility, may attain great
Perfection. Let them therefore read diligently the Preface and first Treatise
and practice exactly what is contained in the second, and I dare promise them
by Gods Grace a happy progress in the third.

Wherefore I judge the Work worthy to be published, as containing nothing
opposite to the Doctrine of the Church: but on the contrary very proffitable
Rules and rare Instructions of Piety and true Devotion.

Given at Doway in the Convent of the English Recollects this 2. of July. 1657.
Brother Angelus Francis, Lectour Iubilate, and Episcopal Censurer of Books.

I have read three Treatise of that V. F. A. Baker of an Internal Life,
Mortification, and Prayer: and do approve and esteem of it, as of a work
that may much promote the perfection of a Religious state; and lead others to
a competent reasonable participation of it, though living in the world. And
(Reader) if thou art seriously resolved to attempt this principal and maine
work of thy Salvation; thou vvilt find nothing will displease thee, but very
many Aduices and Instructions to advance thee in the way to perfection. But if
Spiritual conversation internally with Allmighty God be either vnsipide or
unsavory to thy ill-affected palate; thou vvilt easily find little stravves,
motes or hairs to pick quarrel with, and cost away such food as this: and I
vvish thee to take heed, thou do not cast more away.

Given this 21. of July in our English College of Doway, Anno Domini. 1657. T.
PROGER Prof. of Diui^ity.

TO the foregoing Approbations I esteemed it much for my advantage to adioyne
the following Testimony of my sincerity and faithfullnes in delivering the
Doctrine of our V. Author. The excellent person from whom the Letter came
will, I hope, pardon this publishing, without a Commission from herself, what
she privately directed to me: since it is done for the better recommendation
of the Doctrine so worthily esteemed by her.

TO THE R. F. SERENVS CRESSY.
REVEREND FATHER
I must acknowledge the particular obligation that our Convent has to your R.
P. for the great diligence you have used, and the very much labor you have
bestowed in compi^ing the Abridgment of our Venerable and dear Father Bakers
works so exactly conformably to the sense and meaning of the Author: and as
we well know the pains you have taken in perusing seriously all his Books
several times, and in collecting the substance of each, digesting and reducing
them into a most convenient Order and method, and that, you refused not to
undergo the labor to go through all this a second time, to give the more
full satisfaction in tendering your Abridgment most entirely conformable to his
Writings in the very Expression, as much as might be; so we may very well
believe that it has pleased God to assist very much your unwearied industry;
since not any that has read your Book, and is versd in the Authors Works;
have found any Objections to make, either of any thing wanting or differing
from him: but all acknowledge that you have most fai^hfully, clearly and
substantially delivered his Doctrine. We cannot therefore but hope God will be
the reward of your fidelity, care and pains in a work so acceptable unto him:
as we shall not fail to pray; and none shall esteem themselves more obliged
to testify their gratitude, then

R. FATHER Your Unworthy Sister and Servant S. CATHARINE DE S. MARIA Abbess
Unworthy.
Cambray July the 7. 1657.
A PREFACE TO THE READER.
THE SVMME OF THE PREFACE.
. 1. 2. etc. Objections before and since the Authors Death, made aginst the
Publishing of this Doctrine.

. 9. 10. The first objection: Because the knowledge and practice of it belongs
to few: answered.

. 11. 12. 13. etc. A second Objection, viz. Because suspicion may be given to
Catholics of pretending to new Illuminations, prejudicial to the Doctrines of
Faith and Rules of life established in the Church: Answered largely: and the
contrary demonstrated.

. 16. 17. What Illuminations are here meant: And how Divine Love above all
other things does most enlighten the Soul.

. 21. 22. A third objection, viz. That Sectaries will hence take advantage to
justify their frenzies and disorders.

. 23. 24. 25. etc. Four preparatory grounds laid for the clearer answering
this Objection.

. 31. 32. The said Objection answered. Where is contrarily proved the necessity
of publishing such Doctrines, as the only mean to discover and disprove the
false Illuminations of Sectaries.

. 33. 34. 35. etc. An Exhortation to Sectaries to observe the strange
difference between their Spirits and that of Catholics.

. 39. 40. etc. An explanation of certain Passages in the following Treatises.

. 47. A just Request to the Reader.

. 48. A submission of all to the Sea Apostolic etc.

BELOVED CHRISTIAN READER.
Before thou proceedest to partake of what is promised thee in the Frontispice
of this Book, thou art entreated to permit thy self to be detained avvhile in
the Entry: For perhaps a short delay here will make thy progress afterward
both more speedy and proffitable.

2. This is to acquaint thee that the immaculate Doctrine contained in this
Book, though it never met with any that opposed, or so much as questioned the
Verities thereof, speculatiuely considered: yet there have not vvanted some
that have judged them not fit to be thus freely exposed to thy view, much
doubting thou would prove such an one as would make an ill use and perverse
advantage from them.

3. Now the principal, yea only Point that gives some this Iealousy, is that
which thou vvilt find in the Second Section of the First Treatise, where is
treated touching Divine Illuminations, Inspirations, Impulses and other Secret
Operations of Gods Holy Spirit in the Hearts of Internal Livers. Concerning
which the constant Teaching of our Venerable Author (in breife) is this, viz.
That the Divine Spirit by virtue of the said Operations is to be acknowledged
our only secure Guide and Master in these Secret Paths of Divine Love
(discovered in some measure in the following Treatises.) And consequently that
the most essential, Universal Duty to be aspired unto by every one that
pretends a desire or intention to walk in the same Paths is, to give up his
Soul and all its Faculties to Gods Internal Guidance and Direction only,
relinquishing and renouncing all other Instructours and Instructions as far as
they are not subordinately cooperating with this our Divine Master: For the
receiving of whose Celestial Influences, the humble and devout Scholar is
obliged to prepare and dispose himself by Prayer, Abstraction of Life etc, in
Solitude harkening to his Voice and Call, and learning how to distinguish it
clearly from the Voice and Sollicitatio^s of Humane Reason or Corrupt Nature:
till that by long familiarity and conversation with God, Divine Love alone will
so clear his spiritual sight that he shall see at last no other Light, nor
receive Motion from any other, but God only, and this in all Actions, Omissions
and sufferings, though in themselves of the smallest importance.

4. This is our Venerable Authors Doctrine every where in all his Treatises
(what ever the Subject be) inculcated, and even to the vvearying of the
Readers, continually repeated and asserted. Indeed a Doctrine it is so
fundamental to all his other Instructions concerning Prayer and Mortification
etc, that the least vveakning of its authority renders all the rest
unprofitable.

5. But little reason there is to fear that a Doctrine, which is the very
Soul of Christianity, can be shaken by humane opposition, or disparaged by
jealousy. True it is notvvithstanding, that though this Fundamental Verity
receives testimony abundantly both from Scriptures and Universal Tradition,
though it be constantly asserted in the Schools, and sprinkled every where
in almost all Mystic Writers, yet scarce has any one since the Ancient
Fathers times (especially S. Augustine) so purposely, largely and earnestly
recommended it to Practice. And therefore no great vvonder it is, if such a way
of delivering it have seemed a Nouelty even to those that speculatiuely and in
Theft acknovvledge it to be the established Doctrine of the Church: and whilst
they willingly and with applause hear it asserted daily in the Schools; yet
meeting with it thus popularly spread, they are offended with it, I mean,
with the communicating it to the use and practice of the Unlearned.

6. Now what is was that troubled them, will appear from the only Objection
in the Authors lifetime made against it, which was indeed a mere Iealousy,
least this doctrine so delivered should prejudice the Authority of Superiors.
The which Objection He ansvvered to the full satisfaction of all that were
interessed in the matter. The Sum of which Answer follows in the Ninth
Chapter of the second Section of the first Treatise, and needs not be here
repeated.

7. But since his Death, and especially after that by a general unanimous
agreement of all Superiors among us it had been ordained, that the sum of
the Authors spiritual Doctrine should for the good of Souls aspiring to
Contemplation, be published: both the same Objection has been renewed, and
others moreover added thereto: and all of them have risen from the like ground
of Iealousy, not so much acknowledged to be rational by the Obiectours
themselves (who readily subscribe to the Doctrine as Catholickly true and
Holy:) as feared from others: to wit, partly from ordinary not learned
Catholics, who, it is suspected, will be suspicious of a Doctrine that will
seem new, and hovveuer improper to them: but principally from strangers and
Enemies to the Church, especially the frantic Enthusiasts of this age who, as
is feared, will conceive their frenzies and disorders justified here.

8. These things considered, both zeal to Truth, Duty to Superiors, and
Charity to thee (beloved Reader) obliged me before all other things to beseech
thee to abstain from reading the Book, unless it can be demonstrated
beforehand, that it was fit to come into thy hands; that the suspected
inconveniences and suspicions are evidently groundless: that it would be a
greater frenzy in the Enthusiasts of these day, or in any seduced or seducing
Spirits to claim any right in this Doctrine, then that which all ready
possesses them: and in a word, that no objections either against the Doctrine
or publishing of it, either have or, as we suppose, can rationally be devised
to make us repent the Printing, or thee the reading of the follovving Book.

9. Among the said Objections this one is scarce worthy to find place, which
yet by some has been urged in general against the publishing to all
Christians view Instructions about Prayer and Mystical Practices proper to a
few Contemplative Persons (for whom alone the Author intended them, without
the least thought of having them communicated and exposed so generally:)
Especially considering that this Treatise discourses of Sublime Mystic Matters
above the reach of vulgar capacities; and also, that vvheras to such tender
vvell-minded Souls (as those were for whom the said Treatises were meant)
just liberty and condescendence was allowed in many cases, not to be
permitted to others that either in the world, or else in a Religious life do
walk in other ways; these notvvithstanding will be apt to their own
prejudice to make use of such liberty.

10. But surely as it would be most unreasonable to forbid a Physician to
publish a Book of Remedies against some special Diseases, for fear that some
that are untouched of those Diseases, or perhaps sick of the Contrary, should
hurt themselves with making use of Medecines improper for them: Or Molina the
Carthusian to publish his Excellent Instructions for Priests, least Lay-persons
should assume the Privileges belonging to that Sublime Calling: Or Aluarez de
Paz to print his Volumes about the Duties and Exercises of Religious persons,
because they are improper for Seculars: So neither upon such grounds ought
these Instructions be hindered from being public: Neither ought any to fear
least Ordinary Christians will foolishly apply to themselves the Relaxations
about Confessions etc. necessarily allowed to vvell-minded Scrupulous Souls
that pursue Contemplations ways in an Abstracted life and solitude: Or that
Souls that live distracted, sollicitous active lives, as long as they live so,
will judge themselves interessed in the ways and exercises of internal,
Conte^platiue Livers: Or in a word, that those who are yet but Beginners, or
have made but small proficiency in internal ways of the Spirit, will be so
foolishly presumptuous as to aspire to Exercises more sublime then belong to
them, the which they cannot do without receiving infinite prejudice by their
indiscreete Ambition. Add hereto, that in several occasions there have been
used and inculcated in this Book the best preuentions, Cautions and provisions
that possibly could be devised, against all misunderstanding and misapplication
of any doctrines contained in it. To conclude it may seem a sufficient
Safeguard for me to have herein, the example of the V. R. F. A. Cr. a person
much esteemed for learning and Piety, who has not only published (in an
Additionall Treatise to the Conflict of the Soul) Instructions for
Contemplation, but a great part of his maxims (though brief) are very
conformable to what is here expressed more largely.

11. The special feared inconveniences that may arise from the publishing of
this Doctrine touching Divine Inspirations, do regard partly some that live in
the Communion of the Church: But principally such as are strangers and Enemies
thereto. As for the former; it is suspected, That by urging so seriously the
Duty of attending to and follovving Divine Inspirations, some even of the more
sober Catholics will be apt to be Jealous, that the Teachers and Practisers
of such a Doctrine will seem thereby to exempt themselves in many things from
the ordinary jurisdiction of Prelates and Magistrates: pretending to
Extraordinary illuminations and Commissions, and to walking in mirabilibus
super se^ etc. by which a Prejudice, and contempt also may be cast upon the
Common Orders and Rules concerning Faith and good manner, established in the
Church.

12. Now not to forestall what is copiously delivered in the Second Treatise
(to wit, that due Obedience to all kind of Superiors is so far from being
prejudiced by this Doctrine, that it is only by this Doctrine that it is
perfectly established, and all possible suspicions, all imaginable cases to the
contrary solued:) Hereto it is ansvvered that, Whereas it is said that by a
pretending to Divine Illuminations etc. a contempt may be cast upon the common
Doctrines and Rules of Faith and a good life: There is not the least ground for
such an apprehension. For never did any spiritual M^stick Writer pretend to
receive any New, or formerly vnknovvn Lights or Revelations in matters of Faith
beyond what have been known and universally received in the Church. The
Lights that such persons by Gods gracious visits receive, being only a Clearer
sight of Ordinary Mysteries: the which produces in them a firmer assent unto
them, a greater love to them, an abhorring of all Novelties of Doctrines, and a
most fervent zeal to the Unity and peace of the Church, and to the reducing of
all Vnbeleiuers Misbeleiuers and Schismatics into its bosom and Communion.

13. The like is to be said for the Rules of Practice, and a Holy, Christian
conversation. They know no other but such as are common to all other
Christians, which are revealed in the Glospell, and proposed by the Pastors
of Gods Church in Counsels and in the vvritings of the Holy Fathers. The only
advantage that in this regard is pretended to, and acquired by attending to
Divine Inspirations, is a more perfect use and a more faithful application of
the Ordinary Precepts of Holiness, or of Counsels of Perfection, to those who
profess the embracing of such Counsels: an Extending of them further and to
more particulars, then it is possible to be taught by Books, or attained by
Study.

14. All Christians know that to Blaspheme, to lie, to defraude, to be
rebellious, unchaste, reuengefull etc. are sins Odious to God; and that the
contrary virtues are to be practiced: Yea moreover they know that we are
obliged to Love God with all our Heart, with all our Soul, and with all our
strength: That we ought in all things to intend his love and Honor etc.
Moreover all know that besides the essentially necessary Christian Duties
there are other Counsels of Perfection, which belong to those upon whom God
has bestovved an Extraordinary Vocation and Grace, enabling them to cast from
them all Secular anxieties and other Impediments to Perfect Charity, and to put
themselves in a Condition of Solitude, Obedience etc. the which affords the^
the best Expedients and helps for the increasing of Divine Love, and conformity
to his Will, even in the smallest matters. All this in gross is known to all
Christians of any reasonable capacity and good Educatio^.

15. But yet the wisest; the most Subtle and learned Christians will never be
able by any humane Endeauours of Study or Meditation to put in practice even
those Essential Precepts after a Perfect manner, that is, with an Intention
not only Right, but also Pure and Deiforme. And much less will they by such
vveake helps be enabled to discern in a thousand particular Cases and
circumstances what is most Perfect, most acceptable to God and conformable to
his Divine will. As for example, 1. How when two good; or indifferent things
are proposed, to make choice and preference of that which in the present
disposition of the soul will prove most aduantageous to Perfection. 2. How to
Spiritualize even the Ordinary indifferent occurrences of our life daily and
hourly. 3. How to perceive what manner and Degree of Prayer is most proper
and proffitable to the soul in her present State. 4. Or what Mortifications
are in the present Circumstances most aduantageous. 5. Or how to discern the
State, Inclinations and Spiritual Necessities of other Souls committed to our
Charge. 6. Or lastly to discover a thousand Secret Subtilties, close interests
and Reseruations of our Corrupt Nature, which mingle themselves, more or
less, almost in all our best Actions etc. In these and a thousand like cases
not all the Reading or Study in the world will enable Souls to carry
themselves perfectly in the Execution of those Precepts or Counsels, which in
gross all know to be necessary, at least to the attaining to Perfection. But
a distinct Actual Supernatural Light and Grace is necessary: and this not to
teach us New Precepts, or furnish us with New Counsels, but Circumstantially
to apply those which are Common and universally known. For want of which
Light it is, that the true way to Perfection is almost vnknovvn, even to those
who profess the seeking of Perfection, and fill the world with Books and
Instructions about it.

16. By what other means then is such Light to be had? Surely by no other but
by the Exercise of Divine Love: which is most perfectly performed in Internal
Prayer, in Attention to, and Union with God in Spirit. What an Expert,
persuading and Subtle Master Love is, beyond Study or Consideration, we
see even in Natural and Secular businesses. One that is immersed in Sensual
Love to any person, has no need of Instructions or Books to teach him the Art
of Loving: we see how skillfull on the sudden such an one becomes in the
vvayes how to please the person beloved: He looses not, neither out of
ignorance nor negligence, the least opportunity to ingratiate himself: He
understands the mind and intention of the other by the least signs: The Motion
of a hand, the cast of an eye is sufficient to inform him, and set him on
work to attempt any thing, or procure any thing that may content the party.
The like subtilty and perspicacy we may see in those Earthy souls which
cleave with an earnest affection unto Riches. What subtle ways do they
find out to increase their wealth? Such trifling inconsiderable things they
make use of for that purpose, as another would not take notice of, or could
not see how to make proffit by them. They have almost a Prophetical Spirit to
foresee dangers where none are, and advantages probable or possible to happen
many years after.

17. Now how comes it to pass that the Eyes of Love are so quicke-sighted?
Surely by this: That where Love to any particular Object is predominant, it
subdues all other Affections to all other Objects, which would distract the
thoughts, and seduce the will, from contemplating and adhering to the thing so
beloved.

18. Upon such grounds therefore as these it is, that S. Augustine calls Divine
Love, (Luminosissimam Charitatem) most full of Light, and most enlightening. For
a soul that truly loves God with a Love worthy of him, having the Mind
cleared from all strange Images, and the Will purified from all strange
Affections, is thereby enabled purely to Contemplate God without any
distraction at all. And being desirous in all things to please him, knovves
how to make advantage of all occurrences. Light and Darkness, Consolations, and
Desolations, Pains and Pleasures, all these contribute to the advancing of
this Love. Yea there is nothing so indifferent, or in its own nature so
inconsiderable, but that such a soul can perceive how use may be made of it
to please God thereby.

19. Now since Pure Love is exercised immediately to God only in Pure Prayer,
by which alone the Spirit is united to him; Hence it is that Prayer is the
only efficacious Instrument to obtain Supernatural Light, according the
saying of David (Accedite ad Deum and illuminamini:) Approach unto God (by
Prayer) and (ye shall) be enlightened. And hence also it is that the same Holy
Prophet so earnestly and frequently (above twenty times in one Psalm 118.)
prays for such light to understand and discover the vvonderfull things of Gods
Law. And what were those wonderful things? Surely not to be informed that
Murder or Adultery were Sins: or generally that God was to be loved with the
whole soul: For much more knowledge he had then this, before he prayed. But
being desirous to give himself wholy to God, and to perform his will alone
in all things, he so often makes use of Prayer for the obtaining an extraordinary
Light (to be had no other ways but by Prayer) that he might thereby be
enabled to discover and find out the Divine Will in all manner of cases and
doubtful circumstances.

20. Now only such Inspirations and such Illuminations as these do Spiritual
Persons pretend to by the mean of Prayer and attending to God. And if they do
exercise Prayer with a due fervor and constancy, these they shall most
certainly enjoy, and that in such a measure, that vvheras the greatest part of
ordinary good Christians are so dimme-sighted as to see the Divine Will only in
circumstances where there is a necessary obligation (so that they spend the
far greatest part of their lives in Actions that do no way advance them in
Divine Love, being wrought chiefly in Virtue of the Principle of Self-love
and interests of nature:) Those that are perfectly internal livers, being
clovvded by no vain Images, and distracted by no inferior Affections, do see
the Divine Will clearly in the minutest affairs, which they accordingly make
advantage by to improve themselves in the Love of God. And according to the
degrees of Love, so proportionably are the degrees of Light. And thus I suppose
the pretended Inconveniences suspected to flow from the publishing of this
doctrine, will appear to be only pretended, and causelessly feared.

21. But the other Objection at the first sight seems more considerable, as
implying a far greater and more certain Inconvenience and danger that may
ensue upon the publishing of this Doctrine concerning Divine Inspirations,
Illuminations and Calls. For thus they argue: It is to be feared that the
fanatic Sectaries which now swarm in England more then ever, will be ready to
take advantage from hence to justify all their frenzies and disorders: all
which they impute with all confidence to Divine Inspirations, Illuminations and
Impulses. For can we forbid them to practice what we our selves teach to be a
Christian Duty? And yet it is apparent what fearful and execrable effects the
practice of this pretended Duty does produce among them. It was by Inspiration,
say they, that their Progenitors did break out of the Church: and by
Inspiration they do still introduce endlessely new Fancies and practices. It
is by Inspiration that they endanger the ruin of Christianity it self by
infinite Schisms and pestilent Reformations. It is by Inspiration that they
employ the Gospel to destroy the Gospel: from thence preaching Heresies in
Churches and Chambers; Sedition in States; Rebellion against Princes and
Prelates: So destroying all Order, Unity and Peace every where. These things
considered, what can be more reasonable then that we should take heed how we
furnish them thus with arms to maintain themselves, and to fight against God
and his Church?

22. This is the Objection. Which though it have a fearful show, yet being
well examined it will prove no less vveakely grounded then the former. For
the demonstrating therefore of the inconsequence of it, I will by way of
Preparation lay down these follovving undeniable Principles, briefly
mentioned before, viz.

23. First: That Divine Inspirations are so absolutely necessary in Precepts,
for the avoiding of sin; and in Counsels, for the gaining of Perfection, that
without them no Action of ours can be good or meritorious: Yea the Duties of
Obligation which we perform, or Counsels of Perfection freely obeyed by
us, are only so far acceptable to God as they proceed from his Inspirations
and motions of his Holy Spirit. This is not only an undoubted verity, but one
of the most fundamental Verities of Christian Religion, which attributes all
good in us to the Divine Grace: And what is Grace, but the Divine inspiration
of Love speread abroad in our hearts, by the Holy Ghost, as S. Augustine says?
To this Verity give evident witness those Expressions of the Church in her
Public Devotions: Da, Domine, famulis tuis, vt quae a te iussa agnonimus,
implere Caelesti Inspiratione valeamus, that is, Grant, O Lord, unto thy
Servants, that those things which we acknowledge to have been commanded by
thee, we may by thy heavenly Inspiration accomplish. And again, Auge populi
tui vota placatus: quia in nullo fidelium nisi ex tua inspiratione proueniunt
quarumlibet incrementa virtutum. That is, Increase in mercy, O Lord, the
Desires of thy Servants: For not the least progress in any Virtues can be made
by any of thy Faithful servants by any other means, but only by thy (Divine)
Inspiration.

24. The Second Ground is consequent on the former, viz. That since such
absolute Necessity there is of Divine Inspirations, the Necessity obliging us
to correspond unto them is, and must needs be equal: For from no other Root,
but the neglect of this obligation, does or can proceed all our mischeife. The
guilt of such neglect is so much the greater inasmuch as the Gift of Gods Holy
Spirit imprinted in the Hearts of his servants is of such an active nature,
that were it not that the Spirit of corrupt nature, cherished by us, does
deafen its Call, and weaken its Efficacy, it would continually, being vvakned
by every occasion, incite us to Love God only, and to raise up our Souls to
him. Now by such neglect we are said in Holy Scriptures to Contristate the
Holy Ghost: and by often contristating him, we shall in the end come to quench
him. And the just indignation of God against such negligent Despisers of his
holy Inspirations and Calls, is povverfully expressed in those words of his
(Proverb. 1.24.) Quia vocaui^, and renuistis etc. Because I have called, and
ye refused: I stretched forth my hand and there was none that regarded: I also
will laugh at your destruction; And I will mock when that which ye did fear
shall happen unto you etc. Then shall they call on me, and I will not hear:
they shall rise early, and they shall not find^ me. Now though it be not
indeed a mortal sin to resist the Motions of the Divine Spirit inciting us to
Actions which are not of essential obligation: Yet so doing, we do
contristate Gods Spirit, and more indispose our selves afterward to observe
and follovv its Directions. And Mortal sins are seldom rushed into upon the
sudden: they begin with lesser resistances, by which the mind is more
obscured and less capable to obey it in greater matters. But as for Perfect
souls they are in continual attendance and obedience thereto, being in
continual Prayer, or in good Works and Exercises begun and performed in
Virtue of Prayer, and also accompanied by Prayer.

25. The third Preparatory Ground follows, which is this, That since these
so necessary Internal Inspirations must necessarily be hearkened to and
corresponded with: And since there may be false Suggestions either of the
Devil, or our corrupt Nature, which may counterfeit and subtly pretend to a
Divine Original: Therefore it is necessary that some possible, yea satisfactory
Means should be afforded how to distinguish betvveene true and false
Inspirations. For otherwise we shall have an impossible obligation to obey
we know not whom, nor what: we shall be in as much danger to be actuated
by the Devil, and used as Instruments of his Illusions, as of the saving
Influxes of Gods Holy Spirit: and consequently shall not be able to distinguish
the way betvveene Heaven and Hell.

26. Neither will it suffice to say, That we do sufficiently perform Gods
will when we perform the Commands of God expressed clearly in Scriptures,
likewise the Precepts of the Church, and of all our lavvfull Superiors. For
neither will the doing of these things without an interior insluxe of Grace
avail us, since the Devil can be content, yea will suggest the Exercise of
the greatest Virtues to Hearts that he knovvs will intend only the
satisfaction of natural Pride, or the interests of self-love in them. And
besides, neither can any of these external Rules extend to all our Actions, so
as to regulate them in order to Contemplation and Perfection.

27. The fourth and last Ground to be premised is this, That since it is
necessary to be enabled to distinguish the true Inspirations of God from the
false suggestions of our Enemy: The only means imaginable that can be proper,
natural and efficacious to obtain such a supernatural Light to discern Gods
will in all things, is Pure spiritual Prayer exercised by a soul living an
Abstracted, internal, Recollected Life, spent in a continual attendance on
God etc.

28. This is a Way suitable to Reason, conformable to Scriptures and the
Doctrine of the Holy Fathers, and delivered both by Ancient and Modern
Mysticke Authors, as might copiously be demonstrrted, if there were any cause
to think that to Pray perfectly, and by Prayer to obtain Divine Grace were
suspicious Exercises to any. In a word, this is a way, the which practiced
according to the Instructions here delivered, all manner of good, and no
possible inconvenience can flow from it.

29. Here is no pretending to now or strange Revelations; no walking in
Mirabilibus super se; no zealous seditious Reformations, nor the least
prejudice done or intended to Peace, Unity, Humility, Obedience or any other
Divine Virtue: yea on the contrary, all these Heavenly Graces are hereby not
only fortified and increased, but by no other means can be perfectly obtained.

30. And indeed since in a world of passages in Holy Scriptures we find our
selves obliged to a double Duty, the one whereof perhaps in popular judgments
seems to entrench upon the other; and yet neither of them are in due place and
circumstances to be omitted, namely, Obedience both to Gods Holy Spirit
inwardly directing, and also to Superiors outwardly commanding: By what
other way can we reconcile such seemingly different, and, as it may fall
out, contrary Precepts, but by joining this Doctrine to that concerning
outvvard Obedience? Which is here done, and done without the least prejudice
to either: yea manifestly to the advantage of both in their due circumstances.
If then for any outvvard, carnal Respects we shall conceal or
discountenance this most necessary Duty of follovving the Inspirations of God,
we shall efface the proper Character of God servants, who are said to be
such as are lead by the Spirit of God, and that by the Unction are taught in
all things. Again if on pretense of following Inspirations and internal
Lights which cannot be so absolutely certain, we shall transgress the most
evident cercaine Commands of lavvfull Superiors, which are therefore Gods
also, there would quickly follovv an end of all Order, Peace and Government.
What other mean therefore is left to comply with both these, but to obey God
both ways, that is, commanding most certainly when his will is revealed by
Superiors and also very securely when in other internal things, or which
tend to Perfection, without the least vvrong yea to the great advantage of
Superiors, he does communicate his Light and Directions to us? So as that
saying of the Apostles with which they silenced the whole Jewish Sanedrim,
namely, That God is rather to be obeyed then man commanding contrary to God,
holds only when it can evidently be demostrated (as the Apostles then did by
Miracles) that such a Command did indeed come from God, or that the thing
commanded by man is certainly unlawful.

31. These things considered, in all reason we ought to be so far from being
deterred from publishing such Instructions as these, because (forsooth) the
frantic Spirits of this Age do falsely make pretended Inspirations the cause
and ground of all the miseries and mischeifes of late happening in our Nation
etc. That for this very reason and motive every one ought to publish such
wholesome Doctrines, the which are the only possible means to vndeceiue
them. For what other ways does there remain to convince them of their
errors and Seductions, dangerous to all mankind, but most certainly pernicious
to their own souls? Shall we tell them, that there are no Inspirations at
all? we shall in so doing betray Christian Religion. Shall we say, Though
there be Inspirations, yet they are never to be marked, never obeyed nor
complied vvithall? Besides the ridiculous falsenes of the assertion, which
will expose us to their most just contempt and hatred, they will ouervvhelme
us with vnansvverable Texts of Scriptures, and passages of holy Fathers. What
other thing then can be done, but that (acknovvledging both there are
Inspirations, and that we are obliged to correspond unto them) we should
inform those unhappy souls how to dispose themselves so as to be out of
danger of Diabolical illusions, and to be in a capacity of receiving
Inspirations truly Divine: As likewise with what caution and Prudence, but
vvithall what fidelity they ought to comply with them? But especially we
ought to demonstrate and inculcate this fundamental Verity, That the general
and most certain Precepts of Humility, Obedience, Unity and Peace must never
receive any prejudice by any pretended Inspirations or Illuminations: since
those which are truly from God do establish and increase all these virtues:
Yea that the External Order, Authority and Subordination established by God in
his Church (by which alone it becomes one body and not a monstrous heap of
unlike, unproportionable members fighting and devouring one another) must be
the Rule by which to examine, and Judge to pronounce sentence for or against
all manner of Inspirations.

32. Therefore instead of an humane, fruitless Policy of hiding such Divine,
fundament^ll, practical Truths as these: let us sincerely, faithfully and
plentifully teach them. And though it can never be prevented but that the
Devil will suggest to proud, ambitious, covetous or sensual Spirits to dravv
poison from the most Perfect Doctrines of Catholic Religion: yet then at least
he and they will be the less able to seduce vvell-meaning Souls to join
with them: yea by Gods Grace and Benediction upon his Truth faithfully taught,
they will loose many such already seduced, when all their pretended Lights
being confronted before the Sun of Divine Verity and Holiness, will either
vanish quite away, or manifestly discover themselves to be the Sulphurous,
gloomy lights of such wandering (falling) Stars, as are mentioned by S. Jude,
to whom the tempest of darkness is reserved for ever.

33. O therefore that it were Gods blessed will that they would be
persuaded to examine themselves and their Instincts by such Characters, such
Signs so manifestly Christian, Ho^y, Perfect and secure as are here contained
in this Treatise: and accordingly judge of their and our Inspirations. In the
first place here the only proper Disposition toward the receiving of
Supernatural Irradiations from Gods holy Spirit is an Abstraction of life, a
sequestration from all businesses that concern others; and an attendance to
God alone in the depth of the Spirit: Whereas their Lights come never more
frequently then when either being alone they yield to discontented unquiet
Passions and murmurings about the behavior and Actions of others: Or when in
close meetings and Conspiracies they vent such Passions by Inuectiues against
the Governors of the Church or State. 2. The Lights here desired and prayed
for are such as do expel all Images of Creatures, and do calm all manner of
Passions, to the end that the Soul being in a vacuity, may be more capable of
receiving and entertaining God in the pure fund of the Spirit. Whereas their
Lights fill them with all tumultuous, disquieting Images and Phantasmes
concerning the supposed miscariages of all others but themselves: and not only
heighten their Passions, but urge them to most terrible, desolating Effects. 3.
The Prayer here acknowledged to be the most effectual Instrument to procure
Divine Light is a Pure, Recollected; intime Prayer of the Spirit. Whereas the
Prayer that they glory in, is only an acquired ability and slight to talk
earnestly to God before others, and often thereby to communicate their Passions
and discontents to their Brethren. 4. Here are no new speculatiue Verities or
Revelations of Mysteries pretended; no private nevv-found-out Interpretations
of Scriptures braggd of. Whereas amongst them every day produces a new fancy,
which must gather New Company. 5. Here the established Order of Gods Church,
and the Unity essential thereto is not prejudiced. Yea the Inspirations
expected and obtained by Pure internal Prayer do more firmly and vnalterably
fix souls under this Obedience, and to this Order and Unity: Insomuch as
whatsoever pretended Lights do endanger the dissoluing of Unity, or do
cross lavvfull Authority, or shall be rejected by it, they are presently
suspected and extinguished. Whereas those men's Lights teach them nothing so much
as to contemn and oppose all external Authority, and to dissipate Unity,
dispersing the Body of Christianity into innumerable Sects and Conuenticles. 6.
Our Lights teach us to attend only to God and our own souls, and never to
interesse our selves in any care or employment about others, till evidently
Gods Inspirations force us, and external Authority obliges us thereto. Whereas
their Lights render them incapable of Solitude, and thrust them abroad to be
Reformers of others, being themselves impatient of all Reformation and
Contradiction. 7. Our Lights make us to fear and avoid all Supereminence and
Judicature, all sensual pleasures, desires of Wealth, Honor etc. Whereas their
Lights engage them violently and deeply in all these carnal and secular
ways, and (for the attaining to these) in Tumults, Sedition, Bloushed and
War: In a word, in all manner of actions and designs most contrary to the
Spirit of Christianity. 8. And lastly, Our Lights, if they should chance
sometimes to be mistaken by us, no harm at all would accrevv to others, and
not any eonsiderable prejudice to our selves: because, as has been said, the
matters in which they direct us are in their Nature indifferent, and are
ordered only toward a more perfect loving of God, and vvithdravving us from
Creatures. Whereas all the miseries and almost all the disorders and enormous
vices of the Nation are the effects of their misleading Lights.

34. Thus stands the case betvveene Catholic Inspirations and the pretended
Inspirations of Sectaries. Such is that Spirit of Charity and Peace, and so
divine are the effects of it directing the minds of good, humble, Obedient and
devout Catholics: And such is the Spirit of Disorder, Revenge, Wrath,
Rebellion etc. and so dismal are the effects of that Spirit vvherevvith
selfe-opinionated, presumptuous, frantic Sectaries are agitated. What
resemblance, what agreement can there be betvveene these two? This evil Spirit
though it sacrilegiously usurps the name, yet it does not so much as
counterfeit the opera^ions of the good one: Or if with the Name it do
sometimes seem to counterfeit some outvvard resemblances, and to some persons
show demure Looks etc, yet the Aequiuocation and Hypocrisy is so gross and
palpable, that they must put out their eyes that perceive it not.

35. Shall we then extinguish, and in a sort Exorcise the Good Divine Spirit,
for fear it should raise up the Evil one with it? Or rather shall we not
confidently assure our selves that upon the appearing of the Good one, the
Evil one will either vanish, or the hideousnes of it will affright all from
harkening to it? Shall we forbid the Sun to rise, because in some unclean,
rotten Ma^ishes some foggs will arise with it? We may as well annull the
Sacraments, forbid Prayer, extinguish the Scriptures etc: for from all these
the Devil has maliciously taken advantage to pervert and damn thousands of
Souls.

36. No doubt it is, but that among those Seduced and seducing People great
numbers there are, that if they were charitably instructed in such vvayes of
Discerning Spirits, they would be susprised and start to see to what kind of
Directours and Guides they have vnvvarily committed their Souls. If such as
these could persuaded (and I beseech God they may) even whilst they are yet
out of the Church, for a while to suspend the pursuance of their busy Designs
and Reforming of others, and retiring themselves into Solitude, allow
themselves the leisure to turn their eyes inward into their own Spirits, and
as well as they can to practice the humble, selfe-renouncing, resigned way of
Spiritual Prayer taught in this Book, thereby to procure from God such Lights
as then may be trusted to: Nor they; nor we should ever repent that the
publishing of such Doctrines as these, gave them an happy occasion to do so.

37. And what greater satisfaction can Catholics have in their ways? And
what greater advantage can they have over all those that are out of the
Church, then this Proof made good by universal Experience, viz. That
whosoever sincerely and constantly gives himself to the practice of such
Perfect Prayer, as is here taught; if he be already a Catholic, he will most
certainly ever remain so; and if he be not yet in the Church, he will become
afraid of remaining his ow^e Pastor and Guide. For never any Catholic that
exercised Spiritual Prayer ceased to be a Catholic, till he first ceased so
to pray. And the Spirit of such Prayer, in any Perfection never rested upon any
soul that was out of the Catholic Church.

38. And this I suppose may suffice not only to justify the Truth and Innocence
of this our Doctrine concerning Divine Inspirations etc; but also the
lawfullnes, yea conueniency, yea even the necessity of publishing it to the
world; and this for those very Reasons, vvherevvith others would deter us.
For the Obiectours are afraid of the Publication of it, least franctick
Sectaries should think themselves justified in their pretenses: And on the
Contrary I conceive the Publication necessary, least they should think
themselves justified in their pretenses: which, till they see how unlike to
true Divine Lights and Inspirations theirs are, they may have some show for. I
do not intend when I call it our Doctrine to appropriate it to any Person or
Community for it is the very same that has in all Ages been taught by all
Saints experienced in Internal ways, as will be demonstrated by infinite
Testimonies Ancient and Modern, if God shall engage us to such a labor by the
opposition of any one. True it is that the Pious and sublime Author of the
Treatises here abridged, has (doubtless by the Guidance and assistance of a
Supernatural Light) spent more thoughts about this subject, and taken more
pains in encouragng vvell-minded souls to fit themselves for the receiving
of such Light; in distinguishing it from false Lights, and in shevving the
blessed Effects of it etc. then perhaps any other Author formerly did. And
that is all. For the Doctrine in substance is all old as Christianity it self:
And cannot show strange or new, but only to such to whom in these days
Antiquity does seem the greatest Nouelty.

39. Having thus by declaring the insufficiency of these Objections against the
publishing of the follovving Instructions, opened the Barriers to give this
Book a free escape to range abroad at liberty: And my only intention being (for
Gods Glory) to benefit thy soul, dear Reader: (For as for the mean or
sinister ends of gaining credit or esteem with others thereby, the ambition is
so unworthy my Profession, and vvithall so poor and unreasonable (considering
that I can appropriate nothing to my self but a little pains in transcribing
and digesting another man's Labors) that I cannot think my self liable to any
suspicion with thee in that regard: Therefore to the end I may according to my
utmost ability facilitate thy receiving good to thy Spirit hereby: though I
have no more Objections to answer, yet by conuersing vith certain pious and
learned Persons to whose perusal and Judgment this Book was presented,
having found that some fevv passages in it were not so very clearly expressed,
but that even an vninteressed and unpassionate Reader might perhaps stop a
little at them: I thought expedient to let thee (Good Reader) be acquainted
what Satisfaction I gave to them.

40. One Point that seemed to require an explication is that (in the 1. Treat.
2. Section. 2. Chap.) where is treated of what care a spiritual Disciple ought
to take in the choice of a sit Directour: For to leave a matter of such
importance to the Election of an unexperienced, and perhaps young and ignorant
soul, seemed to them neither convenient nor prudent: Besides that in Religious
Communities such a permission would be an infringing of all due Order and
Submission to Superiors. But hereto was replied. 1. That Religious Persons
were expressly excepted in the Book. 2. And as for others, this very same
Advice was long since given by the Bishop of Geneua, Auila etc. True it is
notvvithstanding, that there may often be found in the world many good devout
souls that yet are not very capable of making a good choice: Hovveuer even
such, as far as is allowed, ought to use their best endeauours, hoping that
God will bless such their care for the advancement of their Spirits.
Notvvithstanding such ought vvithall to take heed that from too nice a
curiosity in choosing, there do not follovv any disquiet in the families where
they live, if several Persons should be zealous each for a particular
Directour: as S. Hierome chides a Mother and a Daughter that upon such an
occasion separated from one another. Therefore in such a case a good soul that
will prefer peace before the contenting her mind, may of all others rely
upon God, assuring her self that He will in a special manner assist and
conduct her, supplying all other wants. And particularly such an extraordinary
Divine assistance may be most confidently expected by vvell-disposed souls in
Religious Communities, where such freedom of choosing is not permitted. For as
Rusbrochius says, God will rather send an Angel from heaven, then that such
humble, obedient and sincere souls relying upon him, shall want due helps.
Therefore such as forbear a sollicitous searching after a Directour, either for
the preventing inconveniences, or out of an humble sincere apprehension of the
danger of erring in the Choice, or a Religious regard to the prejudice it might
cause in a Community to peace and good order etc, such may well hope that God
will not permit them to be loosers thereby. Yea moreover such as in the
forenamed Cases think they have a true occasion, and that they may justly do
it for the quietting of their Consciences, resolving of their doubts etc, had
need be very wary that they proceed sincerely, and that they really seek
their spiritual proffit, and not natural contentment. For as our Venerable F.
Baker in a certain place advises, It is not sufficient to any Souls, that it
is permitted by the Laws of the Church at certain times to require a
Special Directour, (upon a consideration of the expedience and necessity that
some souls in some circumstances may have:): But they are to consider whether
their case have these circumstances, and whether they do truly make use of
the said Permission for the right end.

41. A second Point in the same chapter supposed to deserve explication was
that Assertion, That a Devout Soul once set in a good and proper way of
Prayer, after she has made some progress in it, ought not to have recourse
ordinarily to a Directour, but that she should practice the following of Gods
Directions etc. On the Contrary it was supposed that till a soul have made
some considerable progress in the Prayer of the Will, she would not be
subject to Illusions: and therefore had thence forvvard most need of Advice
from a prudent Guide. But this difficulty is cleared tovvard the latter end of
the third Treatise, where is taught, That in the case and peril of Illusion
upon an opinion of some extraordinary Illuminations etc, it is necessary that
Souls though never so much advanced, should distrust their own judgment, and
never presume to add belief unto, and must less put in execution any thing
suggested by any Illuminations (true or pretended) without the advice and
consent of Superiors and Directours. But as for the ordinary practices of an
Internal Life, as Prayer and Mortification etc, is is very requisite that
souls should be taught, as soon as may be to quit an assiduous dependa^ce on
External Guides, from whence would follovv nothing but sollicitudes,
distractions etc. There is a parallel Advice though in somevvhat a different
Case (in 3. Treat. 4. Sect. 3. Chap.. 36. 37.) where in a Discourse concerning
Rapts and the like extraordinary Favors, it is said of Perfect Souls, that
they may judge of those matters by their own supernatural Light etc. and that
they are not so absolutely obliged to resign their judgments and Wills to
others, as utterly to neglect their own proper Call received from God etc. By
which words is not meant that any Souls, though never so Perfect should be
exempted from the obligation of submission to Superiors, judging or ordaining
concerning any such Divine Favors: But only, that such Perfect, Souls need
not so often to have recourse for Advice about such matters, but may proceed by
that Divine Light communicated to them: Whereas the imperfect ought neither to
yield belief nor execution further then they have Advice and Order for. Now
who would find fault with S. Teresa, S. Catherine of Sienna etc, if they
should forbear consultations after every Rapt, or Revelation, having formerly
been sufficiently warranted by Superiors etc?

42. In consequence to the story of V. R. F. Balthazar Aluarez his Account
given of his Prayer to his General (mentioned in the 3. Treat. 1. Sect. 7.
Chap. at the latter End) where a relation is made of the Generals Orders,
requiring all Superiors to direct and assist the younger Religious among them
so as that they might high y esteem, and in their practice follow the manner
of Prayer most suitable to their Institute and prescribed in their Exercises: I
think my self obliged to acquaint thee (dear Reader) that by two Books
published of late by two RR. FF. of the Society, and perused by me since the
vvriting and printing of that passage, I do find that the said Orders of the
General are not, at least of late, so rigidely interpreted, as formerly they
were.

43. The Authors of said Books written in French are R. F. Ant. Ciuore, and
R. F. Andr. Baiole. In which the whole Doctrine of this Book, especially
concerning the Excellency of Affectiue Prayer beyond Discoursiue, is most
copiously and strongly asserted: yea and moreover the Instructions concerning
the necessity of attending to, and following Divine Inspirations; as likewise
ways prescribed to distinguish them from false suggestions of the Devil or
corrupt Nature, are so largely, clearly and even in the very Phrases of this
Book delivered by the former of the two, in his Book called, Les Secrets de
la Science des Saints (Tr. III. cap. IX. from p. 402. to p. 486.) that it not
being credible that he had seen our V. F. A. Bakers Writings, we may
rationally in far that what he writes with such extraordinary exactnes
proceeded from a deep and experimental knowledge of these Internal and
secret paths of Contemplation.

44. So that, no doubt, there are many Devout Persons in the Society which not
being engaged in many external Employments, and enjoying consequently both a
Solitude and Liberty of Spirit greater perhaps then will be afforded in many
Communities by Profession purely Contemplative, do permit themselves to the
Divine Conduct, and make vvonderfull progress in these Divine Ways.

45. True indeed it is, that the other Author (F. Ant. Baiole) seems to
maintain that the Spiritual Exercises according to the intention of S.
Ignatius, will by practice become a Prayer of Contemplation and Mystic Union:
An Assertion in which I have not found any yet to join with him. But
hovveuer, he shows in his Book^ (styled, La Vie interieure) that he had a
true Notion of the Prayer of Mystic Union: And that being so, he may freely
enjoy the contentment of the former supposition.

46. Besides these there may possibly be other passages that thou also (Devout
Reader) if thou had had the perusal before the Impression, would perhaps
have given us occasion to explain or interpret more at large. If it prove so,
all we can do is to refer them to thine own candor and Charity,
promising upon a re-impression all satisfaction possible: and in the mean time
requesting that our own good meaning and the judgment of our Superiors and
Approuers may be our Safeguard. Only one Suite we make unto thee (most
reasonable and just) which is, That thou would not proceed to the censure
of any passage, till thou have read the whole Book. The same Points and
matters do occasionally come in in several places, and it would have been
too great a tiring of thee to repeat in every place all the circumstances and
phrases necessary for explanation or prevention of suspicions and Objections.
If it be for thine own good principally that thou art a Reader, we shall
stand in little need of preparing thee with Apologies. And if it be for our
hurt that thou art a Reader, we thank God we are not guilty of the least
ill design to make us fear, except only in thy behalf. All that we have to
say is, God almighty make thee (vvhoseuer thou art) a practiser of the good
that thou vvilt certainly find in the follovving Treatises; and then we shall
have no cause to apprehend either for thee or our selves.

47. Thus, truly for ought appears to me, (Devout Reader) thou may freely,
and without the least apprehension of any danger peruse and make thy best
benefit of these follovving Instructions: The which moreover, as thou see,
have passed the Censure, and deserved the Approbations of several pious and
learned Persons. What ever opinion thou shall, after reading, have of them: at
least I will oblige thee to acknovledge that here (in the Treatises that
follovv) is no manner of covert; indirect meaning or design (according to the
fashion new a days) to broach any bold, newfangled Inventions: and much less
of maintaining unduly what shall be du^y found fault with; since they are
exposed to the common view by one that (as he hitherto has, so) here he does
(and by Gods Grace ever will) submit himself and his Writings to the
Authority and judgment of the Sea Apostolic in the first place, and next to
all other his Superiors. This I profess, as is the Duty of an humble,
Obedient Son of the Church: And this if I did not moreover expressly signify
with reference to the Doctrines contained in the follovving Treatises, I could
not avoid some degree of guilt and imputation of not delivering candidely and
faithfully our Venerable Authors sense, who in many places protests the
like submission of all his Writings to all lavvfull Authority whatsoever.
Farevvell, Dear Reader: Oremus inuicens vt saluemur. AMEN.

THE FIRST TREATISE OF AN INTERNAL LIFE IN GENERAL.

THE FIRST TREATISE AND FIRST SECTION. Of a Contemplative life in General; the
nature and end thereof; and general disposition required thereto.
CAP. I.
1. Cap.. 1. 2. 3. Continual union in spirit with God the end of man's
creation, and practiced by Adam in Innocence.

. 4. 5. Man's fall and misery through sin.

. 4. 5. Which is tran^fused into us and all his posterity.

. 8. 9. The reparation of mankind by Christ.

. 10. 11. That all Christians are obliged to aspire to perfection in divine
love by the ways of prayer etc. as Adam did.

1. IT was only infinite Goodness that moved Allmighty God to create the world
of nothing, and particularly in this inferior visible world to create man
after his own Image and similitude, consisting of a frail earthly body,
which is the prison of an immortal, intellectual spirit, to the end that by
his understanding which is capable of an unlimited knowledge, and by his will
which cannot be replenished which any object of Goodness less then infinite, he
might so govern and order himself and all other visible creatures, as thereby
to arrive unto the end for which he was made, to wit, eternal beatitude both
in soul and body in heaven, the which consists in a returning to the divine
principle from whom he flowed, and an inconceaueibly happy union with him, both
in mind contemplating eternally his infinite Perfections, and in will and
affections eternally loving, admiring and enjoying the said perfections.

2. Now to the end that man might not (except by his own free and wilful
choice of misery) fail from atteining to the only universal end of his
creation, God was pleased to the natural vast capacity of man's understanding
and w^ll, to add a supernatural light illustrating his mind to believe and
know him, and divine charity in the will, which was as it were a weight to
incline and draw the soul, with out any defect or interruption to love God,
and him only. So that by a continual presence of this light, and an
uninterrupted exercise of this love, the soul of man would in time have
atteined to such a measure of perfection of union with God in this world, as
with out dying, to merit a translation from hence to heaven, there eternally
to enjoy a far more incomprehensibly perfect and beatifying union with God.

3. Hence it appears, that the means to happiness, and the end it self, are
essentially the same thing, to wit, union of the spirit with God, and differ
only in degrees. And the union which Adam during his state of Innocence did and
would allwaies have practiced, was in a sort perpetual, never being
interrupted (except perhaps in sleep:) For loving God only and purely for
himself, he had no strange affection to distract him, and the Images of
creatures, which either by his consideration of them, or operations about them,
did adhere to his internal senses, did not at all divert his mind from God,
because he contemplated them only in order to God; or rather he contemplated
God alone in them, loving and serving him only in all his reflections on them,
or workings about them. So that creatures and all offices toward them served
as stepps to raise Adam to a more sublime and more intime union with God; the
which was both his duty and his present happiness, besides that it was a
disposition to his future, eternal beatitude.

4. But our first parents by a wilful contempt and transgression of that one
most easy command, which God for a trial of their obedience had imposed on
them, not only broke the foresaid union, and deprived themselves of the hope of
enjoying God eternally in the future life: But moreover were utterly deuested
of all supernatural graces, and extremely weakened and disordered in all their
natural Gifts. So that having lost that divine light, by which their
understandings had been illustrated, and that Divine love by which their wills
and affections adhered continually to God, they were rendered incapable either
of contemplating God (except only as a severe Judge and auenger) or
consequently of affording him any degree of love. On the contrary both their
minds and affections were only employed on themselves, or on creatures, for
their own natural, carnal interests or pleasure; and this with such a
violent obstinacy and firmenes, that it was impossible for them by any force
left in corrupt nature to raise their love toward God, being once so
impetuously precipitated from him toward themselves.

5. All these miserable deprauations having been caused in all the powers and
faculties of their souls by the forbidden fruit, the which utterly and
irreparably disordered that most healthful, exact temper of their bodily
constitutions; insomuch as the spirits and humors etc. which before did
nothing at all hinder their exercisings and operations toward God, but did
much promote them, now did wholly dispose them to love and seek themselves
only with an utter auersion from God, and the accomplishing of his divine will;
and all circumstant creatures instead of being stepps to raise them toward
God, on the contrary more and more seduced their affections from him, and
raised all other inordinate passions displeasing to him. Hereby in lieu of that
peaceable and happy condition which they before enjoyed in this world by a
continual union with God (the which was to be perfected eternally in the
world to come) they became disquieted, distracted and even torn asunder with
a multitude of passions and designs, often contrary to one another, but all of
them much more opposite to God: so that by falling from unity to a miserable
multiplicity, and from peace to an endless war, they were therein captiued by
the devil, readily yiedling to all his suggestions, hateful to and hating
God, and so contracted not only an unavoidable necessity of a corporal death,
but also the guilt and right to an eternal separation from God after death in
that lake of fire and brimstone burning for ever, and prepared for the devil
and his Angels.

6. Now the whole stock of humane nature being thus totally and universally
depraved in our first Parents, it could not by any possible natural means be
avoided, but that all their Posterity should be equally infected and poisoned
with all these disorders, all which were increased and daily heightened by ill
education and actual Transgressions. And consequently the same guilt both of
temporal and erernall death was with all transfused upon them.

7. But Allmighty God the father of mercies pitying his own creatures thus
ingulfed in utter misery by the fault of Adam, seduced by his and our common
Enemy, did in his most unspeakable mercy freely and unasked, provide and
ordeine his own coeternall Son to be a Savior unto mankind: who by his most
bitter sufferings and death redeemed us from the guilt of eternal death; and by
his glorious life and resurrection having obtained a power of sending the holy
ghost (communicated to us in his word and sacraments etc:) he has rectified
all these disorders, shedding forth a new heavenly light to cure the blindness
of our understandings and divine Charity in our hearts, the which abateth that
mordinate self-love formerly reigning in us, and herby he reinstates us
(cooperating with his divine grace, and perseuering therein) to a new right
unto eternal happiness, (perhaps) more sublime then man in innocence was
destind to.

8. Notwhichstanding it was not the good will and pleasure of God by this
Reparation to restore us to the same state of perfect holiness wherein Adam
lived in Paradise. And this we ought to ascribe to his infinite wisdom, and
also to his unspeakable goodness toward us: for certainly if we had been once
more left, as Adam was, in the free power of our own wills, that is, in so
casual an estate as Adam was, and assisted and fortified with no stronger an
Aid then the primitive grace, we should again have irreparably forfeyted all
our happiness and plunged our selves far more deeply in endless misery.

9. Therefore Almighty God thought fit for our humiliation, and to keep us
in continual vigilance and fear, as also thereby daily to refresh the memory
of our primitive guilt, and our thank fullnes for his inestimable goodness, to
leave us in a necessity of incurring temporal death, which we are not now to
look on as a punishment of sin, so much as a freedom from sin and a Gate and
entrance to Eternal Glory. Moreover though by his grace he has abolished the
guilt of original sin, yet he has suffered still to remain in us many bitter
Effects of it, the which shall never in this life be so wholly extinguished by
grace, or our holy endeauours, but that some degrees of ignorance and
inclinations to that pernicious love of our selves will remain in us. By which
means we are preserved from our greatest enemy, Pride; and also forced to a
continual watchfullnes and combat against our selves, and our spiritual
enemies; allwaies distrusting our selves and relying upon the medicinal
omnipotent regenerating grace of Christ far more helpful to us then the grace
of innocence was, in that it not only more powerfully inclines our wills and
conquers the actual resistance of them, by making them freely cooperate with
it whenever they do cooperate, (for it takes not away our liberty to resist)
but like wise after it has been weakened by venial sins, and extinguished by
mortal, it is again and again renewed by the means of the sacraments and
prayer etc:

10. Our duty therefore in our present state, and the employment of our whole
lives must be, constantly and fervently to cooperate with divine grace, thereby
indeauouring not only to get victory over Self-love, Pride, sensuality etc: by
humility, divine love and all other virtues: but also not to content our selves
with any limited degrees of Piety and holiness, but daily to aspire, according
to our abilities assisted with grace by the same ways to the same Perfection
for which we were first created, and which was practiced by Adam in
Innocence; to wit; an utter extinguishing of Self-love and all affection to
creatures, except in order to God, and as they may be isntrumental to beget
and increase divine love in us; and a continual uninterrupted union in spirit
with God, by Faith contemplating him, and by Love ever adhering to him.

11. This, I say, is the duty and indispensable obligation of all Christians,
of what condition soever, not only seriously to aspire to the divine love, but
also to the perfection thereof suitably to their several states and vocations.
for it is morally impossible for a soul to love God, as he ought to be loved,
(that is, as the only object of her love, and as the only universal End of her
being and life, for the procuring of an inseparable union with whom and for no
other reason the use and comfort of creatures was permitted and given to her) I
say, it is morally impossible for such a soul so loving God, deliberately and
habitually to yield to the love of any thing but God only, and in order to
him; or to stop in any inferior degree of love to him. The frailty of nature
and many unavoidable distractions and tentations may and generally do hinder
most souls from atteining or even approaching to such perfection, to such
uninterrupted attention and union with God, as was practiced by Adam in
Innocence, and by a fevv Perfect souls in all ages: But nothing but the want
of true sincere love vvil hinder the aspiring thereto, according to the measure
and strength of grace that each soul in her order enioyes. And both reason and
experience witness this truth in all manner of loves, lavvfull or unlawful.
For we see that wheresoever the love to riches, honor, Empire or pleasure is
the tyrannising Affection, so as to cause the person to place his supposed
happiness in any of these; such persons neither will nor can, being so
disposed, vvillfully surcease a continual progress in pursuinge their
designs endlesly; neither can they admit an habitual and deliberate adherence
with affection to any other object, though (not ruinous, but) in an inferior
degree prejudicial to what they principally affect.

CAP. II.
. 1. Commonly those only are said to aspire to perfection that consecrate
themselves to God.

. 2. A natural devotion and propension to seek God: of which the degrees are
infinitely various.

. 3. 4. 5. Yet all ranged under two states, Active and Contemplative.

. 6. 7. Generally most souls are of a mixed temper between both: hence comes
the difficulty of the guiding of souls.

. 8. At the first Entrance into Internal ways, all souls seem to be of an
Active temper.

1. NOtvvithstanding although all Christians are obliged to aspire to
perfection, and to lead spiritual lives, sanctifying all their actions and
employments by prayer; yet the effectual practice of this obligation is so
very rare, that in ordinary speech those only are said to Aspire unto
perfection, who have been so highly favored by God as to have been called by
him from all sollicitous engagement in vvorldhy affairs, so as to make the
only buisines and employment of their lives to be the serving, adoring, loving,
meditating, and praying unto God, the attending to and follovving his divine
inspirations etc. in a state of competent abstraction and solitude: and this
most ordinarily and perfectly in a religious profession, or if in the world,
yet in a course of life divided and separated from the world.

2. There seems indeed to remain even naturally in all souls a certain
propension to seek God (though not at all for himself, but meerelie for the
satisfaction of nature, and selfe-ends) which is a kind of Natural Devotion,
and is to be found even in heretics, yea Jews and heathens; and this more or
less according to their several dispositions and corporal complexions; the
variety of which is vvonderfull and almost incredible. Now when divine
grace adioyns it self to such good propensions, it promotes and increases
them, rectifying what is amiss in them, especially by purifying the intention
and making them to seek God only for God himself, and no unworthy in feriour
Ends of nature; but it does not at all alter the complexion it self, but
conducts souls in spiritual ways suitably to their several dispositions by
an almost infinite variety of paths and fashions, yet all tending to the same
general end, with is the union of our spirits with God by perfect love.

3. Notwithstanding, all these varieties of dispositions and ways (of which
we shall treat more fully when we come to speak of Internal prayer,) may
commodiously enough be reduced in gross to two ranks, to wit, Active and
Contemplative spirits: Both which aspire to a perfection of union in spirit
with God by perfect love: and for that purpose in gross practice and make use
of the same means necessary to that end, to wit, Mortification and Prayer.
But yet the manner both of their union and prayer, and consequently of their
mortification also is very different. And the root of such difference is the
forementioned variety of propensions and natural dispositions to internal
vvayes.

4. For first, the Propension which is in some souls to Devotion is of such a
nature, that it inclines them much to buisy their imagination and to frame in
their minds motives to the divine love by Internal Discourse, so as that with
out such reasoning and use of images they can seldom with any efficacy raise
or fix their affections on God. Such dispositions are not patient of much
solitude or recollection more then shall be necessary to enable them to produce
and maintain a right Intention in outvvard doings and works of charity, to
the which they are povverfully inclined: And the Mortifications most
willingly practiced by them are usually e^ternall, and oftentimes voluntarily
assumed, the which make a great show and procure very great esteem from
others. And proportionably hereto the divine love and union produced by such
means is very vigorous, but less Pure and spiritual, apt to express it
self by much sensible devotion and tenderness. The state therefore and
perfection of these souls is called the state and Perfection of an Active life.

3. Again others are naturally of a propension to seek God in the obscurity
of faith, with a more profound Introuersion of spirit, and with less
Actiuity and motion in sensitive nature, and with out the use of grosser
Images, yet with far greater simplicity, Purity and efficacy. And consequently
such souls are not of themselves much inclined to external works (except
when God calls them thereto by secret Inspirations, or ingages them therein by
command of Superiors) but they seek rather to purify themselves and inflame
their hearts in the love of God by Internal, quiet and pure Actuations in
Spirit, by a total Abstraction from Creatures, by Solitude, both External and
especially Internal, so disposing them selves to receive the Influxes and
Inspirations of God, whose guidance chiefly they endeavor to follovv in all
things. And the Mortifications practiced by them though less remarkable, yet
are fair more Efficacious, being profound and penetrating even to the most
secret deordinations of the Spirit. By a Constant pursuance of such Exercises
their Spirits becoming naked and empty of all strange Affections, Images and
Distractions, the Divine spirit only lives and operates in them, affording them
Light to perceive and strength to subdue self-love in its most secret, and to
all others imperceptible insinuations. And by Consequence they attain unto an
Union with God far more strickt and immediate then the former, by a love
much more Masculine, pure and Divine. And the state and Perfection of these
happy souls is called the state and Perfection of a Co^templatiue Life.

6. Now though all Internal Dispositions of souls (by which Mankind is more
diuersified then by outward features) may conveniently enough be ranged under
these two states: yet we are not to conceive that each soul is by its temper
entirely and absolutely either Contemplative or Active: For on the contrary the
most part are of a Disposition mixd between both, and partaking somewhat, more
or less, of each: But they receive the Denomination from that whereto the
Propension is more strong.

7. And from hence comes that great Difficulty that there is in the Conducting
and Managing of souls in these Internal ways: For each several Disposition
must be put in a way suitable to the spirit of the party, otherwise small
progress can be expected. Now that wherein the diversity of Spirits is
principally discerned, is their Prayer. If therefore an Active Spirit should be
obliged to that Internal solitude, to that quiet Affectiue Prayer of the Heart
alone which is proper to Contemplative Souls: Or if a Contemplative spirit
should be too long detained or fettred with the Rules and busy Methods of
Discoursiue Meditation (which is a Prayer chiefly of the Head or Imagination:)
Or lastly if a spirit of a Mixed Disposition should be strictly confined to
either of these sorts of Prayer and not allowed to practice them
interchangeably according as she finds profitable to her present temper of
mind etc. They would entangle themselves with insuperable Difficulties,
scrupulosities and vnsatisfaction, and be so far from any considerable
advancement, that they would be in danger of giving over all thought of seeking
God internally.

8. Notwithstanding although the Propensions of some souls to Internal
Operations of the Spirit, and consequently to Contemplation, were never so
strong: Yet at their first entrance into a Sprituall course, they will
ordinarily speaking, seem to be of an Active, extrouerted temper, and
consequently will not be capable of a long continued rigorous solitude, nor of
Operations purely Spiritual. They will therefore be forced to begin with
Exercises of the Imagination and Discoursiue Prayer. And the reason is, because
by their former Secular, negligent and Extrouerted life, their mind is so
filled and painted all over with the Images of Creatures, and their Hearts so
disordred and divided with inordinate Affections and Passions, that the will
alone with its, Actuations, purposes and resolutions has not power to expel
the said Images and to assuage the said Passions. So that there is a
necessity by Meditation and Consideration of introducing good Images to expel
the vain and bad ones, and of inuenting Motives to quiet Passions, by
diuerting them upon God. But this being once done by the Exercises proper to an
Active life (which to such souls will not need to last long:) they thence
forwards are to betake them selves, and alvvaies to continue in such Internal
Exercises as are suitable to their natural Propensions, to wit,, the quiet,
Solitary, Spiritual Exercises of a CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE.

CAP. III.
. 1. The Contemplative state more perfest.

. 2. And also more easy and secure.

. 3. Of Which yet the most simple and ignorant are capable.

. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. The End of a Contemplative life supereminently
excellent above that of the Active, and the Union with God more Divine.

. 11. Of Passive Unions therein, yet more Supernatural.

1. OF these two states, the Contemplative is by all acknowledged to be the
more Sublime and Perfect, in as much as the Operations and Exercises of it are
more Spiritual, more abstracted from the Body, and i^s Sensual Faculties: and
consequently more Angelical and Divine. It is represented to us by our Lord in
the Person of Mary, who is therefore said to have chosen the best Part, Which
shall never be taken from her, being the. Beginning and imperfect Practice of
that which shall be our Eternal employment and Beatitude in Heau^n. As on the
other side the Active life is typified by the other Sister Martha, who
turmoyled her self with many Exterior buisinesses and sollicitudes, which
though they were in the^ selves good and laudable, yet Mary's Vacancy and
inward attention to our Lord is much preferred.

2. And as the Contemplative State is of the two the more Perfect, so also is
it far more easy, more Simple, and more secure from all Errors and Illusions
which may be occasioned by an indiscreete use of Prayer. And the reason or
ground of such Security is evident: Because a Contemplative Soul tending to
God and vvorking almost only with the Heart and blind Affections of the will
povvring them selves upon God apprehended only in the Obscure Notion of Faith,
not enquiring what he is, but believing him to be that incomprehensible Being
which he is, and which can only be comprehended by himself, rejecting and
striving to forget all Images and representations of him, or any thing else;
Yea transcending all Operations of the Imagination, and all subtilty and
curiosity of Reasoning, and lastly seeking an Union with God only by the most
pure and most intime affections of the^ Spirit: what possibility of Illusion
or error can there be to such a soul? For if the devil should suggest an
Image (which is his only mean and way to seduce a soul to error and a
sinful curiosity of hnovvledge;) she is taught and exercised to reject all
manner of Images, and to hold the Internal senses almost wholy vacant during
her Spiritual actuations. Or if by stirring up unclean or other unlawful
Affections in sensitive nature, he seek to assault her: what more secure
remedy is there then with the whole bent and affections of the soul to
adhere and be united to God? neglecting and scarce marking vvht soever
disorders may vnvvillingly happen in inferior nature, above which she is
exalted into a region of light and peace?

3. Now for a further proof of the excellency and security of Contemplative
prayer beyond active, experience demonstrates that all the most sublime
exercises of contemplation may as purely and perfectly be performed by persons
the most ignorant and unlearned, (so they be sufficiently instructed in the
fundamental Doctrines, of Catholic faith) as by the learned Doctors in as
much as not any abilities in the brain are requisite thereto, but only a strong
courageous affection of the heart. Hence it is, theat we see that simple
unlearned women are more frequently graced by almighty God with the gist of
high contemplation, then men, and especially such men as are much given to
sublime speculations. A reason whereof may be (besides the God reueiles
himself more willingly to humble and simple minds) because by means of that
tenderness and compassionatnes which abounds naturally in women, they are
disposed to a greater fervor in Charity, and their affections being once fixed
on their only proper object, which is God, they do more vigorously and firmly
adhere thereunto: and by consequence arrive both more easily and quickly to the
Perfection of Contemplation, which consists (as shall herafter be shevved) in
the fervor and constancy of the will united to God; and scarce at all in the
operations of the understanding.

4. Now this present treatise being intended only for encouraging and
instructing of persons that aspire to perfection in a Contemplatine life, and
more especially for the discovering of the several degrees of prayer proper
for that state: reason requires that, since in all Doctrines which tend to
practice the end is principally to be regarded, as being that, which if it can
be approved worthy the taking pains for, will give life and courage in the
use of the means conducing thereto, we should treat more precisely of the
proper end of a Contemplative life: The which indeed is of so supreme an
excellence and divine profection above any thing that can be designd or sought
after in any other Doctrine or Profession, that those who have eyes to see it
and palates capable of a Spiritual tasting of it, will think no
difficulties, no tediousnesses, no bitternesses or labors too great a price to
purchase it.

4. It was said before that the general end of man's creation, and which
ought to be aspired unto by all christians, and much more those whose more
Special profession is to tend Perfection, whether in an active or a
Contemplative state, is a perfect and constant union in spirit to God by love,
which is, uninterrupted perfect prayer. But the same end is differently sought
and attained by active and by Contemplative spirits. For in an active life the
union is not so immediate, stable, sublime and intime of the supreme portion of
the spirit with God, as it is in a Contemplative state. But as the exercises
of the active livers are much in the imaginatiue and di^coursiue faculties of
the soul, so is likewise their union. The effects indeed of it are more
perceptible, and therefore more apt to cause admiration in others, but with
all, being much in sense, it is not so clear nor so peaceful, and by
consequen^e not so stable nor immediate as is that of Contemplatiues. The
Charity of actiues is strong and vigorous, and the outvvard effects of it
dazeling the eyes of the beholders, and thereby causing great edification: they
are with all frequently multiplied, for strong love is a Passion that takes
pleasure in labors. Whereas the deeds of Contemplative souls (except when
God by an extraordinary inspiration calls them to exterior employments) are
but fevv, and in appearance but small and little regarded or esteemed by others.
Yet those mean actions of theirs in Gods esteem may be preferred incomparably
before the others, as being in a far more perfect degree Supernatural and
Divine, as proceeding from an immediate and most certain impulse of Gods holy
Spirit, whose conduct, light and virtue such souls do far more clearly
perceive, and more faithfully and constantly follovv, even in their daily and
ordinary practices, then active livers do or can in their actions of highest
importance. Lastly the charity of Contemplatiues though it be less stirring
and buisy, yet is far more profoundly rooted in the center of the spirit,
causing an union much more Spiritual and Divine.

5. S. Bernard perfectly experienced in the Internal ways of a Contemplative
life, vvriting to certain Religious Fathers of the Carthusian Order Professing
the same, excellently expresses this union in these words, Aliorum est Deo
seruire: vestrum adhaerere. Aliorum est Deo credere, scire, amare, reuereri:
vestrum est sapere, intelligere, cognoscere, frui: that is, It is the duty of
others (that live active lives either in the world or Religion) ^o serve God:
but it is yours to adhere inseparably unto him. It belongs to others to
believe, to know, to love, to adore God: but to you, to taste, to understand,
to be familiarly acquainted with, and to enjoy him.

6. Consonantly to this expression of S. Bernard, Mystic vvriters do teach
that the proper end of a Contemplative life is the atteining unto an Habitual
and almost uninterrupted perfect union with God in the Supreme Point of the
spirit; and such an union as gives the soul a fruitiue possession of him, and
a real, experimental perception of his Divine Presence in the depth and
center of the spirit, which is fully possessed and filled with him alone; not
on^y all deliberate affections to creatures being excluded, but in a manner all
Images of them also, at least so far as they may be distractiue to the soul.

7. The effects of this blessed, perceptible Presence of God in perfect souls
are unspeakable and divine. For he is in them both as a Principle of all their
actions Internal and External, being the life of their life and spirit of
their spirits: and also as the End of them, directing both the actions and
persons to himself only. He is all in all things unto them: A light to direct
securely all their steps, and to order all their workings, even those also
which seem the most indifferent, the which by the guidance of Gods holy
spirit do cause a farther advancement of them to a yet more immediate union.
He is a shield to protect them in all tentations and dangers: an internal
force and vigor within them to make them do and suffer all things
whatsoever his pleasure is they should do or suffer. They not only believe
and know, but even feel and taste him to be the universal, Infinite Good. By
means of a continual conversation with him they are reduced to a blessed
state of a perfect denudation of spirit, to an absolute, internal solitude, a
Transcendency and forgetfullnes of all created things, and especially of them
selves, to an heauenly-mindednes and fixed Attention to God only, and this even
in the midst of employments to others never so distractiue; and finally to a
gustfull knowledge of all his infinite perfections, and a strict application
of their spirits by love above knowledge, joined with a fruition and repose
in him with the whole extent of their wills: so that they become after an
inexpressible manner Partakers of the Divine nature; yea one spirit, one Will,
one love with him, being in a sort deified, and enjoying as much of heaven
hereas mortality is capable of.

8. To this purpose saih the same S. Bern: Amor Dei, vel Amor Deus, Spiritus
Sanctus Amori Hominis se infundens, afficit eum sibi, and amans semetipsum de
Homine Deus, secum vnum efficit and spiritum eius, and Amorem eius, that is,
the love of God, or love which is God, to wit, the Holy Ghost povvring
himself into the love of man (inclines and) applies m^n by love unto
himself: and thus God loving himself by man, makes both his spirit and love
one with himself.

9. A most blessed state this is certainly, being the Portion chosen by Mary,
which our Lord himself calls optimam partem, the very best of all divine
graces which God can bestovv in this life: and vvhervvith he enriche two in a
singular mnaner those his most highly favored, and most tenderly loved
friends, S. John the Evangelist, and S. Mary Magdalen: but in a yet more
supereminent degree his own most heavenly Virgin Mother.

10. Happy therefore are those souls upon which God bestovves a desire and
ambition so glorious, as seriously and effectually to tend, aspire and
endeavor the compassing a design so heavenly: qualifying them not only with
good natural propensions to those Internal ways of love leading to this
End, but also calling them to a state of life abstracted from the world, the
vanities and sollioitudes of it; and vvithall supernatural light to direct
them in the secret paths of this love: and lastly strong resolutions, and
perseverance with courage to break through all discouragements, difficulties,
persecutions, Aridities and whatsoever oppositions shall be made against them
either from concupiscence within, or the world without, or the devil
joining with both against a design of all others most hurtful to him and
most destructive to his pretentions.

11. And for a yet further and greater encouragement unto them to embrace and
prosecute so glorious a design, they may take notice that besides this
(hitherto described) happy union of a Contemplative soul with God by perfect
Charity, in the which the soul herself actiuely concurrs, not only as to the
fruition, but also in the disposing herself immediately thereto: There are
other unions entirely Supernatural, not at all procured, or so much as
intended by the soul her self, but graciously and freely conferred by God
upon some souls, in the which he after a vvonderfull and inconceiueable
manner affords them interior illuminations and touches, yet far more
efficacious and Divine: in all which the soul is a mere Patient, and only
suffers God to work his Divine pleasure in her, being neither able to further
nor hinder it. The which unions though they last but even as it were a moment
of time, yet do more illuminate and purify the soul, then many years spent
in active exercises of Spiritual prayer or mortification could do.

CAP. IV.
. 1. 2. 3. 4. A Strong Resolution, necessary in the Beginning.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Considering first the length and tediousnes of the way to
perfection, in mortification.

. 10. 11. And also many degrees of prayer, to be passed.

. 12. Therefore it is seldom atteined: and not till a declining Age.

. 13. Except by Gods extraordinary favor to a few.

. 14. Yet old and young ought to enter into the way.

. 15. A motive to resolution are the difficulties in the way.

. 16. And those both from with out, and within.

1. THe end of a Contemplative life therefore being so supereminently noble and
Divine, that beatified souls do prosecute the same, and no other, in heaven;
with this only difference, that the same beatifying object which is now
obscurely seen by faith, and imperfectly embraced by love, shall herafter be
seen clearly and perfectly enjoyed: The primary and most general Duty
required in souls which by Gods vocation do walk in the ways of the
spirit, is to admire, love, and long after this union, and to fix an
immovable resolution through Gods grace and assistance to attempt and
persevere in the prosecution of so glorious a design indespight of all
opposition, through light and darkness, through consolations and desolations
etc. as esteeming it to be cheaply purchased though with the loss of all
comforts that Nature can find or expect in Creatures.

2. The fixing of such a courageous Resolution is of so maine importance and
necessity, that if it should happen to fail or yield to any, though the
feircest tentations, that may occur, and are to be expected, so as not to be
reassumed, the whole design will be ruined. And therefore devout souls are
oftentimes to renew such a resolution, and especially when any difficulty
presents it self: and for that purpose they will often be put in mind thereof in
these following instructions.

3. It is not to be esteemed loftines, presumption, or pride to tend to so
sublime an end: but it is a good and laudable ambition, and most acceptable to
God: Yea the Root of it is true solid humility joined with the love of God:
For it proceeds from a vile esteem and some degrees of a holy hatred of our
selves, from whom we desire to fly; and a just esteem, obedience, and love of
God, to whom only we desire to adhere and be inseparably united.

4. Happy therefore is the soul that finds in herself an habitual thirst and
longing after this union, if she will seek to assuage it by continual
approaches to this Fountain of living waters, laboring thereto with daily
External and Internal workings. The very tendance to this union, in which
our whole Essential happiness consists, has in it some degrees of happiness,
and is an imperfect union, disposing to a perfect one. For by such internal
tendance and aspiring we get by little and little out of Nature into God. And
that with out such an interior tendance and desire no exterior suffrances or
obseruances will imprint any true virtue in the soul, or bring her nearer to
God, we see in the example of Suso, who for the first five years of a
Religious Profession found no satisfaction in soul at all notvvthstanding all
his care and exactnes in exterior Regular Obseruances and mortifications: he
perceived plainly that still he vvanted some thing, but what that was he
could not tell: till God was pleased to discover it to him, and put him in the
way to atteine to his desire, which was in spirit to tend continually to
this union; with out which all his austerities and Obseruances served little
or nothing, as proceeding principally from self love, selfe-iudgment and the
satisfying of Nature even by crossing it.

4. Let nothing therefore deter a vvelminded soul from perseuering with
fervor in this firm resolution. No not the sight of her daily defects,
imperfections or sins, or remorses for them: but rather let her increase in
courage even from her falls, and from the experience of her own impotency let
her be incited to run more earnestly and adhere more firmly unto God, by
whom she will be enabled to do all things and conquer all resistances.

5. Now to the End that all sincerity may be used in the delivery of these
instructions, and that all vain compliance and flattery may be avoided, the
Devout soul is to be informed that the way to perfection is 1. both a very
long, teadious way; and 2. vvithall there are to be expected in it many
greiuous, painful and bitter tentations and crosses to corrupt nature: as
being a way that wholy and universally contradicts and destroys all the
vain cases, contentments, interests and designs of Nature, teaching a soul
to dye unto self-love, selfe-iudgment and all propriety, and to raise her
self out of Nature, seeking to live in a Region exalted above Nature, to wit,
the Region of the spirit; into which being once come, she will find nothing
but light and peace and joy in the Holy Ghost. The which difficulties
considered, instead of being discouraged, she will, if she be truly touched
with Gods spirit, rather increase her fervor and courage to pursue a design
so Noble and Divine, for which alone she was created: especially 3.
considering the infinite danger of a negligent tepide and spiritually
slothful life: and likewise the security and benefitt of being but truly in
the way to Perfection, though she should never attain to it in this life.

6. First therefore to demonstrate that the way to Perfection must needs be
long and tedious, even to souls well disposed thereto both by nature and
education (for to others, it is a way impassable with out extreme difficulty)
this will easily be acknowledged by any well-minded soul that by her own
experience will consider how obstinate, inflexible, and of how glewy and
tenacious a nature corrupt self-love is in Her: How long a time must pass
before she can subdue any one habitual ill inclination and affection in her
self? What fallings and rising again there are in our passions and corrupt
desires; in so much as when they seem to be quite mortified and almost
forgotten, they will again raise themselves and combat us with as great or
perhaps greater violence then before. Now till the poysonnous root of
self-love be withered, so as that we do not knovvingly and deliberatly
suffer it to spring forth and bear fruit (for utterly killd it never will be
in this life:) till we have lost at least all affection to all our corrupt
desires even the most venial, which are ^llmost infinite perfect charity
will never reign in our souls, and consequently perfect union in spirit
with God cannot be expected. For Charity lives and grows according to the
measure that self-love is abated, and no further.

7. Souls that first enter into the Internal ways of the spirit, or that
have made no great progress in them, are guided by a very dim light, being
able to discover and discern only a fevv grosser defects and inordinations:
but by perseuering in the exercices of mortification and prayer this light
will be increased, and then they will proportionably every day more and more
discover a thousand secret and formerly invisible impurities in their
intentions, selfe-sekings, hypocrisies and close designs of Nature, pursuing
her own corrupt designs in the very best actions, cherishing Nature one
way, when she mortifies it another, and favoring pride even when she
exercises humility. Now a clear light to discover all these almost infinite
deprauations not only in our sensitive Nature, but also in the Superior soul
(which are far more secret, manifold and dangerous) and a courage with
success to combat and overcome them, must be the effect of a long continued
practice of prayer and mortification.

8. The want of a due knowledge or consideration hereof is the cause that some
good souls after they have made some progress in Internal ways, become
disheartened, and in danger to stop or quite leave them. For though at the
first, being (as usually they are) prevented by God with a tender sensible
devotion (which our Holy Father calls feruorem Nouitium) they do with much
zeal and as it seems to them, with good effect begin the exercises of
mortification and prayer: Yet afterward such sensible fervor and tenderness
ceasing (as it seldom fails to do) by that new light which they have
gotten, they discern a world of defects, formerly undiscovered, which they
erroneously think were not in them before: whereupon fearing that instead of
making progress, they are in a worse state then when they begun, they will
be apt to suspect that they are in a vvrong way. This proceeds from a
preconceiued mistake, that because in times of light and devotion the soul
finds her self carried with much fervor to God, and perceiues but small
contradictions and rebellions in inferior Nature, that therefore she is very
forvvard in the way to Perfection. Whereas it is far otherwise. For Nature is
not so easily conquered as she imagins, neither is the way to Perfection so
easy and short. Many changes she must expect: many risings and fallings: some
times light, and some times Darkness: sometimes calmnes of Passions, and
presently after, it may be, feircer combats then before: and these successions
of changes repeated, God knovves how often, before the End approaches.

9. Yea it will likely happen to such Souls, that even the formerly well
known, grosser defects in them will seem to increase and to grow more hard
to be quelld after they have been competently advanced in Internal ways. And
the reason is, because having set themselves to combat corrupt Nature in all
her perverse, crooked and impure desires, and being sequestered from the
vanities of the world, they find themselves in continual vvrestlings and
agonies, and want those pleasing diuersions, conuersations and recreations
with which whilst they lived a secular, negligent life they could interrupt
or putt of their melancholic thoughts, and unquietness. But if they would take
courage and insteade of seeking ease from Nature (further then discretion
allovves) have recourse for remedy by Prayer to God, they would find that such
violent Tentations are an assured sign that they are in a secure and happy
way, and that when God sees it is best for them, they shall come of from such
combats with victory and comfort.

10. Now as from the consideration of the tediousnes of a perfect universal
mortification of the corrupt affections of Nature, it does appear that Hasty
Perfection is not ordinarily to be expected. And where there are appearances
of extraordinary lights and supernatural visits in souls not thoroughly
mortified, it is to be feared that there has been some secret exorbitancy in
the proceedings of such souls, some deeply rooted Pride etc. which has
exposed them to the Devils Illusions, so that then state is very dangerous.
The like will appear if we cast our eyes upon the Nature and degrees of
Internal Prayer, in the Perfection of which the End of a Contemplative life,
which is perfect union in Spirit with God, does consist.

11. For a soul must 1. (ordinarily speaking) pass through the way of
external and imaginary Exercises of Prayer, in the which she must tarry God
knovves how long: yea with out a discreet diligence and constancy in them,
she may perhaps end her days therein. 2. Then when her affections do so
abound and are sufficiently ripe, so as that discourse is not needful or
becomes of little efficacy, she is to betake her self to the exercise of the
will: in the which a very long time must ordinarily be spent before she can
chase away distracting grosser Images, and before the Heart be so replenished
with the Divine Spirit, that without any Election or deliberation it will of
it self almost continually break forth into Aspirations and pure eleuations
of the Superior will. 3. Being arrived to this happy state, only God knovves
for how long a time she is to continue therein, there being almost infinite
degrees of aspirations, each one exceeding the former in Purity, before she be
ripe for the Divine Inaction. 4. And having gotten that, a very long time is
like to be spent, very often in most woeful obscurities, and desolations, before
she arrive. 5. To the State of Perfection. Now all these degrees of Prayer are
to be attended with proportionable degrees of mortification. So that no
vvonder is it if so very few, even of those whose Profession it is to aspire
thereunto, do find or atteine unto this End; Par^ly out of ignorance and
error; whilst they place Perfection in an exact performance of outvvard
Obseruances and Austerities the which (though being well used they may be
certainly very proper helps to Perfection, and are accordingly to be duly
esteemed: yet) if they be undertaken for any end of Nature, and not for the
purifying of the interior and disposing it for more perfect Prayer, are of no
value at all, but rather proceed from and nourish Self-love; Pride etc. And
partly out of want of courage and diligence to pursue constantly the way that
they know leads thereto.

12. Upon these grounds Mystic Authors do teach; that though it be a very
great advantage to a soul to tread in these Internal ways from her Youth,
before she be darkened and made sick with vicious Habits, the combatting
against which will cause great difficulty, pain and tediousnes to her: Yet
she will hardly arrive unto the foresaid Active union and experimental
Perception of Gods Presence in her till almost a declining Age: by reason that
though her Natural ill inclinations may be mortified in a reasonable
Perfection before that time: Yet till such Age there will remain too much
vigor in Corporal Nature, and an unstableness in the inward senses, which
will hinder that Quietness and composednes of mind necessary to such an Union.
Whereas some persons of a well disposed temper and virtuous education have in
a fevv years arrived rhereunto; though they did not begin an Internal course
till their ripe Age, but yet supplying that delay by an Heroical Resolution
and vigorous pursuit of the practices proper thereunto. But as for those that
have been viciously bred, there will be necessary a wonderful measure of Grace
and very extraordinary mortifications before such souls can be fitted thereunto.

13. Now what has been said concerning the length of the way, and the
multiplicity of conditions requisite to the atteining to the End of it, is to
be understood with relation to the ordinary course of Gods Providence. But God
who is the free Master and disposer of his own Graces, may bestovv them
upon whom and when he pleases, either Miraculously increasing his Grace in
some Souls, or conferring his supernatural Favors before the time that they
are ripe for them: As he did to S. Catharina of Siena (and some others) who in
their younger years have been favored with a Passive union. Mystic Authors
likewise except from the ordinary course the case where God upon the death of
well willed and well disposed souls happening bofore Perfection atteind,
supplieth after some extraordinary manner what was vvanting, and effects that
in a moment, vhvich would otherwise have required a long space of time. And
this say they, God frequently does in regard of the serious and fervent wills
that he sees in such Souls, which were resolved to prosecute the way of
his Love for all their Lives, though they should have lasted never so long.

14. But be the way to Perfection never so long, the design it self is so
Noble and the end so Divine, that a soul can not begin to aspire unto it too
soon, nor take too much pains to procure it. Yea the very desire and serious
pursuance of so heavenly a design brings so great Blessings to the Soul, and
puts her in so secure a way of Salvation, though she should never perfectly
atteine unto it in this life, that there is none so old, nor so over grown
with ill Habits, but ought to attempt, and with perseverance pursue it, being
assured that at least after Death he shall for his good desire and endeauours
be revvarded with the crown due to Contemplatiues. For it is enough for a
soul to be in the way, and to correspond to such enablements as she has
received: And then in what degree of spirit soever she dies, she dies
according to the will and ordination of God, to whom she must be resigned,
and consequently she will be very happy. Whereas if out of despair of
atteining to perfection she should rest, and do as it were nothing,
contenting herself with outvvard Ceremonious Obseruances, she will be
accounted before God as having been vvanting to perform that whereto her
Profession obliged her. Though the truth is, the soul being a pure Spirit
consisting of mere Actiuity, cannot cease doing and desiring some thing: so
that if her desires and operations be not directed to the right End, they will
go a vvrong way; and if a Soul do not continually strive to get out of
Nature, she will plunge her self deeper and deeper into it.

15. The second Motive to induce a soul to arm herself with a great courage
and strong Resolution in her tendance to Perfection is, because as the Wise man
says, He that sets himself to serve our Lord (especially in so high and divine
an employment as Contemplation) must prepare his soul for Tentations, greater
and more unusual then formerly he had experience of. The which Tentations
will come from all coasts, both from without and with in.

16. For an Internal life being not only a life hidden from the world, but
likewise directly contrary to the ways of carnal rerson, yea even different
from the common notion of virtue and Piety which ordinary Christians, yea too
many even in Religion have also, who approve only of Actions and ways which
outwardly make a fair show, as solemn performance of Divine Offices,
external formal Regularities, mortifications etc. Hence it is that very
sharp persecutions have almost alvvaies attended those whom God has called
to revive the true spirit of Religion (too much generally decayed, and in many
Religious Communities vterly unknown) by teaching souls not to neglect, but
on the contrary to be very careful in an exact performance and just esteem of
such Duties; but yet to place Perfection in exercises of the Spirit, and to
esteem all other obseruances no further then as they serve to advance and
increase Perfection in Spirit: since most certain it is, that if in and for
themselves alone and with out any interior direction for the purifying of the
soul they be esteemed (and performed) as Parts of real Perfection, and not
chiefly as Helps of Internal Devotion and Purity, they will rather become
Hindrances to Contemplation, nourishing Pride, Contempt of others etc. and be
the ruin of true Charity. Examples of such Persecutions are obuious in
stories, witness the sufferings of Thaulerus, Suso, S. Teresa, B. John. de Cruce
etc.

17. Again in the world, the lives of those that God has called to the
Exercises of an Internal life, being so different from and unlike to others,
though ordinary, well meaning Christians: by reason that they abstract
themselves from secular businesses (except such as necessarily belong to their
vocation) likevvife? from vvorldly conuersations, correspondence, and vainly
complying freindships: Hence it is that the sight of them is unacceptable to
their Neighbors and acquaintance, as if they did silently condemn their
liberties. For this reason they are apt to raise and disperse evil reports of
them, calling them Illuminats, Pretenders to extraordinary visits and lights,
Persons that walk in mirabilibus super se and 6. Or at least to deride them as
silly, seduced, melancholy spirits, that follow unusual and dangerous ways.

18. All these, and many other the like persecutions, calumnies and contempts,
a well disposed soul that purely seeks God, must expect and be armed
against. And knovving that they do not come by chance, but by the most wise,
holy, and merciful Providence of God for her good, to exercise her courage in
the beginning, and to give her an opportunity to testify her true esteem and
love to God and spiritual things, let her from hence not be affrighted; but
rather pursue Internal ways more vigorously: as knovving that there can not
be a better proof of the Excellency of them, then that they are displeasing to
carnal, or at least ignorant men unexperienced in such Divine ways. Let her
not with passion judge or condemn those that are contrary to her: for many of
them may have a good intention and zeal therein, though a zeal not directed
by knowledge. If therefore she will attend to God, follovving his Divine
Inspirations etc. she will see that God will give her light and courage, and
much inward security in her way.

19. But her greatest and more frequent Persecutions will be from her own
corrupt nature and vicious Habits rooted in the soul: the which will assault
her many times with tentations and inward bitternesses and agonies, sharper
and stranger then she did expect, or could perhaps imagine. And no vvonder: For
her design and continual endeavors both in mortification and Prayer being to
raise herself out of, and above nature, to contradict nature in all its vain
pleasures and interests: she can expect no other, but that Nature will
continually struggle against the spirit: especially being inflamed by the
Devil, who will not fail to employ all his Arts, all his malice and fury to
disturb a design so utterly destructive to his Infernal Kingdom established
in the souls of carnal me^. The well minded soul therefore must make a
general strong Resolution to bear all with as much quietness as may be, to
distrust herself entirely, to rely only upon God, and to seek unto him by
Prayer, and all will assuredly be well. She will find that the Yoke of
Christ, vvhi^h at the first was burdensome, will, being borne with
constancy, become easy and delightful. Yea though she should never be able to
subdue the resistance of evil inclinations in her, yet as long as there
remains in her a sincere Endeavor after it, no such ill Inclinations will
hinder her happiness.

CAP V.
. 1. 2. A 3. motive to Resolution is the danger of repidity: of which the
nature and Root is discovered.

. 3. 4. 5. The miseries of a Tepide Religious person, that is ignorant of
Internal ways.

. 6. 7. Or of one that knows them, but neglects to pursue them.

. 8. 9. How pestilent such are in a Community.

. 10. On the otherside an indiscreet passionate fervor may be as dangerous as
negligence.

1. A Third yet more pressing Motive to a courageous Resolution of prosecuting
Internal ways once begin, and a strong proof of the extreme necessity
thereof is the consideration of the extreme danger, and miseries inexpressible
of a negligent and Tepide life, whether in Religion or in the world; the
which not only renders Perfection impossible to be atteined, but endangers the
very root of essential sanctity and all pretention to Eternal Happiness, as
among other Mystic vvriters, Harphius in his twelve mortifications earnestly
demonstrates.

2. Tepidity is a bitter poysonnous Root fixed in the minds of negligent
Christians, who though out of a servile fear they abstain from an habitual
practice of acknowledged Mortal Actual sins, and therefore (groundlesly
enough) think themselves secure from the danger of Hell: yet they perform
their external necessary obligations to God and their Brethren sleepily and
heartlesly, without any true Affection, contenting themselves with the things
hovveuer outwardly done; yea perhaps knovving no Perfection beyond this: But
in the mean time remain full of self love, inward Pride, sensual desires,
auersion from internal conversation with God etc. And the ground and cause of
this pernicious Tepidity is want of affection and esteem of spiritual
things, and a voluntary affection to venial sins (not as they are sins, but as
the objects of them are casefull or delightful to nature) joined with a
vvillfullnes not to avoid the occasions of them, nor to do any more in Gods
service, then what themselves judge to be necessary for the escaping of Hell.

3. Such Persons if they live in Religion must needs pass very uncomfortable
and discontented lives: having excluded themselves from the vain
entertainments and pleasures of the world, and yet reteining a strong
affection to them in their hearts, with an incapacity of enjoying them. They
must undergo all obligations, Austerities and Crosses incide^t to a Religious
state without comfort, but only in having dispatched them; with very little
benefit to their souls, and with extreme vvearisomenes and vnvvillingnes.
Now what a resemblance to Hell has such a life, where there is an
impossibility freely to enjoy what the soul principally desires: and where
she is forced continually to do and suffer such things as are extremely
contrary to her inclinations?

4. Whereas if souls would courageously at once give themselves wholy to
God, and with a discrete fervor combat against corrupt Nature, pursuing their
Internal Exercises, they would find that all things would cooperate not only
to their Eternal good, but even to their present contentment and joy. They
would find pleasure even in their greatest mortifications and crosses, by
considering the love with which God sends them and the great Benefit that
their spirit reapes by them. What contentment can be greater to any soul then
to become a true inward friend of God, chained unto him with a love, the like
whereto never was between any mortal creatures? to know and even feel that
she belongs to God, and that God is continually vvatchfull over her, and
careful of her salvation? None of which comforts Tepide souls can hope to
taste: but on the contrary are not only continually tortured with present
discontents; but much more with a fear and horror, considering their
doubtfullnes about their future state.

5. If such Tepide souls be ignorant of the Internal ways of the spirit
(which with out some fault of their own they scarce can be) when they come
to dye, it is not conceiueable what apprehensions and horrors they will
feel: considering that a settled vvillfull affection to venial sins bring a
soul to an imminent danger of a frequent incurring actual mortal sins, the
which though they be not of the greater kind of enormous sins, yet they may be
no less dangerous, because less corrigible, such as are those spiritual sins
of Pride, Murmuring, Factiousnes, Envy, Ambition etc: Besides which how is it
possible for them to give an account of sins of Omission, of the want of
perfecting their souls by prayer etc; of the avoiding of which they never
took any care, although their Profession and Vows obliged them thereto?

6. Again if Tepidity (though not in so high a degree) be found in souls that
are acquainted speculatiuely with the Internal ways of the spirit, and
their obligation to pursue them in order to Perfection: but either for want of
courage dare not apply themselves seriously to them, or do it very faintly,
coldly or with frequent interruptions, and only are not resolved to relinquish
and abjure such ways: such as though they have not a vvillfull affection to
venial sins, yet are for the most part vvillfully negligent in resisting them:
Such souls ought to consider that their case in all respects approaches near
to the miserable condition of the former: And they will have guilt enough to
take away all comfort almost in a Religious state, and to give them just
apprehensions for the future life, of which they have no security.

7. For when such souls approach near unto Death; they will then too late
consider that for want of dilligent Prayer there may be, yea assuredly are in
them a world of inordinations, impurities and defects undiscovered by them,
and therefore can neither be acknowledged nor bevvayled: so that they can not
have any assurance of the state and inclinations of their souls: Besides they
know themselves to have been guilty of a life spent in an uninterrupted
ingratitude to God who gave them light to see the ways to Perfection, and
which their Profession obliged them to walk in, and yet vvillfully they
neglected to make use of such light, or to make progress in those ways etc.
(and this is an aggrauation of guilt beyond the former:) They are conscious
likewise of an inexcusable and long continued vnfaithfullnes, never almost
complying with the Divine inspirations which daily urged them to put
themselves resolutely into that only secure way of an Internal life; nor ever
vigorously resisting the sins and imperfections which they did discover in
themselves etc. Such sad thoughts as these pressing (as usually they do) one
upon another near the approaches of Death, what greiuous apprehensions, what
terrible vncerteinties must they needs cause in Tepide souls, then most
sensible of dangers and fears? so that their lives will be full of anguish
and continual remorse, and their Deaths very uncomfortable.

8. Lastly to all these miseries of a Tepide life, this also may be added as an
increase of the guilt, and consequently an aggrauation of the dangerous state
of souls infected with that poison: which is, that they do not only
themselves most ungratefully withdraw their own affections from God and
Divine things, but by their ill example, by mispending the time in vain
Extrouerted conuersations, by discountenancing those that are f^ruourous in
Internal ways etc. they infect their companions, and so treacherously
defraud Almighty God of the affections of others also. So that a Tepide
Religious person though given to no enormous excesses, is often more harm-full in
a Community, then an open scandalous liver: because none that has any care of
himself but will bevvare of such an one as this latter is. Whereas a Tepide
soul vnperceiueably instills into others the poisonous infection vvhervvith
herself is tainted.

9. From the grounds and considerations here mentioned, it does appear how
necessary it is for a devout soul both in the beginning and pursuance of a
Contemplative life, to excite and fortify her courageous resolution not to be
daunted by discouragements either from within or without, but at what price
soever, and with what labors and sufferings soever, with fervor to
persevere in the exercises and Duties belonging thereto: accounting Tepidity and
spiritual sloth as the very bane of he^ whole Design: the which if it be
yielded unto though but a little, it will gather more force, and at last grow
irresistible.

10. But vvithall she is to be advised, that such her courage and fervor must
be exercised, not impetuously out of passion, or such impulses as a fit of
sensible Devotion will sometimes produce in her: but this fervor and
resolution must chiefly be seated in the Superior will, and regulated by
spiritual Discretion, according to her present forces both natural and
supernatural, and the measure of Grace bestovved on her, and no further. For
there may be as much harm by out running Grace, as by n^glecting to correspond
unto it. Hence it often comes to pass, that many vvellminded souls, being
either pushed fovvard by an indiscrete passionate Zeal, or advised by
unexperienced Directours to undertake unnecessarily and voluntarily, either
rigorous mortifications or excessive taskes of Devotions, and vvanting strength
to continue them, have become able to do nothing at all: so that affecting too
hastily to atteine unto perfection sooner then God did enable them thereto, they
so over burden themselves that they are forced to give over quite all tendance
to it. Therefore we must be contented to proceed in such a pace as may be
lasting; and that will suffice.

CAP. VI.
. 2. etc. A confirmation of what has been said; particularly of the necessity
of a strong Resolution and courage to persevere, shwed by the Parable of a
Pilgrim traveling to Jerusalem, out of SCALA PERFECTIONIS.

1. NOW for a further confirmation and more effectual recommendation of what
has hitherto been delivered touching the Nature of a Contemplative life in
general, the supereminent Noblenes of its end, the great difficulties to be
expected in it, and the absolute necessity of a firm courage to persevere and
continually to make progress in it, whatsoever it costs us, (with out which
Resolution it is in vain to set one step forvvard in these ways:) I will
here annexe a passage extracted out of that excellent Treatise called Scala
perfectionis, written by that eminent Contemplative D. Walter Hilton, a
Carthusian Monk, In which under the Parable of a devout Pilgrim desirous to
travel to Jerusalem (which he interprets the Vision of Peace, or
Contemplation) he delivers Instructions very proper and efficacious touching
the behavior requisite in a devout soul for such a journey: the true sense of
which Aduises I will take liberty so to deliver briefly, as notvvithstanding
not to omit any important matter there more largely, and according to the old
fashion expressed.

Scala Perfect par. 2. cap. 21.22.23.
2. There was a man, says he, that had a great desire to go to Jerusalem: And
because he knew not the right way, he addressed himself for advice to one that
he hoped was not unskillful in it: and asked him whether there was any way
passable thither. The other answered, that the way thither was both long and
full of very great difficulties: yea that there were many ways that seemed and
promised to lead thither, but the dangers of them were too great.
Nevertheless one way he knew, which if he would diligently pursue according to
the Directions and marks that he would give him, though, said he, I cannot
promise thee a security from many frights, beatings and other ill usage and
tentations of all kinds: but if thou can have courage and patience enough to
suffer them without quarrelling or resisting or troubling thy self, and so
pass on, having this only in thy mund, and sometimes on thy tongue, I HAVE
NOVGHT, I AM NOVGHT, I DESIRE NOVGHT BUT TO BE AT JERUSALEM: my life for thine,
thou will escape safe with thy life and in a competent time arrive thither.

3. The Pilgrim ouerioyed with these news, answered, so I may have my life
safe, and may at last come to the place that I above all things only desire, I
care not what miseries I suffer in the way. Therefore let me know only what
course I am to take, and God willing, I will not fail to observe carefully
your directions. The guide replied, Since thou have so good a will, though I my
self never was so happy to be in Jerusalem, notwithstanding be confident that
by the instructions that I shall give thee, if thou will follow them, thou
shall come safe to thy iourneyes end.

4. Now the Advice that I am to give thee in breife is this; Before thou set
the first step into the high way that leads thither, thou must be firmly
grounded in the true Catholic faith; moreover whatsoever sins thou find in
thy conscience, thou must seek to purge them away by hearty penance and
absolution according to the laws of the church. This being done, begin thy
journey in Gods name, but be sure to go furnish6d with two necessary
instruments, Humility and Charity: both which are contained in the
forementioned speech, which must alvvaies be ready in thy mind; I AM NOVGHT. I
HAVE NOVGHT, I DESIRE BUT ONLY ONE THING, AND THAT IS OUR LORD JESUS, AND TO BE
WITH HIM IN PEACE AT JERUSALEM. The meaning and virtue of these words therefore
thou must have continually, at least in thy thoughts, either expressly or
vertually; Humility says, I AM NOVGHT, I HAVE NOVGHT, love says, I DESIRE
NOVGHT BUT JESUS. These two companions thou must never part from; neither
will they willingly be separated from one another, for they accord very
lovingly together. And the deeper thou groundest thy self in Humility, the
higher thou raisest thy self in Charity; for the more thou see and feel
thy self to be nothing, with the more fervent love vvilt thou desire Jesus,
that by him, who is all, thou may become something.

5. Now this same Humility is to be exercised not so much in considering thine
own self, thy sinfullnes and misery (though to do thus at the first be very
good and proffitable:) but rather in a quiet, loving sight of the infinite,
endless being and goodness of Jesus: The which beholding of Jesus must be
either through grace in a sauourous feeling knowledge of him, or at least in a
full and firm faith in him. And such a beholding when thou shall atteine to
it, will work in thy mind a far more pure, spiritual, solid and perfect
humility, then the former way of beholding thy self, the which produces an
humility more gross, boystrous and unquiet. By that thou vvilt see and feel
thy self not only to be the most vvretched filthy creature in the world, but
also in the very substance of thy soul (setting aside the foulenes of sin) to
be a mere nothing. for truly in and of thy self and in regard of Jesus (who
really and in truth is all) thou art a mere nothing; and till thou have the
love of Jesus, yea and feel that thou have his love, although thou have done
to thy seeming never so many good deeds both outvvard and inward, yet in truth
thou have nothing at all, for nothing will abide in thy soul and fill it, but
the love of Jesus. Therefore cast all other things behind thee and forget them,
that thou may have that which is best of all. And thus doing, thou vvilt
become a true Pilgrim that leaves behind him houses and wife and children and
friends and goods, and makes himself poor and bare of all things that he may
go on his journey lightly and merrily without hindrance.

6. Well now thou art in thy way traveling toward Jerusalem. The which
traveling consists in vvorking inwardly, and (when need is) outwardly too,
such works as are suitable to thy condition and state, and such as will
help and increase in thee this gracious desire that thou have to love Jesus
only. Let thy works be what they will, thinking, or reading, or preaching,
or laboring etc: if thou find that they dravv thy mind from vvorldly
vanity, and confirm thy heart and will more to the love of Jesus, it is good
and proffitable for thee to use them. And if thou find that find that
through coustome such works do in time loose their savor and virtue to
increase this love, and that it seems to thee that thou feel more grace and
spiritual proffit in some other, take these other and leave those, for though
the inclination and desire of thy heart to Jesus must ever be unchangeable,
nevertheles thy spiritual works that thou shall use in thy manner of
praying, Reading etc. to the end to feed and strengthen this desire, may well
be changed according as thou feel thy self by grace disposed in the
applying of thy heart. Bind not thy self therefore unchangeably to voluntary
customs, for that will hinder the freedom of thy heart to love Jesus, if
grace would visit thee specially.

7. Before thou have made many stepps in the way, thou must expect a world of
enemies of several kinds that will besett the round about, and all of them
will endeavor busily to hinder thee from going forward; yea and if they can by
any means they will either by persuasions, flatteries or violence force thee
to return home again to those vanities that thou have forsaken. For there is
nothing greeues them so much as to see a resolute desire in thy heart to love
Jesus and to travail to find him. Therefore they will all conspire to put out
of thy heart that good desire and love, in which all virtues are comprised.

8. Thy first enemies that will assault thee will be fleshly desires and vain
fears of thy corrupt heart. And with these there will join unclean spirits
that with s^eights and tentations will seek to allure thy heart to them, and
to withdraw it from Jesus. But whatsoever they say, bebeiue them not; but
betake thy self to thy old only secure remedy, answering ever thus, I AM
NOVGHT, I HAVE NAVGHT, AND I DESIRE NOVGHT BUT ONLY THE LOVE OF JESUS: and so
hold forth on thy way desiring Jesus only.

9, If they endeavor to put dreads and scruples into thy mind, and would make
thee believe that thou have not yet done Penance enough, as thou ought for
thy sins, but that some old sins remain in thy heart not yet confessed, or not
suficiently confessed and absolved; and that therefore thou must needs return
home and do penance better, before thou have the boldness to go to Jesus: Do
not believe a word of all that they say: for thou art sufficiently acquitted of
thy sins, and there is no need at all that thou should stay to ransack thy
conscience: for this will now but do thee harm, and either put thee qui^e out
of thy way, or at least vnproffitably delay thy travailing in it.

10. If they shall tell thee, that thou art not worthy to have the love of
Jesus, or to see Jesus: And therefore that thou ought not be so presumptuous
to desire and seek after it; Believe them not, but go on and say, It is not
because I am worthy, but because I am unworthy that I therefore desire to have
the love of Jesus, for if once I had it, it would make me worthy. I will
therefore never cease desiring it, till I have obtained it. For, for it only was
I created, therefore say and do what you will, I will desire it continually, I
will never cease to pray for it, and so doing I hope to obtain it.

11. If thou meetest with any that seem friends unto thee, and that in kindness
would stop thy progress by enterteining thee and seeking to draw thee to
sensual mirth by vain Discourses and carnal solaces, whereby thou will be in
danger to forget thy Pilgrimage: give a deaf ear to them, answer them not,
think only on this; THAT THOU WOVLDEST FEIGN BE AT JERUSALEM. And if they
proffer thee gifts and preferments, heed them not, but think ever on Jerusalem.

12. And if men despise thee, or lay any false calumnies to thy charge, giving
the ill names: if they go about to defraud thee or rob thee; yea if they
beat thee and use thee despightfully and cruelly; for thy life contend not
with them: strive not against them, nor be angry with them: But content thy
self with the harm received, and go on quietly as naught were done, that
thou take no further harm: think only on this; That to be at Jerusalem
deserves to be purchased with all this ill usage or more, and that there thou
shall be sufficiently repaired for all thy losses, and recompensed for all hard
vsages by the way.

13, If thine enemies see that thou growest courageous and bold, and that thou will neither be seduced by flatteries, nor disheartened with the pains and
troubles of thy journey, but rather well contented with them, then they will
begin to be afraid of thee; yet for all that they will never cease pursuing
thee; They will follow thee all alo^g the way watching all advantages against
thee; And ever and anon they will set upon thee, seekeing either with
flatteries or frights to stop thee and drive thee back if they can: but fear
them not; hold on thy way, and have nothing in thy mind but Jerusalem and Jesus
whom thou will find there.

14. If thy desire of Jesus still continues and grows more strong, so that it
makes thee go on thy ways courageously; they will then tell thee, That it may
very well happen that thou will fall into Corporal sickness: and perhaps such a
sickness as will bring strange fancies into thy mind, and melancholicke
apprehensions. Or perhaps thou will fall into great want, and no man will
offer to help thee: By occasion of which misfortunes thou vvilt be greiuously
tempted by thy ghostly enemies, the which will the^ insult over thee, and
tell thee that thy folly and provvd presumption have brought thee to this
miserable pass, that thou can neither help thy self; nor will any man
help thee, but rather hinder these that would: And all this they will do to
the end to increase thy melancholy and unquiet apprehensions, or to provoke
thee to Anger or malice against thy Christian Brethren, or to murmr against
Jesus, who perhaps for thy trial seems to hide his face from thee. But still
neglect all these suggestions, as though thou heardst them not. Be angry with
no body but thy self. And as for all thy diseases, poverty and whatsoever
other sufferings (for who can reckon all that may befall thee?) take Jesus in
thy mind, think on the lesson that thou art taught, and say, I AM NOVGHT, I
HAVE NOVGHT, I CARE FOR NOVGHT IN THIS WORLD, AND I DESIRE NOVGHT BUT THE LOVE
OF JESUS, THAT I MAY SEE HIM IN PEACE AT JERUSALEM.

15. But if it shall happen sometimes, as likely it will, that through some of
these tentations and thine own frailty thou stumble and perhaps fall down and
get some harm thereby; or that thou for some time be turned a little out of the
right way; As soon as possibly may be, come again to thy self, get up again
and return into the right way, using such remedies for thy hurt as the Church
ordeines; And do not trouble thy self over much, or over long with thinking
unquietly on thy past misfortune and pain; Abide not in such thoughts, for
that will do thee more harm, and give advantage to thine enemies. Therefore
make have to go on in thy travail and working again, as if nothing had
happened; Keep but JESUS in thy mind, and a desire to gain his LOVE, and
nothing shall be able to hurt thee.

16. At last when thine enemies perceive that thy will to Jesus is so strong,
that thou will not spare neither for poverty nor mischeife, for sickness nor
fancies, for doubts nor fears, for life nor death, no nor for sins neither,
but ever forth thou will go on with that one thing of seeking the love of
Jesus, and with nothing else; and that thou despisest and scarce markest any
thing that they say to the contrary, but hold on in thy praying and other
spiritual works (yet allwaies with discretion and submission) then they grow
even enraged and will spare no manner of most cruel usage. They will come
closer to thee then ever before, and betake themselves to their last and most
dangerous assault; and that is, to bring into the sight of thy mind all thy
good deeds and virtues, showing thee that all men praise thee, and love thee
and bear thee great veneratio^ for thy sanctity etc. And all this they do to
the end to raise vain Joy and pride in thy heart. But if thou tendrest thy
life, thou vvilt hold all this flattery and falsehood to be a deadly poison to
thy soul mingled with honey, therefore away with it, cast it from thee,
saying, Thou vvilt have none of it, but thou would be at Jerusalem.

17. And to the end to put self out of the danger and reach of all such
tentations, suffer not thy thoughts willingly to run about the world, but draw
them all inwards, fixing them upon one only thing which is JESUS: set thy self
to think only on him, to know him, to love him; And after thou have for a good
time brought thy self to do thus, then whatsoever thou see or feel in
wardly that is not He will be vnwellcome and painful to thee, because it will
stand in thy way to the seeing and seeking of him whom thou only desire.

18. But yet if there be any work or outward business which thou art obliged
to do, or that charity or present necessity requires of thee, either
concerning thy self or thy Christian brother, fail not to do it, dispatch it
as well, and as soon as well thou can, and let it not tarry long in thy
thoughts, for it will but hinder thee in thy principal business. But if it be
any other matter of no necessity, or that concerns thee not in particular,
trouble not thy self nor distract thy thoughts about it, but rid it quickly
out of thy heart, saying still thus, I AM NOVGHT, I CAN DO NOVGHT, I HAVE
NOVGHT, AND NOVGHT DO I DESIRE TO HAVE BUT ONLY JESUS AND HIS LOVE.

19. Thou will be forced, as all other Pilgrims are, to take of times by the
way refreshments, meat and drink and sleep, yea and sometimes Innocent
recreations; In all which things use discretion and take heed of foolish
scrupulosity about them; fear not that they will be much a hindrance to thee;
for though they seem to stay thee for awhile, they will further thee and give
thee strength to walk on more courageously for a good long time after.

20, To conclude, Remember that thy principal aim and indeed only Business is
to knitt thy thoughts to the desire of JESUS, to strengthen this desire daily
by prayer and other spiritual workings, to the end it may never go out of thy
heart, And whatsoever thou find proper to increase that desire, be it
praying or reading, speaking or being silent, travailing or reposing, make use
of it for the time, as long as thy soul finds savor in it, and as long as it
increases this desire of having or enjoying nothing but the love of JESUS and
the blessed sight of JESUS in true peace in Jerusalem: And be assured that this
good desire thus cherished and continually increased will bring thee safe unto
the end of thy Pilgrimage.

21. This is the substance of the parable of the spiritual Pilgrim travailing
in the ways of Contemplation: The which I have more largely set down, because
by the contexture of it, not only we see confirmed what is already written
before; but also we have a draught and Scheme represented according to which
all the following Instructions will be conformably answerable.

THE SECOND SECTION OF THE FIRST TREATISE. In which is declared and proved,
That God only by his Holy Inspirations is the Guide and Directour in an
Internal Contemplative Life.
CAP. I.
. 1. In Internal contemplative ways a Guide is necessary, and whly?

. 2. 3. 4. All good Christians have within their souls two Internal guides. 1.
The spirit of corrupt nature which is never wholly expelled. 2. The spirit of
God: And these teach contrarily, and for contrary ends.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Divine Inspirations beyond the light of common grace, are to
be our light in Internal ways.

. 10. 11. In what special things such Inspirations do direct Internal livers.

. 12. 13. They ordinarily teach rather cessation and notdoing then much doing.

. 14. Extraordinary Inspirations, Illuminatious etc. not pretended to.

1. Having hitherto treated of a Contemplative life in general, the nature and
end of it, together with the necessary disposition required in souls, that
according to their vocation or profession are desirous to pursue the exercises
belonging thereto, the next thing that in relation to the said state deserves
our consideration, is the Guide whose directions we may and ought to follovv
therein: for certanly a guide must needs be had, since it is evident that in our
present state of corrupt nature we have no light so much as to discover that
there is any such way, and much less to direct and enable us to walk in
Paths so much above, yea so directly contrary to the designs and interests of
nature.

2. Now since in every good, faithful and true Christian, (as truth and
experience teaches) there are two Internal lights and teachers, to wit. 1.
the Spirit of corrupt nature. 2. The Divine Spirit: Both which in all our
deliberate Actions do offer themselves, and even strive for maistery,
contending whether of them, with the exclusion of the other, shall lead us
in the vvayes proper and pleasing to each: The which vvayes, as also the ends
to which they conduct are directly contrary to one another; for the Spirit of
corrupt nature only teaches us such things as are for the present pleasing or
proffitable to our carnal desires, or sensual and secular designs, but
pernicious to the soul or spirit; the which follovving the light of nature,
runs into endless errors, and labarinths, all which lead us from God and
true happiness unto eternal misery. On the other side the spirit of God,
discovering unto us the folly and danger of follovving so blind and pernicious
a Guide as nature is, teaches us that our happiness co^sists in forsaking such a
vvandring guide, and treading paths quite contrary; in renouncing present,
sensual pleasures and commodities, so far as they are a hindrance (yea not an
advancement) to our knovving of God and spiritual things, the which only must
be the object of all our desires and endeavors, and whereby only we shall
arrive to eternal happiness and union with God.

3. Besides these two guides, we neither have nor can have any other within
us; and with both these good Christians are continually attended. Whatsoever
therefore is not the teaching of the Divine spirit is the suggestion of the
false teacher, who is his and our enemy: The which took possession of the
souls of men upon Adam's Transgression: whose fault was the not attending to
the teaching of Gods holy spirit (which then was the only Internal teacher)
but instead thereof hearkening to the flattering tentations of his wife,
seduced by the devil. And from Adam this false light is communicated to all
his posterity, so as naturally we have no other. But the new heavenly
teacher, the holy spirit is freely given us by means of the divine word and
sacraments: it being a new divine Principle imprinted in our spirits, raising
them to God and continually soliciting us to walk in his ways.

4. Our misery is, that whereas by mortal sins the divine light is for the
time wholy extinguished, so as to the producing any considerable good effect
upon the will: it is not so on the other side, that by grace the false teacher
should be totally expelled or silenced; But it remains even in the most
perfect, and God knovves even the best are too much inclined often to hearken
to it. Those that are less perfect, though in matters of necessary Duty and
obligation they follovv the conduct of the Divine spirit, yet in lesser matters
they for the most part are moved with no other Principle then that of corrupt
nature, by which they incur defects, the which though in themselves
venial, yet do much obscure the Divine light, and weaken its efficacy. Yea
even in those things wherein such imperfect souls do for the substance of
the Action and its essentialls follovv the direction of Gods Spirit, yet by
mixing of sensual Interests and ends, suggested by the false teacher, they do
diminish its luster, beauty and value. And so subtle is the spirit of nature,
that it often makes its false suggestions pass for Divine Inspirations, and
seldom misses the insinuating its poison in some degree either into the
beginning or continuation of our best actions.

5. From these unquestionable grounds thus truly laid it follows evidently,
That in all good Actions and especially in the Internal ways of the spirit
which conduct to Contemplation and Perfection, God alone is our only master
and directour; and creatures, wen he is pleased to use them, are only his
Instruments. So that all other teachers whatsoever whether the light of
reason or external Directours, or Rules prescribed in books etc: are no
further nor otherwise to be follovved or hearkened to, then as they are
subordinate and conformable to the Internal Directions and Inspirations of
Gods Holy spirit; or as God inuites, Instructs and moves us to have recourse
unto them, by them to be informed in his will, and by him enabled to perform
it. And that if they be made use of any other vvayes, they will certainly
misleade us.

5. This is by all Mystical vvriters acknowledged so fundamental a truth,
that without acknovvledging it and vvorking according to it, it is in vain to
enter into the exercises of an Internal Contemplative life. So that to say (as
too commonly it is said by Authors who pretend to be spiritual, but have no
taste of these mystike matters) Take all your Instructions from without, from
External teachers or books, is all one as to say, have nothing at all to do
with the vvayes of Contemplation; which can be taught by no other but God, or
by those whom God specially instructs and appoynts determinately for the
Disciples present exigence. So that it is God only that internally teaches both
the Teacher and Disciple, and his inspirations are the only lesson for both.
All our light therefore is from Divine Illumination and all our strength as to
these things, is from the Divine operation of the Holy Ghost on our wills and
affections.

7. Now to the end that this so important a verity may more distinctly be
declared and more firmly imprinted in the minds of all those that desire to be
Gods scholars in the internal ways of his Divine love: they are to take
notice that the Inspirations which are here acknowledged to be the only safe
rule of all our actions, though of the same nature, yet do extend further and
to more and other particular objects, then the Divine light or Grace by which
good Christians, living common lives in the world are lead, extends to, yea
then it does even in those that seek perfection by the exercises of an Active
life.

8. The light and virtue of Common Grace affords generally to all good
Christians that seriously endeavor to save their souls, such Internal
Illuminations and motions as are sufficient to direct them for the resisting of
any sinful tentation, or to perform any necessary act of virtue, in
circumstances vvherin they are obliged, though this Direction be often obeyed
with many circumstantiall defects; And their Actions are so far and no further
meritorious and pleasing to God, then as they proceed from such Internal Grace
or inspiration. But as for other Actions, which in their own nature are not
absolutely of necessary obligation, the which notvvithstanding might be made
Isntrumental to the advancing and perfecting of holiness in their souls (such
as are the ordinary and usually esteemed Indifferent Actions of their lives) to
a due improouement of such Actions, they have neither the light nor the
strength, or very seldom by reason that they live distracted lives, not using
such solitude and recollection as are necessary for the disposing of souls to
the receiving such an extraordinary light and virtue. And as for those that
tend to Perfection by Active exercises, even the more perfect, although they
atteine thereby a far greater measure of light and grace, by which they
perform their necessary duties of holiness more perfectly and with a more pure
Intention and likeevvise make far greater benefit for their advancement by
Actions and occurrences more indifferent; yet they also for want of habitual
Introuersion and recollectednes of mind, do pass over without benefit the
greatest part of their ordinary actions.

9. But as for Contemplative livers, those I mean that have made a sufficient
progres toward Perfection, besides the common grace light or Inspirations
necessary for a due performance of essential Duties, the which they enjoy in
a far more sublime manner and degree, so as to purify their actions from a
world of secret impurities and subtle mixture of the Interests and ends of
corrupt nature, invisible to all other souls: Besides this light, I say,
(which is presupposed and prerequired) they walk in a continual
supernatural light and are guided by assiduous Inspirations in regard of their
most ordinary and in themselves indifferent Actions and occurrences, in all
which they clearly see how they are to be have themselves so as to do will
of God, and by them also to improoue themselves in the Divine love; the which
extraordinary light is communicated unto them only by virtue of their almost
continual Recollectednes, Introuersion and attention to God in their spirits.

11. More particularly by this Internal divine light an Internal liver is or
may be directed. 1. In the manner and circumstances, when, where and how any
virtue may most proffitably and perfectly be exercised: For as for the
substantial Act of such a virtue, and the necessary obliging circumstances in
which it cannot with out mortal sin be omitted, the light of common
sanctifying Grace will suffice to direct) 2. In the manner, frequency, length,
change and other circumstances of Internal prayer. 3. In Actions or omissions
which absolutely considered may seem in themselves Indifferent, and at the
present there may be, as to ordinary light, an uncertainty whether the doing
or omission is the more perfect; This is discovered to the soul by these
Supernatural Inspirations and light; such Actions or Omissions are for
example, Reading, study of such or such matters, vvalking, conuersing, staying
in, or quitting solitude in ones Cell, taking a journey, undertaking or
refusing an employment, accepting or refusing Inuitations etc: In all which
things, well-minded souls by solitude and introuersion disposing themselves,
will not fail to have a supernatural light and impulse communicated to them,
which will enable them to make choice of that side of the doubt, which if they
correspond thereto, will most advance them in spirit, and suite with the
Divine will. Whereas without such light, generally souls are directed by an
obscure light and impulse of nature and carnal ends or Interests, without the
least benefit of their spirit, yea to their greater distraction and dissipation.

12. Generally and ordinarily speaking, when there is proposed the doing or
not doing of any external work, and that both of them are in themselves
lavvfull, the Divine Inspiration in Contemplative souls moves to the
Not-doing. Because the absteining from much external vvorking and the
increasing in Internal solitude of spirit is more suitable to their present
state, and to that abstraction of life which they profess: Except when the
doing may prove a more beneficial mortificatio^ to selfeloue, or other
inordinate Affection of corrupt nature.

13. The special points and matters of Omissions which (among others) are
usually the Objects of such divine Calls and Inspirations, may be such as
these. viz. 1. To eschew unnecessary, though permitted conuersations, and
correspondences with others, either by speaking or vvriting. 2. To be very
wary and sparing in the use of the tongue. 3. not sollicitously to avoid
occasions of mortifications or afflictions. 4. to avoid the encombring our
selves with business not perteining to us. 5. to fly honors, Offices, care
over others, and the like. 6. not to crave this or that unnecessary thing or
commodity, but to be content with out them. 7. not to question or expostulate
why such a thing was said or done, but to hold patience, and to let things be
as they are. 8. not to complain of or accuse any. 9. In cases of supportable
and not harmfull oppressions to abstain from Appeals to higher Superiors. 10.
To avoid the voluntary causing or procuring a change in our present condition,
employme^t, place etc. 11. To quiet and compose all manner of passions rising
in the heart, and all troubles in mind; and to preserve the soul in peace,
tranquillity and cheerfullnes in Gods service. 1^. to avoid such things or
doings as will distract our minds with dissipating Images. 13. to forbear
and break of all particular, partial freindships and compliances. 14. To
preserve convenient Liberty of spirit, and to abstain from enconbring or
insnaring our selves by any voluntarily assumed taskes, obligations etc: though
in matters in themselves good, but which may, becoming obligatory, prove
hindrances to better things. 15. In a word the Divine Inspirations, of which
we here treat, do ever tend to a simplicity in Thoughts, words and deeds;
and to all things which may advance the more perfect exercise of Obedience,
Humility, Resignation, purity of Prayer, purity of intention etc: so that
whatsoever is contrary to any of these, is to be rejected as a diabolical
suggestion.

14. As for extraordinary Supernatural Inspirations, Illuminations,
apparitions, voices, conuersations with spirits, messages from heaven etc: a
spiritual Internal liver is forbidden to pretend to, or so much as desire
them; yea rather to pray against them, least he should abuse them to vanity and
pride: And hovveuer never to admit or esteem them for such, and much less to
put in execution any thing that seems to be such a way commanded, till they
have been first examined, judged and approved by Superiors etc: But of this
particular we shall speak more herafter.

15. The Divine Inspirations, lights, Impulses or Calls of which we here
speak are. 1. Either such as are immediately communicated to the soul alone.
2. or also mediately with the concurrence of some other person or thing, to
wit, by the mean of an External Directour, or else by the use and reading or
hearing read Spiritual or other pious Books. We will in the first place
treat of this latter way of understanding the Divine will, because it is
both more easy to be discerned, and also it is the way by which commonly
imperfect souls are first instructed.

CAP. II.
. 1. 2. Why an External Guide is necessary in the beginning.

. 3. 4. 5. 6. The conditions of such a Guide; of which the principal is
Experience in the same ways, beyond learning etc.

. 7. 8. Active spirits cannot be fit guides for Contemplative.

. 9. 10. Actual Illumination often necessary to external Directours.

. 11. 12. 13. The office of a directour may not be voluntarily assumed or
sought.

. 14. 15. Lay-persons may be spiritual Guides to Religious. Yea women.

. 16. That is no prejudice to the spirit of an Order.

. 17. Conditions necessary in Directours.

. 18. 19. Directours must teach their disciples to seek light from God.

. 20. Sincerity and obedience necessary in the disciple.

. 21. The Gift of discerning spirits necessary in a directour.

. 22. His instructions must be general.

. 23. 24. Frequent consultations harmfull.

. 25. Two general remedies against difficulties viz. 1. Riddance. 2. Patience.

. 26. 27. The directour must not with unnecessary questions raise Doubts.

. 28. Great danger from unnecessary conversation of Directours with women.

. 29. More particular aduises referred to other following places.

1. A soul that comes out of the world to a religious Contemplative life; or
that living yet in the world, is abstracted from the world, and aspires to a
state of Perfection, at the first ordinarily will stand in need of an
External Instructour and guide for most matters that concern her in that
way. The reason is, because that such souls, although being supposed to be in
the state Grace, they have sufficient Internal light to direct them in the
ordinary Duties of a Christian life, for the avoiding of sin, and performing
the necessary Acts of virtues requisite: yet as to the proper practices of
Internal ways, and to the ordering of common Actions to the advancing of
themselves toward Contemplation they are indeed penitus animales, governed by
sense and the obscure deceitful light of natural reason, scarce knovving
what an Internal Inspiration, (with regard to such matters,) is: and
hovveuer very much disabled are they to discern or correspond to such an
Inspiration. And for this reason their natural light and general knowledge
that they have of their own insufficiency to be their own directours in a
new vnknovvn state, will tell them, that they must have recourse to other
guides skilled in those things, of which themselves have no experience. Yet
even this seeking and submitting themselves unto External directours is not to
be esteemed merely an Act of nature, or guided only by a natural light; but of
such Inspirations and supernatural light which atte^d the Actions of all good
Christians, by which they are taught and moved to distrust themselves: and not
knowing as yet how to dispose themselves for the receiving supernatural lights
from God (much less to merit them) Grace directs them to use the mediation of
others, and to hear and ob^y God, speaking and ordeining by them.

2. But the necessity of an External Instructour is generally only at the
beginning of a Contemplative course: For after that souls by the means of
general Directions given, and a competent pursuit of Internal Exercises, have
been once put and conveniently settled in a rightway how to seek for more light
from God alone; they must not afterward out of leuity, curiosity or a foolish
pronenes to discover their interior, nor without a just necessity continue to
seek Instructions from without; nothing will excuse it, but the want of
Internal light in some special Doubtful cases: and then also they having an
Internal Inspiration and motion to seek it from others. In which case it is
indeed their Divine Internal Master that they obey, who speaks unto them by
the external Directour appointed unto them by God. The devout reader may
further see what the forementioned Excellent Author of SCALA PERFECTIONIS
says to this purpose in the 2. Part and 91. Chapter: as likewise the Author
of the Book called the Clowd of unknowing chap. 49. and 54.

3. Now to the end to enable the soul to make a good choice (I mean such a
soul as has freedom to make her own choice) I will set down the
Qualities necessary to be found in a good Directour: by which title, I do not
mean simply a Confessarius, that is only to hear faults confessed, to give
Absolution, and there an end: for the ordinary Qualities of learning and
prudence are sufficien thereto. But by a spiritual Directour I intend one that
besides this, is to instruct the Disciple in all the peculiar duties of an
Internal life; that is to judge of her propension to contemplative vvayes; and
that can at least teach her how she may fit herself with a degree of Prayer
proper for her; that knovves all the degrees of Internal prayer, and can
determine how long she is to remain in such a degree, and when to change it
for an higher; That can judge what employments etc. are helpful or hindering
to her progres in Internal vvayes: But especially that can teach her how to
dispose herself to hearken to and follovv Gods Internal teaching, and to
stand in no more need of consulting her External Directour etc. Such are the
proper offices of a guide; to enable him vvhereto, there are generally by
Spiritual vvriters required three principal Qualities, 1. a good natural
Judgment. 2. Learning. 3. Experience.

4. But because it is scarce to be hoped for in all places and for all souls
to find a Directour absolutely perfect and Qualified with all manner of fitting
conditions; Therefore the said Writers do dispute what quality is the most
necessary to make a Directour capable of a sufficient discharge of his office.
Now for as much as concerns the first condition, to wit, a good natural
Judgment, though by all it be acknowledged to be insufficient alone, yet is it
so absolutely necessary, that without it no considerable experience can be
atteined; and Learning if it be joined with an extrauagant capricious spirit,
will prove rather pernicious then aduantageous; Therefore the Question remains
betvveene Learning and experience, whether of the two is the more necessary?

5. But truly this scarce deserves to be a question. For though for the
assoyling of ordinary Doubts and cases of conscience, as about fasting, saying
the Divine office, Confession, Restitution etc: learning be the principal
condition to be looked after in one that is to be a Guide for such purposes:
Notvvthstanding since the Office of the spiritual Directour, that now we
seek after, is to be exercised in such Internal matters of the spirit, as
has been said, to wit, Contemplative prayer, Attending to divine Inspirations
etc: it is the resolute judgment of Gerson, Auila, S. Teresa, B. John de Cruce,
Seraphinus Firmanus etc: that no trust is to be given to learning without
experience, but much to experience though without learning. And to this
purpose it is obseruable, that for the most part the Instruments that God has
been pleased both in ancient and modern times to employ in the Instructing and
guiding of souls to the perfection of contemplative Prayer, have been persons
of small learning but great experience, such as were S. Anthony, S. Benedict,
S. Francis, S. Teresa etc:

6. No learning therefore that may be got by study and reading, though of all
the contemplative books that now are extant, will alone serve to enable any
one to be a competent Directour for Internal livers. But there is necessary
Experience and practice in the same Prayer, and other internal Exercises that
are to be taught: for never so many years spent in discoursiue Prayer, will
little avail to qualify any person to become a proper and proffitable
Directour for souls that tend to Contemplation, as all enclosed Religious men
and women are obliged to do.

7. Yea it is much more safe for a vvell-meaning soul to trust to her own
internal light though obscure; and to such Instructions as books which
treat of such kind of Prayer, will afford her, or else to the guidance of a
virtuous humble-minded Directour, (who though he have but a very small
Proportion either of Experience or learning, yet out of humility will not
assume unto himself Authority to judge of things above his reach, but will
encourage the soul either to seek out one more intelligent, or to follovv the
directions of her own spirit illuminated by grace) then to confide in such
directours as believe and would feign have the world do so too, that the
Spiritual Exercises are the most perfect kind of Internal prayer, and by
consequence whose best aduises will be to make her suspect all tracts and
inuitations vvhervvith God shall dravv her to a more sublime, quiet, pure
prayer in spirit: from which such Directours will pluck her down to
multiplicity, distraction and unquietness: the best Prayer that they can teach
being that which is exercised more grossly in the Imagination, in figuring of
seenes, postures and representations, or by curious painful Discourses in the
understanding, fettring her likewise with nice forms and methods in
Meditation, both very insupportable, and also unprofitable, yea pernicious to
the design of such souls that tend to contemplation, though very good and
proper for those who live Active lives. What orders can such Directours give
touching the true use of Aspirations, of which there is great variety? or
concerning other subtle pure eleuations, annihilations, or internal,
reposefull silent prayers of the spirit? And much less help is to be expected
from them in the case of those strange in explicable Priuatious, the which are
of infinite variety, befalling to many souls highly advanced in Contemplation.

8. What a misery therefore is it to see Contemplative Orders, yea even those of
the greatest solitude and Abstraction of life, affording them so great
advantages for Contemplation, to seek Rules for Contemplative prayer from
those whose profession is so absolutely contrary thereto? And the more that
such incompetent Directours are practiced and advanced in skill about their
own Exercises, the more unfit are they to become guides to Contemplative
spirits, and the more dangerous is it to rely upon them: for such Experience
joined with learning will make them confident that their own way is the very
best for all, and zealous to draw all others to a liking and admiration of it.
Most certain it is, that this is the very cause why not only the spirit of
Contemplation, but even the knowledge almost of it is again lost in many
Co^templatiue Orders, notvvithstanding so fevv years are past since it was
revived by those eminent lights, S. Teresa, B. John de Cruce, Barbanzon, etc.

9. I may truly say, that neither natural Indgment, learning, nor experience
all together are absolutely sufficient to qualify a person for the employment of
guiding souls in all cases in the Internal ways of the spirit, but very often
an actual supernatural illumination will moreover be requisite and
necessary: though true it is, that experienced Persons have great advantages
beyond what wit or learning can afford. And such for matters beyond their
experience, no doubt, will often remit souls to God and their own
observation. The which is a quality and office not to be expected from persons
that bring no better endovvments with them to the managing of Contemplative
souls, but only subtilty of wit and learning, or experience in a quite
different and much inferior exercise of Prayer (such experience being as I
said, rather a disadvantage:) for such will resolve all cases; and though the
Directions they give must needs be improper, yet they will be very absolute in
requiring obedience: Whereas a person experienced in the same Internal vvayes,
being humble vvithall (for else says Auila, he also will probably be faulty
too) though he be not in all cases able to give a resolute Judgment, yet
finding his own Deficiency, he will make a doubt of the matter, and therpon
out of humility will not scorn, but rather be desirous to consult and take
advise from others more able to resolve.

10. Herpon it is that S. Teresa (as it is recorded in her Life) much
co^plaines of the hurt that such resolute and in sufficient teachers did to
her, and will do to others. And Thaulerus (vvorthily styled an illuminate
Doctor) professes of himself in a certain Sermon that unless he were
specially illuminated by God for the solution of a doubt proposed to him, he
would remit the party to God himself to be instructed in prayer, what to do.
And let not such an one doubt (says he) but that God will be his faithful
counselor. Moreover he finds great fault with those arrogant persons that
reprehend souls for suffering themselves to be guided by the Instincts and
internal lights and motions proceeding from Gods spirit, and for their calling
such by the titles of New spirits, or pretenders to extraordinary
illuminations: whereas says he, those that take all their instructions from
persons and books, will with very small success pursue the ways of the
spirit.

11. It is a miserable thing to see how this Employment of directing souls
(which above all other is most difficult and exceeds even the ability of an
Angel yet) out of an ambitious humor is invaded by persons wholly unfitted
for it, and that without any vocation from God voluntarily undertake it. So
that no marvel it is if so little good come from such Intruders. Not one of a
thousand, (says Auila) is capable of so sublime a task. Nay says the holy
Bishop of Geneua, not one often thousand. And most certain it is, that those
who so freely offer themselves to so Divine an employment, do thereby show
themselves to want the most necessary qualifications, to wit, Humility and a
true knowledge of its difficulty, and therefore their directions are most to be
suspected.

12. Hereupon Thaulerus says, that a soul intending perfection ought to seek
out an experienced servant of God, though it cost her a journey of many German
miles. But, says he, if such a friend cannot be found, then will a simple
Confessarius serve, though never so ignorant. For even by such men does the
Holy Ghost speak by reason of their office; so that they may securely be
submitted to and obeyed, even in things which they do not well understand.

13. If a soul that is fearful and scrupulous be to choose a Directour, she
ought to avoid one of the like temper, for passion which blinds the seeker,
will also blind the Directour, and so the Blind will lead the blind.

14. It is not necessary that the Persons consulted with about Difficulties
concerning Internal Prayer should be learned, or in Holy Orders (except Doubts
concerning matters, of Faith, of Cases of Consc^ence interuene) For though
Lay-persons and women be not allowed by the Church to preach publicly, yet
are they not forbidden to give private Instructions in matters of that nature
to any that shall have recourse to them. And of the good success of such
Instructours we have diverse examples, as in the Lay man that converted
Th^ulerus a learned Doctor and a Religious man, and likewise in S. Catherine
of Siena, S. Teresa etc: And in a well governed Monastery of women, where a
good course of Internal prayer approved by Superiors and Learned Divines is
once well settled, it is very expedient that Instructions concerning it should
rather come from Superiors within; Because otherwise, by reason of the
frequent change of Directours, perhaps of contrary spirits, and many of them
little practiced in such Prayer, souls will be governed uncertainly, and be in
danger to be put out of their way.

15. Though it seem evidently more reasonable and more proportionable to the
spirits of persons professing a Religious state to be conducted by others of
the s ne Profession (Caeteris paribus) then by such as are strangers thereto:
Yet scarce any Directours can be found more improper for such, (supposing that
they tend to Contemplation) then are Religious Guides of Active spirits, that
know no further of prayer then Meditation, and that show more Zeal for an
exact observance of Ceremonies, or a multiplying of external voluntary
Austerities, (the which of themselves, and unless they be guided by Gods
Spirit, have no special influence on the spirit, but only serve either for an
outvvard show of rigor, or for keeping souls from mispending the time) then
for the more essential internal Duties of prayer, solitude of spirit,
Interior Mortification etc: Much more proffitable to such souls would be a
Directour, though not of any Religious Profession, that would impose on souls
only such Austerities as are essentially necessary to an Internal life: such
as are perfect Abstraction, silence, solitude, convenient abstinence etc: And
for other matters not much necessary nor much effectual, leaving them in a due
moderate Liberty of spirit; especially such as will not impose on them any
forms of Mental Prayer, hovveuer liked or practiced by themselves; but for
such matters rathet leaving them to the conduct of Gods holy spirit: and that
will not torture them with painful, iterated coustumary Confessions etc:

16. And whereas it will be perhaps objected, that probably such Directours
being strangers as to the special distinctiue spirit of such an Order or
Community, may endanger in their disciples a loss of the said spirit. I must
profess, that I understand not what is meant by that so much talked of spirit
of an Order; nor how several Orders, though never so much distinguished by
habits or certain external practices, if their profession be to tend to
Contemplation, can have any more then one spirit, which directs them to make
their principal design to be the seeking of God in his Internal vvayes of
Divine love, and for that only end, besides conformable Prayer, to practice
such obseruances and mortifications as will best promote this design. And
surely this good spirit of Religion and contemplation, a good Directour, of
what Profession soever, will very studiously endeavor to advance, yea and
moreover will no doubt oblige his Disciples to be very Regular and zealous in
the observance of all good ordinances of the Community, and principally of the
Rule, according to their profession made: Instructing them vvithall how they
may use such things for the advancing of their spirit, and the service of God;
although in the mean time perhaps he be not cunning in all the particular
Obseruances that belong to them, and little or nothing at all to him.

17. All souls that live in Contemplative Orders are nor naturally fitted for
Contemplative vvayes, nor the seeking of God in spirit. Those therefore that
have not, and indeed are not capable of much light in their Interior, and so
are not so fit to be guided by Divine Inspirations, do the more need to have
certain Rules from without, at least for the exterior. And for such it is
Gods will and direction that they should more depend on External Guides.

18. He that takes upon him the office of a spiritual Directour, says
Thau^erus, ought for some reasonable space of time to converse with his
Disciples, especially at the beginning: for a fevv transitory Conferences will
not suffice to give him light concerning their propensions and dispositions,
that he may fit them with a degree of Prayer proper for them, both for the
present and future. And his principal care must be to set them in such a way,
as that they may not need to have much recourse unto him afterward; the which
is done by giving them general Directions about their prayer, and especially
how thereby to dispose themselves to receive light from God, whose Inspiratio^s
ought for the future to ^e their principal Rule, especially for the Interior.
And for the practicing in particular according to the general Directions
given, the Disciples must use their own judgment, and for a help they may
also make use of such Instructions as they may find, in books, so far as they
shall be proper for their spirit. But in cases when neither their own
Judgment, nor books will help them, if the difficulty be of greater moment,
they may again have recourse unto their Directour.

19. And in this sort are writers that speak much of the necessity of an
External Directour, to be understood, For if such necessity were to last
always, good souls should be obliged to spend their whole lives in conferring
with Directours; from whence would follovv continual sollicitudes,
scrupulosities and dangerous distractions etc. most contrary to an Internal,
spiritual life, which ought to be a state of much repose, cessation,
introuersion and a continual attendance unto what God speaks within unto a
soul; who, if souls will humbly and faithfully depend on him, will clear
and resolve difficulties, which External masters will never be able to
penetrate into. But it is too general an humor in Directours now adays to
make themselves seem necessary unto their disciples, whom hey endeavor to
keep in a continual dependence; to the great prejudice of their progres in
spirit, besides many other inconveniences not needful to be mentioned
particularly.

20. A soul thar has recourse to an Instructour provided by God for her, or
that, using her best advice, she has made choice of, must deal freely,
plainly and heartily with him, conceiling nothing necessary to be known by
him; and his Directions she must follovv in all things, assuring herself that
if she do so in the simplicity of her heart, and as in obedience to God
himself, God will enlighten him so that she shall not be mislead.

21. The gift of discerning spirits is so necessary to a spiritual Guide, that
except thereby he be able to fit a soul with a sort and degree of prayer
suitable to her natural disposition, not tying all souls to begin according
to any general methods (for none such can be perscribed but will be
prejudicial to some) and unless he teach her how she may become illuminated
without him, by God alone, by the means of Prayer and abstraction of life
(vvhervvith, the mists of Images and passions being dispelled, a light will
spring forth in the soul far more clear and certain, then any that can come
from humane instructions) not all the Instructions of men and Angels, joined
with all mortifications imaginable, will be able to bring a soul to
Contemplation. For seldom or never does God work contrary to our natural
complexions; And till souls come to exercises in spirit and prayer, infused by
God alone, they are far from Contemplation.

22. Now at the first it is very hard for any Directour to know exactly the
secret Inclinations of imperfect souls, which are so infinitely various. And
therefore for the most part their Instructions about prayer and attenda^ce to
Divine Inspirations must be general, the which the disciples themselves must
make a particular use of, by observing their own abilities and inclinations,
and by marking what more particular forms of Prayer etc. suite best with
them, and do them most good. And this if they be not able in a reasonable
manner to do, or if they have not the courage to abide in a way in which
they are put, it will be in vain for them to proceed in those secret
Internal vvayes.

23. If the way wherein a soul is put, and has made a reasonable progres,
be indeed proper for her, there will be little need of frequent recourse unto
her Directour. Neither ought he to examine her about her Internal Exercises;
of which he may judge well enough by her external comportment: for it is
impossible for a soul to be in a vvrong way interiourly, but of it self it
will break out exteriourly, especially to the eyes of those who themselves
are in a right way, as the Spiritual Directour is supposed to be. And there
is scarce any more certain sign that a soul is not interiourly in a good
way, then is her being forvvard to trouble her Directour with multiplicity of
Questions and doubts; and her readiness to discover her Interior to others,
whom she has heard or does believe to be skillful in Spirituality.

24. The Images and internal Distractions raised by impertinent consultations
about the Interior are of all other most pernicious. For distractions from
without are but superficial; whereas those being hatched and bred within
the soul from some secret ill qualities, as fear, scrupulosity, curiosity
etc. they are more profound, and destructive to true Recollection.

25. The general remedies against almost all difficulties are these two. 1.
Riddance. 2. Patience. The former consists in affording to the soul some ease
and latitude, as far as a good conscience will permit, in such things as are
apt to perplexe vvel-minded tender souls, as Confession, Saying of the Office,
obligation to the ordinances of the church, and some kind of tentations. In all
which things such souls are to be taught to neglect and transcend scrupulous
nicity; and they are likewise to be prudently freed from the practice of
Coustumes not obligatory. And this remedy is proper against scrupulosity
disintangling the soul from many snares which otherwise would prove a great
hindrance to her. The other remedy of patience and abiding is reasonable in
case of Aridities, Desolations and other such discouragements in an Internal
life. In which cases the devout soul is to be exhorted to behave herself as
well as she can, and to be quietly resigned for what with all her industry
she cannot help. Above all things she is to be heartned to pursue courageously
her appointed Recollections in despite of all such oppositions raised by the
devil or corrupt nature, and permitted by God for her good. The which if she
do, she will either disperse these tentations, or obtain a Divine light to
perceive, that the way both most proper and most secure, by which God
purposes to lead her to Perfection, is the way of Aridities and obscurities;
as B John de Cruce teaches in his Treatise called Mount Carmel. And when she
once perceiues this, then they will not only be supportable, but even
acceptable to her. Hovveuer if a soul did know or could be persuaded how
much better it were for her to suffer a little bitterness, arising from such
difficulties or perplexities, then to hasten for a remedy, by seeking help
from others, or by turning herself to unnecessary solaces in creatures; And
also with what confidence she might expect satisfaction from her Internal
Master, if she would seriously by Prayer seek to him: she would save both
herself and her Directour much trouble and inconvenience.

26. The instructour must use great vvarines that he do not raise doubts and
scruples in his Scholars minds by moving needles and indiscreet Questions, or
by impertinent discourses concerning spiritual matters: for thereby he may come
to raise such doubts as himself shall not be able to resolve, and to put them
so far out of their way as perhaps they will never be able to find it again.
Therefore in ordinary conuersations it is more fit that the subject of discourse
should be some external and indifferent matters, wherein the parties are not
much concerned, then such as regard the Interior. Experience shows how much
inconvenience does come to souls by the conuersations of such as are great
pretenders to skill in Spirituality, and therefore out of vanity, or a mistaken
charity, are apt, when there is no need, to be offering Instructions about
spiritual matters.

27. Some souls do see their way before them far better then others, and
therefore do move fevvuer Questions. The Instructour therefore, is to behave
himself toward them all according to the quality and need of each spirit:
always remembering that his office is not to teach his own way, nor indeed
any determinate way of prayer etc: but to instruct his disciples how they may
themselves find out the way proper for them, by observing themselves what does
good and what causes harm to their spirits; In a word, that he is only Gods
Usher, and must lead souls in Gods way and not his own.

28. Of all other spiritual persons, it concerns women especially to be very
sparing in consultations, and when necessity requires, to be breife in
delivering their difficulties: for otherwise many inconveniences will
follovv; as. 1. loss of time both to the disciple and Instructour. 2.
Distractions far more hurtful then if they were busied about the most
encombring Employments of the Community. 3. danger of multiplying new
perplexities; by fearing that they have not given a full and a right account of
themselves etc: Besides, one difficulty will be apt to beget a new one, so
that instead of seeking peace by disburdening of the conscience, by their
indiscretions they may come both to trouble the peace of their Instructours and
to plunge themselves in incurable perplexities and obscurities of mind. 4.
great cause there is to fear that there may upon such occasion of unnecessary
consultations, ensue dangerous familiarities and freindships with such as may
prove very unfit counselors. Thereupon S. Francis Xauerius, says, that
seldom was there so much good to be expected from the frequent treaties
between Persons of different sexes, as there was peril in them to both.

29. This may suffice concerning the qualities and office of an external
Directour. As for more special Duties belonging to him in more particular
cases, as scrupulosities, mortifications etc. it shall be treated when we
come to speak of such particular subjects. As likewise of the obligation of
Superiors about the promoting the spiritual good of their subjects souls
(although they be not consulted with in the nature of spiritual Guides)
somevvhat shall be said in the follovving Discourse, concerning the state of a
Religious profession.

CAP. III.
. 1. Of Reading which is next to Prayer.

. 2. Some books may be read for Diuersion.

. 3. But spiritual books only for the souls proffit.

. 4. 5. Books proper for Contemplatiues etc.

. 6. Not to stop in obscure places.

. 7. Not to practice Directions, but such as are suitable to the spirit.

. 9. 10. Extraordinary practices of Saints in mortifications not to be imitated
without great caution.

. 11 Why Mystic Authors seem to write diuersely.

. 12. Some Authors indiscreetly require Perfection at first.

. 13. Reading must give way to Prayer.

. 14, how mortification is to be practiced in Reading.

. 15. 16. Divine inspirations to be observed in applying Instructions: And
particularly of those in this book.

. 17. A soul following God may without books or Instructours be lead to
perfect Contemplation.

1. A Second mean by which the Divine spirit teaches devout souls, is the
reading of Pious, books. And this exercise I esteem for vvorth and spiritual
proffit to be next unto Prayer.

2. As for ordinarily books, as Ecclesiastical story etc: it may be permitted
to souls even in Religion to read them for an innocent Diuersion and
Recreation, so that be not the principal end, but that the Intention further
be by such diuersion to dispose a weary soul the better afterward to pursue
her internal Exercises. And this Permission now is the more reasonable, since
that in Religious communities of men bodily labor is almost out of date, and
in place thereof reading and study has succeeded, as now the principal daily
Employment of Keligious persons; who living much less Abstracted from the
world, are almost forced to comply with the customs of the present times in
which learning is so valevved and so abounding.

3. But as for Spiritual Books the Intention of an Internal liver ought not
to be such as is that of those who live extrouerted lives, who read them out
of a vain curiosity, or to be thereby enabled to discourse of such sublime
matters, without any particular choice or consideration whether they be
suitable to their spirit for practice, or no. A Contemplative soul in Reading
such books must not say, This is a good book or passage: But moreover, This
is useful and proper for me, and by Gods grace I will endeavor to put in
execution in due time and place the good instructions contained in it, as far
as they are good for me.

4. For such souls the books most proper are these follovving; Scala
perfectionis written by F. Walter Hilton; The Clowd of unknowing written by
an unknown Author; The secret Paths of Divine love, as likewise the
Anatomy of the soul, written by R. F. Constant in Barbanson a Capucin; The
Book entitled Of the threefold will of God, written by R.F. Benet Fitch
(alias Ganfield) a Capucin likewise; The works of S. Teresa, of B. John de
Cruce: likewise Harphius, Thaulerus, Suso, Rusbrochius, Richardus de S.
Victore, Gerson etc. And of the Ancients, the Lives of the Ancient Fathers
living in the Deserts, and Cassian his Conferences of certain Ancient Hermites
(recommended particularly unto us by our Holy Father) S. Basiles Rules etc.
Then for souls that tend to perfection in an Active life, Books most proper
are, The works of Rodriguez of perfection; The duke of Gandy Of good works,
Mons. de Sales, Ludouicus de Puente etc. And lastly books of a mixed nature
are Granatensis, Blosius etc. Indeed fevv spiritual books there are, vvherin
there is not an intermingling of such Instructions. Now I should advise souls
in an Active life not at all to meddle with Instructions belonging to
Contemplation, but applying themselves to the precepts and exercises of an
Active life, to use them in Order to the end thereof, the Perfection of
external Christian Charity.

5. In all spiritual books, as likewise in all that treat of Christian
morality, such Instructions as concern the essential Qualities and Practice
of virtues, are to be esteemed proper to all souls, yet not so the motives,
manner and circumstances of exercising the said virtues.

6. In reading of spiritual books, if any thing touching prayer etc: occur
(as oftimes it will happen) that the spiritual disciple vndersta^ds not, let
him pass it over, and neither unnecessarily trouble his own brains, nor
make it a business to trouble others about the understanding of it. Perhaps in
time, after more reading, and especially more experience in prayer, he will
come to understand it.

7. And as for those things which he either does indeed, or thinks he
understands them, let him not be hasty to apply them to himself by practice,
out of his own natural judgment or liking; but let him observe his own
spirit, way and internal guidance by God, and accordingly make use of them:
Otherwise instead of reaping benefit, such inconveniences may happen, that it
would have been better he had never read, nor been able to read any books at
all, but only to have follovved his own Internal light, as many good souls
have done that never could read, and yet seeking God in simplicity of their
hearts, and praying without any prescribed methods, practicing likewise
according to the inuitation and impulse of the Divine spirit, have atteined to
Perfect Contemplation.

8. Generally Mystic Authors write according to their own experience in
their own souls, when they treat of the several degrees of Prayer, and
the several manners of divine operations in souls in such degrees; as if the
same Instructions would serve indefinitly for all others. Whereas such is the
in explicable variety of internal dispositions, that the same course and order
in all things will scarce serve any two souls. Therefore if the indiscreet
Readers without considering their own spirits and enablements, shall upon
the Authority of any book, either tarry too long in an Inferior degree of
Prayer, when God has fitted them, and does call them to a higher; or in a
foolish Ambition shall being unprepared, presume to a degree of prayer too
sublime and spiritual for them, there will be no end of difficulties, doubts
and consultations.

9. But of all errors the greatest and most dangerous is the indiscreet
imitating the examples and practices of Saints in particular, extraordinary
corporal mortifications, voluntarily (yet by Gods special Direction) assumed
by them, as labors, fastings, watchings, disciplines etc: for such a
forvvardnes in others, not called thereto, to be extraordinary likewise, it is
much to be feared, proceeds merely from Pride and self-love, and will
produce no better effects then the nourishing of the same inordinate
affections. And if such have not the courage and patience (as it cannot be
expected they should have) to persevere in such exercises, this will cause
Infirmity of body, de^ection of mind, and vvearines, if not an utter casting of
a spiritual course.

10. The benefit that we ought, and easily may reap from the reading of such
extraordinary practices of others, is to admire Gods ways in the conducting
of his Saints, and to take occasion from thence of humbling and despising of
our selves, seeing how short we come of them in the practice of their
virtues: But no further to imitate them in such things, then we may be assured
that God directs us by a supernatural light, and enables us by an
extraordinary Grace, yea and moreover till we have obtained the leave and
approbation of a prudent Directour. Till this be, let us supply with a good
will what our forces will not reach unto. And above all things we must
take heed that we do not entangle our selves by laying obligations or vows
upon our souls about such matters, the which we shall have difficulty to
discharge our selves from, when by trial we find the inconvenience.

11. Mystic Writers in expressing the spiritual way in which they have been
lead, do often seem to differ extremely from one another: The which difference
notvvithstanding if rightly understood, is merely in the phrase and manner of
expression. And the ground hereof is, because the pure immateriall Operations of
perfect souls in prayer, and especially the operations of God in souls in
which they are patients only, are so sublime, that intelligible words and
phrases cannot perfectly express them; and therefore they are forced to invent
new words the best they can, or to borrow similitudes from corporal things
etc. to make their conceptions more intelligible: and thus does each one
according to the manner that he finds or conceiues in himself, or according to
his skill in language. No vvonder therefore if there seem to be diversity among
them. Hervpon the Author of the Clowd observes, That great harm may come by
understanding things literally, grossly and sensibly, which howsoever they
be expressed, were intended and ought to be understood spiritually.

12. Some good spiritual Authors intending to recommend certain Duties
necessary to be practiced, for as much as concerns the substance of the Duties
(as an entire selfe-abnegation, Purity of intention etc.) they do urge the
said duties in the greatest perfection universally upon all, and with such
phrases of absolute necessity, as if upon any defect in practicing that virtue
(so by them extended to the full, to the end to prevent all the most secret
vvayes and shifts in which nature is apt to seek her own satisfaction) all
the whole design of an Internal life were ruined; they do by this overmuch
exactnes and care, instead of exciting the courage of their Readers to the
serious practice of so necessary a Duty, quite dishearten them; yea perhaps
they make them suspect the state of their souls, who being conscious of their
present infirmity and imperfections, loose all heart to adventure upon an
attempt so unproportionable to their vveake abilities. Whereas if Instructions
had been tempered with regard to the capacity of each practiser, they would
have gone on with courage and good success.

13. Voluntary Reading must give place to Prayer, whensoever the soul finds
herself invited thereto.

14. The virtue of Mortification may, and sometimes ought to be practiced in
Reading in this manner. When any book or subject is very gustfull to a soul,
she must be vvatchfull over herself not to power herself wholy upon it
with an intemperate greedines, nor to let curiosity or delight too much
possess her, but let her now and then stop the pursuit of reading, lifting up
her mind by interruptions to God, and afterward continue at least in a
vertuall attention to him, so mortifying and qualifying the impetuosity of
nature. And by no means let her give way to an unwillingness to quitt Reading
for performing her appointed Recollections, or other exercises of obligation.

15. To conclude, whosoever in Reading etc. does not chiefly observe his own
spirit and Divine Call, and makes not the books, sayings and examples of
others to serve the said spirit and Call; but on the contrary makes the divine
Inspirations subject to books etc: it were better for him never to read such
books, or receive humane Instructions; but that he should cleave only to God,
who in case of necessity will most assuredly supply all other wants and
defects.

16. And the same Liberty that I have recommended to souls in the Reading of
other books, I advise them to use in these instructions also, that is, to
apply to their own practice only such Directions, as their spiritual
Instructour, and their own experience and reason enlightened by Grace shall
show them to be proper for them. Indeed in all this book I know scarce any
one Advice which I can confidently say to be properly belonging to all souls
that lead an Internal life generally, except this; That they who aspire to
perfection in Contemplation must not content themselves, nor rest finally in
any inferior degree of Prayer, but following the Divine light and inuitation
(without obliging themselves to any forms or methods) they must from the
lowest degree of Internal Prayer (which is ordinarily Meditation) proceed to a
more sublime Prayer of immediate Affections and Acts of the will; and from
thence ascend to the Infused Prayer of Aspirations.

17. Yea I dare with all confidence pronounce, That if all spiritual books
in the world were lost, and there were no external Directours at all; yet if a
soul (sufficiently instructed in the essential grounds of Catholic Faith)
that has a natural aptnes, though otherwise never so simple and unlearned
(being only thus far well instructed at first) will prosecute Prayer and
Abstraction of life, and will resignedly undergo such necessary Mortifications
as God shall provide for her, observing God and his Call exteriourly and
interiourly, and so forsake herself, and propose Almighty God his will, Love
and honor for her final Intention (the which she will certainly do if she
attend unto his Inspirations,) Such a soul would walk clearly in perfect
light, and with all possible security; and would not fail in due time to
arrive at Perfect Contemplation. These are the two external means by which
God teaches souls, discovering to them his will, to wit, Instructours and
Books: And to these we might add another, to wit, Laws and precepts of
Superiors (for God teaches us also this way, and never commands contrarily:)
But of these we shall speak herafter.

CAP. IV.
. 1. Of the 3. and most principal way by which God teaches internal livers
viz. Immediate Divine Inspirations. The Order of particular considerations
followingt ^ouching them.

. 2. First of the necessity of them: and the ground of such necessity.

. 3. 4. 5. 6. The said necessity proved by the testimony of S. Benedict in his
Rule etc. as also by his example.

. 7. A further demonstration of the said necessity.

1. THE third forementioned, and of all other the most principal Mean by
which God instructs and directs Internal livers in the secret Paths of his
divine love, and upon which do depend the two former, are Interior
Illuminations and inspirations of Gods holy Spirit, who is to be acknowledged
the only supreme Master; concerning which Inspirations it has already been
shevved in general what they are, how distinguished from the lights and
motions of common Grace, and what are the objects about which principally
they are exercised etc. I will now treat more particularly of them, in this
follovving Order, viz. 1. There shall be further shevved the necessity of them.
2. That souls are obliged to dispose themselves for the receiving of them, and
how this is to be done; to wit, by removing the impediments. 3. How God
communicates to the soul his light and grace for her instruandion and
direction. 4. That it is not hard to discern them, and very secure to rely
upon them. 5. That by the use of them no prejudice at all comes to
Ecclesiastical or Religious Obedience.

2. Touching the first Point, to wit, the necessity of them in an Internal
Contemplative life; There is none that will deny or doubt, but that Divine
Inspirations are necessary for as much as concerns the proper and essential
Actions of Christian virtues, the which receive all their meritoriousnes from
the said Inspirations: But some there are that will not allow the same
necessity of expecting Inspirations and Calls for Actions or omissions of
themselves indifferent, or of less moment. But surely since it is generally
agreed upon by Divines following S. Augustine, S. Thomas etc. that there are no
actions done in particular circumstances which are simply to be esteemed
indifferent, but since they must have some end, if the end be good, they are to
be esteemd good; and if evil, they are evil: (hovveuer universally considered
they are in their own nature indifferent, because according to the intention
and end vvhervvith they are done they may be good or evil:) Again since there
are no actions so inconsiderable, but may, yea ought to be performed out of the
motive of divine love, and to the end to increase the said love in our souls,
especially the ordinary Actions and employments of a Religious contemplative
life: And lastly since Perfection in Divine love cannot be atteined by the
simple exercise of Charity, in duties which are absolutely necessary, and
without mortal sin cannot be omitted, the which duties do seldom occur;
But it is moreover requisite for that end to mul^iply frequently and daily
Exercises of the said Love in offices less necessary; yea and to purify all
our most ordinary Actions from the steines of self-love which adhere unto
them: hence, I say, appears the necessity of the Influence of the divine
spirit upon our Actions which are not of such obligation, if we seriously
tend to the Perfection of Divine love in our souls.

3. To this purpose it is vvorth the observing, how seriously our holy Father
S. Benedict in forces the necessity of harkening to and obeying the
Inspirations of Gods holy spirit our only supreme Master, making this the
foundation of all Religious Duties, in the Prologue of his Rule, where he
says, That we must (nunquam discedere ab eius magisterio) never depart from
the Institution and direction of God; That we must have our eyes open (ad
Deificum lumen,) to the Divine light. On which grounds he calls a Monastery
(scholam Dominici seruitij) the school wherein Gods service is taught, and
(officinam Artis spiritualis) the workehouse wherein the art of the divine
spirit is taught and practiced: Namely because all things, all obseruances even
those of the least moment in a Religious life do tend to withdraw us from
all other teachers, and all other skill, and to bring us to be (Deo docibiles)
taught by God only. And therefore it is that our said holy Patriarch lays this
as the foundation of all religious Practices, that they be done in virtue of
prayer; his words are, Inprimis vt quidquid agendum inchoas bonum, a Deo
perfici instantissima Oratione deposcas. As if he should say, In the first and
principal place thou art to consider this to be the end why I inuit thee to
an abstracted Religious life, that thou may thereby be brought to this happy
and secure state, as to be enabled to obtain of God by most earnest assiduous
prayer to give a blessing and perfection to every Action that in a religious
state thou shall apply thy self to. Now if according to our holy Fathers
principal Intention, Prayer ought to prepare and accompany every Action which
we perform in Religion; then surely it will follovv that they ought all of
them to be performed with relation to God, as upon his bidding and for his
love and glory.

4. Moreover more particularly concerning Divine Inspirations our holy Father
makes mention of several ones in special; As in the point of Internal
prayer, though in common, he ordeines that it should be short, (in the 20.
Chap. of his Rule) yet so as that he leaves it to the liberty of any one to
prolong it (ex affectu Inspirationis Diuinae gratiae) by an inuitation and
enablement from a d^uine Inspiration and Grace. And again concerning
Abstinence, as also the measure of allowance for meat and drink, he
professes that he had a scruple how to proportion it, considering the variety
of men's tempers and necessities: But hovveuer though he was vvilling to allow
what might be sufficient for the strongest, yet he leaves every one in
particular to the direction of Grace, saying in the 40. chap. (Vnus quisque
proprium habet donum ex Deo; alius sic, alius vero sic) that is. Every one has
a peculiar gift of God; one has this, and another that. (Quibus autem donat
Deus tolerantiam abstinentiae, propriam se habituros mercedem sciant.) That is,
those unto whom God has given the strength to endure a sparing abstinence, let
them be assured that so doing, God will give them a peculiar reward. Besides
these, several other passages might be produced out of our Holy fathers Rule
to the same purpose.

5. Now in this last passage there is a Document that well deserves to be
considered. Every one, says he, in S. Paul's words, has his proper peculiar
gift, in the matter of Refection. All good Christians have the gift to avoid
therein a mortally sinful excess: But Religious Internal livers have,
moreover (or may have) a special Gift to avoid even venial defects; And the
Perfect to advance themselves thereby toward Perfection. Yet from thence we
cannot conclude that God has obliged himself to discover unto every one,
although seeking it by Prayer, the exactly true state and complexion of his
body. Whence it follows that if he, being mistaken in that which he is not
bound to know, should demand more or less sustenance then is absolutely
necessary; it is no sin, upon supposition that such desire did not proceed from
a sensual affection to meat, nor a faulty neglect of health, but from the
best light that reason could afford him to judge of his own necessity, and
from an Intention to benefit his soul by a moderate refreshing of nature. And
it is Gods will that we should follovv Reason in all external things, in
which God does not usually otherwise illuminate his servants. Though natural
Reason therefore may fail and be mistaken, yet the person does not offend, but
rather follows God by follovving the light of his reason, this being all the
light in such cases afforded him. So for example, if an Hermit being infirm,
and having none to consult with, should doubt whether it were unlawful for
him to break a commanded Fast: and having by Prayer desired Gods Direction,
should remain persuaded thet it was* and thereby should prejudice his health
by fasting; This would be no sin at all in him: yea on the contrary it would
be meritorious: For he would fail indeed in that for which he had no light,
neither was light necessary to him, to wit, the exact knowledge of what had
been requisite for corporal health: But he would merit in that for which he
had light, to wit, the advancement of his soul. And ordinarily speaking, the
inspirations that God affords to the more perfect in such cases, are rather to
abstain even from the more expedient commodities, yea oftimes to some
prejudice of health, for the greater good of the soul; because too anxious a
solicitude for health is vnbecoming an Internal liver. Yea a robustious
health uninterrupted is not convenient for such an one. But leaving this
digression.

6. Our holy Father teaches as himself had been taught, (For what other
Teacher had he from his infancy till the moment of his Expiration but the
Divine spirit, by whose light and impulse alone he was directed into and in
his solitude, and afterward enabled to direct all succeeding ages in a
Coenobiticall life?) to have recourse to the same Teacher! The like may be said
of all the Ancient Hermites and anachoretes who could have no other
Instructour but God, and had no other employment during their rigorous solitude
and silence, but to attend to their Internal Teacher, and put in execution his
Inspirations, in all their actions both internal and external. To this
purpose says a holy Hermit in Cassian, That as it was by Gods inspiration
that we begin, when we enter into Religion: so likewise (Magisterio and
illuminatione Dei ad perfectionem peruenimus) by the discipline, Instruction
and Illumination of God we atteine to perfection. Another says, That a soul
can do no good at all unless she be (quotidiana Domini illuminatione
illustrata) enlightened by a daily illumination from God. These are Expressions
that our holy Father himself uses, and it seems borrowed them from the same
Authors: And for this Reason it is, that in his Rule he contents himself
with ordeining Prescriptions for the exterior only, because he knevv that the
Interior could only be directed by God. But vvithall his ordinations are such,
as we may see his Intention and only design was by them to dispose souls to
be capable of observing and follovving the inspirations and inward
instructions of Gods holy Spirit, without which all exterior Obseruances
would never bring us to perfection: such were very Rigorous solitude and
abstraction from all intercourse either with the business or nevves of the
world, almost continual silence, but when we speak to God etc. And
vvithall in several places of his Rule he signifies by the way that the
Reformation of the Spirit ought to be the principal aim of a Religious Soul.
So that in the conclusion of the Rule having regard to the External
Obseruances expressly commanded therein (as a preparation to the Perfection to
be learnt out of the Lives and Conferences of the Fathers) he professes with
great humility, but with great truth also, that his intention thereby was that
those which observed it be enabled to declare in some sort (honestatem morum,
aut initium conuersationis eos habere) that they had atteined to a laudable
exterior carriage and the beginning of a holy Religious conversation: But,
says he, whosoever shall tend to perfection: Sunt doctrinae Sanctorum Patrum:
as if he had said, He must according to the teachings of the Holy Fathers
attend unto the Divine Master by exercising according to his instructions that
pure sublime Prayer etc. which they practiced and discovered. And suitable
herto S. Francis likewise in his Rule aduises his Disciples thus, Attendant
fratres, quod super omnia desiderare debent habere spiritum Domini, and sanctam
eius operationem, that is, The Religious brethren must attentively mark, that
above all other things they ought to desire to have the spirit of our lord and
his holy operation in their souls.

7. To conclude, either it must be granted that Perfection may be atteined
merely by avoiding Mortal sins and doing such action of virtue as are
absolutely necessary to all Christians (which to say were manifestly foolish
and false:) And likewise that Actions more indifferent and not so universally
obliging (such as are certain more proffitable manners of Prayer, external
Religious Obseruances, Refection, conversation with our brethren etc.) cannot
be rendered capable of a holy Intention, and of advancing us in the Divine love
(which is against experience;) And moreover that without Internal Grace
actually operating (which is nothing else but Divine Illuminations and
impulses) these ordinary Inferior Actions may be exalted to produce that
effect which the greatest necessary virtues could not produce, which to say
were impiety: Or it must be granted that the teaching of Gods Holy Spirit is
the only principal necessary cause by whose virtue we are informed and
enabled to improoue and make use of these Actions for the atteining of so
sublime an end, as Perfection in Contemplation is, and without which it is
impossible to be atteined. And indeed so impossible to be brought under
external Rules, and so secret and vndiscouerable are the Internal
Dispositions of souls and their operations, that they cannot be clearly
perceived, nor consequently ordered, but by him to whom alone (our figmentum)
our hearts and all the secret inclinations and motions of them are naked and
transparent.

CAP. V.
. 1. All Internal livers obliged to attend to Gods Inspirations,

. 2. Therefore the Impediments to this duty are to be removed, which are two:
first distracting Images: which are expelled by Abstraction of life.

. 3. The 2* Impediment is unruly Passions; which are calmed by Mortification
and Peace of mind.

. 4. 5. The end why a Religious state especially of S. Benedicts Institution is
undertaken, is the remouall of these inpediments.

. 6. 7. 8. 9. A third more special impediment, to wit, want of due Liberty of
spirit to follow Gods Directions, caused by voluntary burdens and coustumes
assumed: Several such are exemplified in.

1. THE Necessity of a Divine Internal Teacher being established, there
follows from thence an Equal necessity for all those, whose profession
obliges them to walk in those vvayes toward the sublime end proposed, to
attend unto and obey this only, most necessary Master. And because each one
has in his heart a false teacher that alvvaies urges us to hearken to his
perverse teachings, and to neglect the divine Teacher; Therefore the way to
become a diligent and obedient Disciple to Gods holy Spirit will be. 1. To
neglect, contradict, and as much as lies in us to silence the teachings and
suggestions of corrupt nature. 2. And secondly to be attentive to the voice of
Gods spirit in our souls.

2. For the first; there are two general Impediments that nature lays in our
way to hinder us from attending to God. The first is distracting Images; the
Second unquiet Passions. Now the Remedy against the former is Abstraction of
life; a not engaging our selves in businesses that belong not unto us; the
mortifying of the curiosity of knovving or hearing strange or new things not
pertinent to our Profession: the tempring of our tongues from vain
unprofitable conuersations; the reducing our thoughts, as much as may be, from
multiplicity to unity, by fixing them continually on the divine love which is
that vnum necessarium etc:

3. Again the only proper Remedies against the other impediment, to wit,
unquiet Passions, are first Mortification of all inordinate Affection to
creatures; of all vain encombring freindships, all factious Partialities; all
thoughtfull provision for the contenting of our sensual Desires: But
especially of that most dangerous, because most in time and spiritual thirst
of knowledge unnecessary, and of all ambition to get victory or glory by
disputing, vvriting etc: as likewise of all Anger, Impatience, melancholy,
fear, scrupulosity etc: And secondly a studious care to preserve our souls in
all the peace, tranquillity and cheerfullnes possible: not suffering any
passions to be raised in our minds during our imperfect state, no not although
they should be directed upon good and holy objects: because they will obscure
and disorder our spirits. And therefore we must avoid all violence and
impetuous hastines in performing our best and most necessary Duties, the which
are discharged most efficaciously and purely when they are done with the
greatest stillnes, calmenes, clearnes of mind, and resignation. It is
sufficient in this place only to touch passingly upon these Impediments,
because in the follovving Treatise we shall have occasion to treat more
largely and purposely of them.

4. Now to what End did we come into Religion, but only to avoid all these
Impediments in the world, which withdraw us from attending to God and
following his Divine Guidance? In this very point lies the difference betvveene
a Secular and a Religious state, that a Secular Person secularly minded, by
reason of the noise, tumults and unavoidable Distraandions, sollicitudes and
tentations which are in the world, cannot without much ado find leisure to
attend unto God and the gaining of his love even for a fevv minutes every day,
or little oftener then the laws of the church necessarily oblige him. And all
the directions that he is capable of in Gods service must come from without,
for by reason that his soul is so filled with Images vain or sinful, and so
agitated with impetuous Affections and designs, he cannot recollect himself
to hear God speaking in him. Whereas a Religious person professes his only
business to be attending to Gods Internal voice: for which purpose he
renounceth all these Impediments and distractions.

5. And surely in a special manner the Disciples of S. Benedict, if they will
cast a serious eye upon the frame of their Rule, they will find that as it is
very moderate and prudently condescending in all matters of outvvard corporal
Austerities, afflicting to nature, but not immediately helpful to the Spirit,
so on the contrary it is very rigorous in the exacting of silence, solitude, a
renouncing all proprietary solicitude for corporal necessities and all other
mortifications, which will hinder the dissipating of our spirits and
thoughts, and indispose the soul to recollection and attention to God: But
specially Prayer, which he calls Opus Dei (to which all other works and
obseruances are to give place) is most seriously and incessantly enjoined: By
the practice whereof we do above all other exercises transcend grosser and
sensible Images in the understanding, and subdue unruly Passions in the heart.
So that it is evident that our Holy Fathers principal care in all the
obseruances enjoined by him, was to free his Disciples from these two
general and most powerful hindrances to introuersion and a continual
attention to, and conversation which God: The which may most properly be
called, The Spirit of S. Benedicts Rule.

6. There is moreover one special impediment to the observing and obeying of
Divine Inspirations which is not to be omitted, and the rather because it is
less taken notice of in ordinary spiritual Writers. This Impediment consists
in this, that many souls do indiscreetly prejudice, yea often take away quite
that indifference and liberty of Spirit which is necessary to all that will
seriously follovv the Divine Guidance in all the vvayes that they then are lead
by it. For it were foolish to prescribe unto God the vvayes in which we
would have him to lead us; This were to oblige God to follovv our vvayes and
to do our wills, and not we to perform his. And this is done by those who
obstinatly adhere to preconceiu d opinions and fore-practised coustumes
whatsoever they be. For though such coustumes in themselves and to other souls
may be never so good and proffitable; yea though formerly even to those persons
themselves they have been never so proper and beneficial; yet this was only
whilst they were in such a state and degree of Spirituality; the which state
altering (as in progress it needs must) then that which was formerly proper
and conformable to the Divine will and inspiration, will become improper,
inconvenient and contrary to the present Internal Guidance of God.

7. This impediment must necessarily be removed, and devout souls must
continually keep themselves in a free indifferency and supplenes of Spirit;
for otherwise they will become in many cases and circumstances indisposed to
believe, and incapable to execute that which Gods holy spirit shall dictate
unto them: yea they will often contristate and endanger to extinguish the said
spirit in them by an obstinate doing of the contrary to what it moves unto.

8. The reasonablenes and necessity of this advice may be showed by this
example; It may have been good and proffitable for a soul when she entered
into an Internal life to appoint unto herself certain voluntary Devotions
and vocal Prayers etc: or afterward to select certain peculiar subjects of
meditation, as the Quatuor Nouissima, the Mystery of the Passion etc: or to
prescribe unto herself certain times for some good external or internal
Practices: or to make frequent Examinations of conscience, Confessions etc: All
these things are good whilst the soul finds proffit by them: and so long they
are to be continued. But if God shall call her to an higher exercise, and to a
more pure, efficacious Prayer, so that she begins to loose all gust in her
former exercises, the which do not only abridge her of the time necessary for
her more perfect Recollections, but likewise dull the spirit, and indispose it
for such Prayer, and other more beneficial practices to which she is by a new
clearer Divine light directed or invited, and by Divine grace enabled, In this
case pertinaciously to adhere to former coustumes, because she finds them
commended in books etc: or because she did formerly reap proffit by them,
this is to entangle, fetter and captiuate the spirit, to renounce the Divine
guidance, and to obstruct all vvayes of adua^cement in the paths of
Contemplation. The soul therefore in such or the like cases must necessarily
use some violence upon herself to recover a true and most needful
Indifferency and liberty of spirit, that so she may freely follovv God,
vvhithersoeuer he shall by his Inspirations inuit her, being assured that she
shall never by him be persuaded or tempted to do any thing contrary or
prejudicial to her duty, obedience to lavvfull Authority, or any other
necessary obligations.

9. This Instruction reaches very far; yea so far that even Learned men, yea
some that pass for spiritual, if they be unexperienced in the true Internal
vvayes of Gods Spirit leading to Contemplation, would perhaps mislike the
freedom which in many cases must, and has been allowed by the best and most
sublime Mystic Authors to souls of some peculiar dispositions and in
certain circumstances. And as for unlearned Persons, they would be in danger
almost to be scandalized.

10. The special Points therefore by which Liberty of Spirit is in many souls
much abridged to their great hindrance, are these which follovv, viz. 1.
Confession of certain venial sins. 2. Coustumary sollicitous Examinations of
conscience. 3. In compliance with coustume, to confess both oftener and
likewise such Imperfections as it were better for the soul not to mention in
Confession. 4. Renewing of general Confessions. 5. The Forcing Acts of
sensible Contrition. 6. Not contenting ones self many times with vertuall
Examinations of conscience. 7. Using certain vocal Prayers voluntarily. 8.
The obliging ones self to coustumes and ceremonies not of obligation. 9.
Continuing voluntary Mortifications when the soul finds no benefit by them,
but rather becomes disheartened and dejected. 10. Practicing what is found in
books though improper for the spirit. 11. Imitating vnvvarily the good
practices of others. 12. Obliging ones self not to quitt the meditating on the
Passion. 13. Doing things merely for edification. 14. Tying ones self to nice
methods, orders and a determinate number of succeeding Acts or Affections in
Recollection. 15. Exercising corporal labors and Austerities, without due
Consideration and necessity. 16: Adhering to any kind of Internal Exercise,
when perhaps the soul is invited and enabled to an higher. 17. The troubling
ones self to inquire after or to procure Sermons. 18. The obliging ones self
to a determinate posture in Prayer. 19. The voluntary hearing of such a number
of Masses. 20. Set devotions or exercises to Saints, or Prayers for the dead or
living. 21. Sollicitous or distracting cares to gain Indulgences by going to
such or such Churches. 22. Adjoining ones self to Confraternities, and the
several duties belonging to them. 23. Iterating the Office in case any thing
through inaduertence has been omitted. 24. Generally fettring ones self with
any practices which are not of obligation. 25. And (which is vvorst of all)
intangling the soul by hasty and indiscreet promises and vows, made during
some fit of sensible Devotion, or in a Passion of remorse, fear etc. By these
and other such practices as these, which are supposed not to be of obligation,
many souls in desire tending to Perfection do so ouerburden and entangle
themselves, that they either cannot observe the operations of the Divine Spirit
in them, or have not the liberty to follovv vvhither it would dravv them; and
thereby remain in their imperfect state without hope of making any progress,
unless they will renounce their own preconceiued judgment and preassumed
selfe-imposed obligations.

11: Hitherto it may suffice to have spoken of the impediments by which souls
are hindered from attending to and obeying their Internal Divine Teacher, who
only knows what is best for every one in all circumstances, and will not
fail to direct for the very best every soul that with humility and
Resignation has recourse to him.

12. Now such is the nature of the Reasonable soul (which is all Actiuity, and
will be continually thinking on and loving somewhat) that if these impediments,
caused by impertinent Images of Creatures, inordinate affections to them, and
by a voluntary shackling the soul with assumed opinions and coustumes, were
once removed, she would see clearly what she ought to follovv and love,
which is God only: for creatures being removed and forgotten, nothing remains
but God: no other light for our understanding; nor other object for our wills
and affections, but he only.

13. And the general, of all others most efficacious Mean to remove all these
impediments is, by Abstractio^, and Prayer in Spirit to aspire unto an
habitual state of Recollection and introuersion. For such Prayer besides the
virtue of impetration, by which God will be moved according to his so
frequent and express promises, to be a light to the meek and humble: It has
also a direct virtue to procure this illumination, in as much as therein our
souls see him and nothing else: so that they have no other Guide to follovv
but him; And especially in as much as by Prayer in spirit Divine Charity is
most firmly rooted in our hearts, which makes the^ insensible to all other
things that would divert our Attention or Affection. And we see by experience
thar Love (of what object soever it be) does more clear the mind, and
conferrs in a moment, as it were, more skill to find out the means, by which
the object beloved may be obtained, then never so much study or meditation.

CAP. VI.
. 1. 2. The Gift of the holy Spirit is the Principle of all good Actions in us.

. 3. 4. 5. 6. It does not work of it self, unless excited by Actual grace
and our endeavors.

. 7. By the using and employment of this Gift, there is raised in us a
supernatural light of Discretion, as Prudence is increased by the practice of
virtue.

. 8. How the exercise of love causes Illumination.

. 9. 10. Supernatural light is 1. Actual. 2. Permanent.

. 11. The effects of supernatural Discretion.

. 12. 13. 14. 15. Contemplatiues and Active livers, both guided by a
supernatural light; but differently.

. 16. How imperfect souls may do their ordinary daily actions in light.

1. THE third Point before proposed for our consideration in this matter of
Internal Inspirations is, the manner how God communicates his light and grace
to our understanding and wills for our instruction, and Directions, in the
Mystic vvayes of Contemplation.

2. Now for a clearer explication of this point we are to consider that that
fundamental grace, which in Scriptures is called Donum spiritus sancti. The
Gift of the Holy Ghost, and which is conferred on all in Baptism, and being
afterward by actual sins smothered or extinguished, is renewed by Penance,
Prayer etc: and cherished or increased by the worthy use of the holy Eucharist
and other virtuous practices of a Christian life: This Grace, I say, (what
ever it be Physically in its own nature, if it were examined Scholastically,
which is not my intent) is a certain Divine Principle or Faculty, partaking
somevvhat of the nature of a permanent habit, infused into the spirit of man,
by which he is enabled, whensoever the free will concurreth actually, both
for knovving, beleiuing and practicing to do the will of God in all things.
For the virtue thereof extends it self through all the faculties of the soul,
curing the distempers, wants, and deordinations that sin had caused in them.

3. This new Divine faculty therefore (which seems to be expressed by the
Prophet David, when he says, signatum est super nos lumen vultus tui Domine,
That is. The light of thy countenance, O lord, is like a seal stamped on our
souls) does not, neither is it sufficient of it self alone actually to
produce any saving effects: As we see that a Musician or a Poet though never
so skillfull, do not therefore ever actually sing or write verses, until some
certain occasions or circumstances do actually determine them thereto, as
gain, or requests of others, or praise, or a mind to please themselves etc:
For the Actual employment and exercise of such Grace there is moreover
necessary an actual aid from God, who by a special Divine Providence does
often administer occasions, hints and enablements exciting the will to vvaken
this Grace in the soul, which otherwise would lie vacant and unuseful.

4. And proofs of this, daily experience shows us both in our selves and
others, how a sermon or any other word seasonably spoken, or any object
occurring with due circumstances does incite us to lift up our souls to God
by prayer, to perform some Acts of Charity, to mortify some inordinate
affection etc. Yea sometimes from a desperate sinful state to convert our
souls to God. And thus doing we (as S. Paul exhorts Timothy, do (...)) raise
and blow into a flame the grace which before lay in our hearts, like coals of
fire smothred in the Ashes. And if this be frequently done, that Grace which
at the first imparting was but vveake, and needed strong endeauours to excite
it, becomes far more active, and more easy to be excited, so that upon any the
least occasion offered, it is ready to bestirre it self and disperse its odours
and virtue; till at last it gets so perfect a dominion in perfect souls, that
it quite subdues the contrary Principle of corrupt nature: And is scarce ever
idle, but the least hint being given, it turns the soul presently to God, and
keeps it almost continually fixed on him: In so much as those things which
formerly had no effect at all upon them, now presently and even violently
inflame them.

5. Yea in some supereminently perfect souls this gift of Gods holy Spirit
comes to be so vigorous, that it subdues even reason it self, and leads it
captive after it self, pushing the soul to Heroycall actions without any
precedent Act of reason, or the least deliberation; though in the Act the soul
by consenting, merits. Thus we read of the ancient Martyrs how they by an
impetuous impulse of the Divine spirit, rushed before the persecuting Judges to
confess the name of Christ. Yea S. Apollonia cast herself into the fire: The
love of Christ burning in their hearts and constreining them, as S. Paul says:
From the like efficacy of the Divine spirit proceeded that Spiritual Gift of
Prayer, by which the Holy Primitive Christians in their Public meetings
conceived and povvred forth Prayers without any concurrence thereto of their
own Invention, Gods spirit itself (in S. Paul's expression) praying in them.
And in this sense principally it is, that, I suppose, the Schools do
understand the Gifts of the Spirit, although most certain it is that all Holy
Actions internal or external are effects of the same Spirit, though in a
less degree.

6. This fundamental Grace therefore is that Talent or stock, that has Gods
Image on it, and not Caesar's, which God bestows upon every one in Baptism
etc. to trade with all: the which till the will cooperates with the Actual
Aid of God, is, as it were, wrapped in a Napkin and hid under ground; but
being well managed multiplies into many Talents. This is that very small but
Divine seed of which the Evangelist speaks, which being cast in our hearts,
by labor and cultiuation produces many and precious fruits: this is that
(Fermentum) leaven, which being enclosed in the three faculties of our souls,
as in three measures of meal, does disperse its virtue through the whole mass.

7. Now to the end I may approach more close to the present matter: we may
further consider, that as by the exercise of Moral Philosophical virtues
there is ingenerated and daily increased by perseverance in the same exercise,
that most noble universal virtue of Moral Prudence, which no study or
speculatiue learning how great soever, could have produced: The which
Prudence as the Philosopher says, is a skill most properly conversant about
particular Acts (not general notions or Definitions of things:) and enlightens
the soul to judge and determine in which circumstances, and with what
concurring qualities an Action of virtue ought and may with the best advantage
and perfection be exercised: So that by the help of this virtue of Prudence,
when it is arrived to an excelling degree, a virtuous Person will never omit
a due occasion to practice virtue, nor will he ever do it unseasonably and
indiscreetly (for then it would not be virtue:) and when he exercises it, he
will not be deficient in any thing requisite to give a luster thereto. The very
same in a due proportion is seen in the Exercise of Divine virtue or Charity:
for by a constant practice thereof, not only Charity it self is exalted,
multiplied and increased, but there is likewise kindled in the soul by the
spirit of God a light of spiritual Prudence far more clear and more certain
to conduct us in the Divine vvayes, then moral Prudence is in the ways of
moral honesty. The which Divine light has this great advantage above
Prudence, That whereas Moral wisdom can only teach the exercise of virtue in
those occasions (which do not every day happen) in which such virtues ought to
be exercised, neglecting to give any Rules to lesser indifferent Actions: This
Divine light which teaches us to love nothing at all but God, accounts no
actions at all in particular indifferent, but teaches us to direct all to the
service and love of God, and can discern how one may concur thereto more
then another, and accordingly chooses the best.

8. Now the Reason why by the Exercise of Charity alone (and not by any study
or speculatiue considerations) this Divine light can be kindled is, because the
Blindness and Darkness which is naturally in our understandings comes
principally from the perverse deordination which Self-love causes in our
wills: By means of which we will not suffer the understanding to see what
it does see: For even when by the light of Faith we are in general
instructed in the Offices and Rules of virtue and Piety, yet in many
particulars Self-love adhering to that side which we ought to refuse, will
either forbid and hinder the understanding from considering what is evil or
defectuous in it: or if there be any the least ground of Doubt, it will cast
such fair glosses on it, and so seduce the understanding to find out Motives
and pretenses for the preferring thereof, that in fine the light it self which
is in the understanding will misleade us. But when by perfect Divine Charity
all these distorsions of the will are rectified, and that all the subtle
insinuations, false pretexts, close interests and Designs of self-love are
discovered and banished, then the mind beholds all things with a clear light,
and proposing God as the end of all Actions whatsoever, it sees where God is
to be found in them; and may best be served and ob^ved by them; Then the will
is so far from clovv^^^g, or casting mists before the eyes of the
understanding, that if there were any before, it alone dispells them: for it is
only the novv-sanctified, fervent will that draws the soul in all its
faculties from all other inferior seducing objects, and carries them in its
own stream and swift course toward God: It will not suffer the soul to
choose any thing but what is good, yea the best of all, because God would have
that to be chosen alone. According therefore to the measure of Charity, so is
our measure of Divine light. If Charity be but vvarme and imperfect, our light
in Particulars is obscure, and can show us only such things as are necessarily
to be practiced under the penalty of being separated from God the Object of
Charity: but if Charity be inflamed, how great is the light which that
heavenly Fire casts? not a step we set forvvard but we see the way
perfectly before us, and can avoid all the vneauen, rough, miry or crooked
steps in it, and so run apace without stumbling, delaying, or declining, so
approaching daily nearer and nearer to the end of our heavenly Race.

9. Moreover this Divine light is either an habitual, permanent light: or
Actual and tra^sitory: The Permanent light is the virtue of spiritual
discretion, without which the Actions that to the world give the greatest
luster, are of little or no proffit. Such as are great voluntary austerities,
performing of solemn Offices, almes-giuing etc. all which unless they come
from the Principle of true Charity, and are designed for the increasing and
deeper rooting thereof in the Spirit, are so far from being of any vvorth, that
they do rather prejudice and diminish that virtue. Both these Conditions are
requisite to make an Action perfect and acceptable to God; it must both proceed
from him; and also be directed to him; He must not only be the End, but the
Principle also. It is not therefore sufficient to a soul (especially if she
seriously tend to Perfection in Contemplation) that the Action which she does
now, is in it self good and directed to a good end, unless her Divine light
inform her, that in the present circumstances it is Gods will that she should
perform that determinate Action, rather then another perhaps in it self, and
in other Circumstances better then it: For, as Thaulerus says, God will reward
no Actions but his own; that is, Such as he gave order and commission for.

10. This being a most certain Truth, what a world of Actions, in themselves
of no ill aspect, are there done by imperfect, extrouerted souls, which
having no other fountain, Principle, or light from which they are at first
derived, but the light of humane reason, they will find at Gods hands no
acceptance at all? such souls loose all benefitt by all their doings, but
those which are of absolute necessity: and by many of those likewise. Nay
how many are there which being driven to some Actions by a violent unlawful
Passion for, or against some Person; yet because before the Action is ended,
they can cosen themselves with proposing some good end, do therefore think
themselves excused? whereas such a proposing of a good end to an Action
beginning only from corrupt nature, rather aggrauates the fault, by adding
Hypocrisy to it: The which themselves might easily discover, if they would at
the same time consider, that such Actions would have been forborne, and the
contrary done, if the objects and Persons had been changed. How small a
Proportion of this Spiritual light have such souls?

11. This Permanent light of Supernatural Discretion informs the soul
generally in all things efficacious to her advancement toward Contemplation.
It teaches her in Religious obseruances culpably to neglect none, and to
perform them with a pure intention for her Spiritual good; In Mortifications
to support the necessary ones willingly and proffitably, and assume only such
voluntary ones as God directs her to, therein considering the infirmity of the
body, as well as the fervor of the will, least by ouerburdening nature
unnecessarily she be rendered unable to bear even those which are of
obligation. In Prayer it teaches the soul what degre^ is proper for her; and
how long she is to continue in it without change, till God inuit her to a
higher; and then readily to accept of his Inuitation. Likewise what
proportion of time is requisite to be spent in prayer, so as to make a
discreet and sufficient progress therein. It teaches her to suspect sensible
devotion, and not to glutt herself with the honey of it, nor to follovv it
too fast to designs of seeming perfection, and extraordinary taskes, which
when such Devotion ends would be burdensome and harmefull. In a word, it
teaches the soul that du^^ moderation in all things which makes them laudable
and meritorious.

12. Now vvheras I have called this a Permanent and habitual light; it is to
be observed, that as it is habitual only, it does not direct: because unless
it be in action, it is as it were veiled over; until that God by some
occasion administered do move the soul to reflect and consult him, and hervpon
the light is vnveiled and shines forth, giving direction in the present action
or necessity. So that it is God, or the gift of his holy spirit (very
praedominant in such souls) that is their actual Directour.

13. There is none that has a good will and seeks God in sincerity of heart
but is capable of such a guidance by the light communicated to souls by the
holy Spirit: so that the duty of attending to and obeying it has place not only
in a Contemplative, but also in the exercises of a devout Active life. For
doubtless such likewise have a supernatural light answerable to their state,
by which they are enabled to perform their actions with much Purity of
intention.

14. Notvvithstanding in respect of the degrees of Purity of intention, the
doings of Contemplative souls do much excel those of Active livers, by
reason of the deeper entry that they make into their interior in their more
profound, pure and imageles Recollections, by which they discover the depth of
their most secret intentions, and accordingly purify them from whatsoever is
amiss in them. Besides, they according to their state dealing in fewer
exterior, distractiue employments, do both keep themselves in a better
disposition to attend to the voice of their Internal Teacher, and also
contract fewer blemishes; And those that they do contract, they do more
easily discern and rectify: lastly being exercised for the most part in
internal operatio^s, their continual task is to cleanse the very fountain,
which is the Spirit it self, the seat of Divine light and grace.

15. In a Contemplative life likewise, according to the degrees of
proficiency, so is the attendance unto, and the performance of the Divine
inspirations. For to perfect souls the Divine voice and light is in a manner a
continual guide, and they have a continual correspondence with it, even in
their most ordinary smallest actions. Whereas the imperfecter receive it seldom
(for as much as concerns the purifying and supernaturalizing their ordinary
actions) except in their Recollections, yea perhaps only when they are in the
height of their exercise. And the like may be said of devout souls in an
Active life. And they do at other times put in execution the directions
received in prayer by virtue of the light remaining in their minds. But as for
other actions for which they have received no light at all in Prayer, those
they perform with the help of their natural reason, or at best by the
general habitual light of grace only, by virtue of which they avoid grosser
sinful defects, but yet their Actions are steined with great impurity of
intention, and a mixture of natural and sensual interests. The reason is,
because Imagination, and Passion being yet very predominant in them, do push
them hastily to perform their actions, without sufficient Reflection and
consulting their Internal Teacher: And if they do endeavor to adioyne a good
intention, it comes late, after the action is either begun, or resolved upon
for other motives: so that the divine Love is but an accessory and attendant;
and not the prime mouer or Principle of the Action.

16. The best means therefore that imperfect souls have to cleanse their
ordinary actions from the impurity of natural interests, is in a general
manner to forethinke daily of their employments of obligation, and to
foreordaine the future employments of the day, (I mean such as are left to
their own voluntary choice and judgment, and that are likely to take up any
considerable part of their time and Thoughts, as certain determinate Studies
etc.) and thereupon at their morning Recollections begging the assistance of the
Divine spirit, let them make good purposes to perform them out of the motive
of Divine love, and for Gods glory: and let them take heed not to change the
order resolved indiscreetly: Yet vvithall on the other side, let them avoid the
intangling themselves with any such resolutions, so as that the transgressing
of them should cause disturbance or remorse in them. Thus doing, and sometimes
during the day quietly reflecting upon the promise made in the morning
Recollection, the Divine light will grow more and more familiar to them,
extinguishing by degrees the false light by which they were formerly for the
most part mislead.

CAP. VII.
. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. How a soul is to behave herself to abreine light in
doubtful cases of moment.

. 8, She must not pretend to extraordinary matters.

. 9. God signifies his will two ways. First by clearing the understanding.

. 10. 11. Why and how Prayer disposes thereto.

. 12. 13. The 2. way is by a blind reasonles moving of the will.

. 14, 15. The same confirmed out of S. Thomas and Aristotle.

. 16. A confidence that these operations are of God.

. 17. In what faculties the said operations are wrought.

. 18. 19. What a soul not perceiving either of these operations in her, is to
do.

. 20. 21. 22. Constancy in a resolution onc^ made, requisite. But yet in some
cases, it may be altered.

. 23. 24. Purposes not to be made in the very time of Prayer; except of
resignation.

. 25. A soul must not be troubled if the issue be not as she expects.

. 26. Evident certainty not to expected.

. 27. In known cases the declaration of Gods will is not to be expected.

1. BUT now because, as I said, those that are imperfect have but a dim
light, insufficient to direct them in many occurrent actions: And those that
have atteined to an Habitual supernatural light of discretion do find that
there are many cases to which their light does not extend: yea in the most
perfect it will fail them in some: therefore in such a case of uncertainty,
vvherin a vvell-minded soul has a considerable Doubt about some matter of
moment, either in the course of her Prayer, or in any other thing that
concerns an internal life; and that she cannot find an experienced person to
whom she can confidently propose her difficulty, or perhaps has not an
interior inuitation to seek for Resolution from any one: I will endeavor by
the best light that God has given me, to instruct such a soul how she is to
behave herself in such circumstances, that she may obtain from God an Actual
Illumination or Direction: And then I will declare in what manner such light
is ordinarily conferred upon internal livers.

2. The matter of the doubt is supposed to be of some weight: for as for
ordinary inconsiderable difficulties, she may in the name of God dispatch them
the best she can with her natural judgment, doing with a good intention
that which it shall dictate to be the best, troubling herself no further
about them: Because it would be more prejudice to a soul to loose time, and
disquiet herself with a curious and sollicitous examination of every small
difficulty, then if by determining quickly she should chance to choose that
which in it self were the less perfect (it being supposed that sin lies on
neither side of the doubt.)

3. Again some cases there are of such a nature that they are to be resolved
only by an external Directour or Superior, so that a soul ought not, and
will in vain expect a Resolution from God, who sends her to his Substitutes.
Such are the cases which concern external Obseruances, as Fasting, saying
the Divine Office, Interpreting the Rule, Laws or Constitutions etc. The
office of the Internal Master is chiefly about internal matters, or the
not-doing of external, which are not of obligation.

4. In such doubtful cases of moment, especially if they concern something to
be done, or omitted, or suffered in the future, a devout soul is to avoid all
sudden and unadvised resolutions: And this especially whilst she is in any
kind of Passion, whether it be Fear, Anger, Grief, or else of Tenderness,
Compassion, and kindness etc. And chiefly when herself has an interest of
nature, or when persons are concerned to whom she bears a sensible
affection, or from whom she has an auersion. In such cases it is good to
defer the Resolution as long as well may be, to the end that she may have
the more space to consider of it with her natural reason, and to free
herself from Passion; and so with Resignation to consult God in her
recollections, thereby to obtain light from him to discern his holy will. And
another reason and Motive to defer the matter may be, because it may happen
that before a determinate Resolution be needful, some new circumstances may
spring and interuene that will perhaps alter the state of the difficulty.

5. In case the soul in her nature be inclind more to the one side of the
doubt then the other, she must enforce herself, especially in prayer, to an
indifferency and Resignation in the matter: rather forethinking (and
accordingly preparing herself) that God will declare his will for the
contrary to that to which her nature is more inclined.

6. In seeking to know the Divine will by prayer, let not the person make the
subject and business of his Recollection to be the framing a direct Prayer about
the matter. Neither let him in his Prayer enterteine any discoursing, debating
thoughts in his imagination or understanding about it; as if he had an
intention to account that to be Gods will which by such discourse seemed most
probable. 1. Because by such proceedings our Prayers, which should be pure and
internal in spirit, will be turned into a distracting Meditation upon an
external affair, and so the mind comes to be filled with sensible Images:
and Passions perhaps will be raised. 2. Because by so doing, we incur the
danger of being seduced, by mistaking our own imagination, or perhaps
natural inclination for the Divine light and Motion; vvheras such Divine light
is most effectually and securely, yea and seldom otherwise obtained then
when the imagination is quiet, and the soul in a profound recollection in
spirit. 3. Because such discoursing in time of Prayer is nothing less then
Prayer, being little more then humane consideration and examination of the
matter, the which, if at all, ought to be dispatched before Prayer.

7. Let not the soul therefore that is desirous by Prayer to obtain light
from God in a doubtful matter, for that end alter any thing in the order and
manner of her accustomed Recollections; but let her pursue them as she was
wont before. Only it may be permitted her secretly and briefly to vvish that
God would teach her his will about the said difficulty.

8. But let her be sure to take great care she do not give way to any hope or
desire that God shoud reueile his Will unto her by any Extraordinary way, as
by the Ministry of Angels, strange Revelations, Voices etc. For as nothing
but Pride can ordinarily nourish such foolish hopes or desires, so it is to be
feared that if such desires should be granted, it would be to her prejudice,
and would increase that Pride from whence they flovved.

9. Now there are two Ordinary ways by which God intimates his will to his
servants that with humble and Resigned Prayers address themselves unto him.
The first is by clearing of the understanding, thereto adding a Supernatural
light, by which natural reason comes to see something that it savv not
before, or at least did not esteem before so considerable. For by this new
light of Supernatural Discretion such obscurities as did before hinder reason
from discerning Truth, are removed. The which obscurities are generally caused
by sensible Images, which have prepossessed themselves of the Fancy; or by
Interests of Nature which have engaged the Affections: by both which Reason
is precipitated to hasten a judgment and Election before she have considered
maturely, and without partiality all Circumstances fit to be considered in an
Action: so that Reason vvanting this Supernatural light kindled by Charity
determines it self to choose that part to which Passion inclines.

10. Now since there are no means so efficacious to free the soul from both
these Impediments, as Pure Spiritual Prayer, in which the soul transcends
all gross sensible Images, and vvithall contradicts and renounces all motions
and Interests of nature, We may securely rely upon the light and Dictamen
which is suggested by our understanding so cleared, purified and freed from
all noise and distraction from the sensible Faculties and Appetite: and this
being the best and safest light that man can have, we may and must acknovvledge
it to be Supernatural, because it illuminates us in Supernatural things,
discovering the proportion betvveene the present Action and our Supernatural
end, and extinguishing the light of Carnal Reason, by which the things which
are of God are either not seen at all, or esteemed foolishnes: It is therefore
to be accepted as the very light of Gods Holy Spirit, a light that cannot be
obtained by study, not instilled into another by the most spiritual person in
the world. Yea moreover it is a light that exceeds the efficacy of the
ordinary light of Faith which is permanently in us, by which we are only
illuminated to preceiue in a general manner supernatural objects, and the
means leading to them: vvheras by this Lamp newly kindled in our
understandings by Prayer and Charity, we clearly discern in each particular
Actions and Circumstances in what manner and how far they have relation and
efficacy to dispose us to a Perfect union by love with God.

11. If a soul before her Recollection has advised and considered of the
difficulty, and that afterward upon her Prayer she do find herself inclined
to what before she consulting with her own Reason or with any other
Counselor, had judged to be the best, I should esteem it now to be a Divine
Inspiration: Not for the former debatings sake, but for the subsequent
confirmation of it in virtue of Recollection.

The second way by which God does immediately signify his will to the
Intellectiue soul in virtue of Prayer, is, by imprinting a blind, reasonles
motion into the Superior will, giving it a weight and propension to one side
of the Doubt, rather then to the other, without representing actually and at
the present to the understanding any special Motive or Reason sufficient to
determine the will. This also coming in virtue of spiritual Prayer, may
confidently be esteemed the work of God, since no creature can immediately
move the Superior will.

13. Pertinently herto we read, that the Holy Abbot Nisteron (who was a
familiar friend of S. Anthony) being asked by one, what kind of work he
would advise him to exercise for the good and advancement of his soul,
Ansvvered, God only knows what is good for thee to do, and therefore look
what thou find that thy soul according to God would have thee to do, that
do thou.

14. Certainly if ever God will show that he stands to his Promise of
granting the Petitions of his children in all things which they ask according
to his will; this Promise, is in no case so infallibly made good, as when a
sincere, humble-minded soul being urged merely out of spiritual necessity,
does with all resignation beg at his hands the light of his Holy Spirit, for
resolution of difficulties that concern her purely in Order to his service and
honor, and for the perfecting her in his Divine Love. When can a soul be said
to ask according to Gods will, but when vvithdravving herself from all
interests of Nature, and fixing her eyes and heart upon God only, she makes her
requests known unto him?

15. The Doctrine here delivered, and particularly touching this reasonles and
indeliberate moving of the Will to good, is excellently and fully confirmed by
S. Thomas (part. 1. q. 1. a. 5.) where to the third Objection made against his
Position, That the Doctrine of scholastic Divinity is [SAPIENTIA] Wisdom,
(the which objection was thus conceived, This Doctrine is attiened by study:
But wisdom is had by infusion: (and ther-vpon it is reckoned among the seven
Gifts of the Holy Ghost, Isa. xi.) Therefore this Doctrine is not Wisdom:)
Herto he answers thus, Since judging perteines to a Wise man: according to a
tvvofold manner of judging, Wisdom is understood in a twofold sense. For one
may judge. 1. either by way of Inclination: as he that has the Habit of virtue
does rightly judge of those things which are to be done according to virtue, in
as much as he is inclined unto such things. Whereupon it is said in the tenth
Book of Aristotle's Ethics, That a Virtuous man is the measure and Rule of
humane Actions. 2. By way of Knowledges: as any one that is skilled in Moral
science can judge of the Acts of Virtue, although himself be void of virtue.
The former way of judging of Divine things perteines to Wisdom, which is
affirmed to be a Gift of the Holy Ghost, according to that saying nf S. Paul
[1. Cor. 21.] The spiritual man judges all things: As likewise. S. Denis
says in his 2. Chapt. de Div. Nom. Hierotheus is instructed, not only
learning, but also suffering Divine things. But the latter way of judging
perteines to this Doctrine, in as much as it is gotten by study, although
indeed the Principles thereof come from Divine Revelation. Thus far are the
Words of S. Thomas.

16. Yea even Aristotle himself though a Heathen could observe (lib. 2. magn.
Moral. c. 7.) That to that good which is honest (and virtuous) there is first
required a certain Reasonles impulse: and thereby the Reason is enabled to
discern and determine. But more pertinently and expressly in the following
Chapter he says thus, Good fortune is without any precedent Act of Reason. For
by Nature he is indeed fortunate that without the exercise of Reason is
impelled to good or virtuous things, and atteines them. Now this is to be
ascribed to Nature: For such (an inclination) is naturally imprinted in our
souls by which we are impelled to such things as will render us happy without
any exercise of Reason: Insomuch as if one should ask any person so disposed,
Why does it please thee to do so? He would answer, Truly I know not: But so it
pleases me to do. The like happens to those that are Divinely inspired and
agitated: for such are impelled to the doing of somethings without the exercise
of Reason. Lastly the same Philosopher observing that sometimes there are
suddenly iniected into some souls certain good Thoughts and Desires, from
which many following good Actions do proceed: And herupon enquiring from what
Principle such good Thoughts may be judged to proceed; He resolves, that the
soul herself is not the cause of them, because they prevent all exercise of
Reason; Therefore the cause of them must be somewhat better then the soul; And
that is only God.

17. The forementioned Illustration is supposed to be not in the Imagination,
but purely in the understanding: As likewise the motion and Inclination to be
in the spiritual will, and not in the sensitive appetite: for otherwise they
would not deserve so much to be relied on: because the workings of the
imagination are so inconstant and irregular; And the sensible motions of the
Inferior Appetite (being in corporal Nature, producing a warmth about the
heart, and a stirring of spirits and Humors,) are so disorderly, that they are
very justly suspicious, and scarce to be trusted to. Therefore although in a
fervent Exercise of much sensible Devotion the sensual Nature do after her
manner carry herself well toward God, yet the Superior Soul being not in a
state of due tranquillity and stillnes, is less capable of Divine
Illustrations and Influxes: And therefore the souls Inclinations, Resolutions,
and Designs at such times are less to be regarded.

18. Now if it should happen that after such Trials by Prayer made for the
knowing of the Divine Will, the soul should yet perceive no sufficient light,
nor any considerable Inclination, propension or preponderation toward one
side, more then another; In this case according to Thaulerus his judgment, she
may freely and confidently, as it were by lotts, make choice indifferently of
whether she thinks fit: And a choice so made, when ever it happens, she may
and ought to believe to be according to Gods will, since having done her part
to know his will, after all, this is the Result of her Recollections, in
which she has to her utmost power carried herself with Resignation and
Indifference.

19. Notvvithstanding in making a Choice in such circumstances she may do
well to use, or at least to advise upon these Cautions. 1. Generally speaking,
when two things seem in all respects to be equal, it were better, at least
safer, to choose that side on which lies the greater Mortification to Nature.
2. She may do well to make choice of the not-doing rather then the Doing:
especially if the Doing be likely to engage the soul in any distractions or
sollicitudes. For the Election of not-doing is more suitable to the Perfection
of a Contemplative state, and the spirit of our Order and Rule, that tends to
God by Abstraction, Silence, Solitude etc. 3. Let her choose that side which
she thinks would be more agreeable and better approved by virtuous and devout
friends. 4. Let her follovv the example of any one of which she has a good
opinion, in case the matter concerns others; as if the question be about giving
a suffrage in the Election of Superiors etc. 5. If the business concern
herself and her own souls good only, she is not always obliged to choose
that which in it self is most perfect: but therein she is to consider her
own present state and Degree, and whether the choice will be likely to
produce good or ill effects and inconveniences for the future as well as the
present. For example, it is certainly in it-selfe the most desirable
Perfection that a soul can aspire to, and to which she is also obliged to
tend, to keep herself alvvaies in the Divine Presence, and in a constant
state of Recollectednes; or to renounce all manner of satisfactions to nature
etc. But if an imperfect soul should therefore attempt the exercise of
Internal Prayer without interruption, or to practice so universal a
Mortification, she would overthrow corporal Nature utterly, and in a short
time by indiscreete^ ouerdoing come to an inability to do any thing at all. To
her therefore in such a state that is to be esteemed most perfect, which in it
self is less perfect, to wit, a fervent but moderate exercise both of Prayer
and mortification, by which she will be enabled by little and little to get
ground upon Nature, and at last to do that which will be both in it self
most Perfect, and to her also.

20. A soul having after the manner before said made a Resolution and Election,
it is the Advice of Michael Constantiensis, a Devout Priour of the Carthusians,
that she should persevere in it, yea though afterward something by some
others should be suggested to her contrary to such a Resolution: although also
that which is so suggested should seem to be more proffitable and of greater
Perfection. Just after the same manner that a soul having once advisedly
submitted herself to the Direction of a spiritual Guide, is not to hearken
to, nor accept from any other any Reasons contrary to his directions, nor any
discouragements from obeying him. And surely, faith he, a much greater
obligation has a soul to follow the interior Counsel of God sought by a
Resigned, perseuering Prayer, to which our Lord has given an express Promise,
saying, whatsoever ye shall ask in my Name, believe that ye shall receive
it, and it shall happen unto you. And such was the Practice of B. Angela de
Fulginio etc.

21. To this purpose it is very obseruable in the life of the same B. Angela,
That God commanded her to set down in writing this passage (which is the only
one for which she received such a Command) to wit, That he would take away his
light and grace from those, who being brought immediately to their Internal
Master, would be so ungrateful as to forsake him, and be take themselves to an
External one: yea and that moreover such should have a curse from him: namely,
if they did persist in receding from the Divine conduct, constantly preferring
Humane Directions before God's.

22. Yet this Advice of being constant to a Resolution so made, is to give
place. 1. In case a Superior should command any thing contrary thereto: For a
Superior must be obeyed even against such an Interior Counsel: Because a
soul is not only counseled, but also commanded to obey her Superiors. So
that whensoever a Superior does deliberately disapproue a Counsel so
received, a Devout soul is to believe that now it is Gods will that his
former Counsel should cease from being any further obliging. 2. In case that
any other different circumstances shall occur, which may perhaps alter the
state of the difficulty. Notvvithstanding such a change is not to be made upon
this last ground, without new recurring to God for light. Yea though the
reasons for a change be never so clear, yet it is best it should be made in
virtue of Prayer, to the end it may be done with greater purity of Intention.

23. Now in all cases of such like Nature the Purpose and Resolution is
seldom to be made in the very time of our Recollections: Both because (as has
been said) the thinking on such matters is not the proper subject of Prayer,
but is very distractiue: And likewise because the Internal Illustrations and
motions of Gods spirit are better perceived after Prayer, when the soul
having been recollected, does reflect on them.

24. But it is otherwise in matters of Resignation, or when we Pray for
Patience and Tranquillity of mind in Crosses and Difficulties. For in such
cases we are to make our good purposes in our Prayers themselves, and often are
to renew them afterward: Because such Purposes do of themselves presently
appear to be clear and obligatory: and besides, they are proper matter for
Prayer.

25. After that a soul has made a Resolution in the cases, and after the
manner aforesaid, and likewise has put the same in practice: Let the Issue be
what it will, whether proffitable or harmfull to nature; yet must she never
esteem the Election to have been amiss: Nor must she hearken to the
suggestio^s of Nature, the which finding in such practices something contrary
to her Inclinations, will be apt by subtle insinuations to move the soul to
repent, and to undo what she has done. Such an erroneous Judgment procured
by corrupt Nature is to be despised and deposed. For well may we happen to
err in the manner of executing such Counsel given us by God, and thereby, or
by some other means, inconveniences or harms may sometimes befall us: But the
Election in it self, made in the manner aforesaid, was good: and it would be
an Act of Immortification to blame it, or to be sorry for it. God for our good
does often turn our best deeds to our greatest mortificatio^, and thereby we
reap a double benefitt.

26. In such Doubtful cases as have here been spoken of, a Soul must not
expect an apparent evident Certitude, as Spiritual Writers say. For God to
keep the Soul in Humility, does not use to give an absolute assurance of the
matter it self simply considered: but only a Certainty of being directed and
drawn more to one side of the Difficulty, then to the other: The which side,
in the Judgment of the said Authors, is to be chosen and follovved as the
Divine Will. So that any advantage or preponderation, though never so little,
toward one side more then another, makes certitude enough of Gods will, as
for standing to it. If there be no perceptible difference or leaning either
way, the soul is either to take Advice from some other; or to supply it with
her natural impartial Reason; or even as it were by Lots to choose whether
she thinks good. And what she does after this manner, she may equiualently be
said to do as by the Direction and impulse of the Divine Spirit: Because it is
Gods Will and appointment, that when himself does not direct us immediately by
his Spirit, we should make use of other inferior, external ways, the best
we can, for our Direction: in all things alvvaies intending his Glory and
increase in his love only.

27. It would be a vain, presumptuous and dangerous tempting of God to go
and pray to the end to know his will in things commanded by known Laws and
by lavvfull Superiors: for they are appointed by him as the most assured
Interpreters of his Will: And to expect any more, is to pretend to
Extraordinary Illuminations and Calls; Which are neither to be desired, nor
trusted to: because there will be great danger of Illusion by the Devils
counterfeyting a good Angel. And he that is so presumptuous in his practice,
deserves that God permit such Illusions.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. 2. 3. Sufficient Assurance may be had that Inspirations are from God.

. 4. 5. 6. 7. A soul therefore may securely committ her self to Gods Guidance:
And why?

. 8. No danger if a soul should sometimes be mistaken, taking that for an
Inspiration which is not so.

1. Now all these Instructions and Exhortations to attend unto, and depend on
the Divine Inspirations would be in vain: Yea all the promises of God, That
he would give his: Holy Spirit to those that pray for it as they ought. would
be as vain, if there were no means to be assured of such Inspirations that
they are from God, by an assurance, I mean, of Hope: For a Certainty of Faith
(without extraordinary Revelation) cannot be had of such matters which
necessarily suppose the like assurance of being in the State of Grace. Hence it
is that Thaulerus, Blosius, Michael Constantiensis etc. do teach us how we may
discern, and with confidence judge resolutely what is a Divine Inspiration,
saying, That the Devout soul which proceeds with Recollection and Resignation
in all Doubtful matters of importance, may and ought to take that to be the
Divine will, to which she is interiourly moved in or after her Recollection
(when as passions do not prevail in her) so long as the matter is not
otherwise contrary to external Obedience, or other law of God or man.

2. For it is certain, yea and Faith obliges us to believe, that in all the
good actions we do, or good thoughts we enterteine, we so do and think
in virtue only of a precedent and concomitant illumination of our understanding
and inclining of our will: both which are immediately caused by God. Reason
likewise and experience tell us, that whilst vain or sinful distracting
images or inordinate Passions clovvd the mind, Gods illuminations are either
unperceived or neglected by us, and his motions ineffectuall. If ever therefore
the soul be in a fit disposition to receive those blessed effects of Gods holy
spirit; and if ever God, will make good his so serious and frequent promises,
it is then when by a profound Recollection an humble soul vvithdravves all
her affections from herself and all other creatures, yea and endeavors to
expel all the images of them, transcending all created things, and raising
herself, according to her power, to a strict union with him, and withal
powers forth her desire to be informed in his will, only intending thereby his
Glory and the increase of his Divine Love.

3. Now though imperfect souls not being able as yet to drive away
distracting images, and to still all unruly Passions, are forced to content
themselves with their natural light in many matters of less importance, so
that a great part of their ordinary Actions do not at all contribute to their
aduanceme^t in spirit: Yet perfecter souls walk almost continually in a
supernatural light, perceiving and resisting the subtle insinuations of self
love, and not suffering themselves hastily to be pushed forwards to Actions,
before they have consulted their Internal Guide, and much less contrary to
his directions.

4. Most securely therefore may we, yea with all confidence ought we to
yield ourselves to be disposed of by God, and to follovv him in any ways that
he will lead us, both for the exterior and interior, through light and
Darkness, through bitter and svveet. And what doubt can there be of erring
having such a Guide, which always leads the soul through the Paths of
Mortification and renunciation of self will? although sometimes some special
ways may to our or others natural judgments seem strange and perhaps
impertinent.

5. The grounds of which duty, and the security attending it are these. 1.
Because we through the ignorance of our interior complexion and temper of
soul, as likewise of our present wants (incomprehensible to humane
knowledge got by sense) can neither know the special vvayes either of
Prayer or Mortification proper to us: nor can we be assured that others do
sufficiently know them: Whereas of Gods Omniscience and equally infinite
Goodness none can doubt. 2. Because the end whereto we aspire being
supernatural, consequently the vvayes leading thereunto, and the light
directing in those vvayes must likewise be supernatural. 3. Because if we
knevv the most proper and most direct vvayes leading to Contemplation and
Divine Union, yet they being most contrary to our natural inclinations,
without a Divine impulse we would not choose the fittest, that is, those
which are the most opposite to our nature.

6. Yet we are to consider that there are degrees of security, according to
the several manners by which God co^municates unto us his inspirations. For
1. Though in Sensible devotion the good thoughts and affections given us are in
themselves and according to their substance the effects of Gods Spirit, and
ought with all security to be complied vvithall: (yet with discretion, so as
that out of a gluttonous pleasure conceived by the^, we do not yield unto
them so far as thereby to weaken our heads, or prejudice our healths.)
notvvithstanding the Resolutions of undertaking any practices for the future
grounded on such sensible Devotion, are to be mistrusted, as having in them
more of nature and self-love, and vvanting sincerity of Resignation. Besides
that the senses being principal workers, the reason is rather obscured, then
illuminated thereby: yea and by Gods permission the devil may have some
influence in such Devotion and subsequent resolutions. 2. Of the like
uncertain nature may the seeming Inspirations or lights be which are gotten
by the vvorking of the Imagination and discourse upon the matter, either in
Prayer or our of it: the person thereupon concluding this or that side to be
more likely to be Gods will. 3. But if without such vvorking of the
Imagination, or if after it, the soul in Recollected Prayer made with
Resignation and submission of her natural judgment, and renouncing all
Interests of nature, comes as it were unexpectedly to have one part of the
Question presented to her mind, as truth and as Gods will, God then giving a
Clarity to the reason to see that which it savv not before, or otherwise then
it savv it: or if the soul do find a blind and reasonles motion in the will
to one side of the matter: In such cases the soul may most securely and
confidently judge it to be a Divine Inspiration and motion, being wrought
without any trouble in the exercise of the Imagination, senses or Passions.

7. Let not a soul therefore be discouraged from committing herself to Gods
Internal direction; though it should happen that those who pass for the most
spiritual persons, and that are most forvvard to usurp the conducting of
souls to Perfection (whilst themselves know no further then the exercises of
the Imagination) should declame against it, and out of an apprehension that it
would be a disparagement to them if God should be acknowledged the principal
Guide, they should accuse the doctrine here delivered, as fantastical,
unsafe, and pretending to Enthusiasmes. No vvonder it is, if such being
strangers to the Contemplative vvayes of the spirit, should be ignorant of
these secret Paths by which God leads souls to Perfection: in the which none
can tread, or at least make any considerable progress, till quitting a servile
dependence on external teachers, they rely only upon the Divine Guidance. And
for this propose devout souls are seriously and often to be exhorted to keep
themselves in a disposition of as much Abstraction, both external and
internal, as may be, to the end they may be enabled to hear and discern the
Divine Voice: to the directions of which if they will in practice faithfully
correspond, God will be vvanting to them in nothing.

8. And for a further security that there can scarce happen any considerable
danger to a soul proceeding this way for knovving the Divine Will, though
she should sometimes mistake in the thing it self; Both she (and also the
Opposers of this Doctrine) are to consider that (as has formerly been said)
the only matters that are here supposed to be proposed for a Resolution, are,
and must be, of the nature of those things which of themselves and in the
general are indifferent, but yet which being well chosen, may and will
advance the soul: for in no other things but such can there be any doubt. And
surely if we be capable of knovving Gods will in such things (as who can
question it?) certainly the proceeding thus with indifference and Resignation,
and without suddennes of resolution, or motion of Natural Passions, or self
love, is the most secure and most assured way to come to that knowledge.

CHAP. IX.
. 1. Objections prevented.

. 2. 3. Difference between the term of Inspirations, (being only Internal)
and Calls which are also external.

. 4. 5. How Inspirations direct us about External. Calls and obligations.

. 6. External Calls are to overrule Internal.

. 7. 8. Authority of Superiors ought to ouerrule Inspirations, even in things
not of Obligation.

. 9. Impertinent commands of Superiors in such things to be obeyed: though
Superiors will be severely accountable to God.

. 10. Decay of true spirituality arises from the ignorance or neglect of this
Doctrine touching attending to Divine Inspirations.

1. LASTLY to prevent all misunderstanding of this most holy and most necessary
Doctrine touching our obligation to attend unto (and to practice accordingly)
the Divine Inspirations directing us to Acts of Perfection: as likewise to
prevent all misapplication thereof by souls that ought and are vvilling to
follovv it: I will here take away the pretended grounds upon which some,
who either out of ignorance, Passion or interest have declared themselves to
be enemies thereto, do declame against it: supposing that they have a great
advantage against it, whilst they pretend that by the teaching and practicing
of it great prejudice will come to the due Authority of Superiors, from
which their subjects follovving these Instructions will endeavor to exempt
themselves, upon a pretext of Divine Inspirations to the contrary.

2. For the clearing therefore and dissoluing of this supposed difficulty and
inconvenience, we are to consider that though in this discourse we have
promiscuously used the terms of inspirations, lights, impulses, divine calls
etc. yet the former are only such operations of God as are Internal: vvheras
the term of Divine Calls imports both an external ordination of God, and also
his internal operation in our souls suitable to the external call. And both
these are properly termed Calls, because by both of them God does signify his
will to souls: For by the external ordination and commission given by God to
all in lavvfull authority under him, God by them does reueyle his will unto
us, which we obey whilst we submit unto and execute the commands and
wills of his Substitutes. And by his internal operation he directs us to
perform such obedience, in a spiritual manner, for the good and advancement
of our souls in his DIVINE LOVE.

3 All Laws therefore, all Constitutions, Precepts and Commands of Superiors,
and all external or internal Duties of obligation by virtue of our state of
life as Christians, or moreover as Religious or Ecclesiastical Persons etc.
are indeed, and so to be esteemed by us, true Divine Calls, necessarily to be
attended to, known and performed by us.

4. And as for Internal Inspirations which have regard unto those external
Calls, the end for which they are given us is, not only simply to direct and
incline us to perform all our Christian, Regular or other duties with
readiness and chearfullnes, but to do them with perfection and purity of
intention, in and for God only, as if he had immediately and visibly imposed
them upon us. And for as much as concerns the Not-doing (to the which. I said
that in a Contemplative life the Divine Inspirations do inuit us) that is
meant only in matters either indifferent, or at least to the which we have
no obligation by virtue of any external law. Yea on the contrary, we may
say, that our Holy Rule (the end vvherof is to dispose and lead us to a
perfect union with God by Contemplation) does in general oblige us to such
abstraction and Not-doing, wheresoever it does not require the doing of any
thing of us.

5. Therefore whatsoever internal suggestions, motions or impulses we may
find that shall be contrary or prejudicial to such external Calls to
Obedience and Regularity, we are to be so far from harkening to them, or
esteeming them for Divine, that we ought to despise and reject them, judging
them to be no better then diabolical illusions. Yea this is to hold, although
the said external laws, Commands or obseruances be such, as we in our
private judgments cannot think to be very proper or convenient for us in
particular.

6. Now the reason why no internal suggestion ought to take place of
external obligations is evident and conuincing: Because such external Calls
to obedience being of themselves both manifest, and certainly unquestionable
tokens and expressions of the Divine will, they ought not to give place to any
supposed internal significations of the same will whatsoever, which are
not, nor can be so manifest: but rather to prescribe Rules unto them, and
ouerrule them. We know the former to be Gods will, and to proceed from him:
and therefore we cannot rationally believe that those things that are opposite
thereto, can be acceptable to him. Besides Gods will reueiled to a subject by
the mouth of his Superior, or by established laws, has a kind of public
authority, being derived by a public person and mean: and therefore must needs
take place and be preferred before an Inspiration or signification of the
Divine will to a private person alone.

7. Yea moreover, so indispensably careful, and even scrupulous ought we to
be that exterior order and due subordination appointed by God, should not upon
any pretense be prejudiced: that we are to regard the Authority of Superiors
even in doing or omitting those things which are not within the compass of
any special laws or commands, but are left to our own liberty and
Judgment. So that we ought not to put in execution any thing to which we
are by an Internal Inspiration invited or directed, without the approbation
and leave (either express, or interpretatiue) of our Superior: and if the
matter be of considerable moment, his express permission is requisite.

8. Yea I will add further, that if a Religious subject shall have an
Inspiration, which he confidently beleiues to be Divine, by which he is
invited to the doing of any thing: yet if his Superior shall declare such an
Inspiration not to be Divine, and forbid the executing of what it directs, the
subject ought not only to obey his Superior by forbearing to do according to
such an Inspiration, but he is also obliged to submit his judgment, and to
believe his Superior. And this he may sincerely and securely do. Because
though it were so that in truth the Inspiration came from God, and did direct
to the doing of a thing more perfect, or to a more perfect omission: yet all
this is to be understood only conditionally, that is, upon supposition that a
lavvfull Superior did not judge and command otherwise. For in such a case, it
would be an Act of greater Perfection in the subject to obey him forbidding
the doing or forbearing of any thing, though in it self (and such prohibition
not considered) more Perfect. Yea and a Divine light and new inspiration will
inform and direct the subject to obey and believe the Superior declaring
against the former Inspiration. For though nothing that a Superior in such
circumstances can say will make the former Inspiration not to have come from
God, yet his declaring against it will show it not to be of force now: since
that all such Inspirations do, and ought to suppose the consent, or at least
the non-opposition of the Superior before they be put in practice: and
therefore they are to give place to an inspiration of obeying, which is
absolute. True it is, that in such a case it may happen that the Superior may
commit a great fault and must expect to be accountable to God for it: but
howsoever, the subject in obeying such an undue command, shall not only be
innocent, but also merit thereby: Because in both cases he does well: first in
being prepared to obey the former Inspiration, which was conditional; and
afterward in contradicting that, to obey a second Inspiration of submitting
to his Superior, which was absolute.

9. As it concerns therefore particular souls to depend principally upon their
Internal Directour: so likewise are Superiors and Spiritual Guides no less
obliged to penetrate into the dispositions of their subjects and Disciples, and
to discover by what special vvayes the Spirit of God conducts them, and
suitably thereto to conform themselves and to comply with the intention of the
Divine Spirit. And this Duty our Holy Patriarch in the 64. Chap. of his Rule,
requires from all Abbots or Superiors: forbidding them to use rigor in the
correction of their subjects, or so rudely to scour the vessels, as thereby to
endanger the breaking of them. He would not have them likewise to be restlessly
suspicious and jealous over their subjects: But in their impositions to use
great Discretion (which he calls the Mother of virtues) considering each ones
ability, and saying with Jacob, If I force my flocks to travail beyond their
strength they will all of them die at once etc. If the Superior therefore in an
humor of commanding, on his own head should impose commands on his subjects,
without any regard to the divine will and guidance: such commands will
probably prove unprosperous as to the subject, and certainly very dangerous to
the Superior. Yet so it may be, that the Subject may reap spiritual proffit
by them: for then it may please God to give him an Interior enablement to
turn such undue commands to his own good and advancement, by increasing in
him the Habit of Resignation and Humility. It will indeed be very hard for
imperfect Souls to reap benefit by such impertinent Superiors: But as for
Perfect ones, they have both light and Spiritual strength to convert all the
most unreasonable Commands of Superiors to the benefit and advancement of
their own Souls.

10. In case a Superior should forbid his Subject to pray at this or that
time: or should command him to spend no longer then such a small space of time
in Internal Prayer, as would not suffice for his advancement in the Internal
ways of the Spirit: The Rule of Perfection requires the Subject to obey his
Superior: Yet he may with all Humility remonstrate to him his Spiritual
necessities, acquainting him with the great benefit that his soul finds in a
Constant performance of his Recollections, and in attending to Divine
Inspirations, and what prejudice it might be to him to be forbidden or
abridged of them. But if the Superior do persist, he must be obeyed, and God
will some other way supply the loss the Subject finds in such particular
Obediences. Now though a Superior can no more forbid in general the use of
Internal Prayer and of observing Divine Inspirations, then he can forbid the
Loving or Obeying of God: Yet whether Prayer shall be exercised at such
certain appointed times, or for such a determinate space of time, that is
within the limits of a Superiors Authority: And how he employes that
Authority, it will concern him to consider. For if he guides souls according
to his own will, and not Gods (and surely Gods Internal Inspirations are
his will) besides the guilt that he shall contract by the abusing of his
authority, he must expect that all the harm or prejudice that his subjects
souls through his Miscariage shall incur, will be heaped and multiplied
upon his soul.

11. But concerning the Duties and obligations of Superiors toward souls
whose Profession is to tread these Internal vvayes of Contemplation, more
shall be said herafter in its proper place: where it shall be demonstrated,
That these Instructions are so far from preiudicing their Authority, that true
Cordial obedience will never, nor can be perfectly performed to them but by
such souls as are most zealous and constant in the Essential Duties of Prayer
and attending to the Inspirations of Gods Holy Spirit.

12. To conclude this whole Discourse concerning Divine Inspirations: As these
Aduises are not curiously to be applied to the practice of fearful scrupulous
souls, whose unquiet thoughts make them in a manner incapable of either Light
or Impulses of Gods spirit in matters about which their scrupulosity is
exercised: So in those cases they are to follovv Instructions peculiarly proper
to them. But for as much as concerns all other vvell-disposed Souls that
lead Contemplative lives, this Doctrine ought to be seriously recommended to
them, and they are to be taught how to practice it. For by this and no other
way can they assuredly understand or perform the Divine Will, in the which
alone consists Spiritual Perfection. By these Inspirations alone the Interior
is regulated, without which all Exterior good carriage is little auayleable to
Perfection. No External Directour can order the Interior Operations of the
Soul, either in Prayer or Mortification: None but God alone who knovves and
searches the Hearts of Men. And his principal way of directing is by his
Inspirations: the which by the acknowledgement of all good Christians are
necessary to every Action, to make it good or meritorious. These Inspirations
therefore we must follovv: Therefore they may be known, for we can not be
obliged to follovv an invisible and indiscernable light, we know not what.
And if they may be known, surely the Rules here prescribed for that purpose,
(to wit, Abstraction of life, and pure, resigned Prayer) are the most secure
and most efficacious Means to come to that knowledge, and to procure Grace to
work accordingly.

13. And it may very reasonably be believed, that the principal ground and
reason why true Spirituality is in these days so rare, and why matters go
so amiss among souls that pretend to aspire to contemplation, is because this
most necessary duty of observing and follovving Divine Inspirations is either
vnknovvn, or vvilfully misunderstood, and suspected (if not derided) by some
who in popular opinion are held and desire to pass for chief Masters in
spirituality. And no vvonder is it that such should be disaffected to this
doctrine, of the perfect practice vvherof themselves are incapable, by reason
of their distractiue employments and imperfect degree of Prayer; and
consequently neither can they, nor perhaps if they could, would they teach it
to others, since thereby many soul^s would quickly be discharged from any
necessity of continuing in a dependence on their managing and directions.

14. If any there be that, notvvithstanding all that has been here written
touching Divine Inspirations, and the necessity of attending to them, shall yet
be unsatisfied, or at least suspect that the publishing of such Doctrine may
not be convenient: Such an one for further satisfaction may consult the
Appendix adjoined at the End of the Treatises.

THE THIRD SECTION OF THE THIRD TREATISE TOUCHING The School of Contemplation
viz. Solitude and a Religious Profession.
CHAP. I.
. 1. 2. That the proper School of Contemplation is Solitude.

. 3. Which may be enjoyed in the world.

. 4. 5. 6. Contemplation is by God denied to no states. Yea in some regards
women are rather better disposed thereto then Men: And why?

. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. The condition of Ecclesiastics in the world is of
great Perfection. What dispositions are required to the undertaking and
executing of that Sublime Charge.

1. HAVING hitherto treated of the Nature and End of an Internal Contemplative
Life in general, as likewise of the general Quality and Disposition requisite
to all those who by a Divine vocation do undertake that Sublime course of
life: and in consequence thereto having demonstrated that the only sufficient
Master and Guide in such a Life is God, and his Divine Inspirations, by whom
alone both Disciples and also Masters and Guides must be directed: It remains
in the third place that I should show what and where the School is, wherein
ordinarily this Divine Master instructs his Disciples in this so Heavenly
Divine Doctrine and Science.

2. Now by the unanimous acknowledgment of all Mystic writers the only proper
School of Contemplation is Solitude: that is, a condition of life both
externally freed from the distractiue Encombrances, tempting flatteries, and
disquietting Sollicitudes of the world: and likewise vvherin the mind
Internally is in a good Measure, at least in serious desire, freed also from
inordinate Affection to all vvorldly and Carnal Objects: that so the soul may
be at leisure to attend unto God, who deserves all our thoughts and
Affections, and to practice such Duties of Mortification and Prayer, as dispose
her for an Immediate perfect Union with Him.

3. Now though this so necessary Solitude be found both more perfectly and
more permanently in a vvell-ordred Religious State, which affords likewise
many other advantages (scarce to be found elsewhere) for a better practicing
the Exercises disposing to Contemplation: Yet is it not so confined to that
State, but that in the world also, and in a Secular Course of Life God has
often raised and Guided many Souls in these Perfect ways, affording them even
there as much Solitude and as much Internal Freedom of spirit, as he savv
was necessary to bring them to a high Degree of Perfection.

4. And indeed it is an Illustrious Proof of the abundant, most communicatiue,
ouerflovving Riches of the Divine Goodness to all his Servants whatsoever that
in truth of Heart seek him, that this State of Contemplation (being the
Supremest and most Divine that an Intellectual Soul is capable of either in
this Life, or in Heaven also) should neither be enclosed only in Cauernes,
Rocks or deserts, nor fixed to Solitary Religious Communities, Nor appropriated
to the Subtilty of wit, profoundnes of Judgment, Gifts of Learning or Study
etc. But that the poorest simplest Soul living in the world, and follovving
the common life of good Christians there, if she will faithfully correspond to
the Internal Light and Tracts afforded her by Gods Spirit, may as securely,
yea and sometimes more speedily arrive to the Top of the Mountain of Vision,
then the learned Doctors, the most profoundly wise Men, yea the most
abstracted confined Hermites.

5. Yea both History and fresher Experience do assure us, that in these latter
times God has as freely (and perhaps more commonly) communicated the Divine
Lights and Graces proper to a Contemplative life to simple women, endued with
lesser and more contemptible Gifts of Judgment, but yet enriched with stronger
Wills and more fervent Affections to him, then the ablest Men. And the reason
hereof we may judge to be, partly, because God thereby should, as is most due,
reap all the Glory of his most free Graces, the which if they did usually
attend our Natural Endovvments, would be challenged as due to our own
abilities and endeauours: And partly also, because as substantial Holiness, so
the perfection of it which is Contemplation, consists far more principally in
the Operations of the will then of the understanding (as shall be demonstrated
in due place:) And since women do far more abound, and are far more constant
and fixed in Affecctions and other Operations of the will then Men, (though
inferior in those of the understanding) No marvel if God does often find them
fitter subjects for his Graces then Men.

6. And for this reason it is (besides that women are less encombred with
Sollicitous businesses abroad, (their Secular Employments being chiefly
Domestical within their own vvalls) that they do far more frequently
repair to the Churches, more assiduously perform their Devotions both there
and at home, and reap the Blessings of the Sacraments more plentifully: (Upon
which grounds, the Church calls them the devout sex:) Insomuch as a very
Spiritual and experienced Author did not doubt to pronounce, that (according
to his best judgment which was grounded on more then only outvvard
appearances) for One Man, nere ten Women went to Heaven. Notvvithstanding true
it is, that the Contemplations of Men are more noble, sublime and more exalted
in Spirit, that is, less partaking of sensible effects, as Rapts, Ecstasies or
Imaginatiue representations, as likewise melting tendernesses of affections
then those of women.

7. Now though the true and immediate Motive of the vvriting of these
Spiritual Instructions was the Directing of certain Devout Religious Souls
in the way of Contemplation, to the aspiring whereto their Profession did
oblige them: And for this Reason most of the said Instructions are intended to
be most proper for such. Yet being a Debtour to all vvellminded Souls
whatsoever that desire to tread in the said Internal vvayes, I will here
briefly show how they also may make use of my vvritings for the same End,
from thence selecting such special Directions as may also as well belong to
them, and passing over those that are more peculiarly proper to Souls in a
Religious State.

8. In the world therefore there are two sorts of Persons that do, or may,
aspire unto Contemplation, or Perfection in Prayer, to wit, 1. Ecclesiastics.
2. Lay-Persons.

9. First as for Ecclesiastics (I mean especially Priests, to which all
other inferior Orders do tend) they not only may, but ought seriously to
aspire thereunto: yea perhaps more the^ simple Religious: For their most
sublime, and by all Ancient Saints deemed so formidable an Office (by which
they are empovverd and obliged with immaculate Sacrifices and fervent Prayers
to be daily Intercessours with God for the whole Church) presupposes them to
have already atteined to a good Recollectednes in Prayer. And if moreover they
have a charge of Souls, they will need a far greater stability therein: that
their various Employments may be performed purely for and in God, and not
break their union with him. Moreover by their Profession their Obligations
come nere to the vows of Religious: Persons for 1. They owe an Obedience to
Superiors, though not in every Ordinary Action. 2. They Profess the same
Chastity. 3. They ought to have little more propriety in their Goods: For
whatsoever is beyond their Moderate necessity and Obligation of Hospitable
Charity, they can little more dispose of without vvrong to the Poor etc. then
Religious. 4. Though their Employments require from them more Conversation
with others, then the state of Religious does, yet they are as well obliged
to disengage their Affections from all love or Solicitude about Riches etc. as
the others are: And in like manner to free themselves from all Distractiue
Employments not belonging necessarily to their Calling.

10. And upon these grounds it was, that in the Ancient and best times of the
Church, scarce any durst presume to undertake so high and Perfect a Calling, as
the Charge of Souls is, till after many years first spent in a kind of
Religious Abstraction of life, Solitude, Silence, great Mortifications and
assiduous Prayer etc. Witness S. Basile, S. Gregory Nazianzene, S. Gregory
Nyssen, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine. S. John Damascene etc. And yet after they
had done all this, it is a Wonder with what vnvvillingnes and fear they
suffered themselves to be forced to accept of such a Charge: what Excuses,
Prayers, flights into the Deserts to avoid it? And when they were compelled
by God or Men thereto, they were far from thinking themselves disobliged from a
Continuation of their Contemplative Exercises of Abstraction, Mortification and
Prayer etc. But on the contrary they stole time even from their necessary
Refectio^s and Sleep to employ in their Recollections, as knovving that
nothing they could do would be acceptable to God, further then it proceeded
in virtue of Grace obtained by Prayer.

11. But the best proof and example of the Obligations of an Ecclesiastical
Person is our Blessed Savior Himself: who though by virtue of the
Hypostaticall Union he was replenished with all manner of Graces without
measure, and therefore had no need at all, as for himself, to pray for more,
yet to show an example most necessary to us, He took not on him the
Employment of Converting others, till he had spent the former thirty years of
his life in Solitude, Silence and all the most holy Internal Exercises at
home, where he lived unobserved and vnknovvn unto the world. And during all
the time of his most laborious Execution of his Prophetical Office, besides:
much Prayer exercised openly before others, the Gospel expressly says, that
his custom was at Night to retire himself with his Disciples to Prayer: Yea
and whensoever any great work was to be done, as before the Mission of the
Disciples and Apostles, that he spent whole Nights alone in Prayer. Add
hereunto that he utterly refused to meddle in Secular affairs or
Controversies, he frequented the Deserts etc.

12. So that an Ecclesiastical Person both for his own sake, and out of a
tender love to his flock, ought to think himself more obliged then before, to
the practice of all Internal Contemplative Exercises: and above all others, of
Pure Spiritual Prayer, which alone will sanctify and make successful both to
himself and others all other Actions belonging to his Profession. And hence it
is, that S. Florentius an Ancient Holy Bishop, first of Vtrecht and afterward
of Munster, when he was reprehended by some for spending so much time in
Prayer, as if thereby he was hindered from a more perfect discharge of his
Episcopal function, returned them an answer very becoming a Perfect,
Illuminated Bishop, saying, Quid? Vobis insanire videor, si cum multas oues
habeam, multum orem? that is, What, do you account me mad, because having so
many Sheep under my Charge, I best we so much time in Prayer? Implying, that
it was only by Prayer that he could hope for enablement to perform his
Episcopal Duty, and for a Blessing after the performance of it.

13. Such is the Duty, and such the Obligations of Ecclesiastical Persons. But
if there be any Conscious to themselves of neglect in this matter, and desirous
to repair past omissions by future Diligence, they may, if they think good,
make use of these simple Instructions, the which generally in the substance
are proper enough for them, if they will only separate certain circumstances
and respects in them, which are peculiar to Religious.

CHAP. II.
. 1. 2. How a Secular Person may make use of these Instructions: Some of which
do equally belong to such an one, as well as to Religious.

. 3. What benefit such an one may also reap from Instructions here peculiarly
belonging to Religious.

. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Such a Soul needs not to apprehend want, if consecrating
her self to God, she shall relinquish worldly Sollicitudes.

1. IN the next place as concerning a Secular Person not in Holy Orders, that
lives a Common life in the world, of what sex or Condition soever (for with
God there is no difference or acceptance of Persons) to whom the Divine Spirit
shall have given an Effectual Call to seek God in these Internal ways of
Contemplation; yet so as that they do not find themselves obliged to forsake a
Secular Profession and to embrace a Religious life: (Of which State the Person
perhaps being Married, or otherwise hindered, is not Capable, or hovveuer finds
no inclination thereto:) Such a Soul may make benefit also of these
Instructions, though purposely written for Religious: in as much as many of
them do generally belong to all Persons tending to Perfection: And those that
seem more peculiar to Religious, yet with some qualifications and
applications (such as ordinary Discretion will teach) those Instructions also
may afford unto them some good help and useful benefit. And for that purpose
they may do well to take into their consideration, and apply unto their own
advantage in Practice these follovving Aduices.

2. A devout Soul therefore being inspired by God to such a course, and living
in the world, ought to conceive herself obliged as truly and as properly
(though not altogether equally) as any of a Religious Profession to the
practice of these Substantial and Essential Duties and Instructions
follovving, viz. 1. A Strong Resolution, notvvithstanding any Contradictions
and difficulties, to pursue by the Divine assistance the ways tending to
Contemplation. 2. An Equal care to Observe, and faithfully to execute all
Divine Inspirations, and to dispose herself likewise (as is here taught) for
the better receiving and discerning of them. 3. The practice both of External
and Internal Mortifications. (I mean those which through the Divine
Providence are sent her, or do belong to her present State and Condition of
Life. And as for voluntary Mortifications, she is likewise to behave herself
according to the follovving Directions.) 4. The Exercise of Internal Prayer,
according to the several Degrees of it. In these general Duties there is
little or no difference between the obligation of Religious from that of
Secular Persons.

3. But vvheras in the next place there are in this Book many Instructions
that seem peculiar to Souls of a Religious Profession: Such I mean, as are
grounded upon, and referred unto a life abstracted from the world, confined
unto Solitude, and there limited with a strict enclosure of special Laws,
Constitutions, Obseruances etc. Even in these also a Secular Devout Person
tending to Contemplation may think himself in some proportion and degree
concerned and interested: And from them he may reap much benefit, applying to
his own use so much of the Spirit of Religion, as Discretion will show to
be fruitful to him. Now for a better application of this Advice, I will
exemplify in certain peculiar Duties of a Religious life, and therein show in
what sort a Secular person may do well, yea and in some proportion is
obliged to imitate them.

4. First therefore, such a soul though she be not obliged really and
personally to withdraw herself from vvorldly conversation, and to retire
herself into a solitude as strict as that of Religion; Yet so much solitude
and silence she must needs allow herself daily, as may be necessary for a due
practice of Internal Prayer. Neither must she engage herself in any
businesses of solicitude, and distraction, that do not necessarily belong to
her Vocation: And even those also must she perform with as much internal
quietness and Recollectednes as may be, carefully avoiding all anxiety of mind,
care of multiplying Riches etc. And as for vain conuersations, compliment all
visits, Feastings etc. she must not think to permit unto herself such a free
scope, as others do, and as formerly herself did. But she must set a greater
value upon her precious time; as much vvherof as she can borrow from the
necessary employments of her Calling, ought to be spent upon the advancing of
her spirit in the way of Contemplation. And she indeed will find the great
inconveniences that do attend vain co^uersations, as dissipation of thoughts,
engagements in new vnnecssary affairs, sensual friendships etc. all which
she ought carefully to prevent and avoid.

5. Secondly, such a soul, is by virtue of her new Divine Vocation, obliged
studiously to imitate especially the Internal solitude belonging to a
Religious Person: abstracting her spirit, as much as may be, both from all
affection to outvvard things, as Riches, Pleasures etc: and like wise from the
Images of Creatures and worldly objects. For which purpose she is to perform
all the Duties of her external vocation in order to God, and in subordination
to her principal design, which is the Perfectionating of her spirit in the
Divine Love. She is therefore not to account herself as absolute Mistrisse of
the Riches that God has given her, but only as his steward to manage them so
as may be most to his Glory. So that in the midst of them, she ought to
exercise true Poverty of spirit; renouncing all propriety joined with
affection to them, so as not to be disquieted if God should take them from her:
and making no more use of them for her own sensual contentment, or for show
in the world, then shall in true Discretion be necessary. This Internal
solitude, Introuersion and nakedness of spirit she must increase, as much as
may be, both in her affection to it, and practice of it, so that it may become
habitual to her. Because without it she will never be in a fit disposition
to attend unto the Divine Inspirations, or to exercise the Internal duties of
Prayer etc. belonging to a state tending to Contemplation.

6. Thirdly in conformity to Religious Obedience, she is to behave herself to
all those in the world whom God has set over her, with a most profound
submission of spirit, obeying them, or rather God in them, with all purity of
intention. And moreover she is, at the first especially, to put herself under
the government of a spiritual Directour, if such an one be to be had: Who is
to teach her how she may discern the exercises of Prayer and Mortification
proper for her. And in the choice of such an one, she is to use the utmost of
her Prudence, recommending vvithall an affair of such importance in her
Prayers to God, that he would provide her one of sufficient abilities and
virtue, and especially one that is experienced in those Internal vvayes much
exalted above the ordinary exercises of Prayer commonly taught and practiced.
And when God has found out such an one for her, she is with all sincerity and
humility to obey him; Yet without prejudice to the duty which she
principally ovves to her Divine Internal Master, as has been taught in the
foregoeing Section; The Doctrine and Practice vvherof does as well belong to
her, as to any Religious Person.

7. Fourthly, although such a soul be not by any vovv or otherwise obliged to
any Rule, or restreined by any Constitutions or Regular obseruances:
Notvvthstanding she is to reduce the whole course of her Actions and behavior
to a certain order, Regularity and uniformity: Observing in her Retirements,
Reading, Praying, as also her Refections, sleep etc. an orderly Practice both
for times and manner, according as Prudence and her Spiritual Guide shall
ordain. This order and Uniformity observed discreetly (yet without any nice
scrupulosity) is very requisite in an Internal course. For otherwise a soul
being left at large, will be unstable and uncertain in her most necessary
Duties.

8. It will not be necessary to exemplify in any more particulars: for the
same reflections and the like applications may a soul make from any other
Instructions and duties peculiarly designed for Religious Persons. Besides, if
she pursue diligently and constantly her Internal Prayer, God will not be
vvanting to afford her sufficient Internal light, and likewise strong
impulses and Spiritual force to follovv such light: To the which if she
faithfully correspond, she will find that since God has not given her a
Vocation to Religion, yet he has not deprived her of the means of enjoying in
the world in a sufficient manner the principal advantages of a Religious
State (except the solemn Vows themselves:) Yea in this case she may, not
altogether improbably, think that it was for her own particular good that
God did not give her an opportunity to enter into Religion.

9. And vvheras it was required of such souls that they should quit all
sollicitudes about temporal riches: let them not fear any great
inconveniences by complying with this duty. For as the Author of THE CLOVVDE
OF VNKNOVVING, observes, and confidently professes, those whom God
effectually calls from secular sollicitudes to an Internal, abstracted life,
may more then any others be confidently secure of his Divine Providence and
special care over them, and all that belong unto them, for as much as
concerns a sufficient and contentfull subsistence in this life. For though he
should have called them into a wilderness, where no means of procuring
corporal sustenance did appear: Or if in the midst of a City he should call
any one to lead an abstracted solitary life there, they are obliged to follovv
such a Call, and may most securely do it, referring all care of their
subsistence wholy to his Divine Providence, who infallibly some way or
other, either by ordinary or extraordinary means, will not be vvanting to
provide convenient maintenance for them: the which if it should happen to be
with some scarcity, he will abundantly recompense that with feasting their
Spirits with far more desirable Internal and Celestial Delicacies. And
examples of Gods vvonderfull care over such peculiar servants of his, are
plentifully afforded us in Ecclesiastical Histories, both ancient and modern.
So that to the end of the world that will appear to be a most approved
truth, which the Psalmist so long since delivered, Diuites eguerunt, and
esurierunt: inquirentes autem Dominum non minuentur omni bono, that is, The
rich in the world have been brought to want and hunger: but such as truly seek
our Lord shall not be unprovided of any kind of good things.

CAP. III.
. 1. Of a Religious state.

. 2. 3. 4. 5. How we are to understand and interpret the great Commendations
and Privileges given to a Religious state by S. Bernard etc:

. 6. 7. A Religious state is secure and happy: But yet to those only that are
careful to reform and purify their Interior.

1. HEREAFTER the Instructions following are most especially to be directed to
soul^s living in a Religious Profession (I intend especially such an one as is
according to the Rule of S. Benedict, S. Bruno etc. the most proper school of
Contemplation. A state of life certainly the most happy, quiet, and secure (if
rightly undertaken and accordingly pursued) of any in Gods Church. Concerning
which my purpose is in this place to treat, not in its whole latitude, (for
a great volume would scarce suffice for such a discourse) but only with
relation to the end designed in it, to wit, Contemplation: intending seriously
to press the obligation that Religious Persons have to aspire thereto: and the
great advantages afforded therein for that purpose.

2. But as S. Augustine worthily finds fault with those that do too
indiscreetly and excessiuely commend to secular persons living in the world,
either a Monastical or a Clericall Profession; yea and to Heretics or
Infidels, even the Church it self: taking notice only of the Perfections of
those who in each of these are the most perfect, and forgetting, or purposely
omitting to forevvarne men that they are not to be scandalized, if they meet
with some also who have no part in those Commendations and felicities. By
which it comes to pass, that finding what they did not expect, they fall
back not only to a disesteeme, but also to a hatred of that which was so
excessiuely and vnvvarily commended to them. Upon the same grounds I think my
self obliged to forewarne my Readers, that they do not too inconsideratly
read and attend to all that they find written in commendations of a
Religious state: least being too much taken with what they read, imagining
the outvvard Habit and interior virtues inseparable companions: and thereupon
having undertaken such a profession, and there missing in some what they in
all expected, they be in danger either of living discontented lives, or perhaps
even of finding themselves in a worse estate for their souls, (because
i^proper for them and unproportionable to their forces) then if they had
continued in the world.

3. Moreover devout souls when they read modern spiritual Authors
treating of a Religious state, dilating much upon the great blessings attending
it, and with choice Passages out of the Ancient Holy Fathers, pleasing
Histories and elegant Characters describing. 1. The Noblenes and excellency of
that life, vvherin Honors, Pleasure* Empire and whatsoever the world can
tempt mankind vvithall, are trampled under foot. 2. The great security that it
affords unto souls, which thereby are exempted from the Devils snares, living
continually in the presence, favor and familiarity with God. 3. The
inexpressible sweetness and consolations enjoyed by his conversation etc. In
reading such passages, Isay, just and reasonable it is that vvell-meaning
souls should thereby be encouraged to aspire to such eminent Blessings truly
attributed to the same state, if God by his Divine Providence shall give them a
free way thereto. But yet they are vvithall to know, that such Privileges do
not belong to the exterior Profession of the said state: the which the more
Noble and Excellent it is when the obligations thereof are duly corresponded
with, the more do they abase themselves that live negligently and vnvvorthily
in it. And though it be a great step to a happy security to be secluded from
the worlds Tentations, yet unless se in Religion we fly from our selves also,
we will find, but danger enough. And lastly true it is that the Consolations
that attend an assiduous conversation with God in Prayer, are most desirable
and abmirable: But they are vvithall purely spiritual, and not to be expected
till souls have lost the taste of sensual pleasures and eases.

4. Herupon it is obseruable, how prudently and vvithall how ingenuously our
H. Patriarch S. Benedict deals with souls newly coming to a Religious
Conversion: He commands that his Rule be several times read to them, that so
they may be sufficiently informed what God and Superiors expect from them
through the whole follovving course of their lives. In the which Rule, though
the Prologue does with vvinning Promises invite the Readers to a participation
of the inestimable Blessings of a Religious life: yet (in the 58. in Chapter,
where is set down the Discipline and Order to be observed in the Admission
and Profession of New-comers) he ord^ines, that such shall not without great
difficulty be admitted, yea that they shall be treated rudely, with contempt
and opprobrious usage: All manner of unpleasant, harsh and rough things must be
inculcated to them etc. And all this is done to the end to try whether they
bring with them that courageous Resolution and Patience by which alone the
incomparable Blessings of a Religious State are to be purchased.

5. In the same sense, and with the same conditions we are to understand the
Nine Privileges that S. Bernard affirms are to be found in a Religious State.
For surely it was far from his meaning to apply the said Privileges to any
but industrious souls, whose principal care is to purify themselves
interiourly; and not at all to Tepide persons, that neglect to correspond to
their Profession. For who but the industrious and vigilant. 1. Do live more
Purely, then men do in the world. 2. Or fall more seldom. 3. Or rise more
speedily. 4. Or walk more warily. 5. Or rest more securely. 6. Or are visited
by God more frequently. 7. Or dye more consulently. 8. Or pass their Purgatory
more speedly. 9. Or are rewarded in heaven more abundantly. On the contrary it
is justly to be feared, yea too certain it is, that habitually Tepide and
negligent souls in Religion are in a far worse state, more immortified, more
cold in Devotion, more estranged from God every day then other, considering
that in the midst of the greatest advantages and helps to fervor and Purity
they will continue their negligence: and therefore they must expect for their
obstinate ingratitude, and for their offending against so great Light, that
they shall be more severely punished by Almighty God, then others the like that
live in the world.

6. How ridiculous therefore would it be for any to boast and say, God be
thanked, I have been so many years a Professed Religious Person; in an Order
that has produced so many thousand Saints, that has had so many Popes: that
received so many Emperors, Kings, Queens, and Princes: that has so
flourished with riches, learning, Piety and? As if those good successes to some
were sufficient security to all, so that they should need no more, then only
to be of such an Order.

7. For the vndeceiuing therefore of such as are strangers to a Religious
Profession, and for the admonishing and encouraging of those that have already
embraced it to comply with the obligations of it, that so they may enjoy all
the incomparable Privileges and Perfections, then indeed belonging to it: I
will employ the follovving Discourse principally in demonstrating, That the
principal thing to be intended in a Religious Profession is the incessant
Purifying of the Interior: Which is an attempt the most glorious, but vvithall
the most difficult and most destructive to sensual ease and contentment of all
other. This ought to be the motive of those that enter into it, and the
principal, yea almost sole employment of those that live in it. Whereto I
will add a fevv instructions more specially belonging to Superiors,
Officers, Private Religious and Nouices respectively.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Motives inducing to Religion to be examined. False security of
Tepide Religious Persons. Of false and true motives.

. 6. An habitual state of Introuersion and Recollectednesse is the principal
End of a Religious Life. Wherein such Recollectednes consists.

. 7. 8. Perfection of Prayer is the Perfection of a Religious state.

. 9. 10. 11. The wonderful sublimity of Prayer to which the Ancient Hermits
etc. attained.

. 12. Advantages thereto enjoyed by them beyond these times.

. 13. 14. 15. 16. That S. Benedict chiefly intended by his Rule to bring his
Disciples to purity of Prayer.

. 17. 18. 19. False Glosses and Interpretations of S. Benedicts Rule in these
days.

. 20. 21. S. Bernards Excellent declaration of the design of S. Benedicts Rule.

. 22. That the only sure way of introducing Reformes into Contemplative Orders,
is by the teaching of true Contemplative Prayer, and not multiplying of
external forms and Austerities.

1. IT concerns a soul very much to examine well the motives inducing her to
enter into a Religious State: for if they be not according to God, it is to be
feared she will not find all the Proffit and satisfaction, that she promises
to herself. For. 1. If such a Profession be undertaken merely out of vvorldly
respects, as to gain a state of subsistence more secure (and perhaps more
plentiful.) 2. Or to avoid suits, debates or worldly dangers etc. (unless
such incommodities have given only occasion to a Soul to reflect on the
vanities and Miseries of the world, and from thence to consider and love
Spiritual and Celestial good things, which are permanent and without
bitterness.) 3. Or if such a State be undertaken out of a general good desire
of Saving ones soul, according to the fashion of ordinary good Christians, and
no more: but without a Special, determinate Resolution to labor after
Perfection in the Divine Love; either because such souls know nothing of it;
or if they do, have not the courage, and will to attempt it: but resolve to
content themselves with being freed from vvorldly Tentations and dangers, and
with a Moderate care to practice the External Obseruances of Religion, yet
without sufficient Purity of Intention or a consideration of the proper End of
a Religious Contemplative life etc. I cannot tell whether Persons living and
dying in Religion without further designs of purifying their Souls, shall
find so great cause to rejoice for the choice they have made: Since their
beginning and continuing is indeed no better then a Stable course of most
dangerous Tepidity.

2. Hovveuer as for souls that for external respects have embraced a
Religious life: let them not therefore in a desperate humor conclude, that no
good can come to them by it so vnvvorthily undertaken: But rather hope that by
a Special Providence of God they were even against their own intentions and
wills brought into a course of life, to which if hovveuer afterward they
will duly correspond, it will prove an infinite blessing unto them. For such
oftimes have proved great Saints, after that God gave them light to see their
perverse Intentions, and Grace to rectify them: By which means they beginning
in the flesh, have ended in the Spirit.

3. And as for the third sort (of Tepide persons, it much concerns them, at
least after their solemn Profession to search well into their Souls, and
there rectify what they find amiss: taking great heed how they rely upon
External Obseruances, Obediences or Austerities: the which though they be
necessarily to be performed, yet cannot without great danger and harm be
rested in, but must needs be directed to a further and Nobler End, to wit, the
Advancement of the Spirit.

4. Neither let them conclude the Security of their Condition and good
disposition of soul from a certain Composednes and quietness of Nature, the
which unless it be caused by Internal Mortification and Prayer, is but mere
self love. And much less let them rely upon the esteem and good opinion that
others may have of them: Nor likewise on their own abilities to discourse of
Spiritual matters, and give Directions to others; since no Natural light, nor
acquired learning or study can be sufficient to enable any one to tread in
Contemplative ways, without the serious practice of Recollected Prayer. A
sufficient proof vvherof we see in Thaulerus, Who was able to make an
Excellent Sermon of Perfection, but not to direct himself in the way to it,
till God sent him a poor, ignorant Layman for his Instructour.

5. What is it therefore that a soul truly called by God to enter into Religion
looks for? Surely not Corporal labors: Not the use of the Sacraments: Not
hearing of Sermons etc. For all these she might have enjoyed perhaps more
plentifully in the world. It is therefore Only the union of the Spirit with God
by Recollected Constant Prayer: to the attaining which Divine End, all things
practiced in Religion do dispose: and to which alone so great impediments are
found in the world.

6. The best general proof therefore of a good Call to Religion is a Love to
prayer, either vocal or Mental. For if at first it be only to vocal Prayer,
by reason that the soul is ignorant of the efficacy and Excellency of
Internal Contemplative Prayer, or perhaps has received some preiudices against
it: Yet if she observe Solitude carefully, and with attention and fervor
practice Vocal Prayer, she will in time either by a Divine Light perceive the
necessity of joining Mental Prayer to her vocal, or be enabled to practice
her vocal Prayer mentally, which is a sublime Perfection.

7. It is a state therefore of Recollectednes and Introuersion that every one
entering into Religion is to aspire unto. The which consists in an habitual
Disposition of soul, vvherby she transcends all creatures and their Images,
the which thereby come to have little or no Dominion over her: so that she
remains apt for immediate Cooperation with God, receiving his Inspirations,
and by a return, and as it were a refluxe tending to him and Operating to his
Glory. It is called Recollectednes, because the Soul in such a State gathers
her thoughts, naturally dispersed and fixed with multiplicity on Creatures,
and unites them upon God. And it is called Introuersion, both because the
Spirit and those things which concern it, being the only object that a devout
Soul considers and values, she turns all her Sollicitudes inwards to observe
defects, wants or inordinations there, to the end she may remedy, supply and
correct them: And likewise because the proper Seat, the Throne and Kingdom
where God by his Holy Spirit dvvells and reigns, is the purest Summity of
Man's Spirit. There it is that the soul most perfectly enioyes and contemplates
God, though every where, as in regard of himself, equally present, yet in
regard of the communication of his Perfections present there after a far more
Noble manner then in any part of the world besides, inasmuch as he
communicates to the Spirit of Man, as much of his Infinite Perfections, as any
Creature is capable of: being not only simple Being, as he is to inanimate
Bodies; or Life, as to living Creatures: or Perception as to sensitive: or
knowledge, as to other ordinary Rational Souls: But with and besides all
these, he is a Divine Light, Purity and happiness, by communicating the
supernatural Graces of his Holy Spirit to the Spirits of his servants. Hence
it is that our Savior says, (Regnum Dei intra vos est) The Kingdom of God is
within you; And therefore it is that Religious, Solitary and abstracted Souls
do endeavor to turn all their thoughts inward, raising them to (Apicem
Spiritus) the pure top of the Spirit (far above all sensible Phantasmes, or
imaginatiue discoursings, or grosser Affections) where God is most perfectly
seen, and most comfortably enjoyed.

7. Now the actual practice of this Introuersion consists principally if not
only, in the Exercise of Pure, Internal spiritual Prayer: the Perfection of
which therefore ought to be the Chief aim to which a Religious Contemplative
Soul is obliged to aspire. So that surely it is a great mistake to think that
the Spirit of S. Benedicts Order and Rule consists in a Public, Orderly,
protracted, solemn singing of the Divine Office, the which may be full as
well, yea and for the External is with more advantage performed by Secular
Ecclesiastics in Cathedral Churches. A Motive to the introducing of which
pompous solemnity might be that it is full of Edification to others to see and
hear a conspiring of many Singers and Voices (and it is to be supposed, of
hearts too) to the praising of God. But it is not for Edification of others
that a Monastical State was instituted or ought to be undertaken. Religious
Souls truly Monastical fly the sight of the world, entering into Deserts and
solitudes, to spend their lives alone in Penance and Recollection, and to
purify their own Souls, not to give Example or Instruction to others. Such
Solitudes, are, or ought to be sought by them, thereby to dispose themselves for
another far more proffitable Internal solitude, in which, Creatures being
banished, the only Conversation is betvveene God and the Soul her self in the
depth of the Spirit, as if besides them two, no other thing were existent.

8. To gain this happy state a devout Soul enters into Religion, where all
imaginable advantages are to be found for this End: At least anciently they
were so, and still ought to be. But yet though all Religious persons ought to
aspire to the Perfection of this State, it is really gained by very fevv in
these times. For some through ignorance, or misinstruction by Teachers that
know no deeper not a more perfect introuersion, then into the Internal senses
or imagination: And others through negligence, or else by reason of a voluntary
povvring forth their Affections and thoughts upon vanities, vselesse Studies,
or other sensual Enterteinments, are never able perfectly to enter into their
Spirits, and to find God there.

9. But it is vvonderfull to read of that depth of Recollectednes and most
profound Introuersion to which some Ancient Solitary Religious Persons by long
exercise of spiritual Prayer have come: In so much as they have been so
absorpt and even drowned in a deep Contemplation of God, that they have not
seen what their eyes looked on, nor felt what otherwise would greiuously
hurt them. Yea to so habitual a State of attending only to God in their Spirit
did some of them attain, that they could not, though they had a mind thereto,
oftimes fix their thoughts upon any other obie^t but God: their Internal
senses (according as themselves have described it) having been, in an
inexpressible manner, drawn into their Spirit, and therein so svvallovved up,
as to loose in a sort all other use. A most happy state: in which the Devil
cannot so much as fix a seducing tentation or Image in their minds to distract
them from God: but on the contrary, if he should attempt it, that would be an
occasion to plunge them deeper and more intimely into God.

10. And this was the effect of Pure, Spiritual Contemplative Prayer: The
which was not only practiced by the Holy Ancient Hermites etc. in most
sublime Perfection: But the exercise thereof was their Chief, most proper and
almost continual Employment: in so much as the Perfection thereof, was by them
accounted the perfection of their State. A larger proof vvherof shall be
reserved till we come to speak of Prayer. For the present therefore I will
content my self with a testimony or two related by Cassian out of the
mouths of two) most sublime Co^templatiues. Thus therefore speaks one of them
(in the Conference, cap. 7.) Finis Monachi and totius Perfectionis Culmen in
Orationis consummatione consistit, that is, The End of a Monastical
Profession, and the Supreme Degree of all Perfection consists in the Perfection
of Prayer. And (in the tenth Confer. cap. 7.) Another says, Hic finis totius
Perfectionis est, vt eo vsque extenuata Men's ab omni situ Carnali ad
Spiritualia quotidie sublimetur, donec omnis eius Conuersatio, omnisque
volutatio cordis, vna and iugis efficiatur Oration. That is, This is the End of
all Perfection, that the mind become so purified from all carnal defilement,
that it may be raised up daily to Spiritual things, till its whole employments
and every motion of the Heart may become one vn-interrupted Prayer.

11. Now what a kind of Prayer this was that they aspired to, how sublime
in Spirit (though oftimes joined with their vocal Prayers) may appear from
that Description given of it by a Holy Hermit in these words (in the 10.
Confer. cap. 20.) Ita ad illam Orationis purissimam perueniet qualitatem, quae
non solum nullam Deitatis effigiem in sua supplicatione miscebit, sed nec vllam
quidem in se memoriam dicti cuiusdam, vel facti speciem seu formam Characteris
admittet. That is, Thus by much practice the soul will arrive to that most
Sublime Purity of Praler, wherein no Image at all of the Divinity is mingled,
and which will not admit the least memory, nor a Character or representation of
anything either spoken or done. The strange subtilty and spirituality of which
Prayer considered, there is applied unto it that Saying of S. Antony, (in the
9. Conf. chap. 31.) Non est perfecta oration, in qua se Monachus, vel hoc ipsum
quod orat, intelligit, That is, That prayer is not a perfect one, unless the
Religious Person that exercises it, be not able to give an account of his own
thoughts that passed in it (or, does not perceive that he prays.)

12. What great advantages the Ancient Hermites and other Religious Persons
enjoyed for the more certain and more speedy attaining to this Internal
Purity of Prayer and vvonderfull Cleannes of Spirit (the End of their
Profession:) How much more able their bodily complexions were to support that
most rigorous Solitude, those long continued Attentions of mind etc: And how
much more efficacious herto were their Manual labors beyond our Employments
in Study: And lastly how by such like means they with the only Exercise of
vocal Prayer attained to Perfect Contemplation, shall be showed more fully,
when we come to the last Treatise concerning Internal Prayer.

13. In this place I will content my self with shevving that by the Rule of
our Holy Father S. Benedict, all his Disciples are obliged to propose to
themselves no other End of their Religious Profession, but only such Purity
both of soul, and the Operations of it in Spiritual Prayer: So that how
exact soever they be in outvvard Obseruances, unless they be referd unto, and
efficacious also for the producing of this Internal Purity in some reasonable
measure, they shall not be esteemed by God to have complied with their
vocation and Profession.

14. To this purpose we may observe, that it is from those Ancient Holy
Hermites and Religious that our Holy Father borrowed the greatest part of his
Rule and Ordinances, which in the Conclusion he professes to be meant only by
him as a disposition vvherby we may be enabled to imitate them in their most
perfect Internal practices. It is from them that he borrovves the Phrase of
(Oration pura) Pure Prayer (in the 20. Chap.) The Exercise vvherof, besides the
reciting of the Office, he appointed daily, as appears both by the same
Chapter of the Rule, and also by the Story related by S. Gregory of one of his
Monks, whom the Devil in the shape of a Blackmore tempted out of the
Community in the time of such Recollections. By which may be perceived the
great fruit and efficacy of such Prayer: For the Devil could be contented he
should be present at the Office, because during that Exercise he could more
easily distract his mind: But knovving the force of Internal Prayer, how
recollectiue it is, and what light it affords to discover the inward Defects
of the soul, and to obtain Grace to correct them: His principal aim was to
withdraw him from so proffitable an Exercise. And therefore to countermine the
Devils Malice, Our Holy Father thought it vvorth a journey expressly to cure
the Infirmity and prevent the danger of one of his Seduced Monks.

15. For this End it is, that our Holy Father in the 58. C. ordeines Superiors
in the Examination of the Spirits and dispositions of Nevv-comers, that they
should most especially have an eye to this most necessary condition, (Si Deum
vere quaerit:) If he be such an one as truly seeks God. And more particulary,
(Si sollicitus est ad opus Dei:) If he have a sollicitous care duly to
perform the work of God, which he interprets to be Prayer: and this so
principal a work, that he ordeines, that (Nihil operi Dei praeponatur,)
nothing must be preferred before it.

16. For the advancing of this Prayer, that it may become such as is suitable
to a Contemplative State, all other Exterior Obseruances are appointed. 1. By
the 12. Degrees of Humility, by frequent Prostrations, acknowledging of Secret
Imperfections etc. Pride, selfeloue and all other our corrupt Affections
hindering our union in Spirit with God are subdued and expelled, and (as our
Holy Father says at the end of the last Degree) that Perfect Charity which
most immediately unites the souls to God, is produced in the soul, 2. By
perfect Obedience, self judgment and self will are abated. 3. By Fastings,
watchings and other Austerities, sensuality is mortified. 4. By Religious
Poverty all distracting cares about temporal things are expelled. 5. And for
the gaining of an Habitual state of Recollectednes and introuersion, so great
silence and Solitude were so rigorously enjoined and practiced; all objects of
sensual Affections removed, all conversation with the world, all relating or
harkening to news severely prohibited. All this surely for no other end but
that souls might be brought to a fit disposition to imitate those solitary and
devout Saints (proposed by our holy Father for our examples) in their
continual conversation with God, attending to his Divine inspirations, and
vn-interrupted union of Spirit with him by pure Spiritual Contemplation.

17. Therefore though our Holy lawgiver does not in his Rule give his Disciples
any special Instructions for ordering their Interior spiritual Prayer
(touching such matters referring them to the Inspiration of the Divine Spirit,
as himself says; as likewise to the Aduices of the Ancient fathers and
Hermites professing Contemplation:) Yet it is evident that his principal
design was to dispose his Disciples by his Ordinances to aspire and attain
to such Internal Perfection; without which the External Obseruances would
be of no value, but rather (being finally rested in, without farther
application to the Spirit) empty Hypocritical Formalities. And more
particularly as touching the Conferences of the Fathers (written by Cassian,
and expressly recommended to us by our Holy Father) we reasonably may and
ought to judge that his intention was, we should in a special manner make
use of the Instructions and Examples there delivered by prudent, holy and
experienced Contemplatiues, as a Rule and Pattern, to which we should
conform our selves, principally in our Internal Exercises: as being much more
useful and proper for us, then any Instructions about such matters to be found
in the writings of others far more learned Holy Fathers of the Church, who
generally direct their speeches to such as lead common lives in the world.

18. This obligation being so manifest and unquestionable: how can those new
Interpreters of our holy Rule be excused that; extend the Profession of a
Religious Person no further then to the performance of exterior Obediences and
obseruances literally expressed in the Rule, or signified by the express
commands of Superiors? Surely they forget that it is to God only that we
make our Vows, and not to man, but only as his substitute, and as appointed by
him to take care of the purifying our souls. For the destroying therefore of so
unreasonable an Interpretation (yet too likely to be embraced by the tepide
Spirits of this Age,) it will suffice only to look upon the form of a
Religious Profession instituted by our holy Father in the 58. chapter in these
words, Suscipiendus autem, in Oratorio etc. that is, Let him that is to be
received to a Religious Profession; promise in the presence of the whole
Community assembled in the Church, before God and his Saints; 1. A constant
Stability in that state. 2. A conversion of his Manners, 3. and Obedience. Now
of the three things so, solemnly and with such affrighting circumstances,
vowed, Conversion of Manners can signify no other thing but Internal Purity
of the soul; Obedience indeed seems to regard the outvvard obseruances of the
Rule: yet surely with an eye to the principal end of all external duties of
all Christians, and much more of those that aspire to the Perfection of Divine
Love. And as for Stability, it regards both these, adding to them a
perseverance and a continual progress in both to the end.

19. These things considered, if God so earnestly protested to the Jews,
saying, My soul hates your New Moons, your solemn Feasts and Sacrifices
(which yet were obseruances ordained by himself) and this, because those
that practiced them with all exactnes rested in the outvvard actions, and
neglected inward purity of the heart, typified by them: much more will God
despise and hate an exact performance of Regular Obseruances commanded by man,
when the practisers of them do not refer them to the only true end regarded
by the Institutour, which was, by them to dispose and fit souls to Internal
solitude, aptnes to receive Divine light and Grace, and lastly to the practice
of pure Contemplative Prayer, without which a Religious state would be no
better then a mere outvvard Occupation on Trade: And if only so considered, it
is perhaps less perfect then one exercised in the world, by which much good
commodity may be derived to others also.

20. Again when such condescending Interpreters do further say, that all our
obligation by virtue of a Religious Profession, is to be understood only
(Secundum Regulam,) according to the Rule: We must know that this Phrase
(Secundum Regulam) is to be annexed to the Vow of Obedience only, importing
that a Religious Superior has not a vast unlimited authority, but confined to
the Rule: vvheras there are no limits prescribed to Conversion of manners, to
Christian Holiness and Perfection: in which we are obliged daily to make a
further progress. To the which Duty, as by becoming Religious we have a
greater obligation so likewise have we a greater necessity. For though by
entering into Religion we do avoid many occasions and tentations to outvvard
enormous sins: yet we can never be freed from our thoughts, which will
pursue us where ever we are: and more impetuously and dangerously in
solitude, then in company, being indeed the greatest pleasure of man, whether
they be good or bad. For in Solitude the soul has her whole free scope
without interruption to pursue her thoughts. So that a Religious person that
can think himself not obliged, and that actually does not restreine and order
his thoughts, by diuerting and fixing them on Heavenly and Divine objects, Such
an one if for want of opportunity he guard himself from outvvard, Scandalous
crimes: yet he will more and more deeply plunge himself in corrupt nature,
contracting a greater obscurity and incapacity of Divine Grace daily: And such
inward Deordinations will become more dangerous and incurable, then if he had
lived in the world, where there are so frequent diuersions. Now a poor and
most ineffectuall Remedy against these will he find in an exact conformity to
any external obseruances whatsoever: yea perhaps they will serve to increase
such ill habits of soul, by breeding Pride and security in it.

21. A much better and more proffitable Interpreter of our holy Rule therefore
is Devout S. Bernard, in many passages in his works, and particularly in those
words of his in an Epistle to William an Abbot of the same Order, Attendite in
Regulam Dei etc. that is, Be attentive to the Rule of God. The kingdom of God
is within you: that is, it consists not outwardly in the fashion of our
clothes or manner of our corporal Diet, but in the virtues of our inner man.
But you will say: What? do thou so enforce upon us spiritual Duties, as
that thou condemnest a care of the external Obserua^ces enjoined by the Rule
of S. Benedict? No, by no means: But my meaning is, That the former Spiritual
Duties must necessarily and indispensably be done: and yet these laster must
not be omitted. But otherwise, when it shall happen that one of these two must
be omitted: in such case these are much rather to be omitted, then those
former. For by how much the Spirit is more excellent and noble then the body,
by so much are spiritual exercises more proffitable then corporal.

22. Neither will it avail the forementioned Interpreters to say, that their
meaning is not to prejudice the obligation of Religious Persons to internal
Duties: but only to show that such obligation is grounded on the Divine Law
imposed on them as Christians; and not on an External Law made by man and
voluntarily undergone. For in opposition to this Excuse, besides what has
been said concerning the making of our Vows to God, and the express
obligation therein to an Internal Conversion of Ma^ners: we are to know that
by virtue of our Religious Vows we are obliged to a far greater Perfection
of Internal Purity, then we were formerly as Christians, ansvvereable to
the greater helps and advantages thereto afforded in Religion: And particularly
we have an obligation to aspire to the Perfection of internal Contemplative
Prayer, the practice whereof is (at least) of extreme difficulty in an
ordinary distracted, sollicitous secular state.

23. And from what has been said may be collected this most true and
proffitable Observation, to wit, That whosoever would attempt the restoring
of the true Spirit of Religion (which is Contemplation) miserably decayed in
these days, will labor in vain if he think to compass his holy Design by
multiplying of Ceremonies, inlargeing of Offices, increasing of External
Austeritys, rigorous regulating of Diet and Abstinences etc. All which things
will have little or no effect, unless the minds of Religious Persons be truly
instructed in the doctrine of Contemplative Prayer, and obligation to attend
and follovv the Internal Guidance of Gods Spirit, which is rather hindered
then advanced by the excessive multiplication of outvvard Obseruances. And for
this reason S. Benedict (who surely had a most perfect light and an equal
zeal, at least, to advance the Spirit of Contemplation) was very moderate in
these things; and on the contrary very severe in requiring the observation of
Silence, Solitude, and Abstraction of Life, the which do most directly and
efficaciously begett an habitual Introuersion and Recollectednesse of Spirit.
The ineffectualnesse therefore of these new ways of Reformation we see daily
proof of, by the short continuance of them. For minds that are not enlightened,
nor enabled by the Spirit of Contemplative Prayer suitable to their state, to
make a due use of such great Austeritys for the increasing of the said Spirit,
become in a short time, after that the first zeal (much caused by the nouelty
and reputation gained in the world) is cooled, to grow weary, not finding
that inward satisfaction and proffit which they expected: And so they return
to their former Tepidity and Relaxation.

CHAP. V.
. 1. 2. 3. A Religious Person is not Perfect by his Profession.

. 4. 5. 6. 7. Whether, and how far Ignorance of the true End of Religion will
excuse.

. 8. 9. The danger of those that knowing, will not pursue Internal ways of
Recollection, which are the true End of a Religious state. And much more of
those that discountenance it.

. 10. 11. 12. Vain pretenses of those that discountenance Internal Prayer etc.

. 13. A description of an External and an Internal Monk, out of Hesychius.

1. OUR obligation therefore to tend to Perfect Internal Purity and Simplicity
being so great and so vndispensable: what account, think we, will some
Religious Persons be able to give to Almighty God for their miserable
deficienty in this so essential a condition?

2. Religion is by all acknowledged for a state of Perfection: not that by the
mere taking a Religious Profession or Habit a Person is thereby more Perfect
then he was before: but because by renouncing those distractiue Impediments
which are in the world, he puts himself into a condition, in which he not
only may far more easily aspire to the Perfection of Divine Love: but moreover
by assuming such a state he obliges himself to employ all those advantages
which he finds in Religion, as means to approach nearer to this Perfection
daily, more then if he had continued in the world he either could or was
obliged. The which if he do not, he will be so far from enjoying any
Privilege in Gods sight by the Perfection of his State, as that he will be
accountable to God so much the more for his ingratitude, and negligence in
making use of such advantages and Talents given him.

3. S. Paulinus excellently illustrates this Truth by this similitude. He
compares the world to a dry scorched and barren wilderness: and Celestial
Happiness to a most delicious Paradise, divided from this desert by a deep and
tempestuous river, which must necessarily be past by swimming: The securest
way to pass over this river is by quitting ones clothes: But fevv there are
that have the courage to expose themselves to the injuries of the weather for a
while, and therefore adventure over clothes and all: And of them, God knovvs, a
world miscarry by the way. Some fevv others (such are Religious Persons)
seeing this danger take a good Resolution to deuest themselves of their
Clothes, and to make themselves lighter and nimbler by casting away all
impediments, how dear soever to flesh and blood. But yet this being done, it
remains that they should labor, naked as they are, with svvimming to pass
the River: But this they neglect to do, or take so little pains, and strive
so negligently against the waves and stream, that all they do comes to
nothing, they are in as much danger and as far from Paradise as they were
before. And whereas they glorify themselves because they are Naked: that will
rather aggrauate their folly and make their negligence far more culpable, in
that having so great an advantage, they would not take a little pains to do
that for which they cast of their Clothes.

4. Now the Impediments either much delaying, or quite hindering many souls
that live in Religion, and are naturally apt enough for the Exercises of a
Contemplative Life, from complying with this most necessary obligation, are
partly in the understanding, and partly in the will. Concerning this latter,
which is Self-love, a settled Affection to Creatures, negligence etc. much
has already been said, and more will hereafter be added. But concerning the
other impediment seated in the Understanding, which is Ignorance of the true
way leading to that perfection which is the proper End of a Religious
Contemplative Life, I will here take into Consideration, Whether, and how far
such Ignorance may excuse a Religious Person that does not aspire to that
Perfection to which his State obliges him.

5. For the clearing of this Doubt, we may observe that there may in this
case be a twofold Ignorance. 1. An Ignorance in gross that there is any such
Obligation. 2. On supposition that a soul is informed that she has such an
obligation, an Ignorance of the means and vvayes proper and necessary for the
acquiring of this Perfection: the which in the present case are Mortification
and (principally) Internal Prayer.

6. First therefore for the former sort of Ignorance, it is so gross and even
vvillfull, that there can scarce be imagined any Excuse or qualification for
it. For what other thought can a Soul have quitting the world, and all the
pleasures and commodities therein to embrace Poverty, Obedience, solitude etc,
but thereby to consecrate herself entirely to God, shevved by the Solemn
circumstances of her Admission and Profession, the Questions proposed to her,
and her Answers, her Habit, Tonsure, Representation of a Death and Burial,
Solemn Benedictions of her Habit, and Prayers of the Community etc? All that
are vvitnesses and Spectatours of such an Action do no otherwise understand
it: And indeed except it were so, what difference is there betvveene a
Secular and Religious state?

7. But in the next place touching the second sort of Ignorance, to wit, of
the vvayes most proper and efficacious to bring a Religious Soul to
Perfection: It is to be feared that such an Ignorance will be but a small
Excuse, and that but to very fevv. For since both Faith and Experience teach us
with what great defects, what inordinate Affections etc. we enter into
Religion, with an intention there to abate and mortify them: And since even
natural Reason and daily experience likewise show us, that Perfection of the
Soul cannot consist in External obseruances, which do not penetrate into
the Interior: Yea without Prayer and Purity of intention (to be had only by
Prayer) they do rather nourish Selfeloue and Self esteem: since thirdly the
same experience conuinces us that such vocal Prayers as we use and join to
our other Obseruances do not produce in us a sufficient Purification of Soul:
no nor that any other painful methods of Meditation (unknown to the Ancient
Contemplatiues) do afford us sufficient Light and Grace for such a purpose,
because they pierce not deep enough into the Spirit: what reasonable soul
but will hence conclude, that there must needs be some other efficacious
means for the acquiring of the end which we propose to our selves. And
since God will infallibly give Light and Grace to all those that have recourse
unto him in Spirit and Truth: It must necessarily follovv, that the only
culpable ground of such Ignorance must needs be a neglect of such Prayer: And
the root of such neglect, a sensual tepide disposition of the will, hating to
raise it self to God. And let any one judge whether an Ignorance so grounded
can excuse us: Especially considering, that our Holy Father, requires the
practice of such Prayer in all our smallest undertakings, and teaches us that
his Rule is only a preparation to Perfection, he referres us further to the
examples of the Ancient Hermites, whose manner of Prayer if we would
imitate, we should make some approaches at least to that Perfection, to the
almost inconceiuable Sublimity and purity vvherof they attained.

8. Now if Ignorance will not be a sufficient excuse to any Religious Person
for either not endeavoring after Interior Purity of soul by Prayer in spirit,
or endeavoring after a vvrong improper manner and way: How much less
excusable, nay how deeply culpable before God will those be, who are
sufficiently instructed in the only true internal vvayes leading to
Contemplation, and vvithall are furnished with all helps, leisure and
advantages for that purpose: and yet out of a settled slothfullnes, and fixed
love to sensual objects have not the courage or will to walk in them: yea
perhaps having once comfortably vvalked in them, do most ingratefully and
perfidiously forsake and turn out of them? Reaping no other benefit by their
knowledge, but perhaps an ability to talk of them, to the help of others, it
may be, but to the increasing of their own Pride, and self-love: so that
their knowledge of their obligation and end of their Profession helps to
lead them further from it.

9. But above all most miserable will their condition be, who living in
Contemplative Orders, and not having either sufficient knowledge or Grace to
practice themselves the exercises of true Internal Prayer and Abstraction of
life, shall deter others therefrom, and discountenance, or perhaps persecute
those whom God has inspired to renew the only proper exercises of
Contemplation: The decay of which has been the decay of the true Spirit of
Monastical Religion.

10. True it is that to justify such undue proceedings and to gain an esteem
to their own inferior Exercises, partiality has suggested to them certain
seeming reasons and pretenses against the practice of Contemplative Prayer, and
if it were dangerous, and did expose the exercisers of it to illusions: or as
if it were prejudicial to Regular obseruances and obedience: or that perhaps
it may diminish the credit which some Religious Orders have gained in the
world by their long solemn Offices, laboriously celebrated. But (as I shall
in due place in the last Treatise demonstrate) all these accusations made
against Contemplative Prayer, are most unjust and groundless. On the contrary
those that practice such Prayer as they ought, are most careful of conformity
to Religious Duties, and especially the Divine office appointed by the Church:
And this out of conscience and with great purity of intention.

11. Indeed true Internal livers are not very sollicitous for gaining credit
and esteem with the world; and much less would they make that an end of
their Religious obseruances. On the contrary their cordial desire is to live
vnknovvn and excluded from the world, approving their souls to God only.
Neither are they forvvard to usurp offices abroad not belonging to them, as of
Preaching, Hearing Confessions of seculars etc: by which the most necessary
solitude and Recollectednes, which by their Profession ought to be prised
above all things, are interrupted, and often utterly destroyed. And the more
confidently do they express a zeal for these essential things, as being
assured that God will not be vvanting to supply them sufficiently with all
things necessary to their corporal sustenance, as long as they prefer the
care of Purifying their souls, and complying with the obligations of their
Profession before such inferior things. S. Anthony was so careful of
preserving this spirit of solitude and disingagement from all treating with
the world, that he forbids his Monks to enter into Churches frequented by
multitudes: And much less would he suffer them to inuit and call Seculars
into their own Churches. And S. Stephen of Grammont upon experience of what
extreme prejudice the spirit of Religion had received by neglecting a solitary
abstracted life, forbids his Disciples in his Rule to have public Churches, or
to admit into their Oratories the presence of seculars, or so much as to let
them take Holy Water home with them: Or to quit their Desert to preach to
others. He commands them to avoid Confraternities: etc: And to prevent
complaints and fears least by so rigorous a sequestration from the world they
should be in danger of Penury: He most assuredly protests unto them, that it is
impossible that God should neglect to provide for them, that for his sake quitt
all pretentions to the world.

12. But the true cause of bitterness shevved by some against Internal Prayer
(restored by several most illuminated and Glorious Saints in these latter
times) may be feared to proceed partly from some kind of Pride and an
unwillingness to acknovvledge any Religious Exercises to be more perfect then
those, practiced so long by themselves: or to see that power which they had
gained in the managing of the Consciences of Religious Persons etc: to be in
danger of ceasing.

13. To conclude this Point: Those that place perfection of a Religious
Profession in any thing but in the Purity and simplicity of spirit, such may
call themselves Monks and Co^templatiues, being yet able to show no signs of
such a Profession but the habit, and a certain outvvard, formal, solemn and
severe comportment, under which may be hidden a secret most profound self
love and Pride. And they may do well to meditate seriously on that memorable
saying of Hesychius, a holy illuminated Monk, He that has renounced the world
(says he) that is, marriage, possessions and the like: such an one indeed has
made the Exterior man a Monk: but not, as yet the Interior. But he that has
renounced his own thoughts and affections: such an one has made truly the
Interior man a^ Monk also. And verily any one that has never so small desire
thereunto, may easily make the outward man a Monk: But it is a task of no
small labor to make the Interior man so too. Now a Sign of an Interior
Monk (says he) is the having attained to the Dignity of Pure spiritual
Prayer.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. That Internal Prayer was the Practice of Ancient Hermits: what kind of
Prayer that was.

. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. How it to came to pass that vocal Prayer became to them
Internal, and brought many souls anciently to Perfection: And why it will not
now do so ordinarily.

. 7. 8. 9. 10. The great help that the Ancients found by external labors, to
bring them to Recollection.

. 11. 12. 13. How manual labors came to give place to Studies: that which are
defended.

. 14. The late Practice of Internal Prayer recompenses other Defects.

1. THAT Internal Spiritual Prayer was seriously and almost continually
practiced by the Ancients is appare^t both out of the Lives and Conferences of
the Ancient fathers. But indeed there are but fevv proofs extant that
appointed times were set for the exercising it Conuentually, except in the
fore-mencioned story of the Monk tempted by the Devil to retire himself from
his Brethren when they were in such Prayer. I suppose therefore that
Superiors and Directours of souls tending to Contemplation were in these
latter days obliged to enjoin daily Recollections, by reason that the daily
private and continual employments of Religious Persons are not so helpful and
aduantagious to the procuring of that most necessary simplicity and purity of
soul, as anciently they were: And therefore they were forced to make some
supply for this defect, by such Conuentuall Recollections: The which they
instituted to be performed in public, because they perceived or feared that
Religious souls, if they were left to themselves, would out of Tepidity
neglect a duty so necessary, and so efficacious.

2. Now to the end that by comparing the manner of living observed anciently by
Religious Persons with the Modern in these days, it may appear what great
advantages they enjoyed toward the attaining of Perfection of Prayer beyond
us; We may consider. 1. Their set Devotions what they were: And 2. Their
daily Employments during the remainder of the day.

3. As concerning the first, their appointed Devotions, either in public or
Private, was only reciting ^he Psalter, to which they sometimes adioined a
little Reading of other parts of Scripture. For as for the foremencion^d
conuentuall mental exercise of Prayer it was very short, being only such
short Aspirations as Gods spirit did suggest unto them in particular, as it
were the flower of their Public Vocal Prayers. Yea and in private, when
they did purposely apply themselves to Prayer, they seldom varied from the
manner of their public Devotions, for then they also used the Psalter.

4. Now how it came to pass that vocal Prayers alone were in ancient times
available to bring souls to perfect Contemplation, which in these days it
neither does, nor ordinarily speaking, candoe: I shall declare more fully when
I come herafter to treat of Prayer: And in this place I will content my self
to point only at the Reasons and grounds of difference: viz: 1. One Reason was
their incomparably more abstraction of life, more rigorous solitude and almost
perpetual silence, of the practice of which in these days (it is believed)
we are not capable. 2. A second was their fasts, Abstinences and other
austerities beyond the strength of our infirm corporal complexions. 3. A
third was their External employments out of the set times of Prayer, the
which did far better dispose souls to Recollection, to Attendance on the
Divine Inspirations etc: then those ordinarily practiced in these days.

5. No wonder then if vocal Prayer exercised by such Pure, resigned, humble,
Mortified, and vndistracted souls had the efficacy to produce in them an
habitual state of Recollected Introuersion: which doubtless in many of them
was more profound, not only whilst they were busied in their vocal
Exercises, but also during their External business, then it is ordinarily with
us in the height of our best Recollections.

6. But a more large handling of this matter I refer to the last Treatise,
where we speak purposely of Prayer: And for the present I will only take
into consideration the third forenamed advantage of corporal labors, which
to the Ancients proved a help to Contemplation far more efficacious, then the
general employments of Religious in these days.

7. For the demonstrating vvherof it is to be observed, that anciently souls
embracing a Religious life were moved thereto merely out of the spirit of
Pe^nance: without any regard at all to make use of their solitude for the
getting of learning, or for the disposing themselves to Holy Orders. Being
likewise poor, unprovided of Annual Rents or foundations (the which they
were so far from seeking, or desiring, that, in our holy Fathers expression
(cap. 48.) they did then only account themselves to be (vere Monachi, si de
labor manuum suarum viuerent) true Monks, whilst they lived by the labor of
their hands:) they were both by necessity and choice obliged to corporal
labor.

8. But their principal care above all other things being to attend unto God,
and to aspire unto perfect Union in spirit with him, they ordinarily made
choice of such labors as were not distractiue, and such as might be performed
in solitude and silence: so that during the said labors they kept their minds
continually fixed on God: Such labors were the making of Baskets, or some
other works of the like nature, that required no solicitude, and very small
exactness or attention. And as Ecclesiastical Histories inform us, such was
the Charity of Bishops and other good persons their neighbors, that to ease
them of all care about the disposing or selling of their work, as likewise
to hinder them from having recourse to markets for the sale thereof, order was
taken that such works should be taken out of their hands, and a competent
price allowed them for them.

9. By this means it came to pass that their External labors being
exercised in order to the advancement of their spirits, proved a vvonderfull
help thereto, disposing them to Prayer and almost continual conversation with
God. And indeed it was God himself who by the ministry of an Angel taught
S. Anthony this art and most secure method of aspiring to Contemplation, when
being unable to keep his mind continually bent in actual Prayer, he grevv
weary of solitude, and in a nere disposition to quitt it: At which time an
Angel^ appearing to him busily employed in making Baskets of the rindes of
Palms, signified to him, that it was Gods will that he should after the same
manner intermit his devotions, so spending the time that he could not employ in
Prayer.

10. Such were the External daily employments of the ancient Contemplatiues:
and so great virtue did they find in them for the advancement of their spirit.
By which means so many of them attained to so sublime a degree of
Contemplation: yea and generally most of them arrived to very great simplicity
of spirit and almost continual recollectednes.

11. But when afterward by the most plentifully-flowing Charity of devout
Christians there was not only taken from Religious all necessity of sustaining
themselves by Corporal labors, but they were moreover richly furnished and
enabled to supply the wants of many others: We may well judge that it would
become a hard matter to persuade a continuance of much Manual labor, purely
and only for the greater good of the Spirit, when otherwise it was both
needles and afflicting to the Body. Hence it came to pass, that since
necessarily some Employment besides Prayer must be found out for the
entertaining of those Solitary livers, Learning as the most noble of all other,
was made choice of: yet so that for many Ages corporal labors were not
wholy excluded.

12. Yet ^his was not the sole, nor I suppose the principal Grounds of so
great, and almost universal a Change as afterward follovved in the manners
and fashion of a Coenobiticall life. But we may reasonably impute the said
Exchange of labors for Studies in a principal manner to the good Providence
of God over his Church, that stood in such extreme need of another sort of
laborers in Gods vineyard; and consequently to the Charity of Religious men
themselves, who during that most horrible ignorance and deprauation reigning
over all the world almost besides, thought themselves obliged to repay the
vvonderfull Charity of good Christians, by extending a greater Charity, in
communicating to them Spiritual and Heavenly things for their temporal. Hence
came a necessity of engaging themselves in the Cure of souls and Government of
the Church: the which indeed for several Ages was in a sort wholy
sustained by them: yea moreover by their zeal, labors and wisdom the light
of Divine Truth was spread abroad among Heathens also, and many Provinces and
Kingdoms adjoined to the Church. These things considered, no vvonder is there
if the introducing of Reading and studies in the place of Manual labors was
unavoidably necessary.

13. But perhaps some there may be not so well affected or pleased with the
present reputation or commodidities enjoyed by Religious Persons, that
assenting to what has been here said, will notvvithstanding infer, That,
since Learning is now become so much dilated in the world by the zeal and
Charity of Ancient Monastical Religious, there is no longer any the like
necessity of their interessing themselves in Ecclesiastical affairs: and
therefore that they ought to return to their old Corporal Employments and
labors.

14. Herto it may be replied, that even still there is much need of the^,
considering the far greater frequentation of Sacraments in these days above
the Ancient times. But moreover, if in these times, vvherin learning and
knowledge is so exposed to all sorts of men, Religious persons should quitt
studies, returning to their ancient employment of Manual labors (from which
as has been said, God himself did doubtless withdraw them:) Besides that
their Ignorance would render them the universal objects of contempt through
the whole Church, it would likewise expose them, as for their states, as a
Prey to all that either enuyed or coueted the scarce subsiste^ce left them: and
as to their souls they would be obnoxious to be turned hither and thither by
the variety of Directours that would undertake to guide them: And by these
means all men would be deterred from adjoining themselves unto them for
continuing a Succession.

15. Now though as has been said, such a change has been after this manner
made in the external Employments of Religious persons: Yet still the same
essential indispensable obligation of aspiring to Contemplation remains: For
the attaining to which although studies joined with Prayer seem in some
regards to be less aduantageous then anciently such labors as the Egyptian
Monks etc. undertook, were: Yet it has pleased God in goodness to his
servants in a good measure to recompense that disadvantage, by raising up
several Holy persons to teach more accurately then formerly, the knowledge
and practice of pure, Internal, Contemplative Prayer. For since it cannot be
denied, that to persons far more distracted by studies then anciently they
were by labors (which did not hinder a moderate quiet attention to God)
Vocal Prayer though never so much prolonged has not (ordinarily speaking)
sufficient force to recollect the mind habitually, or to suppress and cure the
many inordinate Affections of corrupt nature: Hence it is that the use of
appointed daily Recollections has seemed to be of absolute necessity; without
which the Spirit of Contemplation would be quite lost. So that to such Prayer
we may most principally impute the great lights and helps for Contemplation
afforded by some later Saints in Religious Orders, and in the world also, to
the great benefit of Gods Church: That sole Exercise in a good measure making
amends for all other Defects in which we seem to come short of the Ancients.

CHAP. VII.
. 1. Of special Duties of Religious Persons.

. 2. A Religious Person ought to desire to be always under Obedience.

. 3. 4. Qualities necessary in a Religious Superior.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. That Active Spirits are very improper to govern such as are
Contemplative. The grounds of the difference.

. 10. A fearful Example in Bernardinus Othinus: Showing how dangerous the
neglect of Internal Prayer is in a Religious Superior.

1. HAVING thus largely set down the proper and only End of a Religious
Profession, to wit, Purity and Simplicity of soul, to be obtained by
Recollected Contemplative Prayer alone: I will further add some more special
Duties belonging to Religious Persons according to their several Relations and
qualities, as Superiors, or other subordinate Officers, Subjects etc. For as
for the proper virtues of a Religious state, as Obedience, Poverty, Humility
etc. the handling of them is reserved to the follovving Treatise.

2. Now with what mind a Devout soul ought to embrace a Religious
Profession, is signified to us in that notable Passage in our Holy Fathers
Rule, where he says, In Coenobio degens desiderat sibi Abbatem praeesse, that
is, Whosoever lives in a Religious Community is desirous that an Abbot should
be set over him. From whence we ought to infer, that the Intention of a
Religious Person ought ever to be to live in subjection to the will of
another, and in such a mind to continue all his life. And therefore those that
readily accept, and much more those that ambitiously seek Government and
Prelature, may reasonably be judged to be lead by a Spirit directly opposite to
the Spirit of Religion. And surely he that shall seriously consider of what
difficul y and of what extreme danger the Office of a Superior is, what
terrible threatenings our Holy Father so often denounces from God against a
negligent, partial, and unfaithful discharge of such an Office, will think
it far fitter to be the object of his fear and Auersion, then of his Desire.
Therefore that Superior that does not find himself more vvilling to give up
his place, then to retain it, ought to suspect that he is scarce in a good
state.

3. Now to the end that both subjects may be informed what qualities they are
to regard in the Electing of Superiors, and also Superiors be put in mind
what is expected from them in the discharge of such an Office duly imposed on
them: I will from S. Bernard set down three necessary conditions or
Endovvments by which Superiors are to direct their Subjects, the which are.
1. Verbum. 2. Exemplum. and 3. Oration, that is, Exhortation, good Example, and
Prayer: Adding moreover, Mayor autem horum est Oration. Nam et si vocis virtus
sit and operis: Et operi tamen and voci gratiam efficaciamque promeretur
Oration. That is, Of those three necessary qualities the greatest and most
necessary is Prayer: For although there be much virtue in Exhortation and
Example, yet Prayer is that which procures efficacy and success to both the
other.

4. From which testimony and authority, yea even from the light of Natural
Reason, we may firmly conclude, that the Spirit of Prayer is so absolutely
necessary to a Religious Superior, that without it he cannot exercise his
charge proffitably either to himself or his subjects: And consequently, that
to a Superior in an Order whose spirit is Contemplation, it is necessary that
he have attained to a good established Habit of Contemplative Prayer. For (as
has been said in the foregoing Discourse, concerning Spiritual Guides) how
can such a Superior without knowledge gained by experience, inculcate the so
necessary Duties of Recollection and Prayer? Nay rather will he not be more
likely to discountenance those Exercises in which he is not skilled, and from
which perhaps he has an auersion?

5. Therefore that too ordinarily maintained Position of some, That Active
Spirits are more fit for Superiorities and External Emploiments, then
Contemplative: which are to be left to the Solitude and Sequestration to which
their Spirits incline them, is indeed most unreasonable and groundles.

6. On the contrary, no doubt there is, but that the decay of Religion has
principally proceeded from this preposterous disorder, viz. that in most
Religious Communities Active Spirits have got the advantage to possess
themselves of Prelatures and Spiritual Pastourships over the Contemplative,
though the state of Religion was instituted only for Contemplation. And this
has happened even since Contemplative Prayer has been restored by Persons
extraordinarily raised by God, as Rusbrochius, Thaulerus, S. Teresa etc. so
that Religious Communities have been ordered even in the point of Spirituallity
by Spirits of a quite different and contrary temper to that for which they
were intended.

7. Indeed it is not to be vvondred at, that Active Spirits should so prevail:
considering that those who are truly of a Contemplative disposition and
design, knowing well the difficulty and Danger of Superiority, how full of
Extrouersion, Distraction and Solicitude it is, and what occasions and
Tentations there are in it to raise, nourish, and satisfy sensual Affections,
Pride etc. to the peril of extinguishing the Spirit of Prayer (except in
souls far advanced in Prayer and Mortification:) such I say, are therefore
justly afraid of, and do use all lawful means to avoid the Care and
Government of others. Whereas Active Spirits that live in Religion, not being
capable of such Prayer as will raise them much out of nature, have not the like
apprehensions of such Employments: But on the contrary being lead by natural
Desires of Preeminence and love of liberty; and beleiuing that those who are
true Internal Livers will not submit themselves to all the ways and Policies
used for the increasing the temporal Good of their Communities; do not fear
to offer themselves, yea and ambitiously to seek Dominion over others: falsely
in the mean time persuading themselves that their only Motive is Charity, and
a Desire to promote the Glory of God, and the advancement, both temporal and
Spiritual, of their Conuents or Congregations. But what the effect is,
experience shows.

8. True it is that it cannot be avoided, but that many unfit spirits will often
be admitted into Religious Orders, very different from the dispositions
requisite: (though it belongs to Superiors to provide as well as may be
against such an abuse:) But such being admitted of Active Dispositions, the
best were to employ them in Active Exercises and External matters: as in the
Offices of Procuration, Dispense, Building and the like: But as for Prelacies,
the Charge of Instructing Nouices, or other Offices pertaining to the directing
of souls, it is the destruction of the spirit of Contemplation to employ
Active Dispositions in such. For how can they without light or Experience
direct souls in ways unknown to themselves, yea which through ignorance
or mistake they perhaps disapproue?

9. Besides upon exact consideration it will be found, that in the point of
Government, Contemplative Spirits that have made a good progress in Internal
Prayer, have great advantages above the Active. For such being careful
themselves to use all due Abstraction, will less molest themselves and others
with impertinent businesses: Not prying too narrowly into all passages, as if
they sought occasion of showing their authority and ability in making
unnecessary reprehensions, to the disquieting of Communities: but for Peace
sake they will sometimes even silere a bonis, passing over many things which
do seem a little amiss: vvherin they show great Prudence, and also cause
much proffit to subjects. 2. Such being diligent about their own
Recollections, do out of a love to silence, Patience, and Peace, forbear the
doing or imposing of a multitude of unnecessary Taskes upon others. 3. By
means of Prayer they obtain light to order all things to the benefit of their
subjects souls. And in case they have erred, or been defective in any thing,
they discover, and amend it in their next Recollection. 4. In the manner and
fashion of their whole comportment a certain Divine Grace shines forth,
which is of great efficacy to win their subjects Hearts to Obedience and
Divine Love. 5. Yea if by Corporal Infirmity they be disabled to attend to
many External Obseruances, yet a view of the Patience, quietness and
Resignation shevved by them, is more edifying to souls under their Care, then
all the most exact external Regularities and Severity of Active Spirits. 6.
Yea even in regard of Temporal Benefit to Communities, Contemplative Spirits
are more aduantageous then Active. Because they not putting any confidence in
their own Industry, Prudence and Actiuity, but only in the Divine Providence
(which is never vvanting to those that for temporal regards will not do any
thing unseemly or misbecoming their Abstracted state) do enjoy the effects
and blessings of God far more plentifully, whilst they prefer his love and
service before any humane, distracting sollicitudes for outward things.
Memorable Examples of great Blessings attending such a Confidence in God we
find abundantly in the Life of our holy Father and of the Ancient Monks, and
more lately in the life of Suso, Ioannes de Cruce etc. Now the want of such
Confidence in Active Spirits proceeds merely from Defect in Divine Love, and
that from the want of Internal Prayer. And hence proceed hurtful and
unseemly compliances with the world, a regard rather to wealth then good
wills to serve God in the souls that enter into Religion etc.

10. A fearful Example of the mischeife follovving the neglect of Internal
Prayer in a Superior, we find in Bernardinus Ochinus a Superior in a most
strict Order, who was a famous Zealous Preacher, and as might be judged by
outvvard appearance, of more then ordinary Sanctity; yet vvithall to comply
with those outvvard Employments, a great neglecter of Internal Conuentuall
Recollections. And when he was sometimes charitably admonished of such his
Tepidity, his ordinary answer was, Do you not know, that he who is always
in a good Action, is always in Prayer. Which Saying of his had been true, if
such good actions had been performed in virtue of Prayer, and by Grace obtained
thereby: For then they had been vertually Prayers: Whereas Actions though in
themselves never so good, if they want that Purity of Intention, which is
only to be had by Pure Prayer, are in Gods esteem of little or no value: The
principal motives of them being no other then such as corrupt nature is likely
to suggest. Ochinus therefore continuing in the same neglect, was by one of his
Brethren prophetically warned, that he must expect some terrible issue thereof,
in these words: Cave ne te Ordo eu^mat: that is, Take heed that our Order be
not herafter constreiued to vomit thee out of it. The which unhappily fell
out: For notvvithstanding all his other specious qualities and endovvments, he
first forsaking God, was afterward forsaken by him, and became a vvretched
Antitrinitarian Apostate. And it is very probable that the greatest part of the
Apostates of these times (such I mean as have formerly lived in Religious
Orders) do owe their Apostasy and Perdition to no other cause so much, as to
such neglect and Apostasy first from Prayer: The which holy Exercise if they
had continued, they would never have been weary of their habit first, and
afterward of their Faith.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. Superiors ought carefully to examine the dispositions of those that they
admit to Religion.

. 2. 3. Great danger to Communities from Loose Spirits.

. 4. 5. Other ill Qualities to be avoided.

. 6. 7. 8. 9. Of a good Nature. What is, and how to be prised.

. 10. 11. Inconveniences by admitting Active Spirits into Contemplative
Religions.

. 12. 13. 14. 15. Sufficient time for Recollection is to be allowed to all
Religious.

. 16. Superiors will be accountable for disorders in their flock.

1. NOw one of the principal Points of a Superiors Care for the vvellfare of
his Community consists in providing or admitting into it only such Spirits and
dispositions, as are likely to promote the good of it, by living according to
the Spirit of it. And in this all such Officers and Counselors are concerned,
to whom the laws have referred the Examination and trial of such as offer
themselves to a Regular life, and are afterward, upon their Approbation, to be
Professed: And a greater consideration of this Point is more necessary in these
days, then ancie^tly it was: For it is not now as in our holy Fathers time,
when incorrigible Persons might be expelled the Congregation.

2. It is not, I suppose, needful to advise such as are in those Offices to
take care how they admit loose Spirits into Religion among them, who will
not so much as intend God or his service: All whose Actions have no other
Motive but either fear of Penance or hope of gaining Reputation, Preferments
etc: Whose bodies are Prisoners in Religion, but their Minds and Desires
vvandring in the world: Who must enjoy all Privileges and corporal helps
equally with the best, yea and generally use them most vvastfully without
consideration of others: Who finding no taste or contentment in Spiritual
matters, are even forced to seek satisfaction in sensual pleasures, and for
the passing of the time to frame Designs, to raise and maintain factions, and
this especially against those that they see do most intend God, on whom they
will cast from of themselves all the Burdens of a Regular life: Who will
think themselves excused from all Duties for the least corporal Incommodity:
Who will desire and endeavor to make others like themselves, that their party
and power may be greater: Lastly who reap so little good to their own
souls, and are likely to do so much prejudice to others, that probably it had
been much better for them to have continued in the world; the state of
Religion only serving to increase their guilt and misery.

3. Such loose Spirits are worse in a Community where the knowledge of true
Spirituality is common, then in other places: Because there they are vvillfully
naught, and do resist amendment. If by the severity of laws and
Constitutions they may come to be kept in some tolerable order, yet this
reaches only to the Exterior, and lasts no longer then the Superiors eyes are
upon them. And indeed the Superiors themselves will in all probability feel
the greatest smart from such undue Admissions, being likely to find daily great
bitterness from their obstinacy. Such loose Spirits are the cause of such a
burdensome multiplicity of Laws, all which notvvithstanding are little
auayleable for their amendment, and yet do abridge the due Liberty of Spirit
necessary to devout vvellminded Souls, nourishing Scrupulosity etc. in them.

4. Let the best care that is possible be used, notvvithstanding some unfit
persons will through easines, partial affection or other respects in the
Examiners, slip in. If therefore those who are apparently bad be received,
what a Community will there be provided? Many that seem good, will prove
bad: but seldom or never will those that appear bad, become good. God indeed
can change the vvorst: But yet an uncertain hope in extraordinary Grace is not
to be relied upon, especially where public good is concerned.

5. Generally there is great fervor in Souls at their first entrance into
Religion. Therefore if any one show unruliness, Obstinacy and Indeuotion during
their Nouiceship, small good is to be expected from them.

6. A little Deuoutnes will not serve to counteruaile ill inclinations to
lying, dissembling, factiousnes, an humor of calummating etc: For a great, and
scarce to be hoped for measure of Grace will be requisite to subdue such
pernicious Qualities. On the contrary a good Nature, even where there is not
so much Devotion, yet will bear up a Soul, and make her a tolerable member
of a Community. It is likewise a great Disposition for Grace: which it may
well be hoped, will one day follovv, and that such an one will become
Devout: Especially this may be hoped for in those that have naturally a good
sound Judgment, which is much to be considered.

7. Now by a good Nature I mean, not such an one as is generally in the
world styled so, to wit, a facility and easines to grant a request, or to
comply with others. On the contrary, for as much as regards a Coenobiticall
life, I account such to be an ill nature, being easily seduced and perverted.
By a good Nature therefore in this place I mean such an one as is endued with
Modesty, Gentleness, Quietness, Humility, Patience, love of Truth, and other such
Morally good Qualities, which are good Dispositions for Christian Perfection.
Now a person of an ill Nature that will make a good show, out of hope to
steal a Profession, ought the rather for his dissimulation to be rejected.

8. And indeed Subtle Natures are much to be taken heed of. Some Nouices
will behave themselves so cunningly, as at the end of their Probation, none
can be able to produce any special accusation against them, and yet they may
in their conscience believe them to be unfit. In this case every one is to
follovv their own judgment: And especial heed is to be taken of the
judgment of the Master or Mistrisse of the Nouices, who are most to be
credited, as having the opportunity and means to espy and penetrate more
deeply into their Interior Dispositions.

9. This Goodness, or vertuousnes of Nature is an Essential Point, and far
more to be regarded then those Accidental ones, as strength of Bodily
complexion, Acutenes of Wit, Gracefullnes of Behavior, skill in Singing,
Nobility, Portion etc. And particularly for this last, how far Religious
Souls ought to be from regarding riches or gain in matters of this Nature, or
for such carnal Ends to admit those that are unfit, or whom God has not
sent, The General Decree of the Church in the first Oecumenicall Council of
Lateran (can. 64.) will show; besides the practice of Antiquity, as we may
read in an Epistle of S. Augustine. Surely the only way of founding Conuents
securely, even in regard of Temporalities, is by making choice only of those to
whom God has given fitting dispositions, vvherby we may engage his
Omnipotence in their preservation.

10. Those therefore upon whose Suffrages the Admission and Profession of
New-comers do depend, are to consider that they are entrusted by the whole
Congregation with a matter of such consequence, as not only the present, but
future vvellfare or ruin of Conuents is interessed in their proceedings: all
which trust they shall betray, if any undue consideration of friendship,
kindred, gain, etc. or a zeal of multiplying Conuents (which is but carnal)
shall corrupt their judgments.

11. Surely therefore in all reason none should be admitted into Communities
professing the aspiring to Contemplation, but only such as are disposed thereto;
and that are vvilling, yea desirous to spend their whole Lives in Solitude,
Prayer and Regular Obseruances, without any designs or thoughts of ever being
employed abroad, (yet alvvayes with an entire submission to the Ordinances of
Superiors.)

12. And indeed (as was said before concerning Superiors, that Active Spirits
being to direct the Contemplative, do endanger the extinguishing of the Spirit
of Contemplation: so likewise) if such be without choice admitted, the same
mischeife will follovv. Yea I am persuaded that many Active Spirits, though
of a Good, seemly, outvvard carriage, are no less harmfull to a Community, then
a lesser number of loose Spirits. And the reason is, because by their good
Exterior show they will seem worthy of Superiority, to which also their
Activity will incline them. And those are they indeed, (says Thaulerus) that
are Persecutours of Contemplation: for having a good opinion of themselves and
their own vvayes (which loose Spirits have not) they think themselves even
obliged to depresse those other good souls that do not judge those external
exercises and fashions suitable to their Profession. And for this reason they
will by faction seek to increase their number: yea and to strengthen their
own party, they will not spare to join with loose Spirits, for their own
Interests yiedling to their disorders. Neither when they have compassed their
Ends by the ruin of the Spirit of Contemplation, will Unquietness cease: For
in a Community wholy consisting of Active Spirits, factions and partialities
for several Ends and designs will never be wanting.

13. Now the same care that Superiors ought to have about the choice and
Admission of virtuous and fit souls into Communities: must be continued in
the managing and directing of them being admitted. Great care therefore is to be
taken that the misbehauiour of Nouices do not proceed from want of knowledge
and Instruction in matters of the Spirit: That so it may appear, that if they
do not well, it is for vva^t of good will, and not of Light. Now it is not
to be expected that Nouices should be perfect: it will suffice that they
seriously tend to it, by a constant pursuance of Internal Prayer and
Abstraction of Life.

14. Above all things therefore Superiors ought to allow to their subjects a
competent time daily for their Recollections, which is the food of the soul:
and to deny which would be a greater Tyranny, then to refuse corporal food
to slaves after their travail. He deserves not the name of a Religious man
(says Caietan:) No not of a Christian (says Thaulerus) that does not every
day spend some reasonable space in his Interior. S. Bernard would not excuse
even Pope Eugenius himself in the midst of those continually most distractiue
weighty affairs of the Popedom from this duty. The want vvherof is more
harmfull to the Soul, then that of corporal food is to the Body: For he that
fasts one day, besides the present pain he finds, will the next have a better
and more eager appetite: But a soul that through neglect is deprived of her
daily food of Prayer, will the next day have a less stomach and disposition
to it: and so in time will come willingly and even with pleasure: to starve
in Spirit: And to such neglect and loathing of Prayer she will come, if
Superiors do hinder, or indeed not encourage her to a constant exercise of it.

15. Now this care of Superiors must extend it self as well to Lay-brethren
or Sisters, as those of the Quire: For they also have the same obligation to
aspire to Contemplation: And if the appointed Vocal Prayers of the Divine
Office without the joining of daily Recollections will not avail to procure
in these the Spirit of Recollectednes; much less will those short Prayers or
Offices to which the others are obliged.

16. To conclude this point: It concerns most deeply Superiors to take care
that their subjects live according to their Profession and obligation: for if
it should be by their fault that they fail, it will be no excuse to the
subjects, but a great part of the burden and punishment will light upon
Superiors. And it were far better they had never come under their Direction,
but stayed in the world, where not having the like obligation to the
Perfection of Christian virtues, their guilt would have been the less. Hence
S. Augustine says; That as he never savv better souls then those in Religion,
so likewise he never saw worse. And the reason is, because it argues a most
maliciously ill habit of soul, when in the midst of so great Light, and such
helps to Piety, spiritual sloth and Tepidity reigns. And where Tepidity is
in Religion, although carnal open sins may be avoided, yet the more dangerous
sins of the Spirit, Pride, Factiousnes, Envy etc. do find occasions of being
raised and nourished, perhaps more then in the world. Add herunto that
irreuerences and profaning of the Sacraments are not so common in the world,
where the obligations and commodity of participating are not so frequent. And
lastly, which is most considerable, those who in Religion are sluggish and
indeuout, do grow continually worse and worse, being more and more hardened
by the daily heartlesse Exercise of Prayer and Tepide Communions: For where
the Sacaments do not produce the good effects for which God gave them, they
do occasionally increase hardness of heart and impenitency: Hence says
Thaulerus, It were better to take into ones body a million of Devils, then
once to take the Body of our Lord, being in an unfit disposition. And so it is
a very extraordinary and almost miraculous thing if God give the Grace of a new
conversion to Souls that in Religion are become habitually Tepide and stained
with known impurity, for they being insensible of their souls good in the
midst of all advantages possible to be had, cannot by any change to a better
state be amended: And therefore (it is to be feared) such do generally dye in
the state vvherin they lived. Whereas in the world an ill liver may far more
probably meet with helps of Conversion by change of state, place etc. or by
sickness: whereupon S. Bernard professed, That he would not doubt to give a
present Absolution to the most enormous sinner living in the world, if he would
promise to enter into a Religious life: But what hopes can be of him that
after he has left the world, so habitually neglects God? What change, what
new occasions can be afforded to him for his Conversion?

CHAP. IX.
. 1. Aduices to Nouices.

. 2. 3. 4. 5. Of the Feruor Nouitius: Why God gives it at the Beginning of our
Conversion. And what use is to be made of it.

. 6. 7. How they are to behave themselves after their Nouice-ship.

. 8. Superiors ought not to employ young Religious in Distractiue Employments.

. 9. How they are to be ordered about their studies.

1. THERE vvil be occasion in the follovving Treatises to speak of several
special Duties of Religious Persons, as How they are to behave themselves in
Exterior Offices, in Sickness, Refections etc. I will therefore content my
self to adioine here a few Directions and Cautions addressed particularly to
Beginners or Nouices in Religion.

2. Daily experience confirms that which Spiritual Writers observe, that God
in great Goodness to souls, does usually upon their first Conversion bestovv
upon them a great Fervor in Divine and Religious Duties, which therefore our
Holy Father calls Feruorem Nouitium. Yea even naturally the inbred liking that
our infirm Nature has to all Nouelty and change, causes a more then ordinary
pleasure, diligence and earnestnes in any New-begun Employment.

3. To this purpose there is in the Annalls of the Franciscans related a
passage touching a devout Brother called Michael Magothi, by which we may
learn the ground and intention of Allmighty God in bestovving such a Fervor.
The Story is this. There was one of the Religious Brethren in his Co^uent that
observed of himself, that ordinarily when he was in any External Employment
of Study, Labor etc, God did prevent his Soul with his blessings of Sweetness,
and an affection oftender Sensible Devotion: the which whensoever he set
himself purposely to Prayer, forsook him. Whereupon he addressed himself to
this good Brother Michael to demand his Counsel. Who ansvvered him thus, When
you are vvalking at leisure in the Marketplace, thinking of nothing, there
meets you a man with a vessel of wine to sell: He inuites you to buy it,
much commending the excellency of it. And the better to persuade you, he
offers you gratis a small glass of it, to the end that being delighted with
the color and fragrancy of it, you may be more tempted to buy the whole
vessel, which, you must expect, will cost you very dear. Even so our Lord
Jesus whilst your thoughts are vvandring upon other matters, either in
reading, or hearing a Sermon, or vvorking, by a secret Inspiration inuites you
povverfully (instilling a fevv drops of his sweetness into your heart) to taste
how delicious he is. But this is but transitory, being offered not to satiate or
inebriate you, but only to allure you to his service. And therefore if you
expect any more, you must consider, it is to be sold, and a dear price paid
for it. For Spiritual Sweetness can be obtained no other way but by corporal
affliction, nor Rest but by labor.

4. Good Souls therefore are often to be exhorted to make good use of this
Fervor, and to improve it diligently (yet with Discretion) thereby to produce
in their hearts an unshaken Resolution to proceed in the ways of the Divine
love, notvvithstanding any contradiction or pain that may happen. They must
not expect that this Fervor will be lasting: for being seated in the
inferior, grosser part of the Soul, it is not of long continuance, since it
may easily be altered, even by any change made in the Bodily humors, or by
External occurrents. So that if it be not well managed, and good use made of
it to fix holy and resolute Desires in the Spirit (which are more lasting, as
not depending on the Body or outvvard things) it is justly to be feared, that
God will not bestovv the like afterward.

5. A Nouice-ship is a golden time for the learning and practicing matters of
the Spirit. In that short space therefore a Religious Person is to raise a stock
for his whole future life: So that if a Nouice-ship be negligently and
vnprouidently spent, he will scarce ever have the like opportunity to promote
his spiritual Good. For after his Profession he will, besides Liberty, have
many more distractions, more freedom of Conversation, and more intercourse
with the Nevves and affairs abroad. Besides he will not utterly be out of
danger of some Offices and employments, for the discharge of which some
perhaps will suppose him already fit and prepared in Spirit.

6. At the going out of the Nouice-ship, the person is to be very careful
with whom he conuerses, so as to become an inward acquaintance: least being
so tender as he is yet, he happen quickly to be corrupted with the Society of
negligent, Tepide Companions. For want of this care too often it happens, that
all the good gotten in a Nouice-ship is clean lost in a short time: since
usually things are no other way preserved but by the same means that they
were first gotten. Therefore since it was by Prayer and Abstraction of Life
that a Nouice procured all the little proportion of Divine Love that he is
possessed of, he must expect that it will no other way be preserved. For this
Reason, it is very requisite that the Superior should appoint such an one his
Companions.

7. A Soul must consider that it is not a little diligence, nor yet the space
of a year or two, that will, ordinarily speaking, suffice to get an Habit
and Stability in Mortification and Prayer. And therefore a young Beginner ought
to imprint deeply in his heart this most important Truth and Advice, That his
Duty is never to abate or slacken, but rather continually to increase in
firmness of mind and Resolution to proceed courageously during the whole
course of his follovving Life in the Internal Exercises of Spirit. For he is
to consider, that his Nouice-ship being once ended, he must never expect such
advantages thereto afterward, such Stillnes, such want of interruptions and
Tentations, such clear Light and such calmnes of Passions, as he enjoyed
before. Therefore least by a change of his State from a rigorous solitude and
silence to ordinary conuersings, and perhaps Employments, or (hovveuer)
studies, he should come to endanger a decay in Spirit, and so be miserably
reduced to his first natural State, or worse: (for indeed, worse it will
be, if such a decay happen:) let him be very vigilant and industrious to avoid
all things that may hinder him from prosecuting Internal Prayer, and let him
be careful to continue according to the utmost of his ability to use all
Abstraction possible, as if he were still in his Nouice-ship.

8. Indeed Superiors ought to be very careful not to put their young
Religious into Distractiue Employments or studies, either sooner, or more then
can well stand with their spirit, or before they be reasonably well grounded
in Prayer. For how is it possible for an imperfect Beginner, having such
hindrances, to make progress in Spirit? Whereas if a good foundation of
Spiritual Prayer were once laid, such a soul by being applied to his studies
or External Offices, will suffer no decay; yea moreover he will probably
proffit in Studies above the proportion of his natural abilities: by reason
that Passions, which much distract and darken even the natural Understanding,
will be much abated by Prayer: And moreover he will undertake his studies as
a Duty and matter of Conscience, which will increase his attention and
diligence. Yet perhaps by reason of his Abstinence and Exercises in Spirit, his
bodily strength will not be vigorous enough to enable him to support very much
study: And if it should prove so, the loss is not great, since the Divine Love
will sufficiently recompense all other wants. So it fared with our holy
Father who, as S. Gregory says, was sapienter indoctus, his wisdom
consisted in despising all learning which was not helpful or not necessary
to his advancement in the Divine Love, which alone is the true Wisdom and
learning.

9. Truly so great harm comes to young Religious after a Nouice-ship well
spent, by being put immediately to Schools, and for that purpose dispensed
with, in a great measure, about their Monastical Duties of Prayer,
Abstraction, Silence etc: That it were very good and fit, when Persons of
tender Age come to demand the Habit, to put them of: and in the first place to
inform them well about Prayer: and to endeavor to persuade them, that
before they undertake a Religious State, they should dispatch their course of
Philosophy and Divinity, and during such a course to use as much Abstraction
and Recollection as well they can, for which they will then find more time
then if they had been Religious, because they shall not be interrupted by the
Quire and other Regular Obseruances: So that if Studies be then a hindrance to
Prayer, how much more would they be so, in case they had been Religious?
Having done all this, then in Gods name let them demand the Habit. By this
means good Souls would not be interrupted in their Religious Course, nor put
in danger never again to recover the Spirit of Prayer. And if follovving such
Directions they should come to dye before the time of taking the Habit, they
may assure themselves that in Gods account they shall be esteemed as Religious
Souls, wholy consecrated unto him.

CHAP. X.
. 1. 2. Of the Obligation of English Benedictius to the Mission. The sublime
Perfection of that Employment.

. 3. 4. The care of it belongs only to Religious Superiors: and not at all to
particular Religious.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. 10. 11. Great danger of seeking that Employment. And false
pretenses to obtain it etc.

. 12. How the said Charge is to be performed.

1. IT will not be amiss to adioyne to this Section concerning a Religious
State, certain Considerations and Aduices touching a subject, which though it
pertain not to Religious persons in general, yet is annexed to our Profession
in the English Congregation of S. Benedicts Order: and that is the Apostolical
Mission into England, the which all that profess do by a particular Vow
oblige themselves to undertake, whenever they shall be commanded by
Superiors.

2. An Employment this is of high importance, and most sublime Perfection if
duly undertaken and administered. But the care thereof only belongs to
Superiors: And indeed it is worthy both of their Prudence and zeal: by a
right managing vvherof they may procure great Glory to God, and good to Souls
miserably mislead by infinite and most pernicious Errors.

3. But as for particular Religious, they are merely to be passive in the
business: they are to submit themselves to the undergoing of all the pains,
incommodities, and dangers of it, whenever it shall be imposed on them. But
this being only an accessory obligation and Capacity, they are not to suppose
that when God gives them a Vocation to a Religious Life, that this does make
any alteration at all in their Essential Design, most secure and profitable
to their own Souls, which is the leading a Solitary, Devout and abstracted
Life, and therein aspiring to Contemplation: This only must they aim at, and to
this must they order all their thoughts and Actions, as if they were all their
lives long to be imprisoned in their Cloisters. Therefore neither entering, nor
afterward must they entertain any Thoughts or designs about any thing that
is out of the limits of their Conuents, in which, for as much as concerns
themselves, their desire and intention must be to live and dye. Particularly
they ought to banish out of their minds all meditations and inclinations to go
in Mission into England. Yea if they will indeed comply with their Essential
Profession, they must resolve, as much as lies in them,, and without offense
to God or disobedience to their Superiors, to prevent such an Employment (of
which they cannot without Pride think themselves worthy, or able to
encounter all the Tentations and dangers accompanying it) simply and sincerely
confining all their Thoughts and affections to that Life of Solitude,
Abstraction and Prayer which they have vowed, and in which their Souls will
find truest comfort and Security.

4. Consequently neither must they (with an intention to approve unto their
Superiors their fitnes for that Charge, thereby as it were inuiting them to
make use of them for it) apply themselves after such a manner to the Studies
proper for such an Employment, as in any measure thereby to hinder or interrupt
the reading of such Books as are most beneficial to their Souls: and much
less to hinder their daily serious Recollections. In case their Superiors
(who are only concerned in that business) shall require of them to apply
themselves diligently to such Studies as may fit them for the Mission, they are
obliged therein to submit themselves to Obedience. Yet even in that case, if
they find that much time cannot be spent in them without hurt to their Spirit,
and a neglect or prejudice to their appointed Recollections, they ought to
acquaint their Superiors with their Case, who no doubt will prefer the
good and advancement of their Souls by Solitude, Purity of Spirit and
Internal Prayer, before any other Considerations whatsoever. Yea they will
judge Prayer to be a better disposition, and to procure a greater enablement,
even for such a Calling, then Study: And will take heed how they send any
abroad that for their Studies neglect their Prayer. For what Blessing from God
can such hope upon any Endeauours of theirs? Is it not more likely that
themselves will be perverted, then others by them converted?

5. It cannot easily be imagined, how mischeiuous to many Souls the neglect
of such Aduices may be. Some will perhaps have a mind to take the Habit for
that End and intent principally of going afterward into England. What
miserable Distractions would such a Resolution cause during all the time of
their abode in their Convent? For all their thoughts almost, all their
Affections, hopes and Designs will be carried abroad into another Country: so
that the place of their Profession will be esteemed a place of Exile to them.
And so far will they be from procuring a Divine Light and Grace to enable them
for so terrible an Employment by the means of Prayer, that Prayer and Solitude
will be distasteful to them. Regular Obseruances will be a burden, and any
thing that may delay their Intention: which they say is of Converting Souls;
but (alas) perhaps with the loss, or at least imminent danger of their own.

6. Nay some that at the Beginning have simply and with a good Intention taken
the Habit, yiedling afterward to the spirit of Tepidity (the which turns
their happy Solitude into a Prison) will look upon the Mission as a means to
free themselves from their Profession, and therefore will not fear to use all
means by friends and solicitations of their Superiors, that they may be
suffered to quit it and to go in Mission? God only knovves into what dangers
and Tentations they vvillfully thrust themselves, being utterly unprovided of
Light or Grace to resist them. And what other issue can be expected, but that
God should give them up to such Tentations, unto which (out of a sensual
Affection to the world, Pride and a vvearines of Prayer) they have exposed
themselves, without any Call from him, yea contrary to his will?

7. Now it is not only particular Religious, but much more Superiors that
ought to think themselves concerned most deeply in these matters. For in case
such vnvvary rash Souls shall come thus to destroy themselves, they annot but
know that those Souls shall be required at their hands. They ought therefore
to root out of the hear^s of their Subjects all such pernicious Designs, by
shevving, that they esteem them least worthy that are most forward to offer
themselves. And great care and vvarines ought they to use how they send, or
permit any to go abroad, before they be sufficiently furnished (not so much
with Learning, as) with the Spirit of Mortification and Prayer, and with
zeal proceeding from an established Charity, that so they may not by
undertaking and executing Active employments, prejudice, and perhaps ruin
their Contemplative state.

8. Our Examples ought to be our first Ho^y Conuerters of England, who did not
undertake such a Charge, till they were grown old in the Exercices of
Solitude and Contemplation: And not then, till an absolute command was imposed
on them by the Supreme Past^ur: And in the Execution of their Charge, they
never suffered their Labors and Sollicitudes to dispense with them for the
continuing of their accustomed Austerities and the Exercise of Prayer: but
borrowed from their Employments as much time, as could possibly be allowed,
to spend in Abstraction, Solitude, and Contemplation. Yea though they conuersed
only with Pagans and Barbarous Souls, yet so zealous were they of their
Monastical Life and Profession, that they would not so much as quit the
Habit: And when they were consecrated and exalted to the Episcopal function,
yet still they retained both the Exercises and fashions of Monastical,
Contemplative Persons, as S. Bid declares.

9. Moreover in latter times Experience has witnessed, that some humble and
devout, though not so learned Missioners have prospered better in Converting
Souls, then the most acute and cunning Controuertists: And have by their
Humility, Modesty and edifying Conversation, but especially by the practice and
teaching of Internal Prayer, gained to Catholic Unity those Souls, that
many other most skillfull in Disputes, and vvithall enabled with Experience*
have for long time in vain attempted.

10. Notvvithstanding all this, I do not deny but that to a Religious foul an
Impulse, and interior inuitation may come from God to go into the Mission.
This is possible: but most certain it is, that such an Inuitation will very
rarely (if ever) come, but to Souls established in a Spiritual Life. And in
this case it will be sufficient for the Person to propose the matter humbly
and modestly to his Superiors: yet vvithall with an entire Resignation, and
almost a desire to be refused. If it be Gods will actually to make use of such
a Religious Person in an Employment of that nature, he will no doubt
facilitate the business, and in his own time incline the will of the
Superior (without the subjects solicitation) to permit him to go.

11. But what ever pretenses are made by others for going into England,
whether it be converting of Souls (and particularly of some special friends
or Kindred:) or of Recovery of Bodily Health, gaining of temporal Commodity to
the Co^munity etc: The true Motiue^ indeed ordinarily proceed from Tepidity:
The which Tepidity ought to be corrected by Prayer and Perseverance in
Religious Duties, and not further increased, and perhaps changed into open
Libertinage and Profaneness by such an Exemption from all Regularity and
Order: by which a poor, unprovided, sensual Soul will become deeply engaged
in the world, exposed to innumerable Tentations without Spiritual Armor, and
as it were cast headlong into a Pit of Darkness, and of a forgetfullnes of all
things that concern a Holy Religious Life.

12. As for their obligations in the discharge of that so terrible an
Employment (when they are once engaged in it) it will suffice to put them in
mind, that the said Charge does not dispense with the essential Obligations
that lie upon them as Religious. If in their Conuents they ought to be Humble,
abstinent, devout etc: much more ought they, being still Religious, but now
exposed to innumerable Tentations, to increase a vigilance over themselves, to
avoid all unnecessary vain Conuersations, all sollicitudes about external
things etc: and to practice all possible Abstraction of life, Solitude, both
External and Internal: But especially not to neglect the principal Duty of
all, which is Pure Spiritual Prayer, which alone can procure Security to
their own Souls, and Blessings upon others. For surely if Prayer be
necessary in a Convent: much more is it necessary to such Persons living in the
world.

THE END OF THE FIRST TREATISE.
THE SECOND TREATISE OF MORTIFICATION.

THE SECOND TREATISE Of the First Instrument of Perfection, viz. Mortification,
THE FIRST SECTION Of Mortification in General: And of Necessar and Voluntary
Mortifications.
CHAP. I.
. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. All the duties of a Contemplative life reduced to two heads,
viz. 1. Mortification. 2. Prayer. And the grounds of that division.

. 6. The necessity of each of these.

7. How they do advance each the other.

. 8. etc. Of the two, Prayer is the more noble.

1. HAVING so largely treated of the nature and end of a Contemplative Life in
general, as likewise of the only Divine Master from whom it is to be learned;
and the School of Solitude in which he gives his directions; Order requires
that we now treat of the special Instructions touching the means or
instruments conducing to the obtaining of the supernatural end aspired to by
us. Concerning which our discourse will not need to be so diffused,
considering the large scope that we have allowed to ourselves in the first
general Treatise, in which mention also was made of much of that which is
to follovv.

2. Several Mystical Authors, each one abounding in his own sense, and
raising a Frame of Spirituality as suited best to his own Imagination and
design, have made several Partitions of the Duties of a spiritual Life: And
it is not a matter much considerable which of them should be preferred. But to
the end the best ease and Help may be afforded to the Devout Readers Memory,
the Division of them shall be the Shortest that may be,, yet sufficiently and
clearly enough comprehending all necessary Duties, namely under these two
Heads of 1. Mortification. 2. Prayer.

3. Now to the end that the grounds of the fitnes of this Division may be
better understood: we are to remember, that the glorious End of a
Contemplative Life (to wit, Union in Spirit with God by Love) is entirely
supernatural and Divine, so that it is impossible for Man by any natural
ability and strength, although he were free from sins, to attain unto it: And
much more is this impossible to him in his present state, since he is naturally
most auerse from it, being wholy possessed and filled with nothing but
Self-love, Propriety and Pride, absolutely inconsistent with such an Union.
Therefore the foundation of all our spiritual Duties must be a true knowledge,
1. Of ourselves, our own Nothing, our vnproffitablenes, vileness and misery,
which is to be the Object of our Auersion and Hatred: And 2. Of the
allsufficiency, universal Being, infinite Perfections, and incomprehensible
Beauty and Goodness of God, who is to be the only Object of our Contemplation
and Love: And consequently upon this Knowledge all our endeauours toward this
End (being directed by a Divine Light and assisted by Divine Grace) must be
employed, first in removing those impediments, and next consequently in
approaching directly to God, an immediate union with whom is aspired to, as the
only End of our creation, and perfection of our Intellectiue Nature. We must
renounce and fly from ourselves, that we may dravv near unto God: We must
destroy Self-love in our souls, that so the Divine Love may be raised and
increased in them. Now it is by Mortification that self love and all other our
natural deordinations, which hinder a Divine union, are removed; And it is by
Prayer that we directly tend to a Divine union. By the former we exercise
all duties and practice all virtues which regard ourselves: (for virtues, are
so far only to be esteemed worthy of that name, in as much, and as far as they
are mortificatory to our inordinate passions and affections, as Humility of
Pride, Patience of Anger, Temperance of sensual desires etc.) And Prayer (in
the notion in which it is here understood) includes all our duties directly
pertaining to God, as comprehending all manner of internal Actuations and
operations of the soul toward God, by the understanding contemplating and
admiring him: by the will and Affections, adoring, obeying, loving and
adhering to him; and in a word the whole soul resigning and submitting it
self and the body also, with all things belonging to eath of them, to be
disposed according to his divine will, both for time and eternity.

4. This Division deserves the rather to be approved, because Hesychius an
Ancient, Illuminated Monk in his Treatise de Puritate Cordis, has conformably
reduced all spiritual duties to. 1. Temperance. 2. And Prayer. By temperance
understanding the very same that is here meant by Mortification; for as he
expresses his meaning; This temperance is a general abstaining from all things
that would any way disorder the affections, or obscure the light of the
soul; He calls it likewise (Custodiam Cordis;) A guard or watch set over the
heart, forcing it to repel all vain and unprofitable thoughts, the which if
they be too freely admitted, do hinder from observing the snares and
suggestions of the devil or of our Corrupt nature, and do vvithall disturb
the tranquillity of the soul.

5. In these two Duties therefore of Mortification and Prayer all good is
comprehended: For by the exercise of Mortification those two general most
deadly enemies of our souls, self love and Pride are combatted and subdued;
to wit, by the means of those two fandamentall Christian virtues of Divine
Charity and Humility. And Prayer exercised in virtue of these two will of
both by way impetration obtain, and also with a direct Efficiency ingraft a
new Divine Principle and nature in us, which is the Divine Spirit, the which
will become a new life unto us, and the very soul of our souls, by degrees
raising us higher and higher out of our corrupt nature, till at last we be
made one with God, by an union as perfect, constant and immediate, as in this
frail life an intellectiue soul is capable of.

6. And both these duties of mortification and Prayer are so absolutely
necessary, that they must neither of them ever cease, but continually increase
in perfection and virtue to the end of our lives. For though self-love and
pride may by mortification be subdued; yet as long as we are imprisoned in
mortal bodies of flesh and blood, they will never be totally rooted out of
us, but that even the most perfect souls will find in themselves matter
enough for further mortification. And again our union with God by Prayer can
never either be so constant, but that it will be interrupted, so as that the
soul will fall from her height back some degrees into nature again; nor is
there any degree of it so perfect, pure and spiritual, but that it may, and by
exercise will become yet more and more pure without all limits.

7. The diligent Exercise of each of these does much advance the practice of
the other. For as Mortification is a good disposition to prayer, yea so
necessary that a sensual immortified soul cannot raise herself up so much as
to look to God with any cordial desire to please him, or to love and be
resigned to him, and much less to be perfectly united to him, so likewise by
Prayer the soul obtaines light to discover whatsoever inordinate affections
in her are to be mortified, and also strength of spiritual grace actually and
effectually to subdue them.

8. Hence it may easily appear that of these two, Prayer is much the more
valuable and noble Exercise 1. Because in prayer of Contemplation consists the
essential happiness both of this life, and that which is to come: So that
Mortification regards Prayer as the means disposing to an end; for therefore a
devout soul is obliged to mortify her inordinate Affections, to the end she
may thereby be disposed to an union with God. 2. Because Mortifications are
never duly and proffitably undergone but only in virtue of prayer. Whereas
possible it may be, that Prayer alone may be considerably advanced without any
other notable mortifications, in case that God have provided none for the
soul. 3. Because Prayer is vvithall in it self the most excellent and
effectual mortification; for in and by it the most secret risings of
inordinate passions are contradicted; yea the mind and superior will are
wholy abstracted and elevated above nature, so that for the time all passions
are quieted, and all creatures (especially our selves) transcended, forgotten
and in a sort annihilated.

9. Notvvithstanding in case that God, as he seldom fails, do provide for us
occasions of mortification out of Prayer: If we be negligent in making good
use of them to the promoting of our selves in spirit, we shall decrease both
in grace and Prayer. As on the contrary by a good use of them, we shall both
certainly and speedily be advanced in the ways of the spirit. So that neither
of them alone is to be relied on. Mortification without Prayer will be but
superficial, or (it is to be feared) hypocritical; And Prayer with a neglect
of mortification, will be heartles, distracted and of small virtue.

10. The subject therefore of this and the follovving Treatise being a
recommendation of these two most necessary and most excellent Instruments of
Contemplation, reason requires that of the two, Mortification should in the
first place be treated of, in as much as it is not only the less perfect: but
because also the proper use of it is to dispose and make even and plain the
way to the other, by leauelling the mountains of Pride, raising the valleys
of sloth, and smoothing the roughnes and inequalities of our Passions, but
especially by removing out of the way that general impediment, which is
Propriety of our natural carnal wills.

CHAP. II.
. ^. The mortifications here treated of in particular are not of such sinful
deordinations of passions as are acknowledged to be sins either mortal or
venial.

. 2. 3. 4. 5. 6. 7. 8. But of such deordinations as are commonly called
Imperfections, and which may occasion sins.

. 9. That sin consists in the Enioyng of creatures instead of Using them.

. 10. 11. 12. All venial sins cannot be avoided: But affection to them must,

. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. Wherein such affection consists, and how it is
inconsistent with Perfection.

1. Now intending to treat of Mortification, first in general; and
afterward of the special kinds of it, at least such as more peculiar to
Internal livers: my design is not to discourse in particular of such
deordinations as are generally acknowledged to be in themselves sinful either
mortally, or (in a grosser manner) venially, that is, such as that the actions
or omissions to which they adhere, can in no circumstances be lawful or
permitted, although the end or intention (pretended) of them were never so
good: Such as are officious lies, smaller reuenges, or calumniations etc. For
it is supposed that the souls for whose benefit these Instructions were
intended, are not in a state to stand in need of aduices concerning such
matters: But are supposed to be entered into a way of Perfection; being
desirous, yea through Gods grace resolved to abandon all things, and to cast
away all adhesions and affections whatsoever that are inordinate, not only
such as will endanger to kill the soul, but also such as would make it
sickly and infirm, or stain the Luster and brightness of it.

2. The objects therefore of Mortification which I shall chiefly handle, are
such defects as though indeed in themselves they be sinful, yet are not
acknowledged by all to be so, but are called only imperfections; being such
sins as considering the frailty of our nature, can hardly be avoided, and never
totally rooted out, being conversant about objects which we may lavvfully
and must necessarily use, but the fault is that we do with some
deordination either adhere to, or are auerted from such objects. In a word,
such sins they are that except when they are more gross, it would be an
endless and unprofitable labor to make the^ the matters of Confession,
although the correcting and abating of them ought to be the object of our daily
care.

3. I will endeavor to explain my meaning more fully in this matter; because
it is the ground of the whole follovving discourse. We must know then that
the duty of a Christian, (much more of a soul that aspires to Perfection) is
to love nothing at all but God, or in order to him; that is, as a mean and
instrument to beget and increase his Divine love in our souls. All adhesion to
creatures by affection, whether such affection be great or small, is
accordingly sinful, more or less: so that if being deprived of any thing or
persons whatsoever, or being pained by any thing, we find a trouble and
sorrovv in our minds for the loss or suffering of the thing it self; such
trouble in what degree soever argues that our affection was sinful; not only
because the affection was excessive, but because it was an affection, the
object vvherof was not God.

4. But yet withal this affection which I say is unlawful, is not simply
such an one as resides and is confined to sensitive nature, for that is
impossible to be rooted out, neither is there any fault at all in it,
considered as such. For to Adam in the state of Innocence, yea even to our Lord
himself many objects were pleasing and delightful to sense; his fight and
taste took contentment in pleasurable objects; and there was in nature an
auersion from pain, and an earnest desire to prolong natural life; and in all
this there was not the least imperfection. The Affections to creatures
therefore which we affirm to be sinful, are such as are seated in the
superior soul, or rational will, by which the mind and will considers and
adheres unto creatures; and knovvingly and willingly pursues the attaining and
enjoying of them, as if they were the good, not of sense only (for so they
are) but of the person, the which indeed they are not; for the only good of an
Intellectual nature is God; who is only exalted above it, whereas all other
creatures are but equal or inferior to it. To the superior will therefore
all things but God must be indifferent, as in and for themselves, and only to
be loved as they are serviceable to the spirit. So that if things which are
unpleasant, yea destructive to inferior nature do yet advance the spirit in
her tendance to God; or if by the will and providence of God they are
presented to her to suffer, she must with all indifference and resignation
accept of them, though sensitive nature do never so much struggle and
contradict.

5. A most perfect Example hereof is given by our Savior, the which we are
obliged to the utmost of our capacity and enablement to imitate. Though
sensitive nature in him took contentment in life and in the Actions and
functions thereof, and above all things did abhor a dissolution by death,
especially such a death accompanied with such inexpressible torments and
shame: And though for our instruction he voluntarily gave way to Inferior
nature to express such her innocent inclinanation and auersion; yet when the
will of his Father opposed it self and presented him a cup in the highest
degree mortal to nature, and all the inclinations thereof, he most willingly,
quietly and cheerfully accepted it, then subduing all reluctances in nature:
The which reluctances in him were to the thing it self considered in it
self, and not at all to the dictates of the Superior soul, the which had so
absolute a dominion over sensitive nature, that it never opposed it self, or
expressed the least vnvvillingnes to conform it self to the dictates of
reason, though with its own destruction.

6. Whereas therefore there are continually presented to our outvvard and inward
senses infinite objects pleasing and displeasing to them: And that the
functions of of life, which we are bound to preserve, cannot be exercised
without admitting the use of many things delightful to sensitive nature,
meats, drinks, Recreatiue conuersatious, and relaxations of mind etc: we
are to consider and resolve, that none of these things pleasing to the appetite
are given to be possessed with any affection at all, or fruition, but the mere
simple use of them is allowed us for the good of the soul; and the
contentment that the appetite naturally takes in them, is no further, nor with
other intention to be admitted, then in as much as thereby the spirit, or
rational will is, or may be enabled more cheerfully to pursue its supreme
Good. And with this end and intention, to admit sometimes with caution and
discretion of moderate co^forts and contentments to Inferior nature, is not in
it self at all unlawful; on the contrary it is fitting, requisite and
necessary.

7. But vvithall considering the most miserable and inexpressible corruption of
our nature; the violent adhesion of our Appetites to sensually pleasing
objects; the uncertain and weak Dominion that the superior faculties of the
soul have over sensitive Nature; it is our duty and obligation not only to be
watchful over the sensitive Appetite, that it do not with too much greedines
pursue the contentments proper and necessary to it; But also, as much as may
be, to abridge the number of them, making as fevv necessary as may be, and not
suffering it to accept all the lawful contentments offered to it; yea often to
restrain and contradict the inclinations of it; In a word, to use all the
industry we can, not to suffer it to run on blindly before, or without the
conduct of reason to things pleasing to it: and when we perceive it does so,
to call it back, hovveuer not to suffer reason to favor it and join with it
in its desires, but to reserve all our rational inclinations and affections to
God only.

8. For the case with us is far different from that it was with Adam during
his state of Innocence. For then it was no inconvenience, but rather perhaps a
help to him freely to make use of the pleasures afforded him in Paradise.
Because though sensual pleasures were to him (considering the exquisitnes of
his temper) far more pleasurable, then they can be to us* yet his appetite did
not so much as desire or vvish the least excess: And his spirit was so
replenished with Divine love, that by admitting of such innocent satisfactions
to nature, it rather increased then diminished or interrupted its fervor in
tending to God, and expressing its gratitude, love and obedience to him*
whereas we find all the contrary effects; and therefore must take a quite
contrary course.

9. This is the ground of Mortification, so proper and necessary in a
spiritual life. And these are the venial sins or imperfections that we are
continually to combat against. In this point of Distinction between the using
of creatures for the good of the spirit, and the enjoying of creatures for the
pleasure of sense, without regard to the souls good and advancement, lies the
difference betvveene the children of God, and the children of Belial. Yea in
the degrees of such using or enjoying, between perfect good Christians and
imperfect; yea moreover between those that are perfect in an Active, and those
in a contemplative state. For wicked men give way deliberatly to an habitual
enjoying of creatures, without regard to their souls or God, yea contrary to
his command. And imperfect good Christians have no care to root out of their
souls an habitual love to creatures, except it be such a love as endangers
the soul by expelling Charity. And lastly those that are perfect in an Active
Life, for want of a constant state of Recollection do not enjoy a sufficient
light to discover how in many things of less importance they give way to
sense preventing reason, and enjoying outvvard contentments without that
purity of intention, which contemplatiues, being far less distracted, do
much more frequently and perfectly exercise.

10. Now having mentioned this diversity of venial sins and imperfections,
before I come to speak further of the Mortification here intended, I will
add some fevv considerations touching venial sins, with relation to a
Co^templatiue state.

11. If it were required to Perfection in a Contemplative life that a soul
should be entirely free from venial defects; it would be impossible to
attain unto it, considering the incurable frailty of our nature, the frequency
of tentations, and the incapacity which is in a soul to be in a continual
Actual guard over her self. True it is, that by perseverance in spiritual
Prayer accompanied with Mortification, such defects become for number more
rare, and for quality less considerable; But though Prayer and mortification
should continue never so long, a soul will find occasion and a necessity to
be in continual resistances against her perverse Inclinations, and in such
combats will sometimes come off with loss.

12. Venial sins therefore are not inconsistent with Perfection: although they
should be committed never so often out of frailty, subreption or ignorance. But
if they be committed deliberately, advisedly, customarily and with Affection,
they render the soul in an incapacity of attaining to perfection in Prayer
etc: This is a point of great moment and consideration, and therefore that we
may distinguish aright betvveene sinning out of frailty, surprise or
infirmity; and the sinning out of affection to the objects of venial sins,
we must know:

13. First that those are said to fall into venial sins out of frailty, which
commit them only when an occasion or Tentation vnvvillingly presents it self,
and then are surprised with a sudden Passion, or deprived of sufficient
vigilance and reflection; but upon an observation of their fault they presently
return to themselves, and find a remorse and selfe-condemnation for it, and an
auersion (at least in their superior will) from such things as hinder their
approach unto God: or if this be not done presently, hovveuer in their next
Recollections such offenses, if they be of any moment, will be brought into
their minds, and will procure a sorrow, and consequently a pardon for them.
But when they are out of such occasions or tentations, they do not give way
to a pleasure conceived in the objects of them, and much less do they
voluntarily seek or intend such occasions.

14. Those in the second place are said to sin venially out of affection, who
both before and after such faults, do deliberately neglect them; yea and are
so far from avoiding the occasions of them, that they do often procure them: and
this, out of affection, ( not to the sault but) to the things, which they see
do often occasion the fault. Such are those that love curiosity in apparel,
Delicacy of meats, hearing of vain discouses;, and that contriue meetings of
iollity, from whence they never escape without incurring many defects. Now
such souls may perhaps have remorse for the sins so committed, and mention
them with sorrow in Confession; But yet such remorse and Confession is not
from the whole heart; not being sufficient to make them avoid the occasions,
when this may be done without much inconvenience or trouble. Yea they do not
sufficiently consider that the very love unto those vanities which occasion
greater defects, if it be a deliberate love, is in it self a sin, though no
other defects were occasioned by it. Such can make no progress in spiritual
Prayer; yea on the contrary as long as such known, voluntary affections,
either to the sins or occasions, are not mortified, they do every day decline,
and grow more and more indisposed to Prayer: The which thereby is so
distracted, and so full of disquieting remorse, that it is almost impossible to
persevere, constantly in an exercise so very painful.

15. An hundred imperfections therefore, though of some more then ordinary
moment are not so contrary to Perfection, whilst thy are incurred by
surprisall or infirmity, as is an affection retained to the least imperfection,
though it be but an unprofitable thought. A vvell-minded and courageous soul
therefore at her first entrance into the Internal ways of the spirit, must,
and does in an instant, cut of this deliberate affection to all venial sins,
and their occasions, with discretion seeking to avoid them; although it may
happen without any great prejudice to her progress, that she may find
herself very often surprised and overcome by many and great faults.

16. Neither ought any soul vainly to flatter herself with a hope of
reserving this affection without preiudicing her pretentions to Perfection,
because one or two examples (almost miraculous) are found of some souls that
notvvithstanding such affections have been visited by God with supernatural
favors and exalted to a very sublime Prayer, as a late eminent Saint writes
of her own self. For besides that there was perhaps some excusable
ignorance in her of the vnlavvfullnes of such affections: we may say, that
God was pleased to confer on her such extraordinary favors, not so much for
her own sake, but rather for the good of others, in as much as she was
destind by him to be The Mistrisse and Teacher of true Contemplative Prayer,
then almost vnknovvn to the world.

17. But most certain it is that according to the ordinary established course
of Divine Providence, Perfection in Prayer is accompanied with a proportionable
Perfection in Mortification. And therefore such souls, as during a voluntary
habitual Affection to venial sins, (as to the obieands and occasions of them)
do seem to have great lights and profound recollections in Prayer (if the
said lights and Recollections do not urge and incite them to quitt such
harmfull Affections) such ought to suspect that all goes not right with them,
but may justly fear that the devil has some influence into such Devotions,
so utterly destitute of true Mortification.

CHAP. III.
. 1. Naturally we love our selves only.

. 2. Even the best and most composed tempers are deeply guilty of Self-love.

. 3. The benefit of such good dispositions.

. 4. Self-love and Propriety must vnjuersally be avoided.

. 5. 6. A state of Afflictions and crosses is only secure.

. 7. What use is to be made of Prosperity.

. 8. 9. The great Benefits of Mortification.

. 10. A great courage is necessary to the due practice of Mortification.

. 11. 12. 13. 14. The advice of some writers, to raise Passions to the end
afterward to repress them, is dangerous.

1. NATVRALLY we love and seek nothing but our selves in all things
whatsoever we love and seek: We are our own last end, referring all
things, even supernatural, yea God himself, to our own Interest and
commodity. We seek things pleasing only to our senses, outvvard or inward,
as if the felicity of our souls and persons consisted in sensual pleasures,
opinion of honor, proffit or curiosity of knowledge etc: Therefore there can be
no merit in nature, or Actions proceeding from nature.

2. Yea they who naturally have much interior composednes and stillnes of
passions, and seem not much to be troubled with rebellion in sensuality, and
that moreover have in them a kind of natural devotion yet even these,
whatsoever they appear outwardly in show, are full of self love, which is
the principle of all their Actions. If they love Quietness, it is because nature
takes a contentment in it; And their self-love is more abstruse and more
deeply seated in the root of the spirit it self; And therefore oftimes it is
hard to be cured, because not so easily discovered. Neither indeed is there any
hope of remedy till by prayer they get a light to discover the said secret
self love; and grace by mortification to subdue it.

3. It is true, such good Natural dispositions may be beneficial to souls in
two respects especially. First in that by means thereof they fall into fewer
sins then more passionate Impetuous natures do; and consequently do not put
so many impediments to grace. But yet it is to be feared, unless they practice
Prayer and mortification, they will increase in Spiritual pride; for certain
it is, that nature not restrained, will one way or other grow more and more
inordinate. 2. A second Benefit is, that such dispositions are better fitted
for internal Prayer, yea to the perfectest kind of it, which is Prayer of
Aspirations; so that they may with less labor get out of Nature, eleuating
themselves to God.

4. An absolute necessity therefore there is for all souls to mortify nature,
and especially to rectify this general deprauednes of Propriety, by which
we are to our selves our last end. The which is done by the Infusion of
Divine Charity, by which our selves are directed to God as our last end: And a
necessary disposition thereto is the Mortification of self love. And thus far
all Christians are obliged to mortify themselves, namely to cure the mortally
sinful disorders of their souls. A necessity likewise there is (upon
supposition of aspiring to Perfection) to mortify all deliberate affections to
any the least venial defects and deordinations of our souls. The which Duty
of Mortification requires of us, that deliberately and customarily we neither
admit into our minds (internally) vain thoughts; nor (outwardly) speak or
exercise Acts of vain love, vain hope, vain fear, or vain sorrovv: and all
is vain that is not referred to God, or is not done for him.

5. Mortificatio^ tends to subject the body to the spirit, and the Spirit to
God. And this it does by crossing the inclinatio^s of sense which are quite
contrary to those of the divine spirit, which ought to be our chief and only
Principle. For by such crossing and afflicting of the body, Self-love and
Selfevvill (the poison of our spirits) are abated, and in time in a sort
destroyed; and instead of the^ there enters into the soul the divine love and
divine will, and take possession thereof: And therein consists our Perfection and
happiness,

6. For this reason the soul is in a far more secure state when crosses: and
afflictions do exceed worldly contentment and sensual ease. For wonderful
seldom it happens that a soul makes any progress in a Spiritual course by
means of outward prosperity. Some Perfect souls may perhaps keep the station
in which they are, not vvithstanding an casefull, contented and abounding
condition in the world; But it is almost miraculous if they thereby advance
themselves in spirit; so naturally and almost necessarily does case of nature
nourish self-love, Pride, security, a spiritual sloth and a distaste of
spiritual things.

7. Indeed the only possible way for a soul to make Prosperity an occasion of
improuement to her, is by a voluntary crossing and diminishing of it, that is,
by taking advantage even from thence to mortify nature; As for example, in case
of Riches and honors, by carrying our selves both exteriourly and interiourly
to God and man with more humility and modesty, as if we were not at all in
such plenty and eminency: also by suppressing vain joy and complacency in such
things; by acknowledging that we are not Lords and proprietaires, but only
stewards and dispensers of such things, from whom a severe account shall be
required for the talents entrusted to us for others sakes and not our own. So
that it is most true, That all the security, solidity and fullnes of our souls
good consists in a right use of those things which are contrary and afflicting
to our nature.

8. In general, Mortification includes the exercise of all virtues; for in
every Act of virtue we mortify some inordinate passion and inclination of
nature, or other; so that to attain to perfect Mortification is to be
possessed of all virtues.

9. The benefits and blessings that come to our souls by exercising of
Mortification are many and most precious. As 1. There is thereby avoided that
sin which otherwise would have been committed. 2. It causes a degree of
purity to the soul. 3. It procures greater grace and spiritual strength. 4.
One act of Mortification enableth to another: As on the contrary by yiedling
any time to our corrupt nature, we are enfeebled and less able to resist
another time. 5. It diminishes our suffering in Purgatory, because so much of
suffering is past; and a little pain for the present will counteruaile and
prevent sharp and long pains for the future. 6. It procures internal light,
by dispelling and calming the unruliness of passions. 7. It produces great Peace
to the soul, the which is disturbed only by unquiet Passions. 8. It helps
the soul much in her advancement in spiritual Prayer and Contemplation (the
end of all our Religious and spiritual exercises) 9. It is of great
edification to our Brethren and neighbors. 10. It increases all these vvayes
our future happiness and glory.

10. The duty of Mortification being so absolutely necessary, and so infinitely
beneficial, and moreover so largely extended, as that it reaches to all manner
of natural Inclinations, in so much as nothing does an imperfect soul any
good, further then it is cross and mortifying to some inordination in her
natural inclinations: It follows from hence; that a soul that intends to
walk in these vvayes of Contemplation had need have a great courage; since
her design must be to combat her own self in all manner of things to which
she naturally bears an affection. For the maintaining of this courage
therefore it will behooue her both to use much prayer, and often to think
seriously on the blessings accompanying and follovving the due practice of it.
Remembering vvithall, that custom will make that tolerable and even pleasant,
which at first seemed in supportable.

11. More particularly, for as much as co^cernes those that are Beginners in an
Internal course, they are to consider that in such a state their souls are so
full of impurities and defects, that scarce in any actions of theirs at all
they do intend God purely, no not even in those that they perform with most
advice and preparation, and with the greatest calmenes of spirit; Much less
in Actions though substantially good, in which their Passions are engaged.
Therefore it is best for them during such state of imperfection, in all times
and occasions as much as lies in them wholly to suppress all passions, not
suffering them to rise and swell in them, though with an intention by them the
better and more fervently to perform their duties and obligation. The reason
is, because such imperfect souls being not as yet Masters of their passions,
cannot prevent them from causing a disorder even in the Superior, rational
faculties also; so that though Reason can raise them at pleasure, yet it cannot
so calm them again, nor hinder them from pursuing those objects out of
motives of corrupt nature, against which they were employed at first upon
Superior and spiritual motives.

12. I do the more earnestly recommend the practice according to this advice,
because I find that some good Spiritual Authors do counsel a quite contrary
proceeding, as a remedy and means to subdue passions. For they would have
souls willingly and purposely to raise them in sensitive nature, and when
they are come to a certain height, then by the strength of reason and motives
of Religion to quiet and pacify them again: As for example, In case of an
Injury received, they advise that we should call to mind all the
circumstances and aggrauations that are apt to kindle indignation and
resentment; And as soon as the Passion is inflamed, then to suppress it by
considerations of the example of our Lord, and his precept of charity to
enemies; Of the dangerous Effects of Revenge, and the blessed rewards of
Patience etc: The like they say concerning a sensual desire to any object,
they would have it represented with all its allurements and charms, so as to
move a strong inclination in sensitive Nature; And this being done, presently
to suppress such inclinations by strong Resolutions and by contrary practices.
Only they forbid this Practice in the passion of sensual Impurity, the which
must not be revived upon any pretense whatsoever.

13. To Perfect souls this Advice may be proper, who have an established
Dominion over their passions; But as for the Imperfect, if they should conform
themselves to it, two great inconveniences could scarce be prevented. viz. 1.
That they would be in danger either to be unwilling or unable to restore
Peace unto their minds once much disquieted. 2. By an advised and earnest
representation of such objects as do raise passions in their minds, they do
thereby fix more firmly in the Memory the Images of them, and by that means
do dispose the said images to return at other times against their wills,
when perhaps the reasons and motives to repress them will either not be
ready, or the soul in no disposition to make use of them; or if she should be
vvilling, it is to be doubted that then such motives will not prove
efficacious. Therefore Imperfect souls may do best to deal with all passions
as they ought with those of impurity, namely to get the Maistry over them, by
flying from them, and, if they can, forgetting them.

14. Yet this advice of preventing all passions and disturbances in sensitive
nature, may sometimes cease, when just reason and the necessary care of the
good of others shall require that some things be done with eagernes; as it may
happen in the case of Superiors correcting their subjects etc: for then it may
be convenient to give some discreet way to passion, without which their
reproves would perhaps have but little effect. Yet even then also care is to
be had that they do not thereby prejudice their own Internal Quiet of mind,
and much less, endanger to diminish true Charity.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. Certain general Rules for Mortification, sufficient for some.

. 2. 3. By practice according to these Rules is exercised 1. A continual
Presence of God. 2. A continual thinking on our own Nothing.

. 4. 5. 6, 7. Mortification is only perfectly exercised in virtue of Internal
Prayer. And why?

. 8. The difference between the Mortification of Contemplatiues, and of Active
livers.

. 9. External Practices or exercises of virtues not sufficient to cause
Mortification.

. 10. How imperfect souls are to practice Mortification.

. 11. Gods care in dispensing matters of Mortification proportionable to each
ones strength.

. 12. The effect of each Act of Mortification.

. 13. 14. It may happen that to an Internal liver (in Religion) some
Mortifications may be more difficult, then if he had lived a common life in the
world.

1. TO discreet vvell-minded souls these three follovving general directions
may be sufficient to instruct them in the duties of mortification. Viz 1. To
do or forbear whatsoever any law Divine or Humane shall require of them to
do or forbear. And where order has been taken by no such laws, there to
follovv the supernatural light and motions that God by the means of Prayer
shall afford them; doing or forbearing such things as they find will promote
or hinder them in their spiritual course, without captiuating themselves to
any particular examples, customs or instructions. 2. To suffer with the best
patience and resignation they can, all the crosses and contradiction; to
selfevvill, which by Gods Providence shall be sent to or upon them; whether
such crosses regard external things, as injuries. disgraces, sickness, loss of
friends or of goods etc. or Internal, as Aridities, obscurities, inward
distresses, inuoluntary rising of pass^^ns, tentations etc. All these things
must be quietly suffered whether they proceed immediately from God, or from
creatures. 3. If any thing pleasing to nature be to be done, as in Refections,
Recreations etc; or any thing displeasing to be omitted, to do or omit such
things, not because they are agreeable to nature, but because they are
conformable to Gods will. By a constant and careful obs^ruing of these
directions a devout soul may be brought to a good established state of
Mortification, and yet vvithall be left in a convenient Liberty and ease of
mind, to go on cheerfully in internal vvayes.

2. Moreover if in practice according to these points, a vvell-minded soul
will be careful to have at least a vertuall intention to the love and Glory
of God (that is, such an Intention as follows in virtue of a precedent
Actual Intention made in Prayer etc.) in so doing she shall perform after the
best and securest way the Exercise of the Continual Presence of God (so much
commended by spiritual Authors) and particularly by our holy Father in the
first degree of Humility. By the which Exercise surely it cannot be intended
that a soul should be obliged to have continually an Actual remembrance of
God; for this being the same with actual Internal Prayer, would so much
endammage the heads, of imperfect souls especially, that they would quickly be
disabled from making any progress in Spirit.

3. The same Practice likewise does after the securest manner supply that
other Exercise (often recommended) of a Continual thinking on our own Nothing;
For by conformity to the foresaid Directions, Propriety and Self-will (by the
which alone we would feign seem to be something more then we are or
ought to be) are not only in thought, imagination or desire of mind, but really
and effectually abandonned, and the inordinate affections of the soul
mortified and annihilated. And it is only for this end that the said Exercise
is so much magnified. In a word, by such practices joined with an Intention
to the glory of God and his divine love, a soul will be very well disposed
to the most perfect Prayer of Contemplation.

4. Such a world there is of conditions and circum^^ances required to the
Perfection of every Action, both touching the substance, manner, motive,
principle and end thereof: and corrupt nature is so subtle to insinuate her
own Interests, seeking them in every thing we do, and persuading us that
we renounce Propriety even when we most earnestly intend it: that without
an Extraordinary light from God (to be obtained only by spiritual Prayer) we
cannot discover the Inclinations of our own hearts; And the reason why this
light can be had only by Prayer, is because then alone every the least defect
and most secret suggestion hinders our view and contemplation of God, and our
tendance to him; and by consequence is easily discernable, as being set between
our eyes and the Sun. Whereas in our ordinary Vocal Prayers, and external good
Actions, only greater tentations are able perceptibly to distract us.

5. Those therefore that do not pursue Internal Prayer can only so far mortify
their passions, that they break not forth into outvvard expressions or
Actions. But the evil Root remains still alive, causing inward disorders
very displeasing to God.

6. As for Crosses and adversities which a soul undergoes out of the strength
of Reason, and not in virtue of Divine Grace and Prayer: the chief effect of
them is only to vex and trouble Nature, or at most they serve to mortify the
superabundant actiuity and vigor of the internal senses and natural
Affections; by which means the persons may become more Judicious, Prudent and
Temperate; but they pierce not to the Spirit it self, to cause any purity
therein, or really to diminish self-love. Moreover the like Crosses undergone
by virtue of such a common Grace, as ordinary good extrouerted Christians do
enjoy, though they may be helpful to prevent the mortally poysonnous effects
of self-love which is in us, yet are far from expelling that secret
self-love which lurkes in the inmost center of our souls; So that they may
remain greiuously full of stains and infirmities, and the Divine love feeble
and easy to be extinguished, notvvithstanding the effects of such Crosses.

7. Whereas difficulties undergone in virtue of Grace obtained by Internal
Prayer do, as it were, scovvre and purity the spirit it self from the Rust
of inordinate affections: and so do spiritualize all the faculties of the
soul, causing it to become a pure spirit, exalted and separated from sensible
objects and all adhesion to them, from which all vicious impurity proceeds.
This is that Division of the Soul and Spirit, mentioned by S. Paul, by which
the Pure Spirit works as a Spirit, not obscured, nor infected with sensual
Ends and Interests.

8. The way of Mortification therefore practiced by Internal Contemplative
livers is different from that of Actiues, though living in a Religious state,
and well advanced in Active exercises; for these endeavor to mortify their
inordinate Affections by combatting them purposely and directly, to wit, by
meditating discoursiuely on the motives afforded by Christian doctrine to
oppose them, as a consideration of their deformity, danger etc. and also by
exercising an Act of virtue contrary thereto, so repressing the inordinate
Passion. Whereas Contemplative souls do indirectly, yet far more
efficaciously, mortify their passions by transcending them, that is, by
eleuating and uniting their spirit to God with the help of pure intellectual
actuations: by this means forgetting and drowning both their sensual
desires, yea all created things, and cheifely themselves in God: So that in a
Tentation they do not turn themselves toward the object, to the end to
resist and contradict it; but by a vigorous Act of Resignation and love they
convert their spirits unto God, scorning even to cast a regard or glance upon
creatures, that would allure their affections from God, and which cannot be
considered, except in God, without leaving some tincture and imperfection in
the soul.

9. It is not therefore the external practice of virtues, nor much less
customary frequent Confessions, Communions, Obediences, Austerities etc: but
pure spiritual prayer, and the sublime degrees of it (to wit, Aspirations,
Pure Eleuations of the will and other such Divine Operations) that must be the
principal Instrument to bring a soul to a state of perfect freedom from
exterior and Interior Immortification. For by such operations only she is
enabled to transcend Inferior nature, and to live in the quiet, secure and
Illuminated region of the spirit.

10. But in the mean time till a devout soul do attain to such Perfection
of prayer, she must be content to work according to her present light and
enablement, so endeavoring to correct her defects by less perfect Exercises,
and such as partake of the Active way; And she must with patience and quietness
of spirit bear with her own imperfections, as she would with others,
expecting Gods good time, and endeavoring to hasten the approach of that time
by assiduous Prayer; by means of which alone she may come to expel those
defects, which do now so much exercise and trouble her, and also to discover
and correct many others, which as yet her eyes are too infirm and dim to
see.

11. Indeed the provident care that God generally has over his children, both
perfect and imperfect, is vvonderfull, being carefully suited to their present
state. For he does not usually send to imperfect souls any mortifications but
such as are ordinary and proportionable to their infirmity, namely such as do
gall and afflict their sensitive nature, but do not pierce into the quick and
center of the spirit, that remains free to support the other. But as for
souls arrived to the state of Perfection, or near it, God does usually
provide for them strange, inexpressible mortifications, most subtle
Tentations, Priuations and Desolations: the which being vvorthily undergone,
do wonderfully purify the spirit. The former Mortifications S. Paul expresses
thus, There has no Tentation taken you, but such as is according to ordinary
humane nature etc: But the latter thus, Our wrestling is not against flesh and
blood (the usual tentations of Gods imperfect children) but against
Principalities and Powers, against the Governors of the darkness of this
world, against spiritual wickednesses in high places (or, things)

12. Every Act of Mortification performed by virtue of Internal Prayer does
increase in us the grace of God, and dispose us to a more perfect future
Prayer: As on the contrary, every act of immortification does increase in us
self-love, and does make us more indisposed for future Internal Prayer.
Again Prayer enables us for future Mortifications, teaching us how to
undertake and support them. So that these Duties must never be separated; These
contain all that an Internal liver is obliged to.

13. I will conclude this Discourse concerning mortification in gross with
one Observation, which may serve for a caution to a vvell-minded soul that
lives an Internal life, to prevent an inconvenience which otherwise might
perhaps surprise her; It is this; That it may happen that Religious or
spiritual Persons will find a greater difficulty in mortifying and renouncing
some sensual contentments after they have entered into a spiritual course,
then they formerly found whilst they lead an extrouerted secular life in the
world. Now this happening to them may perhaps suggest either scrupulous, or at
least disquieting thoughts, as if the change that they have made were not for
the better; or as if some thing (they well know not what) were amiss with
them. But if they will well consider of the matter, they will find that this
is no strange thing, nor deserving that they should much trouble themselves
about it.

14. For the Reasons hereof are 1. Because if such an one had not pursued an
Internal life, he would have perhaps enabled himself to quit one pleasure by
diuerting himself from thence to some other, which would have recompensed
and satisfied for that loss, taking away the present difficulty: Whereas in a
Spiritual life a soul having in Resolution abandoned all sensual pleasures,
as such, that can be abandonned, she cannot recompense the bitterness found in
mortifying one, by a deliberate yiedling to another, the pleasure felt in
enjoying whereof might make her less sensible of the loss of the other. 2.
Again an Imperfect soul will judge it necessary for the sustaining of
corporal infirmity and to prevent an vnchearfull discontented habit of mind,
to allow unto her self some contentments recreatiue to sense; And therefore
when such are denied her, she will be apt to be impatient, or if she
endeavor to contradict and resist such impatience of nature, she will do it
more feebly and faintly. 3. Because it is impossible that a soul can live and
not take pleasure in something or other, that assords contentment either to the
sense or the spirit. Now a spiritual person being yet in an imperfect state,
has but little present sensible pleasure in the exercises proper to his way,
except God now and then visit him with sensible devotion: for the chief
pleasure that spirituality affords is in hope only, and that without any
regard to the body, it regards the Spirit alone. Now hope is not so attractiue
as present sensual contentment is. 4. besides all this, such a soul not
having yet chased out of the Superior faculties all affection to sensual
pleasure, and finding for the present little or nothing but pain in all her
exercises both of mortification, and Prayer; No marvel if when pleasure
sometimes comes in her way, that she finds difficulty in rejecting it. Indeed
the greatest Pain comes not from the particular objects of Mortification, but
rather from tediousnes and irkesomenes in being continually in a condition of
suffering, which she judges must last to her lives end. This is very painful
to an imperfect soul: But yet by a constant practice of mortification and
Prayer she will find daily an abatement of this tediousnes, and in the end the
renouncing of all contentments of sense and nature for themselves, will become
easy and pleasurable to her. 5. ^astly such a soul is to consider that it is a
proof of Gods goodness to her to suffer her to feel so much difficulty now,
not experienced before, to the end to humble her, and to teach her, not at all
to rely upon herself, nor to promise herself the least good from her own
forces.

CHAP. V.
. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. Mortifications divided into 1. Necessary. 2. And Voluntary;
And what each of these are.

. 6. 7. 8. 9. Extraordinary or supernumerary Mortifications are not to be
assumed without great advice. They are seldom allowed in the Rule of S.
Benedict.

. 10. 11. The Advice of some, That we should always in every thing be
crossing our natural inclinations, dangerous.

. 12. 13. The inconveniences of Extraordinary Mortifications unadvisedly
assumed.

. 14. 15. What extraordinary ones are least dangerous.

. 16. Signs by which to discern when such are proper and beneficial.

. 17. Generally speaking, there is little need that Extraordinary
Mortifications should be assumed.

1. HAVING spoken in general of Mortification, come we now to the Division
and kinds of it; And the most general division of mortification is into those
which are. 1. Necessary 2. Voluntary. This is a Division of which we shall
have great use through this whole Treatise, and therefore it deserves to be
explained more distinctly and accurately.

2. First therefore within the notion of necessary Mortifications are
comprehended 1. Not only such crosses and afflictions to nature as we cannot,
though we would, avoid, whether they be external or Internal, as sickness,
want, disgraces, loss of friends, tentations, desolations etc. (The which
indeed are the most proper and beneficial mortifications of all other, as
being sent or suffered to come upon us by the most Wise and Good Providence of
God for our good) 2. but those also that we do or suffer by virtue of our
assumed state of life, either by occasion of any Law or humane Constitution, or
by obedience and subjection to our Superiors, Conversation with our equals,
inferiors etc. 3. Those also that we undertake by the direction of our
Confessarius or spiritual Guide, (to whom notvvithstanding our obedience is
but voluntary, being to last only as long as we think good.) 4. Those works
that true discretion requires of us, and which to leave undone, or to do
contrary would be against Prudence. 5. Likewise whatsoever it befalls us to
suffer from any creature whatsoever, not excepting the devil himself, yea
though it were by our own fault that such things happened to us, or were
brought upon us. 6. Lastly those things that we accept willingly of by virtue
of an Interior Divine Impulse, with the Approbation of our spiritual Father.

3. Secondly on the other side Voluntary Mortifications are such as on our
own heads, and without the Advice and judgment of those that are acquainted
with our Interior, we voluntarily assume, or impose on our selves; either
because we have seen or read of others that have done the like, and thereupon
without further due consideration of our own state or abilities, we will
hope they will advance us as much in the way of perfection: such are
Voluntary corporal fasts beyond what the Church or Regular observance do
require, Wearing of hairecloth, chains, etc: obstinate silence during the
times that the orders of the community do appoint conuersations etc. To these
may be abded an assuming the task of saying so many Vocal Prayers, Rosaries
etc.

4. This Distinction being premised, the devout Reader is to take notice, that
whatsoever hitherto has or shall be spoken of the use, end and benefits of
Mortification is to be understood and applied only to mortifications of
necessity, and not to such as are voluntary; And moreover that all these
Instructions and Directions are intended only for such souls (whether
Religious or others) as are entered (or desirous to enter) into an Internal
course, tending to Contemplation.

5. As touching therefore the former sort of Necessary mortifications,
according to the whole latitude before expressed, a devout soul is to be
exhorted (as being her duty and obligation) with all courage and fervor to
accept and cheerfully undergo them: considering that besides the foremencioned
inestimable Benefits attending them, they are of great security, free from all
peril of error, indiscretion or pride.

6. But as for Voluntary mortifications (those I mean which are properly
such) we have nothing to do with them; yea moreover I should never
persuade a spiritual Disciple to assume any considerable mortifications,
besides such as attend his present state of life, till he can assure himself
that he has a good Call to them, that is, till after that having spent a
considerable time in Internal prayer, he have received light to judge of their
fitnes for him, and Grace or spiritual strength to undertake and pursue them
cheerfully; and vvithall has the approbation of his Superior or spiritual
Directour. Yea though he had a body as strong as Samson and vvithall a very
good inclination to Internal ways, I should hardly be the first proposer,
mouer and inciter of him to such extraordinary mortifications ( unless some
special occasion required them for a remedy against any special tentations
then assalting him; In which case they are not indeed to be esteemed
extraordinary and voluntary (although supernumerary) but, considering the
present state, ordinary and necessary.) Yea and if such an one should ask my
counsel about the use of such mortifications, and upon examination, I should
find it to be doubtful whether it was upon a Divine Inspiration that he was
moved to desire them, I should take the surer course, that is, to dissvvade him
from the undertaking of them.

7. It is true, we find in reading the lives of Saints that most of them have
practiced them: and many even from their infancy. But this shows that spirits
fit for extraordinary mortifications are rarely to be found, being only such as
God himself leads after an extraordinary manner to make them Examples of the
power of his Grace, to the Edification of many, using them for his Instruments
in great works. As for us we are not to suppose that God esteems us fit,
or intends us for such extraordinary matters. Therefore it may suffice us to
undergo such mortifications as God himself has provided for us, beleiuing him
to know what is best for us and most proportionable.

8. In all our holy Rule there is no provision nor order made for such
extraordinary or supernumerary mortifications, but only (in the 49. Cap.) about
diet and in the time of Lent etc. And then it is forbidden to undertake such
without the Approbation of the Superior: the neglect of which Approbation is
imputed to rashness. For our holy Father, as he knevv the inestimable benefit of
mortifications which come from God, and therefore he is exact in requiring
conformity to the Austerities commanded in the Rule; so on the other side was
he not ignorant of the great inconveniences that probably attend the
undertaking such extraordinary ones by imperfect souls, which are commonly
induced thereto, merely out of a fancy, humor or sudden passion; for such are
seldom attended with any blessing from God, who neither is obliged, nor
ordinarily will bestovv his grace and Spiritual strength for the undergoing
of any morcifications, but such as are sent by him, or evidently ordained by
his inspiration; And experience vvitnesses this, because we seldom see
souls to persevere in those which they assume by their own free election:
And vvhiles they perform them, it is with little or no purity of Intention;
hereupon it is, that our holy Father expressly declares, that the Divine
Inspiration and grace is to be acknowledged the root of all religious
voluntary Austerities, by those words of his (Cap. 40.) Quibus donat Deus
tolerantiam Abstinentiae; That is; To whom God has given the courage or
strength to suffer extraordinary abstinence, Adding vvithall, that such
voluntary Abstinences must be offered to God (cum gaudio Sancti Spiritus) with
joy of the holy Ghost.

9. Great caution therefore is to be used in the reading and making use of
Instructions and examples found, especially concerning this point, in
spiritual Books; Because otherwise a soul will be in danger to plunge
herself into great inconveniences and difficulties; for whilst she does
imitate such extraordinary practices, it is to be feared being yet imperfect,
she will entertain a proud conceit of herself; and not receiving Grace to
persevere, she will be apt to dravv from thence matter of scrupulosity and
deiection, so far as perhaps to become disheartened from further tendance in the
way of the spirit. Yea such a soul will be liable to contract thereby an
obscurity in her understanding (especially if she be unlearned) by which she
will become disabled to distinguish Necessary Mortifications from voluntary.

10. It is a very hard, and to many souls would prove a dangerous Advice
which some Spiritual Authors give, viz. That a Spiritual Disciple should in
every thing that is of it self indifferent (in case that several object; be
offered to choice) take that which is most contrary to his natural
Inclination; As if many several dishes were set before us, to eat only that
which we least like etc; and thus to live in a continual contradiction and
crossing of nature.

11. Surely no souls but such as are in a good measure perfect, are capable of
making good use of such aduises, for only such can with facility, discretion
and proffit practice them; As for the less perfect, if they practice them
with any vvillingnes, it is to be feared that the true ground is, because
thereby they do covertly comply with nature some orher way, nourishing
selfe-esteeme, contempt of others not so courageous, nor affording so great
edification etc:

12. It were folly and inexcusable Pride for souls not diligently and
faithfully pursuing Internal Prayer, and not yet perfectly practicing patience
and Resignation in Crosses and necessary mortifications sent by God, or
attending their present condition of life; to attempt the undertaking of those
which belong not to them, but are merely devised by themselves. For vvanting a
Divine light, how can they perceive or judge them to be proper for them? And
if they be unable to encounter difficulties which are ordinary and necessary,
why should they think themselves prepared for extraordinary ones? So that
there is nothing which makes these to be supportable, but only that they
proceed from selfe-iudgment, and selfe-vvill, and by consequence are more
pleasing then distasteful to nature.

13. The inconveniences attending the indiscreet passionate use of such
Mortifications, are much greater in an Internal life tending to Contemplation,
then in an Active: Because liberty of Spirit is much more necessary in the
former, then in this latter. The which Liberty is extremely prejudiced by such
unnecessary obligations and fetters laid by a soul upon herself.

14. And for this reason the supernumerary Mortifications which may prove more
useful, and which are least prejudicial to this Liberty, are those that
least work upon the mind; as corporal labors, not of obligation, are more
beneficial then the ouer-multiplying of voluntary vocal Prayers, the practice
vvherof will probably prejudice the true exercise not only of Internal
recollections, but also of such vocal Prayers as are of obligation. Aod of all
others the most beneficial are those that regard not-doing, as more silence,
more solitude etc. then a person by regular ordinances is obliged to. Such
Mortifications as these, if the person use discretion and abstain from
imposing on himself an obliging necessity, may sometimes be proffitably
undertaken by more imperfect souls.

15. I do not therefore wholy exclude even imperfect souls from the use of
extraordinary Mortifications; for such may be Gods will that they may
undertake them; and upon that supposition most certain it is that they will
much hasten their advancement to Perfection. As he that runns, if he be able to
hold on, will sooner come to his iourneyes end, then he that contents himself
with an ordinary traveling pace. But if indiscreetly he will force himself
to run beyond his breath and strength, that advantage which he got for a
little while, will not counteruaile the loss he sustaines afterward.

16. Now the signs and marks by which a soul may inform herself, whether
the extraordinary Mortifications assumed by her do proceed from a safe and
good principle, that is, from a Divine Motive, and not an Impulse of nature and
passion, may be these. She may esteem them to come from God. 1. If she bear
herself well in the ordinary mortifications of necessity, supporting
cheerfully and courageously both the usual Austerities of her Religious state,
and also all accidental crosses. 2. In case it be with the advice and
Approbation of her spiritual Directour, that is skillfull in discerning of
spirits. 3. If the soul in the continuance of it find a chearfullnes and
resolutenes; for if there follovv any discontentednes or melancholy, that is a
very ill sign. 4. If the occasion of undertaking it was a quiet, constant
Internal inuitation, and not some sudden humor of Passion, Remorse, or some
fit of sensible Devotion, or an ambition to imitate others etc: Especially if
the matter of the Mortification have any peril in it to corporal health etc:
for then the impulse to undertake it had need be very certain and strong. 5.
If by perseverance in it the virtue of Humility be increased. 6. Lastly if it
dispose the soul to better Recollection, and to a greater constancy and
fervor in Prayer.

17. But to conclude this point, There are very fevv that need complain of
want of mortifications, or that are put to a necessity of seeking them. All
obseruances whatsoever, even the least that are practiced in Religion, or in
the submission to a spiritual Directour; and much more all contradictions,
humiliations and Pennances are proffitable mortifications. Yea even the Acts of
Authority practiced by Superiors if they be done (not out of nature, or a love
of commanding, but) in obedience to the Rule, and with a foresight that God
will expect an account concerning them, are such also. And if all these be too
little, a faithful pursuance of Internal prayer, together with Abstraction of
life, will sufficiently abate nature, and will, no doubt (generally speaking)
be effectual to bring souls to Perfection, if they live out their due time;
And if not, yet death finding them in the right way, will bring them to their
desired end. And lastly, such is the care and tenderness of God toward souls
that truly and cordially consecrate themselves to him, that if these
mortifications be not sufficient, he will by a special Providence procure
others, and such as shall be most proper. Yea a very sublime Mystic Author
confidently protests; That rather then such a soul shall receive prejudice
by the want of them, God will by a miracle immediately provide them, or by a
supernatural light and forcible impulse direct and move her to find them.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. Of certain sorts of Mortifications, which are more general.

. 2. 3. 4. The first is Abstraction of life: Wherein it consists. etc.

. 5. 6. etc. The second is Solitude, Several kinds of Solitude. The benefits
of it; And the means to procure it. The strictnes of S. Benedicts Rule in
requiring it. Perfect Solitude is only for such as are perfect.

1. AFTER this general Distinction of Mortifications, before we come to the
special kinds regarding the several passions or affections of the soul to be
mortified (for indeed the only subject of Mortification are our affections, and
not any other faculties but only in order to our affections:) I will briefly
set down more universal and unlimited Mortifications, that is, such as regard
not any one single Passion, but many, yea either the whole person, or some
member, that is the Instrument of many passions, as the tongue. Such indefinite
Mortifications are these. 1, Abstraction of life. 2. Solitude. 3. Silence and
4. Peace or tranquillity of mind.

2. Frist therefore for Abstraction, the duty thereof consists in this, that
we abstain. 1. From intermedling with things not pertaining to us; And 2.
For such things as belong to us to do, that we do them with a reseruednes
of our affections, not povvring them out upon them, (being due only to God
himself:) Yet this does not hinder us from doing our duty with a sufficient
attention and care. 3. That we not only relinquish all unnecessary
conuersations and correspondencies, Complementall visits etc: but likewise all
engagement of affections in particular freindships. This last is necessary in
Religious communities, because from such freindships proceed Parcialities,
factions, murmurings and most dangerous Distractions and multiplicity: for the
avoiding whereof, it is very requisiite that the allowed conuersations should
be performed in common; for from the singling out of Persons by two or three
in a meeting, will flow Personal engagements, Designs divided from the rest
of the Community, Discourses tending to the prejudice of others etc.

3. The true ground of the necessity of Abstraction is this, because the divine
union in Spirit (which is the end of an Internal liver) cannot be att^ained
without an exclusion of all other inferior, strange Images and affections;
Therefore by the means of Abstraction the soul is obliged to bring herself to
as much unity, vacancy and simplicity as may be. For this end a Religious soul
leaves the world; and if she practice not Abstraction in Religion, she does as
good as return to that which by profession she has renounced. To this purpose
is that sentence of the Wiseman, Sapientia in tempore vacuitatis, and qui
minoratur actu, sapientiam percipiet. That is, Wisdom is found in a state of
vacancy; and he that diminishes external employments shall attain unto her.

4. I shall in the next Treatise speak more on this subject, especially giving
aduices how an Internal liver may without prejudice to his Recollections
behave himself in distractiue Employments and Offices imposed on him, and
therefore I will say no more here.

5. The next general mortification is Solitude, which differs from
Abstractio^ only in this, that Solitude regards the exterior, as Abstraction
does the Interior; Abstraction being an Internal solitude of the spirit; and
solitude an external Abstraction of the Person. Abstraction may by fervent
souls be practiced in the midst of the noise and trouble of the world,
preserving themselves from all engagement of their affections in businesses or
to Persons, and ever remaining free to attend unto God. And on the contrary,
some souls even in the most retired external solitude, do wholy plunge
their minds and affections in thoughts and sollicitudes about persons and
businesses abroad, by continual endless vvriting and answering letters, giving
Aduices, inquiring after nevves etc: By which means they do more embroyle
their minds, and are less capable of Spiritual conversation with God, then
many that live in the world: by reason that their retired state keeping the^
in ignorance and uncertainty about the success of their aduices and
correspo^dences, they are in a continual solicitude about any thing, but
their own souls.

6. So that if with External Solitude there be not joined Internal
Abstraction and Prayer, it is rather a hindrance, then an Instrument of
Advancing Spiritual Perfection. Because such a soul is moreover always at
leisure to attend to the object of her sollicitudes, and so roots more fixedly
all internal deordinations of Faction, Anger, Pride, self love etc. Hence
we see that factions grow sometimes to a great violence in many retired
communities, because of the vacancy there to attend to them, the objects of
their passions likewise being, in a manner, continually present before their
eyes.

7. There is another which may be called a Philosophical Solitude, made use
of by Religious Persons, not with a design the more freely to seek God, but
to attend to their studies, and the enriching their minds with much
knowledge. Indeed Study and reading used with discretion, and if the matters
about which study is employed be not such as are apt to puff up the mind
with pride, or a forvvardnes to dispute and maintain Topicall opinions etc:
may be no inconvenient Diuersion for a contemplative spirit, especially since
that manual labors have been disused: But otherwise an inward affection to
curiosity of knowledge is perhaps (caeteris paribus) more prejudicial to
contemplation, and produces effects more hurtful to the soul, because more
deeply rooted in the spirit it self, then some sensual Affections.

8. The solitude therefore here recommended, and which is proper to a Religious
life, consists in a serious affection to our Cell at all times when
conuentuall Duties do not require the contrary; and there admitting no
conversation but Gods, nor no employment but for God. Keep thy Cell (says an
Ancient holy Father) and thy Cell will teach thee all things. A soul that by
using at first a little violence shall bring herself to a love of this
solitude, and that shall therefore love it because there she may more freely and
intimately converse with God; It is incredible what progress she will make
in internal vvayes; vvheras from a neglect of such solitude, nothing proceeds
but tepidity, sensual designs etc.

9. Now to the end that Solitude may in the beginning become less tedious,
and afterward delightful; Religious Persons not only may, but ought to
preserve a convenient and discreet Liberty of Spirit about their employments
and entertainments of their minds in private, prudently using a variety in
them, changing any one, when it becomes ouer-burdensome, into another more
grateful; sometimes reading, sometimes writing, other times vvorking, often
praying: Yea if they shall find it convenient, sometimes remaining for a short
space in a kind of cessation from all both External and Internal vvorking,
yet ever being at least in a vertuall Attention and tendance to God, referring
all to him and his Glory. For so they can truly say with the Psalmist,
(Fortitudinem meam ad te custodiam) I will reserve my principal strength to be
employed for thee, O my God; all other employments (not of obligation) are both
for the manner and measure to be ordered as shall be most commodious for the
Spirit, that it may come with chearfullnes and an appetite to the appointed
Recollections. Suitable herto is the counsel given by an Ancient holy Hermit
to one of his brethren demanding to what he should apply himself in times out
of prayer, he ansvvered, Whatsoever thy mind according to God shall bid thee
do, that do thou. And indeed after a reasonable time well spent in Solitude,
by the help of Internal Prayer a soul will receive a Divine light, by
which she will clearly see what shall be most convenient and proper for her
at all times to do.

10. Notvvitstanding this caution is to be used, That if in any Employment a
soul does find herself carried to it with too much eagernes and affection,
she is to qualify such eagernes by forbearing, and a while interrupting her
present exercise, with a resignation of her will to be quite debarred from
it, if such be Gods will for her good, and actually referring it to God.

11. It is very remarkable the great and studious care that our Holy Father in
his Rule takes to recommend Solitude, and to show the necessity of it; as
likewise to imprint deeply in the minds of his disciples not only a great
auersion, but even a fear and horror of the world. All things must be
provided and executed within doors (vt non sit necessitas euagandi) that no
necessity may force the Religious to be gadding abroad. And in case there
should be an unavoidable necessity thereto, Prayers are appointed to be made for
those that are to go abroad, and the like when they return home: Whither
when they come, they are strictly forbidden to tell any nevves of their
journey. All this, as if by only stepping out of their enclosure they were
exposed to immediate peril; and that it were not possible to have been in the
world without contracting such stains, as that for the washing them away,
Public prayers of the Community were needful. Such was the care expressed
by our Holy Patriarch: who by own experience had learned the vvonderfull
benefit, and extreme necessity of Solitude for the attaining to Contemplation,
according to that of the Prophet, by whose mouth God says, ( Ose. cap. 4.)
Ducam eam in solitudinem, and loquar ad cor illius. That is, I will lead the
devour soul into a solitary place, and there I will speak words of kindness
and intimacy to her spirit. And to the same purpose another Prophet says
(Lament cap. 3.) (Sedebit solitarius and tacebit quia leuauit se super se.) The
solitary person will sit still, and hold his peace, because he has raised up
his spirit above himself (and all creatures.)

12. Indeed whatsoever spiritual Employment a soul has, and whensoever she
desires to have any conversation with God, Solitude is the state most proper
for it, whether it be to bewail her sins; to exercise Penance; to meditate
on the holy scriptures; to prepare herself for any employment: but especially
to exercise spiritual prayer freely. Thither most of the Ancient Saints, yea
many holy Bishops often retired themselves, because they knevv that in solitude
Gods dwelling was especially fixed; and after a free, immediate and
inexpressible communion with him there, they returned more enabled and
enlightened to discharge the sollicitous Duties of their callings.

13. But absolute Solitude (such as was that of Ancient Hermites) was never
permitted to souls till after a sufficient time spent in the exercises of a
Coenobiticall life (except to a very fevv miraculously called thereto out of
the world, as S. Anthony, S. Hilarion, our holy Father S. Benedict etc:)
Because a vvonderfull firmenes of mind, confidence in God, purity of soul etc:
are requisite to him that without the comfort and assistance of any shall
oppose himself single to the Devils assaults, which in such a solitude are
more furious; And likewise an unusual measure of spiritual light is needful
to such a soul to enable her to be her own Directour and disposer in all
things.

CHAP. VII.
. 1. 2. etc. The third kind of general Mortification is Silence; the which is
strictly enjoined in S. Benedicts Rule. But in these days cannot so rigorously
be observed; and why? the conditions of it.

. 12. 13. 14. 15. Of Recreations now permitted.

. 16. 17. 18. Conditions to be observed in Conferences.

. 19. Of melancholic dispositions: and how they are to be treated.

1. THE third general kind of mortification is silence: The which is one of
the most proffitable mortifications in a spiritual Life, preventing a world
of inconceiueably pernicious damages which the spirit of Devotion and
Recollection receives by the superfluity and intemperance of the Tongue: The
ordinary subject of unnecessary conuersations being murmurings, Detraction, at
least vain and distractiue disputes, Professions of Friendships, News etc.
Upon the guard of the Tongue (says the Wiseman) depends Life and Death: and
vvh^soeuer accounts himself Religious and refraines not his Tongue, that man's
Religion is vain, says S. James: Of such infinite importance is the well
ordering of so small a member: And this even in the world: much more therefore
in Religion.

2. Hervpon our Holy Father deals with his Disciples, as God did with a
certain devout and Holy Monk, to whom he left no power at all to use his
tongue but only for prayer in the Community, being absolutely dumb in all other
occasions and times. For in our Holy Rule there seems no Permission allowed
to particular Religious for any voluntary or recreatiue Discourses at any
times; no not to Superiors themselves. And for spiritual discourses by way
of teaching, those were only allowed to the Abbot, or to certain Seniours
and Officers by the Abbots express appointment or leave. And when there
happened a necessity that an answer should be given by any of the private
Religious, they were to deliver it as breifely as was possible: If yea or nay
would serve the turn, they must add no more. And it seems Answering only
was permitted; not asking of Questions, except when necessary business
required.

3. But in these latter days Superiors have conceived themselves obliged to
remit much of this rigorous Silence, not only permitting, but even appointing
set times for Recreative Conversations and entertainme^ts: Therein complying
with the indispositions and general infirmity either of our Complexions or
minds.

4. Now whether it were true, real necessity, or no, that has caused such
dispensations, I will not inquire. But this is certain; that no ancienter
then S. Bernards days the rigorous Silence of the Rule was most exactly
observed: Yea even in these our days, and that in Communities of women, there
is little vvanting of the like rigor. And if Religious Persons had truly good
wills to seek God, they would find many things not very difficult, which in
their present dispositions seem impossible, both in the point of Silence and
also of Diet etc.

5. How ever this is certain, that much and willing speaking is the effect of
Tepidity, self-love, and Pride. For commonly it flovves from an opinion that
we can speak well: and consequently out of a desire of gaining estimation
from others by shevving our wits and abilities. But such Intentions and
Designs as these the Disciple of true Humility and Spirituality will abhor.

6. It is very requisite for an Internal Liver therefore at least to observe
that moderate and qualified Silence required in his Community not transgressing
either in the appointed places, or at the determinate times in which speaking
is forbidden.

7. A young Religious Person must not without necessity be the first mouer or
proposer of a Discourse: nor ordinarily speak till he be asked, unless it be
to propose a question or doubt in a matter of concernement. Yea this Advice may
likewise concern the more Ancient, unless we do conceive that they are
disobliged from Humility and necessary Abstraction. Indeed Perfecter Souls
can, when an occasion of necessary Discourse is administered, speak more with
incurring fewer and less Defects, then the imperfect.

8. When Prudence and Charity require of us to speak, we must be very
careful not to make the Imperfections of others any part of the matter of our
Discourse: and especially not the imperfections of those from whom in our
natures we seem to have an aversion. And principally we must take heed of
speaking or doing any thing to breed a dislike betvveene any. Therefore all
secret Informings and accusations are most carefully to be avoided, as the
ruin of Christian Charity in Communities.

9. And this concerns Superiors as well as others: who ought to be very far
from favoring this perniciously officious and uncharitable humor of accusing
or informing in any of their Religious. Much less ought they to esteem that
their Authori^y can extend to the prejudice of Brotherly Charity, so far as to
ex^use, or howeuer to oblige any one to be an accuser or informer against his
brethren. A pretense of doing good to their subjects souls will be alleged
by such Superiors as are of a curious, inquisitive Disposition, and are
continually searching into the behavior of their Religious: but little good
Reformation will ever be wrought by such an humor of Jealous Curiosity; On
the contrary, the effects of it are the breeding of discontents generally in
all: and the greatest mischeife to the souls of private uncharitable Informers.

10. It is more secure for one that is apt to offend in his Tongue, to be in
company of many, then of one or two whom he affects. Therefore particular
Intimacy and private correspondences between Religious is much to be avoided,
both for the Peace of Communities, and the good of each private Religious
Person.

11. No words are to be spoken nor Action done merely upon the motive of
edifying others. And indeed where recreatiue conuersations are allowed, the
most commodious subjects of Discourse are purely indifferent things, and such
as are neither apt to move Passions, nor to leave distracting Images in the
Hearers minds.

12. Upon this occasion I conceive it necessary to add some Aduices touching
Religious Recreations: The which are not to be concluded fit to be prohibited,
because we said, that the Duty of Mortification extends it self universally
to the whole soul, and that it is to be continued to the end of ones Life. On
the contrary, not only Reason, but the Examples of the most Perfect among the
Ancient Saints, famous for Contemplation show, that it is proffitable, yea at
due times necessary. To this purpose seems the story of S. John the
Evangelist, the first Doctor and Example of Contemplation, whose custom was
to recreate himself with a tame Dove: For which being censured by a Hunter
that passed by, as for an Action that was beneath his gravity, and not
beseeming one that professed a continual conversation with God: He defended
himself to the conviction of the reprouer, by shevving, that as a Bow if it be
alvvayes bent would loose its force: so the mind likewise would become
utterly incapable of Divine Thoughts, if no relaxation were allowed to it;
considering the infirmity of the Body, that cannot always supply fit Spirits
to Actions, especially to such as are so contrary to its inclinations.

13. True it is, that in our Holy Rule there are extant no Orders about
Conuentuall Recreations: which argues that none were practiced in those days.
Yea our Holy Father takes a particular care how every hour of the day should
be employed in common. Notvvithstanding after Refection he enjoined the
Religious to retire each one into his Cell, permitting them a convenient time
to refresh themselves alone, either with Sleep, as the custom was in that
vvarme Climate; or otherwise as they found themselves disposed, if they had no
inclination to Sleep: for no certain employment is then appointed.

14. But because in these latter days our complexions are not supposed able to
support so great solitude and Attention to the Spirit, as has been said:
Therefore have Superiors allowed and ordained daily certain times for
Recreatiue Conferences, almost obliging each particular Religious Person to be
present at them: And besides, at certain seasons monthly, or as the custom
is, they have afforded an addition to the Diet.

15. Neither does this prejudice the Duty of continual Mortification, which
is not to be interpreted in extreme rigor, because then nature, even in the
ablest complexions, would be destroyed. And besides, Recreations are appointed
that Mortification may be better and more fervently exercised afterward. Add
herunto, that even in Recreation it self Mortification may and ought in some
reasonable degree to be discreetly exercised, so as that the mind is not to
power it self forth upon that which is pleasant to nature: but to keep a
moderate vvatchfullnesse over it self, and to refer the contentment found
therein to the good of the Spirit.

16. To speak a little therefore particularly touching such Conferences:
Decency is in gross to be observed: But it will be di^ficult to prescribe any
set order or manner for the Talk, as not to speak unasked; not to exceed
such a limitation of words etc. (to omit many particular cautions, which at
other times are to be observed.) Here some more freedom must be allowed, so
it go not too far.

17. Among Women there can scarce be any Recreation, if the Tongue be too much
stinted. Neither is it to be expected that their Talk should be of Spiritual
matters: Both because such Talk is far from being recreatiue: as likewise
because none but expert Persons ought to discourse of such subjects. Indeed to
make such the subject of ordinary Discourse even between the most able
experienced persons, either Men or women, is not convenient at all: Except
some special occasion makes it expedient. For it usually proceeds from Pride,
or a vvillingnes to interest ones self in the guiding of the Consciences of
others, and may produce inconvenient Effects in both.

18. The matter and conditions of Recreatiue Discourse therefore may be. 1. That
the matter do not particularly refer to the Interior of any of the parties:
But if it regard a Religious State, that it be about less considerable
external matters, as Ceremonies, Customs etc. 2. That it may be some thing
that may be apt to cause chearfullnes, though not laughter (which our Holy
Father would have banished from his Communities:) Now Discourses about such
matters are not to be reputed Idle words. 3. It were better to talk of the
ocurrences of former times, then of the present: because our Holy Father
forbids the inquiring or telling of news in the world, for fear least the
Hearers being interessed, may become distracted with sollicitudes. 4. It must
not therefore be of any thing that probably will leave in the minds any
hurtful Images. 5. The Hearer is not to suffer the subject of the Discourses
to enter so deep into his mind as that it should raise any Passions there. 6.
It must by no means be of any thing ^y which any one present or absent may be
prejudiced or contristated, nor indeed afterward distracted etc.

19. As touching those that are naturally of Melancholic Dispositions, they
ought to be exceedingly vvatchfull over themselves that they give not way to
so pestilent an humor. Nature will incline them to avoid all Recreations and
diuersions, and being very subtle, it will suggest pretenses to justify a
froward Lonelines, and an humor not able to support innocent conversation: as
if this were done out of a Love to a Religious Solitude and Recollection. But
in all likelihood such a perverse Solitude is employed in troublesome
disquieting Imaginations and Resueries, far more distracting then any
Conuersations. Therefore they, or rather their Superiors ought to take a
special care that such a dangerous humor be not nourished by discontented
Retirements, at the times when others are conuersing together: and that at all
other times they should be busied in such kind of employments as should not be
apt to nourish solicitude. Such dispositions if Prudently managed, may prove
proper for contemplation, because their thoughts being not easily dissipated,
they are disposed for Recollection. Whereas on the contrary, the same
Dispositions being neglected, and sufferd to follovv the bent of their Natures,
they will be in danger to fall into terrible Extrauagancies.

20. S. Teresa in her Foundations has a particular Discourse containing
excellent Aduices how Melancholic Spirits are to be managed: Saying, that
they ought not to be dispensed from Mortifications or employments from which
they are auerse, notwithstanding this frowardnes of their humor: Yet withal
that the Superior in his Carriage toward them ought to make it appear, that
all that he imposes so on them, proceeds from pure charity, and not any
crossenes or auersion etc.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. 2. 3. Of the Fourth kind of General Mortifications, viz. Tranquillity of
mind.

. 4. 5. It may be in the Superior Soul during the time that there is disquiet
in the Sensitive.

. 6. 7. 8. How Peace and Tranquillity of soul may be procured.

. 9. 10. Of a State of Perfect Peace: which is the End of a Contemplative Life.

1. THe Fourth General Mortification is a Constant Peacefullnes and
Tranquillity of mind maintaining it self against all disquieting Passions of
Grief, Fear, Despair etc: Of which I shall in this place speak briefly,
and only in a general manner, being shortly in the follovving Section to
treat largely of the chief Enemy thereof, which is Fear and Scrupulosity:
where I shall take notice of the Special Motives or Instruments of procuring
such Peace of mind, and of restoring it when it is lost.

2. Without a reasonable proportion of such Tranquillity obtained, a soul
will be quite disabled from Internal Prayer. Therefore she is to use all care
to preserve it: and when it is disturbed or lost, she must endeavor as soon,
and after the best manner she can to regaine it, till she be able to say, None
shall take my Peace from me. And to use the words of the Psalmist (Anima mea
in manibus meis semper) My soul is always in my hands and disposition, and
not captiuated by the corrupt Passions of Nature.

3. The subject of this Peace is the Soul according to all its Faculties, both
knovving and affecting: and both in the superior and Spiritual, as also in
the inferior and ^ensitiue portion: For not only the Affections of the will,
and Passions of sensuality, but also the Reason and Imagination may be
disturbed: And therefore a Composednes and calmenes is to be procured through
all. But yet the vvayes and means herto necessary, are not the same: neither
does it follovv that when the Inferior Faculties are in disorder, that the
same disorder should be communicated to the Superior also. It does not
alvvayes lie in our power wholy to suppress the instability and obstinacy of
the Imagination, nor the unruliness of sensuality, which often times do resist
our Superior Reas^n. But we are alvvayes enabled by the ordinary Grace of
God to keep in repose our Superior soul that is, to hinder it from attending
to the suggestions of the Imagination (which we may reject) or to deny
consent or approba^ion to the motions of sensuality, and this a^ least it must
be our great Care to do.

4. Neither ought a vvell-minded soul to be discouraged or dejected at the
contradiction that she finds in sensuality; But resisting it the best she can,
she must be resigned and Patient with herself, as she would be at the
refractory humors of another, till that by Gods blessing a longer exercise of
Prayer and Mortification do produce a greater subjection of sensual Nature to
Reason and Grace. In the mean time she may comfort herself with this
assurance, That all merit and Demerit lies in the Superior will, and not at
all in sensuality considered in it self, and as divided from the Will.

5. During the Conflict betvveene Reason and sense, or Appetite, there may be a
real Tranquillity in the Superior Region of the soul, although the Person be
not able to discern that there is any such Quietness: yea on the contrary to
fearful Natures it will seem that whensoever the sensitive part is
disturbed, the spiritual Portion does also partake of its disorders: And this
uncertainty, mistake and fear that a fault has been committed is the ground of
much scrupulosity, and by means thereof, of great unquietness indeeed, even in
the superior soul, to Persons that are not well instructed in the Nature and
subordination of the Faculties and Operations of the soul.

6. Hovveuer a vvell-minded soul may conclude, that there is a calmnes in the
Reason, and in the will a refusal to consent to the suggestions of
sensuality, even in the midst of the greatest disorders thereof, whilst that
the combat does not cease, and as long as the outward members directed by
Reason, and moved by the Superior will, do behave themselves otherwise then
the unruly appetite would move them. For example, when a person being moved
to Anger, though he find an unquiet representation in the Imrgination, and a
violent heat and motions about the Heart, as likewise an auersion in sensitive
nature against the person that has given the provocation: yet if
notvvithstanding he refraines himself from breaking forth into words of
Impatience to which his Passion would urge him, and vvithall contradicts
designs of Revenge suggested by Passion, such an one practicing Internal
Prayer and Mortification is to esteem himself not to have consented to the
motions of corrupt nature, although besides the inward motion of the Appetite,
he could not hinder marks of his Passion from appearing in his Eyes and the
color of his countenance.

7. When we seek to retaaine such Quietness in the midst of unquietness, we
do it by exercising an Act of Mortification proper to the occasion. Every Act
vvherof does in some degree abate impetuous Nature, disposing us for better and
more quiet Recollections, which will procure us a clearer light and more
efficacious Grace to resist sensuality afterward. As on the contrary, each
Act of immortification does increase in us Self-love (the cause and Root of
all unquietness) and causes a greater obscurity in the soul, indisposing it
likewise to Prayer.

8. To the end to procure an Habitual Peacefullnes of mind, we must be
careful not to do any of our Actions (I mean even our Actions of Duty) with
impetuousnes and an inward hastines, but with a composed calmenes. For all
acts of impetuosity and violence are so far but effects of Self-love, and
proceed not from the Divine Spirit, which is altogether stillnes, serenity and
tranquillity. And let us not suspect that such a calm performance of our Duty
argues a Tepidity and want of Fervor. On the contrary such Actions so done
are of more virtue and efficacious solidity. For the Fervor that is indeed to
be desired, is not a hasty motion and heat in the inferior Nature, but a
firm and strong Resolution in the will, courageously (yet without violence
that is outwardly sensible) breaking through all difficulties and
contradictions.

9. All the Duties of Mortification (and consequently the exercise of all
virtues) may be reduced to Custodia cordis. Which is a wary guard of our
heart, and it consists in not povvring forth our affections inordinatly upon
creatures, nor admitting into our souls any inordinate love; it is a
Chariness over our interior, to keep it in as much quietness as we can.
In cases of sufferance it is patience; in occasions of fear and disquiet it is
the practice of Resignation. It is in effect Abstraction, for it requires that
we restrain ourselves from meddling with what does not appertain unto us:
and in what does belong to us to do, it requires a reservedness of our
loves and affections for God, to whom they are only due: Also that in
speaking, hearing, and seeing etc. we be wary they carry no inordinate
affections into our soul. It is in effect Solitude, for though we be in
company, yet having such a guard and care over our Passions and affections,
we are as it were alone. It is a passing over all Creatures with a farther
tendance to God. It is the practice of love, obedience, humility and
resignation to God; for these virtues we exercise vertually, when we
reserve our selves and our affections for God. It is a principal mean to
overcome all temptations of what kind so ever, for it permits not the
temptation to make any entry into the soul, which is kept as the dwelling
place of God and his love. It requires that we look not after superfluities
of meat, drink, clothing etc: and that we desire not superfluous
knovvledges of what belongs not to us, nor is necessary for us. It forbids all
childish immortifyed complaints or expostulations; or any thing wherein we
merely satisfy the inclinations of our corrupt nature. It forbids us to do
any thing impetuously or with inward anxiety. It is termed an interior
silence, or an interior peace or concord: and for the better knowledge and
practice of it, regard the teaching of the little Treatise of the Quiet of the
soul, written by Bonilla of the Order of S. Francis.

10. True Peace of mind, when it is in Perfection, is the Supreme state in an
Internal Life: being a stability in one and the self same tenor: an
immutadbility, indifference, and insensibility as to our selves and to all
Creatures and Events; by which the soul transcends all, living in God only,
and not being concerned in any other thing besides. And the Root of it is the
Perfection of Divine Charity, and destruction of self Love. For as long as
self-love is active in us, it caries us to multiplicity, urging us to seek
contentment in any thing pleasing to nature, and all her Appetites: the which
being crossed or not fully satisfied, are restless and unquiet. Whereas Divine
Love alone reigning, unites and concentrates all our thoughts and Affections in
one only Object, which is God: Carrying all other Affections in that one
stream: So that there being no diversity of Designs, there must necessarily
follovv Perfect unity and Peace. This is a State to which the soul aspires in
a Contemplative Life. The gaining of which will deserve and abundantly
recompense all the sufferings and tediousnes that nature is likely to find in
the way.

11. Yet even this state in the most Perfect, is not absolutely and entirely
exempted from all trouble in inferior Nature: But such trouble is small and
scarce considerable; for notvvithstanding it the Superior soul partakes
nothing of it, but reigns in that upper Region of Light and Peace, and from
thence looks down upon sensuality, either as a thing divided from it self,
in whose imperfections and disorders she is nothing concerned, being as it
were safe locked up from them in a strong Tower: or else she suppresses all
such motions in their first breaking out, in virtue of that Dominion which by
long practice she has gained over them. In such a state of perfect Peace (yet
without the least contradiction of sensual Nature) Adam lived during his
Innocence: And how far any other mere man has, or may attain thereto in this
Life, is not for me to determine.

THE SECOND SECTION OF THE SECOND TREATISE: TOUCHING Certain special
Mortifications of the Passions etc.
CHAP. I.
. 1. Mortification properly is not of the senses or cognoscitiue Faculties, but
of the affections.

. 2. 3. 4. The special Mortifications treated of are 1. Of the Principal
Cardinal Passions. 2. Of the Affections of the Superior will.

. 5. The first Passion is Love.

1. INTENDING now consequently to treat of the Special kinds of
Mortification, those especially which are most proper for a Religious
Contemplative Life: I take this as a Ground, that though Mortification do
regard the whole soul with all the faculties of it (and consequently the
whole person) universally depraved: Yet precisely and exactly speaking, it is
only the Affectiue Part of the Soul that is immediately Mortified, and only in
consequence thereto the knowing faculties or Organs. For though Ignorance be a
defect in the Soul, yet we do not say that Knowledge, or Faith, is properly
a Mortification, though it be a cure of that defect. But an inordinate love to
knowledge unnecessary, which is Curiosity, deserves, and is a Deordination
proper and fit to be mortified. The like we may say of the outvvard Senses:
for it is not Seeing or Tasting etc. that are to be mortified; but the
inordinate Affection to those Objects which delight the Eyes or Taste etc.
Therefore my Intention is to distinguish the several sorts of Mortification
according to the several Passions or Affections of the Soul, both as to the
Sensitive and Rational Portion of it, and to refer thereto the respective
Mortifications of the several Senses (without speaking distinctly and
separatly of them, which would force me to repeat over again the same
Aduices, when I came to treat of the Mortification of Affections.)

2. This therefore shall be the Order according to which I will treat of the
Mortification of Affections, viz. In the First place, I will begin with the
Sensitive Portion of the soul: In which there are four Principal Passions,
comprehending all the rest, which are to be mortified, viz. 1. Love, to which
Desire and Joy have relation, being only a progress of Love: Now the Object
of Love being either Persons or things, and those either material or
spiritual, there are many virtues required to the mortifying (that is, the
rectifying) of it: as against the love of Riches, Poverty; Against impure
Delectations, Chastity: Against the pleasures of Taste, Temperance: Against
excessive (though not unclean) Love to persons, friends etc. the Love of God
and spiritual things etc. But my purpose here is only to treat of that
universal Virtue, which is the Cure of all inordinate Loves, to wit, the
Love of God, and in him, and for his sake only, of our Brethren: and of Purity
of Intention (which in substance are the same:) And because the Tentations
about Taste are such as adhere to the most spiritual Persons, daily and
unavoidably assalting them, I will add some Instructions about our behavior
in Refection. 2. The next Passion is Anger. (Some instead hereof do put in
Hope; But howsoever for our present purpose the Passion of Anger deserves more
to be considered by us; for Hope may be referd to Desire, or Love.) Now the
Remedy or Mortification proper against Anger is the virtue of Patience. 3. The
third Passion in sensitive Nature is Fear. 4. And the fourth is Sorrow: And
because it is not needful (as to our present purpose) to divide these two,
since among Internal Livers it is Fear that is the most tormenting Passion,
and that which causes Excess of Sorrow: Therefore the same Remedies will
serve to cure both: for which purpose I will discourse largely concerning
Scrupulosity, the Causes and Remedies of it etc.

3. In the next place as to the Superior Portion of the Rational Soul
(besides the same Affections of Love, Anger, Fear and Sorrow, which in the
Inferior Soul are called Passions, and having the same Objects etc. are to be
comprised in them) there are more particularly two distempers in the Will, to
wit, Pride or Selfe-esteeme; the Remedy whereof is Humility: And next,
Obstinacy and a violent retaining of Liberty; to which the proper Remedy
opposed is Obedience. As for a love of superfluous Knowledge, or Curiosity
enough has been said touching the mortifying of it, where we treated of the
regulating of the Studies of Religious Persons.

4. In this Order therefore I will now treat of the Passions or Affections to
be mortified, and the manner how to do it by the Virtues opposed: Beginning
with the Sensitive Passions, and so proceeding to the special inordinate
Affections in the Will. First therefore of Inordinate Love either to Persons or
things: and the Remedy of it which is Divine Charity.

CHAP. II.
. 1. Love is the Root of all other Passions.

. 2. The wonderful deprauednes of our Natural Love.

. 3. The only universal Remedy is Charity, or Divine Love.

. 4. 5. Of the distinction of Love into. 1. A love of Desire or Concupiscence.
2. a love of Freindship. The which are never separated.

1. THE Principle of all our Actions both External and Internal, and that
which both begets and sets on work all other Passions is only Love, that is,
an Internal Complacence and Inclination to an object from the Goodness or
Beauty that is believed to be in it. The which Object, if it be absent, the
first effect of Love is Desire or tendance to it. But if it be present, then
the Effect of Love is Joy, Rest, and Fruition of it. Not only Grief and Anger
etc. but even Hatred it self is set on work by Love: For therefore a Person
is angry, discontented or displeased, because something comes in the way,
hindering him from what he Loves: Therefore he labors and works all that he
does work. So that accordingly as Love is regulated and placed upon a worthy
or unworthy Object, so is the whole Person disposed, according to that saying
of S. Augustine, Non faciunt bonos vel malos mores, nisi boni vel mali amores:
that is, It is only a good or ill Love that makes our Actions and Conditions to
be good or ill.

2. Hence will appear how inexpressibly depraved both our Nature and all our
Actions, outvvard and inward must be, since vvheras we were created only to
love and enjoy God, yet we love and seek nothing but our selves. Our
sensitive Affections are carried to nothing but what is pleasing to sensuality.
And our Spiritual Affections to nothing but Propriety, Liberty, Independence,
Selfe-esteeme, Selfe-iudgment, and Self-will, and to those things only that
do nourish such depraved Affections. By this means we are quite diuerted
from our last End and Felicity: Every thought that naturally we think, every
word we speak, every Action we do caries us further from God, our only
last End and Perfection: And consequently nothing can we reap from them, but
increase in Misery.

3. Now the only possible Remedy for this horrible and universal deordination
in us, proceeding from the only Root of Self love, is to have a new contrary
Divine Principle imprinted in our Hearts, by which we should be auerted from
the falsely seeming Happiness that Self love promises us in Creatures, and
converted to our first and only End, which is God; And this can be no other,
but Divine Love or Charity shed abroad in our Hearts by the Holy Ghost. This
Charity is an universal Cure of all our disorders, producing the like Effects
in us with respect to our true End, that Self-love did to a false End. It
raises and emploies, when need is, all other Passions: Anger against our own
negligence, ingratitude etc. Hatred against the Devil and sin that hinder our
Conversion to God etc. And it is the root of all our good Actions: for giving
us an Inclination, desire and tendance to Union with God, from thence it is
that we regulate and direct all our Actions to him. Herupon S. Paul ascribes
to Charity the Acts of all other virtues, Charity (says he) is patient, it is
kind, long suffering, it does nothing unseemly, it rejoices in the Truth,
etc.

4. Now to the End we may have a distinct and clear Notion of the Nature of
true Charity, which is one and the Noblest Species of Love: We may take
notice that in general Love regards 1. Either a thing that we desire to be
possessed of, or to procure for our selves, or some other that we love, as
Pleasure, Proffit, Honor, Knowledge etc. 2. Or else a Person, either our
selves or any other to whom we bear an Affection, and to whom we vvish any
good thing. The former of these two Loves is called a Love of desire: The
latter a Love of freind^hip. The difference betvveene these two is this, That
when we love any thing distinct from our selves, or the Person of our
friend, our love does not rest in the thing, but in the Person, for it is not
the thing is loved, but only for the Persons sake, in whom Love is finally
terminated, and to whom that thing is loved and sought. So that when we
seek pleasure and riches etc. to our selves; the love that we bear unto
them is indeed, self-love, because it is only for out own sakes that we
love them, to give Satisfaction to our Natural desires. Yea when we love a
Person only for Sensual Pleasures sake, and not for virtue, it is our Selves
only that we love in such a Person, whom we then love not properly as a
Person, but as a thing pleasurable to us. But by a Love of Freindship we do,
at least we profess to love the Person for the Persons sake, and to seek
therein not our own good, but only the Persons, for whose greater good we
are vvilling to neglect our own: yea sometimes for the Persons contentment,
safety etc. to sacrifice our own contentment, or, may be, our life also. Thus
far Freindship has been described in Ancient and latter times: And Charity is
by all acknowledged to be a Love of Freindship to God, and, for his sake only,
to men or our selves.

5. Indeed if we narrovvly examine the matter, we shall find, that there
neither is, nor can be a^y other true freindship but Charity, or the Love
which we bear to God or for God: And that all other pretended Freindships
either among Heathens or Christians, are mere sensual Self-love. For though
in some Freind^hips (as they are called) some have professed so absolute a
purity and freedom from selfe-interests, as for their friends sake to neglect
not only all temporal respects of Riches, Honor, Pleasure etc, but also
willingly exposed their Lives: Yet indeed the true Motive of all was a
Sensual love unto themselves: For therefore for their friends sake they made
choice of Death, rather then to live deprived of them, because the want of so
great a Sensual contentment was far more bitter and insupportable to them
then the pain of suffering death: which would quickly be finished, vvheras the
languour and torture of the other would never have ceased till death.

6. But Charity is only, and in the most strict sense a Freindship, because
therein all our Love is terminated in God only: we love nothing but him, or
for him: Yea we direct the love not only of all other Creatures, but also of
our selves only to him.

7. Now in what sense it is usually said, that our love to God must be a free
vnconcerned love, renouncing all interest or expectation of revvard as a Motive
thereto, and how this purely free love may (nothwitstanding) consist with, yea
be grounded upon, a hope of retribution in Heaven, consisting in the vision and
fruition of God: see the following Appendix at the End of the last Treatise.

CHAP. III.
. 1. 2. The proper Seat of Charity is the Superior will: not the sensitive
Affections: Though often in Beginners it operates much there.

. 3. 4. Several Acts or Fruits of Charity.

. 5. 6. The securest Practice of Divine Love is by self Abnegation.

. 7. Propriety makes and fills Hell: And Resignation Heaven.

1. THE most precious Virtue of Charity resides not in Sensuality: Neither is
it a painful longing of the soul, which causes motions in the Heart: Yea
though it become such a love as Mysticks call a languishing Love, yet it is not
such as sensual Loves use to be, a troublesome unquiet Passion. But it is
seated in the Superior soul, being a quiet, but most resolute determination
of the Superior Will to seek God, and a perfect union with him: the which
Resolution she will not give over for any distractions or occurring
difficulties whatsoever. Yea then it is often most excellent and perfect, when
the heart or inferior Nature receives the least contentment by it, yea on the
contrary feels the greatest disgusts and desolations. And such a Resolution is
grounded on an high esteem we have by Faith of the Infinite Perfections of
God, and the innumerable obligations laid by him on us. This makes an inflamed
soul to despise all things whatsoever for God, and to tend to him with a
resolution of enjoying him, though with the loss of Pleasure, Riches, Honor,
yea and the Life it self.

2. Yet so generous a Love as this is not gotten suddenly: At the first it is
very imperfect, and much allayed by selfe-interest, and seeking contentment to
Nature, even in the Actions done for God: so that were it not that ordinarily
during such a State of Imperfection God cherishes the soul with sensible
Comforts and gusts which she feels in the Exercise of her love to him, she
would scarce have courage enough to proceed.

3. The Acts, Effects, and Fruits proper to pure Charity or Divine Freindship
are. 1. To be united in affection to God as our Chief and only Good, with
whom in some sort we are one. 2 Out of Love to him to take joy in his
Perfections, congratulating with him therefore: and exulting that he is adored
and glorified by Angels and Saints. 3. To will and consent to the immutability
of those Perfections. 4. To desire and, occasions being given, to endeavor
that all creatures may love and adore him: That infidells and sinners may be
converted to him, that so he may reign by Love in all. 5. To be sorry for all
offenses, both our own and others, committed against him. 6. In pure Love to
him, to determine faithfully and unchangeably to serve him. 7. To take i^y in
all things that please him. 8. With indifferency to accept of all things from
his hands, as well things displeasing to our natures, as pleasing. 9. To be
sorry for all things that are contrary to his Holy will. 10. To Love all
things that belong to him, merely for that reason. 11. For his sake to love all
men: Yea even our Enemies and Persecutours: Nay moreover to endeavor to
express some effects of love more to them, then others, as being special
Instruments of procuring greater good to us then our friends are. 12. To do
all the Honor we can to him: and all the service we can to others for his
sake. 13. In nothing to seek temporal commodity: but only to please him. 14.
To imitate him in all his Perfections that are imitable: and particularly for
his sake to love others with the like freedom of love vvherwith he has loved
us, not seeking any commodity to himself thereby. 15. To endeavor to serve him
the best we can: and yet vvithall to rejoice that he is served more perfectly
by others. 16. To serve and love him only, in the service and Love that we
show to Superiors, Equals or Inferiors. 17. To resolve never to accept of
any Contentment but in him: nor other happiness but only Him: And therefore not
to rest with affection in any of his gifts, but only in himself. 18. Never to
set bounds to the measure of our Love: but still to endeavor to love him more
and better. 19. To desire to suffer for him here: being for the present
contented with hope only of enjoying for the future. 20. To hate our selves,
our corrupt natures, our insensiblenes of his goodness etc. with a most perfect
hatred: Never being weary in persecuting and mortifying our selves. 21. To
love him equally in his commands, as in his rewards. 22. To congratulate and
take contentment in any Act of temporal severity exercised by him on us. 23.
Never to cease praying that God would show us the defectuousnes of our love,
and that he would daily give us grace more and more to increase it both in the
degrees of Fervor and Purity. 24. To transcend in loving him all thoughts of
our selves and of our own happiness etc. These are marks, signs and Fruits
of pure Charity: But alas, where shall we find a soul that can show them
all? Howeuer we are to aspire to as many of these Perfections as may be: and
to be resigned in our Imperfections, since such is Gods permission.

4. Among all the Expressions of our Love to God, those which are generally
the most proffitable for us are. 1. To depend with an entire confidence on
him, both as to our temporal subsistence, and spiritual progress: Not
relying on our own cares or endeauours, but casting our care on him: Living a
Life of Faith. 2. To have hearts not only obedient to his commands, but
inwardly affected to them, so that though they be never so contrary to our
corrupt natures, yet to account the obeying him to be both our necessary and
most delicious meat and drink. 3. To practice a perfect Resignation to his
will in all occurrents that befall us to suffer. These are secure Testimonies
of our love: because they do exclude the interests of nature: Whereas oftimes
Affectiue Love is mingled with natural gusts and complacency.

5. Now though this most secure practice of Love by Abnegation and
Annihilation of all Propriety and self will be at the beginning full of
difficulty: because all the comfort of Nature lies in Self will: yet by
custom it will be less uneasy, and in the end delightful. For most certain
it is that Christ's Yoke by constant bearing becomes easy.

6. The smallest Act of Love and Service to God performed with a perfect
Selfe-abnegation is more acceptable and precious in his Eyes, then the vvorking
of a thousand Miracles, or the Conversion of Nations, if in these there are
mixed interests of Nature.

7. In a word, the Difference betvveene Heaven and Hell is, that Hell is full
of nothing but Se^fe-loue and Propriety: vvheras there is not the least degree
of either in Heaven, nor any thing but the Fullfilling of Gods will, and
seeking of his Glory: This is the Beatitude of all Saints and Angels: And no
other way do they, or can they love them selves, but by loving God only.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. 2. 3. 4. Of Charity, as it is the same with Purity of Intention. How God
is the only End of all our Actions. Of a Pure and a Right Intention.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. 9. Instructions how to get Purity of Intention: Especially by the
means of Prayer.

. 10. The dangerous State of those that do not practice Prayer.

. 11. 12. Of the Exercise of Offering our Daily Actions and sufferings: and how
far such an Exercise may conduce to Purity of Intention.

. 13. Rules prescribed by a late Contemplative Author, not much approved.

. 14. 15. Other Aduices.

. 16. 17. etc. Difference of Purity of Intention in Contempl^tiue and Active
livers, etc.

WE will now consider Charity under another Notion, as it is the Directour
of all our Actions, and so it is called Purity of Intention: By which we do
refer all that we do or suffer to the Love and Glory of God: which is of
all other the most necessary Condition. For God rewards no deeds but such as
are done purely for his sake. So that whatsoever other End we propose,
which is not Subordinate to this, makes the Action so far unacceptable to him.

2. I say, Subordinate: for doubtless there are and must needs be, besides this,
other immediate Ends and Intentions of many of our Actions, as the Temporal or
Spiritual good of our selves on others: But we are not to rest in those
inferior Ends, but to refer both the Actions and them also finally unto God.
So our Savior commanded S. Peter to give Tribute money, least the Jews should
be offended.

3. Whereas therefore some Spiritual Authors do advise us to exclude the
thought of all other Ends but only Gods Glory, from all our doings: yea so far,
as that they would not scarce permit one in Praying to mention himself
(Saying, O that I could love thee, O my God etc.) We are to suppose their
meaning to be that, considering how forvvard and subtle Nature is to intrude
it self and its interests in our best Actions, even to the Exclusion of God
(though we pretend otherwise:) therefore being so imperfect as we are, our
best course were to study (as much as may be with discretion) to forget our
selves quite, and all other creatures. But surely if we were Perfect, we
might without vvrong to God, yea with the increase of our Love to him, cast
an eye on all intermediate Ends.

4. Harphius makes a difference betvveene a Right Intention and a Pure
Intention: The former he appropriates to good Active Livers, who according to
the Substance of their Actions, and general purpose of their Hearts do indeed
in all things desire to seek Gods Glory: But yet for want of the practice of
Pure Spiritual Prayer, they mix many undiscovered Designs of nature in their
good Actions, the which do so far abase the value of them. But the Intention
of Perfect Contemplative livers he calls a Simple or Pure Intention, because it
proceeds from a purified Interior.

5. Now for the obtaining of such a Pure and Simple Intention I will
endeavor, according to my small experience and the best Light that God has
given me, to yield the best Information and help I can, in the follovving
Instructions, the which do properly belong to souls in a Contemplative
Course. And they are to be regarded, and use in particular made of them, only
so far as Devout Souls shall find them to be proper and proffitable for them
in particular, and as they are suitable to their Divine Calls respectively, the
which are much more to be regarded then all humane Instructions.

6. First therefore let a vvellminded Soul that leads an internal life, by
reading, conferring, considering and praying, get to understand the best she
can, what the true and Perfect love of God is, and vvherin it consists.

7. Secondly, this being done, let her (by the Grace of God assisting her)
seriously purpose with her self (yet so as that she do not fetter herself
by any Vows or Obligations) by all the best means she can to labor for the
attaining to the said Love of God: and also purely for Gods sake and to his
Glory, and no natural Interests of her own, to intend the doing and suffering
of all things that she shall afterward do or suffer.

8. Thirdly Since this Love is only to be obtained by the means of Prayer and
Mortification, let her resolve to abide in the prosecution of these according
to the Directions here given, to her lives End: Not voluntarily resting in any
degree of love already attained, but still proceeding further without all
limits. And this good Resolution let her accordingly with courage put in
execution daily; Often renewing it when she finds herself to become slack or
negligent.

9. Lastly in the Execution of these Duties and of all other her Employments,
she must alvvaies have at least a vertuall Intention of directing them all to
God, making him the final End of all: and often times likewise she must frame
an Actual Intention of the same. Now when God is indeed, and in the true
disposition of the soul the End of her Actions, he communicates a
Supernaturality and a kind of Divinity unto them: And unless he be truly the
End, they have no merit at all.

10. Now it being certain that only by the practice of Internal Prayer this
Purity of Intention can be obtained: In what danger are those Souls that do
wholy neglect it? Neither will a fevv interrupted occasional Offerings of
our Actions to God be sufficient to procure a Stable habit of such Purity,
without constant set Exercises of Prayer and Mortification: All the virtue
that such Oblations have, is a little to diminish the Impurity of those
particular Actions, but they do not at all (or very inconsiderably) increase
or strengthen the Habit of Divine Love in the Soul. The virtue therefore of
such Acts is to be measured according to the state that the soul is in.

11. If an Internal liver do practice such occasional Offerings of daily
Actions, I should advise him 1. Not to multiply such Acts too thick one upon
the other, so as to endanger to hurt the Head, or distract the Imagination, or
hinder the necessary liberty of Spirit. 2. Let not them be a hindrance to other
more perfect and proffitable Eleuations of the Spirit to God, or Aspirations,
if the soul find herself invited thereto, or if they be rellishing to her.

12. It is unquestionable, that the offering of our sufferings to God will be
far more proffitable to the soul, then the Offering of mere Works, that have
in them little or nothing contrary to our Natural Inclinations. Yet even that
also without constant Prayer will be of little force.

13. I dare with confidence profess, that the observing of the foresaied
Simple Directions will be far more available to the procuring Purity of
intention in most souls, then such a curious Examination of our daily works
as is prescribed by a late worthy Contemplative of our Nation, who requires
in every work Six Qualities punctually to be observed, viz. That it be done.
1. Actually: 2. One^y. 3. Willingly: 4. Assuredly: 5. Clearly: 6. Speedily for
the Love and Glory of God: And he exacts of a soul, carefully to search
whether any of these Conditions have been vvanting, and consequently to be
more circumspect in the future. Which surely would be an Employment extremely
distractiue, and full of Solicitude. Though it may be he himself found much
good by such a practice, and was able to do it with Simplicity.

4. It is far more easy for an Imperfect soul to exercise Purity of Intention
in Actions that are of obligation, and done either in Order to any Law, or any
command of Superiors, then in those that are left to her own Choice: And
therefore it would be good for such an one, either to have her daily and
ordinary Employments prescribed to her by her Spiritual Directour; or to
ordain them to her self upon good consideration before hand: yet so as not to
prejudice due Liberty of Spirit.

15. In every Recollection the soul does either directly and expressly, or at
least vertually renew her first Fundamental Purpose of tending in all her
Actions, External and Internal, to the perfect Love of God: and then also she
discovers and corrects such defects and transgressions of this Purpose as
have passed out of the times of Prayer. Our Recollections therefore are the
Fountain and Root whence all our future works have their virtue and merit:
and in them Purity of Intention is most perfectly Exercised.

16. The doings or sufferings of a Contemplative liver, though often times with
much repugnancy in inferior Nature, yet do partake more of Purity of
Intention and Merit, then the voluntary Actions of Active livers, or of one
that does not constantly pursue Internal Prayer: albeit the actions of these
do seem to be done with greater alacrity and facility, and to the doer seem
to proceed purely out of Charity, and vvithall cause great admiration in the
eyes of the Beholders: The reason is, because the Actions of the former are
done purely out of a Divine Inspiration, and also in great Simplicity and
unity, their regard to God being not hindered by the Images accompanying such
Actions: Whereas Active livers immediately contemplate Multiplicity: Yea in
Prayer it self they are not without Multiplicity, though they do direct that
Multiplicity more directly to one, then in Actions out of Prayer.

17. Now since Purity of Intention consists in regarding God with Simplicity,
that is, without mixture of Images, or affections to Creatures, it concerns
Internal livers to use as great care and Discretion as may be, not to intrude
themselves unnecessarily into Distractiue Employments.

18. Even the most Perfect Souls are apt to have less Purity of Intention in
things grateful to Nature, then in such as are Mortifying: Therefore in the
former they may do well to frame an Actual upright Intention.

19. The repugnancy that Contemplative livers do find oftimes in the discharge
of External Employments, proceeds not so much out of any unvvillingnes to
obey, as out of an auersnes from leaving their Internal Solitude and
Abstraction: Yet such repugnancy in inferior Nature is easily subdued, at
least so far that it shall not be a hindrance to Obedience and Duty.

20. True Purity of Intention, is best discerned in the beginning of an Action:
For ordinarily we set upon External works out of a sudden impulse and
liking of Nature: And afterward we cosen our selves with a forced good
intention fastened upon them, so thinking that in them we do purely seek the
glory of God, and faintly renouncing our interests of Nature. It is indeed
better to do thus, then to continue such Actions upon the same Motives upon
which they were begun. But no Actions are perfectly Meritorious and pure, but
such as have for their first Principle a Divine Light and impulse, and are
continued in virtue of the same.

21. Therefore a certain Ancient holy Hermit was accustomed before he set
upon any work, to make a pause for some time, like one whose thoughts were
busied about some other matter: And being asked why he did so: He ansvvered:
All our Actions are in themselves nothing worth. But like a rough unshapen
piece of Timber, they have no Gracefullnes in them unless we adorn and guild
them over with a Pure Intention, directing them to the Love and Glory of God.
Or as one that is to shoot at a Mark, does first carefully fix his eye upon
it, otherwise he will shoot at random: So do I fix my Eye upon God who is to
be our only Mark: and for this reason before I begin any work, I do
seriously offer it to God, begging his assistance.

22. Active livers had need in almost all their Actions of moment to frame an
Actual Intention: but not so the Contemplative, who are alvvaies habitually
united to God: For such iterations of Actual intention would cause too much
distraction to them.

23. To Conclude, how difficult and uneasy soever to Nature the attaining to
Purity of Intention be, because thereby the very Soul of Corrupt Nature (which
is Propriety) is rooted out: Yet since it is absolutely necessary in an
Internal life, therefore considering Gods promise, that he never will be
vvanting to our Endeauours, Souls of good wills will find it neither
impossible, nor of so great Difficulty, as at first it appeared, if they will
attempt it with a strong Resolution. To quicken and fortify which
Resolution, I will end this Discourse with that peircing saying of Harphius:
O how great and hidden deceits of Corrupt Nature will appear (says he) and be
discovered (and consequently be severely punished) after this life, for that
Souls have not here been purified and made Deiforme in their Intentions. God
Almighty give us the grace to discover now and reform this perilous and
secret selfe-seeking of Nature, to the Glory of his Holy Name. AMEN.

CHAP. V.
. 1. 2. Of the Loving of God in our selves and other Creatures. And how the
love to our selves is to be Ordered.

. 3. Even that love which is Duty in Hea^hens etc. is defectuous.

. 4. We can not love others truly and meritoriously, till we first love God.

. 5. 6. 7. All Affections not proceeding from Charity are to be mortified.

. 8. All Intellectual Creatures are the Objects of our Charity, except the
damned Souls and Devils.

. 9. Of the Order of Charity.

. 10. 11. 12 13. 14. Those are most to be loved (even above our selves) whom
God loves most: Yet certain Duties proceeding from love, as Honor,
Sustenance, Alms etc. are first, to be extended to Parents, Friends etc, and
specially to our Selves.

. 15. 16. 17. Further Proofs of this.

. 18. Whether Beauty etc. may be a Motive of Love.

. 19. 20. 21. 22. Of love extended to Enemies. Who are esteemed Enemies.

. 23. Great Grace required to practice this Duty aright.

. 24. 25. Degrees of love to (supposed) Enemies. And the fruits thereof.

. 26 Of a Special kind of love called Philadelphia, or love of the Fraternity
of Beleiuing, Holy, Christian Catholics.

1. BEFORE We end the Subject of Divine Love something is to be said of Love
to our Selves, and our Neighbors in and for God: For as for the love which
out of God we bear to our Selves, or any others, it is not vvorth the
treating of, as being altogether defectuous and grounded in Nature; And the
more vehement it is, the more defectuous is it.

2. The right Ordring therefore of. Our love to our Selves and our Brethren
consists in this 1. That the Motive of our love must be the Divine will and
Command. 2. The ground thereof must be the relation in which we stand to God,
as capable of the Communication of Divine Graces and Beatitude. 3. The End must
be to bring our Selves and others (either by our Endeauours, Exhortaions etc.
or by our Prayers) to God, that he may be loved and Glorified by us: in the
doing of which consists our Perfection and Happiness. 4. Lastly the subject of
this Love must be the Superior will especially: As for tenderness of nature,
distracting sollicitudes and unquiet images in the mind touching those we
love, the best and safest course would be to mortify and diminish them as much
as may be, as proceeding from a natural sensual affection, the which as far
as it does not flow from the Superior soul, and is not subordinate and
directed to the love of God, is defectuous.

3. Hence appears First, That affections in Persons that are strangers from
the true Faith, are full of defectuousnesse in all the particular respects
before mentioned. For though, for example, the love which Children owe to
their Parents, and the affections mutually due betvveene Husbands and Wives
etc: be for the substance according to the Law of Nature, and right reason: and
consequently so far conformable to the Divine Will: so that the want or
refusal of such love, and the neglect of the Duties and Offices required by
such relations is a great sin: yet there can b^ no merit either in such love,
or the effects of it, by reason that it is neither from the Motive of Divine
Charity, nor directed to the Glorifying of God by perfect love, from which all
merit proceeds.

4. Secondly it follows from hence, that we can neither meritoriously love
our selves, nor our Brethren, till first we are firmly rooted in the love of
God: because Charity to our selves, or others, is indeed only love to God by
Reflection, or the loving of God in things belonging to him, and which he
either loves or may love.

5. Therefore an Internal liver ought to mortify all sensual affection to
creatures; I mean, all particular freindships and intimacies which are not
grounded upon the necessary foundation of the Divine Love: And as for such
affections as are necessarily due by virtue of some respects and relations that
God has put betvveene our selves and any others, such an one ought, as much as
may be, to root them out of the sensual portion of the soul: because there
they will cause great distractions and hindrances of our most necessary love
to God.

6. A serious care to practice according to this Advice is very necessary,
especially in Religious Co^munities, both for our own good and others. For
besides that sensual freindships grounded on external or sensual respects
are most unbeseeming Persons that have consecrated themselves only to God, and
infinitely prejudicial to abstraction and recollectednes of mind: and much more
if they be between Persons of different sexes: such particular intimatcies
cannot choose but cause particulities, factions, particular designs etc: to the
great disturbance and harm of the Community.

7. The least defectuous amongst the grounds of a particular friendship may be
the resentment and gratitude for benefits, especially spiritual ones, that
have been received. But yet even in this case also, we ought to prevent the
settling of amity in the sensual part of the soul, and content our selves
with requiting such obligations by our Prayers, or by a return of
proportionable benefits.

8. Now Charity is to be extended to all Intellectual Creatures, that is, to
all Angels, and all men whether alive or dead: except only the reprobate
Angels and damned souls, which are not objects of our Charity, in as much as
they are not capable of enjoying God, which is the ground of Charity. And the
effects of our Charity to the glorified Saints and Angels must be a
congratulation with them for their happiness, and for the love which they
bear to God, and which God will eternally bear reciprocally to them. To all
Christians dying in the faith of our Lord, and not yet purified, we must
testify our Charity by Praying for them, and doing all other Christian Offices
of sacrifices, Alms etc: for the asswaging and shortning of their sufferings in
Purgatory. For all Christians alive, yea all men, we must pray for graces
suitable to their necessities: for conversion to vnbeleiuers or misbeleiuers,
and also all those that are of ill lives: for increase of grace to those that
are in a good state: with whom likewise we must rejoice for the mercies of
God shevved to them; and beg Eternal happiness to all; Neither must we rest
in mere desiring such blessings to all men (our neighbors) but also upon
occasions offered, do all we can to procure, of effect the things we pray
for, by Exhortations, Reproves etc. And if to others, much more must we
express all these effects of Charity to our selves. And as for temporal Good
things (as they are called) we are to desire (and procure) both for our
selves and others, so much of them as God knovves shall be best for the
advancement of our souls in his love.

9. Notvvithstanding though the same Charity ought to be extended to all, yet
not in the same order nor degree, but to some more then others; and to some
also c^rtaine effects of it, which are not due to others. Now how to
determine this order and degrees, though the disputes of many about it are very
intricate, yet if we stand firm to the ground before laid, viz. (That only
God is to be loved by us in and for himself, and our selves with all other
creatures, only for and in God) it will not be difficult to clear this point
sufficiently.

10. It is evident that some effects and expressions of love are due to
Parents, Brethren etc: which belong not to strangers; and some to Superiors,
which are not proper for Inferiors or equals: and much more to husbands and
Wives, which are not due to any other: yet Love generally taken is due to all.
Now our love to Creatures being, as I said, only the love of God as reflected
^^ reuerberated upon those that belong to him, this variety of effects of love
is according to the various impressions of the Divine Perfections in several
of his Creatures: For besides his Graces and beatitude, which are common alike
to all (at least, of which all are capable) and consequently the objects of
our love; God in the first place (as being his own being and nearest to
himself) has in a small degree imprinted being in us, the conservation and
perfectionating of which being ought to be the first object of our desires and
endeauours. Again, God as a Creator and cause of being is imperfectly
exemplified in our Parents, and for that reason our Parents next to our selves
may challenge our affections; and besides our affections, reverence, and
gratitude in providing for their subsistence, as they formerly did for ours,
(except when public good interposes:) Again God as an universal supreme
Governor has imprinted the Character of, his power in Superiors, for which
besides love, we owe them Obedience and respect etc: In the paying of which
Duties we are not to rest with our minds and affections in any of these, but
to pass through the^ to God in whom resides that perfection in an infinite
plenitude, for which we express the said respective offices to several of
his creatures so that it is the universal Creator that we honor in our
Parents: and the supreme King of Kings that we obey in Magistrates etc.

11. But moreover we are to consider, that though no duty that we perform
has any merit, but as it proceeds from Charity, and is commanded and ordered by
it, yet Love as love, and the proper effect of Love as such, may be separated
from these duties: the which are to be paid, although we did not inwardly
love the persons to whom we pay them. Yea even in regard of God himself
we may distinguish these things.

12. Although God had no further relation to us then that we have our Being
from him: nay though we knevv not so much, yet if we knew how infinite his
Power, Wisdom, Dominion etc. were, we could not choose but admire his
Wisdom, tremble at his power etc. but these would not produce Love in us
toward him: the object of which must be good, that is, such Perfections as
are aimable and render a subject beautiful or agreeable; and vvithall there
must be a possibility, at least in the imagination, that the person loving may
in some sort participate of such Perfections. Now in God there being
aknovvledged all the possible Perfections that can compose an inconceiuable
Pulchritude, and moreover he having signified his readiness to communicate unto
us by an affectiue Identification or Union all those Perfections, if we will
approach unto him by love, so requiting the love which he first bears to us:
This is it that makes God properly the object of our love. To which purpose S.
John says, that God loved us first, not because we deserved it, but to the
end to make us deserve his love, and because we were his Creatures capable
of enjoying his perfections and happiness: and we love him, because he loved us
first, proposing himself and his happiness to be enjoyed by love. But because
we are not to look upon God as a friend standing upon even terms, but
infinitely supereminent and exalted above us, therefore with Love we pay most
submisse Obedience, Adoration, Humiliation of our selves, Admiration etc. with
regard to his other Perfections and Relations: the which duties are only
meritorious because proceeding from love: and they proceed from love, because
these other perfections are the perfections of a friend, and such as, in all
our needs, shall be exercised and employed for our good.

13. Proportionally in Creatures, those are most to be loved in whom the
qualities, producing love do most reside; or in regard of which especially
we love God, and God us, that is, Goodness, Purity, Justice, Charity and the
like. Or which is all one, we are by a pure affection of Charity (simply
considered as Charity) to love those most, that God loves most, and in whose
souls God by his graces, deserving love, does most perfectly dvvell, and
which most partake of his happiness. The supreme object therefore of our Charity
among Creatures is the most blessed Humanity of our Lord: and next thereto his
Heavenly Virgin Mother: and after them the Heavenly Angels and Blessed Saints:
And on earth the most perfect of Gods Children.

14. Now though this Assertion does seem to contradict the common opinion,
that Charity is to begin after God with our selves, and that after our
selves it is to be next extended to those that have the nearest relations of
nature etc. to us: yet indeed it does not. For although the affection of
Charity simply considered in it self, is only to regard God, and for his sake
those that have near relation to him, and are most like him in the Graces
properly deserving Love: Yet several effects of Charity and of other virtues
or qualities in us flowing from Charity are in the first place, after God, to
be exhibited to our selves; and afterward to those that God has placed near
to us, respectively according to the degrees of nearnes.

15. For Charity being an affection rather of the Will, then the sensitive
faculties, seems to be a certain esteem and value set upon persons; and
consequently an adhesion of the will, and tendance to an internal union of
Spirit with them. Now questionless this esteem though due to all, (in as
much as all either do, or may participate of God graces and happiness) yet in
the highest degree of it, it is most due to those that most deserve it, or that
are most like unto God. So that to value our selves or any mortal friends or
kindred before the Glorified Saints, would be irrational and unseemly:
Charity would then be disorderly, contrary to what the Holy Ghost says,
(Ordinauit in me Charitatem) He has fitly and duly ordered Charity in me. True
it is, that by reason of self-love and selfe-interest (which is never wholy
rooted out of us in this life) as likewise the great dominion that sensitive
nature often takes in our actions, we can hardly prevent or hinder love from
shevving a greater regard to our selves and our nearest friends; yet as far as
it is an affection of the will, so it may, yea in perfect souls it is stronger
toward those that are nearest to God.

16. But as for some special Offices and duties which in us do, or ought to
flow from Charity, they are to be exhibited according as God has placed
persons in several relations to us. Now it being evident, that God has made
us nearest to our selves, and has entrusted to every particular person the
care of his own soul before all others; therefore every one is obliged to
bestovv his chief solicitude and endeauours upon the adorning of his own
soul, and the directing of it to Happiness. As for other men, certain general
duties of this nature are upon occasions only to be exhibited toward all:
Hence we are generally commanded to Exhort, Edify, Reproove etc. one an
other: But these duties are to be the employment and particular charge only of
those that God has called to the care of souls: yet so as that no souls are
so strictly entrusted to any one, as his own, so that upon no pretense can it
be lavvfull for any one to neglect the care of his own soul. And in the
exte^ding of these offices of spiritual (or corporal) Charity, reason
requires that (other circumstances being equal) we should prefer those
that have nearest relation to us: except when strangers do stand in far
greater necessity, for they are then to be accounted as nearest to us, and as
it were, committed to our Charge.

17. Therefore external works of Charity and other offices, though they ought
all to be paid out of Charity (Honor, to whom honor is due; Fear, to whom
Fear etc.) Yet they are not to follow the order of Charity, but of Proximity:
so that in equal necessity, we are to prefer our Parents, kindred, near
neighbors, special friends, in regard of giving Alms etc: before those that
may challenge the preference in the affection of Pure Charity, as being more
Holy and more beloved of God. It may notvvithstanding happen that in some cases
there may be a doubt how the order of Charity is to be observed. But a soul
that follows internal Prayer will not want a light to direct her. To give
particular rules would be tedious and impertinent to the present design: This
therefore may suffice concerning the order of Charity in general.

18. It may be demanded, Whether external corporal endowments, as youth,
beauty, gracefullnes etc: may be permitted to enter as a motive into the love
that we bear to others? I answer, that such corporal perfections being
Gifts of God, may lavvfully, as such, be motives of love, namely, to those that
are so perfect, as that they can use them as steps to asce^d by them to a
higher and purer love of God in and for them, who is beauty it Self. But as
for imperfect and sensual Persons it would be unlawful and a tempting of God
to give a free and deliberate scope to their love of others (specially of
different sexes) for the regard of beauty: since we know it will powerfully
withdraw their affections from God, and fix them on creatures after the
fovvlest manner. Therefore the necessary care of our selves requires, that we
should not so much as look stavedly and fixedly on the tentation of beauty;
much less favor the attraction of it.

19. Before we conclude this so necessary a point concerning Charity: some
what is to be said touching the most Christian duty of love to our Enemies,
True it is that the love of Christ will not permit us to exercise enmity
toward any Person in the least degree, since Charity is to be universally
extended to all: But enemies I call those that are in their nature auerse from
us, or incensed by some provocation; or that are indeed enemies to our Holy
Profession, or that would dravv us to sin etc.

20. As for these latter sort of enemies, they are indeed truly such; and their
actions we must abhor, and also with discretion avoid their company: but
we must not hate their persons, nor be vvanting in any office of Charity
toward them, when occasion is offered.

21. But touching the former sort, of those that (as it is to be hoped)
without an utter breach of Charity, do in external matters do ill offices
to us, or are contrary to our designs: such we ought to esteem as indeed
our friends: and perhaps if we regard the proffit of our souls, we could
less spare them, then those we call our most officious friends, who do but
flatter or nourish self-love in us. It is only as to the feeling of nature
that we esteem such to be enemies: But really we are to behave our selves
toward them as Gods Instruments for our great good: Yea and as far as prudence
will permit, we are to judge and believe that they love us, and intend our
good in things that they do cross to our nature.

22. Now till we come to a perfect simplicity of thought (which will not be
till we approach to a state of Perfection:) we must be careful neither by
words nor deeds to procure them the least harm in any kind: no not so much as
in thought to vvish it them. On the contrary, we must love them still; and
principally for this, because God loves them, and desires their salvation:
which (it is to be hoped) he will effectually procure.

23. But to do an office so necessary, yet vvithall so contrary to the
inclinations of corrupt nature, a great measure of grace is requisite: the
which is not to be had without answerable efficacious Internal Prayer
seriously pursued: the which joined with good carriage toward them forth of
the times of Prayer, will in time abstract the soul from inferior passions,
and that inordinate self-love, which is the root of hatred to such enemies:
And Divine Love increasing, it will proportionally subdue all other affections
to it self, and even compel us to love our enemies for God, according to the
most perfect example of our Savior. And he that thinks to get this necessary
love to Enemies (or indeed any other Christian virtue) in any considerable
perfection without spiritual Prayer, will find that he will loose his
labor.

24. The Degrees of our love to (supposed) enemies are such as follovv: 1. The
first and lowest degree is, not to revenge our selves on them, nor to render
evil for evil, by word or deed, in their presence or absence, privily or
publicly etc: (Indeed we ought to behave our selves vvith-much vvarines
toward those that in nature we find an auersenes from: so as that it we
cannot as yet conquer the resentments of nature, we were best to eschew
meddling in matters that concern them) 2. Not to be angry or offended for any
ill offices that they may seem to have done us. 3. To forgive them whensoever
they crave pardon. 4. To forgive them before they acknowledge their fault, or
seek to make amends. 5. Not to be contristated at their Prosperity, nor deny
any offices of Charity to them: but to Pray for them, to speak well of them;
and to do kindnesses to them; to congratulate for any good successes of
theirs, and be cordially sorry for their misfortunes etc: 6. To seek occasions
of doing them some special good; yea and for the procuring such good, to
undergo some discommodity, loss or prejudice. 7. To take part in their
prosperities or adversities, as if they were our own. 8. After the example
of our Lord, to hazard and even lay down our lives for their souls good. 9.
To conquer all resentment eue^ in inferior Nature: And in Simplicity of soul
to judge all their ill offices to be effects of their Charity, and not
auersenes. (Yet I doubt whether even in the most perfect, the love to enemies
can come to be transfused into inferior nature from the superior soul, as
our love immediately to God sometimes may be.) 10. To do all this purely for
the love of God. These things we ought to do the best we can: and God
will accept of our good will, though our actions be not so perfect as we
would vvish they were.

25. By such Christian and Charitable behavior toward our Enemies, such a
Divine virtue will proceed from our actions, that we shall come to gain
the^ perhaps to be our best friends, yea (which is far more considerable) we
shall probably gain them to God, if before they we estranged from him.

26. To conclude this whole discourse: We are to know that there is a
peculiar species of Charity, which S. Peter makes the next step to Perfection,
which he calls Philadelphiam, or love of the Fraternity: Being a certain
spiritual affection to all Gods children, the which subdues all other
inferior regards of nature, and makes our union with them to be purely in
God, transcending all other kinds of obligations: And the offices of this
virtue are such as cannot be extended to any, but such as we know to be
truly the servants of God: such as are an inward communion in holy Duties of
Prayer etc: and a communication of certain charitable offices, which out of an
ardent love to God we desire to express to him, by a choice that we make
of his special friends, as it were in them endeavoring to oblige him after a
more then ordinary manner.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. Of the mortification of sensual love to meats etc: by Temperance in
Refection.

. 23. This is a lasting, continual Tentation, even to the most perfect; And
therefore to be especially regarded.

. 4. Defects in Refection which are to be avoided.

. 5. Of Disaffection to sensual pleasures, to be aspired to.

. 6. Feasting to be avoided.

. 7. 8. 9. Inconveniences inseparably attending Refection. Yet are we not
therefore to abridge our selves of a necessary measure of sustenance.

. 10. 11. Aduices touching care to be had in Refection.

. 12. The body to be esteemed an enemy.

. 13. In what case and how we may seek more delicate meats etc.

. 14. Certain benefits to the soul by Refection.

. 15. The subtilty of tentations in Refection.

. 16. Perfect souls have an auersion from necessary pleasures and Refections.

. 17. 18. A sublime kind of mortification exercised by certain Holy persons.

. 19. Of Attention to Reading at Refections.

. 20. Of Physic.

. 21. 22. 23. 24. 25. Aduices touching Sleep.

1. THE Love of God is a sufficient and most efficacious universal Remedy
against all other inordinate affections: And therefore I should have contented
my self with that one general Mortification of the Passion of sensual love,
were it not that the matter of corporal Refection, and pleasure felt in
meats and drinks has something in it very considerable in aspirituall life,
and therefore requires particular Aduices about it: 1. Because it is a Tentation
which unavoidably accompanies us through our whole life, for as much as the
occasion of it, to wit, Food is absolutely necessary. 2. There i^ scarce any
tentation more subtle: For it does so cloak it self under the title of
necessity, that even the most perfect souls which have abandonned all other
occasions, yet being imprisoned in bodies that need daily Refection, are
continually exposed to this, and often surprised and in some measure overcome by
it: not being able to distinguish excess from necessi y Hence S. Augustine in
his Confessions (lib. 10. c. 13.) most elegantly yet passionatly complains of
it, describing the subtlenesse and importunatenes of this Tentation: Which
Passage, being commonly known and obuious, it is not necessary to set down
in this place.

2. The natural Appetite desires food merely for the sustaining of nature.
The sensual, merely for pleasure, not considering benefit either to soul or
body; nor regarding the seasonablenes of the time, nor any other due
circomstance; But the Rational appetite or Will directed by Grace, though it
cannot hinder sensuality from taking pleasure in food and: yet desires and
receives it out of a necessary care of supporting the body for the good of the
soul, according to the will and pleasure of God: and this in such order,
measure etc. as reason judges fit, and not as Sensuality would have it. So
that if the Rational part give way to the inordinate desires of sensuality,
so far there is a fault committed: the which is not to be imputed to
Sensuality, but to the Superior soul, whose office it is to restrain and
bridle Sense.

3. This tentation, as it is the last that is perfectly overcome, so it is the
first that is to be combatted against. For there is no virtue had (says
Cassian) till a soul come to have some degree of maistry over herself in the
point of Gluttony. And the maine mischeife of the tentation is prevented, when
we are come to cast of the habitual affection to eating and drinking,
especially to feasting; the which brings many inconveniences to an Internal
liver; as 1. loss of time. 2. Peril of intemperance and other misbehauiour.
3. Hurtful distractions. 4. Indisposition to Prayer 5. Intemperance likewise
in another use of the tongue, to wit, talking etc.

4. Imperfecter souls therefore must make it their care in Refections to avoid
these special defects. To wit, Eating or Drinking. 1. Too much. 2. With too
great earnestnes. 3. Too hastily, preventing the due times. 4. Delicatly. 5.
With a precedent studiousnes to provide pleasing meats etc. In respect of the
two first qualities or defects, such souls may happen to offend, who yet in a
good measure have attained to a spiritual disesteeme and neglect of those
things that please sensuality; For they on occasions may be tempted to eat
with some excess and ardour. But rarely do such offend in the follovving
qualities.

5. Now the Marks by which a soul may discern whether she have in her a
disaffection to sensual pleasures, are. 1. If her chief delight and esteem
be in Exercises of the Spirit, and that she diligently pursues them. 2. If she
seeks not after, nor willingly admits extraordinary feastings. 3. If being
alone she does not entertain herself with the thought of such things, nor
talks of them with gust. 4. If when she is forced to take Refections, she
takes them as of necessity and duty. 5. If she could be content, so that Gods
will were such, to be deprived of all things that might please taste etc.

6. In case that necessary Ciuility shall oblige a spiritual person to be
present at a feast, he may do well to be vvatchfull over himself at the
beginning: And this he may the more easily do, because then others being more
eager to their meat, will less mark him. And to entertayne the time, which
is ordinarily long, let him choose such meats as are the lightest and of the
easiest digestion; For so doing, he may both seem to avoid singularity in
abstaining more then others, and yet in effect eat far less. In a word, let
him go thither with a mind and affection to abstinence, and retain such
affection.

7. This one unavoidable misery there is in eating and drinking, how
temperatly soever, That a soul for such a time, and for some space
afterward, is forced to descend from that height of Spirit that she had
attained to by virtue of her precedent Recollection. So that if before she had
a sight and experimental perception that God was all, and herself nothing;
she will afterward have no other sight of this, but her ordinary sight of
Faith: by reason that her Spirits are more active; and her internal senses
filled with Images and vapors.

8. Yet a soul is not to abridge herself of a necessary quantity in
Refection, for her Prayers sake, or other Internal Exercises: for that would
for a long time after do more harm to the spirit, by too much enfeebling the
body. Neither is she to judge that she has offended by excess, because she
finds a heaviness, and perhaps some indigestion for some space after Refection:
For this may proceed from that debility of complexion which ordinarily attends
a spiritual life: since, as S. Hildegardis says: The love of God does not
usually dwell in robustious bodies.

9. It is not our petty failings through frailty or ignorance, and much loss
our supposed failings (judged so by our scrupulosity) that can cause God to be
auerted from us, or that will hinder our union with him: For for such defects
we shall be attoaned with God in our next Recollections, or, it may be,
sooner. But those are indeed prejudicial defects which proceed from a settled
affection to sensual objects.

10. To correct the vice of Eagernes in eating, Abbot Isacius advised his
Monks, that when they stretched forth their hands for the receiving of their
meat or drink, they should do it with a certain mental unwillingness.

11. Let every one content himself with what God by Superiors prouides for
him, accounting that, how mean or course soever, to be the very best for him,
and not that which cannot be procured without solicitude and impatience.
Neither ought any to justify or excuse his impatience, out of an opinion of
obligation, that every one has to take care of the body for the service of the
spirit: For the spirit is far more endammaged by such impatience and
solicitude, then any thing they can desire for the body can do it good.

12. We have small reason to love the body; for it is that which one way or
other is the cause of almost all the sins which the soul commits. To cherish
therefore and satisfy its inordinate desires, is to make provision for sin, as
if our natural corruption did not sufficiently incline us thereto.

13. The infirmity of our body may sometimes require not only healthy, but also
well tasting meats: not for the satisfying of our sensuality, but the upholding
of our strength, as S. Augustine says. In which case meats of good relish,
even as such, may be sought for, yea ought to be so, and this for the
recreating and comforting of nature: And such corporal consolation may also
have a good effect upon the Spirit. But where no such necessity is, to seek
for such meats is against the Rules of Religious temperance. And even during
such necessity, to seek them either with solicitude, or so as may be
prejudicial to the Community, is contrary to Religious Poverty and Resignation.

14. As many defects and hindrances to spiritual progres do flow by
occasions of Refection: so on the contrary to vvell-minded souls it may be the
occasion of some advantages for their progress in Spirit. For 1. It obliges a
soul to vvatch and pray that she be not overcome by the Tentation. 2. It may
give occasion for the exercise of Patience in case of the want of things
contentfull to nature: as likewise of temperance in the use of them. 3. The
experience of our frequent excesses beyond true necessity, may afford great
matter for the Exercise of Humility. 4. By the means of Resection there is
given to souls certain pausings and diuersions from spiritual workings,
necessary to enable them (making good use thereof) to work afterward more
vigorously and intensely.

15. Vix perfectus discernit etc. (s^ith S. Gregory) A perfect soul does
scarce discern the secret Tentations, and subtle subreption of sensuality
urging souls to take more then necessity or obedience require: and the only
light necessary for such discerning comes from internal Prayer. And moreover
till the soul by Prayer be raised above sensuality, she cannot have strength
enough to resist all the inordinate desires thereof which she does discern.
And when souls are arrived to Perfect Prayer of Contemplation, they oppose
such desires rather by neglecting and forgetting the body, then by direct
combats against the appetits of it. And only from the decay and ignorance of
such Prayer has it proceeded, that spiritual Directours have been forced to
multiply such and so many nice obseruances about diet and other duties of our
Rule: All which notvvithstanding, without Prayer have but small effect to
produce solid virtues in the soul.

16. A soul perfectly spiritualized, if she might have her vvish, would
willingly be freed, not only from all pleasures taken in Refections,
(considering the daily tentations to excess:) but even from the necessity of
them, being forced to cry out with David (De necessitatibus meis erue me,
Domine) O Lord, free me from these my corporal necessities: for were it not
for them, she might alvvaies, like an Angel, be in continual Contemplation,
and enjoy a neuer-fayling internal light, the which is obscured by the fumes
raised even by the most temperate Refections: by which also passions are in
some degree quickened. Such souls may indeed properly be said to have a
disaffection to Refection. And the best way besides, and out of Prayer to
beget such disaffection, and to prevent the harms that may come from any
corporal necessities, will be not only to practice the mortifying of sensual
contentment in going to the Refectory, but upon serious consideration of the
Tentations there to be found, to go with a kind of vnvvillingnes and fear.

17. A most noble kind of Mortification in Refection is that mentioned by
Harphius of a certain Holy Brother of the Order of S. Francis, called
Rogerius, who by means of eleuating the powers of his soul and suspending
them in God during Refection, lost all perception of taste in eating; and when
he found himself unable so to eleuate his soul, he would for so long
forbear to eat of any thing that might afford any gust. But this practice
belongs only to the Perfect: it may prove prejudicial and dangerous to the
ordinary sort of less perfect souls, or any that have not an especial and
certain Inspiration to imitate it.

18. The like may be said of the manner of Mortification practiced by some of
the Ancient Hermits, who used to mix a fevv drops of oil (esteemed by them
a great delicacy) with their vinegar, to the end thereby to provoke the
appetite to desire more, the which they denied to it. Or of another, who
having received a bunch of grapes, ravenously devoured them, partly to make the
gustfull pleasure so much the shorter, and partly, (as he said) to cosen the
devil, to whom he desired to appear a glutton.

19. A soul that practices Internal Prayer may content herself with a
moderate Attention to what is read during Refection. And the like may be said
of that part of the Office which in some Communities is said immediately after
Dinner. Because too earnest an Attention and Recollectednes at such times
would prejudice the Head and Stomach. A Soul therefore may esteem this to be
as a time of Desolation: as indeed there is some resemblance.

20. Concerning the use of Physic, and cautions to be used about it: some
Instructions shall be given in the last Treatise, where we come to speak
how a soul is to behave herself in regard of her Prayer, during Sickness.

21. Lastly the matter of Sleep is not vvnvvorthy the ear of a Spiritual
Person. For certain it is that a full repast does not so much plunge a soul
in sensuality, nor so indispose her for Spiritual Exercises, as a long and
profound Sleep: From whence even a perfect soul will not be able to raise
herself into Exercises of the Spirit without much difficulty and long
striving.

22. And on these grounds doubtless it was, that the Mi^night Office was
appointed, to the end to interrupt S^eepe. Yea anciently the three Nocturnes
were therefore divided, namely to prevent the immersing of souls in sensual
Nature.

23. For imperfect souls, it may be very prejudicial for them to be deprived
of a convenient measure of Sleep: Yet it is (...) ^eing it should be
interrupted. It is li^evvise good for them to go to bed with an affection and
desire so be early up for such an affection will cause their Sleep to be
mixed with a little Solicitude, the which will dispose them both to wake
sooner, and to rise with less vnvvillingnes.

24. In case that one being in Bed cannot sleep, it is v^ry dangerous to
continue in a State of mere negligence and Idleness, because then not only vain
but very hurtful and pernicious thoughts will be apt to press into the mind.
For a prevention or remedy against which, I should by no means advise one to
betake himself to any seriously. Recollected thoughts or exercises of
Devotion: for that would quite hinder Sleep for the future, and spoil the
next Days Recollections. (The like I say of the time immediately going before
Bedtime.) But in case they be simply Vain Thoughts that then wander
vnsetledly in his mind, let him not willingly pursue them, but rather neglect
them. Whereas if they be sinful Imaginations, set him as well as he can divert
quietly his mind from them, and now and then without much force lift up his
mind unto God, or use some familiar Prayers, or say the Beads without much
forced Attention: yet more Attention is required against Sinful then vain
thoughts.

25. As for Perfect souls, their Prayer in such a Case will less hinder
Sleep, by reason it is both so pure and so facile, that it is become almost as
Natural as breathing, and performed without any agitation of the Spirits, or
reuoluing of Images in the Internal senses.

CHAP. VII.
. 1. Of the Mortification of Anger by Patience.

. 2. 3. 4. 5. Here is treated of Smaller Impatiences chiefly scarce obseruable
but by Recollected livers.

. 6. Patience to be exercised at all times: Even in Joy and Prosperity.

. 7. 8. 9. We ought to aspire to an Indifference.

. 10. Patience toward God afflicting us, is easier then toward Man.

. 11. 12. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. Seven Degrees of Patience.

. 19. Examples of seemingly Extrauagant kinds of Patience etc.

. 20. Prayer the only Efficacious Instrument to get Patience.

. 21. All Actions except actual Prayer, are in some degree defectuous.

1. THE next Passion to be mortified is Anger, the which whosoever willingly
suffers to arise and increase, or that deliberatly yields to trouble of mind
for any matter that concerns the Body, Health, Fortunes, Life etc, yea or
pretended souls good: such an one really makes more esteem of them then of
the solid good of his Soul: For as far as Anger gets a Maistery over him, so
far he looses that Dominion that his Soul ought to have over all other things,
and puts Reason out of its Throne: Herupon our Savior says, In patientia
vestra possidebitis animas vestras: That is, By Patience ye shall keep the
Possession of your Souls: as implying, that by Impatience we loose that
possession: And what greater loss can we have? Hence it is also that almost
in all Languages he that is in any great impatience, is said to be out of
himself.

2. Now the Aduices which I shall give for the repressing of Impatience do
not regard those great excesses of Fury too common in the world, though it is
to be hoped, unknown in an Internal State: But only those lesser inordinate
Passions of Impatience and irresignation, or those smaller Impetuosities of
nature which may sometimes befall devout Souls, by which the necessary Peace
of mind is disturbed, the habit of Propriety increased, and the merit even of
our best works of Obligation diminished.

3. As we said that Love (which is the Root of all other Passions and
Affections) is due only to and for God; so consequently all Passions contrary
to Love, all Auersions, impatiences etc. are to be directed only against that
which is directly contrary to God: the which no Persons are, nor no Actions
or sufferings, which are not sinful. Therefore all such Passions against any
Persons whatsoever, or any accidents be falling us from any, are inordinate
and sinful, to the proportion and measure of the said Passions.

4. Even the most Solitary liver will not have reason to complain of want of
occasions to exercise Patience: For besides the Crosses happening by Gods
Providence from without (against which all impatience is interpretatiuely
impatience against God himself:) A soul aspiring to Perfection must observe
even the smallest Motions passing in the heart, the which will be apt to rise
even against the vilest Creatures, as vermin, flies etc. yea inanimate things,
as Penns, Ink etc. There are also certain Propensions in the will without
any perceptible Motion about the heart, so secret and subtle that they can
hardly be expressed, the which perfect Souls by the Light proceeding from
Prayer, do discern and contradict. None are wholy free from these
inordinations; even the most quiet natures will find unequal inclinations,
which they ought to mortify.

5. Such is the difference, says Cassian, between a Perfect Internal liver
and one that is imperfect, as there is between a Cleare-sighted man and one
that is purblind. A purblind man in a room sees only the grosser things, as
Chaires, Tables etc. but takes no notice of an infinite number of smaller
matters, with their Colors, distances, Order etc. all which are plainly
distinguished by a Cleare-sighted Man, who will observe many defects and
inequalities invisible to others. So it is in regard of our inward defects. An
imperfect soul only takes Notice of grosser imperfections, and strives to
amend them only: And that being done, conceiues her self arrived to great
Perfection: when, alas, there yet remains a world of Imperfections, only
visible to Eyes enlightened with Supernatural Grace (to be obtained only by
Pure Internal Prayer) the which will discover how strangely rooted and
deeply fixed all Passions are in the Soul: And how souls deceive themselves,
who in prosperity do so wholy abandon themselves to Joy, as if nothing
could happen that could diminish it: and contrarily in sorrow: As we find
Examples in Suso, and the Monk cured from a great inward Affliction by S.
Bernard: as likewise in David who says of himself: Ego dixi in excessu meo
etc. that is, Being in an Excess of mind through Divine consolation I said, I
shall never be moved: But he found presently how he was mistaken, for it
follows; (Auertisti faciem tuam etc.) Thou only did turn thy face from
me, and presently I became troubled.

6. Therefore Spiritual Persons at all times must exercise Patience, even in
times of Joy, by expecting a Change thereof: which perhaps is to be desired;
because the way to Perfection is by a continual succession of Mountings and
descendings: to all which they must be indifferent; or rather they must think
their more secure aboade to be in Valleys, then on Mountains.

7. All Commotion of Anger or Auersion is according to the degree of Self love
remaining: The which is never to be accounted subdued, till we be in a
perfect Indifference to all Creatures, Actions or Sufferings, as considered in
themselves: I say, as considered in themselves: For if such Actions, Sufferings
etc, be of Obligation, we are not to be in such Indifference, but are to be
more affected to the Obligation: for that is but to affect God, from whom all
out Obligations do proceed. Yet if a work of Obligation be agreeable to our
Nature, we must take heed of tying our Affections to it under that Notion,
the which we express by doing such works with more then usual
diligence, have and impetuosity. In such case therefore Imperfect Souls ought
to perform such a work as pausingly and mortifiedly, as the work will
well permit: And if it require have, let them endeavor to do it with
Internal Resignation and indifference, at least in the Superior will. On the
contrary, if it be a work from which their Nature is auerted, then the more
cheerfully and speedily they perform it, the more perfectly do they behave
themselves: So that such Speed do not proceed from a desire of gaining
favor, or to have it dispatched quickly out of the way.

8. The Profession of aspiring to Perfection in a Contemplative Life requires
not only Patience and Indifference in such Crosses as we cannot avoid: But
also that we be not Sollicitous in seeking to avoid them, although lavvfull
means were offered: On the contrary to entertain and make much of them, in
case the Soul finds inward strength sufficient to entertain them.

9. A Spiritual Person living in Perfect Abstraction may rather have need,
and has more leisure to exercise himself sometimes in supposed, imagined
difficulties devised by himself, then one that lives a distracted life. Such
an one therefore may judge of his impatience, either by remembering some injury
passed, or feigning one present, and thereupon observing whether, or how far
Anger is stirred in him.

10. Matters about which Patience is exercised, if they come from men, as
hurts, injuries, Persecutions etc. are generally more bitter, then those that
come from God, though in themselves greater, as Sickness, Losses etc. Because
other men are but equal to us; we know not their secret Intentions, but are
apt to suspect the vvorst: therefore we take such things worse at their
hands, then we would at Gods, who besides that he is Omnipotent, and has the
Supreme Dominion over us, we know that his Goodness is infinite; So that we
can assure our selves that all his dealings toward us are meant for our Good,
though sometimes we do not see how they can contribute to it. And as for
matters of Affliction that through imprudence or any other defect we bring
upon our selves, we are less moved to impatience by them, (though often to a
secret shame:) Because that besides that we are too apt to excuse and favor
our selves, we are secure that we mean well to our selves.

11. We may conceive these follovving Degrees to be in Patience: all which
must be ascended before we can attain to the Perfection of this virtue.

12. The first Degree is, To have a Serious desire of Patience, and hovveuer in
the Superior will to endeavor to hold Patience upon any provocation: And if
this cannot be had at first, yet to procure it as soon as may be, at least
before the Sun pass, or in the next Recollection: And hovveuer to restrain
the Tongue and outvvard Members from expressing Impatience, though perhaps as
yet Anger cannot be prevented from shevving it self in sovvre looks. A Person
therefore that ordinarily cannot abstain from deliberate angry Speeches, or
which is worse, from passionate actions (in which the deliberation is
greater) has not as yet attained the lowest Degree of Patience.

13. The second is to use all endeauours to guard the Heart, not suffering the
Contradiction or Cross to enter into it, or move Passions in it: But to
esteem the prouocations as not vvorth the considering, or rather as a matter
from which we may reap much good.

14. The Third is, To use the mildest words and freindliest looks we can to
the Person provoking us: And not only to desire, but endeavor also to procure
his good: and to lay Obligations upon him.

15. The Fourth is to imitate the Prophet David who said (Improperium
expectauit Cor Meum and miseriam) My Soul expected Scornful vpbraiding and
affliction. This Degree does not oblige us to seek voluntary Mortifications:
but only not be sollicitous to avoid them. And God often inspires into his
Servants a Desire that occasions of exercising their Patience may be afforded
them: Yea and sometimes to seek them: as S. Syncletica begged of S. Athanasius
to assign unto her a Crosse-ill-Natured Person to be attended on by her: The
which being granted her, she came to attain this virtue in great Perfection,
suffering all her froward insupportable humors with facility and Joy.

16. The Fifth Degree is showed in bearing with Resignation and Peace Internal
Crosses, Aridities etc. which are far more greiuous, then External ones:
Especially that Great Desolation sent by God for the purifying of Perfect
Souls, of which we shall speak in the follovving Treatise.

17. Sixthly a great Addition is made to the greiuousnes of these Internal
Crosses, and consequently to Patience in bearing them, when they are
accompanied with External Afflictions also. This was our Lords case on the
Cross, when to the intolerable torments of his Body was added Internal
Desolation.

26. The Seventh and Supreme Degree of Patience is to suffer all these things
not only with Quietness, but Joy: This is a Degree more then Humane, being a
Supernatural Gift of God, by which not only the Superior will, without any
repugnance does receive and embrace things most contrary to Nature: But the
Sensuality makes no opposition neither, though they should come suddenly and
without preparation. Now I know not whether ever any mere Creature (except
our Blessed Lady) has ever arrived to so high a Degree of Perfection in this
life, as to become wholy impassible.

19. S. John Climacus mentions two Examples of two Holy Persons that seem
some what extrauagant. The first is of one that having received an injury, and
being not at all moved with it, yet desiring to conceal his Patience, made
great Complaints to his Bethren, expressing a counterfeit great Commotion of
Passion. The other was of a very humble Soul that abhorred Ambition, yet
pretended an impatient desire and pursuit after Offices, and great
irresignation when they were refused. But (says our Author) we must take
heed least by imitating such practices, we come much rather to deceive our
own souls, then the Devil or others.

20. All other means whatsoever used for the procuring of Patience without
Pure Internal Prayer, will produce little better then a Philosophical
Mortification, mixed with secret, undiscovered Interests of Nature. But by
Prayer joined with Exercise of Patience out of it, the very Soul will be
rectified, and in time come to such an established Peacefullnes, that nothing
will be able to disturb it: no, scarce the Persons themselves, if they had a
mind to it. The which amendment will be imperceptible, as progress in such
Prayer is: But after some convenient space of time there will be a certain
general Sense and feeling of it; and this ere we be aware. And the way
that Perfect Souls take for the perfecting them selves in this virtue, is not
so much by a direct purposed Exercise and Combat against special Defects or
Passions, as by an universal transcending of all Created things, by means of
an Elevation of Spirit and drowning it in God.

21. Herupon a Holy Hermit in Cassian seems to account all our Actions
whatsoever, except only the actual exercise of Contemplation to be
defectuous. His reason I suppose to be, because only during the time that a
soul is in Actual Contemplation she is in God, perfectly united in Spirit to
him, and consequently entirely separated from Corrupt Nature and Sin. Whereas
out of Contemplation she is, at least in some Measure, depressed in Nature, and
painted with the Images of Creatures, the which cannot but leave some small
stains in the Soul.

CHAP. VIII.
. 1. 2. Of Mortification of Fear and Scrupulosity which is the most
disquieting Passion of all other.

. 3. 4. What Scrupulosity is.

. 5. 6. Aduices here given, only belong to such as truly desire to lead
Internal lives. And why?

. 7. Scrupulosity though a pernicious Passion, yet is only incident to the
tendrest Consciences.

. 8. 9. Souls at the Beginning of a Spiritual Course are usually very tender
and Scrupulous. And why? Therefore it is necessary (and easy) to prevent
Scrupulosity in the Beginning.

. 10. The Order according to which the following Aduises are disposed.

1. THE next Passion to be mortified is Fear: to which we will add
Grief, not as if they were not quite different Passions: but because
ordinarily the Grief which is in vvell-minded Souls that lead Internal
Lives, proceeds from Fear and Scrupulosity, and not from such causes as
procure Grief in Secular minds, as loss of Goods, Friends etc. or the feeling
of Pains etc.)

2. Now Fear seems to be of all other Passions the most disquieting: For
though Grief regarding the same Object really, adds this excess to Fear,
that it supposes the Evil to be present, which to Fear is only future: And
a present ill, as such, is more afflicting then an Evil only expected: Yet
fear respecting the Evil in the Imagination, and as yet unknown, apprehends
it according as the Imagination will represent it: which ordinarily is far
greater then in reality it is; yea as in a sort infinite: And moreover such an
apprehension sets the understanding on work, either to contriue means to
avoid it, or if that be difficult, to invent new motives of unquietness and
anxiety; the which is far greater in Evils of which we are uncertain how
great they may be, and how soon they may be fall us.

3. The special kind of Fear, the mortification of which we are now to
treat of, is such an one as is incident more particularly to tender Devout
souls (especially women) that pursue the exercises of a Contemplative life,
the which is usually called Scrupulosity: which is a mixd kind of Passion,
the most contrary to that peace of mind necessary in a spiritual course, of
any other, as being enuenomed with whatsoever causes anxiety and inward
torments almost in all other Passions. It regards Sin and Hell, the most
abhorred and most terrible objects of all others: and it is composed of all the
bitternesses that are found in Fear, Despair, ineffectuall Desires,
uncertainty of Judgment, Iealousy etc. And penetrating to the very mind and
Spirit, obscuring and troubling the Vnde stan^ing (our only Directour) and
torturing the Will, by plucking it violently contrary vvayes almost at the same
time, it causes the most pestilent disorders that a vvell-meaning soul is
capable of: in so much, as if it be obstinatly cherished, it sometimes ends in
direct Frensy, or which is worse, a desperate forsaking of all Duties of
virtue and Piety. And where it is in a less Degree, yet it causes Images so
distracting, so intimely penetrating, and so closely sticking to the mind; and
by consequence, is so destructive to Prayer with Recollectednes, that it
deserves all care and Prudence to be used for the preventing or expelling it.

4. For which purpose I will here, according to the best light that God has
given me, afford such tender souls as are upon this Rack of Scrupulosity, the
best Aduices I can; and such ac if they will have the courage to practice
accordingly, I do not doubt, but through Gods help they will be preserved
from the dangerous consequences of such a Passion. I shall insist with more
then an ordinary copiousnes upon this subject, because this so dangerous a
Passion is but too ordinary among souls of the best dispositions.

5. But in the first place I must make this Protestation that these foll wing
Instructions (in which a great, yet necessary condescenden^y is allowed in
many cases) do belong unto, and application of them only to be made by such
tender, fearful souls, as desire and intend sincerely to follow Internal
Prayer and other Duties of a Spiritual life, with as much courage and
diligence as their frailty will permit. Such do indeed too often stand in
need, and are worthy of all assistance and indulgence that Reason and a good
conscience can possibly allow, as being persons thrt will probably turn all
to the glory of God and good of their souls; and not to the ease or
contentment of sensual nature (which they account their greatest Enemy:) and
much less to unlawful liberty.

6. I do protest therefore against all extrouerted Livers, or any of different
Tempers and Exercises, that shall presume to apply or assume unto themselves
any indulgences etc. here, not belonging to them: For they will but misleade
themselves, and reap harm by so doing. It seldom falls out that such persons
have a fear of a sin committed, or of the mortal heynousnes of it, but that
it is very likely that it is such an one, and has been committed: And therefore
for no difficulty of nature, nor for the avoiding of trouble of mind ought they
to expect any dispensations from due Examinations of their Conscience, express
Confessions etc: Whereas a thousand to one the forementioned tender souls do
take those for mortal sins, which are mere Tentations, yea perhaps pure
mistakes: And therefore to oblige them to such strict Exami^ations or
Confessions would only nourish their most distracting Anguishes of mind, and
furnish them with new matters of Scrupulosity.

7. Now to encourage such tender vvell-minded souls to make use of these or
any other the like Aduices proper for the^, I desire them to take notice, that
that very Disposition, to wit, a tender fearfullnes of offending God, which
renders them obnoxious to this so pernicious a Passion, is such an one, as if
they can avoid this inconvenience, will be the most aduantageous of all
others to enable them to make a speedy progress in Internal ways, and to
attain to Purity of heart, the immediate disposition to Contemplation, above
all other. So that this is the only snare that the Devil has to hinder them;
namely by taking advantage from such Tenderness to fill their minds full of
multiplicity and unquiet Apprehensions: With the which snare if they suffer
themselves to be entangled, they will find that Scrupulosity will be far from
being effectual to cure any of their Imperfections; yea it will make
Contemplative Prayer impossible to be attained: And God grant that those be the
vvorst and most dangerous effects of it.

8. Such Tenderness of Conscience that is natural to many, frequently happens
to be much increased immediately after the entering into an Internal course of
life: And therefore then especial care ought to be used for for the preventing
of the fearful Apprehensions which are the usual consequences of it. And the
ground of such increase of Te^dernes at that time, is not so much a conscience
of former sins, as too severe a Judgment of their present Imperfections, the
which seem to be multiplied, by reason of the continual opposition that
corrupt nature gives to their present Exercises: as likewise because ^y the
practice of such Exercises they have a New light to discover a world of
Defects formerly invisible to them. Hence they become fearful of their present
Condition; and knovving as yet no other remedy but Confession, they torment
themselves with anxious preparations thereto. And their fears yet not ceasing
by having received Absolution: and besides, the same opposition of sensuality
against Internal Prayer continuing, they begin to sus^ect their former
Confessions, which therefore they renew: so that all their thoughts almost are
taken up with these suspicions of themselves, unsatisfactions in their
Confessions etc And by giving way to such anxious customary Confessions, to
which also perhaps they are encouraged by their indiscreete Guides, they
endanger themselves to contract an incurable Disease of most pernicious
Scrupulosity and Servile Fear, from which terrible anguishes, deiectednes and
heartlesnes in all Spiritual Duties do follovv, with danger of rendering the
State of Religion, or at least of an Internal Life begun, a condition less
fruitful, yea more dangerous, then a common Extrouerted life in the world
would have been.

9. Devout fowls therefore are earnestly wished to make timely provision
against these Inconueniencies, and courageously to resist Scrupulosi^y in the
beginning, according to the Aduices here follovving: And above all things, to
use their best endeauours and Prudence (as far as it belongs to them) as
likewise their Prayers to God, that they fall not into the hands of Directours
that will feed this Humor (to them in such a state most pernicious) of
frequent iterated Confessions, either particular or General. If such care be
had in the beginning, there is no disease more easily curable: whereas by
progress it gathers such Strength, disordering the Imagination, disquieting
the Passions, and corrupting even the Judgment also, that it is scarce possible
to find a Remedy.

10. Now to the end that the follovving Aduices may be more clear and
distinct, we will sort them according to the several Grounds from which
usually Scrupulosity does proceed: The which are. 1. Either Intervall
Tentations by suspected sinful Thoughts and Imaginations. 2. Or certain
Defects, or supposed Defects, incurred about External Obligations, as S^y^ng
the Office, Fasting etc. In both vvhi^h Cases there is a strong Suspicion of
sin incurred, and an uncertainty of what heynousnes that sin in: from vvhen^e
follovv unquiet Examinations, Scrupulous Confessions often repeated etc: First
therefore we vvi^l treat of Fear and Scrupulosity arising from Inward
Tentations by ill Imaginations or Thoughts: And afterward of the other.

CHAP. IX.
. 1. Of Scrupulosity arising from certain Inward Tentations.

. 2. 3. Tentations are not in themselves ill: But rather a Mark of Gods love.
Yet they are not to be sought.

. 4. Internal Tentations very purifying.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. Of Inward Tentations resting only in the mind. And Aduices
against them.

. 9. Likewise touching those that cause also Effects and motions in corporal
nature.

. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. Prayer is by no means to be omitted for Tentations:
As being the best and securest Remedy: In as much as all Tentations are most
efficaciously and perfectly resisted, by conversion of the soul with Love to
God.

1. THE Special kinds of Inward Tentations which do ordinarily afford matter
of Fear and Scrupulosity to vvell-minded tender souls are, First either such
ill Imaginations or Thoughts as rest in the mind alone, without any other
outvvard Effect, such are Thoughts. 1. Of Infidelity. 2. Of Blasphemy. 3. Of
Despair etc. Or Secondly such as withal have, or may cause an alteration in
the Body: such are Thoughts of Impurity, Anger etc.

2. Now concerning Tentations in general, the Devout Soul is to consider,
That it is no sin to have them: yea being sent us by God, they are meant for
our good, and to give us occasion to merit by them. And those which God sends
us are the most proper for us. For if they were in our own choice, we
should choose least and last of all those that are most fit to humble us, and to
withdraw our Affections from our selves and Creatures: so that the more
displeasing to us and afflicting that any Tentations are, the more proffitable
are they. Let none therefore be dismayed at the approach of Tentations, but
since Self-love cannot be cured but by application of things contrary thereto,
let us accept of them as a special gift of God, assuring our selves that it
would be perilous to be long without them. And if we cannot clearly see
how our present Tentations can turn to our proffit; we ought to content our
selves that God sees it; and otherwise he who is Infinite wisdom and
Goodness would never have permitted them to befall us: Therefore let Faith
supply knowledge or curiosity.

3. Nevertheless we must not voluntarily seek Tentations, for (qui amat
periculum peribit in eo) He that loves danger shall perish therein, says the
Wiseman. God will not deny spiritual strength to resist and make good use of
Tentations that by his Providence befall us; yea although it was by some
precedent fault and negligence of ours, that they befell us: But he has made no
promise to secure us in a Danger into which we voluntarily run.

4. More particularly, Internal Tentations are more beneficial and purifying,
and they do more profoundly humble us, then do outward pains or
Persecutions. 1. Because they discover unto us, (not the malice of others, but)
our own sinful natures, prone of themselves to all abominations. 2. And by
them we come to be delivered, not from other creatures, but from our selves;
in which separation our chiefest and last conquered difficulty consists. 3.
They send us for remedy to none but God: For what effect can any assistance,
medicines or other helps of Creatures have against our own Thoughts.

5. And as for the Special (forenamed) Tentations, a vvell-minded soul ought
to consider, That the simple passing of such thoughts or Imaginations in the
mind is no sin at all, though they should rest there never so long without
aduertence: but only the giving a deliberate consent unto them. Neither is it
in the power of a Soul either to prevent or banish them at pleasure: Because
the Imagination is not so subject to Reason, as that it can be commanded to
entertain no Images but such as Reason will allow: But it is distempered
according to the disposition of the Humors and Spirits in the Body: and
sometimes the Devil also is permitted to iniect or raise Images to the
disquieting of tender souls: But he can force none to consent to the
suggestions proceeding from them.

6. There is less danger of consenting unto Tentations merely spiritual, such
as are Thoughts of Blasphemy, Despair etc: And consequently less likelihood
of Scrupul^si^y from a suspicion of such consent. Though sometimes they may be
so violent and so obstinatly adhering, that the fancy will become extremely
disordered, and the soul will think herself to be in a kind of Hell, where
there is nothing but blaspheming and hating of God.

7. Her best Remedy is quietly to turn her thoughts some other way, and
rather neglect, then force herself to combat them with contrary thoughts: For
by neglecting of them the impression that they make in the Imagination will be
diminished. She may do well also by words or outvvard gestures to signify her
renouncing and detestation of them; As in a Tentation of Blasphemy, let her
pronounce words and express postures of Adoration of God, Praise, Love etc:
Let her be also the more diligent in frequenting the Quire, continuing more
carefully in Postures of Humility before him. And doing thus, let her banish
all suspicions of having consented, as being morally impossible.

8. Certain it is, that how troublesome and horrible soever such Tentations
may seem to be, yet they being quietly resisted, or rather neglected, do
wonderfully purify the soul, establishing Divine love most firmly and deeply
in the spirit. More-ouer by occasion of them the Superior Soul is enabled to
transcend all the disorders and tumults in Inferior Nature, adhering to God
during the greatest co^tradictions of sensuality.

9. As for the other sort of Interior Tentations, which are more gross,
causing often disorderly motions and effects in Corporal Nature; It will be
more difficult to persuade timorous souls that they have not consented: Both
by reason that such Imaginations are more pertinacious and sticking to the
corporal Humors and spirits: and also because inferior Nature is povverfully
inclined to a liking of them, in so much as that real effects and alterations
may be wrought in the body, before that Reason be fully awake to resist them.
Yea and after the resistance made by Reason, yet such Images continuing in the
Fancy, and such motions in the body, the mind will be stupefied, and the
resistance of Reason will oftimes be so feeble, as that in the opinion of the
Person it will pass for no resistance at all. Yea rather the soul will be
persuaded that she has deliberatly consented, considering the continuance of
them, after that she was fully awake, and had reflected on them.

10. Notvvithstanding unless in such souls the Reason do not only reflect
upon the sinfullnes of such impure thoughts, if consented to; but likewise in
the very same instant that she makes such a Reflection, the Will be
deliberately moved to the approving of them, they may be assured that there has
passed no culpable consent to them. Again, if the general disposition of such
souls be such, as that seldom or never either Speeches or deliberate Actions
do proceed from them conformable to such impure Imaginations, they may
confidently judge that there is no danger of having incurred a mortal sin.

11. Above all things the Devout soul is to be careful that she be not
disheartened, by occasion of such Tentations, from pursuing constantly her
appointed Recollections the best she can, notvvithstanding that then above all
other times such Thoughts will throng into her mind, so that she will think
it almost unlawful to appear before God being full of such impure Images.
But she is to consider, that now is the proper time to show her Fidelity to
God. No thanks to her if she adhere to God when nature makes no opposition,
but rather finds a gust in it. But if amidst these tempests of corrupt nature
she will firmly adhere to God, when such adhesion becomes so extremely
painful to her, this is thankevvorthy: then she will show herself a
Valiant Soldier of our Lord, and worthy of that testimony that he gives of
her, who has judged her fit and capable of encountering such furious Enemies.

11. A great blessing and happiness it is, that in all internal Confusions,
Obscurities etc. we can always make an Election of God with the Superior
will: The which being effectually done, whatsoever disorders are in the
Imagination or in inferior nature, they do rather increase then prejudice our
Merit.

12. Indeed this is that great, most Efficacious and Universal Remedy against
all Tentations, to wit, an actual Conversion of the Soul to God in Prayer:
For thereby the soul being united to God, either she will loose the Image and
Memory of the Tentation for the present: Or hovveuer, she does with far more
efficacy oppose and work contrary to such Tentations, then if she had fixed
her Eyes with a direct renouncing and detestation of them: For in an Actual
Union with God is included a vertuall detestation of all things contrary to
him, both for present and future; and also thereby the soul adheres to her only
Good, with whom they are absolutely inconsistent.

13. This Remedy therefore which contains in it all the virtue of all other
particular Remedies, is often and seriously to be recommended to Internal
Contemplative livers: (for indeed none but such as live abstracted lives can,
without great force and difficulty, be in a disposition at pleasure to
introuert and recollect shemselues.) Hovveuer let every soul that is capable
thereof, use it. It is the plainest, easiest, securest and most infallible Cure
of all others.

14. Those that are thoroughly practiced in Prayer cannot only be united in W^ll
to God, but perceive themselves to be so united, whilst in the mean time both
the representation of those Tentations remains in the Imagination and
understanding, and much trouble likewise in inferior Nature: All which
notvvithstanding are not any hindrance or prejudice to such Union: Yea by
occasion of these things a more perfect and intense Union may be caused.

15. The light obtained by Prayer for the discovering of the Causes, Grounds
and Remedies of such Tentations, and the Grace to resist them is vvonderfull,
and incredible to those that do not practice Prayer. By neglect of which many
live in the midst of Tentations, and yet do not know them to be such: Or
knovving them, yet have no strength nor will to resist them. But most certain
it is, that a Soul which duly prosecutes Internal Prayer according to her
present abilities, can scarce possibly be so overcome with a Tentation, as
habitually to yield to it; or hovveuer to dye in it. Indeed there is no
security that a Soul ordinarily is capable of in this life, but by the means
of Prayer.

CHAP. X.
. 1. Of Scrupulosities about External Duties, as the Office, Fasting etc.

: 2. Tender Souls ought to seek full Information touching such Obligations:
which is not out of politic ends to be denied them.

. 3. 4. 5. 6. Several cases of Indulgence about the Office.

. 7. 8. 9. 10. Some learned Doctors do free particular Religious persons (not
in holy Orders) from a necessary Obligation of saying the Office in private.

. 11. An Advice touching the same.

1. IN the next place, the special External Duties about which tender Souls
are apt to admit Scrupulosities are many: Yea some are so inordinatly timorous,
that they can give way to vnsatisfaction in almost every thing that they do
or say. But the principal and most common, especially in Religion, are these.
1. The obligation of Religious Persons to Poverty, Obedience, Regular Fasting,
Saying of the Office in public or private etc. 2. The Duty of Examination of
the Conscience in Order to Confession, and Confession in self, with
Communicating afterward.

2. The general proper Remedy against Scrupulosity arising upon occasion of
any of these matters is a true information of the Extent of the said
Obligations. And surely Spiritual Directours are obliged to allow as much
latitude to vvellminded timorous Souls in all these things, as Reason will
possibly admit, considering that such are apt to make a good use of the
greatest condescendency. Therefore it would be a fault inexcusable before God,
if Confessors out of a vain Policy, to the end to keep tender Souls in a
continual dependence and captivity under them, should conceal from them any
Relaxations allowed by Doctors or just Reason. And timorous Souls when they
have received information from Persons capable of knovving, and unlikely to
deceive them, they ought to believe and rest upon them, and to account all
risings of fear or suspicion to the contrary to be unlawful.

3. More particularly for as much as concerns the Divine Office, since all
that understand Latin may acquaint themselves with all the Dispensations and
largest allovvances afforded by Doctors, I conceive it most requisite that
such ignorant tender Souls (especially Women) as may come to see or read
these Instructions, should not be left in an ignorance or uncertainty
hereabout: For why should any additionall burdens of a Religious life lie more
heavy on those that are least able to bear them, and such as will be far from
being less careful in obliging obseruances, less submisse to Authority, and
less assiduous in the Service of God?

4. Therefore for as much as concerns the Public Conuentuall reciting of the
Offiice, they may take notice, That the Obligation thereto does not at all lie
upon particular Religious under sin, except when they have been pro tempore
expressly commanded by Superiors to frequent the Quire at such or such a
determinate time: At other times they may be pennanced for negligence, and
ought to submit willingly thereto. But the Obligation under sin to see that
Duty discharged, lies only upon Superiors.

5. Again when they are in the Quire, in case that when others are repeating
the Office, they are employed about any thing that concerns the Church, as
lighting of Candles, fetching or turning of Books, Music etc. they are not
obliged to repeat such Parts of the Office as have passed during such their
Employments. Neither is it necessary in case of any considerable feebleness,
that they should streine their voices to the tone of the Convent, unless by
reason of the paucity of the Religious the Office through their Silence cannot
be solemnly discharged. Moreover if any reasonable occasion concerning the
Office require their going out of the Quire, they are not bound to repeat
afterward what shall have been said in the mean time, but at their return
they may content themselves to join with the Community etc.

6. But as touching the saying of the Office in private it is the general Vote
of learned man. 1. That a very ordinary indisposition will suffice to
dispense. 2. That the mistake of one Office for another is not considerable,
since it is only a days Office is enjoined, and not such a determinate Office
3. That if a fevv verses now and then were omitted, that being but a very
small part of the whole, is not valuable. 4. That none are obliged to
repetition for want of Attention, or for not exact pronunciation etc. 5. That
Scrupulous Souls being in an uncertainty whether they have said such a
particular Hour, or other considerable part of the Office, are not obliged to
say it. 6. As for the times of saying each part, the liberty allowed is fully
large enough. Other Indulgences there are generally permitted, of the which
they may do well to inform themselves: These will suffice to show that the
Burden is not so great as many good tender Souls do apprehend.

7. But the root of all these and all other Scrupulous difficulties in this
matter is taken away by the Positive Assertion of certain learned Doctors,
not censured or condemned by any, viz. That no Religious Persons, except they
be in holy Orders, are bound to the reciting of the Divine Office in private
under mortal sin: (And if it were any sin at all to omit it, it would be a
mortal sin, being evidently in materia graui.)

8. The principal Authors of this Assertion are Lessius a very learned
Jesuit, and Marchantius a most prudent, learned and Conscientious Provincial
of the holy Order of S. Francis, who being taught by long Experience in
treating with tender Souls, professes that he thought himself obliged in
Conscience, in Duty to God and Charity to timorous Souls to publish this
Assertion. And the Reasons given for it seem to be very pressing and
concluding: Because the simple not-reciting of the Office being not in it self
evil, for then all seculars not reciting it should sin (mortally:) there can
be named no Title under which it can be made Obligatory.

9. For. 1. all those that would maintain the contrary opinion do profess
that there is no Law for it. For although our Holy Rule aduises that in case
any co^siderable number of Religious by means of any Employment should be
hindered from the Quire, they should in the place of such their Employment
recite the Office in common: Yet it gives no order at all to single Religious
persons in that case. 2. The Foundations and sustentation of Religious
Communities is not as that of Cures or Canonries to which there is
correspondent by a debt of Justice and vertuall Contracts the reciting of the
Canonical Office, so that Restitution is due in case of Omission: But to
Foundations of Monasteries and pious Oblations are correspondent only the
performances and Obseruances of Religious Vows, Fasts, Austerities,
Conuentuall Prayer, aspiring to Contemplation etc: with respect to which
only, Oblations were made to Conuents, not under a Title of Justice but
Charity.

10. There remains therefore no other pretense for an Obligation of particular
Religious not in sacris to a private reciting of the Office, but only Custom
that has the virtue of a Law. Now Caietan doubts whether de facto there be
any Custom of it at all: for certain it is that it is not universally
received: neither is it by privilege that some do not receive it. Hovveuer if
there be a Custom, yet that it has not the force of a Law may appear. 1.
Because if it had been introduced by authority of Superiors, it would have
been established by Constitutions: which yet has never been done: Neither
has any Inquisitio^ been made at Visits of the breach of such a Custom, as a
fault. 2. Because those Doctors that most urge the Obligation thereto, yet
never pretend the omitting to be a Mortal sin: And surely if it be not a
mortal sin, it is none at all. 3. Because several learned men have
publicly without censure protested against any obligation flowing from such
a Custom: which would never have been permitted, if Prelates and Superiors
had an intention that their subjects should esteem such a Custom obligatory.
4. Because there are certain Orders, as the Franciscans, the Nuns of the
Annunciata, etc, which by their Rule and an express Vow are obliged to the
reciting of the Office in particular, in case of absence from the Quire: which
would be ridiculous, if the general Custom was presumed to be sufficiently
obliging. 5. The same is proved by a parity; for vvheras a Custom had been
generally introduced among the Cis^ertians by the Ancients of the Order, of
reciting the Office of our B. Lady and of the Dead: yet in General Chapter
Anno Domini 1618. it was declared, that this Custom though introduced by the
Ancients and Superiors, yet had not the force of a L^w.

11. All this notvvithstanding, according to the Opinion of the said Authors,
we may conceive this to be a Custom very laudably practiced by devout Soule^
and has been indeed received under Title of Piety, and a convenient holy
Exercise: which if it should be causelessly neglected, contemned, or
transgressed, a person so transgressing, if he did it out of indeuotion and
want of fervor in matters of Piety, might justly be condemned, or at least
esteemed a person indeuout and negligent. The which fault yet may be remedied
some other more commodious way, then by laying a snare upon tender souls, or
misinforming them.

CHAP. XI.
. 1. Of the most bitter kind of Scrup^losity touching Confession.

. 2. 3. Indiscreete rigor of Confessors in this Point, very harmefull to
tender Souls.

. 4. Several Instructions and Aduices concerning this matter.

. 5. 6. 7. Absolute and exact Obedience to Spiritual Directours (with Prayer)
is the only Remedy.

. 8. 9. 10. 11. The strange obstinatenesse and subtle peruersenes in some good
Souls, in finding and justifying Escapes from Obedience.

. 12. 13. The great harm proceeding from Scrupulous Examinations and
Confessions.

. 14. 15. A form of Examination of Conscience proper for many Scrupulous
Souls.

. 16. 17. The Conscience of tender Scrupulous Persons is not properly a
doubting Conscience: but only fearful.

. 18. 19. 20. Constancy in Prayer most efficacious against Scrupulosity.

. 21. 22. Confession of Venial Sins is proffitable: but yet not universally to
all Souls.

. 23. 24. 25. The chief trial of Obedience is at the times of Communicating.
Aduices therabout.

. 26. 27. 28. Security in following such Instructions as these.

. 29. 30. The Root of Scrupulosity is Tepidity: and often also a corporal
distemper.

1. WHATSOEVER the matters or occasions are that cause Scrupulosity in tender
Souls, the bitterness thereof is felt especially in confessing of them, or
preparing themselves to such Confession. For then it is that all former
vnsatisfactions recurre to their memory, and new Examinations are made: and not
only all the supposed faults, but also the former Examinations and Confessions
are again examined and Confessed. For to such Souls, partly out of ignorance
in the nature, degrees and circumstances of Sins, and partly having their
minds darkened by Fear, all Sins appear to them to be Mortal, or for ought
they know they may be Mortal: and that suspicion, or even possibility is
sufficient to pierce them through with Greise and Fear.

2. The Misery of such self afflicting Souls is much increased and rendered
almost irremediable by indiscreete Confessors, unwary Writers of Spiritual
matters, and such as are unexperienced in Internal ways: Who in the practice
of Penance and Confession use the same Rules and measure toward all Souls
indifferently, giving Aduices in general terms, which yet are proper only
for the common sort of Souls living in the world: who commend the repetition
of General Confessions, prescribing nice Rules for Examination: who enioine
all their Penitents in a case of uncertainty or Doubt, whether a Sin be
mortal or no, to choose that which appears to their prepossessed judgments
the safer side, and therefore to be sure not to omit it in Confession: who
recommend daily and almost hovverly Examinations of Conscience: who extol the
virtue and Efficacy of Sacraments, without sufficient regard to the
Dispositions, and therefore indifferently encourage Souls to frequent
Confessions, yea even when they can find no present matter: in such a case
aduising them to repeat the mentioning of any one or more sins formerly
confessed, merely to continue a custom of confessing, and to gain a new
access of Grace by virtue of the Keys etc. Now such Aduices and Instructions
as these may possibly be good for some negligent souls living extrouerted
lives (if that a proportionable care were also taken that Penitents should
bring due Dispositions to the Sacraments, without which the effects wrought
by them will be far from their expectation:) But that which is a cure for
ordinary souls, may and frequently does prove poison to such tender Scrupulous
persons, as vvvee now treat of.

3. Therefore surely a Confessor or Directour that has any taste of Internal
ways, and any Spiritual prudence and Charity, when he is to treat with
souls that he sees have truly a fear of God, and a sensible horror of
offending him, even in a proportion beyond what Charity and due confidence do
require; and that, were it not that they are dejected by too great an
apprehension of their guilt, would make great progress in the Divine Love:
Perceiving likewise (after some experience and insight into their lives,
Exercises and manners of their Confessions) that such souls accuse and judge
themselves and their Actions, not by any light of Reason or Knowledge in the
true Nature and Degrees of sins, but only by their ovwne Passion of Fear,
which corrupts their Judgment etc: Such Confessors, I say, in these and the
like circumstances will not surely think it fit to deal with these, as
with the ordinary sort of tepide or negligent Souls in the world, that have
need to be terrifyed, to have their consciences narrovvly searched into, to be
frequently brought before the spiritual Tribunal. The like Prudence is to be
exercised also to such tender souls leading internal lives, who though they
are not actually Scrupulous, either have been formerly, or may easily be cast
into it by rough or indiscreete usage.

4. Therefore surely these timorous and tender Souls are to be told, First that
the End of their coming into Religion, or of consecrating themselves to God in
a life of Contemplation, was not to eni^y the Sacraments, which they might
have had free use of in the world: but in the Quietness of Silence and Solitude
to seek God, and daily to tend to him by Internal Exercises of Love,
Resignation etc. as also by a calming of all manner of Passions: And that all
External Duties are only so far to be made use of, as they contribute to the
increase of this Love, Quietness of mind and confidence in God. 2. That the
Sacrament of Penance and Consession is a Holy Ordinance indeed, instituted by
our Lord, not for the torment, but ease of Consciences, and to the end to bring
souls to have a confidence in him, and not a horror of approaching to him. 3.
That the administration of this Sacrament is left to our Lords Priests who
alone are to be Judges what sins are to be confessed, and in what manner. 4.
That since it is evident that Confession is their chiefest torment, causing
effects in them so contrary to what our Lord intended: that therefore they
should either abstain wholy from so frequent a custom of confessing, or to
make their confessions only in the form that should be prescribed them. 5.
That such examinations of sins will abundantly serve their turn, as they
would think fit to be used in any ordinary matter of importance, and as may
be made in a very short space. 6. That often it is far more proffitable for them
to exercise rather Vertuall Acts of Contrition and sorrovv for sin, by
converting themselves directly to God with Acts of Love, then by reflecting
with Passion upon their sins. 7. That those common Maxims. (viz. That it is
the sign of a good conscience there to fear a fault where none is: And that
nothing is to be done against conscience: Likewise that in Doubtful cases the
securest side is to be chosen etc. These Maxims I say) though in gross true;
yet if they should be strictly applied to Scrupulous persons, would utterly
ruin the peace of their minds, For they are altogether incapable of judging
what is against conscience, or what may be said to be Doubtful, accounting
every thing that they fear (without being able to give any tolerable reason
of their fear) to be against conscience, and to be Doubtful: It is therefore
the spiritual Directour or experienced Confessor only that is to be judge of
these things; who has no interest at all in the business, but the good of his
Penitents soul; who can judge without Passion; who is appointed by God to
be judge; and whose unfaithful dealing the Penitent has no reason to suspect.

5. There is no possible way to be rid from scruples (besides the having
immediate recourse to God by humble resigned Prayer) but an entire
indispensable obedience to prudent Confessors, proceeding according to these
or the like grounds and instructions: According to which if such tender souls
take the courage to practice notvvithstanding any fears in sensitive Nature,
they will find their fears to decrease. Whereas if they neglect, or obstinatly
refuse to put them in practice, their fears will not only grow far more
dangerous, but they will become inexcusable before Almighty God, and contract
the heinous sin of disobedience, ingratitude, and vvillfull obstinacy and
resistance against the light which God has given them.

6. But vvithall they must know, that they will never have sufficient
strength and Grace to obey against passion, except they seriously practice
Internal Prayer: the which alone will make their Obedience to become by
custom far more easy, and also freed from that horror which at the first
they will feel in sensitive Nature.

7. Neither ought they to suspect that their Confessors set over them by God
for their good, do not understand their case aright. True it is, they do not
feel the pains they suffer, no more then Corporal Physicians do their
Patients: But yet they know the causes of it far better then themselves,
proceeding by a Supernatural light, not clowded by Passion. And why should
they pretend to know the causes, being ignorant of them? What interest is
likely to corrupt their judgment? Would they for no reward or gain incur the
displeasure of God?

8. Notwithstanding so subtle such souls are to their own prejudice, that
though they should yield that their Confessor knevv their past state, yet they
see some new Circumstance which was either forgotten, or they doubt so, the
which may perhaps alter the whole Case. As likewise every new sin or defect
has somevvhat in it, to their seeming, different from the former, by which
they make a shift to escape from Obedience. Yet they must know that not all
these shifts will excuse them before God.

9. Yea they ought to consider, that though indeed it were true that the
Confessor should happen to be mistaken: Notvvithstanding the Penitent
practicing bona fide according to his Orders in a point of this Nature about
Confession (which is not a Moral Precept) should commit no sin, nor incur
the least danger by it: yea being an Act of Obedience for Gods sake and in
opposition to Natural Passion, it should be an occasion of merit to them. So
that though the sins suspected by them were indeed Mortal, yet he judging
otherwise, they would not be obliged to confess them.

10. But it is vvonderfull to see in souls very distrustful of themselves in
all other matters, such an obstinate selfe-iudgment in this, that they will
never be persuaded that they are Scrupulous, though their vvitts be almost
perished by Scrupulosity. For if this were once admitted, plain reason would
convince them that they ought not to be their own Judges. As likewise in
souls otherwise very innocent, humble and most pliable to Obedience, the
pertinacious disobedience in this point of abstaining from confessing or
renewing Confessions of things forbidden them to be confessed is very strange:
So that against the command of their present Confessor, and the Advice of all
the most learned Doctors, they will persist in their reluctance: And if their
Confessor will not admit them, they will forbear no means to find out
others, though wholy unacquainted with their state, to hear their
Scrupulosities. And what other ground can there be of such disorder, but only
self-love deeply rooted in corrupt Nature: and oftimes the suggestion of the
Devil, to which such souls by reason of their disordered Imaginations and
Passions, are miserably exposed? They had rather confess their virtues for
faults (as their having resisted their fears in compliance with Obedience)
then their really greatest fault, which is self Judgment and Disobedience.

11. A Scrupulous fearful Soul having been commanded to forbear Examination
and confession of such particulars as do cause unquietness in her; when she
comes to put this in practice, a double Fear will present it self to her:
the one of disobeying her Confessor: and the other of going against her
natural Judgment which is contrary to her Confessors. But she ought to
consider, that the former Fear has nothing of nature in it: yea that it
contradicts Nature in its most sensible part, and therefore is far more worthy
to take place. As for the Fear of going against her own Judgment, it
proceeds wholy and only from Nature, self-love, and a desire to be ridd of
her present pain that the memory of her faults causes in her, or the
Suggestions of the Devil urging her to disobedience: Therefore if she cannot
expel this Fear out of sensitive Nature, she must accept it as a pain, but
vvithall contradict it as a Tentation.

12. She ought to assure herself that more harm comes to her, and
incomparably greater impediments in her Exercise of Prayer etc. by indiscreete
Confessions, or Examinations made merely to satisfy Scrupulosity, then by all
the Defects that she would Confess: the which being generally incurred out of
frailty, do far less estrange her from God, then such Confessions do; by
which she is habituated in selfe-vvill, selfe-iudgment and Servile Fear: All
which are the more perilous, in as much as they have a pretense of Duty, to
God, and to the Orders of his Church, as also of humility, and a desire to
receive benefit by the Sacrament etc.

13. Common Reason will dictate, that it is most unfit that any one should be
judge of his own state, just at a time when a Tentation or violent Fear is
actually predominant, the which do put the soul in a strange confusion and
darkness. What a folly therefore and presumption would it be for a woman
ignonorant, passionate and fearful to challenge the Office of a Judge in this
Case, and to think to regulate the Judge, that sits in Gods seat?

14. Let therefore fearful souls that are forbidden the usual ways of
curious Examinations of Conscience and nice Confessions, Whenever any scruple
or suspicion concerning a Mortal Sin comes into their Minds that would urge
them to run for ease to Confession, or that would affright them from
communicating, let them, I say, content themselves with asking their own
Consciences in one glance of their minds, Do I certainly know the matter of
this Fear to have been a mortal sin: and that it was really committed: and
never confessed in any sort, defectiuely or exactly? And if their consciences
do not answer, that they are most certain of this, they may not only
securely judge that they are not guilty, but they are obliged under sin to
abstain from Confession, in case they have been so commanded, and to proceed
to communicating. For it is morally impossible that such tender souls should
committ a Mortal sin, but without any Examination it will appear evidently
to be Mortal.

15. This way of selfe-Examination I (being warranted by learned Authors) do
seriously recommend to those souls that find that a punctual Examination doch
destroy the quiet of their minds: so that if after one short selfe-questioning
they do not resolutly and positiuely determine that they have d^liberatly
consented to a Tentation, and committed a sin unquestionably mortal: Let them
resolve never after to trouble their Thoughts with it: but if they should
press them to a Re-examination, let them neglect them and consider them as
pure Tentations.

16. Such Souls are not to esteem, that a Fear or suspicion that any thing
is a sin or Mortal, can be sufficient to make the case to be Doubtful: For a
Doubt is when two opinions are represented to the mind, and the contrary
Reasons for each are so even and equal, that the Judgment cannot determine it
self to assent to either. Now a firm Assent may be where there is a violent
Fear of the contrary at the same time. And a Scrupulous person cannot oftimes
give any other Reason or account of her Fear, but that for ought she knows,
the matter is according to her Fear.

17. Amongst other subjects of Scruples, one is a Doubt in such souls, whether
they have true Contrition for their faults, or no. Whereas if there be any thing
that hinders their sorrow from being true Contrition, it is the Excess of
servile Fear mixed with it, which they vvillfully nourish with their
Scrupulosities: But hovveuer, considering they are supposed to practice
Internal Prayer in such manner as they are able, there is hardly any Doubt to
be made, but that they have the true love of God, which makes sorrow for sin to
be true Contrition. The which may be performed either directly, by framing an
efficacious Act of sorrovv and detestation of their Sins, as offensive to God,
and for his love: Or only vertually (yet efficaciously,) by producing an Act of
pure love to God: for thereby they do really auert themselves from whatsoever
does offend him, or is contrary to such love (as Sin is.)

18. And from hence may appear the great Security that a soul has which
pursues Internal Prayer: Because every Act of love or Resignation performed
purely for God, does restore a soul to the State of Grace, in case that by any
precedent sins she has fallen from that State. And if she has not, it does
advance and establish her the more in Grace.

19. There is not therefore a more assured general Remedy against Scrupulosity
and all such inordinate fears then Constancy in Prayer. This alone will
produce a courage to despise such Fears, whensoever they would hinder a
Soul from performing Obedience to the Orders of her Spiritual Directour.

20. The Security and Necessity of which Obedience, as likewise the
culpablenes and danger of proceeding according to the suggestions of Fear, a
Devout Soul may evidently collect from hence, viz. by observing that she never
disobeyes in virtue of Light obtained by Prayer, the which alvvaies dictates
Obedience and renouncing her own Judgment, and contradicting her Fears, to
her: And on the contrary that she is tempted to transgress the Orders of her
Confessor only at the time when Fear is so violent upon her, and makes so
deep an impression of her supposed faults in her mind, that she cannot then
pray with Resignation, and beleiues that then to obey her Confessor would be
to go against her own knowledge. Her security therefore must come from
Prayer: to which her humble Obedience will dispose her: And on the contrary
Scrupulous Fears will render her utterly unfit. Therefore Souls which
vvillfully nourish their Fears and Scruples by frequent vnpermitted
Confessions have very much to answer for before Almighty God for their
vvillfull plunging themselves into a State which makes a Perfect union with
God impossible, thereby defeating the whole Design of a Religious Internal
life: as also for forsaking the ways of Obedience, which almost in all
possible cases are most full of security.

21. It is far from my purpose to deter souls from frequent Confessions,
even of Venial sins, when they find such Confessions proffitable to them, and
helps to their amendment; But otherwise, if by the means of such Confessions
they endanger themselves to run into Mortal sins of the highest Nature, as
Desperation, or a vvillfull renouncing of all ways of Piety, through the
horror arising from their ignorance and incapacity to distinguish betvveene
Mortal and venial sins: Then surely it were better for them to make use of
other ways appointed by God for the expiating and purging of Venial sins
(such as are, Saying our Lords Prayer, Acts of Humiliation or Contrition,
Giving of Alms, Devout taking of Holy water etc.) And if they are desirous in
some good measure to observe the ordinary times of Confession, they may content
themselves with expressing some such faults as they can with assurance, and
without disquietnes declare: and all other faults may be inuolued in some
general Phrase or Expression.

22. If it be objected, that by practicing according to these Instructions such
souls will find nothing new to confess, and so will be deprived of the
blessing and comfort of Absolution. Herto I answer, That it were happy if
Souls could find nothing expedient to be Confessed. And surely the most
effectual means to bring them to such Happiness, is according to these Aduices
to free the^ from their deiecting Scrupulosities: the which as long as they
remain, little effect of blessings can proceed from the best Exercises or use
of Sacraments. We know that in Ancient times innumerable Saints attained to
Perfection with little or no use of Confession (considering their remotenes
from places where Priests inhabited) by Serious practice of Prayer,
Abstraction of life, Mortification etc: which means will doubtless have the
same effect now: and without them Confessions and Communions though daily
practiced, will have but small effect thereto: Now there is not in the world
a Mortification more effectual, more purifying and more proper for such
Souls, then to Obey God in their Confessor, contrary to their own violent
fears, Scrupulosity and seeming Judgment.

23. The proper season of the Trial of Obedience and Submission of Scrupulous
Souls is the time of Commu^icating: because they know that there is necessary
^herto not only the condition of being free from Mortal ^in: but likewise that
a greater preparation is requisite: For in all States they may pray, Say their
Office, Exercise Mortification etc. without a precedent Con^ession (though it
is with great deiection, heartlesnes and most greiuous distractions that such
Souls apply themselves to Internal Prayer etc.) But above all, Communicating
during their Suspicions is most greiuous and full of horror to them.

24. In this case therefore a vvell-minded Soul coming to Communicate according
to Order prescribed by her Confessor, and finding a Fear to seize upon her,
let her take courage, lifting up her heart to God in this or the like manner,
My God, it is not by mine own Choice, but in Obedience to thee speaking to me
by my Confessor, that I presume to approach to thy Altar. In thy name
therefore, and hoping for thy blessing I will Communicate, notwithstanding the
horror and frights which I feel in my Soul. These I accept as a pain, and I
do resign my self to the continuance of them, as long as it shall be thy
pleasure for my humiliation. I hope and am assured that thou will not condemn
me for Obedience, and for resisting the violent impulsions of my Corrupt
Passions. It is only for the comfort of my Soul that I desire to receive the
precious Body of my Lord. If I did not think it to be thy will that I should
Communicate now, I would abstain though this were Christmas or Easter Day, and
whatsoever confusion or shame I were to suffer for abstaining. Having said or
thought to this effect, let her freely Communicate, and be assured she shall
not incur the least danger, but on the contrary merit in a high Degree. And
in the same manner she may lift up her heart to God, whensoever in Confession
she abstaines from mentioning such faults a^ do cause disquietnes in her.

25. Such Souls may also do well to practice very often in private
Spiritual Communicating, preparing themselves thereto by the forementioned
breife and quiet Examinations. Frequent practicing after this manner will
begett a Confidence to do it really upon occasions.

26. Those Souls to whom these Instructions have been, or shall be esteemed
proper in the Judgment of their Spiritual Directours, must not be discouraged
from follovving them by any thing that shall be said by others, or by any thing
that they shall find in Books: For there is nothing written here which may
not be confirmed by the testimony and authority of learned and unquestioned
Doctors. They must therefore abstain from making consultations with others,
or demanding their judgments or Opinions: for otherwise there will be no End
of troubles and distractions. Neither willingly or purposely ought they to
read Books made for the Common Sort of Souls, and that give different
Aduices: for that would be to put themselves vvillfully into a Tentation. But
let them content themselves with these or the like Instructions, reading them
often, and seriously resolving in and with Prayer to practice accordingly, and
they may, through Gods blessing, expect a good Success.

27. Now they must not from hence expect Aduices to fit all cases, which are
almost infinite. But according to their particular necessities they must apply
these General Instructions: observing the Divine Inspirations, (especially in
the time of Prayer) their own Experience, and sometimes likewise serving
themselves of their natural judgment. For of this let them assure themselves,
That if they will not resolve to Obey till Satisfaction be given them to all
their Scrupulous Objections and Fears, their case is desperate: If nothing
will serve them but a riddance from the pain of the Tentation, an Angel from
Heaven will never be able to quiet and satisfy them. They must either Obey,
though with their Eyes shut, or they will live and dye in the State of
Self-love and Servile fear which is a very dangerous State to dye in.

28. Yet those who must of necessity at the first be helpd with relying upon
the vvarrant of their Confessors and Directours, must not finally rest there,
but make use of such Peace as by their means they can obtain, to dispose them
to have recourse to our Lord, to learn confidence in him, which will arise
from frequent conuersing with him by Prayer.

29. To conclude this matter of Scrupulosity: A general good way to Cure it
is by opposing it in its Root and cause: the which is either Spiritual or
corporal: The spiritual cause of scrupulosity is Tepidity: for though it
seems to be an humor full of solicitude, have and eagernes; yet the true
ground oftimes of it is an vnvvillingnes and loathnes to give God more then
we must needs. Now the measure and Rule of what is absolutely necessary
being uncertain, from the ignorance thereof grows a general fear (just
enough, the heart being so corrupted with self-love) of falling short of
what is necessary almost in every thing, either for want of right intention,
or some other important circumstance: the which Fear being Servile, is
perplexing, confounding and darkning. The proper remedy therefore is (as has
been said) an humble recourse to God by Prayer to correct in us what is
amiss, and to supply what is defective: as also a submission and resignation
of our selves sincerely and entirely to do to our uttermost what he requires:
and when all this is done, not to judge of our souls estate, its hope or
danger, so much by a view of our own perfections, or a conceit of the
diminishing of our imperfections, but only by our relying and affectionate
dependence on God. For the greatest and most perfect servants of God the more
they grow in Perfection the more light have they to discern innumerable
imperfections in themselves, which causes great Humility, but yet does not
abate their dependence and confidence on God, grounded in his only Goodness.
Whereas imperfect Tepide Souls hoping to gain security by diminishing their
imperfections (the which arises from Pride:) when they see their defects
rather to increase, they become dejected, fearful and Scrupulous.

30. And such Scrupulosity arising from Tepidity does much increase it, through
a kind of despair of expelling our own imperfectious by our own abilities,
and neglect of the true means of expelling them, which is Serious Prayer to
God. If such souls therefore would take this for a ground; That it is
impossible in this life that they should ever see themselves otherwise then
full of innumerable defects, of which they are not able so much as to give any
account: And yet notvvithstanding they ought, even for that very
impossibilities sake, to have recourse unto God and to rely upon his pardon, as
also his help and concurrence to remove our defects, as far as his good
pleasure shall be: Again if they would not expect a certainty or Security
touching their state, but be content to stand to Gods good pleasure and mercy;
by which not only Perfection, but salvation is to be obtained, they would
shortly be freed from their painful, vvearisome fears and Scrupulosities.

31. Again oftimes this humor of a timorous Scrupulosity is very much to be
attributed to the present indisposition in the Body, (especially in Women)
when by reason of some special Infirmities through the ascending of ill
vapors to the Head there are raised melancholic and afflicting Images in the
Fancy: Which without the help of the Corporal Physician can hardly by
counsel be expelled.

CHAP. XII.
. 1. 2. Of a Scruple concerning a Souls Vocation to a Religious Life.

. 3. 4. t. 6. 7. Of Several grounds and Motives by which Souls may be induced
to undertake a Religious State.

. 8. 9. What Motives are Perfect; and what unsitting. And how a Soul once
engaged, has then a Necessary Divine Vocation to continue etc.

1. BEFORE I quitt this Passion of Fear, it will neither be impertinent nor
unprofitable, I hope, to speak somevvhat of a Tentation taken Notice of by
Thaulerus, the which affords great matter of Fear to some tender Souls; and
regards their vocation to a Religious life. The Case stands thus.

2. Some tender Souls in Religion, that have good minds and wills to
persevere in seeking God, but being unsatisfied with them selves because they
see so many Imperfections not yet amended, yea some that they had not observed
before they entered into that State: They impute all their vnsuccesfullnes in
curing their defects to Gods Judgment upon them for having upon light or vain
Grounds of their own Choice undertaken such a State of life for outvvard, and
perhaps unworthy Ends, as to avoid vvorldly troubles, wants; persecutions
etc. and not out of a pure Intention to seek God, nor from any Inspiration
from him.

3. But to show the groundlesnes of such Scrupulous apprehensions, such
Suspicious Souls may do well to consider, First that in these wicked times
in which there is such a decay of Charity in the world, and of fervor in
Religion, such Heroical Enterprises and such admirable Calls to a Religious
State are not every day to be expected, as we read of in former times, when
Kings and Princes, sometimes even in the prime vigor of their Age, out of a
loathing of transitory things, and a longing after God, renounced all the
abundance of wealth, Pleasure and Glory that the world could afford, in as
much as they were impediments to their Holy design of embracing Solitude,
Poverty and all other Penitential Austerities in Religion. So that it is much
to be doubted, that if the greatest part of those that now enter into Religion
had met with the like Tentatio^s, and Offers in the world, as those despised,
most of our Cells would be Empty, and our Conuents become true Deserts. Yet
all this does not argue that because the Calls to Religion usual in those
days are not so Extraordinary as formerly, therefore they are insufficient, or
not at all Divine. For though our Intentio^s now are not so Heroical and
Deiforme (because our Charity is not so inflamed:) yet for the substance of
them they may be upright.

4. Secondly, they ought to consider, that God is often pleased in love to
certain Souls that perhaps would be in danger to make Shipvvrack of that
imperfect Charity which is in them, if they continued in the world, to permit
by an especial Providence certain External Casualties to befall them, by
which they may be in some sort compelled to retire into the secure Solitude of
a Religious State. For which purpose also he remoues many Impediments to such
a Course, depriving them of their Dearest friends; Riches etc. crossing also
their Designs, which if they had succeeded would have chained them to the
world. Hence it is that some for want of a comfortable Subsistence; others to
avoid Suites and other troubles; or even for want of bodily strength, and
being disabled to taste the pleasures of the world; others out of a tediousnes
and satiety of sensual Contentments; lastly some out of a deep remorse for
some special Crimes, or other respects no better then these, are induced to
embrace a Religious State. None of which respects notvvithstanding without
some degree of Charity would probably have been sufficient to have produced
this Change: as neither would Charity alone, had it not been actuated and
quickened by such considerations. Now these Vocations, though mixed with much
impurity, yet are far from being unlawful.

5. In the third place, it may possibly happen that some may have come into
Religion induced merely and only by outvvard, yea perhaps unlawful respects.
They had much rather have stayed in the world, the pleasures of which, if they
could have enjoyed them, they preferred far before God. But God debarrs them
from such pleasures, sending them great Crosses, which they can no otherwise
avoid, but by the Refuge of a Religious State. In which also, it may be,
their first design is to seek themselves only and not God. Yea we read of
one that adjoined himself to a Religious Community merely for this wicked
End, to get an opportunity to commit Sacrilege by stealing a Chalice. But
being there, God rouched his heart to repent and acknovvledge his Criminal
Hypocrisy: after which he lead a very Religious holy Life.

6. Again fourthly, some do come into Religion, it may be, with a good
harmles meaning, but meeting with tepide or perhaps irreligious Companions
they grow weary of their Condition, the difficulties of which they have not
yet Spiritual strength to support and improve to their Souls advancement: So
that if they were again freely to dispose of themselves, they would choose to
return into the world, were it not that they are chained by a Vovv and
Ecclesiastical Laws: Now although these came into Religion vncall'd by God,
yet now the impossibility of changing their present Condition is an effectual
Call from him to keep them constant and faithful to him.

7. Lastly, some come into Religion as it were vnavvares unto themselves, and
without any Election on their own parts. Which is the case of many persons
of Noble Families, (especially Virgins) that are even forced to such a State by
the Tyranny of their Parents, or enueigled into it by the Subtle auaricious
insinuations and persuasions of others engaged in the same state etc. By
which means they engage themselves in a State of life unknown to
themselves, relying wholy on the wills and judgment of others: And being
once a little engaged, the opinion of Honor, and to avoid the imputation of
inconstancy forces them to persevere.

8. Now among all these varieties of Cases and Vocations to Religion, shall
we say that only those Perfect Souls mentioned in the beginning have a true
Call to Religion? If so, how much the smaller number of Religious could be
judged to have had a Lavvfull Call? What reason therefore have any Souls that
now desire to seek God in Religion, hovveuer they came thither, to disquiet
themselves? Is it because they were not perfect in Charity before they entered
into Religion? (For a perfectly Pure Intention cannot proceed but from a
perfect habitual Charity) Is it therefore strange to them that nature, as long
as it is alive in them, should mix its own Interests even in the most holy
Actions? Or rather is this possible to be wholy avoided, unless we were
Perfect in an instant? If there were any undue or unlawful External Motives
that induced them in the beginning to betake themselves to such a state; Since
it now pleases God to show unto them that such a state is so secure and so
happy a Condition for their souls, surely they ought rather to employ their
Tongues and thoughts to bless him, who dealt with them mercifully and
graciously beyond their deserts, rather then to trouble and disquiet
themselves. Are they afflicted because God made them happy against their
wills? Or that by his special most merciful Providence he discouraged them
from abiding in the Tentations and Snares of the world? Or that he took
advantage from their Imperfections to bring them into the way of Petfection?
Or that he changed their neglect into a desire of seeking him, though with
many defects?

9. They ought therefore to consider that in the present State they now are,
nothing can so much harm them as such unreasonable and unquiet apprehensions.
If they were now in a Capacity to begin to make a free Choice, they would
with an undoubted good and right Intention renounce the world; having often
times freely confirmed their first Profession. And surely this ought to satisfy
them: For God looks upon all his servants according as their present Condition
is: so that if they now seek him in truth, whatsoever the Motives were that
brought them to their present state, they shall be no prejudice to them: If
they were Impure, they are forgiven, and shall never be considered: If good,
they shall be considered for their good only. If they still have imperfections;
it is no vvonder: Who does not complain, and justly of Imperfections? When
they are more perfect they will have lesser defects, but they will see many
more, and be more humbled, though less disquieted for them. Hovveuer, certain
it is that Scrupulosity and Fear is their far greatest and most harmfull
imperfection; for this alone will make Perfection in the Divine union
impossible to be obtained, as long as the soul acts according to its
inclination. And the way to cure it is not to dispute or contest with the
cause of it: but to neglect, transcend and work quite contrary to it; And
doing so, though the pain continue in sensitive nature, yet such pain will
prove a very purifying Mortification.

CHAP. XIII.
. 1. Of the mortification of the affections of the Will, to wit, Pride etc.

. 2. Of Humility, what it is.

. 3. 4. That God is the only object thereof, mediate or immediate.

. 5. 9. 7. 8. Of Humility expressed toward creatures with respect to God:
Which requires that we prefer all others before our selves, according to the
seventh Degree in our holy Rule.

. 9. 10. This does not offend against truth.

. 11. 12. 13. The which is proved by the grounds of true Christian Humility:
And that the most sublime, perfect creatures are the most humble.

. 14. The knowledge and perception or feeling of our own Not-being and Gods
Totality or absolute Being, is the principal ground of Humility.

. 15. Of other means conducing thereto.

. 16. 17. 18. 19. 20. By what considerations a perfect soul may truly judge
herself inferior to all others.

. 21. 22. Of Humility exercised immediately to God, either with reflection on
our selves, or without it.

. 23. 24. An imperfect soul may know, but not feel her own Nothing; which is
done only in perfect Prayer.

. 25. 26. Deliberate imperfections in our selves are an hindrance to this
feeling.

. 27. 28. 29. Of the degrees of this feeling.

. 30. 31. Exhortation to aspire thereto.

1. HAVING thus largely treated of the Mortification of the principal Passions
in Sensitive nature: we are consequently to speak of the Mortifications of
the Will, or Appetite of the Superior soul; the general inordination
whereof is Pride, the root of all other vices, and which of all other is the
last cured, as being fixed in the inmost center of the Spirit. Now Pride does
generally express it self one of these three ways. 1. In curiosity of
knowledge; or seeking to enrich the understanding with sciences not
proffitable, and sought only out of an Ambition of excelling. This is mortified
by a namelesse virtue which S. Paul describes by this circumlocution, when he
exhorts us that we would (sapere ad sobrietatem) be soberly wise: concerning
which Duty we have treated sufficiently where we spoke of the regulating
of our Reading and studies. 2. In a love and desire of self esteem; the
which is mortified by that most divine fundamental virtue of Humility. 3. In
a love of liberty or independency, and a desire of Prelature or Authority over
others: The which is mortified by the Religious Virtue of Obedience. It
remains therefore that we conclude this Treatise of Mortification with
Instructions touching these two eminent virtues of Humility and Obedience.

2. Humility may be defined, to be a virtue by which we acknowledging the
Infinite greatness and Majesty of God, his incomprehensible Perfections, and the
absolute Power that he has over us and all creatures (which are as nothing
before him) do wholy subject our selves, both souls and bodies, with all
their powers and faculties, and all things that pertain to either, to his
holy will in all things, and for his sake to all creatures according to his
will.

3. Properly speaking, Humility is only exercised toward God, and not to
creatures; Because all creatures are in themselves nothing as well as we,
and so deserve as well to be despised. And on these grounds the Heathens were
incapable of this virtue, because they did not, nor could intend God, who was
unknown unto them. Yea it was not without ground, that they disgraced and
condemned this virtue (by which men compared themselves with others,
preferring all before themselves) as a hindrance to other Perfections: Because
the vnderualuing ones self compared with others, was (in their opinion) a
means to deiect men's spirits; and hinder any Heroycall attempts of raising
ones self above others: and also because if the person comparing had indeed an
advantage in Perfections, it would be both unreasonable and unjust not to
prefer himself. But what an inconsequent way of arguing this is, I shall
hereafter show.

4. In this virtue of Humility God toward whom it is exercised, may be
considered. 1. as absolutely and abstractly in himself. 2. as compared with
creatures. 3. as in his creatures, and in several degrees participated by them.

5. In this latter regard, we for God show Humility toward men, preferring
others before our selves; contenting our selves with the meanest things in
diet, clothes, books etc: yea with the meanest parts and endovvments of
nature; flying all honor, authority or esteem etc.

6. If Humility were thus practiced by Religious persons etc: all other duties
also would be cheerfully and readily practiced: for if we did indeed esteem
our selves to deserve no honor, kind usage etc, but the contrary; how could
we be impatient for injuries received, vnresigned in afflictions, infected
with propriety etc? with what sweetness and peace would we live toward
all? with what tenderness and Charity would we embrace all etc?

7. Now the principal Act of this Humility is that which is recommend by our
holy Father in these words: The eleauenth degree of humility (says he) is
when a soul shall not only pronounce with her tongue, but likewise in the most
inward affection of the heart believe herself to be inferior and more vile
then all others, humbling herself and saying with the Prophet, I am a worm
and no man, the shame of men, and an abject among the common people; I was
exalted by thee, but I am humbled and confounded. And again, It was good for
me that thou did humble me, that I may learn thy commandments.

8. Such true Humility is so rare to be found, that there are fevv that make
Profession of this Act even with the tongue: in so much that a man should be
esteemed an hypocrite that should only pretend hereto; Whereas in truth the very
essence of Humility, as regarding men, co^sists principally in the exercising
this Act. For we are not to conceive that any one is become truly humble by
any one or more of the degrees of it, till he have attained (at least in
preparation of mind) to the highest degree, with which our holy Father begins.
Certain therefore it is, that true humility requires this acknovvledgment from
us, that we believe our selves to be inferior and more vile then all others.

9. Now though to ordinary humane reason it may seem an offense against
prudence and truth for one (for example) that knovves himself to be skillfull
in Arts, prudent, noble etc: to prefer before himself those that are
ignorant, silly, ignoble etc: Or for a soul that by the grace of God perceiues
herself to be free from mortal sins, and to live unblameably, yea with
edification, and perhaps is favored by Almighty God with supernatural
graces, sublime Prayer etc: to esteem herself inferior to Persons that she
sees abandonned to all vice and impiety: For doing so, she would seem to lie
against her own conscience and God, and to be extremely ungrateful to him.
Notvvithstanding Humility it not at all opposed to truth; for if it were so,
it could not be a virtue. Yea it is pure Divine Truth it self that forces such
a confession from the perfectest souls. In so much as that he that does not
know, yea and endeauours not experimentally to feel himself to be the most
vile and vvretched of all creatures, does in vain challenge the title of being
humble or true.

10. And this will appear by discovering the ground^ upon which, and the
means by which true Christian Humility is built and to be attained; the
which ar^ these.

11. In the first place, we are to know that God created all things for
himself, that is, in order and subordination to himself, so that the
perfection of their natures (respectively) consists in the preserving of this
subordination, or in taking a true measure of themselves considered in
themselves, and also as compared with God; And so doing we shall in very
truth, without flattery or vanity, acknovvledge that we our selves and all
creatures with us are in and of our selves simply and in propriety of speech
very nothing; we have nothing, we deserve nothing, we can do nothing;
yea moreover, that by all things that proceed from our selves, as from our
selves, we tend to nothing, and can reap nothing but what is due to
defectuousnes: And on the contrary that God alone of himself is, and has
being; and that illimited, replenished with all the perfections that Being can
possibly have.

12. This is the maine universal, unalterable ground of Humility, by virtue of
which all intellectual creatures in all states and degrees are obliged to
refer to God alone not only themselves and all manner of things (because
without him they have no being at all, and only by him they continue to enjoy
that being) but also all endovvments that are in them, all operations that
flow from them, as far as they are not defectuous, and the success likewise
of all their actions; so that to acknovvledge any good to come from any but God
only; or to ascribe Excellency or praise to any other but God, is a high
injustice, a breach of that essential order in and for which creatures were
made and are preserved.

13. By virtue of this indispensable Subordination or comparing of God with
his creatures, the most perfect, most holy and most sublime of all Gods
creatures do most profoundly humble themselves in his presence. The glorified
Saints do prostrate themselves before him, casting their crowns at his
feet; the Seraphins cover their faces; and our blessed Lord as man, having a
most perfect knowledge, perception and feeling of the nothingnes of creatures
and the absolute Totality of God, did more then all Saints and Angels most
profoundly humble himself before the Divine Majesty of his Father, remaining
continually plunged in the Abyss of his own nothing. Moreover in virtue
hereof he submitted himself to all creatures: yea for as much as concerned
suffering, even to the Devil himself. As a creature, he savv nothing in
himself but the nothing of a creature; and in all other creatures he savv
nothing but God, to whom he humbled himself in all, accepting as from him
whatsoever persecutions proceeded from others. True indeed it is, that without
offending truth he could not believe any other creature to be more holy and
perfect then himself; and so could not in that regard humble himself to them:
But he considered all his own perfections as not his own, but Gods; and
therefore assumed nothing to himself for them; yea he did not at all consider
them, but only to humble himself and renounce all pretentious to them; And the
least perfection that was in others he considered as belonging to God, and so
humbled himself to God in them.

14. But in the second place, although this consideration of the not-being of
creatures out of God, and the All-being of God, be indeed the true and most
proper ground of perfect Humility; yet because a great supernatural light and
grace is required to make a soul sensible of this (for by discourse we may
come to know it in an imperfect manner, and to believe it; But to taste,
perceive and feel it, this we can never do till we be entered far into God
by our Prayer) Therefore we are in the beginning to make use also of another
more sensible, and to the weakest eyes perceiueable ground of Humiliation;
which is the consciousnes of our many imperfections and sins, joining
therewith that imperfect discoursiue knowledge of our own nothing and Gods
totality: endeavoring by these two to humble and abase our selves; so by
little and little diminishing that natural Pride which is in every one of us:
by which we are apt not only to think better of our selves then of any
other, to excuse our own faults, and to accuse even the best actions of
others etc. but also to raise up our selves against and above God himself,
considering our selves as if we were both the Principle and end of all Good,
challenging to our selves the praise of all either real or imaginary good in
us, and referring all things to our own contentment.

15. By a serious and frequent consideration of these things, way will be
made for the introducing of true solid Humility into our souls; But yet these
alone will not suffice, except thereto we join. 1. Abstraction of life, by
which we will come to over-looke and forget the imperfections of others,
and only look upon our own; thence flying employments, charges and dealing
with others; or when necessity requires a treating with others, doing it
with all modesty, Charity and a cordial respectfullnes: being confounded at
our own praises etc: 2. A care to practice according to what Humility
obliges us, with quietness of mind accepting humiliations, contempts etc from
others, endeavoring to vvell-come them, and even to take joy in them etc: 3.
But especially Internal Prayer, by which we not only get a more perfect
light to discover a world of formerly unseen imperfections, but also we
approach nearer to God, and get a more perfect sight of him, in whom all
creatures, our selves and all, do vanish and are annihilated.

16. Now when by these means Humility begins to get a little strength in us,
it is vvonderfull to see how inuentiue and ingenious it is in finding vvayes to
increase in Perfection. Then this degree of preferring all others whatsoever
before our selves, will appear not only possible, but easy to be practiced,
as being most conformable to reason and duty.

17. For then a devout soul knovving how valuable and necessary a virtue
Humility is, by which alone that most deadly poison of our souls (Pride) is
destroyed. 1. She will become scarce able to see any thing in herself, but
what is truly her own, that is, her defectuousnes and nothing: nor any thing
in others, but what is Gods; And thus doing she cannot choose but humble
herself under all others, preferring all others before herself; and this
without fiction, with all sincerity and simplicity. 2. She will never compare
herself with others, but to the intent to abase herself. 3. If there be in
her any natural endovvments vvanting to others, she will consider them as not
her own, but Gods, committed to her trust to the end to trade with them for
Gods glory only: Of which trust a severe account shall be required: And being
conscious of her negligence and ingatitude, she will be so far from glorifying
herself for such endovvments, that she will rather esteem them happy that
want them. 4. If she have any supernatural graces which others want, yea or
if others are guilty of many open sins, she will consider that she may
according to her demerits be deprived of them, and others enriched with them,
who in all likelihood will make better use of them; for she knovves by many
woeful experiments the peruersenes of her own heart; but is utterly ignorant
of others: and therefore cannot without breach of Charity suspect that they
will be so ungrateful. 5. She will not take notice of lesser imperfections in
others; yea not knovving their secret intentions, she will judge that those
things which seem to be imperfections, may perhaps be meritorious Actions. 6.
In a word considering that God has made her a judge of herself, only to the
end to condemn herself; and of others, only to excuse them; and knovving that
there can be no peril in judging (if it be possible) too hardly of ones self:
but much in judging the vvorst of another, in the smallest thing; Though others
be never so wicked, yet at least she will judge this, that if God had
afforded them the light and helps that she enjoyed, they would have been
Angels in Purity compared with her; and hovveuer that at least they are not
guilty of such ingratitude as she is.

18. By such considerations as these a devout soul will fix in her
understanding a belief of her own vileness and baseness. For to make Humility
a virtue, it is the will that must even compel the understanding to say, I
will believe my self to be inferior to all, according as I find just cause by
these considerations; And the same Will will upon occasion force practices
suitable to such a belief. It will make the soul afraid to seek things
pleasing to her, yea content with all hard usage, as knovving she deserves far
worse, and ought to expect to be trodden underfoot by all creatures, so that
in love to Justice, and equality she will even desire and rejoice in all
affronts, persecutions and contempts; Or if certain circumstances, as
Infirmity of Body etc. shall require, and that she be necessitated to choose or
desire any consolations, she will accept them in the spirit of humility and
mortification; that is, purely in obedience to the Divine Will, and not at all
for the satisfaction of nature, being far from thinking herself worthy of any
thing but want, pain and contempt.

19. Novvv a Superior is not to be judged to offend against this degree of
humility, when he discouers, objects, reprehends or punishes the faults of his
subjects; for in so doing he sustaines the person of God, to whom alone it
belongs to exercise the office of a Judge, yet vvithall the Superior ought not
therefore to esteem himself better then the person reprehended: for though
perh^ps in that one respect he cannot much condemn himself; yet for many
other faults which he sees in himself, and cannot see in others, he may and
ought to remain humbled: yea to be the more confounded, whensoever the duty
of his place requires of him to be a reprehender of others, whilst himself
does far more deserve reprehension.

20. When by serious practice of humiliation joined with Prayer, a soul is
come to a high degree of Purity in spiritual exercises, then is attained that
more admirable kind of Humility which regards God: In which the soul
contemplating his Totality and illimited universality of Being, and thence
reflecting on her own nothing, (of which now she has a more perfect sight)
she most profoundly humbles and annihilates herself before him.

21. And when Prayer is come to Perfection, then will the soul also mount to
the supreme degree of humility, which regards God considered absolutely in
himself, and without any express or distinct comparison with creatures; for
herby a soul fixing her sight upon God as all in all, and contemplating him in
the darkness of incomprehensibility, does not by any distinct Act or reflection
consider the vacuity and nothingnes of creatures: but really transcends and
forgets them, so that to her they are in very deed as nothing, because they are
not the object which with her spirit she only sees, and with her affection
only embraces.

22. This most Heroycall Humility can only be exercised in the Act of
Contemplation: for then only it is that a soul feels her own nothing,
without intending to reflect upon it. At all other times she in some degree
feels the false supposed being of herself and creatures. Because it is only
in Actual Pure prayer that the images of them are expelled, and with the
Images the Affections to them also.

23. Notvvithstanding a great measure and proportion of the virtue of such
prayer remains, and is operative also afterward out of prayer: for if the
soul do see creatures, she never sees them as in themselves, but only in
relation to God; and so in them humbles herself to God, and loves God in them.
And if she reflect upon herself and turn her eyes inward into her spirit,
desiring to find God there; there will not be any considerable imperfection,
obscurity or stain that will darken her view of God, but she will discover it,
and most perfectly hate it.

24. As for sins or imperfections in others, though never so heinous, they are
no hindrance to her seeing of God; because either she transcends and marks them
not; or is by their means urged to a nearer and more fervent love of him for
his patience; to a greater Zeal for his honor impaired by the sins of men;
and to a greater compassion toward sinners.

25. But the least imperfection in herself being really a hindrance to her
immediate union with God and perfect sight of him, is in so great a light as
she then enioyes, perfectly seen and perfectly abhorred by her. Yea such
faults as to her natural understanding formerly appeared no bigger then
moates, do in virtue of this supernatural light seem as mountains; And
defects which she before never dreamed or imagined to be in herself, she now
sees not only to be, but to abound and bear great sway in her. To this purpose
says S. Gregory (l. 22. Moral. c. 1.) Sancti Viri quo altius apud Deum
proficiunt, eo subtilius indignos se deprehendunt; quia dum proximi luci fiunt,
quidquid in illis latebat inueniunt. That is, Holy men the higher that they
raise themselves approaching to God; the more clearly do they perceive their
own unworthiness. Because being encompassed with a purer light, they discover
in themselves those defects which before they could not see.

26. Hence it appears that there is a great difference between the knowledge
of our own Nothing, and the feeling or perception of it. The former may be got
by a little meditation, or by reading of School Divinity, which teaches and
demonstrates, how that of our selves we are nothing, but mere dependences on
the only true Being of God. Whereas the Feeling of our own nothing will never
be attained by study or meditation alone, but by the raising and purifying of
our souls by Prayer. The Devil has the knowledge of the nothingnes of
creatures in a far greater perfection then any man, and yet he has nothing at
all of the feeling. Now it is only the feeling of our not-being that is true
perfect Humility: as on the contrary, the feeling of our being is Pride.

27. Now this Feeling of our not-being has two degrees. 1. The first is in
regard of the corporal or sensitive faculties: to wit, when the soul is so
raised above the body and all desires concerning it, that it has lost all care
and solicitude about it, having mortified in a great measure all inferior
Passions. This is a high degree of Humility, but not yet perfect as may appear
plainly by this, That after a soul has attained herto by a Passive Union,
there ordinarily follows the great Privation or desolation, in which she
finds herself to be yet full of her self and her own being, combatted with
may risings and repugnances. 2. The second degree follows after that the said
Privation ceases, in which the soul exercises herself after a far more
sublime manner, and begins then to have a more perfect feeling of her not-being
consisting in an Abstraction from the soul herself and all her faculties and
operations, all which are so lost and annihilated in God, that in her
exercises of most pure Prayer, she cannot perceive distinctly any vvorking
either in the understanding or Will, not being able to understand or give an
account of what she does when she Prays.

28. The Author of Secrets sentiers says, that souls which are arrived to
this state of perfect union are yet ordinarily permitted by God to descend often
from their high Abstractions into their inferior nature, even as they were
during their state of entrance into a spiritual course. So that (according to
his doctrine) during such a descent they must needs be full of the feeling of
their own being. But the^ (says he) they from this Descent do by little and
little through their internal exercises ascend higher ther^ they were ever
before; And such Ascents and Descents interchangeably continue all their lives.
Thus says Barbanzon: perhaps out of experience of what passed in his own
soul. But whether from thence he had sufficient warrant to apply this
observation so generally, I leave to the determination of the Perfect, who only
can judge of such matters.

29. But alas, these Contemplations, and consequently the said blessed fruits
of them, are very rare; and not at all in our own power to come to at
pleasure; in as much as a soul does not arrive to the perfection of Prayer
till after a Passive union or Contemplation, whereto well may we dispose our
selves according to our power; but it is in the free will and pleasure of God
to confer it on whom, when and in what manner it pleases him.

30. But hovveuer let not Beginners nor Proficients in spirituality be
discouraged for that as yet they cannot find in themselves (or at least very
imperfectly) a perception of their not-being, not having as yet a supernatural
Intellectual species evidently and even palpably representing to their minds
Gods Totality and their own Nothing; the which species it is not the nature
of Active exercises to produce. It is a great blessing of God to them that he
has given them the courage to aspire thereunto. And perseuering in the ways
leading thither, they will certainly arrive to the partaking of the substance
of this sublime humility, in virtue of which alone all other virtues will be
perfectly exercised by them, in as much as by it they will come to know both
God and themselves aright, and be in an immediate Disposition (as our holy
Father says) to that perfect charity which expells all fear: for which
reason he only treates particularly and largely of this virtue, and of
Obedience, which is a branch of it.

31. We ought therefore never to cease praying that God would reueyle unto us
our own nothing, and his all-being: for Prayer is the only effectual means
to attain unto it. As for exterior Acts and expressions of Humility, if they
flow from prayer, they may be proffitable, and acceptable to God; hovveuer for
the peril of Pride, which will insinuate and mingle it self even in
humility also, we should not be too forvvard to exercise voluntary outvvard
actions of humility out of a pretense of giving edification to others. And
when we do such as are commanded in the Rule, and conformable to our state,
we ought in them, as well as we can, to purify our intention.

CHAP. XIV.
. 1. 2. Of the mortification of our natural Inclination to liberty or
Independency, by the virtue of Obedience.

. 3. 4. Obedience likewise regards God, either mediately or immediately. And
that it is easier to obey God then man.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. The obligation laid by our holy Rule on Subjects to discover
their internal Defects to Superiors, is now much out of use: And how this is
come to pass.

. 9. Obedience earnestly pressed by S. Benedict.

. 10. It ought to proceed from the soul.

. 11. 12. Of the doctrine of Casuists limiting or dispensing with Regular
Obedience; And what use is to be made of it.

. 13. 14. Special aduices thereabouts to scrupulous souls.

. 15. Truly perfect Obedience has no limits.

. 16. 17. 18. Several defects in Obedience.

. 19. 20. 21. 22. 23. How a soul is to behave herself in obediences, in
things prejudicial: And in such as are pleasing to nature.

. 24. An example of perfect simplicity in Obedience.

. 25. Of obedience to Brethren, required in our Rule.

. 26. Prayer a necessary mean to beget Obedience.

1. THE second deprauation of the will which is to be mortified, is a natural
love of Liberty and Independence, as also an Ambition to dispose and Rule
others; And the proper virtue vvherby this is mortified is (Religious)
Obedience; The which is a branch of Humility, as the foresaid deprauation is
of Pride.

2. Obedience therefore, as well as Humility, does principally regard God, even
when it is performed to man. And indeed unless our Obedience to creatures do
flow from our Obedience due to God, it will never advance or perfectionate the
soul, but rather nourish all depraved affections in it, as having its root in
self-love, servile fear, yea often in Pride it self: Whereas if it be grounded
on our duty to God, the soul thereby will become so humble, supple and
pliable, that it will not refuse to subject it self to the meanest creatures,
it will cheerfully suffer all crosses, contradictions and pressures, both
external and internal.

3. Obedience is performed either 1. Immediately to God alone. 2. Or immediately
to man, but for Gods sake. We will in this place only treat of this latter;
for as for the other, it comprehends all the duties of Piety and Devotion,
whether external or internal; and therefore needs not be spoken of
particularly.

4. To submit ones self to man for Gods sake, or out of love to God, is much
harder then to do it immediately to God (and consequently it is in that regard
more meritorious, and will most efficaciously and speedily bring a soul to
perfection.) The reasons of the greater di^ficulty in our obedience to man are.
1. Because though we acknovvledge our Superior to be Gods substitute, yet
we are not alvvaies convinced that his particular Commands proceed from him
as such, but rather from passion, natural interests, auersion etc: so that
we cannot see his commands to be so reasonable (as Gods are acknowledged to
be;) not that Obedience to them will produce so much good to the soul. 2.
Because we know our Superior cannot see nor judge the heart, but may err
and be mistaken: so that it is not easy to submit the mind to one that has no
right over it, nor power to see his commands perfectly executed.

5. For this reason it is that our Holy Father, knovving the vvonderfull virtue
and efficacy of Obedience proceeding from the heart, requires in his holy Rule,
that Subjects should in a sort communicate to their superiors that proper
Attribute of God, who calls himself a seer and searcher of the heart; with
humility and simplicity discovering unto them all their considerable
imperfections in thoughts; And this he does not only out of an eye to the
benefit that may come by the Sacrament of Penance; for this was to be done
though the Superior were no Priest (as anciently often they were not:) But the
ends of this obligation was 1. for the more perfect humiliation of the
subject, and a mortification of that natural auersion that we have from the
discovering and submitting to the censures of others our secret defects. 2. To
the end that the Superior might be enabled to govern his subjects for their
spiritual advancement.

6. We may reasonably impute to the disuse of this obligation the great decay
of Religious discipline and perfection in the world; Because now, generally
speaking, Superiors know no more of their subjects but what they chance to
observe in their outvvard behavior; For as for Internal matters (which are
the principal) they all pass betvveene each Religious person and a private
chosen Confessarius.

7. But vvithall the disuse of the said obligation we are to impute. 1.
Partly to the tepidity of subjects, and their want of care to be governed by a
way absolutely the best for themselves, hovveuer very heavy to corrupt nature.
2. but principally to the Incapacity and Insufficiency of Superiors, in regard
of which such a change of the said custom was esteemed even necessary.

8. Surely this most excellent practice had never been brought into disuse, or
would again be restored, if Superiors (according as our holy Rule requires,
and as in the Primitive times they were) had continued, or generally now
were. 1. Themselves practiced in a spiritual course of Prayer and
contemplation, and would consider that their Duty is to direct their subjects
souls in the same way. 2. If they had the spirit of Discretion and light to
discern the several dispositions and capacities of their subjects souls in
order to their principal end. 3. If in whatsoever impositions they lay on
them, beyond the obseruances of the Rule, they would regard whether thereby
their subjects (considering their several tempers) are likely to be advanced
or hindered in their spiritual course; and not esteem that it is a sufficient
Justification for them that the things in themselves are not ill, and their end
therein is to mortify their subjects wills and Passions: For such
mortifications there may be as will endanger to extinguish the light that is
in their subjects souls, by dravving them to multiplicity etc: so that no
other Impositions or mortifications are excusable, but such as right reason
enlightened by Grace would judge nocessary, and such as God himself would
ordain for them. 4. Especial^y if they would abstain from laying such
encombrances on their subjects as are lasting, and regard not only the
exterior, but Interior also, distracting the memory, confounding the
understanding and breeding perplexity in their minds; or in a word, that are
prejudicial to Internal Prayer (For indeed Impositions are to be accounted;
only so far to be encombrances.) 5. Lastly if they did require obedience from
their subjects not to show their own Authority, but only to benefit their
subjects souls thereby (without which intention their office becomes merely
secular etc:) If, I say, Superiors had remained thus qualified, there would
never have been any sufficient occasion to dispense with such an order
prescribed by our holy Father touching the subjects reueyling to the Superior
their most secret Imperfections, even in thoughts.

9. But hovveuer, matters standing as they now do, and obedience being
divided, as it were, betvveene a Regular, and a spiritual Directour, the
Subject is to perform to each the obedience which is due; yet with this
difference, that he is to consider that the obligation of Obedience to a
spiritual directour voluntarily chosen by the subject and changeable at
pleasure, is far less strict then to a Superior, who has Gods Authority
communicated to him, confirmed by the Church, ratified by a solemn Vow, by
virtue of which we have given up our wills wholy to the wills of our
Superiors. In so much as that our holy Father (in the 5. Chap. of the Rule)
requires a performance of this duty on no meaner motives then the hope of
heaven, the fear of hell and which is the most perfect of all other, the love
of God, for says he, Obedience with, out delay, is proper to them who esteem
nothing dearer to themselves, then Christ.

10. Now since the only principal end why a Religious Person has engaged
himself in a life of Obedience, is the good and advancement of his soul, and
not any temporal conuenience, as in secular governments. Therefore
notvvithstanding the common Saying, That our souls are exempted from humane
Jurisdiction: And notwithstanding that in these days as has been said,
Superiors are not alvvaies the directours of their subjects consciences: Yet
unless their commands be obeyed in Purity of heart, as for Gods sake, and
with submission not only of the outvvard but inward man also, that is, both
the will and judgment, such Obedience is not at all meritorious nor
conformable to the general design of a Religious life and to their Vow of
Profession. For if all Christians, as S. Paul teaches, be obliged to obey
secular Superiors, and servants their masters, Not for fear of wrath or
puni^hment, but for conscience sake, and in order to God who has invested
them with Authority, intending principally the good of their souls in all
manner of exterior obligations; Surely this does much more strictly hold in
Religious Obedience, which was ordained, and has been undertaken, only for
the benefit of the soul.

11. Therefore whereas later Doctors and Casuists have found out Exemptions,
in many cases abridging the Authority of Superiors, and disobliging Subjects
from Obedience; A religious subject that seriously aspires to Perfection
according to his Profession, will be very wary how he makes use of the
advantages and dispensations afforded him; considering that although by such
disobedience he may perhaps escape the punishment of external laws, yet he
will not esteem himself quit from his obligation to obey, unless the things
unduly commanded be such as are inco^sistent with his duty to God, and
manifestly prejudicial to his soul.

12. Moreover a truly humble Internal liver will very rarely, and not
without extreme necessity make use of that just liberty of appealing from an
immediate Superior, allowed by the laws of the Church; And this he will
never do for the case of nature, or the satisfying of any Passion, but purely
for the good of the soul. Indeed I do scarce know any case in which an
Appeal may be fit to be used by such souls, except perhaps when they find
that their immediate Superior, either out of ignorance, or a disaffection to
spiritual Prayer, shall abridge their subjects of time and means necessary
for the exercise of it, either by over burdning them with distractiue and
sollicitous Employments; or as it were purposely and this frequently and
customarily imposing on them obediences at the times appointed and proper for
Prayer. Yet surely the case must needs be extraordinary, if a soul cannot by
using her dexterity and prudence recover each day two halfe-hovvers for
Recollection.

13. Notvvithstanding some good use may be made of the opinion of Doctors,
touching the limits and bounds prescribed to the Authority of Superiors, and
the degrees of obligation to such Authority, for the necessary ease of devout,
tender and scrupulous souls. Not that such are to be encouraged to dispense
with themselves in the duties required thereby: but least they out of tenderness
in suspecting often a Mortal sin to have been committed by disobedience, where
perhaps there was scarce any fault at all, should be disquieted, perplexed and
hindered from reaping any benefit by Prayer, or any other duties. And indeed
little danger is there that souls so disposed should from any larger
interpretations make advantage to the ease of nature, or the satisfaction of an
inordinate Passion.

14. Such souls therefore may know 1. That the Authority of Superiors is not
illimited, but confined to certain conditions: as that it must be iuxta
Regulam, neither besides nor above the Rule; and that their commands must be ad
aedificationem, and not ad destructionem etc. 2. That Disobedience to their
commands which are according to the Rule, is not a mortal offense, unless
the matters commanded be in themselves of more then ordinary importance; and
that a command be expressly given, and with signification that their
intention is that it should so oblige; and that the subject has not ground to
judge that if the Superior were present, he would not have urged such an
obedience so strictly. 3. That in matters of lesser moment, a Disobedience
mortally sinful is not committed, unless it be done with manifest Contempt:
That is, as S. Bernard (lib. de Praecept. and Dispens.) interprets it, When the
subject will neither obey, nor submit to correction for disobedience. So that
all faults that are committed by one that really has a mean or a contemptuous
opinion of his Superior, and which without such a precedent unfit opinion
would not have been committed, are not to be called in this sense sins out of
Contempt: unless the Subject renounce correction; A fault that such tender
souls are incapable of committing etc.

15. Perfect Obedience, says the same S. Bernard, knows no ends or limits, it
extends it self to all lavvfull things, pertaining either to body or soul;
and to all actions both external and Internal (as far as these last are
voluntarily submitted to him:) Insomuch as that our holy father to cut of all
pretenses of disobedience, does not except even things impossible: so that if
such things as not only in the faint-hearted opinion of the Subject are
esteemed such, but really are impossible, should be seriously and considerately
imposed by a discreet Superior (for trial: the Subject is obliged to do his
endeavor tovvard the effecting of them; so they be lavvfull and not
destructive to the subjects life. Yea we find examples of Saints that upon
commands of Superiors have cast themselves into rivers, or leaped down
precipices, or taken coals of fire into their hands etc. But we are to
suppose that in these cases there was a special Divine Instinct both in the
Superior commanding, and the Subjects obeying: As the Events shevved; the said
Subjects having never miscarried, but been miraculously delivered from any harm
by what they so did in Obedience. And therefore the like Examples cannot be
drawn into a Rule.

16. The several Defects in point of Obedience (the avoiding of which
defects, constitutes several Degrees of true Religious Obedience) are reckoned
by Turrecremata to be these which follovv, viz. 1. To do some, but not all
things enjoined. 2. If all; yet imperfectly and incompletely. 3. Or not in the
manner requisite. 4. Or not upon the first simple bidding, but expecting a
second command, or perhaps one in form, and in virtue of Obedience. 5. Or to
do it with reluctance and vnvvillingenes. 6. Or after the discussing the
reasonablenes and lavvfullnes of the command. 7. To go slowly and lazily about
it. 8. To do it rashly and without fit preparation. 9. For want of a resolute
purpose beforehand to obey absolutely and universally, to be in a readiness to
contradict when commands come upon the sudden, rather then to hasten to obey.
10. Then to obey indeed, yet not without repining, or at least a show of it
in the countenance. 11. Or howeuer with sadness and deiectednes. 12. To obey in
greater matters but not so readily in small. 13. To obey in the substance of
the thing commanded, but not according to the intention of the Superior or
law. 14. The command being unpleasing, to suspect or judge ill of the
Superiors intention. 15. To make pretended excuses of insufficiency. 16. To be
of so troublesome and froward an humor, as to discourage the Superior from
imposing any commands. 17. Out of an opinion of ones own judgment or
sufficiency to slight the Superiors way of government. 18. To seek to draw
the Superior to ones own way and opinions, and so in effect to become as
Superior. 19. When one does the thing commanded, to do it with a
vvillling-fraudulent insufficiency. 20. Not to do it with all chearfullnes
and readiness. 21. Lastly not to obey with a perfect intention, for Gods Glory
and Love,

17. Now least a Beginner should be discouraged seeing so many conditions
requisite to perfect Obedience, and so many defects to be avoided: he must
consider, that God does not expect at the first from him an Obedience in all
points perfect; It is well that he do the command without sin, that is, not
making the principal Motive to be outward sensual respects, and without
behauing himself with a deliberate defectuousnes, murmuring etc. By practice
in obeying according to ones power, a soul will by little and little wear
away the defects, as it is in the learning of any art or trade. An Obedience
though imperfect, so it be not sinful, meriteth somevvhat; and besides, it
disposes the person to amend it the next time, by taking notice of the defect,
and being vvilling to be admonished.

18. It is no marvel, neither is it a fault that the body being vvearied and
exhausted with many obediences, there should thereupon be found in inferior
nature a reluctance. But the mind or will should never be weary or backwards,
but remain ever invincible, forcing inferior nature to comply to the utmost
of her power; but yet according to Discretion.

19. In case a Superior command a subject things not only heavy and greiuous
to nature, but even such as are apparently contrary to health and corporal
strength, as a rigorous conformity to Regular abstinences, fasting, watchings
etc: The Subject must neither refuse the command, nor show any vnvvillingnes
to obey: but having, after good consideration and experience, found himself
unable and infirm, he may lavvfully declare unto the Superior such his
infirmity, so he do it (as the Rule expresses it; Patienter and opportune,)
With Patience and taking an opportune time for it, not suddenly, querulously
and in Passion. But in case the Superior do persist, the subject must obey,
submitting both body, will and judgment, and so committing the issue to God;
And then the success, what ever it be, cannot but be good.

20. If the thing commanded be grateful to nature, honorable, pleasing etc:
it is not good nor secure to be ouer-forvvard in obeying; It were better, so
it might be done without offense, to seek to avoid it, vvishing that others
might rather be employed: or hovveuer to undertake it as obedience only, and as
it were against our wills. But if the matter be harsh to nature, we are to
do it with all possible readiness and chearfullnes, being desirous that others
should be exempted from it.

21. It is not very hard internally to resolve universally to forsake ones
own will, submitting it to another. But really and actually to perform this
at all times whensoever Obediences are imposed; and that frequently; and when
the things are of difficulty and contradiction to nature; and (it may be)
imposed by a Superior against whom the subject has some disaffection in
nature; or of whom he has a mean opinion; and when, the subject himself is
in an ill humor of obeying; or when the obediences though performed never so
cheerfully and exactly, yet are usually ill accepted, censured etc: this
requires a great courage and perfect self-denial; and much more to persevere
in such Obedience to the end of ones life, with meekenes and patient
subjection.

22. And a yet greater degree of perfection is it (to which notvvitstanding
Internal livers ought to aspire) for a Religious Person that is hardly and
injuriously treated by his Superior, to be content and desirous that he should
continue to use him so or worse, so it might be without offense to God, and so
that no harm might come to the Superiors soul thereby.

23. There are no commands though never so impertinent or distracting, that can
prejudice perfect souls that are come to an established state of recollection,
and habitually enjoy the Divine presence. But great harm and danger may come
thereby to the imperfect. The which notvvithstanding by patience, quietness and
meekenes in obeying, may come to make their proffit even from them also, so
that though they loose one way by a hindrance to their Recollection, they may
repair that loss by rooting these virtues more firmly in their souls:
Hovveuer the Superior must expect to have a severe account required of him for
indiscreete and harmfull impositions laid upon his Subjects.

24. A memorable example of Obedience, joined with a mortification very
sensible to humble souls (to wit, a mortification caused by an obligation to
accept undue and unproportionable honor) we read of in the Story of the
Great S. Basile: who having obtained at his own request from a neighbor
Bishop, a Priest to attend him, recommended as an humble and obedient Person;
S. Basile for a trial of these virtues, required of him to prepare some water
for the washing of his feet. The good Priest with a modest chearfullnes
obeyed; and having quickly brought the water, S. Basile sitting down;
commanded him to vvash his feet; who readily and diligently performed that
command. That being done, the Saint commands the Priest to sit down, that so
he in exchange might also vvash his feet. The humble and virtuously simple man
without any excuses or contestations quietly and calmely, as it became one
perfect in obedience, suffers his feet to be vvashed by him, that was then
the most eminent and most reverenced Prelate in the Eastern Church. Upon this
Proof S. Basile was satisfied that he had found an attendant fit for the
Employments to which he destind him, and with many thanks to the neighbor
Bishop took the Priest with him for his inseparable comparison.

25. There is mentioned in our holy Rule another sort of Obedience of great
efficacy to bring souls to Perfection, to wit, an Obedience not out of
obligation and duty, to Superiors; but only from respect to Brethren
(specially Ancients) in Religion, and this out of Charity and in conformity to
S. Paul's Advice (which is very general) that we should in honor prefer
every one before our selves. This kind of Obedience as receiving proper
commands from such, is now out of Practice. And whether this disuse has
proceeded from want of simplicity and humility in the younger sort, or from
imperfection and want of discretion and gravity in the more Ancient, or
perhaps from Iealousy and a love of being absolute in Superiors, it is hard to
say; But surely it is a great loss. There were likewise obligations imposed
upon all Iuniours, after any the least offense taken by their Ancients, to make
present satisfaction by prostrations, the which were to continue till that
pardon and a benediction were given. Indeed in those times in which so much
abstraction of life and so seldom mutual conuersations were used, offenses
were so rare, that it would be no hard matter for such simple, humble souls
as most Religious persons then were, to comply with these obligations. So
that the only way to restore them, is to restore that most proffitable
Abstraction, solitude and silence again.

26. It is in vain for any one to seek the attaining to the perfection of
Obedience (which besides the outvvard work requires a submission of the
spirit it self to God alone in the Superior, and a renouncing of ones own
Judgment upon the dictates of the most ignorant or indiscreete Superior) but
by the serious and constant practice of Internal Prayer, which alone purifies
the soul, and makes all other things but God invisible to her. So that
without such Prayer, all other exterior practices of an officious humiliation
will be of little or no virtue or efficacy thereto.

CHAP. XV.
. 1. We do not here treat of all kinds of Mortification or Virtues; but
principally such as are most proper and most necessary to be known and
practiced in order to an Internal life.

. 2. 3. 4. etc. Several Aduices and observations touching Virtues in general.

1. HITHERTO we have treated of the first Instrument and mean of Perfection,
to wit, Mortification; at least so far as we conceived proper to the design
of this book, that is, in order to internal Prayer of Contemplation. And
therefore it is that we have not enlarged the discourse to comprehend
universally all Moral virtues (the which are Mortifications to all our
distempered affections) but only such as are more peculiar to Religious or
Internal livers. For the rest, the Reader is referred to other books of
Christian Morality, which abundantly treat of that subject. The doctrine of
which may be applied to the present purpose, if Reflection be made on the
Aduices which have already been given concerning the special virtues hitherto
treated of. To the which I will, for conclusion of this Treatise, add a fevv
more touching Virtues in general.

2. The first advice is this; That before a soul can attain to perfect
Contemplation, it is necessary that she be adorned with all sorts of Christian
virtues, not one excepted, according to the saying of the Psalmist, Ibunt de
virtute in virtutem: videbit ur Deus Deorum in Sion. That is, They shall go
from one virtue to another: And then (and not till then) the God of Gods shall
be contemplated in Sion. So that if a soul make a stop at any virtue, of
willingly favor herself in any inordinate affection, it will not be
possible for her to ascend to the top of the mountain where God is seen.

3. The Second regards the manner of attaining to virtues: For we are not so
to understand these words of the Psalmist, as if a souls progress to
Perfection was by a successiue gaining of one virtue after another, for
example, first possessing herself of the virtue of Temperance, and having got
that, then proceeding to Patience, Humility, Chastity etc. But they are all in
the root gotten together, and we make no progress in one Virtue, but
vvithall we make a proportionable progress in all the rest. And the reason
is, because Charity is the root of all Christian virtues, they being only such
duties as Charity (which alone directs us to God, our last end) would and
does dictate to be practiced on several and different occasions.

4. True it is, that either by our natural tempers, or by having more frequent
trials and occasions of exercising some virtues, certain Passions opposite to
them may be, according to the material disposition in corporal nature, more
subdued and regulated, then others: yet in regard of the disposition of the
spiritual soul (that is the judgment of the mind and resolution of the will)
the soul (according to the merit of the object) is equally (by an equality of
proportion) inclined to all good, and equally auerted from all ill. Because
divine Love is equally inconsistent with all mortal sins, and does combat and
subdue self-love in all its branches. Our progress therefore expressed in the
Phrase [de virtute in virtutem] is to be understood to be from a lower and more
imperfect degree of Charity, and all its virtues, to a higher; till we come
to the mount of Perfection.

5. The Third Advice is, that this progress and increase in virtues is neither
equal at all times; for the soul by resisting stronger temptations, and in
virtue of more efficacious Prayer does make greater strides and paces; Neither
is it alvvaies obseruable either by the Traveler himself or others. Yea it is
neither necessary, nor (perhaps) convenient that we should much heed the
Rules that are given by some for examination of our Proficiency. Such enquiry
seems not very suitable to humility and probably will not produce any good
effect in us; It may suffice us that we go on, and that God knovves
perfectly our growth in Piety and love, and will most assuredly revvard us
proportionally, though we should be never so ignorant to what degree of
Perfection we are arrived.

6. Fourthly, All increase of sanctifying Grace by whatsoever instruments it
be produced, as by Regular Austerities, Temperance, Exercises of Mortification
etc; is performed according to the good Internal dispositions and Actuations
of soul accompanying the use of them. Yea the same may also in a certain
proportion be affirmed even of the Sacraments themselves (in adultis:) The
which although by their own intrinsecall Virtue and (as the Council of
Trent. sess. 7. can. 8. expresses it) ex opere operato they do conserre a
peculiar Grace and aid: and this, Quantum est part Dei, at all times, and on
all Persons that duly receive them. (see sess. 7. cap. 6. and 7.) Yet vvithall
the quantity and Measure of the said Grace is in the same Council (sess. 6.
cap. 7.) said to be (Secundam propriam cuiusque dispositionem and
cooperationem) according to the peculiar disposition and cooperation of each
Person respectively: That is, Those that come with more (or less) perfect,
intense, continued and multiplied Internal Acts of Faith, Hope, Charity,
Devotion etc, do accordingly receive a more (or less) plentiful measure of
Sacramental Grace. Now what are all these dispositions and Preparations but
the Exercising of Internal Prayer? Whence appears how vvonderfull an
Influence Internal Prayer both by way of Merit or impetration, and likewise
by a direct Efficiency has in the producing and increase of Divine virtues in
the Soul.

7. Fifthly, if a soul out of the times of Prayer shall in occasions (for
example) of contradictions, persecutions etc: neglect to exercise Patience, she
must necessarily exercise impatience; and by consequence will make little or
no progress by her Prayer; Yet if then she shall use any reasonable care,
diligence or vvatchfullnes over herself, though not for the getting of much,
yet not to loose much out of Prayer, God will by means of her Prayer
seriously prosecuted, infuse such a measure of Grace as will cause a
progress, notvvithstanding frequent failings through frailty or inaduertence
etc. But it will be late ere the effects of such infusion will appear.

8. Sixthly, increase in virtue does purely depend on the free Grace and good
pleasure of God, conferring the said grace in prayer etc. in a measure as
himself pleases, and also by his holy Providence administering occasions
severally of exercising several virtues; The which occasions ordinarily are
not at all in our own power or disposal.

9. Seauenthly, according to our progress in virtues, so is our progress in
Prayer; and till the soul be in a very high degree purified from self-love,
she is incapable of that perfect degree of Prayer, which is called
Contemplation; According to that saving of our Savior, (Math. 5.) Beati mundo,
cord, quoniam ipsi Deum, videbunt: That is, Blessed are the Pure in heart, for
they shall see God. And the reason is evident, because until the internal Eye
of the soul be cleansed from the mists of Passions and inordinate Affections,
it neither will nor can fix it self upon so pure and divine an object. True
it is that in every the most imperfect degree of Prayer (by which the soul is
proportionally purified) God is, in some qualified sense contemplated: But we
do not apply the term of Contemplation, except only to the most sublime
degree of prayer. The which yet is never so perfectly absolute in this life
but that it may without limitation increase: Because the soul is never so
perfectly freed from the bitter fruits of original sin (Ignorance and
Concupiscence) but there will over remain matter and exercise for further
mortification, or purification.

10. Eighthly, Virtues are in no other state of life so perfectly established
in the depth and center of the Spirit, as in a Contemplative state; Because all
the exercises thereof do principally and directly regard the exaltation,
spiritualising and purification of the Spirit, by a continual application,
adhesion and union of it to God, the fountain of light and Purity.

11. Last^y, by the means of Contemplative Prayer in an Internal Life Virtues
are most easily obtained, most securely possessed, and most perfectly
practiced. In an Active life a Person that aspires to Perfection therein, stands
in need of many things to enable him for the practice of the Duties disposing
thereto: For the Exercise of External works of Charity there are needful
Riches or friends etc: And for Spiritual Almes-giuing there is required
Learning, study, Disputation etc. And if by the help of these there be
acquired an establi^hed Habit of Solid Charity, it is not very securely
possessed in the midst of so many distractions follicitudes and Tentations. But
a Contemplative life (as S. Thomas 22. q. 182. a. 1. c. observes even from
Aristotle himself) stands in need of very few things, being to it self
susficient. Such a Person alone without needing either assistance or favor
from abroad can both purchase and exercise all virtues, yea and liberally
dispense all kinds of Charity to others also. For by Prayer alone exercised in
Solitude he can employ and engage Gods Omnipotence, Wisdom and all the
treasures of his riches for the supplying all the necessities, External and
Internal of his Church. The light that is gotten by Prayer will be more then
equivalent to long and laborious study (not sanctified with Prayer) for the
enabling him to discharge efficaciously a Pastoral charge over souls, when
they shall be committed to him: Though no doubt Prayer will also incite to
sufficient study. And in the mean time though he were deprived of all
conuersations and Books, yea fettred and buried in the obscurity of a dungeon,
Prayer alone would be a sufficient entertainment to him: There he would find
God and his Holy Spirit as present, and as bountiful to him, as ever: Yea the
greater Solitude there is, at the more freedom is the soul to run speedily
and lightly in the course of Virtues: For nothing does indeed fetter her but
selfeloue and Propriety. And lastly Virtues once gotten are evidently most
securely possessed in Solitude, from whence all distraction and almost all
Tentations are excluded.

THE END OF THE SECOND TREATISE OF MORTIFICATION.
SANCTA SOPHIA.

OR DIRECTIONS FOR THE PRAYER OF CONTEMPLATION etc.

Extracted out of more then XL. Treatises written by the late Ven. Father F.
AVGVSTIN BAKER, A Monk of the English Congregation of the Holy Order of S.
BENEDICT: And Methodically digested by the R. F. SERENVS CRESSY, Of the same
Order and Congregation.

And printed at the Charges of his Convent of S. GREGORY'S IN DOWAY.

VOL. II.

AT DOWAY, By JOHN PATTE', and THOMAS FIEVET, ANNO D. M.DC.LVII.

TO THE VENERABLE AND R. LADY D. CATHERINE GASCOIGNE The Lady Abbess of the
Religious Dames of the Holy Order of S. BENEDICT in Cambray. And to all the RR.
Dames etc. of the same Convent.
MADAME.
If I had not any pressing obligation (as I have many) to take all occasions to
acknowledge both my worthy esteem and resentment also for your many favors:
Yet without injustice I could not but return unto your Ladishipp etc. these
Instructions about the Prayer of Contemplation, which from your full store I
first received. I could wish it had been in my power to commend them to the
liking and practice of others, as the admirable Piety of the Ven. Author
(whose memory will always be in Benediction with you) did to yours. But being
able to boast no other virtue in this matter, but only diligence and fidelity
(asserted by your Ladyships own testimony:) I should doubt that the
unworthiness of the Compiler would to their disparagement-preuayle against the
Excellency of the Author, and his argument, were it not that I am confident
that a view (appare^t to all that know that Convent) of the many most blessed
effects that they have produced there, will have the force to recommend them to
strangers, and to defend them against contradictours. Your great Charity (RR.
DD.) makes you think your selves not vnbeholding to me for dispersing thus
abroad to all that will accept them, these your richest Jewels, your most
delicious provisions, your most secure armor, that is, all that makes your
Solitude and Scarcity etc. deserve to be the envy of Princes Courts, the
Habitation of Angels, and Temples of God himself: For Prayer is all this, and
more good then your selves can express; and yet you can express more then any
others but such as your selves can understand. Since therefore you have been
pleased to say I have obliged you by this publication, let my recompense, I
beseech you, be to be sometimes thought of in your Prayers, that I may become
seriously mine own Disciple, and learn by this Book to pray as you do: and
that this Work may inuit the Readers, whoeuer they be, only to make a Trial
(though at first but eue^ out of curiosity) whether we have boasted too
large^y of the Treasures here exposed: This if through the Divine assistance
they shall do, it may be hoped that many unawares to themselves will become
Conuerts not only to Piety but even to Catholic Truth and Unity. And surely
none will suspect that any danger can come from Pure Spiritual Prayer.

Madame and RR. DD. Doway: this 23. of July. 1657. Your servant in our Lord
most humbly devoted Br. Serenus Cressy.

THE SECOND VOLVME OF INSTRVCTIONS FOR A CONTEMPLATIVE LIFE: CONTAINING A THIRD
TREATISE OF PRAYER etc.

THE THIRD TREATISE: OF PRAYER.
THE FIRST SECTION: Of Prayer in general, and the general Division of it.
CHAP. I.
. 1. 2 3. 4. Of Prayer in general; What it is.

. 5. 6. 7. 8. It is the most Excellent and most necessary of all Duties.

. 9. 10. The Division of Prayer into Vocal and Mental, improper.

THE whole Employment of an Internal Co^templatiue life having been by me
comprehended under two Duties, to wit, Mortification and Prayer; Concerning
(the former) mortification we have discoursed largely in the precedent
Treatise. We are now hence-forvvard to treat of the other most noble and
divine Instrument of Perfection, which is Prayer, by which and in which
alone we attain to the revvard of all our Endeauours; the end of our
creation and Redemption, to wit,, union with God, in which alone consists our
Happiness and Perfection.

2. By Prayer in this place I do not understand Petition or Supplication,
which according to the Doctrine of the Schools is exercised principally by
the understanding: being a signification of what the person desires to receive
from God. But Prayer here especially meant, is rather an offering and giving to
God whatsoever he may justly require from us, that is, all Duty, Love,
Obedience etc And it is principally, yea almost only exercised by the Affectiue
part of the soul.

3. Now Prayer in this general notion may be defined to be, an Elevation of
the mind to God. Or more largely and expressly thus: Pray^r is an affectuous
Actuation of an intellectiue soul toward God, expressing, or at least
implying an entire dependence on him, as the Author and fountain of all good;
a will and readiness to give him his due, which is no less then all Love,
Obedience, Adoration, Glory, and Worship, by humbling and annihilating of her
self and all creatures in his presence; and lastly a desire and intention to
aspire to an union of Spirit with him.

4. This is the nature and these the necessary Qualities, which are all, at
least vertually, inuolued in all Prayer, whether it be made interiourly in the
soul only, or vvithall expressed by words or outvvard signs.

5. Hence it appears, that Prayer is the most perfect and most Divine Action
that a national soul is capable of; yea it is the only principal Action for
the exercising of which the soul was created; since in Prayer alone the soul
is united to God. And by consequence, it is of all other Actions and Duties the
most indispensably necessary.

6. For a further demonstration of which necessity we may consider. 1. That
only in Prayer we are joined to God our last End, from whom when we are
separated, we are in our selves, wherein our chief misery consists. 2. That
by Prayer Grace and all good is obtained, conserved and recovered; for God
being the fountain of all good, no good can be had but by recourse to him,
which is only by Prayer. 3. That by Prayer alone all exterior good things are
sanctified, so as to become blessings to us. 4. That Prayer does exercise all
virtues: In so much as whatsoever good Action is performed, it is no further
meritorious then as it proceeds from an internal motion of the soul,
eleuating and directing it to God; (the which internal motion is prayer:) so
that whatsoever is not prayer, or is not done in virtue of prayer, is little
better then an Action of mere nature. 5. That there is no Action with which sin
is incompatible, but Prayer. We may, lying in our sins, give Alms, Fast,
Recite the Divine Office, Communicate, Obey our Superiors etc: But it is
impossible to exercise true Prayer of the Spirit, and deliberately continue
under the guilt of sin; Because by Prayer a soul, being converted and united
to God, cannot at the same time be auerted and separated from him. 6. That by
Prayer alone approaching to God, we are placed above all miseries; vvheras
without Prayer the least calamity would oppress us. Therefore Pr^yer is the
proper remedy against all kinds of afflictions, guilt, Remorses etc.

7. And hence it is, that all the Devils quarrels and assaults are chiefly,
if not only, against Prayer; the which if he can extinguish, he has all that
he aims at, separating us from the fruition and adhesion to God, and
therevvith from all good. And hence likewise it is, that the Duty of Prayer is
enjoined after such a manner as no other Duty is, for we are commanded to
exercise it without intermission, (Oportet semper orare and non deficere) We
must needs pray continually and never give over.

8. In the precedent Description of Prayer in general I said, that it was an
Affectuous Actuation of an Intellectual soul: By which words is signified.
1. That it is not Prayer, which is performed by the lips only without an
inward Attention and Affection of the soul: that is, That Prayer which is not
Mental, is not indeed properly Prayer. 2. That whatsoever employment the mind
or understanding exercises in Prayer, by discoursing, inuenting motives etc:
these are only preparations to prayer, and not prayer it self, which is only
and immediately exercised by the will or affections, adhering to God; as shall
be shevved hereafter.

9. Hence it follows, that The ordinary Division of Prayer into Vocal and
Mental, is improper: Because the parts of the Division are coincident: For
Vocal Prayer as distinguished from (and much more as opposed to) Mental, is
indeed no Prayer at all; And what ever it is, What esteem God makes of it, he
shows by his Prophet, saying, This people honors me with their Lips, but
their heart is far from me. In vain do they honor me etc.

10. Yet both a good sense, and a good use may be made of that Division, being
explicated after this manner; viz. That though all true Prayer be Mental, yet
1. Some Prayers are merely mental without any sound of words; yea there may
be such Pure, blind Eleuations of the will to God, that there are not so much
as any express internal words, or any explicable Thoughts of the soul it
self. 2. Other Prayers may be vvithall vocally expressed in outvvard words,
the soul attending to the sense of the words pronounced, or at least
intending to do so. And this is properly vocal Prayer.

CHAP. II.
. 1. Of Vocal Prayer.

. 2. 3. etc: By Vocal Prayer the Ancients attained to Perfect Contemplation.
And why this cannot so well be done in these times.

. 10. How voluntary Vocal Prayers may be made instrument all to Contemplation.

. 11. That Vocal Prayer of obligation is upon no pretense to be neglected.

. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. Of Attention, required to Vocal Prayer, and of the
degrees of it.

1. THE Design of this Treatise being to deliver Instructions concerning
Internal Contemplative Prayer; Therefore little shall be said of vocal Prayer;
and that little also shall be of it, considered as it may among others be an
instrument or mean to bring a soul to Contemplation.

2. It cannot be denied, but that in Ancient times many holy souls did attain
to perfect Contemplation by the mere use of vocal Prayer. The which likewise
would have the same effect upon us, if we would or could imitate them both
in such vvonderfull solitude or Abstraction, rigorous Abstinences, and
incredible assiduity in praying. But for a supply of such wants and inability
to support such vndistracted long attention to God, we are driven to help
our selves by daily set Exercises of Internal Prayer to procure an habitual
constant state of recollectednes; by such Exercises repairing and making amends
for the distractions that we live in all the rest of the Day.

3. Notvvithstanding Gods hand is not shortened, but that if he please, he may
now also call souls to Contemplation by the way of Vocal Prayer, so as that
they are their general and ordinary Exercise. The which if he do, it will
be necessary that such souls should in their course observe these follovving
Conditions.

4. The first is, that they must use a greater measure of Abstraction and
Mortification, then is necessary for those that exercise Mental Prayer. The
Reason is, because Internal Prayer, being far more profound and inward,
affords a far greater light and grace to discover and cure the inordinate
Affections; It brings the soul likewise to a greater simplicity and facility
to recollect it self etc. And therefore Vocal Prayer, to make amends, had need
be accompanied with greater Abstraction etc.

5. The second Condition is, that those who use Vocal Prayer must oblige
themselves to spend a greater time at their daily exercises, then is necessary
for the others; to the end thereby to supply for the less efficacy that is in
Vocal Prayer.

The third is, that in case they do find themselves at any time invited by God
internally to a Pure In^ernall Prayer (which is likely to be of the nature of
Aspirations) they then must yield to such an Inuitation, and for the time
interrupt or cease their vo^untary Vocal exercises, for as long time as they
find themselves enabled to exercise Internally. These Conditions are to be
observed of all those who, either in Religion, or in the world, desire to lead
spiritual lives, and cannot without extreme difficulty be brought to begin a
spiritual course with any kind of mere Mental Prayer.

7. And indeed if any such souls there be, to whom Vocal Prayer (joined
with the exercise of Virtues) is sufficient to promote them to Contemplation.
Certain it is that there is no way more secure then it, none less subject to
indiscretion or illusions, and none less perilous to the head or health. And
in time (but it will be long first) their Vocal Prayers will prove Aspiratiue;
spiritual and contemplative, by their light and virtue illustrating and
peircing to the very depth of the Spirit.

8. But in these days this case is very extraordinary, and indeed unknown, And
therefore Contemplative Religious Persons ought not upon any pretense to
dispens^ with themselves for the exercise of Mental Prayer what ever
pretentions or tentations they may have thereto. They may perhaps find their
Vocal Prayers to be more clear and vndistracted: and on the contrar^ their
Recollections to be painful and disturbed: But ye^ in time and by constancy in
pursuing Internal exe^cises, they will find the contrary, and perceive that
the ground of the difference was either some prese^^ corporal indisposition;
or perhaps a tentation of t^^ devil to move them to a neglect of exercising in
spirit. Since certain it is, that little less then a mirac^^ will cause
Vocal Prayers, to imperfect souls, to become Contemplative, or sufficient to
produce profound recollection; The which effects even those that have long
practiced Internal exercises do not find in the reciting of the Office. Such
seeming extraordinary contemplations therefore as seem to come to souls, none
knovves from whence; without any great merit, or due disposition on their
part, are not much to be esteemed, but rather to be suspected; And hovveuer,
they deserve not that therefore the solid Exercises of Internal Prayer should
be neglected.

9. To the like purpose we read that S. Ignatius found extraordinary
Illustrations in soul being at his study of humane learning: whereas at his
ordinary mental Prayers he could find no such effects, but on the contrary
much difficulty and obscurity. But this in time he discovered to be the
vvorking of the devil.

10. The use of voluntary vocal Prayer in order to contemplation may in the
beginning of a spiritual course be proper. 1. for such simple and unlearned
persons (especially women) as are not at all fit for discoursiue Prayer. 2.
yea even for the more learned, if it be used as a means to raise and better
their attention to God: yet so that it must always give place to Internal
prayer, when they find themselves disposed for it.

11. But as for that Vocal Prayer, either in Public or Private, which is by
the laws of the Church of obligation, no manner of pretenses of finding more
proffit by internal exercises ought to be esteemed a sufficient ground for any
to neglect or disparage it: for though some souls of the best dispositions
might perhaps more advance themselves toward Perfection by internal
exercises alone; yet since generally even in Religion souls are so tepide and
negligent, that if they were left to their own voluntary Devotions they
would scarce ever exercise either vocal or mental Prayer; therefore in as
much as a manifest distinction cannot be made betvveene the particular
dispositions of persons, it was requisite and necessary that all should be
obliged to a Public external performance of divine Service, praising God
with the tongues also (which were for that end given us;) That so an order
and Decorum might be observed in Gods Church, to the end it might imitate the
employment of Angels and glorified Saints in a solemn, united joining of
hearts and tongues to glorify God. This was necessary also for the edification
and inuitation of those who are not obliged to the Office, who perhaps would
never think of God, were they not encouraged thereto by seeing good souls
spend the greatest part of their time in such solemn and almost hourly
praying to and praising God.

12. Now whereas to all manner of prayer, as has been said, there is
necessarily required an Attention of the mind, without which it is not
prayer: We must know, that there are several kinds and degrees of attention;
All of them good; but yet one more perfect and proffitable then another. For.
1. There is an Attention or express reflection on the words and sense of the
sentence pronounced by the tongue, or reuolued in the mind. Now this Attention
being in vocal prayer necessarily to vary and change according as sentences in
the Psalms etc do succeed one another, cannot so povverfully and
efficaciously fix the mind or affections on God; because they are presently to
be recalled to new considerations or succeding affections. This is the lowest
and most imperfect degree of Attention; Of which all souls are in some
measure capable: and the more imperfect they are, the less difficulty there is
in yiedling it; for souls that have good and established affections to God,
can hardly quitt a good Affection by which they are united to God, and which
they find gustfull and proffitable for them, to exchange it for a new one
succeeding in the Office; And if they should, it would be to their preiudi^e.

13. The second degree is that of souls indifferently well practiced in
Internal Prayer, who coming to the reciting of the Office, and either
bringing with them, or by occasion of such reciting, raising in themselves an
efficacious Affection to God, do desire without variation to continue it
with as profound a Recollectednes as they may, not at all heeding whether it
be suitable to the sense of the present passage which they pronounce. This is
an Attention to God, though not to the words; and is far more beneficial then
the former. And therefore to oblige any souls to quit such an Attention for the
former, would be both prejudicial and unreasonable. For since all Vocal
Prayers in Scripture or otherwise were ordained only to this end to suppl^
and furnish the soul that needs, with good matter of affection, by which it
may be united to God: a soul that has already attained to that end, which
is union, as long as it lasts ought not to be separated therefrom, and be
obliged to seek a new means, till the virtue of the former be spent.

14. A third and most Sublime Degree of Attention to the Divine Office is, that
vvherby Vocal Prayers do become mental: that is, vvherby souls most
profoundly and with a perfect simplicity united to God, can yet without any
prejudice to such union, attend also to the sense and spirit of each passage
that they pronounce; yea thereby find their affection, adhesion and union
increased and more simplified. This Attention comes not till a soul be arrived
to perfect Contemplation, by means of which the spirit is so habitually
united to God, and besides, the imagination so subdued to the spirit, that it
cannot rest upon any thing that will distract it.

15. Happy are those souls (of which God knovves the number is very small)
that have attained to this third Degree; the which must be ascended to by a
careful practice of the two former in their order, especirlly of the second
Degree. And therefore in reciting of the Office, even the more imperfect souls
may do well, whensoever they find themselves in a good measure recollected,
to continue so as long as they well can, preserving as much stability in their
imagination, as may be.

16. And the best means to beget and increase such a recollected way of
saying the Divine Office is the practice of Internal Prayer, either in
meditation or immediate Acts of the will; the only aim and end vvherof is,
the procuring an immovable Attention and adhesion of the Spirit to God. And
this, as to our present purpose, may suffice concerning Vocal Prayer.

CHAP. III.
. 1. Of Internal Prayer in general, And principally of Internal Affectiue
Prayer.

. 2. 3. 4. 5. The excellency and necessity of Affectiue Prayer. And that it was
practiced by the Ancients ( and not discoursiue Prayer or Meditation.)

. 6. The great necessity of it in these days.

. 7. 8. The Testimony of Cardinal Bellarmine to show that Vocal Prayer etc.
suffiseth not.

. 9. 10. 11. etc. Five admirable Virtues of Internal Affectiue Prayer.

. 16. 17. An exhortation to constancy and courage in pursuing the exercise of
it.

1. INTERNAL or, Mental Prayer (which is simply and merely such and) which
we made the second member in the Division of Prayer in general, (if indeed
it be a distinct kind) and of which only we shall treat hereafter: is
either 1. Imperfect and acquired: 2. Or Perfect, and that which is called
properly Infused Prayer. The former is only a Preparation and Inferior
Disposition, by which the soul is fitted and made capable of the Infusion of
the other, to wit, the Prayer of Contemplation which is the end of all our
Spiritual and Religious Exercises. I shall therefore in order treat of them
both, and of their several special degree^, beginning with the lowest, and
thence ascending orderly till we come to the highest, the which will bring
a soul to the state of Perfection.

2. But before I come to deliver the special Instructions pertinent to the
exercise of the several Degrees of Internal Prayer: It will be very
requisite by way of Preparation and encouragement, to set down the necessity
and excellency of Internal Prayer in general; I mean especially of that
which is Affectiue. For as for Discoursiue Prayer, or Meditation, the world
is but even burdned with books, which with more then sufficient nicenes
prescribe Rules and methods for the Practice of it; and with too partial an
affection magnify it; The Authors of such books neglecting in the mean time,
or perhaps scarce knovving what true Internal affectiue Prayer is; the which
notvvithstanding is the only efficacious Instrument that immediately brings
souls to Contemplation and perfect Union in spirit with God.

3. Some there are that because they do not find in the vvritings of the
Ancient Fathers and Mystical Doctors such exact Instructions touching the
practice of Internal Prayer, as are now common and abounding in the Church;
do therefore undervalue and despise it as a mere humane invention, not at all
necessary, but rather on the contrary, subject to great inconveniences,
exposing souls to Illusions, Errors etc: And therefore they in opposition to
it do only recommend and exact Vocal Prayer, and a solemn protracted
performance of it.

4. Notvvithstanding to any one that shall heedfully read the writings, not
only of the Ancient Solitaries, but likewise of S. Augustine, S. Basile, S.
Gregory Nazianzene and others, it will evidently appear that they both knevv
and practiced most profound and Recollected devotions internally, yea and
exhorted souls to a continual attendance to God and his Divine presence in
the Spirit; Sufficient Proofs whereof shall occasionally hereafter be
inserted.

5. True indeed it is that they have not deliured any exact methods for the
practice of such Prayer, the which in those times were not at all necessary,
or at least not at all needful to be communicated to the world. For to souls
that lived (as anciently they did) entirely sequestered from all worldly business
or conversation, in Continual laborious and penitential Exercises, having no
Images of creatures to distract their minds, and much less any inordinate
Affections to creatures to depresse them from mounting to spiritual union
with God, it was more then sufficient for such to know that their duty and
the end of their solitude was to live in a continual conversation with God,
suffering themselves to be conducted and managed by his holy Spirit. To such,
all other more nice or particular Instructions would have proved but
distractiue and intangling. And therefore we see that our holy Father, though
he ordained daily Conuentuall short recollections for the exercise of (that
which he calls) Pure Prayer: yet he neither interprets what he means by such
Prayer (for all his Disciples understood that sufficiently) and much less does
he deliver any instructions how to exercise it.

6. But in these days, in which Religious Persons and others that aspire to
spiritual Contemplation, do either want the means to enjoy, or have not the
courage and strength to support such solitude and Austerities; least the spirit
of Contemplation should fail in the world, God raised up first in Germany
Masters of Contemplative Prayer, as Suso, Harphius, Eschius, Thaulerus etc. in
former times, and more lately in Spain S. Teresa, B. John de Cruce etc. who
no question by the direction of Gods Spirit (as the grace of miracles conferred
on them may witness) have judged it necessary to supply the want of the
foresaid advantages, by adding a certain obligation to the daily practice of
Internal Recollected Prayer, prescribing orders and times for the performance
of it. They have likewise more exactly discovered the degrees and progress of
Prayer: And in a word most earnestly do they exhort souls to a diligent
pursuance of it, professing that without it, it is impossible to comply with
the essential Design of a spiritual or Religious life.

7. I will content my self in this place to express the grounds and sum of
the Exhortations of those and other Illuminated Persons (the glorious
Instruments of God for the reviving of decayed Spirituality in the world) by
producing a passage of Cardinal Bellarmines, which may be applied to this
purpose, taken out of one of his Sermons (in fer. 2. Rogat.) which is this,
Ego illud mihi videor verissime posse affirmare etc: That is, This, I believe I
may most truly and confidently affirm, (says he) that without a diligent
pursuit of Internal prayer none will ever become truly spiritual, nor attain
to any degree of Perfection. We see many, which often times in the year do
aproach to the Sacrament of penance, and as far as humane fraylty and
infirmity will permit, do with sufficient diligence endeavor to purge away
all the stains and uncleanness of sin; And yet they make no progress, but are
still the very same that they were. And having been at Confession; if a week
after they come to the same tribunal again, they bring neither fewer nor
lesser faults then such as were formerly confessed. Yea without offending
against truth I may add some what more strange then all this; to wit, That we
see sometimes Religious Persons, and not a few Priests, which by their vocation
and habits profess sanctity, and moreover do assiduously read Divine
Scriptures and books of Piety, they do often (if not daily) celebrate the
most holy Sacrifice, they have neither wives nor children, but are free from
all cares and sollicitudes which may distract them from a continual attendance
to Divine things; And yet after all this they are so veyd of all Devotion, and
the spirit of God; so cold in divine love, and so earnest in the love of
secular vanities; so replenished with impatience, envy and all inordinate
desires, that they seem not one iott to differ from secular persons wholly
engaged in the world. Now the only cause of all these disorders is, that they
do not seriously enter into their own hearts by Exercises of Introuersion,
but only esteem and regard the exterior etc: Thus far are the words and too
just complaint of the learned and pious Cardinal.

8. The which with very great reason may be further extended even to those
Religious who by their profession ought to Aspire to Contemplation, and being
mistaken in the true way thereto, erroneously beleiuing that by an exact
performance of outward Obseruances and the solemn saying of the Office,
adjoining the Exercises of such internal discoursiue Prayer, do yet find but
little fruit, as to any interior reformation or simplification of their
souls, by reason that they rest in such Active Exercises (which in a short
time to Solitary livers loose all their virtue:) and do not from them proceed
to the truly enlightening Exercises of Internal affectiue prayer (which is a
prayer of the heart, or will, by good Affections quietly and calmely produced,
and not with the understanding;) a Prayer made without those distracting
methods, or that busying of the Imagination, and vvearying of the soul by
laborious discourses, which are only inferior and Imperfect preparations to
true Prayer.

9. Now to a consideration of the necessity of Internal affectiue Prayer,
we will add certain Virtues, Benefits, and Preeminences thereof compared
with all other sorts of Prayer, either Vocal or discoursiuely Mental; The
which virtues are indeed admirable and inestimable, deserving to be purchased
with all the cares and endeauours of our whole lives.

10. The first Excellency of Internal Affectiue Prayer above all other is,
that only by such Prayer our Union in spirit with God (in which our
Essential Happiness consists) is perfectly obtained. For therein the will with
all the powers and affections of the soul are applied and fixed to the
loving, adoring, and glorifying this only beatifying Object. Whereas in Vocal
Prayer there is a continual variety and succession of Images of creatures
suggested, the which do distract the souls of the imperfect from such an
application. And Meditation in which discourse is employed is, so far, little
more then a Philosophical Contemplation of God, delaying this fixing of the
heart and affections on God, the which are only acceptable to him.

11. The second virtue is this, That by this Prayer of the Will the soul
entering far more profoundly into God, the fountain of lights, partakes of the
beams of his divine light far more plentifully, by which she both discouers
Gods perfections more clearly and also sees the way wherein she is to walk
more perfectly, then by any other Prayer. And the Reason is, because when the
soul endeauours to apply all her affections entirely on God, then only it is,
that being profoundly introuerted, a world of impurities of intention, and
inordinate affections lurking in her, do discover themselves: and the obscure
mists of them are dispelled, the soul then finding by a real perception and
feeling how prejudicial they are to her present union in will with God:
Whereas when the understanding alone, or principally, is busied in the
consideration of God, or of the soul herself, the Imagination (which is very
Active and subtle) will not represent to the soul either God or herself so
liquidly and sincerely, but being blinded and seduced by natural self-love,
will invent a hundred excuses and pretexts to deceive the soul, and to make
her believe that many things are intended and done purely for God, which
proceeded principally, if not totally, from the Root of Concupiscence and
self-love.

12. A third a^mirable Perfection of Internal affectiue Prayer is this, That
not only Divine light, but also grace and spiritual strength to put in
practice all things to which supernatural light directs, is obtained
principally by this Internal Prayer of the heart; And this by a double
causality and virtue; to wit. 1. By way of impetration, grounded on the rich
and precious promises made by God to Prayer, above all other good Actions. 2.
By a direct and proper efficiency; For since all the virtue and merit of our
external Actions does depend upon and flow from the internal disposition and
operations of the soul exercising Charity and Purity of intention in them, and
conquering the resistance of nature, And since all Internal exercises of all
virtues whatsoever are truly and in propriety of speech direct Prayer of the
Spirit; hence is follows, that as all habits are gotten by frequency and
constancy of exercise, therefore by the perseuering in the exercise of internal
Prayer, the soul is enabled with facility to practice perfectly all virtues.

13. To this may be added, that such Prayer is universal Mortification; and a
Mortification the most profound, intime and perfect that a soul can possibly
perform, entirely destructive to sensual satisfaction. For therein the will
forces inferior nature and all the powers of the soul to auert themselves
from all other objects pleasing to them, and to concur to her internal
Actuations toward God; and this oftimes in the midst of distractions by vain
Images, during a torpide dullnes of the heart, yea a violent contradiction of
sensuality, when there is, according to any sensible perception, a total
disgust in the soul to such an exercise, yea when the spirit it self is in
obscurity and cannot by any reflexed Act reap any consolation from such an
exercise. Such an Exilium cordis, such a desertion and internal Desolation is
a mortification to the purpose; yet as of extreme bitterness, so of
inexpressible efficacy to the purifying and universal Perfecting of the soul
and spirit. Therefore S. Chrysostom (Tract. de Oratione) had good reason to
say, It is impossible; again I say, it is utterly impossible that a soul,
which with a due care and assiduity prays unto God, should ever sin.

17. A fourth Excellence of Internal Affectiue Prayer is, That it is the only
Action that cannot possibly want Purity of Intention. Souls may from an
impulse of nature and its satirfaction exactly observe Fasts, perform
Obediences, keep the Quire, approach to Sacraments, yea exercise themselves in
curious speculations during Meditation or in the exercise of sensible devotion
they may comply with self-love etc. (And indeed they have no farther any
Purity of intention in any of these duties, then as they do proceed from
Internal Affectiue Prayer, that is, the will fixed by Charity on God.) Whereas
if any oblique intention should endeavor to insinuate it self into Internal
Prayer of the will, it would presently be observed, and unless it were
contradicted and expelled, there could be no progress in such Prayer. So that
it is not possible to find an exercise either more secure, or more proffitable;
since it is by the virtue of it alone that all other exercises have any
concurrence toward the perfectionating of the soul.

15. Lastly, Affectiue Prayer of the will is that alone which makes all other
sorts of Prayer to deserve the name of Prayer. For were that excluded,
Meditation is but an vseles speculation. and curiosity of the understanding;
and Vocal Prayer, but an empty sound of words: For God only desires our
hearts or Affections, without which our tongues or Brains are of no esteem
at all. Yea there is not so much as any proffitable Attention in any Prayer,
further then the heart concurres. For if the Attention be only of the mind;
that will not constitute Prayer: for then study or disputation about Divine
things might be called Prayer. Hence says an Ancient holy Hermit, Nunquam
vere orat, quisquis etiam flexis genibus euagatione cordis etiam qualicumque
distrahitur. That is, That man does never truly pray, who though he be upon his
knes, is distracted with any wandering or vnattention of his heart. And likewise
the learned Soto to the same purpose conclusiuely affirms, Orationi mentali
deesse non potest attentio; cum ipsa attentio etc: That is: Attention cannot
possibly be wanting to Mental Prayer (of the heart:) since the Attention it
self is the very Prayer. And therefore it is a contradiction to say, that one
prays mentally and is not attentive; as is of it self manifest: For as soon
as ever the mind begins to wander, it ceases to Pray. Therefore Vocal Prayer is
only that Prayer which may want attention: namely when the thoughts diuerting
themselves to other objects, the tongue without the concurrence of the mind
gives an uncertain sound. And we may add, That the attention of the mind
which cannot be separated from Discoursiue Prayer, is little valuable, except
it be accompanied with, or performed in order to the causing an attention (as
we may call it) of the heart, or affections.

16. These inestimable Benefits (to which more may be added, as shall be
shevved) which flow from Internal Prayer of the will being considered, a
vvell-minded soul will think no pains too much that may avail to purchase
so invaluable a Jewel. And Religious Superiors will esteem that nothing
does so essentially belong to their duty, as to Instruct and further their
subjects in the practice of it; According to the Counsel of S. Bernard,
Docendus est Incipiens spiritualiter orare, and a corporibus vel corporum
imaginibus cum Deum cogitat quantum potest recedere. That is: Whosoever begins
a Religious course of life must be taught Spiritual Prayer and in eleuating
his mind to God, to transcend all Bodies and bodily images. And with just
reason did the holy Grecian Abbot Nilus (a disciple of S. John Chrysostom say,
(Beata men's quae dum orat etc) Happy is the soul that when she Prays empties
herself entirely of all Images and forms; Happy is the soul that Prays
feruorously and without distraction; Such a soul increases continually in the
desire and love of God. Happy is the soul that when she Prays does altogether
quit the use and exercise of all her senses. Happy is the soul that during the
time of Prayer looses the possession and interest in all manner of things (but
God.)

17. And indeed a soul must expect to pass through a world of difficulties
before she attain to such a purity in Prayer; for as the same Author says,
Vniuersum bellu^ quod internos and doemones conflaetur, non est de alia re quam
de oratione. That is; All the war and co^trouersy that is between us and the
Devil is about no other thing but Prayer: as being most necessary to us, and
most destructive to all his designs. And hereupon a certain holy Father being
asked, what duty in a Religious life was the most difficult, Ansvvered, To
Pray well. The reason is, because Prayer can never be perfectly exercised, till
the soul be cleansed from all manner of impurities, yea not only from the
Affections, but all Images also of creatures.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. 2. Conditions required to Affectiue Prayer; Of which the first is, That it
ought to be Continual, by our Lords precept.

. 3. The shameful neglect of this Precept, both in practice and teaching in
these times;

. 4. Of the ancient Heretics called Euchites, that misunderstanding this
Precept, neglected all other duties besides Prayer.

. 5. 6. 7. In what sense the said Precept obliges us to Pray continually.

. 8. All other virtues are to be measured by the Degrees of Prayer.

. 9. How the neglect of Actual Prayer may be a mortal sin.

. 10. Our Religions Profession and Rule obliges us to aspire to uninterrupted
Prayer.

. 11. 12. Neither vocal Prayer nor Meditation can become uninterrupted; But
only Internal Affectiue Prayer.

. 13. 4. 15. 16. Whether the habit of continual Prayer may be attained hy
prolonged Vocal offices.

. 17 18. That the sure means to attain to it, is a constant Practice of day^y
Recollections.

. 19. 20. Who they are that shall be accounted by our Lord to have satisfied
the obligation of this precept.

1. HAVING shevved the necessity and excellency of Affectiue Pray^r, I will
now rreate of certain qualities and conditions requisite thereto; of which I
will at the present insist only on three, to wit. 1. The first regarding the
extension of it. 2. The second the intension or fervor of it. 3. The third,
the cause or Principle from which it must proceed, to wit, the Divine Spirit.

2. As touching the first point, to wit, the extension of Prayer, it is our
Lords command, that we should never omit this duty of Prayer; (Oportet
semper orare and non deficere.) We ought always to pray, and not to cease (or
faint in it) And S. Paul exhorts indifferently all Christians (sine
intermissione orate) Pray without intermission. Now in this Precept of our
Lord there is an obligation so express, so universal and so confirmed and
repeated both affirmatively and negatiuely, that all exception and derogation
seems to be excluded, and that it binds both semper and ad semper. In all the
Gospel we can scarce find a Precept so fast-binding and so unquestionable.

3. This being evident, how can any one without grief and indignation read
the strange dispensations and escapes invented and allowed by some late
Writers to defeat this so necessary a duty? Because perhaps no man can
positiuely say, that hic and nunc Actual Prayer is necessary and obliging
under Mortal sin, therefore they conclude that except two or three moments of
our life, it is not at all necessary to pray: that is, in the first moment that
a child comes to the use of Reason, and in the last moment when a soul is
ready to expire; for then indeed some of them (not all) acknovvledge that
without mortal sin, a soul cannot deliberately and wilfully neglect to lift
up it self to God. As for the Divine Office those to whom the reciting of it
is of obligation, such (say they) are only bound under Mortal sin to the
external pronunciation of the words; as for the mentality of it, that is only
a matter of Counsel of Perfection.

4. In the Ancient times there was a certain Sect of Heretics that vvandred
as far vvide the con^r^ry way, who upon a mistaken interpretation of this
precept of our Savior, neglected, yea condemned all other things besides
Prayer, despising the Sacraments, omitting the necessary duties of their
vocation, refusing to do any external Acts of Charity etc. And from this
frenzy they were called Euchitae, that is, Persons that did nothing but pray.

5. But the truth lies between these two extremes; for most manifest it is
that we are obliged to aspire unto uninterrupted Prayer; And yet most
certain also it is, that besides simple Prayer there are many other Duties
required of us. The sense therefore and importance of our Lords precept of
Praying continually without failing, may be cleared by two passages of S.
Paul. The first is this (1. Tim. 4.) Cibos creauit Deus ad percipiendum etc.
That is. God has created meats to be received with giving of thanks by his
faithful servants, and those which have known the truth. For every creature
of God is good, and nothing to be rejected which is received with giving of
thanks; for it is sanctified by the word of God and by Prayer. The second is
(1. Cor. 10.) Sieve ergo manducatis sieve etc. That is; Therefore whether you eat
or drink, or what other thing soever you do, do all to the glory of God.
From which Texts it appears. 1. That all creatures are in their use
unsanctified unto us, that is profane, unless they be used with Prayer. 2.
That we are obliged not only in the use of Creatures by eating and drinking
etc: but also in all our other actions whatsoever to join Prayer and a
consecrating of them to Gods glory; so that if we comply with these our
obligations and duties, we must continually either be in actual Prayer, or
busyed in something done in virtue of Prayer.

6. Now as we said in the first Treatise, that although all are not obliged
necessarily to attain unto the perfection proportionable to each ones state;
yet all are necessarily bound to aspire thereunto; Because no man can love God
with a sincere love, and such an one as may be accounted worthy of Him who
is our only Good and beatitude, that shall fix any limits to his love, or that
shall not aspire continually to a further and higher degree of his love. So
here likewise, we are to conceive, that this Precept of praying continually
so indefinitely expressed, so earnestly pressed, so universally applied, both
by our Lord, and his Apostle, to all Christians, does infer an indefinite and
universal obligation, so as that although none but the Perfect do really
fulfill it, yet all, even the most imperfect, cannot without danger dispense
with or neglect the endeavoring and aspiring to the fullfilling of it. Every
one must exercise as much Prayer as shall be necessary to sanctify his
vocation, and make the works and Duties of his life acceptable to God, and
helpful to the procuring of his eternal felicity.

7. And the ground of this obligation is both very firm and manifest: which
is this, That even reason dictates, that all the things we do, we ought to
do them in order to our last end, which is God: that is, with a sanctified
Intention (for whatsoever is not done with a right Intention in order to God
is of no vvorth at all, being only a work of corrupt nature:) Now since
there are only two things which do sanctify all things and actions, to wit,
the word of God and Prayer; the word of God generally, that is the certain and
reueiled will of God, that the thing is in it self lavvfull to be used or
done: and Prayer in particular, proceeding from faith or assurance that the
thing is lavvfull, and thereupon acknovvleging it to be Gods gift, desiring his
blessing on it, and referring it to his glory etc; Hence it evidently
follows, that since without Prayer all things are unsanctified, or profane,
not at all conducing to our last end, but rather prejudicial to it, therefore
all are bound to endeavor to sanctify all their actions and works by Prayer.

8. Hence we may infer, that the Degrees of Grace and sanctity in any man
are to be measured according to the virtue that prayer has upon his Actions;
for the more, and more frequently that his ordinary Actions are performed in
virtue of prayer, the more perfect and holy such an one is, and the more
approaching to his chief end; And he whose Actions do not for the most part
flow from the virtue of Prayer, is not yet right disposed toward his last
end.

9. Now though perhaps scarce any man can say; That hic and Nu^c actual
Prayer is necessarily obliging under mortal sin; yet vvithall, most certain
it is that that man has reason to doubt that he is in a mortally sinful estate
that does not use so much prayer as thereby to sanctify and render meritorious
the generality of his more serious Actions; Or (which is all one) he is in a
state mortally sinful, that for the most part lives vvillfully and habitually
in a neglect of Grace, which can no way be obtained without prayer. Therefore
it is obseruable, that the Disciples of our Lord never asked any instructions
but how to Pray; for that skill being once had, all other good things are
consequently had; And when all other Actions are performed by Grace obtained
by prayer, and for the end proposed in prayer, then a person may be said to be
in continual Prayer: And much more if they be accompanied with an Actual
elevation of the spirit to God.

10. This is the Perfection of Prayer to which our holy Rule obliges us to
aspire, namely, Besides the set Exercises either of vocal or Internal
Prayer, to preserve our souls in an uninterrupted Attention to God, and
tendance in spirit to him, so as that whatsoever Actions we do, they should
he accompanied (instantissima oratione) with a most fervent and perseuerant
Prayer. And that this perfection of continual Prayer in a supreme degree has
been really attained to by the Ancient Contemplatiues, and accounted by them an
essential Duty of their vocation, is evident out of what we read in
several places in Cassian: Hic finis totius perfectionis est etc. (says a
holy Hermit there) This is the end of all perfection to have the soul become
so extenuated and purified from all carnal desires, as that it may continually
be in an Actual ascent to spiritual things, until all its conversation and
employment, and every motion of the heart become one continual Prayer. We
mentioned likewise before a Hermit whose spirit was so continually fixed on
God, that he could not though he endeavored, depresse it for so small a time,
as till he might fetch from the other end of his Cell, some small thing that
his neighbor desired of him. The like continual attention to God, Gregory
Lopez acknowledges to have been in himself by long practice of Recollection,
so that though he would, he could not but think on him; The which attention
and union no work, conversation or study could interrupt. Another Hermit
likewise in Cassian (in 19. Conf.) called John says of himself, how he
forgot whether he had taken his daily sustenance, so continual was his
Prayer: By which their senses became so stupefied, that they savv not what
was before their eyes. To this purpose it is reported in the Lives of the
Fathers, that when a certain Religious man in a Journey met with a little
troop of Religious women, and seeing them, purposely turned out of the way
to avoid them, the Abbess said to him, If thou had been a Perfect Monk
indeed, though thou had seen us, thou would not have known that we were
women.

11. Now it is impossible for a soul to continue without interruption in
Vocal Prayer, there being so many necessary occasions hourly occurring to
employ the tongue other vvayes; besides that it would utterly exhaust the
spirits. And as for Meditation, the exercise thereof is so painful, that it
would destroy the head to force the Imagination continually to invent and
discourse internally on Divine or spiritual objects.

12. Therefore by no other manner of Prayer, but the internal Exercise of the
Will in holy desires etc: can this Precept of our Lord be perfectly
accomplished. For the soul is naturally in a continual exercise of some one
desire or other; the which are not all at painful to her being her natural
employment, so that if by practice we can so rectify our desires as to place
them upon their only true and proper object, which is God, it will necessarily
follovv that the soul should be in continual Prayer. Si semper desideras,
semper oras, Says S. Augustine. If thou do continually desire (God,) thou
do continually Pray. Such desires by custom will become easy, and as it
were natural to the soul; and consequently without any force used on the
imagination or understanding they may be continued without interruption, for
they will flow as freely as breath from the lungs. And where such desires
do abound, flowing from a holy inward temper of soul, there no Employment
will be undertaken that shall cross or prejudice such desires; on the
contrary, they will give a tincture to all Actions, directing them to the
object of those desires, and thereby adding to the feruency of them.

13. Now a Question may be made, Whether in Contemplative Orders, where
likewise there is used much Abstraction, solitude and other Austerities,
souls may attain to this uninterrupted Prayer by the way of Meditation, or
else of long continued Vocal Prayers alone, without appointed Recollections
of Internal Affectiue Prayer constantly exercised?

14, Hereto it may be answered, First that as for M^ditation, it is an exercise
so disproportionable to the nature of such a state, (except as a preparation
for awhile in the beginning) that it is not possible to be the constant and
continued Exercise of such persons: for as shall be showed, the imagination and
understanding by much exercise thereof in an vndistracted life, will become so
barren, and it will ptoduce so small or no effects in good Affections in the
will, that it will be disgustfull and insupportable. So that all use of
Meditation must be for a long space passed and relinquished, before the soul
will be brought to this good state of having a continual flux of holy
desires.

15. But in the second place touching long continued Vocal Prayers, and
Offices, without any set Exercises of Internal Recollection, no doubt it is
but by them such Religious Persons may be brought to this habit of continual
Prayer So that. 1. They hold their minds to as much Attention as reasonably
they can. 2. So that out of Quire they keep their minds from distractiue
Affections or sollicitudes, either about studies or any other Employments,
voluntary or imposed. 3. So they be watchful over themselves not to give scope
to thoughts which may be harmefull to them. (Thus the Ancient Hermites arrived
to this Perfection. 4. A fourth condition may be, That such Persons content
themselves with the Public Office, and not ouer-burden themselves with a
surcharge of voluntary vocal Prayers; for Turrecremata says well (on the
Decr. d. 92.) That the voice and other external Doings are in Prayer to be
used only so far, as by them to raise Internal devotion; so that if by the
excess of them it should be hindered, or the mind distracted, they ought to be
abstained from. And S. Augustine (no doubt from experience as well as judgment)
says; Qu vitum proficis ad videndam sapientiam, tanto minus est vox
necessaria. That is, The greater progress thou make in contemplative
wisdom, so much less necesary will vocal Praying be. Such Persons therefore,
if in their solitude they do not appoint to themselves any set Recollections,
yet ought they to keep their minds in a state of as much recollectednes as may
be, by interrupted good desires at least begetting in their minds an Affection
to Prayer, and an Appetite to the succeeding O^fice.

16. Notvvithstanding certain it is, that vocal Prayers though never so much
prolonged, and in never so great soli^ude, yet will never produce this effect,
where the true spirit of contemplative Prayer is not known; and such
ignorance has been, even in Orders of the greatest Abstraction and Austerity;
Thus we see that Germanus and Cassianus, though practiced many years in a
stri^t Coenobiticall life, yet were astonished when they heard the holy
Hermites discourse of pure spiritual Prayer, free from Images etc:

17. It remains therefore, that ordinarily speaking, the only efficacious and
immediate disposition to the habit of uninterrupted Prayer, is a constant
exercise of Internal Prayer of the Will; by which the soul being daily
forced to a serious attendance and tendance to God in Spirit, by little and
little becomes more and better affected to a frequent conversation with him,
and in time looses all relish or taste of pleasure in creatures.

18. This, I say, will be the effect of such constant and fervent exercise of
Recollections. For as for those which are commonly called Elaculatory Prayers,
that is, good Affections now and then by fitts, and with frequent
interruptions exercised, though they are very good and proffitable, and
vvithall very fit to be used in the midst of reading especially, or any other
external employments; yet they alone will, though joined to the ordinary use
of the Divine Office, be insufficient to produce such a habit of soul. And the
reason is, because being so short and with such interruption exercised, the
virtue of them is presently spent, and will have little or no effect upon
subsequent actions. But as for the eiaculatory Prayers mentioned and worthily
commended by the holy Hermites in Cassian, the nature of them is quite
different from those forementioned, for they are indeed not different from
infused Aspirations, being the effects flowing from the habit of continual
Pray^r already acquired, and not imperfect preparation^ thereto.

19. To conclude, none can account themselves to have satisfied (in that
perfection that they ought) the obligation imposed on them by this necessary
Precept of our Lord (Oportet semper orare and non deficere:) But 1. Such as do
actually exercise as much prayer as may consist with their abilities, and as
is necessary to produce Contemplation, (if such be their state of life) and
moreover such actual prayer as is suitable thereto; yet not indiscreetly
streining themselves beyond their power to perform it perfectly at first,
least it happen unto them, according to the Saying of the Prophet, (Ierem. 28.
c.) Quia plus fecit quam potuit, idcirco perijt; that is, Because he did more
then he was able, therefore he perished. 2. Such, as when Discretion or other
necessary Employments do withdraw them from Actual prayer, yet do preserve
in their minds a love and desire of it, and a firm Resolution courageously to
break through all discouragemen^s and hindrances to it. 3. Such as do
endeavor to do all their Actions in virtue of Prayer, that is, with the same
holy and pure intention, as God gave them in their precedent Prayers. 4. Such
as do abstain from all voluntary Employments as do indispose their minds for
prayer; keeping their souls in such a disposition, as to be able presently to
correspond to an Interior Divine Inuitation to prayer, if God shall send it,
and to be in a capacity of receiving and perceiving such inuitations. Now this
is done by keeping a continual guard over our Passions that they break not
forth so, as to indispose us even for present Recollection, and much less for
the appointed Recollection which is to follovv. 6. Such as do practice
Mortification in a measure suitable to their state, thereby rooting out those
inordinate Assections which cause distraction in Prayer, and are hindrances to
a state of recollectednes. For as that fundamental Precept of loving God,
obliges a soul at least never to do any thing contrary thereto; so does that
of Prayer oblige that we should always be in a disposition and readiness to
it.

20. Therefore let souls consider in what an vnsecure and dangerous state they
remain, that content themselves with a fevv heartles, distracted Vocal
Prayers; Since not any tentation can be resisted without an Actual Exercise of
Prayer, and that the best Prayer that the soul can make. Besides it is not
with Prayer as with other Arts or habits A student by cessation from study
does not presently loose, nor so much as diminish the knowledge that he had
before: But a soul that is not in Actual Prayer, or at least in an immediate
disposition, and an habitual desire of Prayer, sinkes presently into nature,
and looses much of that strength that she had formerly. There are not alvvaies
occasions to exercise particular virtues, as Temperance, Patience, Chastity
etc: Because Tentations do not alvvaies assault us: But we may alvvaies
pray, and alvvaies we have need so to do; For a soul, except she be in
Prayer, or that the virtue of Prayer be alive in her, is in a state of
Distraction and disunion from God: and consequently exposed to all manner of
enemies, being vvithall deprived of the only means to resist them, so that the
dangers and miseries of an vnrecollected life are inexplicable.

CHAP. V.
. 1. The second condition requisite in Affectiue Prayer; to wit, Fervor, or
Devotion.

. 2. 3. 4. The seat of this Devotion is not necessarily the Sensitive part of
the soul.

. 5. 6. 7. Of a twofold sensible Devotion.

. 7. It is neither to be neglected, nor too much prised.

. 8. 9. Certain Exterior Effects of sensible Devotion. from which great
inconveniences may ensue.

. 10. Sensible Devotion no sure sign of true grace. A fearful example thereof.

. 11. 12. 23. What use Imperfect souls are to make of it.

. 14. Fears are to be repressed.

. 15. Perfect souls in small danger by it.

. 16. Of the Prayer of Aridity, quite contrary to sensible, yet not to true
Devotion.

. 17. 18. 19. The excellent Benefits that may come from the Prayer of Aridity.

. 20. The causes of Aridities.

. 21 22. Vocal Prayer and meditation not so much subject thereto.

. 23. 24. More good comes from Prayer of Aridity courageously pursued, then
from the Prayer of sensible Devotion.

. 25. The superior soul and its good disposition does not depend on the
temper of sensitive nature.

. 26. 27. Means to beget courage in the Prayer of Aridity.

. 25. How a soul is to behave herself in the most violent Distresses in
Prayer.

. 29. The Prayer exercised by imperfect souls during Aridities is not properly
in spirit.

1. AS 1. Prayer for the quantity or extension of it is to be incessant, at
least the virtue of it is to be an ingredient in all other works, whether
they be study, labor, conversation etc. (the which may be without any
prejudice at all to the work, yea to the great improuement and
supernaturalizing of it; so far, that where Prayer is vvanting the most
specious works are of no value at all) so in the next place. 2. As to the
Quality or Intension of it, it ought to be ( instantissima, says our Holy
Father in Prolog) with all possible fervor and earnestnes; For Prayer being
the most immediate and most perfect Act of Charity to God, ought, like Charity
it self, to proceed (ex toto cord, ex tota anima, and ex totis viribus) from
the whole heart, the whole soul and the whole strength. Therefore as he offends
against the precept of Charity that employes either his spirit, sensitive soul
or corporal strength on any thing but God, or which has respect to God, his
love or glory; So if in our Prayer we do willingly suffer our thoughts to
wander upon any thing but God, or if we harbor any desire in sensitive
nature that would hinder the free tendance of our spirit to God in Prayer; or
if we employ our corporal strength about any other matter but such as may
and ought to be intended for God in our Prayers: we do so far neglect to
correspond to this duty of Fervor and Instance which ought to be in Prayer,

2. Notvvithstanding this is not so to be understood, as if we were obliged
either to employ our corporal forces or members; or to force our sensible
Affections to concur in our Prayers to God; or as if God did require that
this Fervor should always be in Sensitive nature; For that is not alvvaies
in our power; yea on the contrary, the sensual part moves often against our
wills, being insensible, auerse and impatient of accompanying our spiritual
Actuations, which commonly do mortify and contradict the desires of nature.
2. And moreover when sensible Fervor and devotion does insinuate it self in
our recollections (especially in imperfect souls) it does rather endanger to
depresse the operations of the spirit, then advance them; and does perhaps more
nourish self-love, then contribute to the increase of Divine love.

3. It is sufficient therefore if this Fervor be in our Superior will alone,
though sensitive nature seem to partake nothing of it. So that our Prayers may
then be said to be Instant and feruorous, when the Will out of a worthy and
high esteem of this most necessary and most excellent Duty, resolutely and
with perseverance pursues them, notvvithstanding any contradictions in nature,
or discouragements from without; for that must needs be a great fervor of
spirit that contradicts the contrary malignant fervor of nature, and
vnderualevves all sensible case and contentment, compared with the spiritual
good that is caused by Prayer.

4. This is that good Quality which our Savior in the Parable of him who at
midnight went to his neighbor to borrow three loaves of bread for the
entertainment of a friend that was then arrived, calls by a homely name, to
wit, Improbitatem: or as it is in the Original, Impudence. The which quality
notvvithstanding he requires in our prayers to God, and promises an infallible
success thereto. Now that Improbity or impudence implies an importunate
earnestnes, a resolution to take no denial, nor to stand upon nice ciuilities,
but ra her then to return empty, to force out a grant even by wearying out the
person to whom we address our selves: So that it includes both a great
fervor and an incessant perseverance in such fervor. The which is in a high
degree in those who spend their whole lives as it were in one continual
Prayer, yea in one only petition, which is, to be united in will and
affection to God only.

5. These therefore being two qualities requisite in Prayer. 1. Earnestnes, or
fervor and 2. perseverance (both which are likewise included in the term
[Instantissima] given to Prayer by our holy Father:) Imperfect souls will be
apt to suspect oftimes that their Prayers are vnefficacious, as being deprived
of these conditions. 1. The former, when they do not perceive a tenderness and
melting Devotion in sensitive Nature. 2. And the later they will fear is
vvanting, vvh^nsoeuer they find themselves (though vnvvillingly) distracted.
Therefore to the end to prevent mistakes, and that a right judgment may be made
of these two, to wit, sensible Devotion, and Distractions: I will treat of
them both, shevving what good or ill effects may proceed from the former; And
what remedies may be applied to hinder any inconveniences from the latter.

6. There is a twofold sensible Devotion. 1. The first is that which we now
speak of, which is found in good but imperfect souls, and it begins in
sensitive nature, causing great tendernesses there; and from thence it mounts
up to the spirit, producing good and melting affections to God, and especially
(in discoursiue Prayer) to the Humanity and sufferings of our Lord, 2. Another
sensible Devotion there is of perfect souls, the which begins in the spirit,
and abounding there, ouer-flovves, and by communication descends into Inferior
sensitive nature, causing like effects to the former. Now there is little need
to give cautions of Instructions concerning the use of this; Because Perfect
souls walking in a clear light, and being established in a generous Love of
the Superior will toward God, are not in danger to be transported with the
pleasing effects which it is apt to produce in Inferior nature, nor to fall
into spiritual Gluttony, by which their affections may be vvithdravvn from
God, and fixed on such mean Gifts of his, as these are. That therefore which I
shall here speak concerning Sensible Devotion, is to be applied unto that
which is found in souls less perfect, for, for such only all these
Instructions were meant.

7. Such souls then are to be informed: That though sensible Devotion be
indeed at the first a good gift of God, intended by him for their encouragement
and advancement in his pure love; As it is therefore not to be neglected; so
neither is it over highly to be prised. For as very good effects may flow from
it, being well and discreetely used; so on the contrary without such
discretion, it may prove very pernicious, endangering to plunge them more
deeply in self-love and corrupt nature (in which it is much immersed:) And so
it would produce an effect directly contrary to that for which Prayer was
ordained. A soul therefore is to separate that which is good and proffitable in
such Devotion from that which is imperfect and dangerous: renouncing and
mortifying this latter; and with discretion giving way and making her proffit
of the other.

8. The special signs and effects of such sensible Devotion are oftimes very
conspicuous, in the Alteration caused by it in corporal nature, dravving
tears from the eyes, procuring heat and reddnes in the face, springing
motions in the heart (like to the leaping of a fi^h in the waters says
Harphius) And in some it causes so perceiueable an opening and shutting in the
heart, says he, that it may be heard. And from such unusual Motions and
agitations about the heart, a windy vapor will now and then mount up to the
head, causing a pricking pain there, the which if the head be not strong, may
continue a good space; yea if good care be not taken to interrupt such
impetuosities of the spirits, the blood will first boil, and afterward
will grow thick and ^^ngealed, incapable of motion. And this once hap^^^ng
the inward sweetnesses formerly felt will be turned into sadness, deiection
and stupidity; thence will follovv complaints that the soul is forsaken of
God; yea she will be in danger desperately to renounce all further seeking of
God. And the more that she shall endeavor to recover her former sensible
affections; the farther will she be from it: and impatience for this will
render her still more indisposed, more darkened in the understanding, and more
stupefied in her affections.

9. Now all these inconveniences proceed from self-love, and a too
gluttonous delectation in sensible sweetnesses. The which if they be
accompanied with any extraordinary Visits there will follovv (it is to be
feared) yet far more dangerous effects in unprepared souls, the which will
probably take occasion from thence to nourish Pride in themselves and a
contempt of others.

10. To abate the too high esteem that unwary souls may have of this sensible
fervor and devotion, it may be observed, that it is not always a sign of a
good disposition or holiness in the soul: for we read of several impious
persons that have enjoyed it; so History makes mention of a certain wicked
Tyrant called William Prince of Iuliers; how at his devotions in the midnight
of our Lords Natuity, he twice or thrice felt so great an internal sweetness
in divine visitations, that he professed afterward that he would be content
to purchase with the loss of half his dominion such another consolation. Yet
after his death it was reueiled to a certain Holy person, that he was in
hell condemned to torments equal to those that that wicked persecuting
Imperour Maxentius suffered.

11. The root of such sensible svveetnesses, is oftentimes a mere natural
temper of body; Yea by Gods permission the Devil also will be forvvard enough
to raise and increase it in immortified selfe-vvilled souls; knovving that
they will make ill use of it, either to the augmenting of their pride, or to a
presumptuous undertaking of mortifications above their strength, by which in a
short time their spirits will be so exhausted, and their forces enfeebled,
that they will become unable any more to correspond with divine Grace, even
in duties necessarily belonging to their Profession. And when this happens,
then all sweetness of Devotion ceases, and in place thereof succeed Anguishes,
scrupulosities, pusillanimity, and perhaps even desperation. Therefore
vvell-minded souls are to take special care of preventing these effects of
sensible devotion, the which without great vigilance they are in danger to
incur. And thereupon Harphius aduises earnestly such, to moderate with
discretion the violent impulses of their internal desires to God; for (says
he) if they shall always to the utmost extent of their ability pursue them,
they will find themselves in a short time quite exhausted and disabled to
perform even easyer and more necessary obligations.

12. The true use and benefit therefore that imperfect souls ought to make of
sensible Devotion (when God sends it) is this, That without resting much on
it, or forcing themselves to continue it, they should make it an instrument to
fortify and establish the solid true love and esteem of God in the superior
soul, and to confirm an unshaken resolution in themselves never to desist
from seeking him by the internal vvayes of the spirit, even in times of
desertion and aridity.

13. And if they will make this use of it, then from what cause soever it
proceeds, yea though the devil himself helping or changing the body, should
have caused it, no harm can come unto them thereby. For a soul is most secure
vvhiles she neglects and disesteemes the effects of sensible devotion, as far
as they are pleasing to sensitive nature; and transcending it, shall endeavor
to exercise herself toward God quietly, yet resolutely in the Superior
will. And by the like practice may a soul obtain the like security in all
extraordinary doubtful Cases of visions, Ex^asies etc:

14. More particularly for as much as concerns Tears, (which are usual
effects of sensible Devotion) a soul must be wary that she give not free
scope unto them, what ever the object or cause be; whether it be compassion
to our Lords sufferings, or contrition for her own sins etc: In all cases it
is best to suppress them rather then to give them a free liberty to flow; For
otherwise, besides the harm that may outwardly happen to the body by
empairing the health, or vveakening the head, they will keep her still below
in sensitive nature and immortification, with little or no advancement
toward the true Love of God. On the contrary, they do hinder the elevation
of the spirit, by obscuring the mind, that it cannot discover her secret
defects, nor what would best keep her in her way. Let her therefore exercise
these Acts in the Superior soul and Will from whence all merit comes, and by
which they are performed with quietness and stillnes, yet vvithall more
efficaciously then in sensitive nature.

15. The case is otherwise in Perfect souls, when God by an extraordinary
Grace bestovves on them the Gift of tears: (as to S. Arsenius, who is said to
have flovved almost continually with them:) For in this case they do begin
from the Spirit, whose operations Inferior Nature does not at all hinder, but
rather promote in them. And such tears flow (tanquam pluuia in vellus) like a
shower of rain into a fleece of wool, without the least disturbance and
bitterness in inferior nature: which is a Grace very rarely, if at all granted
to imperfect souls; And therefore those upon whom it is bestovved may, and no
doubt will, without any danger comply with it, since it can flow from no
other cause but God only, and the effect of it will not be to depresse the
spirit, but rather to draw sensitive nature upward into the spirit, causing it
likewise to concur in the exercise of Divine Love, so as that the soul may
say with David, Cor meum and caro mea exult auerunt in Deum viuum, sensitive
nature not only joining with the spirit in serving and loving of God; but
likewise finding its contentment therein, without the least prejudice to the
spirit. And the way to attain to this solid and secure sensible Fervor is
by a discreet vnderualuing and repressing of that which is originally and
merely sensible.

16. Now it will not be impertinent on this occasion to take notice of
another sort of temper in Prayer of a quite contrary nature, in the which the
inferior soul seems to have no part at all in the actuations of the spirit
toward God; yea is not only inactive, but very repugnant unto them, finding a
great deal of vneasines and pain in them, so that the whole Prayer seems to
be made by the Spirit; the heart or sensitive appetite in the mean time
finding much bitterness in it; and the Imagination in a sort refusing to suggest
necessary Images thereto, any further then as the Superior Soul by virtue of
the dominion it has over it, does even by mere force constrain it.

17. There are scarce any souls that give themselves to internal Prayer, but
some time or other do find themselves in great indisposition thereto, having
great obscurities in the mind, and great insensibility in the affections. So
that if imperfect souls be not well instructed and prepared, they will be in
danger, in case that such contradictions in inferior nature continue long, to
be dejected, yea and perhaps deterred from pursuing Prayer. For they will be
apt to think that their Recollections are to no purpose at all, since for as
much as seems to them, whatsoever they think or actuate toward God is mere
loss of time, and of no vvorth at all, and therefore that it would be more
proffitable for them to employ their time some other way.

18. Yea some souls there are conducted by Allmighty God by no other way, but
only by such Prayer of Aridity, finding no sensible contentment in any
Recollections, but on the contrary continual pain and contradiction; And yet
by a privy Grace and courage imprinted deeply in the spirit, cease not for all
that; but resolutely break through all difficulties, and continue, the best
they can, their internal Exercises to the great advancement of their spirit.

19. It will indeed be very hard and morally impossible for any souls, but
such as have naturally a good propension to introuersion, to continue constant
to their Recollections, when Aridities, Obscurities, and Desolations continue
a long time. For it is this propension alone as^isted by Divine Grace, that
holds them to their Recollections, and that enables them to bear themselves up
in all their difficulties and tentations.

20. The causes of this Aridity and indisposition to Prayer, ordinarily
speaking, (for sometimes God for the trial of his servants may and often does
send or permit such tentations to fall on them) are principally a certain
particular natural complexion of some; and especially of those who by their
corporal temper are most fitted for the exercise of sensible affections; for
of all others such are most obnoxious to these aridities and obscurities;
because the humors and spirits of the body, together with the change of
vveather etc: have a far greater influence upon these sensible Affections, then
upon the mere operations either of the understanding or will, which do not
so much depend upon the body. And therefore whensoever the said corporal
disposition comes by any accident to be altered, such affectionate souls are
apt to fall into these internal distresses; and being in such an afflicting,
disconsolate condition, they are not able to help themselves by any discourse,
to which ordinarily they are indisposed. From this ground it is that devout
Women, who naturally do more abound with sensible affections then men, are
more subject to be afflicted and persecuted with these aridities.

21. Such Discouragements do least appear in Vocal Prayer, the which befits
all kinds of spirits and all sorts of tempers, whether they discourse
internally, or not; and whether they can produce internal Acts of the will
upon conceived Images, or not: for all these at all times, and howsoever they
are corporally disposed, may make their proffit, more or less, of Vocal
Prayers.

22. The Prayer of Meditation likewise in those for whom it is proper, is not
usually much assalted with such Aridities, except it be sometimes toward the
end of such Prayer, when souls would endeavor to dravv good affections from
a precedent Motive considered by the understanding; for then the heart may
sometimes prove barren or auerse from such affections. But hovveuer they that
practice Meditation may find some remedy, by surceasing the producing of
affections, and may either betake themselves to exercise mere Acts of the
will, which are not so affectiue or retire themselves to their internal
discourse.

23. The pain and anguish that good souls suffer from these aridities is very
greiuous, being a kind of continual martyrdom. And therefore the merit of
constancy in Prayer notvvithstanding such discouragments in nature, is the
greater. And souls to whom God shall give such constancy will find their
exercise^ both much more secure (howeuer disgustfull they be,) yea and much
more proffitable, then if they had flowed with sensible affections. For all
manner of good is gotten by Prayer of Aridity courageously prosecuted; all
virtues are exercised in it; it is both Prayer and most efficacious
Mortification too.

24. And indeed the only general effectual Remedy against any inconveniences
that may be caused by such aridities is this generosity of resolution, not to
seek contentment in Nature by Internal Exercises; nor to quit them for any
dullnes, coldness or auersion whatsoever. Let but souls do the best they can
or know, and they will find that their spiritual progress in the true,
solid and only meritorious Love of God will not at all be hindered, but rather
advanced by such froward indispositions of corrupt nature.

25. And such courage and effectual Resolution may well enough consist with
these discouragements; for the spirit, whose operations do not much depend on
the corporal disposition, may in the midst of all sensible aridities and
obscurities, perform its functions with great efficacy: The intellectiue
faculty is at all times capable of illumination, and the will of receiving
Grace and strength from God; And the light and grace which we receive at
such times, are far more pure and Divine, then when corporal affections do
abound: For then they are communicated purely to the spirit. And consequently
the operations performed in virtue of such light and grace are more noble and
meritorious; because it is apparent that nature neither does, nor can mingle
her own interests in them, so that they may confidently be adjudged to be
supernatural and Divine. The essential proffit of a soul consists in the
light and love of the spirit: Such light and love therefore which are got with
so much difficulty and in such struggling of nature, is far more pure, generous,
and vvithall more solidely rooted in the soul, then that which is got by the
exercise of sensible affections; because all the while there is a continual
combat against self-love, and all the most secret, subtle and deeply hidden
snares of it. So that all Virtues becoming thus rooted in the depth of the
spirit, and having been produced by the means and in the midst of the sharpest
Tentations, there is less fear that they will be extinguished by other
follovving Trials.

26. Now at the first, to the end to attain unto this most necessary
courageousnes of mind, such souls may do well to help themselves during
their aridities, with the best motives and most efficacious Affections that
they can furnish themselves vvithall, either out of their own Invention, or
by collection out of books; as likewise frequently to urge and even force
themselves to the love of God by such eiaculatory Prayers and desires as these,
O my God when shall I love thee, as thou deseruest? When shall I love as I am
loved by thee? O that I were freed from my self that I may only love thee!
Excita potentiam tuam, and veni: Veni Domine, and noli tardare. Exurgat Deus,
and dissipentur inimici eius etc:

27. Such Affections as these let a devout soul exercise in her recollections
likewise, the best she can, (in case she cannot see how other vvayes to do
better) although without any gust or sensible contentment: And God will not
fail to accept and plentifully revvard her good will, and thereby promote her
in such manner as he best knovves. She may be sure, that since he has given her
the generous courage to serve him without present wages, he will at least in
the next life multiply rewards upon her infinitely above her expectation. And
she ought to account it a proof of his special love and esteem of her, that
he has selected her to be a Martyr of love, and a soldier to whose courage he
commits the most difficult and hazardous Employments.

28. In Case that internal distresses in Prayer be so violent, that the soul
to her seeming can only keep herself in an outvvard posture of prayer, all
that she thinks or does appearing to her so utterly void of all spirit of
devotion love and Reverence to God, that she may rather suspect it to be
injurious to him; let her be patient, and abstain from disquieting her mind
with murmuring complaints; and by all means let her be sure not to betake
herself to consolation in creatures or recreatiue diuersions in times
appointed for Recollection, and then all will be very well. God will require
no more of her then she is well able to do; and he knovves that it is not in
her power alvvayes to subdue nature; yet she may and must always withdraw
her consent from its sinful suggestions: and doing so, there will be no
danger. Therefore for what she cannot do, let her be humbled and resigned: And
such humble Resignation will prove a very efficacious Prayer.

29. Now it is not to be supposed that Internal Prayer exercised by imperfect
souls during Aridities through the advantage of a natural propension, is a
truly Pure and spiritual Prayer: Because as yet their exercise is indeed in
sense; yet it is in the nobler and supremer part of sensuality, tending much
tovvard the spirit; whereby they in that case do enjoy an Internal light
more clear and pure, then whilst they exercise with flowing affections, in
so much as their operations are then abstracted from grosser sensuality. And
the more strong that their propension to introuersion is, the more easily and
quickly do they raise themselves to that clear superior region of light. And
the reason is, because such a propension and aptitude to internal vvayes
draws the persons endovved with it more and more deeply tovvard the spirit,
in the perfect operations vvherof consists the consu^mation of an Internal
life.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. 2. A second discouragement in prayer opposite to Perseverance, to wit,
Distractions.

. 3. Distractions are a necessary effect of Original sin etc.

. 4. 5. Distractions about objects to which we hear an inordinate Affection,
are most harmfull.

. 6. A remedy against them.

. 7. 8. 9. Remedies against all inconveniences that may come from Distractions.

. 10. Difference between the distractions of Perfect and Imperfect souls.

. 11. 12. 13. A third condition necessary to true Internal Affectiue Prayer,
viz. That it must proceed from Divine Inspirations.

. 14. An Exhortation to constancy in Prayer.

1. THE Second discouraging Tentation opposite to the second Quality requisite
in Prayer (to wit, Perseverance) by which well minded souls are often much
afflicted in their Recollections, and also exposed to greiuous scrupulosities,
is Distraction in Prayer, caused by Images which often against their wills
press into their imaginations, the which dravv the mind from contemplating
God, and consequently the Affections from embracing him by love, at such times
when the soul desires and intends to contemplate and love him.

2. I do not therefore here under the term of Distractions comprehend all
manner of interruptions from a direct actual tendance to God; (for such
sometimes, considering the Infirmity of our nature, may be necessary, to the
end that by a discreet relaxation the head being refreshed, we may be enabled
afterward to produce more efficacious Affections. And therefore those Authors
are too indiscreetly rigorous who oblige souls, not yet perfect, to a
continual recollected Attention to the Divine presence, not considering the
corporal infirmity and incapacity of their disciples spirits, especially in
these days.) The Distractions therefore here, intended to be treated of, are
such as are involuntary; and which happen at times when souls do apply
themselves either to vocal or mental Prayer.

3. Now it is an effect of Original sin (much increased also by Actual) that
souls are generally, some more some less, subject to this deordination:
Because by sin that due subordination of the sensitive faculties (the
Imagination; memory and appetite) to the Superior soul, is empaired, so that
the reason has not that absolute Dominion over them that it had in Innocence;
But they often wander toward objects not prescribed by reason, yea and
sometimes seduce and even compel reason it self to comply with their
disorders. Add hereunto that the body being gross and lumpish, cannot long
endure that the soul its companion should remain in its proper exercise, by
which it becomes as it were a stranger to the body, contradicting its motions
and desires; And therefore till the soul by practice of spiritual operations
be enabled at pleasure to command the inferior faculties, or to abstract it
self from the Images suggested by them, the said faculties do strive to
depresse the spirit, and to call it down to attend to the necessities and
desires of sensitive nature. Yea even in the most Perfect, the soul will not
be able to continue long in the height of its Elevation.

4. As for these Distractions which, generally speaking, are hurtful and to
be avoided (among which notvvithstanding I need not reckon in this place such
as are simply sinful, being about unlawful Objects) the most harmfull to our
spiritual progress are those which are about objects to which we cleave
with affection: Because by such distracting thoughts not only the mind is
diuerted from God, but the heart also inordinately carried to creatures.

5. For as for thoughts merely about vain objects, to which we have little
or no affection, and which proceed wholly from the instability of the
Imagination: Imperfect souls ought not to be discouraged with them, although
they should be never so importunate during their recollections, since the most
abstracted liver must be content now and then to suffer them.

6. And the most powerful Remedy to prevent them is, with as much prudence
and dexterity as one can, to cut of the occasions of entertaining such images
as do most frequently and pertinaciously recurre to the mind in Prayer. And
more particularly for those images to whose objects the soul cleaues by
inordinate Affection, the practice of abstraction and voluntary disengagement
from unnecessary businesses is requisite, and a restraining of our affections
from wandering abroad and fixing themselves upon any external Objects. For
certain it is, that if by the exercise of Mortification and Prayer, we could
restrain our affections from creatures, and fix them on God only, we should
scarce ever have cause to complain of Distractions; for we see that we can
easily and constantly fix our thoughts on such objects as we love. So that
Perseverance in Prayer and Mortification being the most assured Instruments to
increase Divine Love, and diminish inordinate love to our selves and creatures,
consequently they are the most sure remedies against Distractions.

7. But if after all due care had they do still persist, the most effectual
expedients to hinder any considerable inconue^^iences from such Distractions
is. 1. Sometimes so use a discreet and reasonable industry in contradicting
and expelling them; yet forbearing an ouer-violent anxious resistance of them,
out of an opinion that by such violence they may be extinguished; vvheras on
the contrary such an eagernes of contending with them by the imflaming of the
spirits makes those images more active and full of motion, and rather
multiplies then diminishes them; and hovveuer it imprints them deeper in the
imagination. Let a well minded soul rather endeavor, according to the
expression of the Author of the Clowd, to look over their shoulders, as if
she looked after some other object that stood beyond them and above the^,
which is God. 2. Let her (as has been said) fix in her mind and Superior
will a strong Resolution, notvvithstanding the said Distractions, yea in the
midst and press of them not to relinquish Prayer, but to persevere in it to
the best of her power and skill. 3. Let the well minded soul execute this
Resolution with all possible Quietness, stillnes and Patience; not troubling
herself with any fears or scrupulosity, as if they came from her own
fault: whereas ordinarily they are increased, at least, by the distemper of
the body, or the natural instability of the imag^nation. 4. Sometimes it may
be requisite for her (not being able to her own satisfaction to pursue her
appointed exercise) to change it into Acts of Patience and quiet Resignation to
suffer without murmuring such an Affliction and visitation from Gods hands;
And so doing, she will perhaps more advance herself in pure spiritual
Prayer, then if she had no such distractions at all; for, besides that such
Prayer being made with an actual contradiction to the Inclinations of nature,
has in it the virtue of a most purifying mortification also; A perseverance in
this practice, will bring her to that pure Prayer of the will without any
perceiuable help or concurrence of the understanding, in which the will is
firmly united to God, whilst the understanding is in no such union, yea when
both it and the imagination are never so extrauagant and vvandring.

8. And surely a matter of great comfort it is to a soul (and ought so to be
esteemed) that in her Will (which is her principal faculty, and indeed all in
all) she may be united to God in the midst of all distractions, tentations and
desolations etc: And that being so united, she will be so far from receiving
any harm by them, that she will by their means increase in grace; so that
though she do not receive any extraordinary Illuminations, nor any
satisfaction to her natural will by such distracted Prayers; yet does she get
that for which such illuminations and gusts are given, to wit, a privy but
effectual grace to adhere unto God, and to resign herself to him in all his
prouidences and permissions concerning her. And grace gotten by such an
afflicting way of Abnegation, is far more secure, and merits more at Gods
hands, then if it had come by lightsome and pleasing consolations; Since this
is a way by which corrupt nature is transcended, self-love contradicted and
subdued, even when it assaults the soul most subtly and dangerously, to
wit, by pretending that all sollicitudes and anxious discouragements caused by
distractions do flow from divine love, and from a care of the souls
progress in spirituality; Lastly this is a way by which Charity and all
divine virtues are deeply rooted in the spirit, being produced and established
there by the same means that the devil uses to hinder the production of them
in negligent and tepide souls, or to destroy them when they have been in some
measure produced.

9. As for more particular Aduices, Expedients and sleights to be made use of
in special cases and circumstances, none can teach but God only, who by
means of experience and perseverance in prayer will undoubtedly give unto a
soul light and grace sufficient.

10. To conclude therefore this point, This difference may be observed between
distractions in perfect souls, from the same in the imperfect, viz. That in
perfect souls Distractions proceed only from some unwilling distemper in the
cognoscitiue faculties: but in the imperfect they are rather from some degree
of inordinate Affection to the objects of the Distractions. And therefore a
well-aduanced soul has little difficulty in putting them away as soon as
she reflects upon them; for without co^^ending with the^ she can presently
unite herself with her superior will to God, even whilst her knovving
powers are busy about impertinent objects; whereas Imperfect souls in the
inferior degrees of Prayer, having as yet an express and perceptible use of
the understanding and imagination, cannot but receive some prejudice by
distractions; in as much as those faculties cannot at the same time be employed
upon different objects, that have no subordination or relation to one another.

11. There remains a third condition or quality which I said was necessary
to true Internal affectiue Prayer, to wit, the divine Inspiration, from
which if it do not proceed, it is of little efficacy or merit. Now though
in the general division of Internal Prayer I seemed to appropriate the title
of Infused Prayer to the Prayer of perfect Contemplation; the meaning thereof
was, that such Prayer is merely infused, the soul by any deliberate
preparation or election not disposing herself thereto: Whereas in the inferior
degrees there is neces^ary both a precedent and concomitant industry in the
soul, to make choice of matter for Prayer, and to force herself to produce
affections correspondent to the said matter: by reason that as yet Gods holy
Spirit is not so abounding and operative in the soul as to impell her to pray,
or rather breathing for^h Prayers in and by her. But in all cases that is most
true vvhi^h S. Bernard says, Tepida est oration, quam non praeuenit Inspiratio,
that is, That Prayer is a repide prayer, which is not prevented by divine
Inspiration. And S. Augustine, Been orare Deum, gratia spiritalls est. That is,
It is a special grace of Gods holy Spirit, to be able to pray aright.

12. Now the ground of the necessity of a Divine Inspiration herto is
expressed in that saying of S. Paul (Quid oremus sicut oportet nescimus etc.)
We know not how to pray as we ought; And therefore the Spirit of God helps
our infirmity; yea (says he) The spirit it self makes requests in us and for
us; and this often with groans which cannot be expressed, and which the soul it
self cannot conceive. It is this Inspiration only which gives a
supernaturality to our Prayers, and makes them fit to be heard and granted by
God.

13. But of this subject much has already been said, and more will follow
when we treat of the several Degrees of Prayer (especially the perfect
Prayer of Aspirations) where we shall show how these Inspirations are
attempred according to the natural good Propensions of souls; so that those
which are naturally inclined to Introuersion are usually moved by God to seek
him by pure spiritual operations, without images or motives; yet this by
degrees, according to the state of the soul. Where also I will show how
necessary Liberty of Spirit, and a freedom from, nice methods and Rules of
Prayer is to dispose the soul for these Divine Inspirations. And therefore I
will forbear any further enlarging of my self on this point in this place.

14. Now a due consideration of these Excellencies and most heavenly Effects
of internal Affectiue Prayer ought to give us a suitable Esteem and value of
it, above any other Employments whatsoever. An experience hereof it was that
made an Ancient Hermit called Jacob (in Theodoret. de vit. PP.) resolutely to
persist in refusing to interrupt his appointed Prayer, or to delay the time of
it, for any other business on ciuilities in visits whatsoever: he commanded all
to depart when the hour was come, saying, I came not to this solitude to
benefit other men's souls, but to purify mine own by Prayer.

CHAP. VII.
. 1. Internal Affectiue Prayer (of Contemplation) has allwaies been
entertained at first with iealousy and rigor.

. 2. 3. 4. An Illustrious Example in the person of the late R. Fa: Baltazar
Aluarez of the Society of JESUS.

. 5. 6. 7. An Account required, and given by him to his General, touching his
Prayer of Contemplation; The order and manner of Gods guidance of him thereto
and therein* And the excellency of that Prayer declared.

. 16. 17. etc. The substance of a Discourse written by him in answer to seven
Objections made against Internal Prayer of Contemplation.

. 30. The success of this tempest.

1. IT is so far from being a just Prejudice against this most excellent of
Gods Gifts (Internal Prayer of the will) that it is rather a proof of the
more then ordinary Eminency of it, that it has always found some, even among
the learned, and oftimes among such as have been the most strict and severe
about Religious Obseruances, that have, and do oppose it. God forbid that this
should always be imputed either to malice, envy etc: but rather to want of
experience in the Mysterious ways by which the Spirit of God oftimes conducts
his special servants. It is well known what calumnies and persecutions Suso,
S. Teresa, B. John de Cruce, etc. found, when God enlightened the^, and moved
them to communicate to the world this heavenly light; All which they accepted
as a certain proof that it came from God; that it was beneficial to souls,
and therefore odious to the Devil; for so have all such things been ever at the
first entertained.

2. But among all the late Masters of pure spiritual Contemplative Prayer,
there is none deserves more out esteem, nor is more proper to be produced in
this place, then the late R. F. Baltazar Aluarez of the Society of JESUS, well
known unto, and most highly esteemed by S. Teresa (who was much assisted and
comforted by him during her troubles and difficulties.) The special Benefit
that may be reaped from his story is, that by occasion of his Trial and
Examination about his Prayer all the suspicions and allegations against it are
well cleared, and the whole substance of this Treatise vvorthily confirmed
and asserted.

3. This Venerable Person after he had with great diligence spent above
fifteen years in Meditation and the Spiritual Exercises (peculiar to his
Order) and yet received but little proffit to his spirit by them, being on the
contrary tormented with extreme doubtfullnes and vnsatisfaction, was at the
last guided povverfully by Gods holy Spirit to quit Meditation and to betake
himself to a serious Practice of Prayer immediately in the will; To the which
Divine motion he corresponding, presently received abundance of light, and a
perfect remedy against all his anguishes and perplexities.

4. But his Internal troubles ceasing, outward difficulties began; for others
of his Brethren and Companions perceiving that he walked in ways vnknovvn to
them, earnestly required an Examination of this New Spirit: Insomuch as that
out of Spain these complaints came to the ears of their then General the
most R. F. Euerardus Mercurialis resident at Rome. By order from whom his
study was sealed up and afterward searched by learned Fathers thereto
appointed, and all his Papers examined. Tho which affording no matter of just
accusation at all, but on the contrary of great edification; A second command
comes from the General to him, to give a full Account of the order and manner
of his Prayer.

5. This command obliged him to make a free and ingenuous Apology for himself,
the which because it is most pertinent and conformable to the spirit of these
Instructions, and besides is not common in many men's hands, I will here set
down the substance of it, as it is related with most commendable candor and
ingenuity by F. Ludouicus de Puente of the same Society his scholar, who
vvrote his life.

6. Now in his said Apology he freely and humbly declares. That near sixteen
years he had labored like one that tills the ground without reaping any
fruit. That his heart was much streitned with grief, observing that he wanted
the talents for which he saw others esteemed and particularly that he was much
troubled that be had not space enough allowed him for Prayer (...) this
tentation he overcame, resolving to employ no more time in Prayer, then b^y
Obedience permitted, and rejecting that foolish ambition of excelling therein,
or of pretending to divine Favors, which others better deserving enjoyed.
Notwithstanding he still found his defects to multiply, and rather to disquiet
then humble him, yea they made him in an incapacity to comply with the
Internal counsels and inuitations of God. Moreover that by reason of this
unquietness, the defects of others also under his government did much increase
his distemper, so that he judged it a point of right government to make his
Subjects perform all things (like himself) with a melancholic deiectednes of
mind.

7. That at the end of fourteen years he found himself in a practice of
Prayer, by which he placed himself in Gods presence as a beggar, saying
little, but only expecting an alms. But by reason that he could not keep his
mind fixed on God, but did overmuch reflect upon himself, his troubles,
deiection and utter despair of approaching to Perfection increased, since God
had showed hiw no marks of his favor, which it seems he expected; but (as he
confesses) very foolishly, since his coming to God with such an expectation was
a greater fault, then his former deserting him; yea herby he was brought to
that extreme Confusion, that for mere shame be durst not for a good space in
Prayer say any thing to God at all, but only that he would punish, forgive and
assist him.

8. But when sixteen years were passed, he found his hear on the sudden
unexpectedly quite changed and dilated, all his disquietnes vanished, and his
soul freed from all created things, being filled with an astonishing. Joy,
like that of those which say, LORD WHEN WE SEE THEE, WE HAVE SEEN ALL GOOD
AND ARE ENTIRELY SATIATED. Here he found himself in a congregation of persons
destined to Beatitude, the way whereto seemed plain and easy. Now he received
a spiritual discretion to sever between the precious and the vile. New
notions and intelligence of verities were given him, which fedd his soul which
joy and peace. Yet such illuminations at the first were somewhat rare; but at
the time of the writing of this Apology they were become much more frequent.

9. Instead of that anxie y that he had formerly because his ambitious desire
of being eminent was not satisfied, now he was content to live under the
Cross; Now he did so humble himself under all, that he was in confusion to
appear before any. Notwithstanding though he honored all men, yet he found
that they were not at all needful to him, as formerly they seemed to be; but
that it was both better and easier for him to converse with God only.

10. Thence forward he perceived that God had given him an Internal light for
the ordering both of himself and others under him; even in the smallest
matters. And whereas sollicitudes in government etc: did formerly disquiet and
opprese his spirit: now he found that businesses were far better discharged by
casting his care on God, and putting them out of his thoughts, till the time
came that he was to execute his duty; so that in the midst of a throng of
cares, he lived without care: Now he was not, as formerly, troubled for that he
had not time sufficient for Prayer, because he found that God gives more in one
hour to mortified, resigned souls, then to others in many days; And he found
more proffit to his spirit by a faithful discharge of Employments imposed by
God, then in vacancy and reading spiritual Books of his own election.

11. A sight of his defects now does him good by humbling him, and making him
distrustful of himself and confident in God; knowing that no defects nor
knowingly and deliberately persisted in, do hinder Gods counsels and designs
for our Perfection. And as for the defects of those under his government, he
found it a great folly for him to disquiet himself about them; And that his
former desire of making them sad and melancholic was an effect of his own
impatience.

12. His Prayer now was to place himself in Gods presence, both inwardly and
outwardly presented to him, and to rejoice with him permanently and habitually.
Now he understood the difference between imperfect and perfect souls in the
point of Enjoying the Divine Presence, expressed by S. Thomas (22. q. 24. a. 9.
ad 3. Et opusc. 63.) And he perceived that those were blind that seek God
with anxiety of mind, and call upon him as if he were absent, vvheras being
already his Temples in which his Divine Majesty rests, they ought to enjoy him
actually and internal^y present in them. Sometimes in his Prayer he pondered
avvhile on some Text of Scripture according to the inspirations and lights then
given him. Sometimes he remained in cessation and silence before God; which
manner of Prayer he accounted a great treasure; for then his heart, his
desires, his secret intentions, his knowledge and all his powers spoke, and God
understood their mute language, and with one aspect could expel his defects,
kindle his desires and give him wings to mount spiritually unto him. Now he
took comfort in nothing, but in suffering contentedly the will of God to be
performed in all things, which was as welcome to him in aridities as
Consolations; being unwilling to know more then God freely discovered unto him,
or to make a more speedy progress, or by any other ways then such as God
himself prescribed unto him; If his heart out of its natural Infirmity did
any time groan under his present burden, his Answer thereto would be, I^ not
that good which God wills to be? and will it not a ways incessantly remain
so? Or will God cease to perform his ow^e will, because thou do not judge
it to be for thy good? In conclusion his present established comfort was to see
himself in Gods presence to be a sufferer, and to be treated according to his
Divine pleasure.

13. If sometimes leaving this Quiet Prayer to which God had brought him, he
offered to apply himself to his former Exercises of Meditation, he found that
God gave him an internal reprehension and restraint. For his greater assurance
therefore he searched Mysticke Authors, S. Dionysius Areopagita (de Mist.
Theol. c. 1.) S. Augustine. (epistol. 119.) S. Gregory (Mor. lib. 30. 26. etc.)
S. Bernard (in Cant. sermon. 55. etc.) out of which he satisfied himself; That
as rest is the end of motion, and a quiet habitation the end of a laborious
building; so this Peaceful Prayer and quiet enjoying of God in spirit, was the
end of the imperfect busy Prayer of Meditation. And therefore that all Internal
Discoursing with the understanding was to cease whenever God enabled souls
to actuate purely by the Will. And that to do otherwise would be as if one
should be allwaies preparing somewhat to eat, and yet afterward refuse to taste
that which is prepared. By this Divine Prayer of the Will the ho^y Spirit of
Wisdom with all the excellencies of it, described in the Book of Wisdom
(Cap. viii.) is obtained, and with it perfect Liberty.

14. In consequence hereto he proceeds by reasons to demonstrate the
supreminent Excellency of this reposefull Prayer of the Will, as 1. That though
in it there is no reasoning of the Mind, yet the soul silently presenting
herse^fe before God with a firm faith that her desires are manifest to him,
does more then equiualently tell God her desires, and withal exercises all
Virtues; humbling herself before him, loving him only, and beleiuing that
leaving her own ways and constantly holding to Gods, all good will proceed
from thence to her. 2. That in this Prayer a soul has a far more sublime and
worthy notion of God. 3. That this still and quiet Prayer may be far more
prolixely and perseuerantly practiced then the tiring Prayer of Meditation.
(^ea it may come to be continual and without interruption) 4. That all the
good effects of Meditation, as Humility, Obedience etc: are far more
efficaciously and perfectly produced by this Prayer, then by that which is
ioy^ed wi^h inward reasonings. 5. True indeed it is, that ^he Exercises
instituted by S. Ignatius were more proper ge^erally for souls then this; yet
that this ought to be e^^eemed proper for those whom God had called and
prepared to it. And that this was S. Ignatius his own practice: who though
in his less perfect state he pursued the imperfect Exercises instituted by
him, yet afterward he was exalted to this sublime Prayer, by which he came
to suffer Divine things. That therefore as none ought to intrude into the
Exercise of this pure Prayer, till God have called and fitted them for it; so
being called, none ought to be forbidden it (as Osanna in his Alphabet
teaches:) And that whosoever forbids such, shall give a strict account to
God for so great a fault: Insomuch as a certain Spiritual Writer says, that
God will shorten the lives of those Superiors who shall presume to
discourage and affright any souls from these Internal vvayes, except they
desist from such an attempt.

15. This is the sum of the Account which the most Venerable F. Baltazar
Aluarez after a retirement of fifteen days, with a most humble Confession of
his own defects and misery, and a magnifying of Gods liberal Goodness
extended toward him, gave unto his General.

16. Now besides this account, he vvrote likewise a short Discourse, in
which he did more fully treat of the nature of this Prayer of rest and
silence, and gave a particular Answer to several objections which certain
of his Brethren had made and dispersed against the said Prayer. The Sum of
which Objections with hi^ Answers to them, I will here adioyne.

17. The first Objection was, That one who exercises this Prayer, which
admits neither of discours^^ Meditation, nor any such like use of the
understanding* seems to spend his time vnproffitably in doing nothing, which
might far better be bestovved in external exercises of Virtues.

18. The Answer herto is, That though the understanding be in a sort suspended
from exercising its actiuity, yet the soul is far from being idle; on the
contrary she performs that which S. Bernard calls the Business of all
Businesses; for therein the stream of holy affections does freely flow by
loving, admiring, adoring, congratulating, resigning and offering the soul to
God contemplated with the eye of faith etc: and all this sometimes in a few
words, sometimes in silence: In a word, the soul behaues herself according to
the variety of Affections that the Unction of the holy Spirit, who is the
principal Master herein, does teach and move her to, according to that of S.
Dionysius Areopagita to Timotheus, (Convert te ad radium etc.) Turn thy self
to the Beam of Divine light. From hence that admirable union does proceed
which the same Saint calls THE UNION OF THE VNKNOVVN WITH THE VNKNOVVN, the
which is the supreme height of mystical Theology, and which without
experience of it cannot be conceived by any.

19. The Second Objection is, That to leave Meditation out of an expectation of
Divine Inspirations or revelations, seems to be a tempting of God, and a
s^uouring of the error of the Heretics called Illuminates.

20. The Answer is, That this Prayer exercised merely by holy affections
without mental discoursings, cannot be practiced but by such as have a long
time been exercised in the inferior degree of discoursiue Prayer: except it be
when God preuents souls extraordinarily by a special inuitation and
enablement; And those likewise that from Meditation do ascend to this quiet
Prayer, do it by the guidance of a supernatural light; and being in it, they
exercise themselves the^^n not by desiring or expecting revelations, but by
acknovvledging the Divine Presence in the soul, and producing the foresaid
holy affections to him. Neither is here any affinity with the doings of the
Illuminates, who without any call from God, without any preparation did
arrogantly presume to pray as they did, remaining in a distracted idleness and
mispending the time in expectation of extraordinary visits without any good
effect at all toward the reformation of their inordinate affections. Whereas if
an immortified soul should presume to betake herself to this prayer; she will
be forced to quit it; for none can appear with a secure peacefullnes before
Gods presence, that does deliberatly resist his spirit, which is the spirit of
Purity, Sanctity, humiliation and conformity to the Divine will.

21. In the third place it is objected, That there is no way to discern when
one undertakes this Prayer by a Divine Inspiration, and when this is done out
of presumption and a desire to enjoy spiritual gusts, which nouri^h self-love.

22. It is ansvvered, That this will evidently enough be known by the
effects, as a tree by its fruits. Now the effects of this Prayer when it is
practiced upon a Divine Call, are a softnes and flexibility of the heart to the
divine will, a resig^ed acceptance of all things from his hand; a confidence
of obtaining all good from him upon whom the soul has entirely bestovved
herself; an imitation of the pattern of all Perfection our Lord JESUS; a
renouncing of selfe-vvill etc. Now surely that Prayer which teaches these
things is doubtless from God.

23. But fourthly it is replied, That those which practice this kind of Prayer
are selfe-opinioned, adhering to their own vvayes, and out of a presumptuous
conceit of being Spiritual, despise others, and refuse to submit themselves
to the judgment of Superiors.

24. The Answer is, That such defects and miscariages as these are not to be
imputed to the Prayer it self (which teaches the quite contrary) but to the
imperfections and frailty of those that do not practice it as they ought. And
therefore this is not a ground sufficient to condemn the Prayer it self; no
more then Meditation ought to be condemned, because the like or greater faults
are committed by some that practice it: who are more obnoxious to a vain
esteem of themselves upon occasion of some curious inventions found out by
their internal reasonings therein. Yea the Sacrements we see are abused, but
yet not therefore forbidden. As for Superiors, none of them, except it be
sometimes for a trial, ought to prohibit their Subjects from praying
according as God by his inspirations directs them. And if they shall absolutely
prohibit this, they must expect that God will require an account of them;
hovveuer in such a case, it would be a fault in Subjects to disobey them. But
yet till such a Prohibition do issue forth, the subjects surely may lavvfully,
yea ought to follow the internal directions of God: Neither is it presumption
in them, if by the advantage of experience they shall think themselves capable
of judging of such matters, better then those that have no experience at all in
them; nor is it Pride to acknovvledge the gifts given us of God, as the Apostle
says.

25. Fifthly it is objected, That some are so whol^y given up to this fashion
of Prayer, that they are allwaies in a kind of Ecstasy, being so delighted with
the gusts which they find in it, that they quite forget their obligations of
Charity, obedience, and exercise of virtues, from which they retire themselves
to the end they may immerse themselves in a Prayer, that affords them no
rrueths which may proffitably be communicated to their Neighbors. Now all
this is directly contrary to the Institute of S. Ignatius. Moreover by this
kind of Prayer many of the practisers of it become subject to diverse corporal
infirmities, which render them incapable to comply with the obligations of
their state of life.

26. The answer is, That it is no vvonder if some defects be sound in these
persons, since none are entirely free. But hovveuer the said defects are not to
be imputed to the Prayer, but undue use of it. For Contemplation it self does
even urge souls to the exercise of Charity, w^ensoeuer necessity and duty
requires it (not otherwise:) Hence is that saying of S. Augustine (lib. 19. de
Ciuit. D. c. 19.) (Otium sanctum quaerit charitas veritatis etc:) Love of
Verity seeks a holy vacancy; Necessity of Charity undertakes due
Employments; the which charge if it be not imposed, one ought to remain in
the fruition and contemplation of Verity. And agreeable herto is the Doctrine of
S. Gregor. (in cap. 7. Job.) and S. Bernard. (ser. 57. in Cant.) Moreover, a
soul by Meditation may perhaps find out finer conceits; but the will is more
enriched with virtues by this Prayer; Now it is virtue alone that renders a
soul acceptable to God. And as for corporal Infirmities, they proceed only
from an indiscreet use of this Prayer; for otherwise it being a Prayer of
stillnes and repose, is far less dangerous to the head and health, then the
laborious Imaginatiue Exercise of Meditation; And hence it is, that those holy
persons that practiced it, were enabled much longer to continue in it.

27. A sixth Objection was, That this manner of Prayer does dravv souls so
wholy to it self, that all Devotion to Saints, and all praying for common or
particular necessities become too much neglected and forgotten.

28. It is answered; That since such Vocal Prayers and voluntary exercises are
only means to bring souls to perfect Prayer of quietness, according to S.
Thomas his Doctrine (22. q. 83. a. 13.) they ought to cease when the soul
finds herself full of fervent affections. Neither is this any proof of
disesteeme of such means, but a right understanding and use of them. It is
said of S. Ignatius that by long practice of Vocal Prayer etc. he was brought
to such inward familiarity with God, that he could not proceed in the saying
of his Office, by reason of the copious communication of ardent Affections and
graces that God bestovved on him; in so much as his companions were forced to
obtain for him a dispensation from that obligation, because the performance of
his Office took up almost the whole day, so abundant were the Divine
visitations in it toward him. Neither are we to think that a soul by
follovving the divine conduct in Pure Prayer does thereby omit due Petitions
for either common or particular necessities; on the contrary, since those
necessities are known to God, who sees the hearts of his servants that
ardently desire a supply to them, but yet do not busy themselves much in
making express prayers for them, because they would rather employ their
affections in such prayer as they know is more acceptable to God; By such a
not-expresse-asking, they do privily and most efficaciously ask and obtain
the said Petitions* And as for Devotion to Saints they account it to be their
chiefest honor, that God should be most honored.

29. The seventh and last Objection was the same that the Author had before
answered in his Account to his General viz. That this fashion of Prayer calls
souls from the spiritual Exercises, instituted by S. Ignatius; The which
answer needs not be repeated. But whereas it was added, That diversity of
Prayer might cause factions in the Society; It was ansvvered, That the Perfect
may lavvfully practice vvayes not common to the imperfect, without any fear
of divisions, or any intention of contradicting or despising of others.

30. This is the Sum both of the Account given by the V. R. Father Baltazar
Aluarez to his General, touching his Prayer; as likewise of his Answers to
the Objections made unto it. And the success of the tempest raised against him
was, as to his own person, very prosperous and happy; for after a most
strict examination his innocence and truth were asserted by his Writings, and
his most humble Patience manifested in his whole behavior. Moreover the
General conceived so great an esteem of him, that he preferred him to two
Offices successively of the greatest dignity and trust that the Society then
had in Spain. Notvvithstanding the same General not approving that such a
perfect manner of Prayer (though acknowledged to proceed from a special grace
of God) should be commonly dispersed and indifferently taught through the
Order, as supposed not to be agreeable to its actiuity ( yet none ever did
execute the Offices imposed with greater perfection then the said R. Father
Baltazar:) Therefore a Decree was made to forbid the spreading of it. Which, for
ought appears, produced the desired Effect.

THE SECOND SECTION OF THE THIRD TREATISE. OF THE FIRST Degree of Internal
Prayer, viz. Meditation.
CHAP. I.
. 1. 2. 3. Several Degrees and Stations in an Internal Life; as the three
ways, Purgative, Illuminatiue and Unitive etc.

. 4. 5. They are best distinguished according to the three Degrees of Internal
Prayer.

. 6. 7. The Grounds of the several Degrees of Prayer.

. 16. 17. How God is represented in the said Degrees.

. 18. 19. How the Operations of the Soul grow more and more pure.

. 20. 21. The Degrees of Prayer are not so diverse, but that sometimes they may
be intermixed.

. 22. 23. 24. In what sense the Exercises of an Active Life (to wit,
Meditation) are divided into three ways also, Purgative, Illuminatiue and
Unitive.

1. IT is generally the custom of those that write Treatises of Spiritual
Doctrine, to begin with a Division of the several Stations or Ascents
observed in the Duties and Exercises thereof. But such a Division I have
conceived most proper to be reserved to this place: And the reason is, because
though in a Spiritual Progress there be an Ascent in the practice of all
Duties universally of a Spiritual life, as well of Mortification as Prayer,
notvvithstanding, the true Judgment of a Progress is to be made with
reference principally to Prayer, according to the increase in the Purity and
Spirituality vvherof, so is the person to be esteemed to have made a
proportionable progress in all other Duties and virtues disposing to
Contemplation and Perfection.

2. Now several Mysticke Authors according to the several Notions that they
had both of the End of a Spiritual Life, and Means conducing thereto, have by
several terms made the Division of its Degrees. The most ancient Division is
into three States, 1. Of Beginners. 2. Of Proficients. 3. Of such as are
Perfect: Yet vvithall they do not signify by what distinctiue Marks each of
these States are separated from the others. But generally in latter times the
whole course of a Spiritual Life is divided. 1. Into the Purgative way: in
which all sinful Defects are purged out of the Soul. 2. The Illuminatiue
way, by which Divine Virtues and Graces are introduced. 3. The Unitive way,
by which a Soul attaines unto the End of all other Exercises, to wit, an
Union with God in Spirit by perfect Charity.

3. Besides these, many other Divisions may be found, as of F. Benet Canfield,
who making the Divine Will (that is God himself) the sole object of all our
Exercises, does by a Division of the said Will into 1. External. 2. Internal.
3. Essential or supereminent Will, vertually divide all Spiritual Exercises
into such as are proper and conformable to these three Notions of one and the
same Will. Again others divide all Exercises into 1. Active. 2. Contemplative
etc. And it is of no importance which of these Divisions is made use of, so
they be rightly understood.

4. But since, as has been said, the Degrees of Perfection generally
understood as relating to all the Duties of an Internal life, are best
conceived and measured by the Degrees of Internal Prayer, the which indeed
are of a different nature one from the other, and therefore are not so properly
called Degrees, as several States of Prayer (which is not so in Mortification
or the Exercise of Virtues, because the Perfect do the same Actions though in
a more perfect Degree, then the imperfect:) Hence it is that the R. F.
Constantin Barbanson, the most learned and experienced Author of the Book
called Secrets sentiers de l'Amour Divine, diuides the whole progress of a
Spiritall Contemplative Life according to the progress of Prayer, which
(says he) has these Degrees. 1. The Exercises of the Understanding in
Meditation. 2. The Exercises of the Will and Affections without Meditation
(the which at the first are very imperfect.) 3. Afterward a Soul comes to an
Experimental perception of the Divine Presence in her. 4. Then follows the
great Desolation. 5. The which being past, there succeedes a sublime
Manifestation of God in the Summity of the Spirit. 6. From thence after many
interchangeable risings and fallings (the which are found likewise in all the
Degrees) the Soul enters into the Divine, yet most secret ways of Perfection.

5. Now this order of his in gross (as being most natural and suitable both
to reason and Experience) my purpose is to follow: yet so as to collect the
four last Degrees into one: So that I shall only distinguish three Degrees of
Prayer, to wit: 1. Discoursiue Prayer, or Meditation. 2. The Prayer of forced
Immediate Acts or Affections of the will, without Discourse preparatory
thereto. 3. The Prayer of pure Active Contemplation, or Aspirations as it were
naturally and without any force flowing from the Soul, powerfully and
immediately directed, and moved by the holy Spirit. Now this third Degree, (to
which the Prayer) belonging is indeed truly the Prayer of Contemplation,
beyond which there is no State of Prayer, may very conueni^ntly include all
the four Degrees mentioned by Barbanson, and so nicely distinguished by him,
rather out of a particular Experience of the Effects passing in his own
Soul, the which perhaps are not the same in all: (for God works according to
his own good pleasure in the Souls of his perfect Servants, and not
according to any Methods that Man can conceive or express.)

6. These therefore being the three Degrees of internal Prayer (the which do
most properly answer to the commonly assigned ways of spirituality, the
Purgative, Illuminatiue and Unitive.) Of them, the first is a Prayer consisting
much of Discourse of the Understanding: The other two are Prayers of the Will:
but most principally and purely the last: Of these three I shall treat in
Order in the follovving Discourse: (to wit, 1. In pursuit of this Second
Section of the most imperfect Degree, to wit. Meditation: 2. In the follovving
Section, of the Prayer of immediate Acts of the Will: 3. And in the last
Section, of the Prayer of Aspirations or Contemplation:) But before I come to
treat of each in particular, I conceive it requisite first to show the grounds
upon which the propriety and Reasonableness of this Division of the
succeeding Degrees of Prayer is built, and may be evidently and conuincingly
demonstrated, so far, that according to the ordinary dispensation of Divine
Grace to souls that tend to Perfection it may be affirmed, that they are
conducted by these Degrees, in this Order, and no other way: And this
experience will make good even in souls that never heard of any Degrees of
Prayer, but without learning, reading or Instructions are immediately guided by
Gods holy Spirit in his Internal Ways; The reason hereof will appear by
that which follows.

7. First therefore, it is apparent and acknowledged that general speaking, a
Soul from a state of Negligence and secularity first entering into a spiritual
Course though she be supposed by Virtue of that Grace by which she is moved to
make so great and happy a Change, to be really in the state of Justification:
yet there still remains in her a great measure of Fear conceived from the
guilt of her former sins: And vvithall strong inclinations to sin and vicious
habits do yet abide, and will do so, till by long practice of Virtue and
Piety they be abated and expelled: Moreover a world of vain and sinful
Images do possess the Soul, which distract her whensoever she sets her
mind on God, calling her to attend to her formerly-pleasing objects, which
took up all her Affections, and which do still oftimes insinuate themselves
into her Memory, with too much contentment to inferior nature: The which
contentment though she upon reflection do resist and renoune with her
Superior Soul, yet this resistance is oftimes so feeble, that frequently she
is really entangled and seduced, and more often does find ground to doubt that
she has given consent thereto.

8. Such being ordinarily the disordered condition of a Soul at her first
Conversion: The Remedy acknowledged to be proper and necessary for her is
Prayer: And the highest degree of Prayer that for the present she is capable of
is either a much distracted Vocal Prayer, or Discoursiue Meditation, in which
the Understanding and imagination are chiefly employed. And the reason is,
because although God has imprinted true Charity in such a soul, yet seducing
Images so abounding, and vicious Affections being as yet so predominant in
sensitive nature, there is a necessity for the fortifying it to chase away the
said Images, and subdue such Affections by storing the Imagination with
contrary good Images, and setting on work Affections contrary to these: and
this is done by inuenting arguments and motives (especially of Fear.) So that
the exercises proper to a soul in this first imperfect state are those of
sensible Contrition and Remorse for sin etc. caused by the consideration of the
foulenes of it; of the misery that attends it; the certainty and uncertainty of
Death; the terrors of Gods Judgment; the Horror of Hell etc. as likewise a
consideration that no less a price would serve for the reparation of a soul
from sin then the ibloudy Passion of the Son of God etc. Such matters as these
are now the seasonable subjects of Meditation. And the actions of
Mortification fit to attend such Prayer are more sensible, gross and
exterior, proper to repress her grosser defects.

9. Now when by means of such Exercises the Soul is become well eased from
Remorse, and beginns to be moved to the resistance and hatred of sin by the
Love of God, rather then Fear of his Judgments: Her Discoursiue Prayer for all
that does not cease: but there is a change made only in the Objects of it:
Because instead of the consideration of Judgment, Hell etc. the Soul finds
herself more inclined to resist sin by the Motives of Love, or a consideration
of the Charity, Patience and Sufferings of our Lord, as likewise out of a
comfortable Meditation of the future Joys promised and prepared for her.
Although Charity be much increased, yet not yet to such a Point but that she
stands in need of Motives and considerations to set it on work, as likewise
of good, holy and efficacious Images of Divine things to allure her to forget
or neglect the vain Images that yet do much distract her. The Object of her
thoughts now are the infinite Joys of Heaven, the sublime Mysteries of Faith,
the Blessed Humanity of our Lord, the glorious Attributes of the Divinity etc.
And the Mortifications answerable to the present state do grow more
internal, being much exercised about inward defects, which by Prayer are
discovered to her and corrected. Now a soul whilst she continues in this sort
of Prayer and Mortification, standing in need of a much and frequent
consideration of Motives, is properly said to be in the Purgative way: though
toward the latter End there be a mixture of the Illuminatiue.

10. In the Second place, when a Soul by Perseue^ance in such Discoursiue
Prayer comes to find (as in ^^me she will) that she stands in less need of
inuen^^ng Motives to induce her to exercise love to God, because good
Affections by Exercise abounding and ^ovving ripe, do with facility move
themselves; so ^^at the mere presenting of a good Object to the Soul suffises
to make her produce a good Affection: Thenceforvvard by little and little the
Soul in Prayer quits Discoursing, and the will immediately stirs it self
toward God: And here ( Meditation ending) the second and more perfect Degree
or State of Internal Prayer begins, to wit the Prayer of Immediate Acts of
the will.

11. Now a Soul living a Solitary or abstracted Life, and being arrived to
this Prayer, if she should be obliged by others, or force herself to continue
Meditation, she would make no progress at all. Yea on the contrary, the
extreme painefullnes of inuenting Motives (now unnecessary) and tying herself
to Methods and prescribed forms would be to her so distractiue, so void of
all taste and comfort, and so insupportable, that not being suffered to follovv
Gods inuitation calling to an Exercise of the will, she will be in danger to
give quite over all Internal Prayer. Whereas by pursuing Gods Call, she will
every day get light to discover more and more her secret inward Defects, and
Grace to mortify and amend them. And such her Mortification is exercised rather
by tra^scending and forgetting the objects of her inordinate Affections, then a
direct combatting against them. And this state of Prayer does properly answer
to that which is commonly called the Illuminatiue way; because i^ it the soul
with little reflection on her self or he^ own Obscurity by reason of sin
etc, tends directly and immediately to God, by whom she is enlightne^ and
adorned with all Virtues and Graces.

12. In the third place, a soul after a long Exercise in forced Affections of
the will to God represented to the Understanding by Images far more subtle and
spiritual then formerly, yea endeavoring to contemplate him in the darkness
and obscurity of a blind and naked Faith void of all distinct and express
Images, will by little and little grow so well disposed to him, that she will
have less need of forcing herself to produce good Affections to him, or of
prescribing to herself determinate forms of Acts or Affections: On the
contrary Divine Love will become so firmly established in the soul, so
wholly and only filling and possessing it, that it will become as it were a
New Soul unto the Soul, as constantly breathing forth feruorous Acts of Love,
and as naturally almost as the Lungs do send forth breath.

13. And here begins the State of pure Contemplation (the end of all Exercises
of an Internal Life.) In this blessed State the Actuations and Aspirations are
so Pure and Spiritual, that the soul herself often times is not able to give
an account what she does. And no vvonder, since they do not proceed from any
forethought or Election of her own, but are suggested to her by the Divine
Spirit entirely possessing her. And although in these most sublime and blind
Eleuations of the will the Imagination and understanding with their Images are
not absolutely excluded, yet so unperceptible are their Operations, that it is
no vvonder if many Mystical Writers speaking according to what they felt and
experienced in themselves, have said, That in Pure Contemplation the Will
without the understanding was only operative. As for the Mortifications proper
to this state, they are as inexpressible as the Prayer. Indeed Prayer and
Mortification seem to be now become the same thing: For the light in which
the Soul walks is so clear and vvonderfull, that the smallest Imperfections
are clearly discovered, and by Prayer alone mortified. Prayer is the whole
Business of the life, interrupted by sleep only, and not always then
neither. True it is that by other Necessities of corporal Nature, Refections,
Study, Conversation or business it may be depressed a little from the height in
which it is when the Soul sets it self to attend to God only: but still it
continues with efficacy in the midst of all those auocations. And this is
truly and properly that which Mysticks do style the Unitive way, because
herein the Soul is in a continual Union in Spirit with God, having
transcended all Creatures and herself too, the which are become as it were
amnihilated, and God is all in all.

14. There is no state of Spirituality beyond this. But yet this state may
infinitely increase in degrees of Purity, the operations of the Soul growing
more and more Spiritual, intime and Divine without all limitation. In this
State it is that the Soul is prepared for Divine Inaction, Passive Unions, and
Graces most admirable, and most efficacious to purify her as perfectly as in
the condition of this life she is capable. Now it is that God prouides for
Souls dearly beloved by him, Trials and Desolations incomprehensible to the
unexperienced, leading them from Light to darkness, and from thence to Light
again: In all which changes the Soul keeps herself in the same Equality
and tranquillity, as knovving that by them all she approaches nearer and nearer
to God, plunging herself more and more profoundly in him. A Soul that is come
to this State is above all Instructours and Instructions: a Divine Light being
her Guide in all manner of things. In a word, it is not she that now lives,
but Christ and his holy Spirit that lives, reigns and operates in her.

15. These are the three States of a Spiritual Contemplative life,
distinguished according to the three states or Degrees of Internal Prayer. As
for Vocal Prayer it is not to be esteemed a peculiar Degree of Prayer, but it
may and does accompany all these states without any change in the substance of
the Prayer, though with very great variety in the Actuation of the Soul
during its Exercise. For whilst the soul is in the imperfect Degree of
Meditation she performs her Vocal Prayer with the use of grosser Images, and
much distractednes. But being arrived to the Exercises of the will, she recites
them with less multiplicity, and some good measure of Recollection. And being
in the Exercise of Aspirations, her Vocal Prayers become likewise Aspiratiue
and Unitive, not at all distracting her, but rather driving her more profoundly
and intimely into God.

16. Now God being both the Principle and Object of all our Internal
Exercises, is after several ways represented to the mind in them: For 1. in
Meditation the soul, as yet much immersed in sense, is forced to make use of a
distinct grosser Image by which to apprehend him, as the Humanity of our Lord
and the Mysteries belonging thereto, and sometimes such Attributes of the
Divinity as are most obuious and easy to be conceived, and which do produce
more sensible motions in our imperfect Souls, as his Justice, Mercy, Power
etc. 2. But in the practice of the Acts of the will, the understanding
endeauours to apprehend God in the obscure Notion of Faith: And when she is
sometimes forced to make use of more particular sensible Images, the mind after
a short reflection on them gives place to the recollected Actuations of the
will alone. 3. But being arrived to Aspirations (which is Active
Contemplatian) the Soul makes use of no particular express Images at all, but
contents herself with the only general obscure Notion of God which Faith
teaches her.

17. Now though it may seem that the most Perfect have no great advantage in
this regard over the more imperfect: Since all that are endued with ordinary
knowledge do sufficiently believe, and are assured that God, being infinite
and incomprehensible, cannot be truly represented by any particular Images and
Notions, the which are creatures of our own framing: Notvvithstanding we
are to consider, that there is a great difference betvveene the acknovvledging
of this Truth in the Speculatiue Judgment, and the operating according to such
a Truth by the will. For Imperfect Souls notvvithstanding the foresaid
Judgment, when they are to apply themselves to Prayer, are forced in practice
to contradict such their Speculatiue Judgment, and to represent God to their
minds not only by particular and distinct, but even grosser sensible Images,
because they find that the said true and Perfect Notion of God by a general,
negative, obscure conception of Faith will have little or no efficacy on their
wills; the which will remain aride and void of all good Affections, except
they exchange the said Notion for others more particular and express. Whereas
on the contrary, Perfect Souls having by long practice purifyed their
internal Operations, in time do come to such a State that they cannot, if
they would, receive benefit, or vvarme their Affections by sensible or
particular Images: Except they do silence not only the Imagination, but
Understanding also, the Will remains without motion or vigor. Yea in the
particular case of the great Desolation the Eleuations of the Will also become
so wonderfully pure, delicate, and even vnperceptible, that the Soul it self
can scarce perceive, or so much as believe that she operates toward God:
insomuch as on the contrary she is often perplexed with great fear and doubt
that in truth she does not love God.

18. Now the foresaid Division of the three States of Prayer, together with
the successiue purification and spiritualizing of Images is so grounded on
reason and even Nature, that every one that experiences Prayer will perceive
it, and others cannot except against it. For as we see in all Arts and
Sciences, as (for example) Music or Poetry, a Person that sets himself to
learn them, is at the first obliged to make use of a world of gross distinct
Images, the which he applies particularly and leasurely to every string, every
stop and every finger moving the Instrument: as likewise to every word and
syllable in a Verse. But by Exercise having attained to a moderate skill, a far
less number of Images will serve to direct him. And the reason is, because
the Images by practice becoming more pure and spiritual, are by consequence
more universal; so that one will come to have the Virtue of a great number
which formerly were requisite. And at last the Person becoming perfect in
those Arts will be able to make a Verse exact according to the Rules of Poetry
without any perceptible reflection upon any particular Rules; And to play on an
Instrument not only in the dark, but even whilst he is conuersing with
another; By reason that the Images are become so pure and universal, that the
Person using them perceiues them not, neither knows by what he is directed.

19. Now if the Operation of a Soul in natural, sensible things may come to
be so pure and subtle, much more in spiritual and Divine matters: in
exercising about which her endeauours ought to be to exclude all manner both
of sensible and intellectual Images: or rather in exercising about which the
will alone strives to be operative.

20. Notwithstanding what has been said of the Distinction of these three
ways of a Contemplative Life, we are to observe, that they are not so
absolutely distinguished, but that sometimes there may be a mixture of them:
For it may happen that a Soul being as yet in the most imperfect Purgative
way, may in some fits be so abundantly supplied with Grace, as that during the
Exercise of Meditation she may often be enabled to produce immediate Acts of the
Will, yea and perhaps Aspirations too, so joining together Exercises both
Purgative, Illuminatiue, and Unitive in one Recollection: Yea it may be
possible for such an imperfect Beginner to spend the whole time of a
Rec^llection in those nobler Exercises. But yet when such Grace and Devotion
(which ordinarily lasts not long) does come to cease, she will be forced to
return to her imperfect exercise of Meditation: Or if out of an auersion from
descending lovver, she will needs stick to those higher Exercises (which to
her are but temporary) she will by means of Aridity and Indeuotion loose all
the fruit of her Recollections, which will indeed become insupportable to her.

21. So on the other side it may well happen that a soul that is ascended to
the Exercise of immediate Acts, may some times for some short space find it
necessary for her to help herself now and then by using Meditation, and
seeking Motives in the Understanding to move her Affections. Therefore these
three States are to be distinguished and separated with relation to the proper
and constant Exercises of Souls.

22. Before we quitt the present Subject of the Degrees of Prayer and a
Spiritual Life: It is, for the preventing of Mistakes, to be observed, that
those Writers likewise which teach and know no more sublime exercises then
Meditation do notvvithstanding divide the whole Course of their Spirituality
also into these three Exercises of the Purgative, Illuminatiue and Unitive way,
although the Perfection both of their Doctrine and Practice reaches no further
then the Active Life which they profess: As we may see in the Books of
Puente, Rodriguez etc, to which we may add Ludouicus Granatensis also etc.

23. But these three ways of Active Livers though agreeing in Name with the
forementioned Mysticke Exercises, yet are much different in their nature and
qualities. For all the said three ways are exercised by the help and with
the use of Discourse, and do never arise to the Exclusion of particular
sensible Images. So that the Perfection of their Exercise is to Discourse with
more subtilty, and from such Discourse to derive and dravv more fervent
Affections and good purposes of the Will. Further then this Active Exercisers
cannot go: because their life does not afford the leisure, freedom and
Vacancy from external businesses, which is necessary for enabling Souls to
Contemplative Exercises, the which begin with those that I call Proper
Aspirations, arising upon the Expiration of Imaginatiue Exercises, as being the
Perfection o^ them.

24. And indeed if Active Livers should proceed further, they would then
relinquish their Institute, that refers all the doings of it to the Exterior,
which cannot be without the use and help of particular Images: so that the
forementioned general Image of God, or rather non-Image is not at all proper
for their Course. They do not therefore ordain these their External
Imaginatiue Exercises in order to Contemplation: but only to enable them to
perform their external Deeds of Charity with greater Perfection and Purity
of intention. As therefore they do not themselves practice Contemplation, so
neither do they teach it to others, nor indeed can they, for want of
experience.

CHAP. II.
. 1. 2. Of Meditation, the first and lowest Degree of Internal Prayer.

. 3. 4. Who are apt, or unapt for Meditation.

. 5. 6. Generally most Souls are to begin with it. And why.

. 7. 8. 9. 10. What those are to do that are unapt for Meditation.

. 11. The misery of Souls that are tied to a Prayer improper for them.

1. THE first and most imperfect Degree of Internal Prayer is (as has been
said) Meditation or Discoursiue Prayer: Of which we shall treat here, not
with that exact niceness as may be found in many Books current in all hands,
yet sufficiently in order to our present Design, which is to consider it only
as a preparation to the Perfect Prayer of Contemplation. And therefore the
Instructions concerning it shall be such as may be proper for those whom God
has called to that Perfect State, and vvithall moved to comply with the said
Call. And to such many Instructions will not be proper.

2. Meditation is such an Internal Prayer, in which a Devout Soul does in
the first place take in hand the consideration of some particular Mystery of
Faith, to the end that by a serious and exact search into the several points
and circumstances in it with the Understanding or Imagination, she may extract
Motives of good Affections to God, and consequently produce suitable Affections
in virtue of the said Motives, as long as such virtue will last.

3. This is a Prayer to the exercise whereof all sorts of Persons are neither
disposed, nor enabled. Neither is it a token either of excellency of wit and
Judgment, or of true Devotion to be apt for the practice of it. On the contrary
the more that a Soul does abound with Devotion and good Affections to God,
the less is she enabled or disposed thereto, yea incapable of continuing long
in the Exercise of it. And again, some superficial Wits, full of fancy, but
vvanting solidity of Judgment, and which are not naturally much disposed to
Devotion, yet if they be put to the Exercise of this Discoursiue Prayer, they
will perform it better, and thrive more in it, then others though of sharp
vvitts, solid Judgments, and great abilities both in learning and Invention,
and that vvithall have very good wills to seek our Lord.

4. Women are, generally speaking, less apt for Meditation, then men: and by
consequence more fit for the more perfect Exercises of the Will: By reason that
they are more disabled in judgment and invention, and more abounding in will
and Affections: so that in them the Will draws the stream from the
Understanding. Therefore great care is to be taken that they be not compelled
without necessity to tarry long in Discoursiue Exercises: least thereby they
be much prejudiced in the Head and Spirit, with little or no proffit any way,
but much harm, in being detained from the more proper and beneficial Exercise
of the Will in holy Affections.

5. Now there being so great and inexpressible variety in the Internal
Dispositions of persons, it is not possible to give certain and general Rules
to fit all; Except this, that in the beginning of a spiritual Contemplative
Course all Souls that are not naturally incapable of raising Affections by
internal Discourse, ought to apply themselves thereto, and to tarry therein
till they find themselves ripe for a future Exercise: To the which they will
attain sooner or later, either according to their diligence and constancy in
practicing Meditation; Or the measure and Grace of Devotion which God shall
give them; Or their natural aptnes or unaptness for Exercises of the
Understanding.

6. This Advice is of great concernment: And therefore souls are not easily and
lightly to be permited to apply themselves to Exercises of the Will, till a
convenient time spent in those of the Understanding. For though perhaps whilst
the Feruor Nouitius lasts in the beginning of one's Conversion, a soul being
then full of Affection, may for a while have little need of Motives to open
the passage to the said Affections, which of themselves will be apt enough to
flow: Yet that Fervor ceasing, they will be at a miserable loss, full of
nothing but Aridities, Obscurities and Desolations, having no refuge at all,
except their Understanding be stored with good Motives of holy Affections
caused by former Consideration and Meditation.

7. Yet this is not so to be understood, as if Souls were to be obliged to
those nice, distracting painful Methods of Meditation which are described in
many Books: or to frame curious Pageants and scenes of the Mysteries to be
meditated on etc. For though such an Employment of the Imagination in Prayer
may be proper and proffitable for those that by their Profession live Active,
distracted lives: to the end by such workings of the Fancy to wipe out, as it
were, the vain Images contracted abroad, by superinducing, or painting over
them new and holy Images: Yet for those who are more Solitary and abstracted,
such a way of Meditating would be very painful, and the proffit so little,
as it would not counteruaile the pain. To such therefore it will suffice,
with moderate attention to think on the substance of the Mystery proposed, or
on such circumstances of it as either are expressed in the Text, or do even
naturally attend it, and from thence to dravv as strong, feruorous and frequent
Affections as may be.

8. As for those that are naturally utterly disabled and incapable of
Meditating (as many Women are) it is very requisite in the beginning that they
should at least supply the benefit that comes from Meditation, by preparing
themselves to their Recollections with much, serious and attentive reading of
some pious Book, the which may in some good proportion recompense Meditation.

9. But in case a soul incapable of Meditation and unable likewise to read,
shall undertake a spiritual, Contemplative course (as none are excluded:) such
an one must resolve to take a very great courage to pursue her Exercises of the
Will and Affections (which is but a dry Exercise, and wanting sensible
Devotion, is very ungrateful to the palate of the soul:) She must be prepared
not to be daunted with Aridities and Distractions: The which Distractions she
has no other way to resist or expel, but only by pure Obstinacy of the will
not to attend them, or care for them: And lastly she must use more Abstraction
of life and Solitude to prevent the multiplying of Distracting Images.

10. Those who in the Exercise of Meditation are more seriously affected to
the Discoursing part of it, then to the good Desires and purposes which should
flow from such Discourse, are in danger of many perils, as of Pride,
Curiosity, Extrauagant Opinions, yea pernicious Errors. The cause of which
Dangers is the predominancy that their Imagination has over their other
faculties, which inclines them to please themselves with subtle aeriall and
curious Discourses, and with framing of places, and times and other
circumstances in the consideration of a Mystery. All which inconveniences are
avoided in the Exercises of the Superior Will, which being a blind faculty,
is best able to heave up herself unto God in darkness and vacancy of Images:
And being likewise a Spiritual faculty, is exempted from the Devils
influences, who has great dominion over our corporeal Powers to suggest
representations etc. For these reasons it is good to make the Discoursing part
of Meditation as short as may be: So as that if the mere reflection on a Mystery
will suffice to produce a good affection, the person is to restrain the
Imagination.

11. To conclude; the great and inexplicable variety that is to be found in the
dispositions of Souls being considered: and likewise the great inconvenience
that necessarily follows a misapplication of Spirits to Exercises improper for
them, the sad condition of those good Souls cannot sufficiently be bevvayled,
who by their Profession being as it were emprisoned in a Solitary, Religious
Life, and being naturally unapt for Discourse, are yet kepd all their lives in
Meditation, repeating over and over again the same toylesome Methods, without
any progress in Spirit, to their great anguish and disquietnes. And this
misery is much greater in Religious Women, who having no diuersions of Studies
or employments, cannot possibly find exercise for their Imagination: and
therefore seeing great Defects and vnsatisfactions in themselves, and not
knovving the only cure of them, (which is by ascending to the Internal
Exercises of the will) their Imperfections increase, and their anguishes
proportionably, without any known means to amend them.

CHAP. III.
. 11. How a Soul is to Exercise Meditation.

. 2. 3. 4. etc. What inconvenient Practices and Methods therein are to be
avoided.

. 9. 10. etc. What Orders are positiuely to be observed.

. 15. The grounds of those Aduices.

. 16. 17. etc. Further special Instructions to the same purpose.

. 23. A particular way of Meditation in Blosius.

1. INTENDING now to set down more particular Instructions and Aduices how
and in what manner a Soul (by her choice or Profession aspiring to
Contemplation) ought in order thereto to practice the lowest and most imperfect
degree of Internal Prayer, which is Meditation: I will first show such a
Beginner what he is not to do, that is, what practices and orders he is to
avoid. 2. And nex how he is to behave himself in the Exercise thereof.

2. As to the former therefore, I should be so far from commending, that I
would scarce permit Souls living a Contemplative life (as all enclosed
Religious Women do etc.) to be strictly obliged to a prescribed Method in
Meditation, or to those many and nice Rules which are ordained by some Modern
Authors, as. 1. That a Soul should put herself in the Divine Presence. 2.
That she should make Acts of Contrition. 3. That she should select Points of
Meditation. 4. That she should consider them in such an order, with such
framing of representations of the Persons, times, places, postures etc. 5. That
thence she should dravv motives of good Affections. 6. That thereupon she
should dravv Petitions. 7. That afterward she should make Purposes. 8. That
thereto she should adioyne Thanksgiving. 9. Moreuoer that she should have a
list of Imperfections or faults committed the day etc before, and make
expunctions of faults amended. 10. That in conclusion she should make an Examen
how her Meditation has been performed, to the end she may give an Account
thereof to her Spiritual Directour etc.

3. It is far from my Intention to speak against the use of such Methods and
Orders among those where they were first invented, and are still practiced:
for they may well enough agree with their Institute, which is far more
Active then Contemplative. But among Solitary Contemplative Spirits, such
Orders are indeed a disorder, and a nice observance of such ceremonious Methods
would be more distractiue and painful then the simple Exercise it self: And
particularly the expectation that an Account is to be given of ones Thoughts
during Meditation, would afford more business to a Soul, then the Mystery on
which she meditates; So that she would be more sollicitous to give
satisfaction to her Directour, then to perform her Duty to God. And therefore
S. Theresa with just reason complains against those Directours which fetter
and encomber their Disciples minds with Orders and Rules, which require more
attention then the matter of the Prayer it self.

4. How to meditate proffitably (though not curiously) is quickly and without
much difficulty learnt by such as are fit for it: But to observe all the said
prescripts is both difficult, incombring and unprofitable; being indeed little
better then a mispending of the time: (I mean for souls tending to
Contemplation.)

5. Moreover in Meditation I would not tie the Will that it should not go
beside or beyond the Understanding. On the contrary my Advice and request is
that the will, so it be carried toward God, should be suffered to go as far
as it can, and that scope should be given to any good Affection: Not caring
whether such Affections be pertinent to the present Subject to be considered
on at that time; upon condition that the Soul find that she bestovves herself
more efficaciously on God by such Affections, then by those which would
properly flow from the present Motives considered.

6. Neither would I that when a Soul has chosen one point or Mystery to
meditate on, she should strictly oblige herself to proceed on with it, but
that if without a voluntary rouing and seeking, any other should offer it
self to the mind more grateful and more gustfull to the Soul, she should
entertain the latter, holding herself to it, as long as the v^rtue of it
well lasts: And it ceasing, then let her return to the first proposed
Subject. And the like liberty I recommend in the follovving Exercises of
Immediate Acts, whensoever any Act or good Affection is suggested to the mind,
besides those which the Soul finds in her Paper proposed for the present
Recollection.

7. Notvvithstanding in case that the new matter (or Affections) occurring be
such as that it does feed some ouer-abounding humor or passion in the Soul,
as Fear (even of God himself,) Tenderness, shedding of Tears, scrupulosi^y
or deiectednes of spirit etc. I would by no means permit a soul to entertain
her mind with such matter; Because she will thereby only plunge herself more
deeply into nature and immortification, and not at all purify her inordinate
Affections. Such souls even in the beginning ought not to choose such matters
for their Prayers: and much less ought they to be permitted to quit other good
matter for that. This Advice extends likewise to the Exercise of immediate
Acts of the Will, for as much as concerns the matter of them.

8. Now such freedom of Spirit and permission to change the present matter or
Affections is to be supposed to be allowed only when the said change proceeds
not out of sloth, inconstancy, a vain pleasing of the fancy or Affection: but
out of a judicious Election, or from an interior inuitation, the which most
probably is from the Spirit of God. Hereto therefore may be applied that saying
of S. Bernard, Modus diligendi Deum, est diligere sine modo, that is. The
measure and manner of loving of God is to love him vnmeasurably, and freely
without a prescribed manner.

9. In the next place having shevved what encombrances a Soul is to avoid in
her exercise of Meditation, I will proceed to declare positiuely and directly
how I would advise her to behave herself therein.

10. Let a soul that begins Mental Prayer with the Exercise of Meditation,
make choice of some good Books of that subject, as Fuluius Androtius,
Granatensis, or the Abridgment of Puentes Meditations (which I would
especially recommend.)

11. Let her begin with the matter of the Purgative way, as concerning Sin,
Death, the Final Judgment, Hell or the like: And let her abide in the
Exercises of that way, till she finds in her self an auersion from Sin, and
that much of the Fear and remorse that were formerly in her, are deposed, so
that she is come to have some good measure of Confidence in God. When she finds
these Effects in her, let her (without regarding whether she has run over
all the Exercises and matters in her Book belonging to the Purgative way)
pass to the Exercises of Meditation which respects the Illuminatiue way (as
they call it;) that is to such whose matter or argument is some Mystery of
Faith touching our Lords Life, Passion etc. and which are apt to beget and
increase Humility, Patience and other Virtues in her.

12. Being entered into the Illuminatiue way, let her in like manner abide in
the Exercises thereof till she find her self apt for Resignation, Love and
other Affections of the Unitive way, to the Exercise of which let her thereupon
apply herself.

13. It may happen that a Soul that is duly and in right order come into the
Illuminatiue and Unitive way (as those ways are distinguished by the Masters
of Meditation) and after some time spent in the Exercises proper to those
ways, may afterward find herself called back to the Purgative: As after
the committing of some fault extraordinary, or during some unusual tentation
etc. In which cases, she is to yield thereto, and abide in those inferior
Exercises as long as she finds them proper and proffitable for her (which is
not like to be very long.)

14. In like manner whilst she is in the Purgative way, if Acts of
Resignation, Love etc. and much more if Aspirations shall offer themselves to
her (as some times they may) let her by all means correspond unto them, as
long as they are relishing to her, neglecting and forbearing in the mean time
to consider Motives, or to produce inferior Acts of Contrition, Fear etc.
belonging to the Purgative way.

15. The grounds of the reasonablenes and necessity of these Aduices is this,
Because the Matter and manner of Prayer are to be prescribed and ordered
according to the temper and disposition of Souls, and not the Methods of
Books: And therefore souls are to be applied to such a manner of Prayer as God
calls them to, and is likely to subdue inordinate Affections in them: Therefore
scrupulous and fearful souls even in the beginning ate to be forbidden the
Exercises of Terror etc. which belong to the Purgative way: and they are to
be applied to such exercises as are apt to produce Love, Confidence in God etc.

16. For some short space before a Soul begins her Exercise of Meditation, let
her look upon the Book, and therein peruse the Points that she intends to
meditate on. Or rather indeed those Points are to be thought upon and provided
before hand; that is, Ouer-night for the Morning-Meditation; and after dinner
for the Evening. So doing, she will be less to seek about the^, and better
employ the time appointed for her exercise.

17. Let her not trust her Memory for the Points that she is to meditate on;
but have the Book ready, that she may look on it as she shall have need. And
let her take one point after another as they lie in the Book; or as she shall
have determined before, when she prepared for the succeeding Recollection.

18. In her meditating on each Point, let her behave herself after this
manner. 1. With her Memory and understanding let her think on the matter of
that point. 2. Out of which let her dravv a Reason or motive by which the
will may be inclined some way or other toward God. 3. And thereupon let her
produce an Act of the Will (as of humiliation, Adoration, Resignation,
Contrition etc.) abiding in such application of the soul to God as long as the
Will has life and actiuity for it, or as long as she shall be able to do it.
4. The which failing and growing to be disgustfull, let her proceed to the
next Point; therein behauing herself likewise after the same manner: so
proceeding in order to the others follovving, till she have spent a competent
time in her Recollection.

19. Now I conceive a competent time for one Recollection spent in Meditation
to be an Hour, or very little less. Whereas for the Exercise of immediate Acts
of the will a lesser space will suffice. And the Reason of the difference is.
1. Because in this latter Exercise more Acts of the Will (vvherin all good does
consist) are produced, then in Meditation. 2. And besides, the exercise of Acts
is more dry and vvearisome (except in some fevv that abound in sensible
Affections) then is Meditation to souls fit for it.

20. During Meditation let the soul (neglecting the too common Practice, in
which Meditation is made rather a study and speculation, then an exercise of
the spirit) spend no more time in inuenting Motives and in internal
discoursings, then shall be necessary to move the will to good Affections. But
as for such Affections, let her abide in them as long as she can. (for therein
consists all the proffit.) And if upon one consideration or Motive she can
produce many Acts of the will, let her not fail to do so; and to continue in
each Act as long as she finds that she is enabled. It is no matter though in
the mean time the Understanding should lie quiet, as it were a sleep, and
without Exercise.

21. Indeed in Souls which have an effectual Call to an Internal Life,
their Meditations will have little study or speculation in them. For after a
short and quick reflection on the matter, Mystery, or Motive, they will
forthwith produce Acts of the will. And their consideration of the matter is
not so much by way of reasoning or inferring, as a simple calling to mind, or
thinking on a subject out of which the Will may produce some act or other
answerable to the Point reflected on by the understanding. And this sort of
Meditating is proper for many ignorant Persons, especially women, which have
not the Gift of Internal Discoursing.

22. A soul that practices Meditation will find that at the first she will,
during one time of recollection, stand in need of many Points to be thought
upon, and of many Motives to produce Affections. But in continuance the Will
will become so well affected, as fewer Points will suffice to employ it in
producing good affections and purposes, the which will take up almost the
whole time appointed for the Recollection. And a soul being come to this
State, will be ready and ripe for a more sublime Exercise of Immediate Acts of
the will.

23. Another way of Meditating like unto this and proper for persons of good
wills, is that which is recommended by Blosius, and seems to have been his
own Practice; Which is, without much discoursing to represent to the mind
any Mystery to which the soul has an Affection (as our Lords Agony, or Ecce
Homo, or his Dereliction on the Cross etc.) and to regard him in such a State
with as much tenderness of Affection as may be, Exercising short Acts of Love,
compassion, gratitude etc. Moreover he aduises a Person to endeavor (yet
without much straining or force used) to preserve this object present to the
mind all the day after, and to perform the daily employments as in our Lords
presence. By this means a Soul will come well prepared with a tenderness of
Heart to her Recollections, and so will have little need to spend it in
employing the understanding.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. Of the Custom of set appointed Retraits for Meditation etc.

. 2. 3. For what Sorts of Persons the said Retirements are proper.

. 4. They are improper for Religious Persons practicing Contemplation,
especially Women.

. 5. 6. 7. Except with certain Conditions.

. 8. 9. 10. How Seculars may and ought to make use and benefit by the said
Retraits.

1. BEFORE I quit this Subject of Meditation, or treat of the signs by which
a Soul after a convenient time spent in the practice of it may be able to
judge of her ripenes for an higher Exercise of Prayer: It will not be amiss
to consider what use or effect in souls by their Profession or Election
aspiring to Contemplation and actually advanced in the same vvayes, the yearly,
quarterly, or otherwise appointed Retraits for more serious Meditation may
have tovvard the same end etc. Now just ground there is to take this into
consideration, because Exper^ence shows that the said custom has of late
been introduced into Conuents (even of Women) professing the greatest solitude
in order to Contemplation.

2. The clearing of this Doubt will depend upon 2 due consideration of what
condition the Persons are, and what are the proper Ends and uses for which
the said Retraits and practices of Recollection therein were (or ought to be)
designed: The which in the first place in regard of Secular persons were. 1.
To be an efficacious Instrument for one in an imperfect extrouerted course of
life to be brought to discern the foulenes of his soul, the peril of his
State etc. and from thence to procure Remorse, Contrition and purposes of
amendment. 2. Or for a secular person in a less perfect State of life, to
discern and know Gods will concerning the undertaking of a more Perfect
State. For such Recollections (proper for the imperfect condition of the said
Persons) being practiced in solitude, do serve much to the illuminating of the
understanding, purifying the intention, and fortifying the will in good
purposes and designs. 3. By the same the said persons may be well instructed
how to serve God better, remaining in the same less perfect state. On which
ground they have been vvorthily recommended by the Sea Apostolic, and their
practice promoted by the Grant of Indulgences.

3. Next in regard of Religious Persons the said Retirements. 1. Are very
helpful in the beginning of such a spiritual state, by teaching with great
exactnes the Rudiments of mental Prayer. And for the same End they may
likewise serve devout secular persons of Active lives, that are desirous and
have the courage to undertake a more spiritual Course. 2. In the progress of
an Active Religious Life, Religious Persons by their many distractiue
employments and studies cannot but contract many stains and defects, the
which are not easily perceived, and less are they perfectly corrected by the
help of their daily usual Meditations: And therefore such solemn and rigorous
Retirements were justly esteemed requisite to procure light and Grace for the
discovering and rectifying such Defects and dissipations of the Spirit.

4. These surely are the natural and proper Ends of the said Retirements, as
they are usually practiced at set times, respectively to each ones particular
need. Now in none of these regards can they be proper for persons that in a
life of Religious solitude do actually practice Contemplation; Except only in
the last Point, viz. in as much as the said Retraits are instituted to the end
that Religious Persons may thereby take the benefit of a more strict Solitude,
and a freedom from distractiue Employments, there to enjoy a vacancy to attend
to God alone in perfect liberty of Spirit. For indeed in this regard Religious
persons of Contemplative Orders (especially such as are employed in Offices,
Studies etc.) may often have need to recollect their dissipated and distracted
Spirits, as well as others. So that they may do very well monthly (or as
occasion shall require) by such Retirements to increase their light, and to lay
up a Treasure of good purposes and Aduices for the time follovving: By which
practice an use and habitual State of Recollectednes may be attained, and
provision made that it be not extinguished by future Emploiments.

5. But if the End of such Retraites be only to oblige souls to a nice
Observance and practice of Meditation, merely for the foresaid purposes,
without any consideration of advancing them in Affectiue Prayer, it cannot be
imagined what benefit Contemplative souls can reap thereby, but rather a
hindrance and distraction. For. 1. they are supposed not to stand in need now
to learn how to pray Mentally: to which kind of Prayer the said Exercises
are but the first imperfect Rudiments. 2. Much less do they stand in need of
a total Change of Life: Or of doing some extraordinary Penitential
Satisfaction for former Crimes: or to learn remorse for them. 3. By such
Exercises, as they are commonly taught and practiced, such souls will not
learn how well to practice their Religious Obseruances in Solitude, or to
use vocal Prayer of Obligation more perfectly. For all such Exercises, unless
they be practiced in Order to Affectiue Prayer, do end in themselves, not
being intended to be means to lead souls to higher Prayer etc. 4. And in
case the Persons be naturally indisposed for Internal Discoursiue Prayer,
what is it that they can learn thereby? (Which is very ordinarily the case,
especially of many Religious Women.)

6. All things therefore considered, Nothing seems to me more improper, then
the said Retraits for Meditation are for solitary Contemplatiues, to whom a
due Observance of the Quire is both far more proper and efficacious to all Ends
pretended to by such Exercises, then they are. Yea moreover great harm may
come to souls professing Co^templation by them; For so great attention, such
an exact performance of nice obseruances, and such a captivity of spirit is
required, that when all is passed, souls thereby oftimes become disabled to
continue the Internal Prayer proper for them, or to comply with many Regular
Duties. To these we may add the great inconveniences which may come from
strict Examens of Conscience, Repetitions of General Confessions etc. very
prejudicial to tender Souls.

7. Therefore as touching Contemplative Persons, who (living perhaps under the
Conduct of those that are wholy devoted to the Active way) shall be obliged
to such Retirements, and therein to Exercises very unsuitable to their State, my
Advice to them is, That they should keep themselves in as much stillnes of
mind as may be; and having received Instructions for their Prayer, let them in
Practice give as much scope as they well can to their good Affections; not
much troubling themselves whether the said Affections be proper to the matter
proposed for Meditation, or no; nor distracting themselves with reflection
upon their Prayer, to the End to give an Account of it to others. Let them
likewise endeavor to preserve all due liberty in Spirit in their Examinations
and Confessions, therein proceeding no further then may consist with their
Spiritual proffit: and by all means avoiding such particulars as are likely
to nourish Fear and Scrupulosity, or to disturb the Peace of their Minds.

8. And as for Secular livers to whom indeed the said Retraites (according to
custom undertaken at set times) may prove of admirable proffit and benefit, to
the end the virtue of them may not quickly expire, they ought to be careful
afterward to make good use of the lights received in them, and to put in
execution the good purposes made during such Retirements. For they must not
expect by a fevv days solitude and Prayer to get a habit of Sanctity, but only
a transient good Passion and disposition thereto, which without future care to
cherish and increase it, will quickly vanish, and their fervor will be
cooled.

9. Moreover perceiving evidently by this experience the good effects of
Mental Prayer, they ought to resolve the best they can to allow some
reasonable time to the prosecution of it when they return to their Secular
Vocations, using likewise as much abstraction as their State of life will
permit. Otherwise it is to be feared they will not only return to all their
former defectuousnes and sins, but will moreover thereto add the guilt of
ingratitude to God, that so effectually called them from sin: And their
follovving sins will be sins against clear light.

10. Certain it is that if souls shall so rely upon the repeating such
Retirements and new taking of the same Practices of Meditation etc. as by them
to make amends, (toties quoties) for all faults past, they will be in great
danger to find themselves deceived. For though in it self it be very good to
seek all good means to procure Remorse and Contrition for past sins: yet if a
soul upon a consideration that she has such a special Remedy in a readiness,
shall neglect the care and vvatchfullnes over herself, it is to be feared, and
not without just grounds, that that which she takes for contrition will
prove to be no more then a natural Remorse: For it is not likely that God
will shovvre down his Grace upon a soul so corrupted in her Intention.

CHAP. V.
. 1. A Change from Meditation to a Prayer of the will, is necessary in an
Internal Life.

. 2. It is otherwise in Active Livers.

. 3. A soul of a Contemplative Profession, when to leave operating with the
understanding.

. 4. Exercises of the will more perfect then those of the understanding.

. 5. Whether Meditation on the Passion may be left.

. 6. 7. 8. etc. Reasons to prove the affirmative.

. 12. 13. etc. Aduices showing when a Change of Prayer is seasonable.

. 18. 19. More particular signs showing the proper time of a Change.

. 20. The wonderful variety of Changes in an Internal Life.

1. IT is impossible for a soul that leads an abstracted Life, and diligently
pursues Internal Prayer, to fix continually in Meditation, or to rest in any
Degree of Affectiue Prayer: Because the Nature of such Intellectual and
Spiritual Operations is to become more and more pure, abstracted and
universal, and to carry the will and Affections of the soul still higher and
further into God: the Actiuity of the Imagination and understanding continually
abating, and the Actiuity of the Will continually increasing, and getting
ground upon the understanding, till at last all its operatio^s become so
quieted and silenced, that they cease, or at least become vnperceptible.

2. A soul therefore being thus invited and disposed to approach continually
nearer and nearer unto God, if she be either by her own or others ignorance
so fettered with customs or Rules, that she is deprived of due Liberty of
Spirit to correspond to such an Inuitation, and to quit inferior Exercises,
she will find no proffit at all by her Prayer, but on the contrary extreme
pain, which will endanger to force her to relinquish her Recollections.

3. It is otherwise with those whose Profession is to live Active,
distracted Lives, though they do seriously aspire to the Perfection
answerable to that state. For such may continue all their lives in Meditation,
and follovv the Methods of it: Because what they loose by their Distractions,
they may recover by their follovving Meditation, the good Images used therein
expelling the vain Images contracted in their External Employments. True it
is, that to such persons, Meditation will grow more and more pure, and more
in spirit: yet never so as to exclude a direct use of the Imagination.

4. When a Contemplative Soul therefore has for some reasonable time practiced
Meditation, and comes to perceive that a further Exercise thereof is become dry
and ungrateful to her Spirit, causing great disgust and little or no proffit:
She ought then to forbear Meditation, and to betake herself to the Exercise
of Immediate Acts, which she will then doubtless perform with great gust and
facility, to her notable proffit in Spirit.

5. It is a great mistake in some Writers, who think the Exercise of the will
to be mean and base in comparison of Inuentiue Meditation, and curious
Speculation of Divine Mysteries: in as much as none but elevated Spirits can
perform this, whereas the most ignorant and simple persons can exercise Acts
or Affections of the will. On the contrary it is most certain, that no Act of
the understanding (as Speculation, consideration, deduction of Conclusions
etc.) in matters pertaining to God, are of themselves of any virtue to give
true Perfection to a soul, further then as they do excite the Will to love
him, and by love to be united to him. And this Union by exercise may be
obtained in Perfection by souls that are not at all capable of Discourse, and
that have no more knowledge of God then what is afforded from a belief of
the Fundamental verities of Christian Faith. So that it is evident that the
End of all Meditation etc, is the producing Acts of the Will. Therefore let no
man neglect or scorn the Exercise proper for him, out of a conceit that it is
too mean: but let him first try the proffit of it, and not till then make a
judgment.

6. Others there are, that do indeed persuade souls in due time to quit the
Exercises of the understanding for those of the Will: But yet alvvaies with
one Exception and reservation, to wit, of the Meditation on the Passion of our
Lord: This, say they, is never to be said aside, but will be a subject fit for
the Conte^plation of the most Perfect. What an ingratitude would it be to God;
(say they) and what a neglect of our Souls good, purposely to forbear a
frequent Meditation of this Mystery, the ground of all our Happiness, the Root
of all Merit, the Supremest testimony of Divine Love toward us, the most
inuiting and vvinning object of love from us to God, the terror of all our
Spiritual Enemies etc? This is the Position of many Spiritual Authors, and
particularly of F. Benet Canfield.

7. Nottvvithstanding I cannot join with these Authors in this Position, nor
agree that a due Liberty of Spirit should be abridged for any pretext
whatsoever. The ground of which Liberty is this, That a Soul is to make the
Experience and proof of her own Spiritual proffit to be the Rule and measure
of all her Spiritual Exercises: and upon no colors or conceits of Perfection
in any Subject or Exercise, to oblige herself thereto further then she finds it
helpful and gustfull to her spirit.

8. As for the Mystery of the Passion, it does doubtless deserve all the Titles
given unto it. But yet Souls are not to be discouraged if they find in
themselves a disability to meditate on it: Whether this disability proceed
from some natural temper of the Internal senses, or from abundance of
affections in the Heart, that cannot expect, because they do not need
curiously to search Motives from the understanding and Discourse. Neither is it
to be supposed that such Persons exercising Immediate Acts of the Will toward
God without discoursing on the Passion, are therefore be^eaued of the true (yea
only true) Exercise of our Lords Passion. On the contrary, in such Exercise of
the will is contained the Virtue of all precedent Meditations: Neither are the
persons driven to the pains and expense of time in finding out Reasons and
Motives to raise their affections to our Lord, but immediately and without more
a do suffer the Affections to flow. And they do far more truly, efficaciously
and proffitably exercise, and as it were exemplify the Passion it self: and
this in two manners, viz. 1. In their Internal Prayer, vvherin they produce
the same Affections and Acts of Love, Humility and Patience, of which our Lord
gave them a Pattern in his Passion. 2. In their External Doings, really on
occasions practicing the same Virtues (which are proper to the Passion) with
far more Perfection in Virtue of such Prayer, then they could by Meditation:
And so do show themselves to be more true Disciples of his.

9. This Divine object therefore is far from being lost or forgotten by such
proceeding in Prayer: yea it is in a far more noble manner both commemorated
and imitated. And surely to tie the Soul generally in all Recollections to a
particular curious reflection on the Circumstances belonging to our Lords
Passion, would be as if one would oblige a person that can read perfectly,
and with one glance of his eye join a whole sentence together, to make an
express and distinct Reflection on each letter, syllable and word: Such a
framing and multiplying of Images would only serve to obscure the mind and
cool the Affections. Well may such Devout Souls out of time of Prayer, in
Reading or discoursing admit such Images, and receive benefit by them in future
Recollections: But when they actually pray, then to be forced to stop and
restrain the will from melting into Divine Love, or from sacrificing herself
to God by Perfect Resignation etc, till she have passed through her former
imperfect Method of Imaginatiue Meditation, is all one as to forbid Souls to
unite themselves in Spirit to the Divinity.

10. Notvvithstanding when Souls come to be Perfect they will be in such a
state, as that the express consideration of this or any other good sensible
Object will be no impediment at all to their higher Exercises: yea it will
very efficaciously advance the soul in them. And this is after that Perfect
Contemplation is attained to: For then the Imagination is so rectified and so
perfectly subjected to the Superior Soul, that it will not only not obscure
or distract, but on the contrary will with great readiness help to make
Contemplation more pure and clear: Then a view of the Humanity of our Lord
will drive the Soul more deeply into the Divinity. As we see that the
glorified Saints without the least distraction to their Vision of God, yea
surely with an addition to the Perfection of it, do in their Thanks-giuings
reflect on the Humanity and Passion of our Savior, saying, Dignus est Agnus
qui occisus est etc.

11. Till that souls therefore do attain to such Contemplation, let them
(being in the Exercise of immediate Acts etc.) content themselves to exercise
the Mystery of the Passion vertually, though not expressly: Remembering the
saying of a Spiritual Author, That in God nothing is neglected: all faith and
all love is exercised in the Contemplation and Union of the Spirit by Love to
the Divinity: All particular Devotions are both sufficiently and perfectly
performed when we perform our principal Duty most perfectly. In doing this
we do honor the Saints after a manner most acceptable to them: We do most
perfectly discharge our Vocal Prayers (which are not of obligation:) And we
most efficaciously express our Charity both to our friends living and dead: so
that there will be no need for such ends to interrupt or distract our
Recollections, by obliging our selves voluntarily to multiply the repeating of
Offices etc. And lastly so far is this from being any disparagement to our
Gratitude unto our Lord for his sufferings, that we thereby acknovvledge that
all the good Thoughts that we entertain, and all the good Actions that we
do, are produced in Virtue of his Passion adhered to by faith and Love,
although no express internal Discourse on it be exercised.

12. Now what has here been delivered concerning the disobliging of Souls
that practice internal Prayer, from tying themselves to Imaginatiue Exercises
about sensible Objects, is not only suitable to Reason, but is moreover
confirmed by the Authority of learned and experienced Mysticke Writers. And
particularly the Devout Reader may see what Barbancon in his Secrets Sentiers
(1. cap. 6. admonit. 2.) has written on this point.

13. Thus having shevved the indispensable necessity for a soul aspiring to
Contemplation, with all due liberty of spirit to follovv the Divine Guidance
from each inferior Degree of Prayer to another more sublime, the^ become more
proper and proffitable; I will now endeavor to give more particular Aduices
concerning passing from the Exercise of Meditation to that of immediate Acts of
the Will: and will show by what Signs and Marks a Devout Soul may
reasonably judge and conclude that such a change and Transition is proper for
her. Yet so as that my Intention and desire is that Souls should principally
depend on their Internal light which Gods Holy Spirit will afford them in
and by Prayer.

14. Let every devout Soul diligently pursue her present Exercise in Prayer
advisedly undertaken, or recommended to her by a prudent Directour, till there
come a proper time for a change. Let her (says the Excellent Author of Scala
Perfectionis) content her self with this Gift of God, till he be pleased to
bestow on her a better: which he will not fail to do, when he shall see it
to be for her good. And so doing, she cannot but increase in Charity, although
she see no evident proof of her Advancement in spiritual operations.
Whenever it shall be Gods pleasure to make a change in her Prayer, he will
by degrees so press her thereto, that in the End she shall both clearly
perceive, and correspond to his Inuitation. And till that time come, it is to
no purpose for her to examine or frame any judgment of her progress. Her best
is to do her Duty, and leave the Success to God.

15. A change, whensoever it is made as it ought to be, consists in this, That
the Actiuity of the Fancy and Discourse is abated, and the whole Internal
Exercise of Prayer by little is reduced to blind operations of the will: The
which operations (or Affections) likewise grow by practice more and more
natural, quiet, pure, silent, subtle, imperceptible, and profound: The Divine
Spirit dravving the Soul in her Exercises ever more and more unto it self.

16. Ordinarily when a time of Change from a more imperfect to a more sublime
Exercise of Prayer comes; it will not on the sudden, or at once be perceived;
or but very obscurely and doubtfully. Only a Soul will perceive a bettring in
her Exercises, her operations by little and little becoming more Spiritual.
And indeed in some Persons there is almost daily a bettering and purifying of
their Prayer: The which themselves do, or may well enough observe; though
perhaps they are not able to express the manner of it to another, by reason of
its subtilty.

17. Far less Inconveniences would follovv by detaining a Soul somevvhat too
long in an humble inferior Exercise (as of Meditation) when she is fit and
ripe for a more sublime one: Then if (through inconsideration, leuity, or an
ambitious humor to imitate Examples or Instructions in Books, not pertinent
to her) she should at the first, or before her time be put into one above her
present Capacity. For in the former case an easy and present Remedy may be
found, by exalting the Soul afterward to a more perfect Exercise suitable to
her present Disposition: till which be done, she will at least exercise her
Humility and Submission of Judgment, by which she will receive much proffit.
But it is very difficult to find a Remedy in the other case: Because first the
natural vnvvillingnes and shame that is in Souls to acknovvledge their too
hasty Ambition, and to descend lovver, will secretly hinder them: And besides,
they will be ready to justify themselves by misapplying certain Documents in
Spiritual Authors, which forbid Souls to quit their present Exercises for
one inferior, through any discouragement from Aridities or vnsatisfaction
found in them. Notvvithstanding except they will be content with the
Mortification of returning to Meditation (in case they be not yet ripe for
Immediate Acts of the will) they will be in danger of incurring an habitual
Dryenes, Melancholy and stupidity; and moreuer they will run into an endless
labarynth, perplexing and entangling themselves therein, to the great disquiet
of their own minds, and the troubling of others with questions and doubts.

18. Yet it cannot be denied, but that God does often inuit Souls to some
change in Prayer according to that which before they had read in some Books:
And then they are to follovv the Instructions of such a Book, as a light sent
them from God. In which case, it is indeed the secret motion and Inuitation
afforded them by God to apply such Instructions, that is their sure Guide:
without which they must apply nothing that they find in Books.

19. More particularly, by these follovving Signs a Devout Soul may for the
most part perceive and judge when it is fit for her to change her Exercises of
Prayer, (as for example, to quit Meditation and to betake her self to a Prayer
of the Will etc.)

20. First she will not find that pleasure, satisfaction and proffit in her
present Exercise, which formerly she did: But on the contrary, a sensible
Disgust and a kind of Impotency to practice Internal Discourse any longer. Or
if she will force herself to observe her Method of Meditating, it will
produce no effect upon her Affections: the which if they were left to
themselves, would flow far more freely. And this Disgust is not for once or
twice: nor as formerly, upon occasion of some corporal distemper, Passion,
Aridity, or any unusual accident: But it is a lasting Disgust, arising from a
desire to please God, and to grow in Perfection, joined with an uncertainty or
fear that the way vvherin she now is, is not proper to effect that desire.

21. Secondly, she will thereupon find in her self a certain Motion or
inward inuitation to enter into some other new Exercise, at yet not clearly
known to her. Or if there be no new Exercise proposed to her, there is
hovveuer a Motion to a cessation from the present Exercise, at least for as
much as concerns the manner of it. As it happens, when from Aspirations a
soul is invited to a Resting and Repose in God, with a cessation of all
Active Aspirations or affections: The which is an immediate disposition to a
Supernatural Contemplation.

22. Thirdly a devout soul considering the benefit that she has hitherto
reaped by her present Exercise, and her accustomance to it (which is not
easily left:) Considering likewise that for want of trial she does not as
yet know the vvorth and benefit of the new proposed Exercise, (the which at
first appearing a little strange and uncouth to her, she will not easily see
or believe that it will prove as proffitable as her present Exercise has
already been.) For these and the like reasons, she will be apprehensiue and
unwilling to adventure upon the new one.

23. Fourthly, during these uncertainties and irresolutions, her Disgust in her
present Exercise rather increasing then diminishing; And God still interiou^ly
(though not grossly and sensibly) inclining her to the new proposed way, she
at length, as it were forced thereto, adventures upon it: yet with some fear
at the first, whether this Change will prove for her good or no.

24. Fifthly, as soon as she is well entered into this new Exercise,
presently she will find it gustfull and delightful unto her: and vvithall
much more proffitable then was the other formerly practiced: Whereupon she
will thenceforvvard with courage and joy persevere in it.

25. By such steps and Degrees does a soul, that is purely under the Guidance
of Gods Holy Spirit, pass from one degree of Prayer to another formerly
unknown unto her, till at last she come to Contemplation. And she will
clearly perceive that it was not herself, but God only that did as it were
lead her by the hand, and dravv her forvvard into the new Exercise. Teaching
her likewise how to hehaue herself in the Beginning. Whereas in the pursuance
of it she afterward proceeds as it were by her own habitual skill,
though really God is in every thing her secret Master and Helper. And he
deals with an humble soul, as a writing Master with his Scholar, who at
first moves and directs his hand to form and join letters: but afterward
directs him only with his Eye and Tongue; Or as a Father that caries his child
over a Ditch or Style: but lets him go alone in the even plain way.

26. And as for a Soul that by Reading, or Teaching is informed in the Nature
and Degrees of Internal Prayer, her proceeding and Transition is much after
the same manner: Excepting only that the Next Degree to which she is to ascend
does not seem so strange to her. But the signs by which a necessity of
change does appear are, as formerly, a constant disgust in her present
Exercise (of Meditation etc.) and a kind of disability to continue it with any
proffit to her spirit: By which means it comes to pass that in her
Recollections the Meditating or Discoursing part diminishes daily, and the
Affectiue part increases: the Will by little and little getting ground of the
Understanding, till at last the Prayer becomes entirely of the will. And thus
she passes almost vnavvares into the next Degree, her Prayer becoming by little
and little more and more purifyed. Into the which Degree when she is in such
a manner and order entered, then indeed she is not for any Aridities, or
obscurities to quit it, and to return to Meditation: But to use a discreet
violence upon the will to make it to produce good Affections and Acts, although
nature take little comfor or satisfaction in the Exercise. For by so doing she
will much benefit herself, both by mortifying Nature; and fixing Divine Love
more profoundly in the Spiritual Region of the soul.

27. To conclude this Point: A Spiritual life is subject to many and
vvonderfull Changes, Interior as well as Exterior: And all are according to
the mere will and good pleasure of God, who is tied to no Methods or Rules.
Therefore follovving him in all Simplicity and Resignation, let us vvonder at
nothing? let us neither oblige selves too rigorously to any Exercise: nor
refuse any to which he shall inuit us, seem it never so strange, or to
Natural Reason even senseless. For in his Guidance there can be no danger of
Error; but on the contrary there is all security. And this may and ought to be
a great Comfort and encouragement to a vvell-minded resolute Soul.

THE THIRD SECTION OF THE THIRD TREATISE. TO WIT Of the Exercises of immediate
forced Acts of the Will: Being the second Degree of Internal Prayer.
CHAP. I.
. 1. 2. 3. Of Exercises of the will, to wit, forced immediate Acts or
affections and Aspirations.

. 4. 5. etc: Difference between Acts of the will and affections.

. 8. 9. How the Prayer of sensible Affections is to be exercised.

. 10. Of sublime, pure affections of the spirit.

. 11. 12. etc: Of the Prayer of Immediate Acts of the Will: compared with
Meditation.

. 17. 18. Conditions of Acts.

. 19. Mere cessation of Prayer to be avoided.

. 20. An account not to be required touching the behavior of souls in
affectiue Prayer.

. 21. Acts proceeding from a good natural propension are most efficacious.

1. A Soul that by a Divine Call, as being in a state of maturity for it,
relinquisheth Meditation to the end to betake herself to a more sublime
exercise, which is that of Immediate Acts or affections of the will, then only
begins to enter into the vvayes of Contemplation. For the exercises of the
will are the sublimest that any soul can practice. And all the difference
that hereafter follows, is only either in regard of the greater or lesser
promptitude, or in regard of the degrees of Purity vvherevvith a soul produces
such Acts.

2. So that the whole latitude of Internal Prayer of the will (which is
Contemplative Prayer) may be compre^ended under these two distinct Exercises,
to wit, 1. The Exercise of forced Acts or Affections of the will, produced
either immediately according to the persons present disposition, without a
distinct or express motive represented by the understanding, or else suitable
to such ^ motive, yet without any formal discourse of the understanding.
These are called forced Acts, because after that a Soul is become indisposed
to prosecute the Ex^rcise of Meditation, it will be long before that good
affections do as it were naturally flow from her, so that she will need to
use some force upon herself for the producing of the said Acts of the will,
which are imperfect Contemplation. 2. The Exercises of Aspirations, the which
though they be in substance little differing from the former, yet by reason of
the facility vvherevvith they are produced without force, foresight or
election, purely flowing from an Internal impulse of the Divine Spirit, we
therefore give the^ another name, and call them not Acts, but Aspirations: The
constant Exercise of which is proper and perfect Contemplation.

3. Of these two Exercises I shall consequently treat, beginning with the
more imperfect, which is that of forced Immediate Acts or Affections of the
will.

4. In the which Exercise I make some difference betvveene Acts and affections
of the will. The former o^ which are made in and by the Superior Will only,
without any concurrence of sensitive nature; such are Acts of Humiliation,
Resignation etc: the producing of which do not cause any gust in inferiou^
nature. Whereas affections of Love, Joy, Hope, Desir^ etc: (being exercised by
imperfect souls) are much immersed in sense: And they begin at the first
almo^^ wholy in inferior nature: but yet by practice the^ become more and
more pure, being raised to the to^ of sensitive nature, where it is joined or
combind vvit^ the Superior spiritual will.

5. Now whether of these two, that is, Acts or Affections, are to be
practiced respectively by souls, that must depend upon the observation and
experience that each soul has of her own natural disposition and
inclination. Generally souls are more disposed to the exercise of immediate
Acts: the which likewise are both more proffitable and more secure. And
therefore in the follovving discourse I shall most insist upon them.

6. And as for the exercise of sensible Affections, it belongs only to such
souls as in their natural temper are more tender and affectionate; whose
love expresses it self with great liquefaction in sensible nature, so that
they are easily moved to tears, and do feel warmth and quick motions about
the heart etc: (which effects or symptoms do not argue love to be greater,
for it may be as cordial and more firm, generous and Active in others who
seldom or never feel such effects.)

7. Such tender souls as these, having vvithall a natural good propension to
seek God in their Interior, can easily exercise their affections to God in
and by their corporal nature, without troubling themselves with seeking
reasons and motives for it. Yea in a short time they come to have a kind of
disgust in inuenting or considering motives represented by the understanding.

8. As for the manner how such souls are to behave themselves in their
Recollections, the special Instructions follovving concerning the Exercising
of immediate Acts of the Will will serve, so that there will be no need of
repeating them twice.

9. The principal care that such souls ought to have is, to endeavor to
raise this their love out of sensitive nature to the Superior spiritual
will, by whose operations alone the soul is truly perfected. Therefore
according to the Aduices formerly given touching sensible Devotion, they are to
mortify and restrain, rather then to give scope to tears and other
tendernesses of nature in Prayer etc: And some other particulars which do
concern Affections, as distinct from Acts of the will, shall hereafter be
occasionally taken notice of.

10. Now besides these sensible Acts of love, there are others which are
pure^y in spirit, and which among all the operations of the will are the most
sublime that can be exercised in this life. For they cannot be used by a soul
(so as to be her constant usual exercise,) till she be come to a perfect
degree of Mortification, which ordinarily is not before a Passive Union; after
which they are exercised in a manner so Spiritual and Divine, that the
unexperienced cannot conceive, nor the experienced express. These are certain
painful, yet delightful longings after God, certain languishing eleuations
of spirit toward an unknown dark, Divine Object: The Desire and absence of
which causes a tedious disgust of all sensible contentments, yea even in
spiritual things also. But of such operations as these it will be seasonable
to speak when we come to treat of Perfect Contemplation.

11. As touching the most proffitable Exercises of Immediate Acts of the will,
the practice thereof in gross is after this manner. The souls aim is to
recollect herself by that general notion that Faith gives her of God; but
being not able to do this presently; she does in her mind, and by the help of
the Imagination represent unto herself some Divine Object, as some one or more
perfections of God, or some Mystery of Faith as the Incarnation,
Tranfiguration, Passion, Agony, or dereliction of our Lord etc: And thereupon
without such discoursing as is used in Meditation, she does immediately
without more ado produce Acts or affections one after an other toward God,
or upon herself with reference to God, Adoring, giving thanks, humbling
herself in his presence, Resigning herself to his will etc.

12. This Exercise is more easy to learn and comprehend then Meditation:
because so many Rules are not necessary to it, neither is there in it such
study or exercising the abilities of the understanding or Imagination. It is
indeed a very plain, downright and simple Exercise, consisting merely in the
efficacy of the will. But notvvithstanding such plain simplicity, it is a far
more Noble Exercise then that of Meditation, as being the fruict and result of
it. For whatsoever the understanding operates with reference to God, can
produce no good effect upon the soul further then it has relation to and
Influence on the will, by disposing it to submit and Resign it self to God,
or to tend toward him by Acts of love, Adoration etc.

13. Now this Exercise although likewise it be not so busy and laborious as
Meditation, yet it may, and will often times seem to some souls, even after
they have made a reasonable progress in it, to be more harsh and difficult.
But the good will and Resolution of the soul persisting in it, will by Gods
grace overcome all difficulties.

14. An Advice therefore it is again and again to be repeated, and never to be
forgotten, to wit, That the Devout, well-minded soul that shall be called by
God to walk in these Internal ways of Prayer, be courageous and diligent in
the pursuance of them after the best manner she can: amidst all Desolations,
Obscurities and Distractions, practicing these Exercises, as much as may be, in
the Superior will, not caring whether sensitive nature concur therein, or no.

15. In forced immediate Acts of the Will, especially at the beginning, there
is some degree of Meditation, which is the thinking on the object, and
thereupon internally producing the Act or Affection it self, and quietly
continuing and resting in it till all the virtue of it be spent. There is
likewise alvvaies some use of Images: And in the beginning these Images are
more gross: but afterward by practice they grow more pure, and all manner
of discourse cease. Yea the soul will begin to reject all distinct Images,
and apprehend God without any particular representation; only by that obscure
notion which Faith informs us of his Totality and Incomprehensibility. And
this only is Truth: vvhearas alll distinct Images are but imperfect shadows of
Truth.

16. Now how great is the security of a soul thus operating purely by the
Will? How free is she from those Errors and dangers into which she may be
lead by the curious searching subtilty of the understanding? Here God himself
is only her light, and not any Imagination of her own. Though Images should
intrude themselves perforce into the fancy, or be iniected by the devil, yet
the soul will not with the will apply herself to such Images: but either
diuerts her mind from them, or transcends and renounces them. And without
Images stirring up sensuality and the Rational will, the devil cannot
produce the least harm or danger to the soul, nor hinder her Union with God.

17. The more plain and simple that Acts of the will are (for the manner of
expression) the more proper and efficacious are they to cause a good and
proffitable Recollection. And therefore such Elegant and sprigh^ly expressions
as are to be found in many places of S. Augustins Confessions, Soliloquies etc:
or in S. Bernard, S. Teresas Exclamations etc: though they be more full of
life, and more apt to inflame affection being read out of times of
Recollection: yet they are not so proper to be used in the Recollection;
because the pleasingnes and exquisitenes of the expression, gives too much
exercise and contentment to the Fancy, and by that means distracts and
enfeebles the actuation of the Will. This, I say, holds most generally true:
yet if souls do find their proffit more by the use of them, let them in Gods
name make choice of such.

18. The more impetuous that the operations of the will are in this exercise
Immediate Acts; and the more still, quiet, peaceable and profound that they are
(so there be no vvillfull negligence) the more effectual and proffitable are
they, and the more efficacious to still Passions, as also to compose and settle
the Imagination.

19. There may come much harm to a soul by cessation from Internal working
and from all tendance to God in her Recollections, if so be the motive of such
cessation be a desire and expectation to hear God speaking after any unusual
manner within her, and telling her some new thing or other. For by giving
way to such a foolish presumption, she will deserve, and pu herself in a
disposition to receive diabolical suggestions; or at least vainly to conceive
and interpret her own Imaginations to be Internal speakings of God. And this
may prove very perilous, if a Soul give credit to such fancies (as probably
such souls will:) But they ought to consider that if Gods pleasure be such as
to communicate his will internally after an extraordinary manner, he will
speak and work whether the soul will or no, and whether she will or no
she must hear and suffer. And therefore let her abstain from such indiscreete
inuitations or expecting such Divine Conuersations; let her continue quietly
her exercises, and not cease till God force her to cease them.

20. The Custom practiced by some spiritual Directours of requiring from all
their Disciples an account of their Internal Prayer, formerly judged to be
inconvenient, as causing Distractions and too frequent Reflections with
solicitude upon their present Actuations, to the End they may remember them
and so be able to relate them: The said custom, I say, is moreover (besides
this inconvenience and vselesnes) of extreme difficulty in this exercise: The
which being simple and plain, acted only or chiefly by the will, cannot well
be explicated, inasmuch as the Acts leave scarce any sensible impression in the
memory: And lastly they are exercised directly to God without any Reflections.
Now it is by the means of Reflections that a soul takes noude of, and
remembers her Actuations.

21. Where there is a good propension in the Interior to Introuersion, an Act
produced by the will to God is not only much more prompt, facile and profound,
but also far more efficacious, then any other without such a propension can
be, though the party be never so learned, and employ never so much the faculty
of Reasoning. Yet do I not deny but that even souls of the greatest
propensions may sometimes find themselves obliged to make use of some
Meditation. But (unless their Directour misleade and wrong them) they will
not tarry long therein, but will presently break forth copiously into good
Affections.

CHAP. II.
. 1. 2. 3. etc: Touching certain forms of Immediate Acts etc: adjoined to the
End of the Book: and how they are to be used.

. 15. 16. etc: Great variety of Acts there are: Some directed to the pure
Divinity; some to our Lords Humanity; some to Saints; some to the soul
herself etc: and what use is to be made of them.

. 24. 25. 26. To what souls one form of Exercise without variety may be
proper.

. 27. Of exercising upon the Pater Noster: The Excellency thereof.

. 28. 29. Souls are not to bind themselves to certain forms.

. 30. 31. 32. What use is to be made of the usual Reading in Preparation to
Recollection.

. 33. 34. etc: How souls that cannot make use of Images are to behave
themselves.

. 37. 38. What order is to be observed in the change of Acts.

. 41. Souls must not bind themselves to these, or any set forms of
Exercises: but they must choose for themselves.

1. AT the end of this Book I have adjoined a Collection of several Patterns
of Exercises by Acts of the will, and holy Affections, for the use and practice
of those whom either in the world or in Religion God shall call to an
Internal life of Contemplation. I did not not conceive any necessity to annexe
any Exercises of Meditation: Partly because it was not my design to treat of
that degree of Prayer, but only passingly and in order to affectiue Prayer, to
which it is but a remote preparation: And besides there are Patterns of such
exercises abundantly obuious to every one, the which may suffice any Internal
liver, being practiced according to the instructions here formerly given. And
as for the Supreme Degree of affectiue Contemplative Prayer, to wit, perfect
Aspirations, I have contented my self with selecting a few, which are added
in the conclusion, rather to show to imperfect souls the form and manner of
them, then for the use of Perfect Souls ripe for the exercise of them: For
such are conducted immediately and entirely by a Divine Light, and have no need
of humane prescriptions: Neither indeed can they proffitably make use of any
other Affections then only such as Gods Holy Spirit shall suggest to them.

2. As touching therefore the foresaid Exercises of forced immediate Acts of the
Will and affections, I have compiled a sufficient variety of them, proper for
all states and dispositions of souls: as Acts of Remorse, Fear, Contrition
etc. (which belong to the Purgative way:) And likewise Acts of Adoration,
Glorification, Humiliation, Resignation, and Love (which belong to the
Illuminatiue and Unitive Ways.) I have moreover made some distinct Exercises
of Affections, more proper for some souls, then are those which I call Acts
of the Will. Besides, I have set down most copiously Patterns of simple Acts
of Resignation, as being generally the most useful and proper for most souls.
And lastly, several Exercises there are mixed and interlaced partly with Acts
and partly with Affections, and those not of one but several kinds: Because
many souls there are that cannot content themselves with being tied to any
one kind of determinate exercise. And therefore my desire was to comply with
all tempers, to the end that every one might find an Exercise proper and
proffitable for him, or at least might be put in the way how to f^ame for
himself such an one.

3. A soul that after a sufficient time diligently spent in the practice of
Meditation, is maturely called and conducted by God to the Exercise of
immediate Acts, may, and indeed ought at the first to take for the subject of
her Recollections those Acts which belong to the Unitive Way, to wit, Acts of
Divine Love, Resignation etc. But the case is otherwise with a soul that is
found utterly unfit for Meditation, and consequently must necessarily begin a
spiritual course with the Prayer of Immediate Acts. For for such a soul
(ordinarily speaking) it will be expedient that at the beginning she take for
the matter of her Acts such as are proper for the Purgative Way, as Acts of
Contrition, Fear of Judgment, Hell etc. And this Advice is conformable to the
Directions of Blosius in the X. and XI. Chapters of his Institutions.

4. Now for the use of the said Exercises of Immediate Acts and Affections, I
would advise a soul that is well disposed and resolved to practice them,
that at the first she would rather use them Mentally; Because it is less
distractiue, and more Recollectiue: Unless by experience she find that the
using them Vocally does most relish with her spirit, and (as in some
dispositions it may) cause a more intime and perfect Recollection.

5. Whereas every Exercise consists of about ten clauses of Acts or Affections,
let her not tie her self pre^isely to that number in any Recollection. But if
one Exercise will not serve, let her borrow from the next follovving. And
again if one be too much for one time, let her use as many of those Acts in
order as they lie as will suffice for the time, and no more; and in the next
Recollection, let her begin where she last ended.

6. A devout soul will find, that by diligent practice, in progress of time
the number of Acts or Affections to be exercised in each Recollection will
come to diminish: so that vvheras at the beginning (perhaps) ten Acts would
scare suffice for one Recollection; afterward five or three, yea it may be,
one will oftimes be sufficient.

7. Let her generally observe the Order and sequel of the said Acts contained
in the exercises proper for her: beginning and prosecuting them as they lie.
For otherwise she will spend the precious time allotted for Prayer in looking
here and there for somevvhat that may be pleasing to her fancy or humor, and
yet in the end perhaps not content herself; Or at the least the satisfaction
that she may come to find will scarce counteruaile the distraction incurred,
and time lost. And again, it is an ill custom of some to take at random the
Acts or affections on which they would exercise themselves, opening the book
and at adventure making use of what their eyes first light on.

8. Yet let her not tie herself so rigorously and superstitiously to any of
the said Acts, but that if without searching there should be offered to her any
other kind of Act or Affection (be it Resignation, Love or Aspirations and.)
which may be gustfull to her: let her entertayne it, and therein abide as long
as the relish of it lasts: And that ceasing, let her return to prosecute the
Acts of the present Exercise.

9. Yet one special case there is, in which a soul ought by no means to
oblige herself to any Order prescribed in the said Exercises: And that is,
when she finds that Fear or Scrupulosity do over much abound in her, causing
unquietness, Deiection and want of Confidence in God. In which ca^^ let her by
all means omit such Exercises or Acts as are apt to raise or feed such
Passions in her. And instead of them let her apply herself to Exercises of
Hope, love and Joy in God, which ought to be cherished in her.

10. Yea souls that are of such a disposition, ought even in the beginning,
after their first Conversion, not to dvvell long upon the Exercises that
concern Remorse for sin, or other matters of Fear, as Death, Judgment and
Hell: but rather to fix upon Affections contrary to their present disposition:
And in case of new faults committed, let their Contrition or Detestation of
sin be rather exercised in a generality, or Vertually, in Acts of Conversion to
God, then particularly, directly and expressly. And let them not be scrupulous
herein, out of an opinion that at such times God expects painful Remorses
from them, or earnest expressions of detestation of their sins: For such
detestation is sufficiently inuolued in an Act of direct love to God, which
conteines much perfection besides. Such Acts therefore being more beneficial to
her, are consequently more acceptable to God.

11. A soul having pitched upon any Act or Affection contained in the said
Exercises, let her tarry as long upon each of them, without passing to an
other, as her Gust unto such an affection lasts, and as she finds proffit to
her spirit by it.

12. Whenever in any Clause there is contained matter of several desires or
Affections, let her in her, mind and Exercising separate them, and rest upon
each of them severally: For by this means the said Exercises will last
longer, and yield more proffit.

13. After that all the Exercises, appointed for her, have been passed over,
let her repeat and pursue them again and again: Unless she do find
herself drawn by God to some other Exercise more perfect, as is that of
Aspirations. And indeed whensoever in her Exercise during her Recollection,
she does find her self moved to perfect Aspirations, Eleuations of the Will
etc: or else to produce some other Acts, as of Resignation etc upon occasion of
some present Cross to be sustained, let her not fail to correspond to such an
inuitation.

14. Those that can find no proffit or relish by any of these prescribed
Exercises, or the like, may conclude that they are not as yet ripe for them,
and that therefore they are to continue in Discoursiue Prayer, till it looses
its relish, and that they begin to find Gust in Affections.

15. The Acts and Affections in the follovving Exercises are for the most part
directed to God himself, or the pure Divinity: as if they were internal
conuersations with God: The which are perfect introuersions, and of all
active, assumed Exercises are the most proffitable.

16. But vvithall such Actuations are oftimes very painful: by reason that
such Introuersions are exercised without the help of grosser Images (the
which have some kind of recreating diuersion in them:) and when such Images
do offer themselves, the soul tending to the naked Divinity, taries not in
them, but transcends or reiects them. And if her mind finding no Gust in an
Object so perfectly spiritual, becomes vvilling to ease it self by fastening
upon some other good, but inferior Object, she is by some Writers taught to
withdraw her attention from any thing but God: the which violence and self
contradiction cannot be without much pain; in so much that souls become
thereby sometimes so tired with such Introuersions, and find so great
difficulty in seeking the Divine Presence so above the course of nature, that
they loose all comfort and proffit in their exercises: yea and come to such a
pass, that they find an impossibility to introuert themselves, by reason that,
to their seeming, they find not God so present as at other times.

17. Therefore in such cases it not only may be permitted, but ought to be
enjoined unto a soul to give ease unto herself by quitting for a time such
painful introuersions and addresses to the Pure Divinity, and instead thereof
exercise herself in producing other Acts less painful because less
introuerting, as Acts or Affections to the Humanity of our Lord, to Angels,
Saints etc: yea she may sometimes address her Internal speech to her own
soul, or to some persons or creatures absent: yet all with reference to God:
for otherwise it would not be an Act of Religion, nor proffitable to the
soul.

18. The truth is, that for the attaining to Contemplation it is not necessary
(speaking of precise and absolute necessity) that the Acts whereof the
Exercises consist should immediately be directed to the Pure Divinity: (Though
it cannot be denied but that such are the most Perfect and most efficacious,
because the most introuerting. And therefore a soul must give over all other
addresses either to the Humanity of our Lord, or to any Angel or Saint etc:
whensoever she is interiourly moved or enabled to actuate immediately toward
God himself: who is likewise the end and vltimate object of all other
speakings and Actua^^ons.)

19. To the end therefore to comply with the several Dispositions of souls I
have in many places in the follovving Exercises intermixed several other Acts,
for the most part addressed to our Lords most sacred Humanity, likewise to our
Blessed Lady, etc: and sometimes soliloquies to the soul herself.

20. And such Acts and Affections as these are frequent in the Psalms and
other Scriptures: so David speaks to his own soul: (Nonne Deo subiecta eris
anima mea:) O my soul will thou not be subject and resigned to God? And
again, (Quare tristis es anima mea etc.) O my soul, why art thou sad, and why
do thou so disquiet thy self in me? Hope still in God for etc. Again
sometimes he speaks to Persons absent, (Venite and narrabo quanta fecic Deus
animae meae.) Come hither, and I will tell you h^w great things God has done
for my soul? Sometimes in Scripture the soul imagins that she hears God
speaking to her, as (Veni electa mea, and ponam in re thronum meum) O my Chosen
beloved soul, Come and I will place my throne in thee. S. Augustins
soliloquies, and Thomas a Nempis are full of such kind of Acts; and by any such
change the soul will receive some refreshment, and be enabled to produce some
good affections to God.

21. Now, as I said, that the form of the act is not of absolute necessity,
so neither is the nature or matter of it; as whether it be of Contrition,
Humiliation, Adoration, Resignation etc: performed to God; or of Congratulation
to the Saints, Veneration of them, or imploring their intercession, so that
such Acts be vltimately terminated in God: for it is perseverance in any
exercises of Religious Acts which is the principal, if not only means to
attain to Contemplation.

22. The truth is: vvhatsouer kind of Acts or Devotions a soul uses, if they
be constantly practiced they will all end in God; so that even the most
ignorant among those that God calls to Co^templation Prayer, though they know
no other practice of devotion but the Rosary, and cannot begin their
Recollections any other way then by turning their thoughts toward the
blessed Virgin, whose protection and intercession they crave; yet being by
that means become profoundly introuerted, they quickly leave all direct and
express addresses to her, and are lead, vnavvares perhaps to themselves, to
the unknown obscure Object of the Divinity, in which they plunge and loose
themselves. For perfect Introuersion cannot consist with a continuation of
direct and express Internal Acts made to any creature.

23. The general Rule and Advice therefore in this matter is, that accordingly
as souls upon experience and observation do find themselves disposed to any
kinds of Acts or affections, whether of one kind only or several kinds mixed
together, so they must order their exercises, and recollections; preferring the
savor and proffit that their souls find in them, before any Rules, methods or
authority of Examples.

24. Some fevv souls there are to whom one only Exercise without any change
or variety may suffice for their whole life, till they arrive to perfect
Contemplation. So that their advancement will consist only in the degrees of
Purity and recollection with which they perform the said exercise. Now
these are such souls as. 1. are fitted naturally for Acts of the will, and not
for meditation; Because in discoursiue Prayer change of matter will be
necessary, in as much as the same motive vnuaried will not have the efficacy
to produce sensible affections. And again, souls will be apt to be cloyed
and to have an auersion from an affection or desire after they have fed upon it
for some reasonable time. 2. such as vvithall have a very strong and urgent
Call from God to seek him in his internal vvayes, joined with natural
aptnes to an internal life; The which aptnes consists in a stability of the
imagination, and a quietness of Passions.

25. For such souls as these it will be best that they should be confined to
one exercise, such an one as that is which Blosius in his Institutions has
framed, and professes that by a diligent prosecution thereof (together with
mortification) a soul may attain to Perfection and mystic Union. A pattern
of such an Exercise conformable to the direction of Blosius (who seems to
have practiced it himself) I will set down among the follovving Forms of
Exercises.

26. And indeed one singular Benefit that such souls will reap by being
constant to one exercise, is this, that they will never be to seek for it, nor
stand in need of books: because after a little practice they will have it in
their hearts and memories. Only, good care must be had to fit the exercise to
the soul, giving a scope and atitude sufficient to it, that it may comprehend
in it Acts suitable to several states of the soul, that is, both Acts of
Contrition, and likewise of the exercise of the principal Virtues; (among all
which, the most efficacious, proffitable and lasting are the Acts of
Resignation.) In the Exercise of which it will be good for the soul to abide
till she be fitted and called by God to Pure Aspirations; for then all manner
of prescribed Exercises must cease, because then a soul does not pray by her
own Election, but by an Internal impulse of the Divine Spirit.

27. Some Spiritual Writers for this purpose recommend our Lords Prayer for a
constant Exercise in daily Recollections, aduising such souls to exercise
separately every Petition as a several Act, dwelling on each as long as they
can find relish in it; And so doing they shall be sure not to omit any thing
that a soul can or ought to pray for. And this Advice is suitable to the
teaching of an Ancient holy Hermit, whose words recorded by Cassianus (9.
Conf. c. 25.) are these, Haec oration licet omnem videatur Perfectionis
plenitudinem continere, vtpote etc: that is, This Prayer of our Lord, although
it may seem to contain in it the fullnes of all perfection, as being either
begun or established by our Lords own Authority: yet it does promote those
that are familiarly exercised in it to that far more sublime state which we
mentioned before; conducting them to that inflamed Prayer, that far more
supereminent actuation of soul, known or experienced by very few, yea (to
speak more properly) altogether inexpressible; The which transcending all
humane sense or knowledge, is not distinguished by any sound of speech, or
motion of the tongue, nor any pronunciation of words; But it is a degree of
sublime. Braier which the Spirit illustrated by an Infusion of heavenly Light,
does not design or express by humane language; but having all the senses and
faculties united and conglobated, it does plentifully gush it forth but of the
heart, as water out of a copious fountain, and ineffably powers it out unto
our Lord, in that one short moment of time sending forth so many and so great
desires, as the soul herself* making a reflection on her own operations, is
not able to declare, nor even conceive.

28. But it is not ordinary to find souls so composed in their imaginations,
and resolute in their wills, as to content themselves with one only exercise.
And for this reason I have made a Collection of several kinds, with
sufficient variety and mixture. These I have gathered out of several Books,
using mine own liberty and judgment in altering them so as to make them more
proper for those that prosecute internal affectiue Prayer, and for that
purpose oftimes leaving out many discourses and considerations intermingled
with them in the books out of which they have been extracted.

29. Now I do not pretend nor desire that souls practicing Affectiue prayer
should oblige themselves to these particular Exercises, or to the order
observed in them. They may if they conceive it for their purpose, frame other
exercises for their own use; Either by selecting here and there out of these
or out of any other books such acts or Affections as they shall find agreeing
to their spirit. But having framed such a collection, I would seriously advise
them to practice according to the aduices here set down, especially in this
Chapter.

30. The reading of some pious Discourse before Recollections usually practiced
in Communities, is a good and proffitable practice, but especially proper for
souls that are not advanced beyond Meditation; who may do well to attend to
the Mystery read, that after they may make it the matter of their prayer: Yet
better it were they should have the matter of their Meditation prepared
beforehand; because it is to be feared that by once Reading over the points of
a Mystery they will not be sufficiently imprinted in the memory, so as to be
made use of.

31. But as for souls that are in the practice of immediate Acts of the will,
I should not require of them the like attention; But rather that they would
employ that time in chasing away distracting Images; in placing themselves in
the divine presence; in begging Gods assistance; and directing their follovving
Recollection to his glory. And if in their private Recollections they shall
premise some competent Reading, I conceive that S. Augustins Confessions,
Soliloquies; The Imitation of Christ, and such other books affectuously
written, will be most commodious for them; or above all, certain passages of
the holy Gospells containing some words spoken by our Lord himself will
likely be a most proffitable and effectual Preparation. But no certain Rules
can be prescribed for these things; Every one therefore is to choose that Book
and subject that he finds most proper for him.

32. When the preparation by Reading is past, let the person applying himself
to his recollection, look upon the matter of the Act or Affection that he
intends to employ his Prayer upon; And after this vvithdrawing his eyes from
the book, let him think awhile upon it, framing a spiritual image or
conception of it. And when that is done, let him forthwith produce an Act or
Affection to God answerable to the matter, resting thereon as long as the
virtue thereof lasts; And so proceed to the follovving Acts in like manner.

33. Some souls there are that through a secret natural Quality in their
Internal senses cannot so work with the imagination as to produce an Image
that may become a matter of Prayer to them. Such persons consequently are not
fit for the exercise of immediate acts of the will (and much less for
meditation.) They are therefore to apply themselves to the exercise of pious
desires or Amorous Affections. But generally souls are so disposed as to be
rather enabled for Acts of the will then affections, yet so that sometimes
also they will find Affections more flowing then Acts; And therefore
accordingly they are to give way to them.

34. It may happen sometimes to devout souls that they may find themselves
disabled to either of them. In such case I would advise them to use a discreet
violence on themselves to exercise some good Acts most relishing to them (for
where force is to be used, there Acts to be exercised by the superior will
are rather to be chosen, then Affections:) But if after trial they find that
they are not able to continue in so constrained an Exercise, and so are at a
stand, and likely to spend the time appointed in an unprofitable Idleness; let
them try if a more imperfect exercise will fit them, either speaking to God in
the third person, as if he were absent, or would not hear them; Or
addressing themselves to Angels, Saints, or to their own souls etc. And if
they cannot perform even this mentally, that is, neither with attention, nor
gust; let them do it at least vocally; vvithall exercising as much patience,
stillnes and quietness, as may be; And doing thus, let them assure themselves
that thereby they will afford unto their spirits a good wholesome and
proffitable, though tastles, repast.

35. But if after all this it should happen (which would be very strange)
that they should find all these vvayes insupportable to them, so that they can
do nothing at oll, both the understanding and will failing them; Then, since
no Active vvorking, External or internal, will help them, they may conceive
it to be the case of an extraordinary desolation and desertion; So that their
only recourse must be to pure suffering with patience and Resignation;
exercising these the best they can in such circumstances. The which if they
will do, then will this afflicting desolation really prove more proffitable
then a state and Prayer of light and comfort. The which proffit is scarce
perceptible, because the spirit of God works more intimely in the depth of
the spirit; but therefore is more efficacious to the souls advancement.

36. In this case I should scarce allow the suffering soul to divert and ease
her mind by reading (and much less by any corporal exercise) during the time
appointed for her Recollection. Or if so, as soon as ever she finds by a
little glancing on a book, an affection to be raised, let her pursue the said
affection and quit reading presently; for Reading at such times being allowed
merely for necessity, ought to be used no further then necessity shall require.

37. No certain Rules or determinations can be assigned for the time that
souls are to be detained in the exercise of certain kinds of Acts, as of
Contrition and others of the Purgative way, before they pass into those of
Resignation or love (which are of the unitive way.) Only in general it may
be said, that the longer and deeper that souls have been plunged in vicious
habits, the longer (probably) will it be before they be ripe for such a
passage: yet that time may be contracted by fervor in prayer and
mortification. To some, fevv months will suffice to remain in Acts of
Contrition etc: To some not many days; yea some souls (as tender innocent
virgins etc:) are so well affected to God and so unacquainted with vicious
customs, that they may at the first be put into Acts of Resignation or love.

38. But herein every one is to regard the state of his soul and conscience;
observing whether he find therein quietness and competent satisfaction; In
which case he may reasonably judge that he may relinquish the Acts of the
Purgative way.

39. But as for giving over the Acts of Resignation and love etc: from thence
to pass to the exercise of Aspirations, God knows, a much longer space of
time is required, even in souls the most innocent. For this sublime exercise
arising out of a settled habitual Charity fixed in the soul through long and
constant practice of forced Acts of the will, (contrary to the teaching of
Barbanson, who says, that souls may from Meditation immediately pass to
Aspirations) it does not depend on man's choice when he will Exercise
Aspirations, of which God alone is the mouer and Directour. And whatsoever
industry in Prayer a soul shall use, it is very usual that she should be
enabled to arrive to this Exercise in Youth, before the boiling heat and
actiuity of nature be well qualified.

40. Notvvithstanding in whatsoever exercise a soul shall be, if such
Aspirations do offer themselves, she is to give way unto them, and as long as
they continue, she is to cease all other forced and elected Acts.

41. To conclude these Instructions, it is to be considered that the follovving
Patterns of Exercises of Acts etc: are to be made use of only for a necessity,
such as commonly beginners have, yea and most souls even after they have for a
good while pursued this Internal Prayer. But as for those whose Interior,
without seeking abroad, does minister sufficient matter unto them of
Resignation, love etc: either suggested by occasion of occurring difficulties,
or coming of it self into their minds, such souls being enabled to pray
without any forms prescribed, as long as they are so sufficiently furnished
from within, are not to make use of exercises in books. And this may be the
case even of some imperfect souls, which may be prevented and much helped by
God for the matter of their Prayer. But howeuer it is good that they should
have a Book in readiness to help them, in case they come to stand in need;
least for want of matter so suggested they should be idle and at a stand. For
such must not rely upon their first sensible fervor; but when that ceases (as
they are to expect that it will) they must not scorn to descend not only to
make use of Books, but also to apply themselves to inferior Exercises and
helps suitable to their imperfect state.

CHAP. III.
. 1. 2. More special Aduices touching the exercise of Assections of Divine
Love.

. 3. 4. etc. Likewise touching Acts of Resignation: the great proffit and
excellency of the said Acts.

. 9. Several Objects of Resignation.

. 10. 11. 12. etc. Farther instructions concerning the exercising of the said
Acts.

. 22. All Acts whatsoever must give way to Aspirations.

1. VVHERAS all Internal Affectiue Prayer consists either 1. Of such
Affections as are apt to cause suitable motions in corporal nature. 2. Or of
Acts of the will, produced by, and residing in the Superior soul; As among
holy Affections the principal is Love, the source and mouer of all the rest;
so among all immediate Acts of the will the most useful and considerable are
those of Resignation or submission to the Divine will.

2. Now having in the Second Treatise spoken sufficiently concerning the
nature and qualities of Divine love, I shall not need to give more particular
Instructions how to employ that inward affection of Charity immediately to
God in the exercise of Internal Prayer: the which is to be regulated
according to the Precepts formerly given. But as for the Exercise of
Resignation (which is indeed an exercise of Love too, but so as that it
regards external difficulties, as the occasion or matter about which such
love is expressed) it is an exercise that deserves to be more particularly
treated of, and above all others most to be recommended, as being generally the
most secure and proffitable of all other Exercises.

3. For though Acts of pure melting Love to God, (in which all Images of
creatures, yea all direct representations of God are excluded) be in themselves
more perfect and Unitive, then are Acts of Resignation, which inuolue in
themselves images of external things (to wit, the special difficulties in
which the soul intends to resign herself:) Notvvithstanding to recompense
this disadvantage, there is in Acts of Resignation far more security, and less
danger of propriety or selfe-interest then in Acts of immediate Love: the
which being apt to cause stirrings and pleasing motions in corporal nature,
very fevv souls can practice them purely and without propriety, except they
be exalted to a supreme degree of spiritual Divine Charity. Again there is in
Resignation exercised more directly true Mortification and Contradiction to
self Love and interest then in any other kind of internal Prayer: and
consequently it is a Prayer more purifying, and considering the daily and
hourly use that we have thereof in unavoidable occurring difficulties, it is
of all other the most proffitable; And though Acts of Resignation (which are
also the immediate fruits of divine Love) do inuolue in themselves images of
external things; yet this is only in the beginning of the Act, so that the
soul does not tarry in such images, but presently passes from and out of them
into God.

4. Good Lord! what millions of questions, debates and perils does total
Resignation cut of? And this not only for Meum and tuum, or vvorldly propriety
in a secular state, for the regulating whereof there are such endless volumes
of vseles and perplexed Cases dispersed every where: But also in external
matters in a religious life, either with regard to Superiors, or among
Religious Persons themselves, or toward Externes; Yea and for matters of
doubts merely Internal, being such as are in question betvveene God and
fearful or scrupulous Souls; All these, I say, are cut of by a total
Resignation; the which does tend to simplicity, peace and the possession of
that one thing which our Savior says is only to be counted necessary, to
wit, the Divine will (which is God himself:) and so does reject all other
things that may hinder or delay the soul from attaining to that one only
necessary good.

5. Hence it follows, that that soul which is resigned both for external
and internal matters, is not only freed from perils that may come from
tentations or contradictions; but in a manner from all doubts, questions and
debates. Whereas the vnresigned soul is in a state wherein nothing can
satisfy or secure her conscience.

6. A soul that is in the practice of the Prayer of Resignation ought not to
interrupt or omit the producing of Acts conformable thereto, notvvithstanding
any failings or transgressings against good Resolutions formerly made, if so be
such failings proceed out of frailty or sudden Passions; (being then oftimes
more in sensuality then in the superior will, and so have less fault in
them.) For notvvithstanding such failings, Resignations heartily made will not
prove in vain, but in time will come to good issue.

7. In consideration of the eminent Excellency of this duty of Resignation I
have adjoined several Exercises of the Acts of that virtue, exemplifying in
all kinds of difficulties, regarding either external or Internal objects,
touching outvvard goods, friends ctc: as likewise all accidents that may befall
the body, as sickness, Pains, want of conueniences or necessaries etc. And
lastly touching the soul, as Aridities, Tentations etc: for the practicing of
which exercises, besides the Aduices given in the last Chapter (which ought
to be applied to this present purpose) I thought expedient to add certain
more peculiar instructions here follovving.

8. When the Exercise of Resignation in Prayer comes to be the ordinary daily
exercise of a soul, then she is established in the Unitive way, properly so
called. And vvell-minded quiet souls will soon be ready and ripe for the
practice both external and internal of this heavenly Virtue.

9. Concerning the matter or objects of resignation (the which are generally
matters of difficulty and contradiction to nature) either they are. 1. Such
difficulties as are sure to happen. 2. Or only probably (of which probably
there may be several degrees.) 3. Or very unlikely, but yet possible. 4. or
lastly altogether impossible. Now in all these, Resignation may be proffitably
exercised. But the better the more likely that the things are to happen: And
the best and most necessary Resignation of all is in things sure to be fall us,
and which belong to our state; especially such against which our nature finds
the greatest difficulty.

10. Now since these last do most frequently occur to our minds in our
Recollections; therefore we must be the more industrious and courageous to
overcome them by framing Internal Acts of our judgment and will to entertain
the said difficulties, that so we may be prepared against the time that they
do really befall us.

11. Now having made efficacious and preualent Acts of Internal Resignation:
if when the said difficulties do de facto happen, we do truly and really
accept and embrace them with our superior will (whatsoever repugnance we
find in our sensitive nature) this will much more advance the soul in divine
love and increase the good habit of Resignation, then many bare Internal Acts
would do, by which the soul does only represent a difficulty in the
imagination, resolving with the will to accept it.

12. In performing these Acts internally a soul must be very careful to
exercise them with most profound humility, and a distrust of her own ability
to resist any tentation or contradiction; And with an entire trust and
dependence on Gods grace, with a firm faith in him that he will assist her
at all times whensoever he shall bring such trials upon her.

13. For this reason I have frequently expressed the Acts of Resignation either
by way of Oblation and delivery of the soul into Gods hands, to be entirely
disposed of by him; Or of petition that in all such occurrences not our own
will, but Gods will should be performed. As for the Acts which are made by
way of Resolution or purpose, though they seem to argue some confidence in our
own strength, yet the devout exerciser ought in his mind to exclude all such
confidence.

14. The most perfect way of producing Acts of Resignation (as likewise all
other Acts) is by intending pure^y the love of God and seeking his glory,
renouncing all inferior unworthy Interests of our own. And therefore
Alphonsus in his Method of serving God, in his excellent Chapter of Prayer,
exhorts all devout souls either expressly or vertually to exercise Prayer
with this intention; But as for the exercise of Aspirations, an express and
direct intention of Gods glory will scarce consist with it; because that
sublime Exercise will not admit any reflected Act to be mixed; Though
implicitly and vertually they contain as much, or more.

15. A soul needs not always to oblige herself in her recollections in
order to go through the follovving Patterns and forms of Resignation,
according to all the examples given, as she was advised to do in other
immediate Acts. But she may alter, interrupt, omit or add others, as she
shall see cause, or according to her present need, or as they shall be
interiourly suggested to her by God, or her own thoughts.

16. In the beginning of the exercising this degree of Prayer, I conceive it
will be the best course for a soul to single out and make choice of such Acts
of Resignation as do regard such daily occurring difficulties, to which
nature has less auersion to resign herself; And from these to ascend
afterward by degrees to matters of more difficulty, till at last by Gods
grace she be enabled to accept even those things from which nature does most
abhor. For if she should suddenly adventure upon Acts above her present
strength and forces of mind, she will be in danger to be dejected, finding
that she wants internal courage to undertake or submit to such difficulties
represented to her mind.

17. And indeed according to this method God himself in his most wise and
blessed Providence deals with us, proportioning our trialls and afflictions
to our present strength, and to the measure of grace which he gives us:
sending to imperfect souls only ordinary tentations (as S. Paul says 1. Cor.
7.) and reserving the greater for such heroical spirits as are most advanced
in the waves of Perfection.

18. When special occasions of Actual and real resignation do not occur,
a soul may make general and indefinite Acts of Resignation, regarding in
gross all occasions whatsoever without exception: either according to the
form practiced by S. Ignatius, Deus men's and omnia, Ecce me tibi penitus
offero, and omnia mea tuae subijcio voluntati. Or saying in our Lords words,
Non mea voluntas fiat, sed tua Domine in terra sicut in coelo: (Amen Jesus;) or
in any other form like to these. And this practice of universal Resignation
may be begun very timely, and accordingly continued ones whole life, although
indeed only perfect souls can purely without reservation exercise such acts.
Yea when a devour soul has a particular occasion to resign herself in any
special difficulty occurring, she may for that purpose make use of any such
general form of resignation; only reflecting internally upon the present
occasion, and so applying the general form, without expressly naming the
particular difficulty.

19. In exercising internally these Acts, a soul is not to produce them
ouer-fast and quick one upon another, to the hurt and oppression of the head or
spirit; but quietly and leasurely one after another, with reasonable pausings.

20. Though in the follovving Examples of resignation mention is only made of
matters difficult and unpleasing to nature; yet may a soul with benefit
exercise herself in the clean contrary, for example; as she may resign to
sickness, pain, want, dishonor etc: so she may also for the glory of God
resign herself to health, pleasures, riches, honor etc: intending if Gods
will be such, to accept of these also, and to employ them only to his glory,
and not to the satisfaction of corrupt nature; not diminishing but rather
increasinge humility, and Divine love by them. In which case how pleasing
soever to nature such things in themselves be, yet the resignation is exercised
with regard to that which is mortyfying to nature. As he that for the glory
and love of God submits himself to accept of an Office imposed on him and
attended with dignity and power, intends thereby not the satisfying of his
ambition, but rather frames a resolution to abate and mortify such a
satisfaction, and to employ that Office (not sought, but obediently accepted by
him) purely to the glory of God and the benefit of souls. Thus it is the
nature of a spiritual life to make good use both of prosperity and adversity;
In all things renouncing all selfe-seeking, and having an eye only to God.
Though indeed considering our frailty and inclination to be corrupted by
prosperity, adversity is far more secure and proffitable for us; and therefore
such resignations are proper for fevv souls.

21. To conclude this matter; Some souls there may be which will find it
best for them to continue in Acts of Resignation, yea and perhaps even in the
same Acts, till they be thence brought to Aspirations. And others there will
be whose exercises may consist of great variety both of Acts and Affections,
and that confusedly both for matter and manner; and this either out of a book,
or from their own Interior. And in the exercising of Acts or Affections, in
some the said Acts may be raised by a short reflection, or by consideration of
some motives, or even with a precedent slight meditation. Lastly some will
find more relish in Acts expressed in Latin, though they do but imperfectly
understand the language, then in their own natural tongue for whose sake I
have in the follovving Collection framed Exercises in both languages:) And all
these manner of exercises are good, if the soul by experience and observation
find proffit by them: for by that alone must all our exercises be regulated.

22. But how perfect soever any Acts or forced affections be, they must give
way to Aspirations whensoever a soul is invited or enabled to produce them.
For as Acts are the end of meditation, so are Aspirations the proper end and
fruit of Acts, far more perfectly effecting and procuring that Purity of soul
and heauenly-mindednes, to which we aspire by all our exercises.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. How Internal Exercises are to be practiced in times improper and
distractiue.

. 2. Particularly in a state of distractiue Offices and Employments.

. 3. Souls ought to prepare and furnish themselves before hand for such times.

. 4. 5. etc: With what conditions and unwillingness Offices ought to be
undertaken.

. 9. 10. etc: How they are (being imposed) to be discharged.

. 14. 15. etc: No Offices whatsoever ought to dis^ense with Internal prayer.
21. 22. No distraction, Aridities etc: ought to hinder it.

. 23. God will bless a soul that behaues herself well in distractiue
Employments.

1. BEEORE I quit this present Argument of the Prayer of forced immediate Acts
of the will, to treat of the supreme degree of Prayer, to wit, Aspirations; I
conceive it requisite to consider how a devout person is to behave himself,
who having undertaken a Religious Contemplative live in solitude, repose and
vacancy to attend to God and his holy Inspirations, but afterward coming to
find some change in that life, either 1. by being distracted with unavoidable
External Employments and Offices imposed for the good of the Community etc.
from which all cannot be exempted: 2. Or else encombred with the
incommodities and sollicitudes of sickness, to which all are obnoxious: (the
which are generally two states that seem most disaduantageous for retired
Prayer:) I say, my intention is to give the best aduices I can how souls are
to behave themselves in these two states, as with regard to their Prayer
especially.

2. First therefore to the end that a vvell-meaning soul may with purity
behave herself about External Offices and employments: she is to consider. 1.
That it is unlawful, contrary to humility and a sign of a wearines of
internal vvayes, and of a sensual desire to rule over others; yea moreover it
is a vvillfull thrusting ones self into dangerous distractions and tentations,
for any one voluntarily to desire or seek such employments, dignities or
Prelatures. 2. Yet because it is necessary that some should be employed in
offices that regard the common good, spiritual or temporal; it is as
unlawful utterly to refuse them, whensoever God shall by the command of
Superiors call a soul to the undertaking and discharge of such Offices.

3. For this reason it will behooue every Religious devout soul by assiduous
Prayer, during the time of vacancy, to furnish herself with light and
discretion, that she may proceed in this matter with the spirit of humility,
prudence and Religious Perfection.

4. In case therefore that Superiors shall think good to impose an office upon
a Religious subject; 1. If the subject know of any real incapacity or
disability in himself, or if he believe any other more sufficiently qualified,
he ought with all humility and simplicity to rectify the Superiors mistaken
opinion concerning his sufficiency; yea he may represent unto him his just
grounds of fear, least such an Employment should prove notably prejudicial to
his soul; Protesting likewise that he does not desire any kind of preeminence
over others etc: 2. Yet if the Superior, notvvithstanding such humble and
sincere Remonstrances of the Subject, shall persist in a resolution to impose
on him any such office, (whatsoever the Superiors motive be, whether
necessity, Reason, or even Passion:) the Subject must submit himself, and
accept of it willingly, whatsoever reluctance there be in the imagination or
nature against it. But let him accept it with a pure Intention for God in the
spirit of obedience; Especially if the office be grateful to nature or to the
sensual or ambitious desires of it. 3. Notwithstanding considering his own
frailty and the tentations likely to accompany such an employment, he ought to
undertake it with some fear and apprehension, least without extraordinary
vvatchfullnes in Prayer, he may come to be corrupted or oppressed by it.

5. In this regard therefore the subject ought oftentimes to renew and rectify
his Intention about it, at least in his recollections twice a day. For, for
want of care in this point it often falls out, that the Office which at first
was undertaken out of obedience to God and Superiors, comes afterward to be
executed for selfe-vvill and sensual complacence, after that the spirit of
devotion is abated or extinguished.

6. Indeed so contrary and prejudicial to the spirit of Contemplative Prayer
are the distractions and sollicitudes which attend Offices, that. 1. Religious
subjects during the time of vacancy when they are more illuminated, ought to
forethinke and imprint in their hearts good purposes never to offer themselves
to such dangers; and when they shall befall them, to carry themselves in them
vigilantly and prudently, according to their former light; least entering upon
them unprovided, they should prove mischeiuous and destructive to all devotion.
2. And again Superiors, if they will consider that their principal care
ought to be for the good of souls, will think it concerns them to be very
nice in exposing to such perils their subjects, before that the spirit of
devotion and charity be firmly rooted in their hearts: for they also shall be
accountable for the harm that their subjects souls shall so incur.

7. Some Superiors either being of Active spirits, and not knovving or not
duly esteeming Internal vvayes; Or perhaps mistakingly beleiuing their
subjects to be more affected to external Employments then interior, thereupon
vnvvarily heap on them businesses to the hindrance of their recollections. In
this case the Subject ought to acquaint his Superior with the inward
disposition of his soul: how much good he finds by a constant Exercise of
Prayer; and what damage the want of it causes to his imperfect soul: but
this being done, he must resolve to submit, in case his superior still think
fit to employ him.

8. In such circumstances let not the subject be troubled if he find it hard to
abstain from shevving some outvvard marks of vnvvillingnes, hovveuer in his
superior will he be resigned. For indeed to show chearfullnes argues in an
imperfect soul rather a contentednes to be dispensed from prayer, not
sufficiently esteemed by him, then a love to obedience. Yea such a seeming
unwillingness will afford him a double mortification. 1. In that he contradicts
sensuality in the discharge of obedience. 2. In that he incurres in the opinion
of others an esteem of being immortified, the which will be a means to
humble him.

9. When an Internal liver is once actually and duly engaged in an office, In
the first place he ought seriously to consider that coming out of a state of
Abstraction and solitude into business, he will thenceforvvard walk in less
light then formerly, and yet will be exposed to far greater perils, by reason
of many unavoidable occasions of distraction, Impatience, satisfaction of
sensuality etc: of which he had little experience in time past. Therefore he
must resolve to keep a more watchful guard over himself; least business bring
him to a forgetfullnes of his soul, and of all former Instructions and good
purposes.

10. Secondly, to the end to secure himself from such perils, he must in the
Actual execution of businesses be wary that he do not fix his mind more
intently and affectionatly on the^ then mere necessity shall require. Let him
often call to mind his former good resolutions, and reuiew again and again
these or the like Instructions. For without such preuentions it can scarce be
avoided but that he will decay in spirit, and grow negligently tepide in his
spiritual Exercises; since corrupt nature will be very forvvard to take any
colorable pretenses of quitting Internal Recollections (the only support of a
spiritual life:) the which now will become more irksome by reason of
greater dissipation of thoughts, and more frequent occasions of falling into
immortifications. And therefore souls will be apt to think that the nature of
their present Employments is such, as that they will not consist with the
obligations of an Internal life; Then they will catch hold of any advantage
to dispense with them, for that pupose making use of such popular sayings as
this, That every good work is a Prayer etc.

11. Thirdly, more particularly in this state of Active employments a soul
must be careful, as far as the Office will permit, not only to continue the
practice of her former mortifications (and principally for the tongue and
senses:) but also to make good use of those many new mortifications, which
the discharge of her employment will afford her occasions to exercise. And
indeed, since probably she cannot enjoy that repose of spirit requisite to
serious and perfect Recollections, she ought the best she can to recompense
that defect by increasing the practice of Mortification and patience; by which
means she will advance herself in spirit.

12. Fourth^y she must remember that the doctrine of Abstraction (most
necessary in an internal life) has place also even in distractiue Offices; at
least thus far, that the person is not to meddle in things that belong not to
his present Employment; And for such things as do belong thereto; he must be
careful, as to do them well and faithfully, so without bestovving on them
more solicitude then shall necessarily be required; performing them seriously,
but yet with composednes and tranquillity of mind; not suffering them to
distract or encomber his memory before the time come for the executing of them;
And then abstaining from passion and impetuousnes, and from engaging his
affections to them. A devout soul thus constantly discharging her Office,
will come to that liberty, easines and setlednes of spirit, that necessary
employments will breed in her no harmfull distractions; (the cause of which
is inordinate love to creatures.)

13. But Fifthly and lastly, her principal care must be about her Prayer;
Although by occasion of business she cannot so habitually continue in a
recollected state, yet at least she must resolve diligently and faithfully to
pursue her daily appointed Exercises; since prayer is the principal instrument
by which divine light and grace against all tentations is administered to us. So
that if Prayer be duly performed, be it with distractions or without them, it
will both urge a soul to use fitting Mortifications out of Prayer, and to
make advantage (tovvard the perfectionating and advancing of her spirit) even
of the distractions and encombrances of her Office. Whereas if she be careless in
Prayer, she will become careless also in Mortification; And by little and
little will loose all that which with great pain and travail she had
formerly gotten, yea and be in very great peril never to find a way to
return to her former state.

14. Certainly if any distractions or employments can justify a soul for the
neglect of this duty of internal Prayer, those which attend the Popedom (the
highest vveightiest and most incessantly encombring Office that a soul is
capable of) may do it. Yet S. Bernard in those excellent Books of
Consideration written to Pope Eugenius the third, seriously aduises him not so
wholy to plunge himself in business, but that every day he should borrow or
steal from the affairs of the universal Church some hours to employ in this
holy exercise.

15. Hereupon Granatensis will allow of no excuse, under pretense of business,
to cease from pursuing daily Recollections. For (says he) no business can be so
necessary and so continually urgent as to hinder our daily necessary
Refections. Now Prayer (which is the food of the soul) is as necessary, if
not more, then that of the Body. And if it so fall out, that businesses are to
be dispatched just at the hours appointed for daily Spiritual Refections, the
person foreseeing that, ought to repair himself by taking some other vacant
time for his Prayer. And if that will not be allowed him, he may and ought
according to the judgment of Aquauiua General of the Jesuits, to solicit his
Superiors to give him some relaxation from such employments: Which the
Superior is obliged to grant, otherwise God will require a severe account
from him for the harm that must needs come to the subjects soul by the want
of that which is only able to support the spirit, and to enable it with
proffit to discharge the most necessary duties of his calling.

16. If either out of sloth, distractions or remorse through some imperfections
incurred a soul find difficulty to apply herself any time to prayer, though
she promise better for the future; yet if upon any motives of sensual nature
she omit it at any time, she will the day follovving have less mind to go to
it; and so be in danger quite to abandon her recollections. If she have not the
very same excuses and pretenses that she had formerly, Nature will be subtle
enough to invent some other; for the longer she delays, the more unapt will
she be for it; according to that wise saying of the Ancient Rabbis, Qui
protrudit horam, hora protrudet ipsum, that is, He that thrusts of the hour of
doing any good duty till another time; that hour when it comes will thrust of
and delay him; he will be less capable then of doing his duty, then he was
formerly by means of some new impediment. Whereas a soul by using some
violence upon herself to break through discouragements to prayer, will get
such courage and grace from God, that afterward her employments will afford
her less hindrance unto this holy duty.

17. To this purpose Johannes a Jesus Maria General of the discalced Carmelites
relates concerning a devout Gentleman a Penitent of his, who daily used at a
certain time to recollect himself in prayer: how that treating with another
upon some affairs of consequence, and the clock happening to strike the hour
appointed for his prayer; he abruptly broke of the conversation, excusing
himself, that he had then an affair of such importance that it could not be
delayed, and must not be omitted; And so dismissing his friend, he retired to
his recollection; wherein God was pleased, as in revvard for his diligence
and fidelity to him, to visit him after an extraordinary manner with some kind
of supernatural Contemplation, such as he had never had experience of before.

18. A vvell-minded soul therefore, to the end she may be enabled to attend to
this business of businesses (as S. Bernard calls it) ought to employ all her
providence and subtilty so to order all her daily employments both for time and
manner, as that they may be no hindrance thereto. Let her, if need be, make
notes and remembrances of her several affairs each day (to the end her memory
may not betray her:) and beginning the morning with a serious recollection
(which will sanctify all the follovving days work) let her endeavor to
dispatch her task with such care and diligence, that toward evening she may
be beforehand with her task of businesses, that sollicitudes about them may
not disquiet her mind, encomber her memory, nor distract her Prayer.

19. It is morally impossible that in a religious state there should be any
Employment that should so wholy (and this constantly) take up ones thoughts,
as not to leave one hour each day to be given to God. Or if such an employment
were, it would be absolutely unlawful, as being destructive to the
obligation of a Christian, and much more that of a spiritual or Religious
person. No excuse therefore or pretense can justify a customary neglect of so
essential a duty.

20. In case that sometimes by reason of some pressing affairs the devout
soul cannot allow herself the whole time appointed for her Recollections;
let her at least take as much of it as possibly may be spared. Or let her in
exchange take some other hour of the day, or night. Hovveuer let her preserve
a thirsting desire and love to Prayer, and by fervent interrupted Actuations
(as the present business will permit) and by some more then ordinary
Mortifications (especially of the tongue) repair the loss of a set
Recollection.

21. If a soul in Employments cannot free her mind from distractions,
Aridities and sollicitudes in Prayer: let her hovveuer be courageous to pursue
it after the best manner she can; preserving as much Resignation and
tranquillity (at least in the Superior soul) as may be. And let the sight of
such imperfections humble, but not disquiet her spirit. Let her consider and
believe that God is not only as present to her in her spirit during her
greatest desolations, as he was in her clearest Recollections, but as loving
also; And that this is the proper season for a soul to show her fidelity to
God, in adhering to him in the top of her spirit, when as not only the
Interior senses are diuerted by images of businesses, but the Affections also
disordered by sollicitudes.

22. To this purpose she may apply the Point of Election mentioned by fa: Benet
Canfeild, who to the great comfort of vvell-meaning souls, shows, That in
the midst of the greatest troubles, Afflictions, Passions and distractions a
soul may as truly and efficaciously dispose of the operations of the Superior
spirit (which depends not upon our corporal organs) fixing them upon God,
making choice of him for her final end, and submitting herself with
resignation and love to him even for sending her such trial's, as she could in
her greatest solitude and most quiet Introuersion. And this is best done
without any violence or impetuosity, but with great tranquillity darting a
spiritual regard to God, by means of which she may be as truly and
effectually united to God (though not according to sense) in the midst of these
troubles, as in her greatest sensible unions.

23. A soul that will be thus vigilant and industrious may assure herself,
that God who lays this Office on her, does it not for her harm, but for her
greater good, and to give her occasion of exercising several virtues, which
otherwise she would have vvanted, (at least the perfection of them:) as
likewise for the trial of her fidelity to him amidst whatsoever encombrances
and tentations. Now by means of these virtues she will make a great
progress in spirit, at least for as much as concerns solid Charity, if not
for light of contemplation; And retaining a love to Prayer, and practicing it
as well as she can, she will come to be in so good a disposition, that when
she thall return to her former vacancy and solitude, she will make a a
vvonderfull progress in the vvayes of Contemplation. Thus she may see, that as
the Office has perils in it; so will God proportionably increase his grace
and assistance.

24. For want of this care and vigilance over their interior, it is to be
feared there be many in Religious Conuents that fruitlesly spend their lives in
Employments in some sort beneficial to others, but of little proffit, yea
perhaps very prejudicial to themselves; as some that read Lessons of
Philosophy or Divinity, yea even many that pass their whole time almost in
spiritual Employments, as preaching, hearing Confessions, giving Spiritual
Directions etc: for these works being performed not in virtue of Spiritual
Prayer, and consequently not proceeding from the Divine spirit, but the spirit
of corrupt nature (which is the source of all actions performed in a state of
Distraction) Gods spirit seldom gives a blessing to them.

CHAP. V.
. 1. 2. How Internal livers ought to behave themselves in time of Sickness. The
benefits of Sickness to such only.

. 3. 4. etc: The great danger of souls unprovided for sickness; especially of
Tepide souls in a Religious state.

. 9. 10. 11. How Sickness is to be accepted.

. 12. 13. Of a certain great tentation in Sickness.

. 14. A sick person is Gods prisoner.

. 15. Spiritual exercises by no means to be neglected in sickness.

. 16. How Mortification is then to be practiced in Internal Tentations.

. 17. 18. Particularly how Fear of death, and uncertainty of what follows is
to be mortified.

. 19. 20. etc. It is for our good to be ignorant of our future state.

. 26. 27. Of tentations to Infidelity, despair etc: A Story out of Cardinal
Bellarmine.

. 28. 29. etc: How Mortification about sensual pleasures is then to be
exercised. 34 etc: Solicitude about health misbecomes Religious Persons.

. 37. In sickness and pains we are best sensible of our Lords sufferings.

. 38. Aduices to those that attend on the sick.

. 39. 40. A sick Persons chief care must be, not to neglect Internal Prayer.

. 46. Prayer is the universal remedy against all tentations, afflictions etc.

. 48. A soul shall be judged according to her state in sickness.

1. THE second state (before mentioned) that requires a more then ordinary care
and provision (as seeming less proper for internal exercises) is the state of
Sickness; The which though it do exact a greater solicitude and vigilance, as
being a disposition to a condition ireuersible; yet in it self it is a more
secure state then that of external Employments; In as much as those are such
as are apt to dravv our affections from God to sensual objects; vvheras in
Sickness all things do rather drive a soul to seek and adhere unto God, since
all other comforts do fail her, and all pleasures become distasteful to her.
Moreover in Sickness there are continual occasions of high Resignations, and
far less sollicitudes about temporal matters; for the chief business of a
sick Person is forbearing and holding of patience; In a word, it is rather a
Not-doing then doing.

2. Now since it concerns a soul most deeply to be vvell-disposed in sickness;
My purpose is to give some general Aduices to souls already practiced in
internal vvayes; and they shall be such as chiefly have a reference to Prayer
and Mortification; The which Aduices notvvithstanding our sick person ought
only so far to make use of, as he finds them proper for his spirit and case.

3. It was not without just reason that an Ancient holy man said, that a
Religious spiritual life is a continual meditation of death: because the
principal end of all our exercises is to prepare our selves against the day of
our great account, to the end we may give it with joy, and not with fear.

4. If when sickness is come, a soul be to learn how she ought to behave
herself, it will go hard with her, by reason that then such a soul will
be in great blindness of understanding, and deadnes of will: All her thoughts
and care will be employed in seeking to avoid pain, to pass away the tedious
time, and to recover; And if any good thoughts come into her mind, it is Fear
that principally raises them. Hence it is that a serious conversion is seldom
given in sickness, when Passions do swell, and immortifications come thick
upon one another; And a soul that in health has neglected God and despised
the means of Conversion, cannot with any reason or confidence expect an
extraordinary or miraculous Grace to work a sudden cordial Conversion. If
that ones whole life spent in painful mortifications and serious
recollections be but even little enough to conquer the peruersenes of our
wills, and the glevvynes of our Affections adhering to sensual objects; what
may be expected from a fevv interrupted inefficacious Prayers or purposes in
sickness, suggested merely by fear upon the approches of death and Judgment,
whilst there still remains in the heart a secret love to those sinful
delights that must now be forsaken? Upon which grounds S. Hierome has a
terrible saying; That among those that defer their Conversion till their
death, scarce one of a hundred thousand are saved.

5. And I believe the case of such a soul in Religion is more perilous,
because having enjoyed so great helps to a holy life, she has with so
unpardonable an ingratitude neglected them. Whereas a secular person being
touched in sickness, may resolve to secke those means of abstraction of life, a
renouncing of the world, Prayer etc: the want of which was the principal
cause (it may be) of his deordinations. Upon which grounds alone S. Bernard
says, that he would give absolution presently to the greatest sinner (in
sickness,) if he would promise (upon supposition of recovery) to quit the world,
and embrace a Penitential life in Religion. Because it is not possible to
promise or perform a greater satisfaction. But I doubt whether he would be
so indulgent to an unconverted Religious person, that can promise no higher
state then he is in already with so little good effect to his soul.

6. Yet God forbid that from hence any should advisedly give way to despair,
or deliberately refuse to humble themselves, to mortify their inordinate
affections, or to pray the best they can. Good purposes and actions performed
merely out of fear will produce some good effect; and Gods goodness (which is
incomprehensible) may change fear into love, how imperfect soever.

7. Now though the case of tepide livers be not altogether so miserable; yet
it is infinitely perilous, and the issue extremely to be suspected. For though
they cannot be charged with many great sins of Commission; yet their whole
life has been a continual omission of duties to which their Profession did in
a special manner oblige them. And now what other new motive can they have to
relinquish their negligence but only fear also? Or what Prayers are they
likely to make, when their necessity is so great, and the helps to Prayer so
small?

8. The only secure way therefore to prevent the incurring this hazardous state
in sickness, is during health to combat against Tepidity, and by diligent Prayer
to provide ones self of Internal strength and Grace. For such souls by a
prosecution of their accustomed Duties of mortification and Prayer make good
use of their sickness and gain extremely by it. They are not forvvard to
promise great matters (as tepide souls usually do, though they perform but
little:) They have forethought of sickness, and the tentations accompanying it;
and now call to mind and execute former resolutions made to improoue, for
their souls advancement, all states and conditions; and by occasion of their
present corporal Infirmity or pains to fortify in their minds the virtue of
Patience, Resignation, contempt of the world and adhesion to God. Thus Sickness
proves to them a greater blessing then health. And if they do recover, they
do yet more seriously and feruorously perform their former exercises.

9. When Sickness is actually come, a soul is to accept and embrace it, as a
special gift of God; yea though such sickness happened through the persons own
intemperance or other fault; As a Malefactor is obliged with resignation to
accept of death deserved for some crime. He ought indeed to be penitent and
sorry for the faults which were the cause of such an harmfull effect; but the
effect it self he ought to consider as proceeding from the Divine Will and
Providence. Yea in such cases, a soul may even rejoice that God is so
merciful as to bring on her the smart and punishment of her sins in this
world; giving her withal a proffitable occasion to exercise her resignation;
from whence she may infer a hope that he will therefore spare her after this
life.

10. A soul must not forbear this willing acceptance of Sickness etc. because
perhaps she finds great resistance thereto in sensuality; yea she ought therefore
the rather to accept it, as knowing that it is the Superior will, and not the
will of sensuality that meriteth or demeriteth. And so doing the repugnance of
sensuality will, as well as the sickness, turn to the merit and advancement
of the soul.

11. Now a soul must not content herself for once or twice to accept
sickness; but she must practice this almost continually; and especially when
any extraordinary pain or irkesomenes does afflict her. And such acceptance
must be not only for the present, but with a mind willingly to submit to the
Divine will, if his pleasure were that such pains should continue never so
long.

12. She must particularly take heed of one notable tentation, which often
befalls good, but imperfect souls, by means of which they yield too freely
to impatience in Sickness; Which is this; Nature being soon weary of suffering,
will suggest unto the soul, to justify impatience, among other incommodities
of sickness this one, that thereby she is put in an incapacity to pray, or
otherwise to serve God or her neighbor; upon which she will be apt to
desire health with impatience; falsely justifying herself for such
impatience, as if she did not so for the satisfaction of nature, but to the end
she may perform spiritual duties more perfectly. But this is a mere
delusion; For that is the true and perfect way of serving God, which is
suitable to the present Condition wherein God has placed a soul; and an
imperfect interrupted Prayer made with resignation in the midst of pains or
troubles sent by God, is perhaps more efficacious to procure the good of the
soul, then the highest eleuations exercised otherwise.

13. It is no great matter though the soul herself do not distinctly and
clearly see how her present sufferings (external or Internal) may be
proffitable to her; she is to refer all things to the infinite Wisdom and
goodness of God, who can bring light out of darkness. And therefore she must be
contented (if such be his will) to be blind-folded, and humbly to remain in
her simplicity, and in a reuerentiall awe and admiration of the inscrutable
ways of the Divine Providence.

14. A sick person is to account himself after an especial manner in Gods
hands, as his Prisoner, chained, as it were, by his own weakness; disabled
from the ordinary solaces of conversation, vvalking etc: debarred from eating
what pleases the Palate: become proffitable to none; troublesome and
chargeable to many; exposed oftimes to bitter pains, and sharper remedies of
such pains etc: A greiuous indeed but yet a happy prison this is to a soul
that will make a good use of it: For unless the internal taste of the soul
also be depraved, she may by this occasion infinitely increase in spiritual
liberty, health and strength, by accepting with indifference these
incommodities, and mortifying her natural exorbitant desire of remedies; not
desiring to escape, but when and after what manner God shall ordain.

15. But to speak more particularly touching the Duties of a soul during
sickness; She is to assure herself of this one thing; That if she think that
her Sickness may justify her neglect of her spiritual Exercises of
mortification and Prayer (the essential Duties of an Internal life:) if these
be not continued as well in sickness as health, the soul herself will become
the more sick of the two, and exposed to greater danger then the body. For
most certainly, if sickness do not produce good effects of patience and
resignation etc: in the soul, it will produce the quite contrary. And such
effects cannot be produced, but only by the exercise of mortification and
prayer.

16. First therefore for Mortification, this is indeed the proper time wherein
it is most seasonable and necessary. Store of matter for that virtue is almost
incessantly afforded, Pains, weakness etc: in the body; and grief, fear and
other disquieting passions in the mind, which are often more insupportable then
outvvard torments: all these tentations the soul must be armed against.

17. Now among all Internal tentations the greatest and most painful is Fear
of death, and especially of the consequents of it, Judgment and hell; without
which, death to a faithful Christian could not rationally be the Object of
fear, as he that knovves it to be the universal inheritance of mankind, and
to Christians the Door of eternal happiness. In case therefore that such fear
of death do remain in Inferior nature, the Superior Reason ought to
contradict it, and use it as a subject of a very healthful Mortification.

18. But as for the other far more considerable, more inward and painful
subject of fear, which is the Uncertainty of a future Eternal condition
after death, the which does usually much afflict and deiect imperfect souls,
that are conscious of their manifold defects, small satisfaction paid for them,
great weakness of Divine love (a proof whereof is this very fear, which
would be expelled if Charity were perfect;) It is a hard matter to encourage
such souls against it, or to persuade them to mortify it, and resign
themselves willingly to support it, it being indeed very proffitable and
healthful to the soul. On the contrary they think Resignation in this case
to be scarce a fitting or lavvfull thing; though most certainly it is so.

19. I do not say that such souls ought to bring themselves to an
Indifference what way they shall be disposed of after death. But the Point of
Resignation lies in this; that a soul ought to content herself not to know
how and in what manner God will dispose of her after death. Her Anchor is
hope; which she ought to cherish and fortify all she can. And the best way for
souls to fortify that, is to make as few reflections on themselves as may be,
and to employ all their thoughts and affections directly upon God. It is Divine
love alone that is at least the principal virtue that brings souls to
Beatitude; and therefore fearful souls though they were in as dangerous a
state as they suspect, must needs rationally argue thus, That the way to
procure and strengthen love is by fixing their minds upon the Mercies, Goodness
and Perfections of God, and to contradict or forget all arguments or motives of
servile Fear, the greatest enemy of Love. What folly is it, because they are
imperfect, therefore vvillfully to continue in their imperfections by nourishing
fear? Surely at the close of our lives we ought to practice after the best
manner we can the best Actions, and most acceptable to God, which is to
relinquish our selves, and to contemplate, trust, rely and role our selves upon
him.

20. Let the afflicted soul therefore herein as in all other matters, not only
with Patience support such an ignorance, but with an amorous Resignation
congratulate with God his eternal most secret purposes and Decrees concerning
her, both for time and eternity; freely consenting and agreeing to the will of
God that such secrets should be reserved to his own breast, hidden from our
knowledge; Therein acknovvledging his Divine Wisdom and Goodness, which
moved him (doubtless for our good) to conceal from us those things, the
knowledge of which would have bred security, negligence, and perhaps pride
in our corrupt hearts. Let her desire be to know nothing, and to have nothing,
but what, when and in what manner it does please Almighty God.

21. Such behavior of hers toward her Creator and Redeemer, (to whom she
belongs both for her being and manner of it) as it is most just and reasonable,
so it will make her most acceptable to God, and in conclusion most assuredly
bring her to happiness. Whereas to be dejected and disquieted because God will
not reveal his secret purposes to her, is most unreasonable, and can proceed
from no other ground but natural Pride and self love; And to give a
deliberate scope to unquietness so grounded, is both dishonorable to God, and
utterly vselesse to the soul herself; for assuredly God will not, to satisfy
the inordinate desires of nature, alter the course of his Divine Providence.

22. It did not hinder or abate the tranquillity of Adams state in Innocence,
that he was uncertain of Perseverance; yea though he knevv that one sin
committed would exclude him utterly from his present happiness: Whereas in our
present state after thousands of sins, one Act of true Conversion to God and
amorous Resignation to his will is able to restore us.

23. Let the soul vvithall consider, that he which has denied unto her an
assurance, and forbidden her to presume, has yet commanded her to hope, and to
comfort herself in that hope. Let her therefore frequently and seriously
exercise Acts of hope (how little gust soever sensuality finds in them: for
the greater repugnance there is in Inferior nature, the more generous are such
acts and more acceptable to God.) The which Acts are to be grounded not upon
any conceits of our own Innocence or vvorth; for if the soul were never so
perfect, yet a conceit of her own innocence would be but a rotten foundation
of hope, which should regard only the free Mercies of God, the merits of his
Son etc.

24. Moreover let her exercise these Acts not as Acts of her own will, but
(far more perfectly and divinely) as Acts of Gods own will, who has
commanded us thus to hope. She may vvithall if need be, make use of
considerations and motives in the understanding, by reading or hearing
comfortable Promises in Scripture etc: to incline the will to conform it
self to the divine will. To which conformity when a soul shall once
perfectly be brought, there remains to her no Hell, nor Purgatory, no more
then to God himself; for where there is no propriety of will, there is
nothing but the divine will, which is God himself; And according to the
measure of this conformity, such will be the measure of our happiness.

25. As for other Internal Pains and anguishes arising from other grounds, as
scrupulosities about Confessions etc. The Instructions formerly delivered in
the second Treatise are to be made use of, especially those of submitting
absolutely to the Advice of a spiritual Directour, and of transcending all
imaginations and all risings in Inferior nature. And surely now above all
other times the soul is to be careful not to yield to the suggestions of
fear, which is the only tentation left, by which the devil can disquiet
tender souls, (to whom now pleasures and ambition etc: have lost all taste)
and so dravv them from God and resignation to him, from confidence in his
mercies etc. for which virtues this of all other is the most proper season.

26. And as concerning Tentations to Infidelity, despair etc: besides what
has been already said, I will only add these two Aduices; 1. That the soul
be sure to avoid all inuenting of Reasons or disputes to oppose the
tentations. 2. To turn the mind neglectingly from the said tentations, and to
fix it with Resignation and confidence on God. These indeed are the only
proper Remedies for souls, especially those that walk in Internal vvayes.
For these require no study, nor subtilty of wit to encounter the Enemy, who
is able to entangle even the most learned, that in confidence of their
abilities dare contest with him; And yet these Remedies are sufficient to
quench even his most fiery darts. And moreover this one Expedient of turning
the mind from all Objects but God, and adhering to him, is an universal
Remedy, alvvaies ready at hand, being the usual Exercise of those souls for
whom these Instructions were principally written.

27. To this purpose Cardinal Bellarmine (in his Book De art been moriendi)
from Barocius Bi^hop of Padua relates a sad Story of two Doctors in that
University famous for Scholasticke Controversy; The one vvherof after his death
did (according to a mutual agreement formerly made) appear to his friend
after a most affrighting manner, all burning in flames; giving this account of
the causes that brought him to that woeful condition; A little before my
expiring (said he) the devil suggested to me Doubts and Arguments against the
Divinity of our Lord; the which I out of a confidence in my own abilities
undertaking to resolve; found my self so pressed with new replies, that in the
end being quite overcome, I renounced the Catholic Doctrine of the Church and
assented to the Arian heresy; And in that state (a just Judgment for my Pride)
I expired, so receiving this reward of Heresy. The living Companion astonished
with this relation, revealed the case to some Pious friends, from whom he
received Aduices directly conformable to these here before delivered. And
thereupon spending the remainder of his time more in Prayer and Penance then
Study, and not long after approaching to his end, the same Tentation assaulted
him; for the devil requiring of him an account of his faith, could get no
other answer from him but this, I believe what the Church teaches; And being
thereupon asked, What the Church taught, He ansvvered, The Church teaches that
which I believe; The which words he often repeated in the hearing of those
that assisted him. By which means he eluded the subtilty of the enemy^, and
(as afterward appearing to some of those his good Counselors in a glorious
manner he manifested) he passed to heaven.

28. In the next place as touching Mortification to be practiced about
External things, it is a duty so necessary in all states, that it belongs as
well to the Infirmary as the Refectory; For in all manner of things and
occurrents in this life there lies a snare to be avoided, and an enemy to be
combatted; so that whosoever out of slothfullnes shall forbear to continue
the practice of Mortification, will the next day be more auerted from it,
nature getting strength against the spirit.

29. In as much therefore as Sickness is a tentation and a snare, it is by
consequence (well used) an occasion of victory against impatience and
self-love, and of advancement in spiritual Perfection.

30. More particularly the Exercises of Mortification proper in the time of
sickness are 1. not to be drawn by the pains and inco^modities of it to
impatience. 2. not to yield to an immoderate satisfaction of nature when it
suggests a desire either of seeking improper or unlawful remedies; or when
pleasing nourishment, refreshments etc. are offered to us. 3. To take heed of
spiritual sloth, and neglect of our devotion to God; (of which we will
speak when we etreate of the duty of Prayer.)

31. As concerning the Mortification of impatience, by restraining the Tongue
from breaking out into Complaints or murmurings, and the mind from yiedling to
melancholy and discontent: enough has been said in the second Treatise, the
which may easily be applied to the present subject of Sickness. I will
therefore only add these two Aduices: 1. That the infirm person would consider
that impatience in sickness is not only harmfull to the soul, but likewise to
the body too: As on the contrary Patience, peacefullnes of mind and a
mortifying temperance, which are heavenly ornaments of the soul, are vvithall
very efficacious means to restore health: in as much as thereby neither will
the patient out of immortification refuse bitter things which are aduantageous
to health, nor greedily seek pleasing things which are harmfull. 2. That
patience ought to be preserved at least in the Superior soul, although
violence of pain should force the patient to groan, or it may be to cry out,
(The which if they afford ease, are not wholly to be condemned.)

32. Next touching the Mortification and moderation of the sensual appetite to
be practiced in Sickness; In the first place it cannot be denied, but that it is
lavvfull and fitting for a sick Person to desire and seek remedies proper in
that case. Yet this is to be done without too much solicitude and disquietnes
of mind; And in case such Remedies cannot be had, a contented submission of
mind in the want or refusal of them is of admirable virtue to advance the
soul; since necessity declares such a want to be the will of God, and this
for the souls greater good. A most perfect Example hereof we have in our
Lord, who among the other insupportable torments of the cross was most
greiuously afflicted with Thirst; in which case he demanded refreshment; But
all assvvagement being denied him, yea Gall being presented to him to inflame
his Thirst, he complained not at all.

33. In the second place, it is to be considered that though the same manner of
exercising temperance by repressing sensuality in the interior Disposition of
the soul, be alike to be practiced in health and sickness; yet there is a
difference as in regard of the matters about which such temperance is to be
exercised; for those meats and Solaces which would misbecome a spiritual
person in health, may be very allowable and expedient in Sickness. Only care
ought to be had that the yiedling to some reasonable pleasure and recreation of
the senses may be by the direction of the Spirit, according to spiritual
discretion, for the good of the spirit, so as not to hinder internal Exercises
of the soul, and because such is Gods will; and not that an undue liberty
should be allowed upon the pretense of sickness to give the reins to sensual
appetite, so as to make the state of sickness more easy and pleasurable perhaps
then that of health. It is nothing considerable as in it self whether the
body have ease or no; All the matter is how it fares with the spirit; If
bodily ease may indeed be an help to the spirit, it is to be admitted for that
purpose; for as S. Bernard says, As man was not made for the woman, but the
woman for man: so spiritual Exercises were not made for corpora^l, but
Corporal for spiritual.

34. Notvvithstanding there is beyond this a perfection to be recommended to
the Imitation of such internal livers, whose grace and fervor have rendered
them in a capacity of aspiring to it; the which the same S. Bernard has both
by his Instructions and admirable Example delivered: Hippocrates, says he,
does teach to save lives in this world, but Christ and his Apostles do teach
to loose lives; he that will save his life shall loose it. Now which of these
two Masters do^ ye choose to follow? Truly that religious man plainly shows
whom he chooses for his Master who says, This meat is ill for the eyes, that
for the head, the other for the stomach etc: Now such nicenes as this the
holy Father so earnestly protests against, as almost to deny the use of
Physic to be lavvfull; The only proper medicinal remedy for Religious
Persons being Abstinence. Yea it is observed that he purposely made choice of
vnvvholesome places to build his Monasteries in, as being desirous that his
Religious should rather be infirm then robustious.

35. Hovveuer in the choice and use of diet or Physic every one must follovv
that Divine light of discretion which God gives them: always avoiding
superfluities, and sometimes contenting themselves with the want even of
necessaries. They must account themselves obliged to continue the practice of
the same Internal duties, though after another manner; increasing the
mortification of the will (which is a mortification far more pure and
perfect) though they be forced to allow a little more to the body; their minds
are to be set upon the benefits which sickness brings with it, and to use all
endeauours to possess themselves of them; Considering. 1. That they have a
continual occasion of exercising Patience and resignation (the greatest
blessings that a soul is capable of.) 2. That they have opportunity for more
free, pure and less distracted Recollections; so that their Prayer and
mortifications do inseparably attend one another. 3. In a word, they are now
in such a state by which the greatest Saints have more surely and more
speedily advanced themselves to perfection, then by many years voluntary
external, and corporal labors and austerities.

36. Thaulerus has a saying, That the condition of the dearest and most
perfect servants of God is to have their souls full of the Divine love, and
their bodies full of pains; And that when they feel no pains nor other
afflictions, they greatly apprehend least God have forgotten them; but their
comfort returns when God visits ihem with any corporal or worldly affliction;
Then they even feel that it stands well with them, for then they are in a
state that of all other does best dispose for the Divine union.

37. The sufferings of our Lord are never is perfectly understood by reading or
meditating, as when devout souls themselves taste of the like; then they see
and comfortably taste his love to them. If their pains be supportable, they do
inuit them to unite themselves to God by express Acts of Resignation; But if
they be so excessive that they become incapable of making express formal
Prayers, then the very suffering of those pains with patience and peace of
mind is a most sublime and efficacious Prayer. Then is the proper season for
those (Gemitus inenarrabiles) those groans which cannot be uttered, which, as
S. Paul says, the holy Spirit suggests to suffering humble and devout souls.

38. And here by the way I would recommend to those Charitable persons that
do attend on the sick, a care to behave themselves as becomes them in those
mortifications that attend such an Office: that they would bear with the
passionate humors of (their Patients, and not judge them for small excesses.)
That they would freely and charitably administer what shall be requisite to
their present state; being assured that God will never be vva^ting to those
that have left all for him, and now depend only upon him; he will rather
enrich them more for their charity, then suffer them to be endammaged by it. It
may be it is for the sick Patients sake that the healthful enjoy a
comfortable subsistence. Let them herein imitate the tenderness of our holy
Father to the sick, and his care likewise to admonish their Attendants of
their duty (in the 36. chapter of his Rule.)

39. But above all things a devout soul ought to judge that God has sent her
the most proffitable trial of sickness, not to the end to discharge her of her
daily Recollections; but rather that she may pursue them after a more
efficacious manner. Probably she will not be able to observe exactly her
former appointed times of Prayer: as also through disturbance of humors and
spirits she will find great Distractions; yet if, lifting up her spirit as
well as she can, she offer both her pains and distractions to God: and
vvithall if in times out of Prayer, she be vvatchfull over herself not to give
way either to the inordinate Appetites or impatiences of nature, but to be in
a continual state of Resignation, she will have little reason to complain of
the imperfections of her Prayer.

40. A soul can have no excuse for neglecting this most necessary duty of
Prayer; the times of which may more securely be observed in sickness, then in
health. For who would trouble or interrupt such an one against his will? or
who would not permit him to be alone, or to rest whensoever he has no mind
to continue Conversation? Hovveuer if the devout soul should stand in need,
she may and ought to use all lavvfull foresight, industry, excuses and sleights
that may be, to prevent the being hindered or interrupted.

41. Now because P^ysicke inwardly taken does much encomber the stomach and
indispose for Prayer; Therefore I would advise the sick Person; 1. Not to be
forward to seek or accept of all Receipts that friends and visitants are apt
to prescribe. 2. When he is to take Physic (whether in the morning or
evening) so to order his times as not to take it till he have performed his
appointed Recollection. 3. Not to receive Physic, no nor repasts ofter or more
then shall be necessary: not too much neglecting the body, but yet being
careful rather to attend to the necessities of the spirit. Let our Patient
therefore stoutly resist the inuitations and tendernesses of friends, that are
apt to urge him to eat more or oftener then shall be needful. And whatsoever
he shall receive, let him take it in the name of God and for his sake, neither
with auidity if it be pleasing to nature, nor with murmuring if displeasing.

42 It will be exceeding difficult during pain or any great Infirmity to use
Discoursiue Meditation. The exercise of Acts of the will (and much more of
Aspirations) is a far more proper Prayer in such a case. Therefore it is good
even for those who are not yet fully ripe for the exercise of Acts, so as to
make them their constant Exercise, yet to use them sometimes in time of health,
to the end that if they be overtaken with sickness, they may not be to seek
for their exercise.

43. Among Express voluntary Acts, the exercise of total Resignation is the
most perfect, and generally the most proffitable; yet a soul in Sickness if she
find herself indisposed for such acts, may content herself with Acts of an
Inferior nature; yea with devotions to any particular Saints, to her Angel
Guardian, and specially to our Blessed Lady.

44. Those that are only infirm and languishing, are (for as much as concerns
the nature of their Prayer) in a case little different from that they were in
during health. Those whose sufferings are from outvvard pain merely, without
sickness, may happen to have their Prayer altered to the better by means of
such Pains; the which themselves may prove a very proffitable Prayer, if the
patient with quietness and submission to the Divine will do offer such pains
continually to God.

45. But as for Sicknesses more inward, they do more indispose the patient to
Prayer; Besides the great distractions that come from Physic, blood-letting,
diet etc: So that none can prescribe any certain Aduices. The vvell-meaning
soul therefore must, and with a moderate Attention may, herself observe all
circumstances, and accordingly for the manner practice both mortification and
Prayer. She will easily discern at what times, how long, and in what
manner she ought to pray; as likewise wherein she is to mortify herself, and
how far she may yield to the desires and necessities of nature. The truth is,
the cases not only of several persons in several sicknesses, but even of the
same person in the same sickness, are so vvo^derfully various, that it is
impossible to fit Aduices for all. All that an Instructour can say to the
purpose is, That prayer and mortification are absolutely necessary to a soul
as well in sickness as health. But for the special manner and matter, her own
judgment and discretion, but especially the Spirit of God must teach her, and
doubtless will, if she attend to his holy Inspirations.

46. I said before, that the universal Remedy against all inward Tentations
was Actual Prayer and conversion of the soul to God. The which remedy is
good for all souls in what state soever. But more proper for such as practice
Internal Contemplative exercises; (who are not now in a disposition to
invent motives and arguments to contradict such tentations:) but most necessary
for the fearful and scrupulous. Notvvithstanding I would not oblige all
imperfecter souls upon every thought of a tentation to recurre always to
their prayer; but only when necessity and a just fear of being overcome shall
require it. Otherwise being in no such fear, they may content themselves
with some intermitted Eleuations of their minds to God, deferring their prayer
till their next appointed Recollection. For it would be too great a burden
imposed on such souls as without some difficulty cannot enter into serious
introuersion, to bind them hereto upon every assault of an Inward tentation,
when a moderate care not to yield to the tentation will suffice.

47. God seldom sends great sicknesses to spiritual Persons in the beginning
of their course, before they have gotten a reasonable habitude of Prayer to
make good use thereof: least thereby they should become disabled to pray. But
after such an habitude gotten, if sickness come, it will advance their Prayer:
and as their bodily strength decays, their Prayer proportionably will grow
more easy, profound and spiritual. But it is to be doubted that the Prayer of
Meditation will be little bettered by sickness.

48. I will conclude this Point of Sickness with proposing one special
consideration, which ought to induce souls to be careful that they do not
deliberately turn Sickness into a liberty of sense or spirit, by omitting or
neglecting Prayer and mortification, and it is this: In all sickness there is at
least some degree of peril of being taken out of this life. The which event
if it should happen to a soul whilst she continues in such a tepide, negligent
state, God will assuredly judge her according to her present state, in which
death finds her. Yea she will be in danger to loose the fruit that she might
expect from all her former good purposes and Resolutions, or at least to
suspect that such purposes were not sincere and cordial, since now the proper
time of putting them in execution being come, they are ineffectu^l. (And above
all other the case of Scrupulous souls would be miserable, if they should
neglect to combat their scrupulosities by a simple obedience and transcending
of their fears.) On the contrary it is certain that a soul cannot possibly
have a firmer ground of assurance of eternal happiness, then a sanctified use
of sickness.

CHAP. VI.
. 1. Internal Exercises weaken the body; yet often prolong life.

. 2. 3. 4. The body ought to suffer for the good of the spirit; and not the
spirit for the body.

. 5. Yet with Discretion, that the body be not unnecessarily prejudiced.

. 6. 7. etc. In the first place Discretion is to be used about mortification;
both by Superiors and others.

. 13. 14. etc: Secondly discretion is to be used in sensible devotion.

. 17. Thirdly in Meditation.

. 18. 19. 20. Fourthly in the exercise of Immediate Acts.

. 21. 22. Fifthly even in Aspirations.

. 23. Of languishing Love mentioned by Harphius.

1. INTERNAL Prayer seriously prosecuted (as it deserves to be) being contrary
to our natural inclinations, cannot choose but cause some trouble and vneasines
to nature, and abate the vigorousnes of the body, quenching those spirits, and
drayning those humors which are superfluous, and afford matter of tentations.
Yet on the other side, it makes amends even to nature it self, in contributing
much to the prolonging of life, by means of moderation of Diet, a composednes
of Passions and contentation of mind etc: which it causes. Proofs whereof
we have in the Ancient holy Fathers of the desert and more lately in S.
Romualdus, who lived till he was a hundred and twenty years old; and S.
David of Wales till a hundred and forty etc:

2. Hovveuer if it were otherwise, the soul is not to serve the body, but
the body the soul; so that if one of them must for the benefit of the other be
a looser, it is most just that the loss should lie on the bodies side. And
surely since there is scarce any study or exercise of mind which does not
abridge life or debilitate the functions of it, without making any amends to
the soul for the future life; and yet for all that men neither are
discouraged, nor do think it fit for such considerations to forbear such
studies; much less certainly ought spiritual and Divine exercises be laid
aside upon such pretenses.

3. Notvvithstanding just it is that some due regard be had to the body, that
it be not too much prejudiced by the exercises of the spirit performed, with
overmuch violence and impetuosity, And this not so much for the bodies sake, as
the spirits; the which since in this life it cannot work without the body,
by too violent workings it may so weaken the body as that it will not be
enabled for continuance; and so those little short gains which are got by a
few impetuous Exercises, will be dearly bought by an incapacity of continuing
them, contracted in both soul and body. We must neither stretch our
understandings to high seekings, least we be plunged thereby in Internal
darkness, from which would proceed intolerable perplexities: Neither must
we force the affections even to good objects too much, nor suffer them to
flow with too violent a stream; nor lastly must we exhaust bodily strength
by unnecessary external Austerities.

4. As for the painfullnes, troubles and vneasines to nature that without too
much debility does accompany spiritual exercises, those may well enough be
digested, considering the unspeakable benefits and service that they produce
unto the soul. And yet for our comfort this vneasines will by custom and
constancy continually diminish; for as Harphius observes, a soul after long
practice of Eleuations of spirit, will come to such a facility in them, that
they vvilll become as it were natural to her. And herein we may observe the
vvonderfull wisdom and goodness of the divine Providence over souls, how he
tempers the exercises of the spirit to the Exigence of the body; For while the
body being vigorous, is able to endure more, he gives her ruder and more
laborious exercises; But when by long-continued workings, it is become so
feeble that any violent Intention of the spirit, or rude external
mortifications (of which there is no need) would ouer-vvhelme it, then the
exercises are most easy, peaceable, silent and serene, yet infinitely more full
of virtue then formerly.

5. Now the peculiar virtue by which all harmfull inconveniences either to
the body or spirit may be avoided is that supernatural Discretion, by which a
soul is enabled to hold a Mean, and avoid the vicious Extremes, in the
practicing of all spiritual duties. It is justly called a supernatural
virtue, because God only can bestovv it (for all the wit and Philosophy in
the world are but mere folly and blindness in these matters.) And this he does
principally by the means of Prayer, with the use of requisite Abstraction and
attendance to his divine Inspirations, whereby we shall receive a Celestial
habitual light to direct us in all things suitably to our own particular
dispositions, and abilities; for no one man can in all matters be a Rule unto
another.

6. Now as touching a particular application of this supernatural Discretion
to the exercises of an Internal life, much has already been set down
dispersedly in these Treatises; I will therefore only point at some fevv
considerations which in the practice of the several Duties of a Contemplative
life do regard this Mistress of all virtues, Discretion; which surely
deserves above all other to be purposely and by it self treated of, in as much
as without it all other Virtues are imprudent, that is, not virtues at all.

7. First therefore in regard of the duty of Mortification (I speak now only of
necessary Mortifications, of which kind all are to be esteemed that come from
God, either immediately, or by means of others, especially Superiors) a soul
is to esteem those Mortifications which a Superior beyond the Rule shall
voluntarily impose upon the subject, to be to the subject himself necessary,
hovveuer voluntary to the Superior.

8. Now Superiors ought rarely to impose such kind of Mortifications on their
subjects; because so many circumstances are required to make them well
imposed, that a great measure of illumination from God is requisite for those
that practice the imposing of them. For 1. The Superior must evidently see
that the subject in probability will make good use of them. 2. And that though
they may do the subject good some one way, yet they will not harm him more
another. 3. He must take heed that others be not scandalized thereby.

9. The like circumstances are to be observed by a particular person that
would voluntarily assume mortifications. For want of which point of
Discretion, Harphius says, That such kind of strange odd and uncouth
mortifications: as are imposed and practiced in some Communities, ought not to
be voluntarily assumed, as if with a design therefore to be despised by
another.

10. The Author of the Abridgment of Perfection justly imputes Indiscretion to
those who will never give rest to nature, but will al^wayes have some cross or
other (Exterior or Interior) by which to mortify Nature. For (says he) the
highest Perfection is not to desire to be allwaies suffering; but to be content
to suffer all that by Gods Providence shall befall us. The which contentment
is taken away by that continual anxiety which those must suffer that will
needs be always upon the rack.

11. In like manner Harphius taxes those that think ^hemselues ready for
afflictions, and complain that they ^vant occasions to exercise their
Resignation. For, ^ives he to such an one, thou deceiuest thy self by ^ide;
God does see that as yet thou art not indeed ready and strong enough for
extraordinary trialls, for if he did he would not fail to furnish thee with
occasions. He will send an Angel from heaven on purpose to exercise a soul,
rather then she would want Mortifications for her good. Therefore let souls
never be sollicitous, nor set themselves to devise or procure mortifications,
as if they thought that God had forgotten them. Notable examples of this
Providence of God may be seen in the life of Thaulerus; where likewise we
read how God reprehended the Layman (that converted Thaulerus) in his sleep
for certain assumed voluntary corporal Austerities. To this purpose there is
a memorable passage in the life of Suso concerning a spiritual daughter of
his, who of herself was disposed to have undertaken some great corporal
mortifications, but was dissuaded by Suso, although himself by a special
Call from God did use very violent and sharp ones. In the which Discourse
there are many excellent Documents, very well deserving to be perused by the
devout Reader.

12. Let a soul therefore seriously practice that Mortification of
Mortifications, which is pure Internal Prayer, and with it join a diligent
good use of those Mortifications attending her state of life, or sent her
otherwise from God, not omitting those most efficacious Internal
mortifications by Acts of humiliation and Annihilation of herself; and so
doing she will have little reason to complain of want of exercise of this
virtue. For Corporal Austerities do not by the excess of them, but by the
fitnes and proportion to the souls present disposition, perfectionate an
Internal liver; So that some in firm but sincerely affected persons do
advance themselves more by ordinary and trifling Mortifications, then others
that consume their strength and spirits with intolerable fastings, chains,
disciplines etc: For as Cassian says (in the Preface to his Institutions) Si
rationabilis possibilium mensura seruetur, eadem obseruantiae perfectio est
etiam in impari facultate. That is, If a reasonable discreet measure of
Austerities that ordinarily are not above our power be observed: there will be
the same Perfection of observance, where the external abilities are unequal.

13. In the next place, there is great use of Discretion in sensible Devotion,
by which (says Harphius) some souls are so far carried away, so besotted with
self-love and self-will in the use of it, that no advice from the most
experienced will avail to moderate them, till it be too late to amend, and
till they find themselves unable to support any serious application to
Exercises of the spirit. Nevertheless (says he) having thus by their
indiscretion brought on themselves this inconvenience, they may for all that
merit much, if with humility Patience and resignation they will accept of such
their infirmity.

14. We ought therefore much rather to mortify such sensible Fervor, then use
force to increase it, applying hereto that Saying of the Wiseman (Proverb. 25.)
Have thou found honey, eat of it what may be sufficient for thee, least thou
be filled and vomit it up.

15. All the Merit that is in sensible Devotion consists in the concurrence of
the superior will to those Acts, without which it will not help to raise
the soul out of her natural state. Yea the more she is visited and even
bathed in such sensible consolations (except she use mortification about them,
and be wary not to rest in them, but turn them to the producing of more
efficacious Acts in the superior will,) the more strong will she grow in
self-love, and more defiled with a kind of spiritual lust. Unless souls
therefore do grow more humble thereby, it is a sign of danger to be perverted
by it, and quite to loose the end for which God gave it.

16. Yet souls during their imperfect state are not violently to strain
themselves to work purely in spirit; but moderately to use sensible devotion,
when God sends it, as a means to advance them in spirit. Neither ought they
on the other side to be so carried away with a liking and gluttonous
affection to it (which indeed affords delicacies more agreeable to nature then
any sensible satisfactions:) as for it to omit other duties belonging to their
state, and which God would have them to do.

17. Third^y as touching the Exercise of Meditation, how far Discretion is to
be used in it, has hene sufficiently declared, when we treated of it.
Indeed souls during that Exercise are to be directed rather by the Discretion
of others then their own, and this both in judging whether they be fit for
it; how long they are to continue in it; (the Rule whereof must not be
custom but experience of proffit;) and what proportion of time they are to
allow unto the understanding and will to operate in it; for that Exercise
does not afford supernatural light enough to enable a soul to be her own
Guide.

18. Fourthly for as much as concerns the Exercise of immediate Acts of the
will, a soul that out of ripeness got by sufficient practice of Meditation
is arrived thereto, will have light and Discretion sufficient to judge what
Acts are most proper for her; what time is to be spent in each recollections;
when and what pauses shall be necessary; and when she is to change it for a
higher.

19. A principal Point of Discretion in this Exercise is not to be carried
away with the examples of some Saints in former times, who could remain
almost continually in some Mental actuation to God, without giving way to an
extrauagant thought; by which means they were almost continually in
Internal combattings; An indiscreete imitation of such examples, as likewise
a too violent producing of Acts upon one another would so oppress ordinary
spirits that it would put them into an incapacity of ever being able to pray
for the future.

20. They who do not use set Recollections may and ought frequently to force
themselves to Interior Acts toward God: Yea as often as they please: Not much
regarding the season of the day, as whether it be after Refection or before
sleep. And when they have done all, their progress will be but small, for
want of more prolonged and continued Exercises.

21. Lastly, Discretion and Mortification likewise is to be used also even in
those Exercises to which we are invited and enabled by God himself; such
are the Exercises of Aspirations and Eleuations of the spirit. The usual times
therefore of set Recollections are to be expected; for they do so weaken and
consume corporal nature, that if souls should give way unto them as often as
they think themselves enabled (which is indeed almost continually, so
perfectly are they disposed to God) they would utterly disable themselves to
do any service to God for the future.

22. To this purpose Harphius relates an account that one brother Rogerius a
devout Franciscan gave of himself, saying, That a hundred times in a Mattins
he was in spirit drawn vpvvard to a more high knowledge of divine Secrets.
All which tracts he forcibly resisted; being assured that if he had given his
soul free scope to fix the eye of the understanding upon those Objects so
represented to him, he should have been so plunged in the Abyss of the Divine
incomprehensibility, and so wholy driven out of himself, that he should
never have been able to have retired himself alive from such a Contemplation.
But there is little peril of Indiscretion in souls so highly elevated, and so
wholly in Gods hands, who may do with souls and bodies what he pleases.

23. The same Harphius describes the state of some other souls (not so
sublimely elevated) who yet are so languishing in their love to God, and in
such an impatient ardour and thirst after him, that it makes the body to faint
and quite wither away; And therefore he calls them Martyrs of Love. Now by
this l^nguishing Love, I conceive, is understood a Love much in sensuality
(though the object thereof be God:) and it is exercised about the heart, much
after the same manner that a violent but chaste love is often exercised betvveene
absent persons of different sexes; so that I take it to be the highest degree
of sensible Devotion. Now though Harphius says, that such Martyrs of Love
dying corporally through the extremity of Passion, do immediately pass into
heaven, having been already purified in the Purgatory and fire of Love:
Notvvitstanding, although no doubt such souls dye in a most secure estate; yet
it may be they will not escape some degree of Purgatory for their indiscreete
yiedling to the impulses of nature in the exercising of this love: which
though truly divine, is yet far less perfect then that pure love which in
perfect Contemplation is exercised in the intellectual soul, without any
sensible change or redundance to the body. For the tree of Love is in no sort
to be plucked up by the roots, as long as there is any hope that it may be in
a disposition or capacity to bring forth more fruit.

CHAP. VII
. 1. 2. Touching a special sort of Internal Prayer prescribed by Antonio
Roias a Spanish Priest, with Approbations given to it.

. 3. 4. The Order for preparation to the said Prayer of internal Silence.

. 5. 6. etc. How the said Prayer it self is to be exercised.

. 11. 12. The great advantages and Benefits of the Prayer of internal Silence.

. 13. This Prayer may become proper for most souls.

. 14. A soul is not to be obliged to use the same preparations prescribed.

. 15. It is commended by the Author both to Beginners and Proficients: yet
with some Cautions.

. 16. This prayer is inferior to S. Teresas Prayer of Quietness.

. 17. Of the Phrase by which the soul is said herein to be AVX ESCOVTTES.

. 18. This Prayer is far from the mere cessation or idleness of the Illuminati.

. 19. 20. A transition to the following discourse of Contemplation, with a
serious exhortation of S. Teresa to aspire courageously thereto.

1. BEFORE we proceed to the Supreme degree of Prayer, which is pure
Contemplation, it may be convenient, as it is also pertinent enough, to insert
here as an Appendix to these Instructions concerning the Prayer of forced Acts
of the will, a certain Exercise of Internal Prayer pertaining to this same
degree, though in regard of the souls behavior, much differing. It is a
prayer of Internal Silence, Quietness and Repose; in which there is no
Meditation at all, nor no Acts of the will expressly and directly framed;
being rather a kind of vertuall and habitual attention to God, then a formal
and direct tendance to him. Yet is this a far inferior degree of prayer, then
is that Prayer of Quietness, which S. Teresa speaks of and experienced, which
was indeed supernatural Contemplation.

2. The first that published a Treatise purposely of this kind of prayer was
Antonio de Roias a devout Spanish Priest and Doctor, in a Book called The
life of the spirit, approved which large Elogies, by no less then nime Eminent
Doctors, Bishops or Inquisitours: So that there can be no reasonable grounds
to doubt of the lawfullnes, co^uenience and security of it. It has moreover
been translated and published in french, and reco^me^ded by several other
Doctors.

3. Now the order that the Author aduises a devout soul to observe in the
exercise of this Prayer of Internal Silence, both in regard of Preparation
thereto, and Actual Exercise of it, is as follovveth.

4. In the first place for Preparation. 1. The soul is to examine and purify
her conscience with a prudent, diligent search. 2. She is to endeavor
seriously and cordially to make an Act of Contrition for her sins, from a
consideration of Gods Goodness, Love and Mercy etc. 3. She is to frame an Act of
pure and entire Resignation of herself into Gods hands, with reference to the
present exercise of a silent Recollection; determining to perform it purely
for Gods glory, renouncing all inferior private Interests and contentments
etc: 4. She may (if need be) meditate a little upon one of the Mysteries
concerning the Incarnation and Passion etc. of our Lord: also mixing certain
Eiaculatory Prayers. 5. She is to make a firm Act of faith and
acknowledgement of Gods Presence in the center of the soul, before whom she
intends to place herself with most profound Reverence, humility and love.

5. In consequence to these Preparations (in the which she is to continue till
she find herself disposed to quitt all such express and direct Acts or
affections, and having an implicit assurance by a bare and obscure faith that
God, who is incomprehensible universal goodness, is indeed present to and in
her:) All that remains for her then to do is, with all humility and love to
continue in his presence in the quality of a Petitioner, but such an one as
makes no special direct Requests, but contents herself to appear before him
with all her wants and necessities, best, and indeed only, known to him, Who
therefore needs not her information. So that she with a silent attention
regards God only, rejecting all manner of images of all objects whatsoever;
and with the Will she frames no particular requests nor any express Acts
toward God, but remains in an entire silence both of tongue and thoughts,
(the virtue of the precedent direct Acts remaining in her:) with a svveere
tacit consent of Love in the will permitting God to take an entire possession
of the Soul, as of a Temple wholy belonging and consecrated to him, in the
which he is already present.

6. In this state the soul behaues herself much after the manner of an
humble, faithful and loving Subject, that out of duty and with most entire
affection and respect approches to the presence of his Sovereign. At his first
access he uses such profound Reuerences and protestations of duty, and
fidelity as are befitting; but that being done, he remains silent and
immovable in his presence, yet with the same respect and reverence that he
first entered; And knovving that his Prince only ought to dispose of his fortune
and state, and that he is both most wise to judge what favors may become the
one to give, and the other to receive, and vvithall that he has a love and
magnificence to advance him beyond his deserts, he makes no particular requests
at all. Now the Reverence that he shows him is not by making any express
reflections or inward saying, The King is here, to whom I owe all duty, love
and obedience: For knovving him to be present, there is no need of renewing
either speeches or thoughts that he is so; And really exhibiting all manner of
respect to him, it would be to no purpose to make either internal or
external professions of it. He is in a readiness to hear and execute any
commands; and till he be informed by the King how he ought to perform his
will and service, he is not forvvard to voluntary undertakings. So does the
soul (according to the Instructions of Roias,) behave herself in Gods
Presence, not renewing, but only perseuering in the virtue of those direct
Acts of Faith, Love, duty etc: which she framed in the beginning. If being in
this vacancy and Internal silence, Gods Spirit shall suggest unto her any pure
Affections, she is attentive and ready to entertain and quietly exercise them,
and presently returns to her silence.

7. If during this silence the soul find any Aridity, obscurity or
insensiblenes in Inferior Nature etc: those things do not interrupt her
perseuering in her silence and vertuall Exercise of Faith, Oblation and
Resignation, joined with a quiet attention to his will and Inspirations. Yet
if indeed she should forget herself, and that either vvandring thoughts or
sensual Affections should press upon her and divert her attention from God
(which can scarce be whilst she is vigilant to expel all images whatsoever
that may cause her to break her internal silence) she can easily recover the
said Silent attention, by renewing (if need be) a short express Act of Faith
of the Divine Presence etc.

8. In this Attention to God she is far from expecting any extraordinary
Illuminations, favors or Visits, of which she accounts herself utterly
unworthy.

9. Lastly, she has no suspicion or fear least such a respectfull Silence
should be mere Idleness or cessation; for she knovves it to be the effect of
love and respect. And since an intellectual soul is all Actiuity, so that it
cannot continue a moment wi hout some desires; the soul then rejecting all
desires toward created Objects, she cannot choose but tend inwardly in her
affections to God; for which end only she put herself in such a posture of
Prayer: Her tendance then being much like that of the mounting of an Eagle
after a precedent vigorous springing motion and extension of her vvings, the
which ceasing, in virtue thereof the flight is continued for a good space
with a great svviftnes, but vvithall with great stillnes, quietness and ease,
without any vvauing of the vvings at all, or the least force used in any
member, being in as much ease and stillnes as if she were reposing in her nest.

10. This seems to me to be in sum the fashion of that Internal Prayer of
Silence recommended by Roias; The which without any variation he would have
exercised daily, morning and evening, allowing to each recollection about an
hour.

11. Now the advantages that he (not without grounds of reason) attributes to
it are. 1. That it causes far more profound Recollections, then any other kind
of set internal Prayer: Because a soul having either by a short Discourse or
exercise of Faith, oblation etc. found him who is the center of her repose,
she then leaves all the rooms and appartements of sense (both external and
internal) void and empty, and passes forvvard to those of the Spirit, which
are pure, clear and secure. 2. It does extremely abate the Actiuity both of th
imagination and passions, neither of which does it suffer to stir at all. 3.
God is most perfectly contemplated in it, being apprehended simply and truly by
Faith in the Superior spirit. For as long as there are discourses in the
understanding, images permitted to rest in the Fancy, and sensible motions of
tenderness in the heart, there God is not perfectly and entirely the object of
such operations; In Spiritu, non in commotione Dominus, says the Prophet
Elias: God is not in the rushing wind, (he is not in the stirrings of Passions
or of the imagination.) But (in sibilo aurae tenuis) he is in the silent
whisper of a soft air. And says David (Factus est in pace locus eius) His
place of abode is in the clear and peaceful Regions of the Spirit. 4.
Moreover by this exercise we come to the most perfect operation of
selfe-annihilation; by which both our selves and all creatures are so
transcended and forgotten, as if they were not at all; Neither can the devil
find where to fasten a tentation. We present to God the temple of our souls
empty, to the end he alone may possess it, which he will not fail to do,
and vvithall most richly adorn it, making it fit for such a Guest.

12. To these benefits may be added this (which is a great one, and fruitful
in many blessings) to wit, that in this Exercise all Divine Virtues are in a
very sublime manner exercised, viz. 1. Faith, by which the soul quitting all
discourse and doubting, beleiues, and even perceiues the divine presence; by
which she conquers the world; exalting herself so much above all created
things, that they are out of her sight. 2. Hope, because the soul placing
herself before God in the posture of a beggar, confidently expects that he
will impart to her both the knowledge of his will and ability to fulfill it.
3. Love; because the soul resolutely affects nothing but correspondence to the
divine Love. 4. Resignation, since the soul forgets all private interests, has
nothing at all to ask, neither repose nor business, but only whatsoever God
would have her to enjoy, do or suffer. 5. Patience; because herein the soul
must expect to suffer many Aridities, Desolations, Obscurities, encombrances of
thoughts, tentations and other internal Afflictions; whence it is that
Thaulerus gives unto an exercise much resembling this, the name of the
afflicting exercise. 6. Purity: For the soul is hereby separated from all
adhesion to creatures, being united to God only. 7. Mortification: of which
here is the very Quintessence: for when the soul acts in Spirit only, them the
flesh becomes insipide and without taste, says S. Gregory. The flesh with all
its desires is here slain as it were, and buried out of the way: The eyes
see nothing pleasing to sense; the ears hear nothing; the tongue is silent; a
curtain is drawn before all images and representations in the Memory; The
will is separated from all created things, neither vvilling nor nilling any of
them, but permitting God to will for her. 8. Obedience; for the understanding
contracts and abases the vvings of all discourses and disputes against any
thing that God commands. 9. Humility in the most perfect Degree; because the
soul therein, and thereby is even reduced to nothing. 10. In a word here is
Adoration, Sacrifice, Devotion and all graces united together, where creatures
are excluded, and God with all his Perfections is alone exposed to all the
faculties of the soul to be contemplated by the mind, embraced by the will,
and to be the sole object of all her operations: Here is Abstraction in
Perfection; And (as Phaulerus says) all virtues are learnt in learning
Abstraction.

13. This is an Exercise fit for all sorts almost, and all dispositions of
souls. Learning is but a small furtherance, neither needs it be any hindrance
to it. It excludes no other kind of Prayer, exercise or devotion; for any kind
of Prayer may be used as a preparation to find God in the spirit. And that
being once done, the soul is to chase away all objects that are not God, that
she may be united to him alone; Knowing him most perfectly by ignorance;
approaching to him by resting and forbearing all motion; and conuersing with him
most comfortably and proffitably by Silence. By this holy Idleness in pure
Recollectiue Prayer, the soul attaines to a clear and most comfortable
Experience of that which is obscurely apprehended by faith, and cannot be
known by discourse. This is that (Mors Angelorum) death of Angels (that S.
Bernard desired) by virtue of which they regard not, neither live in
themselves (as the Apostate Angels did) but in God only, and God in them.
There is no other Act of the understanding exercised in this, but that only
which is the most perfect, to wit, simple intelligence, which is incapable
of error; And the will seeks nothing, desires nothing, but emoyes all.

14. Now as touching the forementioned Preparations, souls ought not to
think themselves obliged to make use always of these: but to use their
own liberty. That was an excellent preparation which the good simple,
Devout old-woman is said to use, who when she set herself to her Devotions in
the Church, said only: O my God, let that come to thee which I wish: and let
that befall me which thou desire: And having said this, presently with a
belief of Gods presence she abandoned herself into Gods hands, remaining in
this silent busy idleness, and negative knowledge, more full of fervor and
light then all the speculations of the Schools, or studious meditations of
Cloisters.

15. Now whereas the Author commends this exercise both to the Perfect and
Imperfect; confidently affirming that any one may securely begin with it even
at the first entrance into a spiritual course, as many have done with great
and speedy proffit; I conceive that in such a case there will be need of more
then ordinary courage in beginners to prosecute it; For their understandings
and inward senses not yet being stored with good images to chase away vain
distractions, nor their wills sufficiently inflamed with holy desires, it is
not possible but they must often be assaulted terribly with most tedious
aridities, passions etc: They will be often suspicious that they spend most of
their recollections in a mere fruitles idleness, and so will be apt to fall
into doubts, and to betake themselves to unquiet consultations with others.
But if they can avoid this, and resolutely go on notvvithstanding these
discouragements, no doubt they will reap inestimable Benefits by it. But
considering these great tentations and dangers, I should judge that the most
secure way is not to adventure upon this exercise at the beginning, till one be
arrived to the practice of immediate Acts. And also in the prosecution of it,
it will be necessary to use great abstraction of life, and to practice
likewise out of time of Prayer the same Internal silence, calming both the
busy vvorking of the Imagination, and stilling the motions of (even) good
desires, both in study, vvorking, saying the Office etc.

16. Though the exercise be the same in substance at all times, yet by long
practice it grows more and more pure and abstracted; the silence and
introuersion grows more profound, and the operations more imperceptible; And
it will in time securely bring a soul to that which S. Teresa calls the
Prayer of Quietness: which is indeed perfect Contemplation, to which this is
but an imperfect degree, and of which this is but a slight imitation.

17. Some spiritual Writers do express the state and behavior of a soul in
such a kind of Prayer as this, by his Phrase, That the soul is then AVX
ESCOVTTES, that is, she is watching and attending what God will speak to her,
or work in her. The which phrase is to some very suspicious and offensive, as
if it implied, that the practisers of such Prayer did pretend to extraordinary
visitations and favors; from which notwithstanding they are wholy auerse.
And they mean no more by the phrase, but only to signify, that the most
perfect disposition that the soul can put herself in to receive Divine
lights, and to be enabled to tend purely and spiritually to God, is, by
silencing all noise of creatures and their images, by quieting all motions of
Passions, by admitting no other operation of the understanding, but simple
Intelligence of objects apprehended by Faith; and lastly by a real embracing
with the will no other object but God himself, without reflecting or
professing that the will adheres to him. It is surely a far more perfect
expression of resignation to the Divine will in any difficulty and affliction,
really and quietly to embrace it with perfect silence, then to busy ones self
with profession that one does embrace it; as also actually and indeed to love,
then to say one loves etc.

18. Now though no distinct reflecting or otherwise express Acts either of
the understanding or will are admitted into this Exercise, yet the soul is
far from that mere cessation or non-Actuation professed by the frantic
Illuminates; for here the soul is in a case like to a tender mother with
unspeakable satisfaction regarding her most amiable Child; she all the while
says nothing, neither thinks any express distinct thought of which she can
give any account; Yet both her mind and will also are busy. Yea the mind in
one simple regard has the virtue of many long discourses; and the will in one
quiet continued application, has the quintessence of a thousand distinct
Affections. In like manner a soul does actually regard God; and being in his
presence she does really with Adoration, humility, resignation and love behave
herself toward him; And what need is there that she should tell him that
she does acknovvledge his presence, or that she does adore, love and resign
herself to him? She rather chooses the Psalmists way of praising and serving
God, who (instead of the Latin interpretation, Te decet hymnus Deus in Sion
Psalm. 64.) in the Hebrew expression follovved by the Septuagint, says,
(Domine tibi silentium laus est,) Silence is praise to thee, O Lord; and indeed
the most effectual becoming Praise of all other it is, proceeding out of a
deep sense of his Incomprehensible Perfections and Majesty, whom the
Seraphins contemplate by covering their faces, and glorify most perfectly in
that profound and avvfull halfe-houres silence, mentioned in the Apocalipse.

19. Thus we conclude our Instructions concerning the two Inferior degrees
of Internal affectiue Prayer. The remainder of this Book will be employed
about the blessed fruit of all our labors, to wit, Perfect Contemplation; The
Aduices about which are not meant for the informing of those that are arrived
thereto (for they have a Divine light shining brightly in their hearts, beyond
all humane Instructions:) but for the encouragement of those that tend toward
so Divine a state, that will abundantly recompense all the labors, pains,
bitternesses and contradictions that occur in the way. Yea though the
vvell-minded soul should never in this life attain thereto, yet faithfully
tending tovvard it to her last hour, she will not want even here a
sufficient recompense of Divine light and Graces, with an inestimable comfort
of mind at her death; and afterward she will not fail of the peculiar
crown due to those that here do aspire to Contemplation.

20. Let no excuses therefore be admitted, no encombrances hinder souls (those
especially whose Profession and state is Contemplation) to pursue the vvayes
of Prayer proper thereto with all courage and perseverance; for as S. Teresa
says, It is of great importance to have a resolute determination and fixed
purpose of mind never to desist from diligent endeavor, until at length we
come to drink of this water of life, I mean, supernatural Prayer. Labor
therefore for it, come what will come from your labor; succeed what may
succeed; though it cost never so great a price, and never so much travel; let
who will murmr at it; whether we attain to it, or die in the way; although
the heart faint and break asunder with the excessive pains undergone for it;
yea though all the world be in an uproar against it, and would fright us with
telling of the dangers that are in the way.

THE FOVRTH SECTION OF THE THIRD TREATISE. OF CONTEMPLATION.
CHAP. I.
. 1. 2. Of Contemplation in general: what it is?

. 3. 4. Contemplation is twofold; viz: First Philosophical: Of which there are
several sorts.

. 5. 6. etc: Secondly Mystical: what it is.

. 9. Mystic Contemplation or Union is 1. Active. 2. Passive.

. 10. 11. etc. Of Active Mystic Union: the nature and manner of it: whether
the Internal senses be used in it etc.

. 16. A Mistake of some concerning this Contemplation.

. 17. 18. The Divine Excellency of it.

. 19. 20. Whether there be several states of it.

HITHERTO the Exercises of a devout soul have been exceedingly laborious, in
which she has been obliged to use force and constraint (more or less) upon
herself to eleuate the will above all created things, and to apply it unto
God. She has struggled through terrible oppositions of the devil and corrupt
nature, the instability of the Imagination, tumultuosnes of Passions etc. all
which would hinder her perseverance in her Recollections. But
notvvithstanding all this, pursuing them still, sometimes in light and
sometimes in darkness; sometimes allured by sweetness, and again sometimes
afflicted (but not discouraged) with Desolations: in the end God crowns her
courage and Patience by exalting her to a new, more perfect and Divine
Exercise of the Prayer of Union or Contemplation.

2. Contemplation (in the accepted general notion of the Word) signifies a
clear, ready, mental seeing and quiet regarding of an object: being the
Result and effect of a precedent diligent and laborious enquiry and search
after the nature, qualities, dependances and other circumstanciall conditions
of it.

3. Now according to the nature of the object contemplated, and the
disposition or end of the person contemplating there are several sorts of
Contemplations (at least so called.) For in the first place, Anciently there
was a certain kind of false Contemplation, which we may call
Philosophical, practiced by some learned Heathens of old, and imitated by some
in these days, which has for its last and best end only the Perfection of
knowledge; and a delightful complacency in it. Others there were (and it is
to be feared, are still) that contented themselves with an airy vain renown
which they hoped to gain by their knowledge. So that whatsoever was the
object of their Contemplation (whether things natural, Moral, yea or even
Divine, as far as by wit and subtilty or tradition they could be known)
self-love and Pride was the utmost end of all these Contemplatours. Yea to
this Rank of Philosophical Contemplatours may be referred those Scholastic
wits, which spend much time in the study and subtle examination of the
Mysteries of Faith, and have not for their end the increasing of Divine Love in
their Hearts, Nay these are indeed more imperfect and culpable (says Albertus
magnus lib. de Adhaer. Deo) in as much as they offend against a greater and
supernatural light.

4. Yea and those among them that do truly intend, as their last and principal
end, the glory of God and seeking his Divine Love (which is the best sort of
scholastic Contemplatiues:) yet since their chief employment consists in much
internal Discourse and Reasoning, which cannot be practiced without various
and distinct sensible Images by which to represent God etc. the knowledge
with they attain to is not properly Contemplative: and the highest Degree of
Prayer that they arrive unto is only a Perfect kind of Meditation.

5. In the second place there is a Mysticke Contemplation which is indeed
truly and properly such: by which a soul without discoursings and curious
speculations, without any perceptible use of the Internal senses or sensible
Images, by a pure, simple and reposefull operation of the mind, in the
obscurity of Faith simply regards God as Infinite and Incomprehensible Verity;
and with the whole bent of the will rests in him as (her) Infinite,
Universal and Incomprehensible good. This is true Contemplation indeed: And as
Rest is the end of motion, so is this the end of all other both Internal and
External Exercises. For therefore by long discourse and much practice of
affection the soul enquires and tends to a worthy Object, that she may
quietly Contemplate it, and (if it deserve affection,) repose which
contentment in it.

6. So it is in Prayer: The soul aspiring to a perfect Union with God as yet
absent, begins with Enquiry by Meditation: For as S. Augustine says,
Intellectus cogitabundus principium omnis boni, That is, All Good proceeds from
the understanding as its first principle. By Meditation the soul labors to
represent this Divine Object with all the sensible advantages and motives of
admiration and of love that it can invent, to the end the Will by pure love may
rest in him: But this being done, the Will being not yet at free liberty to
dispose of it self, is forced with some violence to untwine and withdraw
its adhesion from creatures, that it may eleuate it self and be firmly fixed
to this her only Good. And at last by long custom the force by little and
little diminishing, the Object begins to appear in its own perfect light,
and the affections flow freely, but yet with a vvonderfull stillnes, to it:
And then such souls are said to be arrived to Perfect, Mystical Union, or
Contemplation.

7. This is properly the Exercise of Angels: for their knowledge is not by
discourse, but by one simple intuition all Objects are represented to their
view at once, with all their natures, qualities, relations, dependences and
effects. But Man that receives all his knowledge first from his senses, can
only by effects and outvvard appearances with the labor of Reasoning collect
the nature of Objects, and this but imperfectly. But his reasoning being ended,
then he can at once Contemplate all that is known unto him in the Object.

8. Now in Holy scripture our chiefest Happiness and Perfection is said to
consist in this, that we shall be like unto Angels both in our knowledge and
love, for we shall (as they) have a perfect view and Contemplatton of God,
as he is not by any created forms and representations: And so beatificall
shall that Contemplation be, that it will for ever ingulfe all our affections.
But in this life our Perfection will consist in approaching as near as may be
to such an Angelical Contemplation of God, without sensible forms, and as he
is indeed proposed by Faith, that is, not properly represented, but obscure
notions imprinted in our minds concerning him, by which we do perceive that
he is not any thing that we can perceive or imagine, but an inexhaustible
Ocean of universal Being and Good, infinitely exceeding our comprehension: The
which Being and Good, whatsoever it is in it self, we love with the
whole possible extension of our wills, embracing God beyond the proportion of
our knovving him. But yet even such a Contemplation and love in this life, by
reason of our bodily weakness and necessities, cannot be without many descents
and interruptions.

9. This Mysticke Contemplation or union, is of two sorts. 1. Active and
ordinary: being indeed an habitual state of perfect souls by which they are
enabled, whensoever fit occasion shall be, to unite themselves actiuely and
actually to God by efficacious, fervent, amorous and constant, yet vvithall
silent and quiet, Eleuations of the Spirit. 2. Passive and extraordinary: the
which is not a state, but an actual Grace and favor from God, by which he
is pleased at certain times according to his free Good pleasure to communicate
a glimpse of his Majesty to the spirits of his servants after a secret and
wonderful manner. And it is called Passive, not but that therein the soul does
actiuely Contemplate God: but she can neither when she pleases dispose
herself thereto, nor yet refuse it when that God thinks good to operate after
such a manner in the soul, and to represent himself unto her by a Divine
particular Image, not at all framed by the soul, but supernaturally infused
into her. The which Grace is seldom, if ever, afforded but to souls that
have attained to the former state of Perfect Active Union. Concerning this
Passive Union, and the several kinds of it, we shall speak more hereafter.

10. As for the former sort, which is Active Contemplation, of which we
have already treated in gross in this Chapter, we read in Mystic Authors,
Thaulerus, Harphius etc: That he that would become spiritual ought to
practice the dravving of his external senses inwardly into his Internal,
there loosing and as it were annihilating them. Having done this, he must then
dravv his Internal senses into the Superior powers of the soul, and there
annihilate them likewise. And those powers of the Intellectual soul he must
dravv into that which is called their Unity, which is the principle and
Fountain from whence those Powers do flow and in which they are united.
And lastly that Unity (which alone is capable of perfect union with God) must
be applied and firmly fixed on God: And herein, say they, consists the perfect
Divine Contemplation and union of an Intellectual soul with God.

11. Now whether such Expressions as these will abide the strict examination
of Philosophy, or no, I will not take on me to determine. Certain it is,
that by a frequent and constant Exercise of Internal Prayer of the will,
joined with Mortification, the soul comes to operate more and more abstracted
from sense, and more elevated above the corporal organs and faculties, so
dravving nearer to the resemblance of the operations of an Angel or separated
spirit.

12. Yet this Abstraction and Elevation (perhaps) is not be understood, as if
the soul in these pure operations had no use at all of the Internal senses or
sensible Images: (for the Schools resolve, that cannot consist with the state
of a soul joined to a mortal body.) But surely her Operations in this pure
Degree of Prayer are so subtle and intime, and the Images that she makes use
of, so exquisitly pure and immateriall, that she cannot perceive at all that
she works by Images. So that spiritual Writers are not much to be condemned
by persons utterly unexperienced in these Mystic affairs, if delivering
things as they perceived by their own Experience, they have expressed them
otherwise then will be admitted in the Schools.

13. Now to this kind of purely Intellectual operations does a soul begin to
arrive after a sufficient Exercise of Immediate Acts of the will. And having
attained thereto, they do grow more and more spiritual and sublime by the
Exercise of Aspirations and blind Eleuations, without all limitt.

14. I call them pure Intellectual operations, in opposition to actuations
Imaginatiue, produced by mean of gross sensible Images: and not as if the
said operations were in the intellect or understanding: for on the contrary
they are exercised in a manner wholy by the Will. For in proper Aspirations
the soul has no other use of the understanding but only antecedently to
propose an object, which is no other but only a general, obscure, confused
notion of God, as Faith darkly teaches: and this rather vertually then directly
and expressly: the maine business being to Eleuate the will, and unite it to
God so presented.

15. In which Union (above all particular Images) there is neither time nor
place: but all is Vacuity and emptines: as if nothing were existent but God
and the soul: Yea so far is the soul from reflecting on her own existence,
that it seems to her that God and she are not distinct, but one only thing.
This is called by some Mystic Authors, the State of Nothingnes: by others the
State of Totality: because therein God is all in all, the container of all
things. And the Prayer proper to this state is thus described by a holy Hermit
in Cassian (collat. x. c. 11.) Ita ad illam Orationis incorruptionem men's
nostra perueniat etc. that is, So will the mind ascend to that pure simplicity
of Prayer the which is freed from all intuition of Images, vndistinguished with
any prosecution of words or senses: but uttered internally by an inflamed
intention of the mind, by an unutterable excess of affoction, and
inconceiuable quicknes and alacrity of spirit. The which Prayer, the spirit
being abstracted from all senses and sensible Objects, does power forth unto
God by sighs and groans that cannot be expressed.

16. It is an error therefore of unexperienced persons who think and say,
that all the Exercises and thoughts of Contemplatiues are actually in Heaven,
in interior Conversation with Angels and Saints; tasting of the Joys of
Paradise; or wholy employed in sublime speculations about Divine Mysteries of
the Trinity, Incarnation etc: True it is that in a passive Union, God may after
a clear and distinct but vvonderfull manner represent any, or all these things
by a supernatural species imprinted in the soul. But as for the proper
Exercise of Active Contemplation, it consists not at all in speculation, but in
blind Eleuations of the Will, and ingulfing it more and more profoundly in God,
with no other sight or knowledge of him, but of an obscure Faith only.

17. This happy state of Active Contemplation is for substance the most perfect
that a soul is capable of in this life: Being almost an entire reparation and
restitution of the soul to the State of Primitive Innocence, for as long as it
lasts; because then the soul is freed from all sinfully distracting Images and
affections that would separate her from God. Hereupon a Holy Hermit in
Cassian says, That except in the very actual exercise of Contemplation, a
soul is not only in an imperfect state, bur also in an immediate disposition
to a sinful Defect: by reason that where God does not wholly possess the
soul, the very Images of creatures cannot but, more or less, defile her. How
comfortable therefore, and how only secure is a life of Prayer.

18. Those that are unexperienced may and often do call this a state of
Idleness and unprofitable cessation, as Martha complained against her Sister
Mary: But those that have attained to a taste of it know it to be the Business of
all Businesses, as S. Bernard calls it: True it is they do not without a
special and certain Inspiration from God interesse themselves in external
businesses; nor perhaps employ much of their time and Devotions in express
Prayers for common necessities: yet those inexpressible Devotions which they
Exercise, and in which they tacitly inuolue the needs of the whole Church,
are far more preualent with God, then the busy endeauours and Prayers of ten
thousand others: A fevv such secret and vnknovvn servants of God are the
Chariots and horsemen, the strength and bulvvarkes of the Kingdoms and
Churches where they live.

19. I know that some Mysticke Authors do constitute several distinct
states follovving Active Contemplation: As Barbanson makes mention of the state
of the Divine Presence in the soul; and after that of the manifestation of God
to the Spirit etc: and in all these, great variety of ascents and descents etc:
Likewise F. Ben. Canfield in his last and most perfect state of the Essential
and supereminent Will of God makes mention of several distinct Exercises, as
Denudation, an Active and Passive Annihilation etc: These Authors perhaps
spoke according to the Experience of the Divine Operations in their own
souls, and with regard to their particular manner of Prayer: Therefore I
conceive that what they deliver needs not to be esteemed a common measure for
all. Neither will I deny, but that there may be distinct States (some of
which I will mention) as the great Desolation etc. But it will be to no
purpose subtly to search into them. Those happy souls whom God shall so
highly favor as to bring them to the Mount of Vision and Contemplation, will
have no need of light from any but God to conduct them in those hidden Divine
Paths: And the unexperienced will reap but little proffit from such curious
enquiries.

20. I will therefore content my self with delivering in a general manner.
1. The nature of the Prayer proper to the state of Active Contemplation. 2. And
from thence I will proceed to treat modestly concerning Passive Union and
the several kinds of it. 3. To which I will add a breife discourse of that
Great Desolation which usually follows the said Union. 4. And then I will
conclude the whole Book with a very short Description of the state of
Perfection.

CHAP. II
. 1. 2. Of the Prayer proper to the state of Centemplation, to wit,
Aspirations: and w^y they are so called.

. 3. Examples of Aspirations.

. 4. ^. etc. Agreement and difference between Aspirations, and other internal
Acts.

. 11. 12. etc. How a soul becomes ripe for Aspirations, and passes to them.

. 16. 17. Aspirations may be exercised in external business; and why?

. 18. 19. Great variety of Aspirations, to wit, with, or without words etc.

. 23. 24. etc. The great Benefit and fruits of Aspirations.

1. INTERNAL Prayer proper to the State of Active Contemplation consists of
certain most purely spiritual operations of the Will, longing and thirsting
after God, and an Union with him in the supreme point of the spirit, where his
most proper dwelling is.

2. These Perfect Operations are by Spiritual Authors severally named, as
Eleuations, Inward stirrings of the spirit, Aspirations etc: We will in the
follovving Discourse make use for the most part of this last term of
Aspirations, as most proper in a general notion to express the said
Operations. For 1. by them the soul in a Holy ambition does aspire, to raise
and eleuate herself out of inferior Nature, and to mount to the Apicem
spiritus, which is Gods throne. 2. By them the soul being inflamed with
Divine Love, does breath forth her ardent affections to God, as the Heart
forces the lungs to send forth that air which they had formerly sucked in,
that they may dravv in fresher air, to refrigerate it: so that in both there
is a quick reciprocal motion of emptying and filling, of rising and falling.
For after every Aspiration there is a short descent; and then a mounting higher
then before. 3. Because as our outward breathing is an action as it were
purely natural, performed without any labor at all, or so much as election:
So a soul rooted in Charity breathes forth these pure Aspirations without any
force used upon herself, they flowing from her freely, (both as to the matter
and manner of them) and in a sort naturally. 4. Because as the motions made in
Breathing do not hinder (but rather advance) all other motions and operations;
so may Aspirations be exercised during other ordinary Employments without any
prejudice to either, or without any considerable distraction: Except they be
such Businesses that do require a special fixed attention of the mind with
serious study. Now in such Employments, if they be imposed by necessity or
Obedience, the soul ought to quit her Aspirations: And so doing, she will
gain as much by her Obedience as she would by Prayer.

3. Now these Aspirations are certain short and lively affections of the
soul, by which she expresses a thirsty longing after God: such as these are:
My God, when shall I love thee alone! When shall I be united to thee! Whom have
I in heaven or earth, but thee alone! O that thou would live and reign alone
in my soul. O my God, thou alone suffisest me! Do not thou know, O my God,
that I love thee only? Let me be nothing; and be thou all, O my God. O love! O
love! O infinite, universal Good! When shall I come and appear before the
face of thee, O my God! Let me love thee only, and that is sufficient! When
shall I dye, that my God alone may live in me? etc.

4. Now the same Affections (such as these) that are used in the Prayer of
Aspirations, may also be used, for as much as concerns the expression and
sense of them, in the exercise of immediate Acts, and even in Meditation it
self: But yet the manner by which the soul produces the said Affections are
in many respects different in Perfect and Imperfect souls: and the said
Aspirations are of a quite different nature from other forced immediate Acts of
the Will.

5. For first such feruorous Affections tending directly and immediately to
God, are the entire matter in the Exercise of Aspirations: Whereas in immediate
Acts they are only now and then interlaced: But the ordinary matter of such
Acts is the doing or forbearing any thing for God, as in Acts of Resignation
etc.

6. Secondly in those immediate Acts and Affections in which there are no
images of Creatures inuolued, but which respect God immediately, He is
represented by some distinct Image, or express notion in the mind, as by some
special Attribute, Perfection, Name, Similitude etc. But a soul after a long
practice of Internal Abstraction and renouncing of all representations of God,
contents herself with such a confused notion of him as may be apprehended by
an Obscure general Faith: That is to say, not simply and absolutely with no
kind of Image at all (for that is supposed inconsistent with the Operations of
the soul whilst it is in a mortal body:) but not with a distinct, formal,
chosen particular Image: for all such offering themselves, are rejected by
perfect souls: So that if they were to give an account of what they conceive
in their minds when they intend to think of God, all that they could say
would be: God is nothing of all that I can say or think, but a Being
infinitely beyond it, and absolutely incomprehensible by a created
Understanding: He is what he is, and what himself only perfectly knows; and so
I believe him to be, and as such I adore and love him only: I renounce all
pretending to a distinct knowing of him, and content my self with such a blind
beleiuing. Now though imperfect souls also (especially such as are learned)
do acknowledge this negative apprehension of God to be only truly proper and
perfect; yet by reason that gross images are not yet chased out of their
minds, they cannot in their Internal operations proceed constantly according
to such an acknovvledgme^t. Such an obscure negative Object will not
ordinarily move their Affections: Whereas no other but such an object will
move the Affections of Perfect souls.

7. Thirdly, Proper Aspirations in Perfect souls have no precedent Discourse
at all, as Acts have, at least vertually: Neither does the Will in Aspirations
intend to employ or make use of the understanding: for they are sudden
eleuations of the Will without any preuious motive or Consideration.

8. Fourthly, immediate Acts are not only produced with deliberation and
choice, but ordinarily with some degree of force used upon the will. But
Aspirations proceed from an interior impulse, indeliberatly, and as it were
naturally flowing from the soul. And thereby they show that there is in the
Interior a secret supernatural, directing Principle, to wit, Gods Holy Spirit
alone teaching and moving the soul to breath forth these Aspirations, not only
in set Recollections, but almost continually. Now this does not infer that
the Holy Spirit is not also the Principle of all other good Acts and affections
of the Will, (for none of them have any true good in them further then they
proceed from this Divine Principle:) But in them, the Will does preuiously and
forcibly raise up it self to the producing them: in which likewise much of
nature is mixed: And so the Holy Spirit is not so completely and perfectly the
fountain of them, as he is of Aspirations.

9. Fifthly in case that a soul whose constant exercise as yet is but
immediate Acts or Meditation, do sometimes merely by an Internal Impulse
produce such indeliberate Aspirations: yet they are neither so pure and
subtle: Neither will they continue any considerable time: but the present
inu^ (...) ^g passed, the soul must be content to return to her Inferior
exercises: or if she will needs force herself to continue them, her
Recollections will become dry, insipide and without any proffit at all.

10. Lastly Aspirations (when they are a souls usual Exercise) do proceed
from a more habitually Perfect Ground; and therefore are far more efficacious
and noble then Immediate Acts: And moreover there being no violence at all used
in them, they are much more frequently and continuedly produced; and
consequently do procure more new Graces and Merits, and do far more increase
the Habit of Charity.

11. No man can limitt the time how long souls are to continue in inferior
Exercises, before they will be enabled and made ripe for so Sublime a Prayer:
And therefore there is no relying upon the Instructions, Practice or Examples of
any. All depends, 1. Upon the industry or diligence of souls in Prayer and
Mortification. 2. Some what upon their special temper and Disposition. 3.
Likewise upon the advantage that they may have from Solitude and Abstraction of
life. 4. But principally upon the free Grace and good pleasure of God: Who may,
and does by ordinary or extraordinary means call and enable souls to
Aspirations, some sooner and some later.

12. In passing from the Exercise of Acts to Aspirations there is, as to the
manner of the Cessation of forced Acts, great variety in souls; For some will
have their Morning Recollections to be suddenly and entirely changed from
forced Acts to Aspirations; and also the ability for a longer continuance
increased: Whereas the Evening Recollections, will be little altered. In other
souls (and this is most ordinary) their Exercising of Acts will grow by
degrees more and more Aspiratiue: And this will happen sometimes in the
beginning, sometimes in the middle, and sometimes in the Conclusion of their
Recollections. And thus they in their Recollections will get more and more
ground upon Acts, diminishing both the frequency and constraint or difficulty
of them, and increasing Aspirations, till in progress they become wholy
Aspiratiue.

13. Some souls whose Exercise is Acts mixed with Aspirations at their first
coming to their Recollections, yea and till they have for some reasonable space
exercised themselves, may happen to find themselves in perfect Distraction. In
which case if they be called away by occasion of businesses of no great
solicitude, they may find much proffit by such interruptions, and be disposed
thereby to return with much eagerness to their Recollections, and with an
enablement to exercise Aspirations. Yea sometimes they will find themselves
enabled to exercise them during such Employments, their spirits being refreshed
by means of such pauses and distances caused by the said Interruptions. And
Experience will teach them that it will be needful sometimes to break of
the course of their present Internal Prayer for some little space: after
which they will find themselves better disposed for more frequent and
Efficacious Aspirations.

14. But as for imperfect Souls, this must be no Rule for them, for they must
not by reason of Distractions interrupt their Mental Prayer (or at least very
seldom:) but must with discreet violence force themselves to begin with a
serious Recollection: by that means driving away, or at least abating their
present Distractions.

15. When the Exercise is become wholly Aspirations, all the change that will
happen afterward will not be in the substance of the Exercise, but only in
the Degrees of Purity, subtilty and spirituallnesse of those Aspirations, for
there is no Active Exercise more sublime.

16. A soul may come to that state, that she may constantly breath forth
Aspirations, and yet sufficiently to the discharge of her obligation either
Work, Read, hearken to a lesson recited, say or hear Mass, Communicate etc:
neither is there any negligence or irreuerence committed by so doing. For by no
operation so much as by Aspirations does a soul enjoy a sublime and perfect
Union in Spirit with God, which is the end of all Exercises and duties. And
this is the meaning of that saying of Mysticks, In God nothing is neglected.
Yea some of them do affirm that there may be souls so Perfect, that even
amidst the noyses and disorders of a Camp, they may without neglecting their
present duty there, most efficaciously exercise themselves in Aspirations to
God.

17. Now the reason why Aspirations are less hindered by external
businesses, then are Meditation or Immediate Acts, is, because in Aspirations
the understanding is scarce at all employed, and therefore may well enough
attend to other businesses; And moreover the Will abounding and even
ouerflovving with Divine Love, will not find herself interressed in
Affection, and consequently not distracted by such employments.

18. There is great variety in the manner of producing Aspirations: For first
some are purely mental; being certain indeliberate quick Eleuations and
springings up of the spirit to God-vvard, as sparkles of fire flying from a
burning coal (which is the expression of the Author of the Clowd of
unknowing.) And of these some are more gross and Imaginatiue, especially in
beginners, and therefore not difficult to be expressed. Others in more perfect
souls that are come to a higher degree of spiritual Abstraction, grow more
subtle and Intellectual, in so much as oftimes the person himself cannot
express what passed in his spirit: which was indeed nothing but a blind,
and almost imperceptible Elevation of the Will exercised in the summity of the
Spirit; as it happens oftimes in the Great Desolation. Now this growth of
Immateriality in Aspirations is not easily perceptible, though it be real and
certain; as we know that Corn grows, though we cannot perceive its
growing. And indeed it is no great matter whether we observe such degrees,
or no: Yea the Examination thereof were better neglected.

19. Again others Aspirations are moreover externally expressed by the tongue.
And in such expressions sometimes there is a proper sense and meaning: as Deus
meus and omnia (which was S. Francis his Aspiration:) or, Nouerim te and
nouerim me (which was S. Augustins.) And in these sometimes a soul does
abide a good space, iterating again and again the same Aspiration: sometimes
she does vary: Always proceeding according to her interior impulse from Gods
Holy Spirit. Other Aspirations have no sense at all, as were those practiced
by Br. Massaeus a Disciple of S. Francis, who when he was full of interior
affection could usually cry out nothing, but V.V.V. Such unusual Aspirations
as these do show a great Excess of interior fervor, which bursting out,
forces the soul (not able to contain it self, nor yet to find out words by
which to express her Affection to power forth it self after such an
vnsignificant manner.

20. Moreover Aspirations and forcible Eleuations of the Will there are which
are signified, not by the tongue, but by some extraordinary Action of the Body,
as Clapping of hands, leaping etc: To this purpose we have an Example of
another Disciple of S. Francis called Br. Bernard, who out of an inward
boiling fervor was forced to run over mountains and rocky places, being
agitated with a kind of holy frenzy. In such cases as these, tears are very
rare, Gods holy spirit not usually moving thereto, because they would then
flow vnmeasurably to the great prejudice of corporal health.

21. Now such actions and motions, though they may be yielded to sometimes
when one is alone: yet in company they are to be suppressed. To which purpose
Blosius gives this good instruction out of Thaulerus, That albeit these things
be good, as flowing from a Divine principle, yet they are not the things
principally to be commended. For these unions of the spirit with God, to which
corporal nature concurres, are not to be equalled to that most Perfect union
which some souls do experience in pure spirit. And therefore it is
obseruable, that such violent agitations do chiefly befall such souls as have
had their Exercise much in sensible Devotion, as women, and devout ignorant
men. And on the same grounds such are more disposed to Rapts, Ecstasies etc.

22. Lastly to these several Expressions of Aspirations may be added that, of
saying the Divine Office or other Vocal Prayers aspiratiuely: which is a far
greater proof of sublime Contemplation, then any of these unusual motions
etc: This was the Contemplation of many of the Ancient Hermits, and is no
doubt of some in these days. As a certain spiritual Writer says of
himself, that being in the constant Exercise of Aspirations, using daily two
Recollections consisting of them: on a time he found himself invited to
produce them vocally: And thereupon he took in hand the saying of our Ladies
Office; choosing that, because he could say it perfectly vvithout-Booke. He
repeated it nine or ten times a day with a perfect attention of spirit. The
which mental attention or operation was in effect but Aspirations (taking
the word, as here we do, in a large sense.) And so for a fevv days, as
long as that inuitation and Enablement lasted, he used no other internal
Exercise, finding great benefit by this. But that inuitation ceasing, he found
himself again obliged to return to mere Mental Aspirations.

23. I will conclude this Point with setting down some of the great and
inestimable Benefits that accrue to souls by this sublime Exercise: As first
in regard of the interior senses and sensitive faculties, the Dominion that
the Superior soul has over them is now become very great; For in as much as
it is God that helps, moves and directs souls in their operations during
this Exercise of Aspirations; the Heart also being estranged from the love of
creatures and replenished with Divine Love; distractiue thoughts and Images of
creatures either do not press into the mind; or if they do, yet they pass
no farther then into the Imagination: Or if the Understanding do sometimes
busy it self with them, yet they do scarce, or not at all touch or affect
the Will, the which is not by such extrauagant Thoughts interrupted or
diuerted in her pursuit of Aspirations and blind Eleuations. Whereas in
immediate forced Acts greater force is to be used against such distractions,
which do not only busy the Understanding, but likewise, more or less,
withdraw the Will from God.

24. Secondly in regard of sensible Devotion, though the devil may have great
influence upon it in Meditation or even sometimes in immediate affections and
Acts; seeking thereby to seduce souls to Extrauagances and a Spiritual
gluttony: It is otherwise in the Exercise of Aspirations, which are so much
elevated above the Imagination and sensitive nature, that here he has no
advantage given him for such Deceits. And if during that sensible Devotion,
which in some souls during this exercise flovves from the spirit into
inferior nature, he should endeavor to iniect his baits, an humble and
perfectly mortified soul will easily turn his malice to her own good and
the Enemies confusion.

25. Thirdly in regard of the Understanding: vvheras it was before all be
painted with Images of Creatures: yea when it regarded God, it savv him by an
Image of its own creating: Now the soul looses all remembrance of it self
and of all created things: And all that she retains of God is a remembrance
that he cannot be seen nor comprehended. All Creatures therefore being removed,
and no particular distinct Image of God admitted, there remains in the soul
and mind as it were a Nothing and mere emptines: The which Nothing is more
vvorth then all Creatures: for it is all that we can know of God in this
life: This Nothing is the rich inheritance of Perfect souls, who perceive
clearly that God is nothing of all that may be comprehended by our senses or
Understanding. The state therefore of such souls, for as much as concerns
knowledge, is vvorthily called The Clowd of unknowing, and the Clowd of
forgetting, by the Author of that Sublime Treatise so called. And this is the
perfectest and most Angelical knowing that a soul is capable of in this life.
Now this perception of this Nothing does appear more clearly and comfortably
the longer that a soul remains under this Clowd and darkness, where Gods
dwelling is; for as the Psalmist says, this Darkness is immediately under his
feet. This knowledge of Nothing is by F. Benet Canfield called an Active
annihilation.

26. Fourthly in regard of the Will, it is in this exercise so wholy
possessed and enflamed with Divine love, the which does so intimely
prenetrate into the very center of it, that it is become like fiery, burning
steel, clean through shining with this fire. It is now a Will Deiforme, and
in a manner Deified, for it is so closely united and hidden in the Divine Will,
that God may be said to Will and do all things in and by her.

27. Fifthly in regard of the whole person: Till a soul be arrived unto this
Exercise, she never attaines to a perfect possession of all Virtues
universally. They are indeed all in an inferior degree and with much mixture
of natural, sensual ends produced by the former Exercises: And if some
special virtues seem to be in a high Degree, it is either because nature
disposes more to them; or because the practice of them may be more suitable to
some designs of nature. But as soon as by the Exercise of Aspirations Divine
Love is far more perfectly exercised, the very Root of all sin (self love) is
distroyed, and purity of Intention is practiced to God for himself only, and
only by his Instruction and motion. The Divine Love that the soul Exercised
before was immediately upon herself with relation to God, and not directly
and immediately to God himself: Or if so sometimes, yet it was with
reflections upon herself. But in Aspirations she exercises Love only to God
himself without Reflections: which cannot be exercised but by Souls
perfectly mortified, being the highest Mystic Contemplation possible to be
exercised in this life. For as Alphonsus Madriliensis says, A Soul is never
able to to produce a proper Act of love to God, till she have first got a
perfect hatred of herself, which is the supreme Degree of Mortification. The
which once attained, she is ripe for a Passive Union, and perhaps at the very
door of it.

28. The Author of the Clowd, and likewise Barbanson do with great reason
teach, that after a Soul is mounted to this Degree of exercising love
constantly by Aspirations, she is not in any difficulty, Aridity etc: to
descend to any Inferior Exercise: Herein differing from F. Benet Canfield, and
some others, who require some Exercise of the Passion in all Estates.

CHAP. III.
. 1. 2. Of the second sort of Unions: to wit, Passive.

. 3. 4. etc: Of several sorts of Passive Unions: and first of such as are
sensible; Exteriourly or Interiourly.

. 6. 7. etc: Of Rapts, and Ecstasies, etc.

. 9. 10. etc: Rules of Discerning true Ecstasies and Apparitions from false.

. 22. 23. etc: How a soul is to behave herself with Humility, and
disaffection in regard of these Extraordinary favors.

. 26. 27. etc: In what Cases the Judgment of a Prudent Directour is necessary.

. 36. 37. etc: In what Cases some souls may follow the^^ own Light.

. 39. 40. In what sense Ecstasies are supernatural.

1. HITHERTO of the Exercise of Perfect Active Union or Contemplation. I call
it Perfect, because though in every Degree of Prayer, there is a proportionable
degree of Union of the soul with God; ^et perfect Union is only in this of
Aspirations; but so as that it may increase in degrees, and grow more and more
immediate without all limits. But how much soever it increases, it will
never exceed that obscure light which Faith affords: which is the perfectest
light that we can have in this life. (For to see God as he is, is reserved
for the future life.) Now though even the most imperfect have this light of
Faith, yet in their inferior Contemplations they do for the most part make
use of and follovv their natural light, regarding such Images and
representations of God as they frame in their Imagination or by Discourse. But
in Perfect Contemplation this light of faith is the only light.

2. But besides these Active Unions, there are other Unions and Contemplations
which are Passive and Extraordinary, by which God reueiles himself unto the
soul by a supernatural species impressed in her: In which he is the only
Agent, and she the Patient: Not as if when a soul does Contemplate God she
were not in some sort Active: But because by no dispositions or preparations
that the soul can use, can she assuredly procure them: But when God is
pleas^d graciously to communicate them, the soul is taken out of her own
disposal, and does and must see and think only what God will have her, and
this no longer then his good pleasure is such.

3. Now such supernatural Graces are either 1. Sensible, or 2. Purely
intellectual. The former are the most imperfect and least efficacious to cause
a gracious good disposition in the soul that receives them.

4. Of sensible Unions the most imperfect, and least to be relied upon are 1.
Those which by God are communicated to the outward senses, as Apparitions
visible to the eyes; Words framed in the air by the operation of Angels;
Alterations made in the other senses as in the smell by a grateful Odor
presented thereto; in the Palate by a pleasent Taste caused therein etc. Of which
kind of favors diverse examples occur in spiritual Authors. To which may
be added the Gift of tears, Warmth about the Heart etc. And (which seems to
be the highest kind of sensible favors) a splendor seen in the eyes and
Countenances of Gods Saints, betokening an inward Purity: likewise Elevation
of the body; ability to walk on the water, or to pass through doors whilst
they are shut, and other such like, resembling the qualities of Glorified
Bodies. Now though the devil can counterfeit these; yet they are seldom
given by God, but he vvithall gives an assurance that they are from him.

5. A second sort of sensible Graces, more sublime then the former, are such as
are by God commucated to the Internal senses, especially the Imagination, in
fusing supernatural Images into it: by which God sometimes makes known his
will either immediately, or by the disposition of Angels: so as the persons
will perceive words imaginatiuely spoken, or think they see an Angel or
Saints as if such words had indeed been spoken, and those objects represented
really to the outvvard senses. For such is the nature of the Imagination that
it can after its manner exercise all the functions of the outvvard senses.

6. Of such supernatural Inactions of God upon the soul by means of the
internal Senses; the most notable effects are Rapts or Ecstasies, likewise
internal Visions, and Apparitions: the which go together sometimes, and
sometimes are separated.

7. Now a Rapture or Ecstasy is an Elevation of the soul caused by God, by
which the person is bereaved of the use of the outvvard senses: by reason that
the soul in her Internal Operatio^s cleaues wholy to supernatural things,
and the Imagination is enuironned with lights, visions etc. And all this is
done to the end that the person may internally know and see what is Gods
pleasure to reueile unto him, for the good either of himself or any other.

8. My purpose is not to treat nicely of these matters: (for which the Reader
is referd to Ioannes a Iesu-Maria a Discalced Carmelite, who treats of them
with great exactnes) I will content my self with insisting, 1. On the ways
of discerning true Visions, Raptures etc from false. 2. And affording
Instructions how a soul ought to behave herself about them.

9. Now for a preparation to the follovving Rules of discerning, I will lay
these Grounds. 1. That the Devil cannot immediately operate either on the
understanding or will, but only by imprinting new, or disposing the Images
already in the fancy; or by moving the sensitive Appetite. 2. By consequence if
the lights imprinted in the understanding by means of Rapts, Visions etc. do
direct to real good (as to the Love of God, Humili^y etc) and that the will
entertaines these good Affections, ^^a^ soul may prudently and rationally
ascribe the cause to God.

10. The Rules of discerning, delivered by both ancient and modern holy
Authors are these which follovv: The First. When the will is moved without
the ordinary precedent Action of the understanding or Imagination: and also in
the same instant a certain new light is communicated to the mind; a Soul may
be confident that it comes from the Divine Spirit.

11. The second Rule. Good observation is to be made whether the Persons be
Christianly disposed; not much svvayed by Curiosity or Pride; not addicted to
Melancholy etc: Whether by such Favors they be not invited to say or do some
thing contrary to Catholic Truth, Peace, Obedience, Honesty, Puri^y, Humility
etc: And accordingly Souls are to judge from what principles they flow.

12. The third Rule. Divine Spiritual Unions, Visions etc. are ordinarily of
short continuance.

13. The fourth Rule. Apparitions of good Spirits although in the beginning
they cause a trembling and amazement: yet in the end the soul receives courage
and comfort; finds herself illuminated, inflamed with Devotion and in great
Peace. Whereas when the Devil grovvs familiar with any, though he appear in
never so fearful and horrible shapes, the Persons are not affrighted: and he
leaves them as he found them.

14. The fifth Rule. It is ordinarily the mark of a good Spirit. 1. When he
effectually shows that his Power accompanies his Will: as when upon his
saying, Fear not, the Person presently becomes quiet. 2. When his words are
clear, intelligible and so delighfull, that the soul does diligently observe
and remember the pronunciation of every word and syllable. 3. When the Person
thinks himself obliged to attend to what is said. 4. When the soul conceiues
much more by those holy and Divine words then in themselves they signify. 5.
When there remains in the Soul an assurance that what is said shall certainly
be effected etc. All these are signs of a good Spirit, says S. Teresa.

15. The sixth Rule. The receiving of any extraordinary outvvard favors or
Gifts, as Roses, Rings, Jewels etc. is much to be suspected, unless such
things happen to souls of a long continued Sanctity: and that they be rather
miraculously reueyled after their Death, then diuulged during their life. The
like judgment is to be made of outvvard Characters imprinted on Bodies, as the
Name of JESUS, Marks of our Lords Wounds etc.

16. The seventh Rule. When Souls after the practice of long and severe
Austerities come to enjoy much Peace and contentment both external and
internal: especially if such Favors be overmuch in sense, and not greatly
relishing of the Spirit; or if they be never so little indecent etc: It is much
to be feared that the devil has a great influence upon such a change. And
therefore such Persons ought to persevere in fear and Penance, not trusting
upon their good works past, but humbly beseeching God to preserve them from
the Enemies Illusions.

17. The eighth Rule. Ecstasies that do not produce considerable proffit either
to the persons themselves or others, deserve to be suspected: and when any
marks of their approaching are perceived, the persons ought to divert their
minds some other way.

18. The ninth Rule. The appearance of objects how beautiful and Celestial
soever ought not suddenly to be vvell-com'd, nor affection to be placed upon
them; For the Devil has been permitted to take on him the shape even of our
Blessed Lord himself. And if in such Visitations the persons feel any impure
motions, or fall into indecent postures etc. whatsoever reluctance they make
against them, they ought to judge that they proceed from an ill Principle. Yet
if a soul being surprised with any seemingly glorious false apparition,
should either afford veneration, or unfitting Affection thereto, she ought not
to be much dejected for what is past, since the Error committed was only
material.

19. The tenth Rule. It is very suspicious to see a Soul that is very young in
a spiritual Course, or that is not of extraordinary Purity, to fall into Rapts
etc. For great Mortification with Prayer is requisite to make a soul ripe for
the Divine inaction.

20. The eleauenth Rule. It is no proof at all of the want of Grace and
Charity in Persons to be troubled with Diabolical Apparitions etc, if thereby
there be wrought in them no other ill effects besides Molestation and
Affliction. Yea in that case, it may reasonably be judged that they are
strongly assisted with Gods Holq Spirit, since they overcome so great
tentations of the Evil Spirit.

21. The twelfth and last Rule. It cannot proceed from a Good Spirit, when
Souls visited with Revelations etc, shall obstinatly believe them to be of
God, after they have been condemned by experienced Superiors and Directours:
Unless the persons be able to yield most conuincing Proofs thereof, and
moreover shall seriously profess, that God together with the secrets
reueyled, has imprinted in their Souls this assurance and belief also.
Certain it is that Obedience is a most secure Remedy against all possible
inconveniences, and can do no harm in no cases. This is that that S. Teresa
seriously enioynes, and most constantly practiced herself, and this in very
strange circumstances, when the Confessarius condemning her was both
unlearned and impertinent etc. But vvithall Spiritual Directours ought not to
be rash in their proceedings, nor to judge till after a long experience and
knowledge of the inward dispositions of the Persons, and a due vveighing of
the nature of the Revelations discovered to them: It is likewise requisite
that those that take upon them to judge of these things be themselves devout,
exercised in Prayer, and in good state toward God: to the end they may from
him receive Light to direct others.

22. In the next place as touching the manner how a Soul after the receiving
of such Supernatural favors, is to behave herself: The principal care that
she ought to have is, that she do not bear a deliberate and fixed love to
such things (which is due to God only:) And consequently that she do not
either expressly or implicitly pray to God to have such Visions, Revelations
etc. Or in case that God without her Prayers has sent them, that she do not
usually without necessity talk of such matters, or love to hear others talk
of them: for these are signs of an undue affection to them.

23. B. John de Cruce says, that when God does after an extraordinary manner
make known unto humble souls his will that they should take in hand some
great Employment, by means whereof they may likely gain a great Esteem of
Excellency, and probably will be in danger to conceive some extraordinary
vvorth to be in themselves for which they are so highly favored by God;
(which conceit the Devil will not fail to cherish and increase:) He does
ofentimes rather increase, then diminish the fear and repugnance that they had
formerly to such things, causing in them a desire and readiness much rather to
the undergoing of some vile or base Offices: Thus he dealt with Moses when
he sent him to Pharao, and thus with Jeremy etc. But it happens quite contrary
when the bidding is from the Devil, counterfeyting privily a Divine Mission:
for he with his Commissions causes a forvvardnes in souls to take upon them
Employments of Excellency, or otherwise grateful to Nature: as also a great
auersion from those that either suspect or would dissvvade them from such
undertakings.

24. A Soul therefore is by serious consideration to raise and increase in
herself an apprehension and auersion from such matters, saying with S. Peter,
Exi a me etc. Go from me, O Lord, for I am a sinful man. And by exercising
so proffitable a mortification she will secure herself from all perils, and
render herself very acceptable to God. Serious Instructions to a
disappropriation and mortifying our love to such things are to be found in
Scala Perfectionis, Angela de Fulginio; and particularly in the Book called
Interior Abnega^ion there is this passage: To God it belongs to give rare
and Excellent Gifts; and to the Soul it belongs to refuse them. It is
suitable to the Divine Goodness to approach unto a Soul: and the Souls duty is
in humility to draw back, as S. Peter did. It belongs to God to eleuate the
Soul: and her duty is to humble and abase herself. For as our Nature in every
thing and upon every occasion desires a proper Excellency and Sublimity, yea
even in things holy and appertaining to God so our Spirit illuminated by Grace
(which is Superior to our Nature) ought incessantly in all things and
occasions to seek to be deprived of all Excellency (except in Essential
virtues:) and to embrace all poverty and lownes even in Sacred things: that so
she be not less careful and resolute to overcome herself, then Nature is to
seek herself. Thus there must be a continual contestation between God and
the humble Soul etc. And especially those Souls that are most inclind and
forward to embrace these high and grateful things must necessarily make such
resistance, not yiedling till pure necessity forces them, and till God take
from them all power to withdraw themselves, and to refuse the Excellences of
that Grace whereunto he at the same time so continually and powerfully urges
and draws them. Instructions to the same purpose we find in Auilas Epistles.

25. This was the practice of the holy Virgin Coleta, who when God offered to
reueyle unto her diverse Secrets, ansvvered, Lord God, it suffiseth me only to
know thee, and the sins in which I have offended thee, and to obtain thy
pardon for them. But most notable in this regard is the Example of Suso, when
God commanded him to publish to all Estates in the world (the Pope, Bishops,
Abbots etc.) their vices and Enormities represented to him in the Vision of the
Nine Rocks. He out of that habitual fear and humility that was in him did so
resist the executing such a Charge, that till he was adjured and commanded in
the Name of the Holy Trinity, and and so forced to it even against his will,
he had never yielded. And then also he submitted himself with much bevvayling
his misery, expressing his fear of the danger of Pride, and therefore humbly
begging that his Name might be conceiled from the world; and lastly protesting
his Desire and love to be directed to nothing but only to God himself. His
resistance indeed was so obstinate, that God told him, that if he had not
known that it proceeded from true (but indiscreet) Humility, he would
presently have cast him into Hell for it.

26. Those therefore that are favored with extraordinary Graces, if they did
duly consider their state and danger, would find little ground to exalt
themselves, or to despise others that are in a more lovv, but vvithall far more
secure way.

27. Now for the preventing and avoiding the great danger of ill using such
Favors and Divine Graces, to the feeding of self love and Pride, Spiritual
Authors do, seriously enjoin such Persons so visited by God not to trust
their own Judgments, or to determine whether they come from God or not: and
much less to put in practice any thing of consequence upon such Revelations:
but to refer themselves to the Judgment and Advice of others.

28. And herein great care is to be had to choose pious and discreet Directours:
because too many there are that will too readily and suddenly resolve such
matters to come from none but God: and will thereupon desire such persons to
intercede for them, and to beg some particular Favors of the like nature
etc. Now upon such indiscreet behavior in those that should be Directours,
such Persons will begin to think that God loves to treat with them, and
will interpret the things declared unto them according to their own Gust and
Humors: And if things shall fall out otherwise then they imagined, they will
fall into Melancholic suspicions, and great danger of the Devils snares.

29. The best Course that a Confessarius in this case can take is, if there be
any rational Grounds of probability that such Visions etc. do not come from
God, to exhort and enjoin the Persons to avoid and despise them. Yea and if
after long and serious examination it should seem almost evident to him that
God is the Author of them: yet ought he so to behave himself both in words
and Actions, as to deter the soul from adhering to them with Affection:
rather inclining her to a suspicion and fear, or hovveuer to an indifferency
about them, with an aspect of love to God himself only, who is above all his
Gifts, and ought to be the only Object of our love. And thus if the
Confessarius behave himself, he may be sure that he will prevent all harm to
ensue, and he shall perform a Service very acceptable to God.

30. Certainly the danger is far less to be too difficult in beleiuing and
esteeming such things, then to be never so little too credulous and inclind to
admire them. For it were better that good ones should be often suspected, the^
that an ill one should be once believed. And therefore we do find that our
Blessed Lord appearing to S. Teresa did neither take it ill from her, nor from
her Directour, when by his order she did spitt at him and defye him so
appearing to her: but he only informed her how she should give conuincing
proofs that it was no Illusion.

31. B. John de Cruce gives very good Aduices touching this point: Exhorting
souls as the surest way, that in case they cannot meet with a prudent and
experienced Confessarius, they should not speak one word concerning such
Graces; but to pass them over and to make no account of them. And hovveuer by
no means, of their own heads, to proceed to the executing of any thing
signified after such an unusual manner.

32. And though it should happen that the Soul being so disposed as to make no
great estimation of such things (which will be a great security from danger
by them) shall therefore think it to no purpose to consult with a prudent
Directour about such trifles: Or if on the other side such Revelations seem
unto her so absolutely clear and unquestionable that there is no need at all
to ask any ones judgment about them: Yet says the same Author, it will be
necessary that she discover them to her Spiritual Master.

33. And the reasons are. 1. Because ordinarily such is Gods order and
disposition, to the end that by such an humble submission of herself a new
light and Grace may be communicated to her. 2. To the end that upon such an
occasion she may be put in mind to restrain her Affections from such things,
and be established in true Nakedness and Poverty of Spirit. For which End the
Confessarius ought not to insist upon the Excellency of such Favors: but
(passing over them slightly) to encourage the Soul rather to value and tend
to a perfect Active Union by Charity and pure Prayer. 3. That by such an
occasion offered, the soul may conquer that natural unwillingness which is in
some to discover what things pass within them. And with such souls the
Confessarius is to deal mildly, not affrighting or scandalizing them, nor
disheartning them from dealing freely: That by this means such Visions,
Ecstasies etc. may produce in them that effect which probably God intended,
namely by them to call Souls to a nearer and more perfect Active Union by
Love; Whereof one perfect act framed by the Will is of more vvorth, and more
grateful to God, then all the Visions and Revelations of all things that pass
in Heaven and Earth can be. And certain it is, that many souls which are
never visited with any such Favors, are yet far more advanced in Spirit, and
more near to God, then are some others who frequently enjoy such
extraordinary Favors.

34. Whatsoever it be that is suggested in such a Revelation, whether it
concern Knowledge or Practice, though in it self it be of never so small
moment, yet without Advice a soul ought neither to assent to it, nor execute
it: For whatsoever the thing it self be, yet considering the cause and means
by which it comes (which is supposed to be supernatural;) it becomes of
great importance. Yea the mere conversation and familiarity with an
intellectual Spirit is a matter of great consequence: And as being with a
good Spirit, it is likely to be occasion of much Good: So being with a bad
Spirit (as it may well be supposed to be till the contrary be evident) it
will probably cause very much harm.

35. A soul being to consult with others about such matters, ought to take
heed that she fall not into impertinences, but as Aluarez de Paz advises, let
her humbly, briefly and clearly manifest so much of these extraordinary matters
to her Directour, as may be sufficient to enable him to judge: And if he do
not much value them, let her simply hold on her course, and securely proceed
in her ordinary exercises of Devotion.

36. If some eminently Perfect Souls have followed their own light in
judging of these things and practicing accordingly, without consulting others.
This ought not to prejudice the foregoing Aduices; which are indeed for Souls
less experienced and Perfect, and such as in S. Paul's Phrase, have not their
senses exercised in the discerning of Good and Evil (in matters of this
nature.)

37. In such cases likewise all souls are not so absolutely obliged to resign
their judgments and wills to others, as utterly to neglect their own proper
Call received from God. For to a vvell-minded soul that walks and deals
simply and plainly with God; and labors diligently to keep her Affections
free from all created things, aspiring to an indifference, whether she have or
wants them: yea out of humility and a pious fear rather desires to want such
extraordinary visitations; Such a Soul doubtless will be so guided and
illuminated by Gods holy Spirit, as she will perfectly know what to do and
forbear, and whether, when, and of whom to ask Counsel. Let therefore such
a soul carefully observe her Internal Direction. And this is the Advice of B.
John de Cruce.

38. From these precedent Aduices it may appear how differently a soul ought
to behave herself in this case of Extraordinary Calls or Inspirations, from
that to which (as has been said in the first Treatise) we are obliged in
those Inspirations, which, though indeed supernatural, yet are Ordinary. For
in Ordinary ones we are not at all to trouble others with Consultations, or
to seek advice: but presently to put in execution what shall be inspired, or
internally suggested unto us: Whereas in these extraordinary cases we must do
the quite contrary.

39. Thus far concerning those Passive Unions and Contemplations which God
sometimes communicates to Souls after a sensible manner, especially in
Ecstasies (and Revelations,) in which there is an alienation and suspension of
the use of the outvvard Senses. The which I have styled Supernatural Graces
of God: Not as if the like might not be produced by a natural way: for
History informs us of some that by a vvonderfull intention of mind upon
Philosophical verities have drawn the operations of the Spirit so much
inward, that the exercise of the outvvard senses have been suspended, and an
Ecstasy ensued: And therefore no doubt the like may even naturally happen in the
contemplating of Divine Verities. In which case the Imagination being full of
divine and Spiritual Images only, no vvonder if during such a Suspension there
be represented internal Discoursings with God and Angels etc, which to the
persons may seem to have been real. Hovveuer even in these Circumstances an
Ecstasy so follovving according to the Exigence and disposition of natural
causes, may properly be termed Supernatural, since the preceding Contemplation
which caused it, did proceed from a more then ordinary Supernatural Grace:
and the Imaginations occurring during such an Ecstasy are no doubt ordered by an
especial and Supernatural Providence of God.

40. But besides these, there are (no doubt) many Ecstasies and Revelations
purely Supernatural, in which God either immediately or by the disposition of
Angels does communicate such divine Lights, Graces etc, as could not possibly
flow from any assemblance of Natuturall Causes: Such were many of those
communicated to S. Teresa, B. John de Cruce etc. Now which way soever, of
these two, such Graces do proceed, the foresaid Aduices ought to have place.

CHAP. IV.
. 1. 2. etc. Of the second and more Perfect sort of Passive Unions, to wit,
such as are purely Intellectual.

. 5. 6. etc. How in these Unions God is Contemplated In CALIGINE etc.

. 8. 9. etc. The Excellency and wonderful Benefits flowing from these
Intellectual Vnion^ (though very short.) As first, in regard of the
Understanding.

. 14. Secondly in regard of the Will.

. 15. 16. Thirdly in regard of the Internal senses etc.

. 17. Unexperienced persons cannot and ought not to be Judges in these things.

1. THE Other beforementioned Passive Union, which I called Intellectual, is
far more noble and sublime: In which God or some Divine Mystery is immediately
presented or discovered to the Understanding, without any representations,
figures or discoursings in the Imagination. In the former Sensible Unions the
Contemplations pass from the Outward senses to the Inward, and thence to the
Understanding: But this begins in the Understanding, and only by reflection
returns to the Imagination, there making use of some Species for an
apprehension (after a humane manner) of the Object Intellectually discovered to
the Soul.

2. The former sensible Vnion^, especially such as pal^e in the Internal
Senses with alienation from the exercise of the Outvvard, do seldom befall
very perfect Souls, and less to Men then to Women. Because such an Alienation
from sense proceeds partly from the Infirmity of the Soul and its incapacity
to attend to Divine Inaction; (perhaps not from a necessary Exigence of the
Inaction it self:) and partly from a Customary Exercise of Prayer by strong
and tender Affections in Sensitive Nature, the which do more push forvvard
the Soul to attend earnestly to Divine Objects: from whence is caused a
suspension of the Outvvard senses.

3. There are some Degrees of this Intellectual Passive Union to which a
Soul by leading a pure, Spiritual Life may dispose herself, making herself
worthy and capable of the said Inactions, the behauing herself as an humble
Patient, and not an Agent in the business.

4. By virtue of these Inactions many souls have received Internal Lights and
Resolutions to many difficulties concerning themselves or others: likewise
many Suggestions strong and clear concerning extraordinary matters to be said
or done: And all this without any External or Imaginatiue Vision, by certain
secret whispers of the Divine Spirit, silently but a^suredly enlightening the
mind concerning certain Truths or Purposes to be believed or performed.
Frequent Examples whereof we have in the Lives of B. Angela de Pulginio, S.
Teresa.

5. Of these Intellectual Passive Unions the Supremest and most noble that may
be had in this life is that whereby God is Contemplated without any
perceptible Images, by a certain Intellectual supernatural Light darted into
the Soul; In which regard it draws much toward an Angelical Contemplation:
for herein though God be not seen as he is; yet he is clearly seen that he
is, and that he is incomprehensible.

6. Mystic Authors call this rather a Divine passive Union then
Contemplation: An Union it is far more strait and immediate then any of the
former: An Union exercised more by the Will then the Understanding, although
the effect thereof be to refund great Light into the Understanding:
notvvithstanding which light, yet the Understandings Contemplation is said to
be in caligine in which darkness God is more perfectly seen, because there is
nothing seen that is not God. Yea according to the Doctrine of Mysticks, this
Union passes above both the Understanding and Will, namely in that supreme
portion of the Spirit, which is visible to God alone, and in which he alone
can inhabit: a portion so pure, noble and Divine, that it neither has nor can
have any Name proper to it, though Mysticks endeavor to express it by diverse,
calling it the Summity of the Mind; the fund and Center of the Spirit; the
Essence of the soul, its Virginal Portion etc.

7. Such Passive Unions are rather a Reward and free Grace, bestovved by God on
souls that have been extraordinarily faithful and diligent in Mortification
and internal exercises; then an End to be intended by any: For even the most
pure and perfect souls cannot with all their industries procure it at
pleasure.

8. This most pure Contemplation does so exceed all voluntary operations of
the souls faculties, that it usually causes an alienation and suspension of
all the senses, as well external as internal. Yet the Continuance of it is
but very short, as S. Bernard (who no doubt could speak from his own
experience) observes: For it seldom lasts above a quarter of an hour.

9. But the Benefits, fruits and Graces which so short a Visitation causes in
the soul are both wonderfully excellent and very lasting and these both in
regard 1. Of the Understanding. 2. Of the Will: and 3. The sensitive Faculties
likewise.

10. First in regard of the Understanding, there is thereby a Divine Light
communicated: not revealing or discovering any new Verities, but affording a
most firm, clear assurance and experimental perception of those Verities of
Catholic Religion which are the Objects of our Faith: the which assurance
the soul perceiues to be Divinely Communicated to her.

11. O happy Evidence of our Catholic Belief! No thanks to them that believe
after such sight, which is more evident then any thing we see with our
corporal Eyes. Surely the first knowledge and assurance that the Primitive
Christians had of the Mysteries of our Religion came by such Contemplations
communicated to the Apostles etc. (as S. Paul vvitnesses of himself for one:)
Who savv and even felt the truth of what they preached, and delivered by
Tradition to others.

12. Such Contemplations as this made S. Teresa so confident in the Points of
her Belief, that it seemed to her that she was able to dispute with, and
confound all the Heretics in the world. But yet therein she might perhaps be
deceived, if that God did not further enable her then by such Contemplations
only. For though they served to establish most firmly her own Belief, yet
would they not suffice to enable her to dispute with and convince others:
Because neither could she intelligibly enough express what she had seen: And
if she could, yet would not all believe her; nor were they rationally obliged
to do so. And therefore doubtless she would never have undertaken of her own
accord without a special Motion and inuitation from God to have entered into
any such Disputes. Indeed if God had urged her thereto, then doubtless he would
have given her an especial assistance and force.

13. A soul that is newly avvakened, as it were, from such a Contemplation
or Union, coming to read the holy Scriptures or any Spiritual Book, will
pierce far more deeply into the Verities contained in them and will see
clearer Lights, and feel far more perfect Tastes of the Divine Truths therein,
then ever before: So that all the knowledge that she formerly had, will seem
unto her mere darkness, and a knowledge of the outward letter only: vvheras
now she penetrates into the internal Spirit of the vvritings.

14. In the next place, the change that is made by this Supernatural Union,
with regard to the Will and Affections, is equally admirable: In so much as
many years spent in mortification and other Internal Exercises will not so
purify the soul, as a fevv minutes passed in such a Divine Inaction. Here it
is indeed that a soul perfectly feels her own nothing, and Gods totality,
and thereby is strangely advanced in Humility and the Divine Love. For being so
immediately united to God, so illustrated with his heavenly light, and inflamed
with his love, all Creatures (and herself above all) are become as nothing,
yea perfectly odious to her. Besides there are many secret defects in a soul
so subtle and Intime, that they can neither he cured, nor so much as
discovered but by a Passive Union. In so much as hereby the soul is advanced
to Perfection in a manner and Degree not to be imagined, far more efficaciously
then by all the former actions of her life putt together: so that the
follovving Aspirations and Eleuations of the spirit become far more pure and
efficacious then before. And indeed were it not for such good Fruits and
effects upon the Will, such Passive Unions would be little proffitable unto
the soul. For our merit consists in our own free Acts produced in virtue of
Divine Grace assisting us, and not in the operations simply vvherin God is only
Agent, and we Patients.

15. In the third place these supernatural Unions are of that virtue that they
do wholy subdue the Imagination and other Internal senses to the Superior
Soul: so that they cannot as they list wander to and fro, but are reduced to
such a happy servitude to the spirit, that without any stresse or violence
they are brought to attend it in all its employments and occasions. Or if the
Imagination do sometimes wander, yet it never fastens it self with delight
on any external perishing objects, by reason that self-love is in a sort
extinguished in the soul, so that it may easily be reduced: or howsoever by
its vvandrings it does not hinder or interrupt the operations of the Spirit.

16. Moreover it is observed by Mysticks, that souls which formerly during
the precedent less perfect Exercises were of quite different, even contrary
dispositions and natural complexions, after such supernatural Unions do come
to a very near resemblance to one an other: (As we see that several ways
or paths which from far distant places lead to a City, the nearer they
approach to the City, the nearer also do they come to one an other, and at
last fall into, and make one common high way.) And the reason hereof is,
because nature and its particular affections and inclinations are now so
worn and even burnt out by the fire of Divine Love and Grace, that it is the
Spirit of God that is the only principle of all their Actions: the which
therefore must needs be uniform and like to one another.

17. It will be no vvonder if these things here spoken of a supernatural
Passive Union, shall seem incredible, or perhaps to be but dreams of
Extrauagant or Melancholicke Spirits, not only to those that are strangers from
the Catholic Faith, but those Catholics also that are vnexperie^ced in
Internal vvayes. Yet if they would consider that all this has been delivered
by the testimony of most devout, humble and spiritually prudent Persons, some
of them very learned also, who profess to write nothing but what themselves
have had experience of, and this by an Internal command of Gods Spirit, and
for the edification of others; they will perhaps judge more warily of these
things. And vvithall considering that out of the Catholic Church no such
Divine Graces and Communications were ever heard of: they will howeuer reap
this benefit by them, if not to dispose themselves the best they can for the
enjoying them: at least they will abhor all novelties in doctrines, and
continue unshaken and Obedient Children to the Church.

CHAP. V.
. 1. 2. 3. Of the great Desolation usually following an Intellectual Passive
Union.

. 4. 5. etc. A description of the Nature and woeful bitterness of this
Desolation.

. 8. How a Devout soul does, or ought to behave herself therein.

. 9. The great Benefits and fruits proceeding from this Desertion well
undergone.

1. A Soul having once experienced such extraordinary Divine Favors, will be
apt to say with the Psalmist, (Non mouebor in aeternum) I shall never be
moved, thou Lord of thy Goodness have made my Hill so strong. But if she
think so, she will find herself strangely deceived. For as the whole course
of a spiritual life consists of perpetual changes, of Eleuations and
depressions; and an extraordinary consolation is usually attended by succeeding
anguish and Desertion: So above all other times, this so supereminent and so
comfortable a Divine Visitation is commonly follovved by a most terrible
unexpected Desolation: A Desolation so unsupportable to souls unprovided or
unaware of it, that many not enabled, or not well instructed how to behave
themselves in it, have lost all heart to prosecute Internal vvayes: and so
bereauing themselves of the benefit of all their former exercises, and Divine
Passive Inactions, have returned to a Common extrouerted life.

2. The which truly is a misery so great and so deplorable, that to prevent
the like in others, I conceive requisite to give warning of it: and by a breife
description of the nature and manner of such a Desolation, together with the
good ends for which God permits, yea in a sort conducts souls into it, to
encourage them to bear themselves in it with Patience, Resignation, and
tranquillity of mind. I shall be breife in this Point, remitting the Readers
for a farther Explication of it to Barbancon, as likewise to that excellent
Treatise called Interior Abnegation.

3. From the foresaid sublime familiarities therefore and communications between
God and his chosen souls, he conducts them usually (especially after the first
Passive Union) to another far different state of pure suffrance; But this is
not a happy suffering (as formerly) from God, but a woeful suffering from the
soul herself. For God for some time retiring himself from her, permits her
to feel her natural infirmity. And this he does by degrees, least if the
extremity and bitterness of this state did at once seize upon her, she should be
utterly oppressed by the Tentation. Therefore when by many inferior Trialls of
her Patience and Resignation he sees her strong and courageously resolved to
follovv him vvhithersoeuer he shall lead her, then he puts her to this last
and of all other greatest Trial.

4. For first he not only vvithdravves all comfortable obseruable infusions of
Light and Grace, but also depriues her of a power to Exercise any perceptible
operations of her Superior Spirit, and of all comfortable reflections upon his
love, plunging her into the depth of her Inferior Powers. Here consequently
her former calmenes of Passions is quite lost, neither can she interouert
herself: sinful motions and suggestions do violently assault her, and she
finds as great difficulty (if not greater) to surmount them, then at the
beginning of a spiritual Course. The feeling of all this is intolerable to
her: and thereupon she begins to suspect that by some great vnknovvn sin she has
procured all this: or hovveuer that her resistance is now so feeble and
inefficacious, that she deserves that God should quite cast hereof. She finds
the corrupt inclinations of her nature so strong in her, that she thinks she is
nothing but Nature: the rebelliousnes whereof, and its rage against God is
inexpressible. She is now as full of Images of Vanities as ever she had been
formerly: and it seems to her that she has far less power to expel them,
then when she lived in the world. If she would eleuate her Spirit, she sees
nothing but Clovvds and darkness: She seeks God and cannot find the least
marks or footsteps of his Presence. Something there is that hinders her from
executing the sinful suggestions within her; but what that is, she knovves
not: for to her thinking she has no Spirit at all: And indeed she is now in a
Region of all other most distant from Spirit and spiritual operations, I mean
such as are perceptible. Her Prayers and recollections are most greiuous unto
her because infinitely difficult, by reason that sense and nature (which most
abhorrs them) is now almost only Active and operative in her. And the
Recollections which she endeauours to make, are not only insipide, but, as it
seems to her, utterly inefficacious: so that she often suspects that it were
better perhaps if she were quite extrouerted. Yet for all that she dares not
altogether quitt her endeauours to practice Recollections: but yet she knovvs
not why.

5. Now if all these disorders continued only for some short time, she might
without extreme difficulty practice Patience, as she did in her former
Aridities and desolations. But alas, this most afflicting Martyrdom oftentimes
continues many months, yea in some persons several years; (not alvvaies in
extremity, but with some intercisions:) so that the soul comes in a manner to
loose all Patience. She often complains in her Prayers to God for deserting
her that would feign not desert him: yet when she makes such Prayers, to her
seeming her Spirit will not join: If she had nothing to do but merely to
suffer, it were not so much: But she knovves it is her duty to work, and to
raise herself up by Prayer: and this she cannot do. She stands in need now
of as gross operations to cause an Introuersion, as ever: and yet those gross
operations have not so good an effect, as in her former imperfect state.

6. Moreover the Tentations which she now suffers, are both so violent, and
her resistance so feeble: They are vvithall so unexpected, so secret and
subtle, that notvvithstanding any information that she formerly had by Reading
or otherways, touching such a condition of suffering to be expected: yet when
it comes, she will scarce be persuaded that this can be possibly a way to
Perfection, or conducing to her good. All her former light and instructions
will scarce at all diminish her resentment of her deplorable condition. She
looses nothing of her former Light (for souls arrived to this state are not to
seek, or to learn how and in what manner they are to exercise themselves
interiourly: they study no more for that, then one would do how he may see
with his eyes, or hear with his ears, having the Perfect use of his
senses:) But when she is to practice according to this light, she has no
satisfaction at all. If she have any difficulties or obscurities, it is how
she is to comport herself in external matters: and even this obscurity is but
very small. But hovveuer she thinks that all the light she has serves to little
purpose: finding that notvvithstanding it she works as if she had no light at
all. In a word, she now sees her own natural misery so perfectly (yea and
can see nothing but it) that she cannot see how God can comfort her, if he
would.

7. All this shows that notvvithstanding all her precedent Exercises, yea
that during the foregoing Divine Inactions, yet many dreggs of corrupt nature
did remain in her: they were only hid, but not extinguished. This therefore
was the only forcible Expedient left to destroy in a manner all the sinful
inclinations of nature in her. Indeed to natural reason this seems a strange
and most improper Remedy, to destroy nature by suspending the Influences and
operations of Grace, and by suffering nature to break forth violently without
any control and restraint, all sensible light in the understanding, and
fervor in the will being in a manner extinguished. Yet out of this darkness
God produces Light, and strength from this Infirmity.

8. For the truth is, that in this case of Desolation the soul does by her
Free Will, or rather in the center of the Spirit beyond all her faculties,
remain in a constant Union and adhesion to God: although no such Union do
appear unto her, yea though it seems to her that she is not only estranged,
but even auerted from God: And by virtue of that most secret but firm
adhesion, she makes election of God as her only Good: The which may to any but
herself sufficiently appear by her carriage during that State. For she breaks
not out into any murmurings: she seeks not to comfort herself by admitting
any inordinate External solaces* not does any thing deliberately, by which to
rid herself from such an afflicting Estate, sooner or otherwise then God
would have her to do. She practices Tranquillity of mind in the midst of a
tempest of passions in sensitive nature: She exercises Resignation, without the
least contentment to herself therein: she learnes Patience in the midst of
impatie^ce, and Resignatio^ in the midst of irresignatio^. In a word, she
yields herself as a prey unto Almighty God, to be cast into this most sharp
Purgatory of Love. The which is an immediate Dispoition to an established
State of Perfection.

9. More particularly, the Fruits and Benefits flowing from this most sad
estate (supported with Patience and Tranquillity of spirit) are vvonderfull.
1. For first hereby the devout soul obtaines a new Light to penetrate into
the Mystery of our Lords desertion in the Garden and on the Cross: and from
this light a most enflamed love to him: Now she ceases to wander why he
should deprecate a cupp so mortally bitter as this: and that it should work
such strange effects on him; or that he should cry out, Eli, Eli,
lammasabacthani: and by this Desertion of his (which lasted till the very last
moment of his life) she hopes to have an end put to hers. 2. Now she learnes by
experience to make a Division between the supreme Portion of the Spirit, and
inferior Nature: yea between the Summity of the Spirit and the faculties of
the same. For that Portion of her by which she cleaues to God, seems to be an
other third person distinct from her self that suffers, complains and
desires. For she chooses God, and at the same time fears that her Will chooses
and consents to sin: she is mightily supported by God, and yet she thinks him
utterly estranged and separated from her. Thus at last she perceiues that she
can operate without any perceptible use of her Faculties. 3. Hereby she
learnes a perfect disappropriation and Transcendence even of the highest Gifts
and Graces of God: and a contentation to be deprived of the greatest Blessings
that God has to bestovv on her (except only Himself.) 4. The sight of the
inexpressible weakness and perverseness of nature left to it self without
any sensible Influences of Grace upon the inferior faculties, produces in her
a most profound Humility and Hatred of herself. 5. Lastly by this most sharp
Purgatory of Love she enters into a state of most Perfect Confidence in God, of
Tranquillity of mind, and Security of Gods unchangeable Love to her, not to be
disturbed by any possible future Affliction. For what has a soul left to
fear, that can with a peaceable mind support, yea and make her benefit of the
Absence of God himself?

CHAP. VI.
. 1. 2. 3. Of the End of all the precedent Exercises, and of all the changes in
a Spiritual Life, to wit, a Stable State of Perfection and Prayer.

. 4. 5. Wherein that State consists: the testimony of Suso.

. 6. 7. The wonderful Purity and sublimity of the souls operations in this
State: out of Barbanson etc.

. 9. 10. Of the UNION OF NOTHING WITH NOTHING etc.

. 11. The sublimity of Angelical love in perfect Souls.

. 12. A conclusion of the whole Book.

1. IT remains only for a conclusion of the whole Book, that something be
said of the End of all these Exercises of Mortification and Prayer, in which
there is so great variety of Degrees and changes.

2. And surely that End must needs be supereminently excellent, for the
attaining whereof such incredible labor (both interior and exterior) must
be undertaken, and vvhereto such vvonderfull Divine Graces and Visits are only
isntrumental Dispositions. Suso writing from his own Experience concerning
the foresaid Passive Union by which a soul has a distinct View of of God
her Original, says, That though the said Contemplation continued but as it
were a moment, it so replenished his Heart with joy, that he vvondred it did
not cleave asunder. On the other side upon the subsequent most contrary
Visitation by a spiritual Desertion, the Heart becomes so replenished with
bitterness and Anguish, as if all Gilead had not Balm enough to assuage it.

3. And for what End all this? Surely not that a man should rest finally in
the Joy conceived by such a fruition: nor merely to torture the soul by such a
bitter Desolation. Our supreme Happiness is not Receiving but Loving. All these
favors therefore, and all these sufferings do end in this, namely the
accomplishing of this Love in our souls. So that all our Perfection consists
in a state of Love, and an entire Conformity with the Divine Will.

4. There are therefore in a Spiritual Life no strange Novelties or wonders
pretended to Divine Love is all. It begins with Love and Resignation: and there
it ends likewise. All the Difference is in the Degrees and luster of it. Love
even in its most imperfect State is most divinely Beautiful: the which Beauty
is wonderfully increased by Exercise. But when by such fiery Trials and
Purifications, as also by so near approaches as are made to the Fountain of
Beauty and Light in Passive Unions, this love is exalted to its Perfection;
How new, how admirable and incomprehensible to us imperfect souls, is the
manner of the Exercising of it? we must content our selves to hear those
speak of it that have had some experience in it: And if what they say be
incomprehensible to us, we ought not to vvonder at it.

5. That which the forementioned Suso (in his Ninth Rock) writes of the
nature of this Love in gross, is not so abstruse. O how small (says he) is
the number of those Perfect souls! And yet as few as they are, God sets them
as Pillars to support his Chruch; So that if it were not for them, it would be
in danger to be dissipated. The Prayer of one such soul is of more efficacy
then of all Christians besides. They approach very near to God their
Original: and yet such is the vile esteem that they have of themselves, they
themselves are not assured of this. Yet by fits a certain Clarity or Glimpse
of their Prime Principle is Communicated to them, by which they easily infer
that there is some other thing within them from whence those splendours do
issue. But they are so purely, simply and nakedly resigned to God in Catholic
belief, that whenever they receive any joyful consolation from him, they
are more apprehensiue, then when they find themselves deprived of it. For their
only desire is simply to imitate the Example of our Lord Jesus in simple Faith.
They adhere so purely and simply to the Catholic Faith, that they neither
desire nor endeavor to know any thing else. There is in them so profound an
Humility, that they esteem themselves unworthy of any of those secret and
Comforting Graces of God: and therefore dare not ask them. They desire no other
thing but this, that God may be perfectly Glorified. They are so absolutely
resigned to the Divine will, that whatsoever befalls them and all other
Creatures, is most acceptable to them. Therefore if God give them any thing,
they are contented with it: If he deprive them of it, they are as well pleased.
Thus they Challenge nothing: they appropriate nothing. Yet if it were left to
them, they would choose rather to avoid pleasing, then bitter things. For the
Cross is their sovereign delight. They fear neither Life nor Death,
Purgatory nor Hell, nor all the Devils in it. For all servile fear is utterly
extinguished in them. And the only Fear remaining is this, that they do not
as yet imitate the Example of our Lord, as they ought and desire. They are so
humble that they despise themselves, and all the works that ever they
performed: Yea they abase themselves below all Creatures; not daring to compare
themselves with any: They love all men alike in God: and every one that loves
God they love him likewise: They are totally dead to the world and it to them:
And all the intellectual Exercises and operations which formerly they pursued
with propriety, are altogether dead in them. They do neither by intention nor
love seek themselves, nor any proper Honor nor proffit in time or Eternity:
They have utterly lost themselves and all creatures both for time and eternity;
And they live in a certain learned Ignorance, not desiring to know any thing.
They resent no Tentations nor Afflictions: It is their Joy to follow our Lord
bearing his Cross. To the last gasp they desire to walk in no other way but
this. And although they be unknown unto the world, yet the world is well known
unto them. These are truly Men indeed: True Adorers of God, that Adore him in
Spirit and Truth. Thus Suso.

6. But as for the Internal Actuations in the souls of the Perfect, they are
so inexplicably subtle and pure, that Experience it self does not
sufficiently enable them to give an intelligible account of them. What soul
can imagine how divinely Spiritual and Angelical must needs have been the
Internal Exercises of Divine Love in S. Romualdus, after almost a hundred
years spent in solitude; during all which time they continually grew more and
more pure and Divine?

7. In the Active Unions which souls during a less Perfect state have with
God, God is in them as an Object distinct from them, and so Contemplated by
them. But in the state of Perfection he is not only the Object and End, but the
only perceiueable Principle also of all their Operations. Yea, says Barbanson
(cap. 12.) He is the Fund, the entire state, the stable Foundation of the
soul: by virtue of which the Being, Life, and Respiration of the Spirit is
become as much exalted, as the operations and Contemplations thereof. For this
union is not now only a Gift and operation of God; that is of a short
continuance: Nor only simple Actual Infusions, by which the soul may at some
times be actually informed, and no more: But the very Foundation, State and
Disposition of the Soul is Changed, Reuersed, and reformed, by Divine Grace:
The which being a participation of the Divine Being, and consequently making us
partakers of the Divine Nature, confers on us a stable and permanent state in
regard of our Interior, to live according to the Divine and supernatural
Life. Conformable whereto are the consequents and effects of it, to wit, Light,
Knowledge, Experience and Inclination to Divine things. Yea (says the same
Author in another place.) although the Divine, Actual and Special touches be
not a^ways really present, so as by means of their prevention to produce
actual Operations: the soul notwithstanding can maintain it self, yea and
perceive it self to persist in a state of Life according to the Spirit of God:
a Life of Peace, serenity and Repose: in which the Spirit is continually
attentive to what God will vouchsafe to speak in her.

8. By reason of this Habitation and absolute Dominion of the Holy Spirit in
the souls of the Perfect (who have wholy neglected, forgotten and lost
themselves, to the End that God alone may live in them, whom they Contemplate
in the absolute Obscurity of Faith) hence it is that some Mysticke writers do
call this Perfect Union, THE UNION OF NOTHING WITH NOTHING: That is, the Union
of the soul, which is no where corporally; that has no Images nor
Affections to Creatures in her; yea that has lost the free disposal of her
own faculties, actuating by a portion of the Spirit above all the faculties,
and according to the Actual Touches of the Divine Spirit; and apprehending God
with an exclusion of all conceptions and apprehensions: Thus it is that the
soul being no where corporally or sensibly, is every where spiritually and
immediately united to God this Infinite Nothing.

9. The soul now is so elevated in Spirit that she seems to be all Spirit,
and as it were separated from the body. Here she comes to a feeling indeed of
her not-being, and by consequence of the not-being of Creatures. The which is
indeed a real Truth: Not as if the soul or other Creatures either did cease
according to their natural Being: or as if a natural Being were indeed no
real Being (as Father Benet Canfield does seem to determine:) but because all
sinful adhesion by affection to Creatures being annihilated, then they remain
(as to the soul) only in that true Being which they have in God, by dependence
on him and relation to him: so that He is all in all. Whereas whilst we
sinfully adhere unto them, by staying in them with Love, we carry our selves
toward them as if we thought them to have a Being or subsistence of and in
themselves, and not of God only; and that they might be loved for themselves,
without reference to God: which is the fundamental Error and root of all
sin.

10. All sensible operations formerly exercised, yea all express and
deliberate Intellectual Operations bring the soul some whither, and to some
determinate thing: But in this Perfect state the souls desire is to be
nowhere: and she seeks nothing that either sense or understanding can fix
upon. Such souls can taste and comprehend what S. Denis meant in his
Instructions to Timothy, (Tu autem relinque sensus etc.) But thou, o Timothy,
relinquish the senses and sensible Exercises. Yea abandon all Intellectual
Operations, and with a courageous force of mind repress all these things: and
according to thy utmost possibility raise thy self in ignorance and renouncing
of all knowledge, to an Union with God above all substance (or Being) and
knowledge.

11. But these are Secrets of Divine Love, the which except by Experience they
be tasted, can in no sort be comprehended. Blessed are those souls that thus
loose themselves, that they may find themselves. This loss is so infinitely
gainful, that it is cheapely bought with all the Anguishes of Mortification,
all the Trauells of Meditation, and all the Aridities, obscurities and
desolations attending the Prayer of the will. This loss is the Design of all
these Exercises and Labors: This is the fruit of all Divine Inactions. We
mortify our Passions, to the End we may loose them. We Exercise Discoursiue
Prayer by sensible Images, to the End we may loose all use of Images and
Discourse. And we actuate immediately by Operations of the will, to the End
we may arrive to a state of stability in Prayer above all direct Exercises of
any of the souls Faculties: A state wherein the soul being often brought to
the utmost of her workings, is forced to cease all vvorking, to the end that
God may operate in her. So that till a Soul be reduced to a Perfect
denudations of Spirit, and a deprivation of all things, God does not enjoy a
secure and perfect possession of it.

12. And thus by Gods assistance we have passed through the several degrees
of Prayer: according to which especially the stations and degrees of an
internal Life are to be measured. We have endeavored (it is to be hoped not
altogether vnproffitably) with all simplicity and perspicuity to declare the
Order and cbanges of them. If God by the means of our Prayers give us the
Grace and Courage to proceed de virtute in virtutem according to these steps
and these Directions, we shall without doubt, sooner or later, arrive unto
the top of the Mountain where God is seen: A Mountain, to us that stand
below, enuironned with Clovvds and darkness: But to them who have their
dwelling there, it is Peace and serenity and Light. It is an Intellectual
Heaven, where there is no Sun nor Moon, But God and the Lamb are the Light
of it.

The Blessed Spirit of Prayer rest upon us all.

AMEN. AMEN.

FINIS.
AN ADVERTISEMENT TO THE READER.
DEAR CHRISTIAN READER,
There was intended (and accordingly promises were made in two or three
passages of the precedent Treatises) that hereto should be adjoined an Appendix
consisting of a fevv Chapters of several Subjects, as 1. A breife Description
of the Nature, Faculties, and Operations of an Intellectual Soul: (the
knowledge of which may be conceived very expedient for the unlearned, to
enable them the better to comprehend many passages in this Book, both touching
Tentations and Prayer etc.) 2. A Discourse to prove that it is no prejudice or
disparagement to Divine Charity, to love God for a reward, so that such a
Reward be the blessed enjoying of himself, and not any inferior Ends,
pleasing to Sense etc. 3. A Protestation (which in one word is here made)
against the least intention of reflecting with Censure or disparagement upon
the vvayes or doings of others, (whether Directours, or Disciples) in the
matter of Prayer, or any other good practices taught or used by them, as
considered in themselves: And much more against all thought of decrying any
Ceremonious or Solemn Obseruances practiced in or by any Communities etc. The
Venerable Author of these Instructions being of a Spirit too full of Charity
and Spiritual Prudence, and too auerse from so mean an Ambition as to seek
the procuring an Esteem to himself or his own Writings by the depressing of
others. So that whensoever he gives any Aduices or Cautions touching such
matters, his intention only is, That the purifying of the soul and exalting of
Prayer should not be prejudiced by the foresaid practices: the which whether
indeed they be prejudicial hereto, or no, only Superiors are to be the
Judges. 4. An Answer to certain Objections made by some, since the Venerable
Authors Death, against the publishing of these Instructions, especially
touching Divine Inspirations.

These are the principal Points that the Author of this Abridgment purposed
to annexe here at the end of the Third Treatise. But certain pressing
occasions obliging us to hasten the publishing of this present Work: and
likewise an Vnvvillingnes that it should at first swell to too great a
proportion and bulk: For these reasons it was judged expedient to omit the
said Discourses, which to a Charitable Reader will not be necessary: or
hovveuer to remit them to another Impression, if we shall be encouraged
thereto. Only Notice may be taken, that for as much as concerns the last of
these particular Points, viz. The Answer to to such Objections as have been
made against the exposing indifferently to the world Instructions intended
only for a fevv solitary, devout Religious Souls, and especially those that
concern the Duty of attending to and executing Divine Inspirations and Calls:
It was judged very expedient, and almost necessary that it should not be
omitted, but rather premised (as it is) in the beginning of the Book. I will
detain thee no longer (Devout Reader) but only to tell thee, that if by Gods
Grace these Instructions prove isntrumental to the teaching or promoting thee
in Pure Prayer, my Hope is thou vvilt not in thy Prayers be unmindful of the
poor unworthy Author of this Abridgment.

A POSTSCRIPT TO THE READER.
Beloved, Charitable Reader:
To recompense with some advantage the want of a promised Appendix, which was
to have contained certain Discourses framed by the unworthy Author of this
methodicall Abridgment, for a clearer (though not necessary) explication of a
few passages in the foregoing Treatises, I here present unto thee the
Testimonies and Approbations of the Doctrine here delivered, given by two of
the most learned and pious Fathers of our Congregation, famous through all
Christendom for the more then ordinary eminency of their Endowments, to wit,
the V. R. F. Leander a Sancto Martino, and the V. R. F. Rudisind Barlow, both
Doctors in Divinity, and who had several times been Presidents General of
our Holy Congregation etc. The which Approbations they gave first voluntarily
upon the request of the venerable Author and submission of his Writings to
their judgment: and a second time by the Commission and Order of the General
Chapter assembled at Douay A. D. 1633. in which an attempt had been made by a
cert^i^e Religious Father to cast some aspersions on the said Doctrine
specially concerning Divine Inspirations and Calls) as if the lawful Authority
of Superiors did receive prejudice thereby. But when the said R. Father had in
a short Writing delivered the Grounds of his Suspicions and allegations, and
that in consequence thereto the late Venerable Author had as briefly with
great sincerity and clearen^sse presented his sense in that matter, the VV. RR.
FF. in Chapter did presently absolve the V. Author, causing withal his
Opponent to subscribe to a Writing conceived, in a manner, Verbatim out of the
Account given by the Author. But on that occasion they imposed on the two
foresaid VV. RR. Approuers once more diligently to peruse the several
Treatises composed by the V. Author, who most freely and humbly submitted them
to their Censure; So that on that occasion they renewed their former
Testimonies and Approbations.

From hence, Beloved Reader, thou will perceive, and can not but give thy
Testimony and Approbation also to the Prudent care expressed by our H.
Congregation, not to permit any Books of this Nature even to the private
Reading and use of their Religious Subjects, till all poss^ble circumspection
and diligence had first been used, that nothing should therein be contained that
might produce the least danger, prejudice or inconvenience. And after all this,
way was not given to a publishing the said Books, till twenty years were
passed; When in a General Chapter assembled in A. D. 1653. at Paris, the VV.
RR. FF. perceiving the many blessed fruits proceeding from the said VVritings,
to the advancement of all Regular Duties, of Solitude, Obedience, Humility and
Devotion, especially in the Convent of our RR. Dames of Cambray, and elsewhere*
And moreover finding that many among the Secular Clergy in England, yea that
several devout persons of the Layty, both Men and Women, did to the wonderful
proffit of their souls make use of some of the said Treatises: And not any one
appearing that did make any opposition at all to any part of the Doctrine: On
these and the like grounds by unanimous agreement (Nemine contradicente) it was
ordered, That a Methodicall Abridgment of the Spiritual Instructions dispersed
through the numerous Treatises of the late Venerable F. Augustine Baker should
for the good and benefit of souls be exposed to the Public.

To the said Approbations I will adioyne a short Discourse written for the
satisfaction and encouragement of the Religious Dames of Cambray by the
foresaid most R. Father Leander a S. Martino, and by him called a Memorial, in
which he briefly explaines the principal Aduices delivered by our Venerable
Author: as likewise a Scheme of the Doctrine of Divine Calls and Inspirations,
at one glance representing to the Reader the sum of the said Doctrine,
acknowledged by our Author to be perfectly comformable to his sense of it.

THE APPROBATIONS FOLLOW.
The first Books written by our Ven. Author were certain Collections out of
several Spiritual Writers, which He entitled with the letters A. B. C. After
which he composed himself several Treatises, the which he entitled with the
following Letters, D. F. G. H. etc.

Now the first of these, viz. D. consisting of about 300. Aphorisms, in which
is contained the sum of Spiritual Doctrine, or Directions for Contemplation,
has these Approbations.

Legi and approbaui hunc Libellum pro vsu Monialium nostrarum.

Ego Fr. Leander S. Th. Doctor and Prior S. Gregorij, huius Monasterij B.
Mariae de Consolatione Ordinarius indignus
Augusti. 17. 1629. Again in the Re-examination.

Allowed. Br. Leander. Br. Rosendo.

Again, Lectus est hic libellus, and admissus and approbatus a me Fr. Leandro
de S. Martino, pro vsu Monalium nostrarum.

F. Leander de S. Martino Ordinarius.



To the Book F. (being the second part of Directions for Contemplation and)
treating of certain erroneous Opinions frequent in these days: Also of
matters of Confession in a Spiritual Life: Together with a Caetalogue of
choice spiritual Books etc. THE APPROBATIONS.
THis second Part of Directions for Contemplation is not only lavvfull to be
read, but necessary to be known of such as be not instructed in a Spiritual
Life, to the end they may learn something here, and know where to learn
more, and to perform their obligations without trouble of mind, and loss of
time to themselves and others.

F. Leander de S. Martino Priour S. Gregory's, eiusd. Ord. and Congreg.
Ordinarius. Monalium. B. Rosendo Barlovv President of the English Congregation
of the Order of S. Bennet.

The the Book G. (the 3. part.) of varieties of Contemplations etc. THE
APPROBATIONS.
I Have read over diligently this Book: and find it in all points worthy of
allowance, full of very wholesome doctrine, and fit for our spirit and
Calling. And therefore I do allow of it for the use of our Nuns: and
commend much unto them the practice thereof, according to the Rules herein
contained. 27. Aug. 1629.

Fr. Leander de S. M^rtino, Priour of S. Gregory's and Ordinary of the
Monastery of our Ladies of Comfort in Cambray.

This Book called Directions for Contemplation the 3. part, is a breife sum
of what is largely handled by the best Mystic Authors that write of this
subject: and therefore worthy to be read, and read again. Duaci 24. Dec. 1629.

Br. Rosendo Barlovv President of the English Congregation of the Holy Order of
S. Bennet.

To the Book H. treating of Purity of Intention, Custodia Cordis, and of
Meditation on the Passion. THE APPROBATIONS.
THis 4. Part of Directions for Contemplation is replenished with passing good
Documents, and very fine explications of the Nature and effects of Prayer, and
therefore most serviceable to such as seriously seek a perfect course of Life.
Doway. 24. Dec. 1629.

F. Leander de S. Martino Priour of S. Gregory's: eiusd. Ord. and
Congregationis. B. Rosendo Barlow President of the English Congregation of the
Order of S. Bennet.

To the first part of Doubts and Calls are THESE APPROBATIONS.
I Have carefully read over these 3. Books of Doubts and Calls, and find them
to contain nothing against Faith or good order: but rather very many necessary
and secure Instructions and rules for the Direction of internal Prayer; all
conformable to the teaching of the best M^^isters of Spirit that have written
of these matters. May. 12. 1630.

F. Leander de S. M^rtino, Priour of the English Benedictins of S. Gregory's in
Doway.
Again.

Item probatus a me F. Leandro Praeside Congregationis.
1634. Aprilis. 4.


To the 2. Part of Doubts and Calls are THESE APPROBATIONS.
THis Book called The second part of Doubts and Calls, may lavvfully be read:
It contains nothing but that which is true and proffitable to the Reader. 4.
Ian. 1630.

B. Rosendo Barlovv President of the English Congregation of the Order of S.
Bennet.
Scene and allowed, as containing very proffitable and necessary Doctrine,
according to the Spirit and vocation of our Rule. 7. Sept. 1629.

F. Leander de S. Martino Priour of S. Gregory's, and Ordinary of the Monastery
of our Ladies of Comfort in Cambray.


Again.

Item approbaui.

F. Leander de S. Martino Praeses Cong.
1634. Apr. 4.


To the 3. Part of Doubts and Calls are THESE APPROBATIONS.
Seen and allowed as containing very proffitable and wholesome Doctrine, fit
and agreeable to the vocation of our Rule. 7. Sept. 1629.

F. Leander de S. Martino Priour of S. Gregory's, and Ordinary of the Monastery
of our Ladies of Comfort in Cambray.
Again.

This Treatise of Doubts and Calls is a very good one. 1630.

B. Rosendo Barlow President of the English Congregation of the Order of S. Ben.



To the Book of Confession (the Original vvherof is lost, but a Perfect
transcript remaining) is THIS APPROBATION.
I have read this Book, and have found nothing in it against Faith or Good
manners. For although the Author dispute much against the urging of Confession
of Venial sins, as unnecessary to Spiritual proffit: yet he does not in any
sort condemn the discreet use of frequent Confession of Venial sins but
only the needless renumeration of them and of daily defects, which cannot be
used without great loss of time and anxiety of mind. In testimony of this I
subscribe my Name at Cambray. 17. Sept. 1629.

Br. Rudisind Barlow President of the English Congregation of the Order of S.
Bennet.

Besides these many more Approbations might be added annexed by the same VV.
RR. FF. to other Books: as to that of Discretion; of Sickness; Directions for
the Idiots Devotions, (contained in 16. several Books,) Remedies; The Stay of
the Soul in Tentations in two volumes; A Book called The five Treatises; The
Alphabet and Abstract etc. But I made choice only of the forementioned, because
they treated of Subjects more likely to meet with contradiction. Supposing
therefore that these will suffice, which are taken from the Originalls extant
at Cambray in the Approuers own hand-vvriting, I will here adioyne the
forementioned Memorial, containing both an Approbation and Explication of the
general Doctrine of our V. Venerable Author.

A Memorial written by the late V. R. F. Leander ^ S. Marcino, and placed in
the Book of Collections.
I have read over carefully the Book A. B. C. and the Alphabet and Abstract,
as also the 3. Parts of Doubts and Calls, besides diverse other Treatises of the
same Author, in all which are to be seen my Approbation and allowance in
the beginning of them. They do all contain very sound and wholesome
doctrine, for the Direction of devout Souls, and fit and agreeable to our
Calling and Rule: and especially for the use of our Dames: the Spirit of our
holy Rule consisting principally in a spiritual Union of our soul with God
in affectiue Prayer, and exercise of the will immediately upon God; rather then
Intellectual and discoursiue Prayer, busying the understanding; as appears
plainly by our Rule, and the daily use of our Quire Office, which for the most
part consists of Aspirations and affects, and has very few discourses.

Yet because the Author refers the Dames his Scholars to his larger
explication by word of Mouth in many places, and to his practice, in which he
settled them: both which can not be known but by those who knevv the
Author; and this Mysticke way, though most plain, most secure, and most
compendious to perfection, contains many hard and delicate points, which
will seem strange to such as have been only accustomed to intellectual
Meditation, and little to affectiue Prayer, by reason of the great abstraction,
which it requires from all things that are not God.

Least the ensuing Confessors, and Directours should mistake the meaning of
the Author, and thereupon alter the course of Prayer begun and settled in the
house, (as we hope, to the Glory of God and Spiritual proffit of Souls in
Perfection proper to our Calling) I have thought convenient to note these fevv
points follovving.

First of all, that the reader of these Books and Collections have always
before his Eyes, that they are written precisely and only for such Souls as
by Gods holy Grace do effectually and constantly dedicate themselves to as
pure an Abstraction from creatures as may with discretion be practiced in the
Community: and consequently for such as abstain from all manner of leuity,
loss of time, notable and known defects, vain talk, needless familiarity,
and in a word, do take as much care as they can to avoid all venial sins,
and occasions of them, and all things which they shall perceive, or be warned
of to be impediments to the Divine Union of their Souls with God.

Secondly: let him consider that it is supposed as a ground in all those
Collections and Observations, that the Office of Quire, and Actions of
Obedience, and Conuentuall Acts, and all other things prescribed by Rule and
Statute, are most exactly to be kept and observed, yea preferred before all
other private Exercises whatsoever. So that all these Instructions are to be
understood always with reservation of the Conuentuall Discipline, and
public Observance prescribed by Obedience.

Particularly let the Reader observe a Note, which is given in one of these
books, and found but in fevv Spiritual vvriters, yet necessary for those
Religious that are addicted to the Quire, viz: That although the Author
commends so highly mental Prayer, yet that Prayer which is perfectly
mental and vocal too, is far more excellent, then that which is mental
only; as will be the exercise of the Saints in heaven after the day of
Judgment, when in body and soul they shall praise and contemplate Allmighty
God. Whereupon it follovveth, that allthough in this Life, our frail and
vveake body hinders our soul, that our Prayer cannot be so perfectly mental
and vocal, as it shall be in heaven: yet must our mental Prayer be so
practiced, that by the grace of God, and joy all perseverance in union with
him, our Vocal Prayer inquire may be converted into mental; that is, that our
vocal saying and singing may be so lively animated, as it were, and informed
with affect of the soul, as if it were altogether spiritual Prayer. And so
shall we fulfill the words of our Rule (Nihil praeponatur operi Dei)
Nothing preferred before the Office of the quire. Whereas in diverse places the
Author says that all bodily exercises, even frequenting the Sacraments,
without mental Prayer, and abstraction, and mortification, do not advance a
soul one ^ot in spirit: although it be plain enough to them that know the
necessity of these 3. Instruments of spiritual perfection, yet least any
should mistake his meaning, as if these former exercises did not proffit a
soul at all, without these Instruments practiced by fevv; out of the former
aduices the reader must understand that by Advancement in spirit, is meant
here, not the bare avoiding of grosser sins, and some perfection too in Active
Life, which is gotten by these bodily exercises; but a clear and
experimental knowledge of the will of God, and a spiritualizing of the soul
by adhering to God, and transcending all creatures whatsoever; for this do
the Mystic Doctors call advancement in spirit; and this cannot be attained
unto but by the three above named instruments continually practiced and
employed by Gods grace. Which notvvithstanding the Author denies not, but
that a soul without the foresaid exercises, may so proffit in spirit, (as
Active souls do that live in worldly manner) that they may carefully avoid
sin and keep Gods commandments, and be truly united to God in follovving his
will, by the use of bodily exercises and frequency of Sacraments, although
they use not much Mental Prayer, abstraction and mortification. For if they
use none at all (as no good Christian but uses them in some degree)
undoubtedly they will not proffit at all in spirit, neither actiuely nor
contemplatiuely, nor avoid sin, nor be in any sort united to God.

About the doctrine of Confession; vvheras the Author disputes much against
the using of Confession of venial sins, as necessary to Spiritual proffit: it
is to be understood that he does not in any wise condemn the discreet use of
frequent Confession; but only the needless numeration of venial sins, and
daily defects, which some souls do make in their Confessions with great
anxiety of mind; and some Confessors do oblige their penitents unto with
great prejudice of that cheerful Liberty of Spirit, which a soul should have
to converse in Prayer with God; and is commonly a cause of scrupules, one of
the greatest baines of spiritual Perfection. So that for souls that are by
nature prone to fear and scrupulosity, the Directour of necessity must
moderate them both in the frequency of Confession, and matter to be confessed.
Yea he may advise them to confess fewer times then other freer souls do.
Otherwise for souls that are cheerful and valiant and courageous in the way
of the Spirit; the Author obliges them in his practice to keep the ordinary
time of Confession: Much more those that are not altogether so careful in
avoiding occasions of ordinary defects. I say, he obliges them in such sort as
the: Constitutions oblige, which is not under any sin, as if they should sin
as often as they omit the ordinary time of Confession: but as a laudable
counsel and proffitable observance, which under a penalty and regular
correction is to be kept, and not omitted but by advice of the spiritual
Father or leave of the Superior.

Note also that he does vvorthily advertise a defect of many who come to
Confession making the principal intention of it only the Absolution from sin;
I say this is a defect, because the principal part of the intention must be
the increase of Grace, and love of God, by which formally infused or povvred
into our selves, God Almighty does blott out sins and wipe them away. Now
although Absolution from sin is never given without infusion of grace, yet
ought the intention of the Penitent to be principally the obtaining of Grace;
for if he principally intend the absolution of sin, it is a reflection of the
soul upon its own proffit by self-love desiring to avoid the wrath of
God, and punishment due to sin, and to be freed from the deformity of
guiltines; which though it be a good desire; yet it is but a property of
Beginners in love, and nothing comparable to the intention of Grace, which is
the perfect love of God, and is an elevation of the soul to transcend it self
and all creatures, to live only in God.

About the doctrine of set Examens of Conscience, the Author does not
condemn it, especially for souls who are not greatly advanced in perfection;
but for souls which daily proffit and grow in Grace; he prefers the exercise
of love: and not without cause; for his meaning is, That in our Recollection,
it is an easier and speedier way to amend our selves, by vvrapping all our
defects in a generality, and so endeavoring to consume them; as it were
casting them into the fire of love then by particularising them, and discussing
them in singular: because in so doing they distract the mind, that may be
better employed. Yet this Doctrine hinders not, but if any notable defect have
been committed, it should be by a particular reflection amended; yet rather by
an amorous conversion of the soul to God by Humility, then by turning it self
to look upon the defect in particular. And doubtless a soul that according
to the Authors Doctrine, does so carefully avoid all defects, that it
presently upon sight of any default, exacteth an amendment of it self; such a
soul needs no set Examen, but suplieth the use thereof by a more noble
exercise, which is as I termed it, an humble consuming of all her defects in
one bundle in the heavenly fire of Charity, or love of God.

Nevertheless a set Examen is proffitable for such as are not yet come to such
a height of Unitive love, and is counseled by our father Blosius in diverse
places, and by S. Bernard in his book to the Carthusians in these words, Nemo
te plus diligit, nemo te fidelius iudicab. Mane praeteritae noctis fac a
temetipso exactionem, and futurae diei tu tibi indicito cautionem. Vespere diei
praeteritae rationem exige, and superuenientis noctis, fac indictionem, ^^c
districte, nequaquam tibi aliquando lasciuire vacabit. (That is,) None loves
thee more, none will judge thee more faithfully then thine own self. In the
morning then exact an account of the night passed, and appoint thy self a
caveat for the day ensuing. At evening take account of the day passed, and
order the course of the night following. Thus districtly examining thy self,
thou will find no leisure to play the wanton. And long before S. Bernard, the
holy Abbot S. Dorotheus commends the same exercise: Sermon: 11. as usual among
all Monks. Quo pacto per singulos dies nosipsos purgare, and propemodum
expiare debeamus exactissime docuerunt Maiores and Patres nostri: Nempe vt
vespere sedulo quisquam perquirat and inuestiget quomodo pertransierit drem
illum. Rursus mane examinet, quomodo exegerit noctem illam. Et paenitentiam
agat, ac resipiscat coram Deo, si quo pacto (vt fieri potest) peccatu^ aliquod
admiserit. And long before him, holy S. Ephrem that lived but 250. years after
Christ our Lords Passion, has the commendation of a set Examen in these golden
words: Diebus singulis vesperi and mane diligenter considera quo pacto se
habeant negotia tua, and mercimonij ratio. Et vespere quidem ingressus in
cubiculum cordis tui examina teipsum, at dicito; Putasne hodie in aliquo Deum
exacerbaui? nuquid verba otiosa protuli? number per contemptum negligentiam ne
peccaui? number in re aliqua fratrem irritaui? number alicuius famam detractionibus
laceraui? etc: Et facto iam dilucalo, rursus eadem tecum meditare, and dicito:
quomodo putas ista mihi nox praeterijt? lucratus sum in ea mercimonium meum?
numquid improbae ac sordidae cogitationes inuaserunt me, atque illis libenter
immoratus sum? etc:

Neither does our Author discommend this set Examen, but the defective use of
it; which is 1. to make it in order to Confession: which doubtless in a
soul well advanced breeds needless images, since such a soul will call
to mind what suffiseth for her ordinary Confession without this examen. 2.
Too much particularizing of our defects; which is likewise distractiue, it
being sufficient to examine the performance of our duty and obligatory actions,
or if any notable defect have carelessely crept upon us: All other defects
being more proffitably vvrapped up in a generality, and so cast into our
Saviors passion; then particularly stirred up, which would in a manner but
raise a new dust in the soul. 3. The anxious looking upon the defects in
themselves and in their peculiar matter or object; whereas it is better and
safer to turn the eye of our soul from the matter in particular unto God
Allmighty, humbling our selves before him, and with loving reverence or auing
pardon of him; A 4 defect is, to imagine that it it is a sin in careful souls
to omit this Examen: whereas indeed it is none at all: though in souls that
be careless of their actions, it be ordinarily a defective negligence worthy
to be reprehended. In a word, a set Examen may be used proffitably by all
souls with those Caueats above mentioned, and is to be cou^selled to all
Beginners in the way of Perfection, and to all that be not so wary in their
Actions; But if the Directour perceive a soul to be so wary, that she is
perpetually careful of progress in Spirit, and never deferreth correction and
amendment of her defects, but out of hand redresseth what she discovers to
be amiss: to such a soul may the Directour permit instead of a set Examen, to
use her ordinary elevation of heart to God, and by vertuall contrition or
actual (as God moves her) included in the exercise of love, deface all the
defects of her life.

Let none likewise be scandalized at that which is said, that there be higher
exercises then Meditation of the Passion: and that it is not always the
proffitablest way to busy our soul in that object. For since our Religious
hear ordinarily 2. Masses, or at least one daily, in that they do actually
celebrate the memory of our Saviors Passion; and at diverse other times they
have leisure to think lovingly thereupon, that they need not in all their
Recollections take that only object; especially since their manner of prayer is
more by Act of will, then by consideration of the understanding; and (as is
very well declared in one place) all their recollections and actions that have
any other special object are vertually intended in honor of our Saviors
Passion.

What is said about passive Contemplation, that it is rather received into the
soul, then produced or wrought by our own action or endeavor, is most
true; supposing always that this reception of it in our soul is a vital
operation; (which whether it be called an action of the soul or a mere
passion, is a School question and nothing to our purpose.) Certain it is,
that by all our own power we could not produce it, and therefore it is
called the Inaction of God in our soul, by many Mysticks, to which we only
concur by vital receiving it, and by a vvilling consent to let God work
his will in us.

What is said about the immediate operation of God in the very essence and
substance of our soul, and not in the powers thereof, nor by mediation of the
powers, allthough it be against the general doctrine of the Philosophers and
School men, yet is it a probable opinion, and grounded upon experience of
devout men, that were also great Scholars; and therefore may securely be
follovved: As also that which is there said, that God can move the will to
love without the operation of the understanding, though many deny it, yet is it
most probable and befitting the Allmighty power of God; and held by Gerson,
and S. Bonauenture, which were no small School Divines.

Lastly the vehement urging, that great heed be taken in the choice of a
Confessor and Directour in these mysticke ways of God, is necessary, and not
intended to the dispraise of any, nor to the disabling of such, as perhaps have
not all the qualities required, but it seems especially for two ends; the one
for an advertisement to the directours and Confessors that they presume not to
judge, or proccede rashly in direction of our Religious, but according to these
Caueats and instructions: especially if they themselves have not been
accustomed to this affectiue prayer of the will. And we do con^^re them in
beh^lfe of our Savior Christ to cherish this way, and to set it forvvard as
the peculiar exercise belonging to our Spirit and calling: yet so as
intellectual prayer be not altogether neglected in the occasions which in
these books are sufficiently assigned. The other end is to cut of a dangerous
curiosity that Women use to have of desiring to confer their Interior with
every learned or devout man they hear of: Which is a very great defect, and by
those vehement persuasions of our Author very deservedly and warily
prevented. And although S. Teresa did give way to this universal
communication of interior to diverse learned men, and commended it to her
daughters: Yet we are credibly informed, that in her later days with tears
she has said, That by it, occasion was given to discontented minds to vent
forth their disgusts, with harm to themselves and Community. Therefore out of
this point let the Religious resolve to communicate their interiours only to
their lavvfull Superiors, and directours by them appointed: who will have
care that the spirit of prayer be not extinguished or hindered in them by any
unskillful or heedles Guides. Thus much we thought convenient to note under
our hands in commendation of ^hese holy instructions; and for a Caveat and
warning to the future Confessors and spiritual Directours.

F. Leander de S. Martino. Priour of S. Gregory in Doway and Ordinary of the
Cloister of the dames of our Lady of Comfort in Cambray of the holy order of S.
Benedict.

In the last place I will adioyne a scheme clearly and at once representing the
sum of the Ven. Authors Doctrine of Divine Calls: composed by the same. V.
R. F. Leander de S. Martino.

Whatsoever action or omission occurres unto us in all our Life; what occasion
soever of doing forbearing, suffering or receiving from God or any creature; is
of that condition, that either 1. It has some exterior Rule commanding it, or
forbiding it, which is to be esteemed undoubtedly as the Call of God; and in
all such occurrences 1. The exterior Rule is to be faithfully kept and
practiced, in the performing or omitting the action occurring. 2. The interior
Call is likewise as carefully to be kept and practiced in the manner of
omittance or performance; that it may be done, or omitted, with the true
Spirit and Life of Grace, by the exercise of the Will.
2. It has no exterior Rule allotted the occurence at that time, and is
otherwise against no exterior Rule of lawful Authority: as certainly an
infinity of such things happen and occur in time of silence and rest, in our
cells: being alone, in our labor, recreation, refection etc. and in such
cases. 1. If it be extraordinary in matter, as long fasting, much watching
etc. Or in manner, as if it be extaticall or in some strange manner of
Illumination or inspiration unaccustomed or vnvvonted to the soul, it is not
to be practiced, till it be examined and allowed by the ordinary exterior
Rule: yet in no sort to be neglected, but remembered and noted for use and
direction, when occasion occurreth in our selves or others. 2. If it be
ordinary in matter and manner, neither implying any inconvenience nor notable
singularity, then is the inward Call in a spiritual and true minded soul a
sufficient and secure Guide, and ought to be carefully observed and obeyed
least otherwise the soul ungratefully take Gods Graces in vain, and so be
vvorthily deprived of them.



F. Leander de S. Martino President
18. Martij 1634. After the above written paper, there follows this in Father
Bakers own hand.

The Doctrine of Divine Calls here above expressed by our Reverend Father,
Father Leander de S. Martino, being at the present our worthy President, I do
profess to be the selfsame in substance (and by my intention,) which more
largely, but less sufficiently I have expressed and delivered in diverse books
and Treatises that are of my penning concerning that subject.

B. Augustine Baker.
the 20. of March. 1634. Stilo Romano.


FINIS.

