TWO LETTERS OF NOTE.

THE ONE FROM THE LORD DIGBY TO THE QUEEN: THE OTHER OF A LATE OVERTHROW
WHICH THE ENGLISH GAVE THE REBELS IN IRELAND.

LONDON: Printed in the Year, 1642.

A TRVE COPY OF THE LORD DIGBIES LETTER TO THE QUEEN.
MADAME;
I Shall not adventure to write unto your Majesty with freedom, but by
expresses, or till such time as I have a Cipher, which I beseech your Majesty
to vouchsafe me. At this time therefore I shall only let your Majesty know
where the humblest and most faithful servant you have in the world is, here at
Middleborough, where I shall remain in the privatest way I can, till I receive
instructions how I shall serve the King and your Majesty in these parts. If
the King betake himself to a safe place, where he may avow and protect his
servants from rage and violence, for from Justice I will never implore it. I
shall then live in impatience and in misery till I wait upon you. But if after
all he has done of late, he shall betake himself to the easiest and
compliantest ways of accommodation, I am confident, that then I shall serve
him more by my absence, than by all my industry: and it will be a comfort to
me in all calamities, if I cannot serve you by my actions, that I may do it
in some kind by my sufferings for your sake, having (I protest to God) no
measure of happiness or misfortune in this world, but what I derive from your
Majesty's value of my affection and fidelity.

Middleborough the 21. Ian. 1641.
Joyful News from Ireland, or a true relation of the great overthrow which the
English gave the Rebels before Droheda, etc.
Noble Sir,
IN my last to you, I signified to you, the difficulties which were like to
befall us by the releeving of Droheda, but God by his infinite mercy has freed
us (I may say miraculously) from that hazard: for when our men there were
driven to that extremity to eat horseflesh, Sir Henry Tichbourne sallied out
of the Town with only forty Musketeers, and forty Horse, and beat off four
hundred of the Enemies, killed above threescore of them, recovered fourscore
Cowes and Oxen, and two hundred sheep; burned four Towns, and brought home two
of their Colors. Besides, I must relate unto you Gods abundant goodness unto
us, in that the night before the relief and succors which we sent by Sea from
Dublin to them, should have entered into the Harbor of Droheda, (which was
strongly fenced over with a Chain and several boats) there happened a storm
which broke their chains, and gave our men so free a passage, as with little
difficulty they came safely to the Town. The Rebels were gathered at
Kilshalgham within seven miles of Dublin, above two thousand men, where they
were settled in a very strong wood. My Lord of Ormond carried out part of our
Army, and beat them out of that great strength (for they would not come into
the Champaine) and killed above a hundred of them, without any considerable
loss of our side, only Captain James Rochfort, a most gallant and courageous
Gentleman. This was an act of great braverie, wherein Sir Charles Coote did,
(as he does always) beyond expectation, exposing his person to as much danger
as any man living could; and in truth he is a gallant man, full of courage and
good affections, and deserves great encouragement from that side. Our Soldiers
are in great want of money, which causes a general want of all other
necessaries, yet notwithstanding God has infused such courage into them (for
undoubtedly it is his work) that they think there is no danger so great, but
they may attempt it.

Colonel Munke is arrived here with my Lord Lieutenants Regiment of fifteen
hundred foot, and Sir Richard Grevill with near four hundred. Horse, which
puts much heart into us, and makes us look big upon our neighbors, yet we
grieve we cannot be able to releeve our friends in other parts; but I hope when
our full succors shall come, we shall not only defend this place, but add
comfort to our poor distressed friends abroad.

The enemy though their numbers be very great, even beyond belief, yet their
hearts begin to faint, and I believe they repent their furious madness.

If my Brother be in London, I pray you impart this Letter to him, I would have
written to him, but that I thought he was at Chester, or in his way thither; By
the next he shall hear from me at large, and I shall likewise trouble you.

I must now only tell you, that I thank you for your care of those things
which concern me, and that I am, Sir, your most affectionate servant,

Feb. 27. 1641. Ed. Loftus,
Martii 7mo. It Is this day ordered forthwith that this Letter be published in
Print. H. Elsing. Cler. P. D. Com.

FINIS.

