Britain Revived: IN A PANEGYRIC TO THEIR Most August MAJESTY'S, William and
Mary.
A Pindarick Poem.
I.
IT IS done; the weighty Business of the State,
That has so Long been in Profound Debate,
Is to Perfection brought:
Not by a Mortal thought,
For Heaven Inspired 'em with a greater Sense
Of things Past, Present, and to Come,
Which their most prudent Souls did Influence,
To work our Safety, from the Threatened Domb.
O Hero's more than half Divine,
For Monarchy in its Decline
By Nature made the Antidotes.
Religious Champions, against that Monster Pope.
You the first did us Convince
Of an Enslaving Arbitrary Prince,
By whom, as by an Ignis fatuus led on,
We wandered, till our Laws and Liberties were gone;
Until Religion did Consumptive lie,
And weakn'd so, we were afraid she would die.
II.
So tossed and Ship-wreck'd in the Storms of Chance,
By a Popish Wind, which blew from France;
She on the ravenous Billows tottering lay,
And too much trusting to the Romish See,
Had she not quickly clapped the Helm a Lee,
She had by ventring thrown her self away;
But growing Sea-sick fell to Prayer,
Imploring Heaven's Care.
At which the The Nobility of England.
Higher Powers in Council sat,
How to reduce this shattered State,
Of cicumvented Church,
By The late King.
Neptune left in the lurch,
To raffle with the Popery.
Boistrous Seas,
Our Ruin only could appease;
For then the Sea and Dissenters.
Winds were knit together,
Where e're we sailed, we met with stormy weather.
III.
O dismal time! when each audacious wave
Grew bigg, to see us sink they would not save;
Roaring Destruction, roul'd to us apace,
And dashed our Non-resistance in our face.
The Dissenters.
Winds too treacherous were, and hissed aloud,
At the Obedience Passive of our Ship-wreck'd crowd.
IV.
Then our Heroic WILLIAM, all Divine,
With true Religious Valor did incline,
To our assistance; braves the Daring Main,
And brings us to our Calmer Days again.
V.
Next, in the Rank of Heroes, let me bring,
Those who Opposed our Popish King,
And dared in this storm of State.
To turn about the Wheel of Fate,
And lead the way to Fortune.
Those Nature sure stamped in her largest mould,
With all Ingredients to be bravely bold;
Or some unusual Virtue was from Heaven
To them at their Creation given,
That they so wisely knew to look,
Into the Adamantine Book,
Of future Destiny.
And where they could espy,
Our approaching Misery;
Blot out the Ill, and write the Fate anew,
And change a James, Great To the King.
SIR! for You.
So by this brave Experiment we are taught,
Most August Prince, You were God's Second Thought.
VI.
Then long blessed King, may God, who crowned Your Brow,
To Your bright Days all Happiness allow.
And Your Illustrious QUEEN, Exalt yet higher,
Than Envy e're can reach, but to admire.
O happy we! since You Have your Reign begun,
Our LAWS shall now in their Old Channel run;
LIBERTY no more shall fettered lie,
Nor PROPERTY with close confinement dye;
But all our Hearts shall mutually agree,
Dread SIR! to Honor, Love, and Fight for Thee.
London: Printed for R. Baldwin, near the Black-Bull in the Old Bailey. 1689.


