THE LORD DIGBY

His last Speech against the Earl of Strafford,Occasioned upon the reading the
Bill of Attainder touching the point of Treason.

Printed Anno, 1641.

The Lord Digby's last speech against the Earl of Strafford, occasioned upon
the reading the Bill of Attainder, touching the point of Treason.
Master Speaker.
We are now upon the point of giving (as much as in us lies) the final
sentence unto death or life, on a great Minister of State, and Peer of this
Kingdom, Thomas Earl of Strafford.

A name of hatred in the present ages by his practices, and fit to be made a
terror to future ages by his punishment. I have had the honor to be employed
by the House, in this great business; from the first hour that it was taken
into consideration, it was a matter of great trust, and I will say with
confidence, that I have served the House in it with industry (according to my
ability) with most exact faithfulness and secrecy.

And as I have hitherto discharged my duty to this House, and to my Country in
the progress of this great cause, so I trust I shall do now in the last period
of it, to God, and to a good conscience.

I do with the peace of that unto my self, and the blessings of Almighty God
to me and my posterity, according as my judgment on the life of this man shall
be consonant with my heart, and the best of my understanding in all integrity.
I know well Master Speaker, That by some things I have said of late, whilst
this Bill was in agitation, I have raised some prejudices upon me in the cause.

Yea, some (I thank them for their plain dealing) have been so free as to tell
me, That I suffered much, by the backwardness I have shown in this Bill of
Attainder of the E. of Strafford, against whom I had been formerly so ^een, so
active.

Master Speaker, I beg of you and the rest, but a suspension of judgments
concerning me, till I have opened my heart unto you freely and clearly in this
business.

Truly Sir, I am still the same in my opinions and affections unto the Earl of
Strafford, as that I confidently believe him the most dangerous Minister, the
most insupportable to free subjects that can be caractered.

I believe his practizes in themselves as high, as Tyrannical, as any subject
ever ventred on; and the malignity of them hugely aggravated by those rare
abilities of his, where of God has given him the use, and the Devil the
application; in a word, I believe him still that grand Apostate to the
Commonwealth, who must not expect to be pardoned it in this world, till he be
dispatched to the other: and yet let me tell you Master Speaker, My hand must
not be to that dispatch; I protest, as my conscience stands informed, I had
rather it were off.

Let me unfold unto you the Mystery, (Master Speaker) I will not dwell much
upon justifying unto you my seeming variance at this time, from what I appeared
formerly, by putting you in mind of the difference between Prosecutors and
Judges, how misbecomming that fervor would be in a Judge, which perhaps was
commendable as a Prosecutor; Judges we are now, and must put on another
personage.

It is honest and noble to be earnest in order to the discovery of Truth; but
when that has bin brought as far as it can to light, our judgment thereupon
ought to be calm and cautious.

In Prosecution, upon probable grounds, we are accountable only for our
Industry, or Remissness; but in Judgment we are deeply responsible to God
Almighty, for its rectitude, or obliquity: In Cases of Life, the Judge is Gods
steward of the parties blood, and must give a strict account for every drop.

But as I told you Master Speaker, I will not insist long upon this ground of
difference in me now, from what I was formerly.

The truth on it is sir, The same ground whereupon I with the rest of the five,
to whom you first committed the consideration of my Lord of Strafford, brought
down our opinion, That it was fit he should be accused of Treason; upon the
same ground, I was engaged with earnestness in his prosecution, and had the
same ground remained in that force of belief with me (which till very lately
it did) I should not have bin tender in his Condemnation: but truly sir, to
deal plainly with you, That ground of our accusation, that spur to our
prosecution, and that which should be the Basis of my judgment of the Earl of
Strafford, as unto Treason, is to my understanding quite vanished away.

This it was Master Speaker.

His advising the King to employ the Army of Ireland to reduce England.

This I was assured would be proved before I gave my consent to his accusation,
I was still confirmed in the same belief, during the prosecution, and fortified
in it most of all since Sir Henry Vains preparatory examinations by the
assurances which that worthy member M. Pimme gave me, That his testimony would
be made convincing by some notes of what passed at the juncto concurrent with
it, which I ever understanding to be of some other Counselor, you see now
prove but a copy of the same Secretaries notes discovered and produced in the
manner you have heard, and those such disioynted fragments of the venomous part
of discourses, no results, no conclusions of Counsels, which are the only
things that Secretaries of State should register; there being no use at all of
the other, but to accuse and to bring men into danger.

But, Sir, This is not that which overthrows the Evidence with me, concerning
the Army of Ireland, nor yet all the rest of the juncto upon their oaths
remember any thing of it.

But this Sir which I shall tell you, is that which works with me (under
favor) to an utter overthrow of his Evidence, as unto that of the Army of
Ireland, before whilst I was a Prosecutor, and under tie of secrecy, I might
not discover any weakness of the cause, which now as a Judge I must.

Master Secretary was examined thrice upon oath at the preparatory Co^mittee.

The first time, he was questioned to all the Interrogatories; and to that
part of the seventh which concerns the Army of Ireland, he says positively in
these words, I cannot charge him with that, but for the rest, he desires time
to recollect himself, which was granted him.

Some days after (the precise time I cannot say) he was examined a second time,
and then deposes these words concerning the Kings being absolved from rules of
Government and so forth, very clearly; but being pressed to that part concerning
the Irish Army again, can say nothing to that.

Here we thought we had done with him, till diverse weeks after, my Lord of
Northumberland, and all others of the Iuncto, denying to have heard any thing
concerning those words of reducing England by the Irish Army, It was thought
fit to examine the Secretary once more; and then he deposed these words to
have bin said by the Earl of Strafford to his Majesty, You have an Army in
Ireland, which you may employ here to reduce (or some words to that sense) this
Kingdom.

Master Speaker, these are the circumstances which (I confess with my
conscience) thrust quite out of doors that grand Article of our charge,
concerning his desperate advice to the King, of employing the Irish Army here.

Let not this I beseech you be driven to an aspersion upon Master Secretary,
as if he should have sworn otherwise then he knew, or believed; he is too
worthy to do that; only let thus much be inferred from it, that he who twice
upon oath, with time of recollection, could not remember any thing of such a
business, might well a third time misremember somewhat; and in this business,
the difference of one Letter, here for there, or that for this, quite alters
the case, the latter also being more probable, since it is confessed of all
hands, that the debate then was concerning a war with Scotland, and you may
remember, that at the Bar he once said, to employ there; and thus Master
Speaker I have faithfully given you an account, what it is that has blunted
the edge of the hatchet or bill with me toward my Lord of Strafford.

This was that whereupon I accused him with a free heart, prosecuted him with
earnestness, and had it to my understanding bin proved, should have condemned
him with innocence: Wherein now I profess I cannot satisfy my conscience to
do it.

I profess I can have no Notion of my Lords intent to subvert the Laws
treasonably by force, and this design of force not appearing, all his other
wicked practices cannot amount so high with me.

I can find a more easy and more natural spring, from whence to derive all
his other crimes, then from an intent to bring in tyranny (and to make his own
posterity as well as us slaves) as from Revenge, from Pride, from Avarice, from
Passion, and insolence of Nature.

But had this of the Irish Army bin proved it would have diffused a complexion
of Treason over all; it would have been a Weith indeed to bind all those
other scattered and lesser branches, as it were into a faggot of Treason.

I do not say but the rest may represent him a man as worthy to die, and
worthier perhaps then many a Traitor; I do not say, but they may justly
direct us to enact that the like shall be Treason for the future: but God keep
me from giving judgment of death on any man, and of ruin to his innocent
posterity upon a Law made a posteriore.

Let the mark be set on the door where the Plague is, and then let him that
will enter die.

I know Master Speaker, there is in Parliament a double power of Life and Death
by Bill, a judicial power, and a Legislative; the measure of the one is what is
Legally just, of the other what is Prudentially and Politickly fit for the good
and preservation of the whole.

But these two (under favor) are not to be confounded in judgment, we must not
proceed upon want of Legalitie with matter of conveniencie, nor the defailance
of Prudentiall fitness, with a pretense of Legal justice.

To condemn my Lord of Strafford judicially as for Treason, my Conscience is
not assured that the matter will bear it. And to do it by the Legislative
power, my Reason consultively cannot agree to that, since I am persuaded,
neither the Lords nor the King will pass the Bill; and consequently, that our
passing it will be a cause of great divisions and combustions in the State.

And therefore my humble advice is, That laying aside this Bill of Attainder,
we may think of another (saving only Life) such as may secure the State from
my Lord of Strafford, without indangering it as much by division concerning his
punishment, as he has endangered it by his practizes.

If this may not be hearkened unto, let me conclude in saying that unto you all,
which I have thoroughly incultated to my own conscience upon this occasion; Let
every man lay his hand upon his heart, and sadly consider what we are going to
do, with a breath, either Justice or Murder, Justice on the one side or
Murder heigthned and aggravated, to its supremist extent: For as the Ca^^ists
say, That he who lies with his sister commits incest, but he that marries his
sister, sins higher by applying Gods ordinance to his crime: So doubtless he
that commits Murder with the sword of Justice, heightens that crime to the
utmost.

The danger being so great, the case so doubtful, that I see the best Lawyers
in Diametrall opposition concerning it Let everyman wipe his heart, as he does
his eyes when he would judge of a nice and subtle object, the Eye if it be
pretainted with any color is vitiated in its discerning. Let us take heed of a
blood sho^t^ Eye of judgment.

Let every man purge his heart clear of all passions, I know this great and
wise body politic can have none; but I speak to Individuals, from the
weakness which I find in my self: Away with all personal animosities; Away
with all flatteries to the people in being the sharper against him, because he
is odious to them; away with all fears, lest by the sparing his blood they may
be incenst; away with all such considerations, as that it is not fit for a
Parliament, that one accused by it of Treason, should escape with life.

Let not the former vehemency of any against him, no fear from thence, that
his cannot be safe, while that man lives to be an ingredient in the sentence of
any one of us.

Of all these corruptives of judgment, Master Speaker, I do before God
discharge my self to the utmost of my power: and with a clear conscience wash
my hands of this man's blood, by this solemn protestation, That my vote goes
not to the taking of the Earl of Straffords life.

FINIS.

