STAND STILL OR, A bridle for the Times.

A Discourse tending to Still the Murmuring, to Settle the Wavering, to Stay
the Wandering, to Strengthen the Fainting.

As it was delivered to the Church of GOD at Great YARMOUTH, Anno 1643.

By JOHN BRINSLEY, Minister of the Word there. And now published as a proper
Antidote against the present Epidemicall Distempers of the Times.

EXODUS 14.13. Fear ye not, [Stand-still] and see the salvation of the Lord,
which he will show unto you this day.

LONDON: Printed for William Frankling, and are to be sold at his Shop next the
George in Norwich. 1647.

TO MY EVER HONORED AND WORTHY FRIENDS The Baliffes, Aldermen, Burgesses, and
Commonalty of the Town of great YARRMOUTH.
(Much'esteemed in the Lord)
THese Meditations, A^u. 1643.
when first delivered in your hearing I am sure they were then seasonable;
would to God they were not too much so now that they are presented to a public
view. A fourfold Evil I then observed, (I wish they were not all still too
observable;) which the times inclined and disposed multitudes unto, viz.
Murmuring, Wavering, Wandering, Fainting. My desire and design in the following
discourse was to meet with them all, by suggesting such Counsels as might be
proper for each. Possibly my right intentions herein (as in Preaching so in
Publishing) may at some hands meet with sinister acceptations; But this I weigh
not, my ey^ being more upon doing of good, then receiving of thanks. May these
my poor labors be any ways serviceable to the Church (for whose Peace I am
as willing to be sacrificed, as Jonas was to be cast overboard, for the laying
of that storm which endangered the Ship wherein himself was a Passenger) I
shall account it recompense sufficient. Io^. 1.12.
In the hopes whereof, with my Prayers for you, that he who is of power to
stablish you would both make and keep you stable in these unstable times I
shall leave them with you, and rest

Yarmouth, Iul. 1.1647. Your unworthy servant in our Lord, John Brinsley.

STAND STILL: OR, A bridle for the Times, etc.
EXODUS 14.13. [ Stand still:]
STand,] This word in the mouth of a Soldier is a word of Command. And so
shall we find it in the mouth of Moses here in my Text: A Word of Command
directed by this man of war, this truly valiant and noble General, to the
Host of Israel at the Red Sea, orde^^^g them what to do in that great strait
whereinto God had then brought them. State, Consistite, Stand, Stand-still. A
word in the signification of it large, and comprehensive: Stand still.
Importing four things
Here (as I conceive) importing these four things, which I shall express unto
you in four words. Stand-still, First, not Murmuring: Secondly, not Wavering:
Thirdly, not Flying: Fourthly, not Fighting. Not murmuring, hold your Tongues
still: not wavering, hold your Hearts still: not flying, hold your Feet still:
not fighting, hold your Hands still. With an eye to all, and every of these (as
I conceive) Moses here speaks to the people, both counselling and charging
them to Stand-still.

First, Holding their Tongues still, not Murmuring. This at the present they
did. I. ^ot Murmur^ng.
Their hearts being filled with the wind of inordinate fear, their tongues
began to walk, and Run. Even as Asaph says of foolish and wicked men, Psalm.
73. ^sal. 73.9.
They set their mouth against the heaven, and their tongue walks through the
earth; so was it here, These mutinous Israelites in that distempered Passion of
theirs, they began to set their mouth against the heaven, murmuring against God
himself; and their Tongue walked through the earth, running Riot against Moses
and others, whom they looked at as the chief Instruments of their present woe.
In reference to this distemper, and misbehaviour of theirs, Moses here bids
them Stand still, hold their tongues still. So the latter part of the verse
following may seem to explain it; where Moses minds them of holding their
peace, and (as the old Translation reads it) charge them so to do. The
Lord shall fight for you, therefore hold you your peace; that is, cease to
murmur against God, and me.

Secondly, Keeping their Tongues still, he would have them also to keep their
hearts still; 2. ^ot Waver^g.
that forbearing to murmur, they should not give way to wavering. Stand still,
not doubting, not wavering. So lunius here expounds the Phrase; Consistite,
Stand still, that is (says he) Ne commoveamini, ac fluctuetis animo, Be ye
not inordinately moved, or stirred, be not wavering-minded, but Spe firm^ open
Domini expectate, quietly, and confidently wait upon your God for his
salvation, his deliverance. Standing, it is a waiting Posture. David's Courtiers
advising the King their Master to make choice of a Damsel that might wait
upon him in his decrepit age, Let there be sought for my Lord the King (say
they) a young virgin, ^ing. 1.2.
and let her [ stand] before the King. And so the Queen of Sheba speaking of
Solomon's attendants, happy (says she) are thy men, and happy are thy
servants, 1 King 10.^^.
which [stand] continually before thee. By way of allusion whereunto, Gods
Ministers who are servants to him in ordinary, having a more constant and
immediate attendance upon him in regard of their office, they are said to stand
before him. The Lord has chosen you to stand before him, (says Hezekiah to
the Levites) Bless ye the Lord all ye servants of the Lord, 2 Chr. 29.11.
Ps. 134. Ps. 135.2.
which by night stand in the House of the Lord, (says David speaking of the
same Priests and Levites,) standing, it is a waiting posture, and a posture of
Confidence, in both which respects this gesture is sometimes used in Prayer,
not without our Saviors own allowance; when ye stand Praying, (says he)
forgive etc. A gesture not unsuitable to the action of Prayer, Mar. 11.85.
wherein the soul is to wait upon God, and that with an holy confidence, both
of them imported and signified by this posture. And thus would Moses here in
the Text have the Israelites to wait upon their God, to wait upon him, and
that with an holy affiance and confidence, not doubting, not wavering, and
therefore he says unto them, stand still.

Thirdly, Holding their Tongues and their Hearts still, 3. Not Flying.
he would have them also to hold their Feet still, stand, i.e. not Flying. So
the word is commonly used, standing put in opposition to Flying. the Prophet
Nahum speaking of Ninevebs flying before their Enemies, They shall fly away,
(says he) stand, stand shall they cry, 2 Nah. ^.
but none shall look back. This were the Israelites at this time ready to do;
Their hearts failing them, they were ready to fly before their Enemies. In
reference hereunto Moses speaks unto them as a resolute Commander to his
faint-hearted Soldiers, bidding them stand, not flying from the Enemy, much
less flying to him. This some of them had in their thoughts to do, and they
were even ready to do it, to return and yield up themselves to the mercy of
the Enemy, taking such quarter as he would afford them. In reference hereunto
also Moses bids them stand, stand still, not flying from the Enemy, much less
flying to him.

Fourthly, In the fourth and last place, holding their Tongues and Hearts and
Feet still, 4. ^ot Fighting
, he bids them also hold their Hands still, not Murmuring, not Wavering, not
Flying, he tells them they should not need to fight neither. So Master Calvin
here construeth the phrase, Verbo standi vult quietos manner. Bidding them
stand still (says he) he wills them to rest themselves quiet, as if he had
said, there shall be no need for any of you to stir a hand, to move a fingar
in this service; stand you still, God will do the work for you, and without
you. And this exposition the verse following seems to countenance, where
Moses tells them, The Lord shall fight for you, and you shall hold your Peace,
ye shall be silent, ceasing, as from speaking, so from doing any thing in this
business; so that phrase is sometimes used, being applied to actions as well
as words. Keep not ^ilence O God, (says the Psalmist) Hold not thy Peace, and
be not still, Psalm. 83. ^s. 83.1.
I have a long time holde^ my Peace, (says the Lord) I have been still, and
refrained my self, Is. 42. ^s. 42, 14.
refrained my self, viz. from taking vengeance upon mine Enemies; which when
God does forbearing to punish them, then he is said to hold his peace, and sit
still, In a like sense not improperly may Moses be conceived there to speak
unto the people, ye shall hold your peace, i.e. ye shall not strike a blow,
nor draw a sword, nor lift up a hand, let God alone with the work, stand ye
still.

Put these four together, and you have (as I conceive) the full latitude of
the word, as here it is used. Stand ye still (says Moses) to the people; not
Murmuring; not Wavering; not Flying; not Fighting. Never a one of these but
will afford us somewhat for our Instruction. I shall touch upon them severally
by way of Illustration, Application.

Stand still, not Murmuring.
First, Stand still, not Murmuring, 1. Corrupt nature prone to murmr. Romans
13.4.
whether against God or me. This corrupt nature is very prone, and ready to
do, to murmur against God, and Superiors, those whom God has set over us,
and made his Ministers for our good. To make good this charge, we shall need no
other evidence, or instance, but this of the Israelites, whom if we follow in
their march through the wilderness, we shall take them murmuring no less
then eight several times, (besides that in the Text) against God, and his
servant Moses. Looking upon them, stand not to wonder at their wawardnesse, and
forwardness, but rather reflect upon our selves; in this Glass beholding our
own faces, taking notice how prone our corrupt nature is to fall into this
distemper upon all occasions. This we are prone, and ready to do; but this we
may not do: Sand still, says Moses unto them, willing them not to give way to
any discontented Passions that might cause them to murmur.

A Lesson for all the Lords people, the Israel of God, ^. Gods people in their
strait^ must Stand still, not murmuring. 1 Cor. 10.^0.
teaching them what to do, (or rather what not to do) in all their straits
and difficulties, viz. Stand still, not Murmuring. It is Paul's advice and
charge to his Corinthians, 1 Cor. 10. Neither murmur ye, as some of them also
murmured; some of the Israelites in the wilderness. And how did they murmur?
Why, upon all occasions they were discontented, and displeased with Gods
administrations, and dealings with them; and withal, ready to vent their
discontents, expressing them both in words and deeds. As for instance: In case,
1. They wanted something which they would have: The Israelites murmuring in in
four cases.
2. Liked not what they had: 3. Met with some dangers, difficulties,
discouragements: 4. Saw others honored, and preferred before themselves. In
all, and every of these cases, we shall find their spirits (like the Sea in
this Winter season) presently stirred, and their Tongues ready to pumpe out the
secret discontents of their hearts, in quarrelling with, and murmuring against
God and his servant Moses. Take a brief view of particulars.

First, In case they wanted somewhat that they would have. 1. For want of
somewhat that they would have.
Thus we find them thrice murmuring for water, viz. once in the wilderness of
Shur, Exodus 15. Exodus 15.22, 24.
A second time at Rephidim, afterward called Massa and Meriba, from their
strivings, Exodus 17. Exodus 17.3.
A third time in the Desert of sin, Numb. 20. Numb. 20.3.
Twice for Food, viz. once for Bread, Exodus 16. Exodus 16.2.
once for Flesh, Numb. 11. Numb. 11.4.
and every time ready to fall foul upon Moses.

Secondly, In case they liked not what they had. Thus being cloyed with their
Mannah, 2. The dislike of what they had.
they nauseate and loath it; and loathing it, fall to murmur against God, and
his servant Moses, for not making them better provision. They speak against
God, and against Moses, saying, Wherefore have ye brought us out of Egypt to
dye in the wilderness? Here is neither Bread nor water, and our soul loat^eth
this Mannah, this Light-Bread, Numb. 21. Numb. 21.5.


3. Meeting with dangers and difficulties.
3. In case they met with any danger, (thus in the Text) any difficulties or
discouragement. Thus at the return of their Spies, making a discouraging
report to them of the good Land which they had taken a view of, representing to
them a great deal of difficulty in the conquest of it, hereupon they fall
soul upon Moses and Aaron, and upon Caleb and Ioshuah, ready to Cashire the
one, and to stone the other, and so to create a new General, that might
conduct them back again into Egypt, of all which you may read, Numb. 14. Numb
14.^, 4, 10.


Fourthly, 4. Seeing others preferred before themselves.
Seeing others honored and preferred before themselves. This was the ground of
that grand Rebellion, or Sedition, raised by Korah and his Confederates, those
two hundred and fifty Captains, or Princes of the Assembly, (as they are
called) i.e. Chief Senators, principal Statesmen, Famous in the
Congregation, men of renown; of which you may read, Numb. 16. Numb. 16.2, 3^
41.
These combine, and make head against Moses and Aaron, whom they maligned and
envied, only for their promotions and preferments, that they should be in any
thing preferred before themselves. Hereupon they charge them to be too
Pragmaticall, too busy, to usurp and arrogate to themselves more then was
their due; Ye take too much upon you seeing all the Congregation is holy, v.
3. And afterward, when God had made the chief Actors in that Conspiracy
exemplary, by causing the Earth to take vengeance upon some, and the Fire to
do execution upon others of them, the next day the people begin to take up the
quarrel afresh, making a fresh charge upon Moses and Aaron, calling them to
account for the disaster of the day past, charging all that Blood upon their
heads. On the morrow all the children of Israel murmured against Moses, and
against Aaron, saying, Ye have killed the People of the Lord, v. 41. Thus did
some of them murmur. But take we heed that none of us thus murmur. This is
Paul's counsel to his Corinthians, and this is mine to you at the present, and
I beseech you in the fear of God to hearken to it.

Applic. Let not us murmur.
Thus let us not murmur. A piece of counsel (I think) never more seasonable.
Murmurings, I suppose they were never more rife; and it may be others may
think they were never more just then at this day. Grounds of murmuring amongst
us compared with Isreal's in the wilderness.
It cannot be denied, many bl^ssings at the present we (or at least our
Brethren) want, which formerly we and they have enjoyed, viz. Peace and
Plenty, and Liberty; Abundance of outward comforts and contentments; And many
Pressures and Burdens we now lie under, which heretofore we have not been
acquainted with; And this causes murmurings in some: Some Blessings we have,
and those choice ones, (so our Fathers would have thought them) which yet some
are discontented with, and weary of; That causes murmuring in them. Many
dangers and difficulties, and discouragements, are daily represented unto us
for us to encounter with; And those cause murmurings in others: And some there
are, who think that Moses and Aaron take too much upon them, not sparing to
impute all our disasters to the evil counsels of Superiors, upon their
heads, charging all the Blood that has been shed in this Uncivil and
Unnatural War; And that causes murmuring in them. Thus, whatever cause or
grounds of murmuring the Israelites in the wilderness pretended to have, the
same with like pretext, may be thought to be found amongst us at this day: So
as Murmuring-Spirits may seem to want no ^ewell to feed the fire of their
present discontents, and to make it break forth into open flames. But this let
us beware of.

Murmuring, what. P. Martyr. Com. in Cor. 1, 10.^0.
Take we heed how we quarrel with Gods dispensations and dealings with us, or
proceedings toward us, (for that is properly Murmuring, (as P. Martyr well
describes it) Quesimonia de Administratione Dei, A quarrelling with Gods
Administration, an inward discontent, outwardly expressed by words or actions,
against Gods dealings with our selves or others.) And of this murmuring take we
heed.

First, To set on the Council: Consider we (in the first place) against whom
it is that we murmr: Note. 1. Consider against whom it is that we murmr,
viz. God himself.
Against whom have thou exalted thy voice, and lifted up thine eyes on high? It
is the Lords speech to, and concerning that proud Senacharib, Is. 37. Is. 37.23.
Let it be spoken to us, to all I mean that stand guilty of this sin of
Murmuring) Against whom is it that we rise up? Is it against the holy one of
Israel? what do we set our mo^th or heart against the Heavens, quarrelling
with divine dispensations, murmuring against Gods proceedings? If so; Alas who
or what are we that we should dare to quarrel with that God in whose hands we
are, as Clay in the hands of the Potter? Who art thou O man that ^epliest
against God? (that quarrellest with him (says the Apostle) shall the thing
formed say to him that formed it, why have thou made me thus? Romans 9. Romans
9.20.
However God be pleased to deal with us, what ever his Administrations be
toward our selves or others, yet who, or what are we that we should dare to
murmr against him?

I know what will here presently be replied. Obj. W^ murmr not against God,
but Instruments, Superiors.
It is not against God that we murmr. Against whom then? Why against those
whom we apprehend to have been, or like to be the Instruments of our woe?

First, And who, or what are they? It is Moses his Interrogatory to these
murmuring Israelites, Ans. 1. Take heed of murmuring against Superiors.
when they were murmuring against Aaron and himself, Exodus 16.7. Exodus 16.7.
And what are we (says he) that ye murmr against us? So I may here say;
Those whom we look at with so evil an eye, apprehending them as Instruments
of our woe: who are they, or what are they that we should murmr against
them? Being set over us by God.
Are they such as are called, and set over us by God, by him appointed and
commissionated to go before us, and with all such as desire to approve
themselves faithful, faithful both to God and us, in seeking his Glory and
our good? In this case if the success of their endeavors do not answer their
desires, and our expectations, take we heed how we dare to murmr against
them; which if we do,

2, God is sensible of this murmuring. Exodus 16.8.12.
Secondly, Consider (in the second place) that God will be very sensible of this
Murmuring, so much Moses tells the people in the 7 and 8 ver. of the Chapt. last
named, The Lord hears your murmurings. There is not a murmuring word that
passes out of the mouth, nor yet a murmuring thought that rises up in the
heart against any Instruments employed by God for our good, but he takes
notice of it, and is very sensible of it.

3. He takes it as done to himself. Ibid. v.8.
Thirdly, I, so sensible (in the third place) as that he takes it as done to
himself; your murmurings, (says Moses in the place forenamed) they are not
against us, but against the Lord. Such a respect has God unto his Officers,
his Ministers, whom he imployeth in any special service for him; that what is
done to them, (whether for them or against them) he takes it as done unto
himself; So it is in the case of Murmurings: The Lord hears your murmurings
which you murmr against him, (says Moses there) Their Murmurings there they
were directed and aimed immediately at Moses and Aaron; verse. ^.
I but they rebounded, and reflected upon God, wounding him through their sides.

4. He will not (...) it.
Fourthly, And thus taking it, (in the fourth place) God will not bear it;
however not ever bear it. True it is, such is his long sufferance and
patience, that sometimes he bears and bears much, with the Infirmities of his
people in this kind. This we see in these Israelites, whilst they murmured
for bread and water, (as one well notes upon that, Par. com. ad Boar.
1 Cor. 10, 10.) things necessary for their sustentation, God bears with their
Infirmity, passing it by without any remarkable Judgment. But when they go
on still to provoke him in that kind, withal, adding contumacy to their
sin; murmuring not so much out of want as wantonness. This was the case when
they murmured for Flesh, for Quails; Specially if wanton murmurings.
Not contented with the Commons which God had allowed them, (though Angels
food, Man did eat the bread of Angels, (says the Psalmist) Bread given from
Heaven, Ps. 78.25.
and brought to them by the ministry of Angels, 1 King 17.6.
even as Elias his Bread was by the ministry of Ravens; I, and such bread as
if the Angels would have had bread to eat, they could have eaten no better)
they would have more full tables, and more delicate fare. In this case God
would not bear with it.

Much less when their murmurings were out of Envy and Malice. Malicious
murmurings.
That was the case when Korah and his Confederates so seditiously rose up
against Moses and Aaron; That was the case when the whole Body of the Army
siding with those wicked Spies, and giving credit to their false reports, they
were ready to take up stones against Caleb and Ioshuah, making head against
their Governors. Here their murmurings were not out of weakness, but
wilfulness; murmurings not of Infirmity, but Contumacie, having a tincture of
malice in them: Now such murmurings God will not bear with. Read we but the
stories, and we shall see how severely God dealt with them in these cases; what
exemplarie vengeance he took upon on these their contumacious, Exemplarie
vengeance taken upon the Israelites for such murmurings. Numb. 11.1. Montan.
wanton, envious, malicious murmurings. When the People became murmurers,
(says the Text in that 11 Numb.) i.e. contumacious murmurers, conquerentes
injuste, unjust Complainers, (as the Original has it) not contented with Gods
allowance, but quarrelling with his administrations: This displeased the Lord;
malum fuit in auribus Domini, it was very evil in the ears of God, and
therefore his wrath was kindled, and the fire of the Lord burnt amongst them,
(the fire of the Lord, i.e. a fire sent from the Lord, or a vehement and
terrible fire, as that Hebrew phrase often signifies) which consumed the
utmost part of the Hoasts. Thus dealt the Lord with those wanton murmurers, who
would not be at his finding; being weary of their Mannah they would have flesh:
God gives them their longing, but withal he sends a Curse and a Plague with
it; so you have it in the close of that same Chapt. ver. 33. Numb. 11.33.
While the flesh was between their teeth, yer it was chewed, the wrath of the
Lord was kindled against the People, and the Lord smote them with a very great
Plague. And for the same cause he sent the fiery Serpents amongst them,
(Numb. 21. Numb. 21.6.
How he dealt with that seditious confederacy, Korah, and his company, the
story is well known. The Earth swalloweth up some of them, Numb. 16.31, 34.
and the Fire consumes the rest: And as for the people who took up their
quarrel the next dsy, no less then fourteeen thousand and seven hundred of
them are swept away with the Plague. Verse. 49,
As for those wicked Spies, and that Rebellious rout which sided with them, God
suffered them not to go unpunished. They were all of them by little and little
consumed in the Wilderness; Numb. 14.29, 30.
not one of them entered into Canaan, 1 Cor. 10.10.
but were destroyed of the destroyer, (as the Apostle has it) Thus did God
make them Exemplarie to us, that we might hear, and fear, and take heed of
committing the like wickedness. These things were our Examples, 1 Cor. ^0.6.
(says the Apostle) to the intent that we should not lust as they lusted, nor
yet murmr as they murmured; which if we shall dare to do, do not think
that God will bear with it in us more then in them: specially if we murmr as
they murmured, Contumaciously, Wantonly, Enviously, Maliciously.

And are there not such murmurings to be found amongst some of us (my
Brethren) at this day? Such murmumurings to be found amongst us. wanton
murmurings.
Murmurings not of Infirmity, but Contumacie, we murmr, and wherefore is it:
not for Bread and Water. (Blessed be God we are not yet reduced to that
necessity, though it may be many of our Brethren are.) It is not for any
necessaries* whether for Body or Soul, but for Flesh, for Quails. It may be
some of us want what we would have, and formerly what we have had, and herein
we cannot endure to be abridged and cut short; or else we like not what we
have, and so murmr for a change of condition; wanton murmurings. In some of
us (it may be) Envious and Malicious murmurings: Envious, malicious murmurings.
Murmurings against the Callings of some, and Persons of others, whom we envy
and malign, and that for no other cause, but for some special honors which
God himself has put upon them: Our murmurings against the ways of God,
against which we are prejudiced through the evil reports that some slanderous
Spies have brought upon them: Or (^o come nearer) and there not murmurings to
be found amongst some of us rising chiefly from this ground? we are afraid lest
we shall not have the like license, the like liberty for our lusts that
formerly we have had, but that we shall be more straitlaced that way then
heretofore we have been. This it was that irritated and stirred up some of the
Corinthians against Paul, occasioning their m^rmurings against him, (as P.
Martyr notes upon that, 1 Cor. 10.10. 1 Cor. 10.10.
(Vincebantur impatientia Disciplinae, Their spirits would not stoop to Paul's
Discipline. They being loose themselves thought him too strict, and thereupon
did in a manner prefer the false Apostles before him; they would give them
that liberty, that license, allow them that latitude in their walkings that
Paul would not. And is not this the case of some amongst us at this day? do
not their murmurings spring from the same root? they cannot endure Paul's
Discipline; the very shaking of Paul's Rod over them (that Rod which he
tells his Corinthians of, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Cor. 4.21.
what will ye, shall I come unto you with a Rod?) this afrights, and terrifies
them. They cannot endure so much as to hear of a Rod, under which they must
Pass, Ezekiel. 20.37.
that they may be brought into the bond of the Covenant. The very name of
Discipline, and noise of Reformation founds so harsh in their ^ares, that it
even sets their teeth on edge, (as some harsh founds sometimes use to do) so
as they are even ready to gnash them against all those whom they look upon as
Isntrumental in this work: Now are our murmurings such? Contumacious, Wanton,
Malicious, Envious Murmurings? surely these God will not bear with; And
therefore in the fear of God, take we heed all of us how we give way to them,
which that we may not do: Give way to the Counsel and Charge here given by
Moses unto the People of Israel, when they were in a condition not unlike unto
ours at this day. Stand we still.

Take we heed of murmuring against God.
Not murmuring against God, not quarrelling with his Administrations and
dealings, whether with our selves or Brethren, which if we do, (yet to put a
little more strength to it) know we.

First, The next (...) to blast the mercies which we have
(In the first place) This will be the next way to blast all the mercies which
we have; what was it that tainted the Israelites Quails? so as (though in
themselves both toothsome and wholesome, delicious food, yet) to them they
proved pernicious, surseiting and poisoning of their bodies; Insomuch that what
they put in at their mouths came out at their nosthrils, becomm^ng most
loathsome unto them? why, it was their murmuring which had blown upon them,
and caused God to blow upon them. Numb. 11.2^.
They despised the Lord which was amongst them, (as the Lord bids Moses tell
them) murmuring against him, not contented with his allowance; and that turned
this Blessing into a Curse.

Again secondly, 2. The next way to keep off mercies we would have.
This is the next way to keep off the mercies which we want, and would have.
What was it that kept the old stock of Israelites, even all that came out of
Egypt, from entering into Canaan? Not one entered in but Joshua and Caleb, not
one of them received the promise. It was their Murmuring, Murm^rings upon Earth
will cause Repentings in Heaven, making void promises, keeping off Mercies; at
least retarding and delaying them. What was it that made the Israelites march
in the Wilderness so long, so tedious unto them, keeping them there for so
many years, when as they might have dispatched it in as few days? It was
their murmuring, which still set backwards the work when it was in a good
forwardness; putting them out off, and keeping them out of the possession of
the promised land for forty years together: besides the many difficulties and
hardships which they met with, for all which they might thank their murmuring.
No such way to lay blocks in the way of mercy, to keep off mercies, at least
to retard them as this.

Thirdly, In the third place, 3. ^ ready way to pull down judgment.
as it will keep off mercy so it is a ready way to pull down Judgment:
Judgment, and that both Temporal and Eternal, Temporal, not upon our own
heads only, but also upon the places where we live; Eternal upon our own
heads without repentance. It is a branch of Enochs prophecy with Saint Iudes
gloss upon it, Jude. ver. 15.16. Jude, v. 14, 15.
Behold the Lord comes with ten thousand of his Saints to execute Judgment
upon all, and to convince all that are ungodly: Convince them of what? why, as
of their wicked works, so of their wicked words, of all their hard speeches
which ungodly sinners have spoken against him. And who are these that Enoch
there speaks of. The Apostle in the next words points them out: These are
M^r^urers, Complainers; men that are so ready to quarrel even with God
himself, Verse 16.
to complain of his dispensations and proceedings with themselves and others.
O take we heed of this, as we desire to have the mercies which we enjoyed,
continued, sanctified, blessed unto us; As we desire to have the mercies which
we want, speeded and hastened; As we desire to have judgments temporal
removed, and both temporal and eternal prevented; stand we now still, Take
heed of Murmuring against God.

Take heed of murmuring against our Leaders and Governors.
Or yet (in the second place) against those which are appointed by him to go
before us, to be our Leaders and Governors; Take we heed how we quarrel with
them, murmr against them, or against their Counsels and Actions, passing
rash, and uncharitable censures upon what (it may be) we understand not;
Ignorance of the councels of Superiors oft-times a cause of murmuring.
A case very common and ordinary. It was the case of the Jews our Saviors
auditors; when they heard him say, that he was the Bread which came down from
Heaven, they were presently offended, and began to murmr against him, so you
have it, Joh. 6.41.
Io. 6.41. And so did many of the Disciples also, when they heard it, they
murmured, v. 61. And what was the ground of their murmuring? Why, their
ignorance; they understood not our Saviors meaning; which had the Disciples
done, certainly they would never have murmured against their Master. Thus
happily, did we but understand the counsels of our Superiors, and were able
to dive into the bottom of them, we would approve and allow of what through
ignorance we murmur at; Ignorance being the mother of misunderstanding,
oft-times brings forth murmuring. This makes me^ to murmur against God.
This it is that makes men so apt to murmur against God; even Ignorance of his
Counsels; they cannot trace him in those deep and hidden ways, which in
themselves are (...), Romans 11.33.
untraceable, past finding out; and thence is it that they are so ready to
quarrel with his Decrees and Administrations; whereas if they could but dive
into the bottom of his counsels, they should then see so much wisdom and
justice in all his proceedings, as would quiet and silence all their
Murmurings. To this purpose is that of the Prophet Isaiah, Isa. 29. Isa: 29.
ult.
last, They that erred in spirit, shall come to understanding; and they that
murmured, shall learn doctrine. Intimating that it is the want of
understanding and instruction, that makes men to murmur against God: the not
understanding of his counsels, of his ways; wherein if men were rightly and
thoroughly instructed, it would heal all their murmurings against him; Against
me^
And surely this it is oft-times that makes men so apt to murmur, ahd
complain against Superiors: They are none of their Counsel; they are not
privy to their aims and intentions; and consequently through ignorance
thereof, are apt to misconstrue their actions, though in themselves never so
just and equitable. Thus did the bystanders misconstrue that pious and most
religious act of Mary Magdalens in pouring out her Box of ointment upon the
head of her Savior: Mark. 14. verse. 5.
They seeing it, were offended at it, crying out of the waste. Ad quid perditio
haec? verse 4.
To what purpose is this waste? And what was the cause of their offense? Why,
they understood not the meaning of what was done. The waste they saw, but the
meaning of that waste they saw not. They understood not that she bestowed that
ointment upon her Savior, verse. 8.
(...), as an Embalming in way of preparation to his Burial. Surely even thus
fares it with many of us at the present: We see the great waste and spoil
that has been, and yet is made in the Kingdom at this day; waste of
Treasure, and waste of Blood; and we are ready thereupon to cry out in our
discontented passions, Ad quid perditio haec? To what purpose is all this
waste? But in the mean time (as we do not know what the purpose of God herein
is, so) we are not so privy to the Counsels of Superiors, as that we can
pass an unerring verdict upon their Actions. We know what the Wiseman faith
of the Kings heart; The Heavens for height, Prove. 25.3.
and the Earth for depth, and the Kings heart can no man search: And the like
may we say of his Great Council; Their counsels are for the most part
mysterious and deep, locked up from vulgaries, not to be fadomed by common
apprehensions, specially by those who look upon them at a remote distance, and
so cannot take the true height, or just scantling of them. Now seeing we cannot
pry into them, be we ware how we pass rash, and uncharitable censures upon
them, least we fall into the number of those whom Saint Jude speaks of, Jud.
v. 8, 10. Turn we Censurings and Murmurings into Prayers and Supplications.
^who speak evil of Dignities, speaking evil of things which they know not.

It will be a great deal more safe for us, and more prositable both for us and
them, to turn our Censures our Murmurings into Prayers; Our censures upon
them, and murmurings against them, into prayers for them. For this (I am sure)
we have warrant sufficient, It is that which the Apostle exhorts to, and calls
for, 1 Timothy 2. 1 Timothy 2.2.
I exhort therefore, that first of all, Supplications, Prayers, Intercessions,
be made for all men (all sorts of men.) For Kings, Pray for Superiors.
and for all that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable
life, in all godliness and honesty. This is an exercise fit and proper for
Subjects to pray for Superiors. And this do we. Pray for them, not Curse
them. Curse not the King, no not in thy thought, (says the Preacher) And Curse
not the Rich in thy Bedchamber, Eccles. 10. Eccles. 10. last.
Pray for them, not Revile them. Had Paul been aware who it was that he spoke
to, he would not have given him such language as he did. So much himself tells
the people, alleging his Rule for it; It is written, Act. 23.5.
thou shall not speak evil of the Ruler of thy People. Pray for them, I,
though they should be persecutors, That is the Rule. Pray for them that
persecute you. This do we, and do we it in the first place. Mat. 5.44.
So the Apostle there presses it, (...), First of all. Oh that murmurers would
but take out of this lesson, to pray for Superiors first of all; pray for
them, before they let fly at them, or murmur against them, certainly this
would take off the Edge of their murmuring: The more they prayed for them, the
less they would murmur against them Sure I am, They which murmur most, are
such as pray least. To prevent the one, practice the other. Pray for ^^r
Superiors. First for the King.


And that (as the Apostle there directs) First for the King, whom we
acknowledge by a divine and special Providence, set over us, as a Supreme
Governor in these his Dominions. Be we earnest with God for him, that he may
be made a Moses to us, having Moses his spirit put upon him, (and if it might
be, doubled upon him, as Elias his spirit was upon Elisha) a wise, King. 2.9,
10.
and a large spirit proportionable to the charge committed unto him; that he
may be wise as an Angel of God, (as the woman of Tekoah said to King David)
able to discern betwixt good and evil: Sam, 14.17.
And with Moses his head, beg we for him also Moses heart, a heart faithful to
his God; that like Moses he may be as a faithful servant, faithful in all the
house of his God: Mat. 24.45. Heb. 3.5.
A heart tender, and affectionate toward his people, Carrying them in his
bosom; (lovingly, tenderly, carefully) As a Nurse bears her sucking child,
Numb. 11.12.
(as the Lord requires Moses to do to his Israel:) So making him in truth,
Isa. 49.23.
what he is by office, Patrem Patriae, a Father, a Nursing Father to his
People, Gods People. Every ways a Moses, a Savior, a deliverer to the Israel
of God.

Praying for him, Pray we also for those which are in Authority over us, For
all in Authority under him.
under him. And here in special for the Representative Body, the great
Synedrion, our English Sanhedrim, The high Court of Parliament. Numb. 11.17.
the supreme Court and Council of this Kingdom, now assembled together in the
name of God, to be unto their Prince, as those seventie Elders were unto Moses,
a Council of Assistance, to bear the Burden of the People together with him.
For them beg we also, that God would do for them, what he there promises Moses
to do to his Counselors and Assistants, Ibid.
viz. take off the spirit which was upon Moses, and put it upon them, even a
spirit suitable, and proportionable to the Burden laid upon them. Making them
a Wise and faithful Council to their Prince; and Wise and faithful guides
unto his people, leading them on in such ways as God himself has laid out
for them, so as in due time they may conduct them through this Red Sea, this
Sea of blood, and this wilderness of Confusion, whereinto at the present we
are cast, unto a Canaan, a Land of rest and peace, where Righteousness and
Peace may dwell together.

And remembering them, Assembly of Divines; for whom beg. Direction.
forget we not the Sons of Aaron, who are now called together to consult about
the business of the Tabernacle. For them also beg we a spirit proportionable
to the work which they have in hand: Even the same spirit that the Lord put
upon Bezaleel and Aholiab, when he called them to the work of the Tabernacle;
The Spirit of wisdom, and understanding, Exodus 31.2, 3. Exodus 36.1.
and knowledge, to know how to work all manner of work for the service of the
Sanctuary, according to all that the Lord has commanded. Such a Spirit beg we
for them, that so all things in this Tabernacle-Temple-worke, may be done, and
performed according to the Pattern in the Mount, Act. 7.44. Heb. 8.5.
according to the mind and will of God himself.

Begging direction and assistance for them, A blessing upon their endeavors.
The budding and blossoming of Aarons Rod, the next way to stay the murmurings
of the people. Numb. 17. verse. 2.
withal beg we a blessing upon their endeavors, that the Rod of Aaron may Bud
and Blossom, and bring forth fruit. No such way to quiet the murmurings of the
people as this. It was the Lords own way which he bad Moses take, and make use
of for this very purpose, Numb. 17. The people being subject to murmuring upon
all occasions (and in particular about the Priesthood) (as you have heard) for
a Cure of that Disease, the Lord directs Moses to take twelve Rods, according
to the number of the Tribes, for every Tribe one, verse. 4.
laying them up in the Tabernacle before the Testimony; verse. 5.
And it shall come to pass, (says the Lord) That the man's Rod whom I shall
choose, shall blossom; and I will make to cease the murmurings of the children
of Israel, etc. This was the means propounded. What the success was the
sequel of the Chapter will show. verse. 8.
It came to pass that Moses went into the Tabernacle, and behold Arons Rod
which was for the house of Levi was budded, and brought forth blossoms, and
yleeded Almonds; whereupon the Lord orders Moses to take that Rod, and lay it
up in the Tabernacle before the Testimony, Verse. 10.
there to be kept for a Token against the Rebels, and (says the Lord) Thou
shall quite take away their murmurings. I shall not need to tell you that the
chief ground of our murmuring at this day, is (if not the same, yet) not
unlike to theirs, about the Priesthood. O that the wonder-working God would be
pleased to work the like wonder in our days; that we might see the Rod of
Aaron (which at the present through the Calamity of the times seems to lie
secure and dead) to Bud and Blossom, and Bring forth Almonds; yielding us, not
only Hopes but Fruits; Hopes of a quiet and comfortable condition to the
Church, with the sweet and blessed fruits of a Glorious administration in it:
No doubt but this would have a strong influence upon the present and future
distempers of unquiet spirits, either to cure and stay their murmurings, or
else to be a witness against them to all succeeding ages. This we know our God
is able to do, and this we hope he will yet do. In the meanetime, let us and
all the Lords people Stand still, waiting, and quietly waiting upon our God for
his salvation. It is good for us so to do, so faith the Church, Lam. 3 Lam.
3.26.
It is good that a man should both hope, and quietly wait for the salvation of
the Lord. I have done with the first Branch of this Direction, which (I
confess) has taken more of my thoughts and your patience, then at the first
in my intentions I allotted it.

Stand still, not Wavering.
2. All men by nature unstable, some more then others*
Pass we now to the second, Stand still, not Wavering. This men naturally are
very apt to do, being all by nature, ever since the first man left his
standing, become very unstable: but some more then others: It is that which the
Patriarch Jacob says to, and of his son Ruben, Genesis 49. Genesis 49.4.
Unstable as water. Water, it is an unstable Element, seldom standing still,
specially if there be any wind stirring; then we see how unequally and unevenly
it moves, being carried this way and that way up and down. Such is the
Instabilitie of some persons, they are (as Saint James says of his
double-minded man, Jam. 1.) ^am. 1.8
(...), unresolved, uncomposed, unstable in all their ways, carried this way
or that way as the tide runs, as the wind blows, up and down like waves of
the Sea. It is the same Apostles comparison, and it is an elegant one, Iam.
1.6. Jam. 1.6.
He that wavereth, is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind, and tossed.
A wave, you know what the motion of it is; how it rises and falls; now a
Mountain, by and by a Valley; now lifted up, by and by as much depressed
again. So unconstant and unequable is the motion of some Christians up and
down; As their condition change, so do they: In prosperity, (when things go
well with them, heaven and earth smile upon them) their spirits are alost, none
higher: In adversity, (when things run cross with them) as much dejected,
none lower. Like men in a stresse at Sea (according to the Psalmists
description of them, Psalm. 107.27.
) They mount up to heaven, they go down again to the depths, their soul is
melted because of trouble. Thus far are they moved, inordinately moved, not
knowing how to Stand still.

But thus should it not be with the Lords people, D. Gods people ought not to
be in ordinately moved, whatever their condition be.
whatever their condition be, whatever their straits, dangers, difficulties be,
(for that is the case which the Text leads us to) yet their Direction is,
they must Stand still, not being inordinately moved.

^oved they ^ay, and ought ^o be at the ^udgements of ^od.
Inordinately moved (I say) Moved they may be, nay ought to be. Christianity
does neither require nor allow a Stoicall Apathy, a Brutish stupiditie, that
men should not be affected with the hand of God, striking or threatening. Not to
be moved with the apprehension of imminent impendent evils; Perdifficite est
^ominemexue^^e Laert.
what is it, but (as he says) Hominem exuere, To put off the nature of man?
Which seeing the Eternal Son of God was pleased to put on, the sons of men
ought not to put it off.

^ut not Trou^led.
Moved they may be, but not inordinately moved, not Troubled. So our Savior
gives it in charge to his Disciples, Joh. 4. ^oh. 14.1.
Foretelling them of sad times a coming, of great Tribulation that they
should meet with, in and from the world after his departure; Let not your
hearts be troubled (says he) (...). The word is emphaticall, taken from the
royling and troubling of waters, where they are so stirred, as that the mud is
raised up from the bottom. That is properly (...). Now Christians must beware
that their hearts be not thus troubled. There is not the best heart but has
some mud, some corruption in the bottom of it, so as if it be stirred by
inordinate passions, and perturbations, it will rise and roile the spirit. This
was the case of the Israelites here in the Text; Apprehending the eminency of
the present danger which they were in, their spirits were presently ro^led,
troubled, inordinately moved. And therefore Moses for the settling of them,
bids them Stand still, Ne commoveaminis, ac fluctuetis animo, (so Iunius (as
I told you) glosseth upon the word) Be ye not stirred, troubled, disquieted,
with anxious and dubious thoughts, what shall become of you and yours? Give not
way to diffident and distrustful thoughts, so much as to call in question
either the power or presence of God: Stand you still, not doubting, not
wavering. Thus should Christians do in the like cases: In straits, in
exigents, when they know not what to do, nor which way to look, then labor
so to fix their souls by faith and confidence upon God, as that they may not
stagger, they may not waver. It is Saint James his direction to him that would
obtain wisdom, or any the like mercy at the hands of God, Jam. 1.6.
Let him ask in faith (says he) nothing wavering. (...), Nihil disceptans,
haesitans, Christians very apt to be thus troubled.
not reasoning, not scrupling. This Christians are very ready to do. We see
it in the Apostles and Disciples of Christ, when they apprehended any imminent
danger, or met with any great difficulty, they were ready to give way to
carnal reasonings and doubtings. So did Peter when he was walking upon the
Sea, treading of the water, not finding his footing so firm as he made account
of, he presently cries out, Mat. 14.30.
ready to give himself for a lost man, notwithstanding that he had his
Masters warrant and command for that which he did. The Disciples the like in
that stresse at Sea; notwithstanding that they had their Lord and Master with
them, yet they cry out, Lord, save us, we perish. Mat. 8.25. ^
And afterward coming unto a strange place, and having forgot to take Bread
with them, Mat. 16.7. ^
they began to reason with themselves how that want should be supplied to them,
notwithstanding that they had twice before had experience of the miraculous
power of their Lord and Master in multiplying of the loaves, as himself
tells them. verse. 9, 10.
Such was their weakness: A weakness which our Savior still reproves them
for, taxing their Infidelity in giving way to those faithless fears, those
carnal reasons and diffident doubts, Mat. 14.31.
O thou of little faith (says he to Peter) Wherefore did thou doubt? Why
are ye fearful O ye of little faith? Mat. 8.26. Mat. 16.8
O ye of little faith, why reason ye among your selves? They are his rebukes
to his Disciples upon the occasions aforesaid: Christians in like cases, in
cases of Danger and Difficulty, are very subject to such carnal disceptations
and reasonings, whereby their souls come to be disquieted and unsettled. But
these they must beware of, not giving way to them, but laboring for steady and
stable hearts; Jam. 5.8. A stable heart a great blessing.
Be ye also patient (says Saint James) Stablish your hearts. A great blessing
where it is. A Blessing which Paul prays for, for his Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians.
2. 2 Thessalonians, 2 last.
Now our Lord Jesus Christ, and God even our Father, etc. Comfort your hearts,
stablish you. Saint Peter the like for the Saints to whom he writes; The God of
all grace make you perfect, establish, strengthen, settle you, 1 Pet. 5. 1 Pet.
5.10.
What they beg for others, Christians should all seek for themselves; stable
settled spirits, that they may Stand fast, and Hold fast; So Paul ex^orts those
his Thessalonians in the place forenamed. 2 Thessalonians. 2.15 Heb. 10.23.
Therefore Brethren stand fast, and hold fast the Traditions which you have
been taught, etc. Let us hold fast the Profession of our faith without
wavering (says the Apostle to his Hebrews.) Thus should Christians Stand
still, standing their ground against whatever opposition they meet with in
respect of the faith which they profess. Paul could not but wonder to see his
Galathians so inconstant and wavering this way. I marvel (says he) that ye
are so soon removed from him that called you into the grace of Christ unto
another Gospel. Gal. 1.6.
Such Weather-cocks are no ornament to the Temples of Christ. Such unstable,
unsettled, wavering spirits, they do not become those who have once given up
their name unto God, and have his name called upon them. It is for them to
Stand still, to have stable heads and hearts. Herein they shall be made like
unto God himself, who is immutable, unchangeable, I am the Lord, I change not,
Mal. 3. Mal. 3.6.
Such he is in his nature,

And such he is in his promises; Reas. 1. The promises are stable.
which may serve as a Reason why Christians should not waver; so the Apostle
makes use of it, Heb. 10.23. Let us hold fast the profession of the faith
without wavering; why? ( For he is faithful that promised.) Gods promises,
they are the gro^nd upon which a Christian stands. Now if the ground were false
and shaking, they which stand upon it could not be blamed for shaking with it.
But that being firm, no Reason why they should waver, but Stand still: which
unless Christians do, they cannot See the salvation of the Lord.

(Which may serve as a second Reason. Reas. 2. Wavering hearts cannot see the
salvation of the Lord.
) So much we may collect from the Text it self. Stand still, and see, etc. A
man that wavers up and down can never take sure aim. He that would See the
salvation of the Lord, must stand steady, Stand still.

Use. Applic. Labor we for a holy stability.
And such a holy stabilitie let all of us in the fear of God be excited to
seek after, and labor for, that whatever changes come down upon the world,
yet we may in our measure be like unto God himself, immutable, unchangeable.
An Exhortation I think never more seasonable then at this day. I shall not
need to tell you what unsettled and unsteady times we are fallen into; I shall
only make this use of it; The more unsetl^d the times are, Speci^lly in in
the^e unsettled times.
the more settled spirits we had need to labor for: Unsettled spirits and
unsettled times will not do well together. A swimmering Brain and a seeling
reeling-ship, will make but foul weather of it. If ever, now labor we for
stable hearts, steady and composed spirits, that whatever Herican^'s, whatever
Storms and Tempests come down upon the world, upon the Kingdom, upon the
Church, upon the State, upon the places where we live, upon our selves, yet we
may ride it out, and that in some measure steadily, not being inordinately
moved, though moved, but like a good ship at Anchor, though moving, yet we may
Stand still.

Q. How the heart may be made steady in such tempestuous times as these.
I know now what your thoughts are. How shall this stabilitie be attained? How
shall the heart be made so steady as that it may Stand still? As that a
Christian may come to ride steady in a stresse, and particularly in such a
stresse as that which is now come down upon this Church and Kingdom?

A. Illustrated by way of Allegory, from a ship riding at anchor in a stresse.
A great and a useful Question. In the resolution whereof, give me leave to
take hold of that Metaphor which the Question (as I have propounded it) puts
into my hand. A metaphor which many of you, (most of you) are familiarly
acquainted with, and therefore I the rather make choice of it. You can tell me,
by what means a ship may be made to ride steady: And let me tell you, that by
the very like means the heart may be brought to be steady, so steady as that
it shall not be inordinately moved in the greatest stresse of Temptation that
can come down upon it.

To make a ship ride steady, four things requisite.
To make a ship ride steady, there are (as I take it) these four things
principally requisite. She must be well built, downe-ballasted, low-masted,
sure-anchored. If any of these be wanting, she will never ride steady; bring we
home every of them, and make use of them (by way of Allusion) to our present
purpose.

I. It must be well built, viz. strongly and artificially.
First, The first requisite to make a ship steady, is, she must be well built,
which consists in two things. She must be built strongly and artificially;
strongly, well-timbred, not weak; which if she be, she will give way in a
stresse, and so prove leakie: Artificially, well molded, not tender-sided;
which if she be, she will prove Waltrie, Applied to the soul, which must be
well built.
and so make soul weather of every ordinary gale. And thus must the soul be
built that it may stand still, ride steadie in a stresse; It must be

First, Well-simbered, well laid in with all requisite variety of true, sound,
substantial, sanctifying Graces, I. Strongly, wellayed in with substantial
Graces.
which are to the soul as Beams, and Timbers, and Ribs to the Ship; without
these, it is not an outward formal profession that will serve the Turn: It is
not the outward planke or sheading of the ship, that will make her keep up
tithe in a stresse; If she be not well strengthened within, she will (as I say,
and you know) give way, and prove leakie. It is not an outward profession (how
glorious soever) nor yet any common Graces, that will bear up, and bear out
the soul in the hour of Temptation. Unless there be aliquid intus, unless
it be well laid in, and strengthened inwardly (in the inner Man (as the Apostle
calls it) with sound and substantial sanctifying Graces, it will give way.
Ephesians. 3.16.
See an instance of it in Hymaeneus and Alexander, sometimes Paul's followers
and companions, they made an outward profession of the faith, and (no question)
for the time a glorious one, but having nothing but an outward profession, not
being well laidin, (...), 1 Timothy 1.19.
They made shipwreck of what they seemed to have. A truth which our Savior
illustrates (as you know) by the Parable of the stony ground, which receiving
the good seed soon puts it sorth again in a fair promising blade; Mat. 13.5,
6.
but no sooner does the Sun arise and lie hot upon it, but presently not having
Earth and Root to bear it out, it withers and comes to nothing. I shall
not need to make any interpretation of the Parable, our Savior has done it to
my hand in the 20 ver. of the same Chapter, Verse. 20, 21.
He that received the seed into the stony places, the same is he that
hears the word, and anon with Joy receives it, (making in outward glorious
profession) but having not root in himself, (the root of the matter being not
found in him, Job. 19.28.
(as Job speaks) he indureth but for a while; for when tribulation or
persecution arises because of the word, by and by he is offended. I might
here mind you of that other Parable of the house built upon the Sand, Mat.
7.26.
tending to the same purpose, showing that the soul which is not strongly
built, built upon a sure foundation (as Saint Luke explaines it) it will never
endure the storm of temptation; Luke 7.49.
but it will fetch way, and totter and shake, and in the end fall down to the
ground. Would we then stand still, would we be steady in times of trial, not
being inordinately moved, much less over-turned, see that our souls be well
and strongly built.

I. First built upon a sure foundation.
First built upon a sure foundation, and that is Jesus Christ: Other foundation
(says the Apostle) can no man lay then that which is laid, which is Jesus
Christ: He must be to our souls as the foundation to the house, 1 Cor. 3.11.
or (to return to the Metaphor in hand) as the Keel to the ship: If a ship
have not a good Keel, A good Keele.
all her upper-worke is to no purpose; If the soul be not built upon Christ,
all our super structures will prove nothing worth; And therefore (in the first
place) make we him our Keel, laying our souls upon him, Make Christ our Keele.
resting upon him, as the floor-timbers in a ship do upon the Keel, bottoming
all our hopes in and upon him, laying all the weight of our souls for
salvation and eternal life upon him; not resting upon any thing else besides
him, what end else we rest upon besides Christ, we shall find it at the best
but a Kelsie (as you call it) a false Keel, not able to bear any weight, any
stresse. That our souls may be well, and strongly built, let them be built
upon him who is the strong God, (as he is called Isa. 9. Isa. 9.6.
) upon him who by his Power upholdeth the whole frame of Heaven and Earth, even
as the Keel in a ship does all the upper-worke, Heb. 1.3.
with all the lading in it.

Having Christ for our Keel, 2. Then get the soul furnished with other graces.
1 Cor. 1.5, 7.
our foundation being built upon him by faith, now see that our souls be well
timbred, well furnished with other Graces, that (as Paul says of his
Corinthians) we may be in every thing enriched by Christ; not defective in any
requisite Grace: be it hope, or love, or zeal, or humility, or Patience, or
the like: Let it be our care that our souls may be laid in with some
proportion of every of these. And here take heed that we do not content our
selves with shows and shadows of Graces; These will prove but as sappie or
rotten timbers in a ship, which will bear no stresse) but make sure that our
Graces, what ever they be for the quantity, yet for the quality they be sound
and substantial; Heart of Grace (as I may call it) That so we may be
strengthened with all might in the inner man, according to the glorious Power of
our God unto all patience and long-suffering with joyfulnesse, Ephesians. 3.16. Col.
1.11.
(as Paul prays both for his Ephesians and Colossians) here is the first
Branch of this first Direction. The soul, that it may be steady, must be like a
good ship, built strongly.

Secondly, And (as strongly) so (in the second place) it must be like a
well built ship, which is built artificially, 2. Built Artificially,
well-moulded.
well-moulded. Now (to follow the metaphor) when is a ship said to be
well-moulded; why, when there is a due proportion observed in her Dimensions, a
due proportion for length, an breadth, and depth, Which consists in a due
proportion of Graces.
which if it be not observed she will never ride well.

Thus must the soul be molded (as I may say) that would ride well, and keep
steadie, it must have a due proportion in her Graces; not a great deal of one,
and little or nothing of another. As for instance, not a great deal of zeal,
and little or no knowledge; this disproportion or defect the Apostle observed,
and pitied in many of his countrymen the Jews. Romans 10.2.
I bear them record (says he) that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge. And is not this the record (my Brethren) which the
Ministers of Christ may as truly bear unto some and many, as in this, so in
other places of the Kingdom at this day (otherwise well-meaning Christians)
that They have a zeal for God, but not according to knowledge. There is no
proportion betwixt their knowledge, and their zeal; they have a great measure
of the one, little or nothing of the other. Now it being so, it is no wonder
that they are many of them so unsteadie, so unstable, so unsettled as by sad
experience we see them to be; carried this way and that way into errors of
the right hand, and of the left hand, rolling too and again, like ill molded
vessels, which are no content either to those that stear them, or are
Passengers in them. Would we ever have steadie, stable hearts, labor for a due
proportion in our Graces.

And in particular, let me advise and persuade you to get a large proportion of
one Grace, Get a large proportion of love.
(a Grace wherein you shall not need to bear exceeding proportion) and that is
that Grace of Graces, without which the Apostle will tell you, 1 Cor. 13.2, 3:
all other Graces are nothing, or as good as nothing, viz. the Grace of Love.
Oh seek we all of us after this Grace, that our souls may be (as I may say)
well laid out with it: with love to God, love to his Truth, love to his
Ordinances, love to his Ministers, love to our Brethren. Without this, what
ever other graces we have, we will never hold steadie; a truth which the
Metaphor in hand illustrates very aptly. A ship, be she never so well and
comely built, as for all materials, so for all other her proportions; yet if
she be tender-sided (as you call it) not well laid out, but pinched in the
sides, she will never be steadie. A very lively Emblem (me thinks) of a
straight-hearted Christian, one who it may be has some other commendable parts
and Graces, as of Knowledge and Zeal, etc. I, but he is not well laid out, his
Bowels are straightened. It is Saint Paul's own expression, 2 Cor. 6. 2 Cor. 6.
complaining of want of love in his Corinthians toward himself, and his
Ministry; Verse. 12.
O ye Corinthians (says he) ye are straightened in your own Bowels; Their
Hearts were not laid out, and enlarged toward his Person and Ministry, as
his was toward them in the unfeigned desire of their good. Verse. 13. One maine
cause of unsteadinesse in these times, the want of love.
Now where the soul is thus pinched in, the Bowels thus straightned for want
of love, no wonder that Christians are so fickle and unstable, as at this day
we find them to be; so ready upon every slight occasion to take the snuff,
and to fly off from the Ordinances of God, unless they be dispensed by such
hands, and after such a manner and fashion as themselves like best; so ready to
forsake the fellowship and communion of the Saints in the public Assemblies,
Heb. 10.25.^.
and to run out into Errors both in Doctrine and Practice. Certainly (my
Brethren) were our souls but laid out with this grace of love in any measure
proportionably to some other graces that we pretend unto, and presume to be
owners (if not masters) of, we would not be so unstable, so unsettled, so soon
taken off, and turned aside. It is the nature of love (as the Apostle tells
us, reckoning up the property of it, 1 Cor. 1 Cor. 13.4.
) (...), to suffer long and much; to suffer much for God and from men; for God,
in standing for his Truth against opposition; verse. 5.
from men in bearing with the infirmities of Brethren. Neither is it easily
provoked, (...) (as the Apostle there goes on) it is not easily sharpened or
edged; but it bears all things (all things tolerable) it indureth all
things: verse. 7.
And therefore (to draw toward a conclusion of this point) would we have our
selves steady, get them laid out, get them enlarged: It is that which Paul
begs from his Corinthians in the place forenamed; 2 Cor. 6.11, 13.
O ye Corinthians, our mouth is open unto you, our heart is enlarged. Now for
a Recompense in the same (I speak as unto children) Be ye also enlarged. And
give me leave, without either ostentation or flattery, to take up his words,
and say unto you of this place, To you our mouth is open, (a mercy which I dare
say) some of you, many of you, have heretofore begged at the hands of God; God
has heard your prayers, Our mouth is open to you) and (let me speak it as in
the presence of that God, who is the searcher of hearts) Our heart is (in
measure) enlarged toward you in the unfeigned desire of your good, your peace,
your welfare, spiritual and temporal; your happiness, your salvavation: Now
for a recompense in the same (I speak as unto children, hoping that there are
somehere present that will own that spiritual relation) Be ye also enlarged,
enlarged in your affections toward that ministry which heretofore (through
the blessing of God upon weak endeavors) you have found effectual for the
begetting of some, and for the nursing up of others.

And now, O that all our hearts were but thus laid in, and thus laid out;
laid in with a due proportion of all requisite graces, laid out with a large
proportion of this Grace of Love, Certainly they would then be more steady then
generally in these unsteady times they are: I, so steady, as that though the
whole world should turn round, yet we (like the Polar stars in the Heavens)
should Stand still.

Secondly, A second Direction follows: 2. Downe-ballasted, viz.
That a ship may be made to ride steady, she must be downe-ballasted, so bound
down to the water by some sad and pondrous lading, as that she may not be
tossed with every blast or billow: In like manner the soul that would Stand
still and be steady, it must be ballasted, downe-Ballasted; Ballasted, with
what? Why with sound Judgment, With judgment and discretion, which is the
Salt of Graces.
and true Christian Direction, A Grace (whatever any hot and violent spirits in
these times may speak or think of it) both useful and necessary, as Salt to
our meat, (for so indeed it is, the Salt of all Graces, seasoning persons,
actions, words, without which they are all unsavory.) And will you know what it
is? It is a power or faculty to discernethings which differ: Judgment, what
it is? 1 Phil. 9.
This I pray (faith Paul to his Philippians) That your love may abound more and
more, in all knowledge and judgment, that ye may discern things which differ
(so the old Translation reads it according to the Original. A power or
faculty to judge of things as they are, not according to appearance, Joh. 7.24.
2 Cor. 10.7.
but according to truth; and that not only of the lawfulness or unlawfulness
of them, but also of the expediency or inexpediency, convenience or
inconveniency of them, that so a man may order himself in his speeches and
actions accordingly; which David makes the property of a good man, he is one
that steereth his course with this Rudder: A good man will guide his affairs
with discretion, Ps. 112. Psalm. 112.5.
This is judgment, this is Discretion: A grace needful for all, A Grace most
requisite for the Ministers of the Gospel.
specially for the Ministers of the Gospel, who being to go before the Lords
people, stand in need of a double portion of it, (specially in such times as
these into which we are fallen that their whole carriage, all their actions,
all their speeches maybe seasoned with it, specially those in publik, that so
the word in their mouths may not (through want of this) be made unsav^ry to
any, Sam. 2.17.
nor any of the ordinances of God made to stink in the nosthrils of mere
carnal men. Not only they, but all others, even all private Christians should
look out for their share and portion of it: Requisite for private Christians,
specially in these times.
It being a Grace so necessary to them, that without it they will never be
stayed, never settled. What is it that makes multitudes so heady, so unstable,
so unsettled at this day as they are? So ready to cast off received truths? So
ready to embrace any noveltie that is obtruded upon them, specially if it have
but a gloss of piety set upon it? Alas, they are unballasted, they want
judgment to discern of things, to judge of them according to truth: And as
for discretion, possibly some of them may take it for a Dull Grace, not fit for
these active and busy times. (Foolish Pilots (who would not account them so?)
That throw over their Ballaste in a stresse.) What wonder now if they heave and
set, and are carried this way and that way with every billow, with every blast.
S. Inde speaking of such, he fitly resembles them to empty clouds,(...), clouds
they are without water Jud. verse. 12. Jud. v. 12.
carried about withwinde. It is so, you know, with light and empty clouds; How
are they hurried hither and thither according as the winds drives them? And all
for want of water, which should be as Ballaste unto them to balance them, (as
Elihu phraseth it, Job 37. Job 37.16.
Do thou know the ballancings of the clouds?) Would we come to Stand still
in these unsettled and tempestuary times, take we in every of us some of this
Ballaste; get we our hearts ballasted with some proportionable measure of sound
judgment, Take heed of putting to Sea without Ballast.
and do not dare to venture our selves upon the differences and controversies
of the times without it, we would account him an unwise Pilot that should dare
to put to Sea without his Ballaste: Vnballasted bottomes may lie safe in the
harbor, but to put to Sea (specially in a stresse) they cannot without
emminent hazard. Certainly it would be a great deal better and safer for
private Christians to contain themselves within the bounds of known truths (a
safe harbor to them) then to venture rashly, and heedily upon the controversies
of the times, which they cannot do without emminent danger both to themselves
and others. Before you launch forth into this deep, into this grown Sea, I
mean engage your selves in Church differences, which are now risen to a
height, get your hearts thus Ballasted, downeballasted, with sound judgment
and true Christian discretion. This will be a means to keep you steady, so as
you shall not be tossed too and fro, Ephesi. 4: 14.
nor carried about with every wind of doctrine, (as Paul speaks to his
Ephesians) much less make shipwreck of that faith which you have embraced and
professed, which otherwise you are subject to and in danger of. Lamentable
instances of this kind the present times afford many. Should we coast along the
shore of the English Church in this Kingdom at this day, alas! How many such
wracks shall we see? How many Vessels (which might otherwise have been
serviceable and profitable) have by this means of late miscarried? Some bilged
upon this rock, others upon that; some run a ground upon this shelfe, others
upon that; some fallen into quick-sand, others into that; some fallen upon
Separatisme, others upon Anabaptisme, a third upon Familisme, a fourth upon
Antinomianisme, all in hazard to be lost (at least to the Church) unless God
be the more merciful to bring them off; and all this for adventuring to put to
Sea without their Ballaste. O that we may all of us be warned by their
miscarriages, not daring to make the like adventures before we have taken in
some good proportion of this Ballaste, which may keep down our spirits unto
truths received; So as whatever Errors break in upon the Church, to the
disturbing and disquieting of the Peace of it, yet we may ride it out, and do
what Moses here requires from the people, Stand still. Here is a second
Direction; Pass we to a third.

Thirdly, That a ship may be steady, and ride steady, she must be low-masted,
3. Low-masted and Low-built.
(and I might add low built too) high-carved, and Tante-masted ships, they
will fetch way in a stresse; and therefore (as you know) the use at such times
is, to strike the Top-masts, and if need be to cut all by the Board, that so
the wind may have the less force and power over them. I know your thoughts
here run before me in the application. That the soul may be steadie, it must
be humble and lowly, not high-minded, if so, it will be heady. It is not for
nothing that Paul puts these two together, A humble and lowly soul.
heady, high-minded, 2 Timothy 3. 2 Timothy 3.4.
seldom shall we find them asunder. Surely it is none of the least causes why
many in these days are so heady, (...), praecipites, Rash and praecipitate in
their courses, they are high-minded; (...), inflati, puffed up, (which some
(with no great mistake) read (...), August. Aquin. Vid. Bez. ad loc.
Excaecati, blinded) swollen with some high conceits, high thoughts of
themselves of their own deserts, their own parts, their own gifts, it may be
their own perfections. In the mean time looking overby, and superciliously
upon others, whom they apprehend to be inferior to themselves; No wonder if
such souls be unstable, running from error to error: Alas the wind has
too much power over them for them to stand still; A stable soul must be a
humble, a lowly soul.

And how steadily does such a soul ride it out in all weathers, come what will
come? A humble soul rides steady in all weathers
it rides snugge (as you say) lying under the wind, not feeling much of it;
whilst in the mean time those high-carved and tall-masted vessels, men of high
thoughts and conceits, are tossed to and fro, and (it may be) soon over-set,
and over-turned. I shall not need to mind you how many (otherwise useful)
vessels have miscarried this way. I suppose there is scarce any of us but our
own experience can furnish us with some instances of this nature, making good
this undoubted truth; that there is no one thing that sooner over-sets and
over-turnes the soul then Pride; and amongst all Prides none so soon as
spiritual Pride, when men shall be proud of the Graces of God: Would we in our
own particulars be secured from the like miscarriage, and would we be steady
in these unsteadie times; O take the Apostles Counsel to his Colossions: Put
we on as the Elect of God, humbleness of mind, Col. 3. Col. 3.12.
In lowliness of mind each preferring others before our selves, Phil. 2.3.
(as the same Apostle presses it upon his Philippians.)

And thus thinking meanly of our selves, Seek not high things for others.
do not either promise or seek high things to, or for our selves; It is that
which the Lord bids Jeremy say to Baruch, Ier. 45. Ier. 45.4, 5.
telling him what God was about to do, viz. to break down what he had
built, and to pluck up what he had planted, to bring desolation upon the
whole Land; And (says he) seek thou great things for thy self, seek them
not; Let it be spoken to every of us, as counsel very seasonable for the times
into which we are fallen. God at this day amongst us, (who but sees it?) he is
breaking down what he has built, he is plucking up what he has planted:
Great are the desolations which he has brought upon this Land already, yet
threatening greater; And what do we now seek great things, high things for our
selves? Are our eyes upon great estates, high places, upon riches and honors,
and dignities, and preferments? Do we seek these, promising or propounding
them to our selves? Alas, do it not in such times as these; if God may but
do that for us which he there promises Baruch to do for him, Verse. ^.
viz. Give us our lives for a Prey to our selves, it is more then we deserve,
and more then many of our Brethen elsewhere have found. Alas, how many
thousands of them, have had not only their Estates, but their Lives also given
as a Prey to others? How many of them have been, and daily are numbered to the
Sword? O, if the Lord may but give us our lives as a Prey unto our selves, it
is mercy, and a mercy beyond our deserts; I, and more then we can promise to
our selves. Promise not great things to our selves.
Take heed in the mean time of promising great things to our selv^es. Take
heed of building our nests on high. It is an expression which the Spirit of God
is pleased to make use of more then once; Though thou should make thy nest as
high as the Eagle, I will bring thee down from thence, (says the Lord
speaking to Edom) Jer. 49.] Jer. 49.16*
Though thou set thy nest amongst the Stars, thence will I bring thee down,
(says the Lord, speaking to the same Edomites) Obad. 4.] Obad. v. 4:
Woe to him that coveteth an evil covetousness to his house to set his nest
on high (says the Prophet Habucuck) Hab. 2.] Hab. 2.9.
The Metaphor is elegant, and for the sense of it obvious enough: To build the
nest on high, what is it but to propound and promise great things, high things
to a man's self? Now this take we heed of, specially in such times as these: If
we do it, we will never be stable, we shall never Stand still. They which
build their nests on high will never be stable.
A Truth which that Metaphor illustrates very aptly. Birds which build their
nests on high in the tops of the Cedars, or other Trees, we see how they wave
to and again with every wind, ready to have nests and all over-turned; whilst
in the mean time those Birds which build upon the ground, or in the shrubs and
bushes, they sit quiet and still. Surely thus will it be with those who build
their nests on high, that propound and promise great things unto themselves; if
storms come down upon them, if they meet with troubles and disasters, if they
be driven from their house and home (as many of our Brethren at this day are;)
Alas, how does this shake and disquiet them? To see all their designs dashed,
their hopes made abortive, their expectations frustrated, they cannot bear it,
they cannot brook it, it comes near them, and shakes them terribly.

It is the speech of the Prophet Jeremy unto the house of the King of Judah,
Jer. 22.23. Jer. 22. v. 1.
O inhabitant of Lebanon, that make thy nest in the Cedars, how gracious
shall thou be when pangs come upon thee, Verse. 23.
the pain as of a woman in travel? The people of the Jews generally
(specially those of the Court) they were a secure people, promising peace and
tranquillity, and prosperity to themselves; they made their nests amongst the
Cedars, thought themselves out of the reach of what ever dangers. I, but what
says the Lord to them? How gracious shall thou be when Pangs come upon thee?
When sudden, unexpected, unlooked for evils and judgments over-take you, what
will you then do? Let it be spoken to all secure persons amongst us, the
Inhabitants of Lebanon, those who make their nests amongst the Cedars, promise
or propound great things, high things to themselves. O what will you do when
judgments come down upon you as Pangs upon a woman in travel, suddenly,
unexpectedly, unavoidably? That we may not be inordinately moved with such
storms that we may feel little of them; Learn of the Lark to fly high, but
build low.
learn we of that little bird the Lark; which though she fly high, as high
as any bird (if not higher) yet she builds low, as low as any. Let we our
souls rise high, mounting up a loft to heavenward in heavenly contemplations,
but build low in regard of temporal expectations.

Specially in Evil times. Jer. 48.28.
Specially in such times as these: It is that which the Prophet^ Jeremy says by
way of threatening against Moab, Jer. 48. O ye that dwell in Moab, leave the
Cities and dwell in the Rock, and be like the Dove that makes her nest in the
sides of the holes mouth. Moab had been proud and haughty, verse. 29.
so it follows in the next words. We have heard of the Pride of Moab, he is
exceeding proud, his l^ftinesse, and his arrogance, and his pride, and the
haughtiness of his heart. Moab had built his nest on high. I, but the Lord by
his Prophet there tells them, they should be brought down, and made to build
lower, to take up with a meaner condition. That which is there said against
them by way of threatening, let it be spoken unto us by way of Counsel. What is
there said of Moab may as truly be said of England: England through her long
continued peace and prosperity, she was become proud and haughty. Who is
there but has heard of the pride of England? Not long since she was exceeding
proud; Certainly so would our forefathers have thought, had they but seen
this their daughter in her late Ruff and Pomp, I, but now God (as he has in
measure already done) he seems to be about to pull down the pride of
England, having already stripped her of many ornaments, many superfluities. O let
all of us be now like the Dove, contenting our selves with lower and meaner
Lockers, stooping to meaner conditions if God shall see them fitting for us. We
know not how low the condition of the Kingdom in general, or any of us in our
own particulars may yet be. By way of preparation to what may come, let all of
us be dealing with our own hearts aforehand, laboring to bring our spirits
low, and so low as that yet they may be beneath our condition. Lay our Spirits
beneath our condition.
If a ship be over-masted, she will be top heavy, never steady. And thus is it
with a man whose spirit is above his condition, he will never be stable. True
it is, a ship that is under-masted will never be good for sail, and so a man
that has not a spirit in some measure proportionable to his condition, he will
never be active, nor very serviceable: But yet let it rather be under, then
over, specially in such times as these.

Calamitous times, they are stooping times. Calamitous times, stooping times.
When the wind is aloft, and the Sea is grown, and men ride for their lives,
it is no time then to put out tops and top-gallants, and flags and streamers.
Surely such are the times that are come down upon us: No times to lift up our
heads or hearts, no times to put out flags and streamers of pride and
prodigality. If ever, now stoop, humbling our selves under the mighty hand
of God, bring we our hearts low, that (apprehending our selves unworthy of the
least mercy) we may be contented with whatever condition providence shall
please to allot us. Taking this course, we shall find it of singular use for
the quieting and stablishing of our spirits in the midst of these tempestuous
and unquiet times, (which threaten no less then ruin to all those that look
upon them, and are embarked in them) so as whatever storms arise, yet we may
ride it out, and in our measure Stand still. I pass to the fourth and last
Direction.

4. Sure-Anchored.
Fourthly, That a ship may ride steady in a stresse, she must be sure-anchored.
By that means, though moving, yet she keeps her station, Stands still. To
prosecute the Metaphor. To sure-Anchoring, three things requi^ire.
To the sure-anchoring of a ship, there are three things requisite. First, the
Anchor it self must be sure: Secondly, the Ground on which it is cast must be
good: Thirdly, the Cable wherewith it is fastened must be strong. And all these
must the Soul have a regard unto that would ride it out, and Stand still in
the stresse of Temptation and Trial.

I. A sure-Anchor, viz. Faith. Heb. 6.19.
First, It must have a sure Anchor: Now what that is, the Apostle will tell you
in that place well known, Heb. 6. Which Hope (says he)(or Faith, for they are
near a kin, so near as that they are often taken the one for the other) We
have for an anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast. The soul of a
Christian in this world it is as a ship at Sea, subject to storms and tempests
of Temptations: In these storms, unless it have an Anchor, and a sure Anchor
to ride by, it will be driven too and fro to the great both disqui^t and danger
of it. Now this Anchor is Faith or Hope, and very fitly may it be so called. An
Anchor being let fall, Faith fitly compared to an Anchor.
(as Calvin well applies the Metaphor) it passes through the waters, makes
way through all the waves and billows, never staying till it come at the
bottom; where taking hold of the ground which lies out of sight, by a secret
and hidden force it stays the ship; so as though it be moved, yet it is not
removed, but still keeps her station: Of such use is Faith to the soul. When
the soul is in a stresse: tossed with the waves and billows of Temptations
and Trials, threatening to swallow it up, Faith breaks through all, never
resting until it come at God himself, who is invisible, and taking hold upon
him, by a secret force it stays the soul, keeps it from being driven upon
the rocks or sands of Desparation. An Anchor, and a sure Anchor, a
Sheat-Anchor, an anchor which the soul may trust to, which it may ride by, and
live by, in whatever stresse can come down upon it. The just shall live by his
Faith, 2 Hab 4.
(says the Prophet Habbacuck) live by it, even in the jaws of death; as a
ship which riding at Anchor in a stresse is said to live by it. Would we then
have our souls stayed (as at all times so) in these tempestuous and
troublesome times which are come down upon us (wherein almost every day
presents us with new fears, new dangers) make we use of this Anchor.

Only taking heed that it be an Anchor like that which the Apostle there
describes, (...), a sure and steadfast Anchor that will not deceive us.

Q. But how shall we be sure that our Faith is such, and will prove such?

A. Not to go from the Metaphor in hand. To make faith a sure-anchor, two
things requisite.
To make an Anchor sure and firm, there are two things requisite. It must be
Good Iron, and well wrought. And such must our Faith and Hope be, if we would
have it firm and sure.

First, It must be first a true, sound, solid, 1. It must be solid and
substantial.
substantial faith: Faith, not Fancy. Such, (and no better) are the Hopes
which mere natural men stay their souls with in times of danger; whatever
befalls others, and threatens them, yet they hope well. But what is that Hope
of theirs? Nothing but Fancy. A light imagination grounded upon some
possibilities, at best some probabilities. They conceive a possibilite of
escaping the danger, and happily they apprehend some probable ways and means
whereby they may secure themselves from it; and hence spring their Hopes
wherewith they bear up their Hearts and Heads. Vain Hopes, like brittle Iron
that will never make good Anchor.
Now alas these are but vain and brittle hopes, like spalt and brittle Iron
that will never make good Anchor. There is no trusting to them, they are
Perishing Hopes. So Bildad in Job says of them, Job 8. Job 8.13, 14.
The Hypocrites hope shall perish; whose Hope shall be cut off, and whose trust
shall be as the Spiders Web. A Spiders Web, it is spunne (as you know) out of
the Spiders own Bowels. And such are the hopes of Hypocrites, and mere
carnal men, they are but webs spunne out of their own Bowels, nothing but a
Contexture (as I may say) of some probabilities and possibilities, which they
fancy to themselves. No trusting to such Hopes. Spiders threads, though they
were twisted never so many double, yet they would never make a good Cable. Had
we never so many possibilities and probabilities represented to us, yet trust
not unto them. Look we out for better Hope then this, viz. a sound, solid,
substantial Hope or Faith: A Hope spunne (as I may say) out of Gods own
Bowels; or (to hold to the Metaphor) a faith dug (as I may say) out of the
Mine of the Word. No other Mine will afford Iron to make this sure Anchor of:
It must be Gods own Mine, the Scriptures. There we shall meet with many rich
veins of precious promises; these are (as I may say) the Metal, the matter
and groundwork, out of which a true faith, a sound and sure hope is drawn.

2. A Faith wellwrought.
First, Which then (in the second place) must be well-wrought, viz. by the
Spirit through the Word. Even as in the forging of an Anchor, there is the
Smith, the Fire, and the Hammer: so here in the working of this Faith, the
worke-man is the Spirit, which is therefore called the Spirit of Faith, 3. Cor.
4.13.
being the Principal efficient of it. The Fire and Hammer, that is the word in
the ministry of it: Is not my word like as a fire, (says the Lord) and like a
Hammer? Jer. 23. ^er. 23.29.
Such is the Word in the mouth of Gods Ministers, being accompanied by the
Spirit. Now it is as a fire for the so^tning of the heart, and as an Hammer for
the forging and fashioning of it. Would we then have our Faith and Hope firm
and sure, see we that they be thus wrought. And for that end put we our souls
into the hands of this Workman, by a constant and cons^ionable attendance upon
the Word, which let us daily and frequently meditate upon, working the promises
upon our own Hearts. An Anchor, it is not forged at one heat, nor welded with
one stroke: It must into the fire again, and again, and have stroke after
stroke; and piece after piece. A sure and sound faith, it is not ordinarily
wrought by one Act, but many. There must be an inculcating of the promises of
God by frequent meditation and Application, laying on one promise after
another, and working them on upon the soul. Here is the first thing requisite
to this sure. Anchoring; the Anchor it self must be sure.

Secondly, The second requisite is, 2. Good and firm Ground, neither Foul nor
false.
that the Ground on which the Anchor is cast be Good; good ground fit to Anchor
in. Now to make it so, there are (as you know) two things requisite. It must
neither be Foul nor False: Not Foul, but Clear; free both from Rocks and
Wrecks, which are subject to chase the Cable in pieces: Not false, but firm;
so as the Anchor may not come home. And even such a ground must a Christian
choose for his Faith and hope, that would ride it out, and Stand still. The
ground of his Hope and Confidence must neither be Foul nor False.

First, Not Foul: I. Not foul ^round.
Such is the Hope and Confidence that wicked men put in their ill-gotten goods,
got whether by Oppression or Fraud: neither of them to be trusted in. Trust not
in oppression, Psalm. 62.10.
become not vain in ^obbery (says the Psalmist.) This David there speaks
more, specicially to his Soldiers (as our Aynsworth observes upon it. A Lesson
for Soldiers.
) And indeed it is a Lesson very proper for men of that Profession: If there be
any of them here present this day, let them carry it away with them, carrying
it both into the field, and from the field to their own Houses: Trust not ye
in Oppression, in unjust Extortions, or fradulent Injuries; become not ye vain
in Robbery: make not your selves vain and vile in the eyes of others, by
violent and unwarrantable Plunderings, and Spoylings, and Robbings, seeking
thereby to enrich your selves. Hereby (as you wrong others now) you will but
deceive your selves in the end; specially if you put any confidence; any trust
in goods so gotten, both ways becoming vain. A Lesson for all.
An Instruction very proper for them, and not improper for others. Let all of
us this day carry it home with us. Are we the owners or possessors of any
ill-gotten goods; goods gotten by Oppression or Fraud, by Violence or Deceit?
Trust not to them, nay take we heed of them, they will be but as Rocks and
Wrecks to chase in funder our Cables; confidence so placed will never hold. No
more will that confidence which is placed in any indirect, unlawful, and
unwarrantable ways and means for the securing or delivering of our selves.
That of the Wiseman is expressed, Prove. 12. Prove. 12.3.
A man shall not be established by wickedness. Would we ride Sure, take we
heed that we cast not Anchor upon Foul ground.

2. Nor false Ground.
Secondly, No nor yet upon false ground. Such are Riches, though well-gotten,
and truly come by, yet they are but false-ground, Uncertain Riches (as the
Apostle calls them) and therefore (as he there presses it) not to be
confided in. 1 Timothy 6.17.
Charge them that be Rich in this world that they trust not in uncertain
Riches. So also the Psalmist in the place forenamed, prosecutes his charge.
Trust not in Oppression, become not vain in Robbery; Psalm. 62.10.
If Riches increase set not your Hearts upon them.] If Riches, Cajil, (says
the Original) a Power of Wealth, or Powerfull-Wealth, (as Aynsworth renders
it) If they increase and flow in upon us, though it be at the right Channel,
by honest and good ways, (as Calvin and other Expositors interpret that
Clause) yet set not our Hearts upon them, trust not in them; cast not Anchor
upon this ground. If we do, we shall find it no better then a quick-sand,
false ground. Our Anchor thus cast, it will come home, so did the poore-Rich
man's in the Gospel: Having heaped up a mass, and as he thought, a mountain of
wealth, he casts anchor upon it, hoping to ride by it many days, nay years;
Soul, Soul, take thy ease, Luke 12.19.
thou have goods laid up for many years. I, but see, the ground being false,
his Anchor comes home the first night. verse. 20.
Thou fool this night, etc.

I might say the like of whatever it is that the soul can put any confidence
in besides God. Be it out of our selves, in any creature in earth or heaven; or
be it within our selves, in any Gifts, whether of nature, as strength or wit,
or the like, whereby we may think we shall be able to shift for our selves; or
Gifts of Grace, whether Common or Saving. In none of these may a Christian put
any confidence. As for saving, Sanctifying-Graces, the Jesuit says well;
Bellarm
A Christian may take up confidence from them, but not put any confidence in
them: Take up confidence from them, as they are evidences of Gods love, and
favor toward him; but not making them a ground of Confidence, not resting
upon them. This if we shall do, they may fail us, I mean as touching the
sense and apprehension of them. The case is common and ordinary; In Satanicall
Temptations, and Divine desertions; Gods dearest Saints come to doubt, and
question whether they have any truth of Grace or no. Now in such cases, should
we make them the ground of our confidence, our Anchor would come home, our
trust would fail us. And therefore, that we may ride it out in all weathers,
taking heed of both these, foule-grounds, and false-grounds; cast we our
Anchor upon Good ground.

This good Ground only in Heaven.
Q. And where is that to be found? A. Why in Heaven. Here is a difference, and
a remarkable one, betwixt this and other Anchors, (as Interpreters upon that
sixth of the Hebrews, Calv. Paraeus.
commonly observe) They are cast downwards, this upwards. Faith (or Hope) it
is an Anchor (says the Apostle there) which enters to that which is within
the veil, enters into heaven, whither Christ our High Priest is gone to make
Intercession for his people, as the High Priest under the Law was wont to go
within the veil of the Temple. Cast Anchor within the Veil.
And here we must cast Anchor if we would have it sure and steadfast, so as we
may ride steady by it. Cast it within the veil, in Heaven upon God himself.
Shall we cast it upon any thing without the veil, upon any thing of this side
Heaven, or upon any thing in Heaven besides God and Jesus Christ (as poor
deluded Papists do upon their Saints and Angels? Making God alone our
confidence.
) It will come home and deceive us when we have most need of it. Learn we
therefore all of us to make God, and God alone our Confidence, Psalm. 65.5.
He is the Confidence of all the ends of the earth (so the Psalmist calls him:)
Make we him our Confidence. So did David for himself. As what time I am
afraid I will trust in thee, Psalm. 56. Psalm. 56.3.
And he would have others to do the like, and that at all times. Trust in him
at all times ye people, Psalm. 62. Psalm. 62.8.
And this do we, (as at all times, so) specially in these unsteady and
unstable times. Resolve we to make not man, No trusting in man.
but God our confidence. The former we have made trial enough, (I fear too
much) of. And we see how that anchor has come home, how that confidence has
failed us. That which David has written we may sign to, Psalm. 62. Psalm. 62.9.
Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree are a lie; to be
laid in the Balance, they are altogether ligher then vanity. Whatever they
be, be they never so great, nay never so good, yet take heed how we trust in
them. If we do, it is both possible and probable, at one time or other our
Anchor will come home. Romans 3.4.
Let God be true, but every man a liar. Such are all men as men, liars both
Actively and Passively, subject to Deceive, and be deceived. God alone is
Immutable, Unchangeable, like firm ground which will not, cannot give way.
Would we ride sure, Anchor upon him. Here the Jesuit himself will yield us a
Tutissimum est, Bellarm.
that it is the safest course so to do, Totam in sola, To place our whole
trust and confidence in the alone mercy of God, and merits of Christ for
Eternal Salvation. And do we the like for Temporal salvation. Psalm. 44.6.
Use means (as David would his Bow and Sword) but trust not in them. I will
not trust in my Bow, neither shall my Sword save me: Make God alone our Trust.
By that means may we come to Stand still, to ride sure and steady in all
weathers, not to be changed in the midst of changes. In the Lord put I my trust
(says David) how say ye then to my soul, flee as a Bird to your mountain?
Psalm. 11. Psalm. 11.1.
They which trust in the Lord, shall be as Mount Sion, which cannot be removed,
but abides for ever, Psalm. 125. Psalm. 125.1.


3. A strong-Cable.
Thirdly, The third and last Branch of this Direction is behind, I will dispatch
it in a word. The Anchor and ground being good, now what wants but a
strong-Cable to fasten the Anchor to the ship? Thus the soul having placed and
pitched her confidence upon God, what wants now but a firm and
strong-Resolution not to let that confidence go? A firm Resolution. Heb.
10.35.
Cast not away your confidence (says the Apostle to his Hebrews Heb. 10. Let
not this Anchor slip, hold it fast. Whose house we are if we hold fast the
confidence, (says the same Apostle) Heb. 3. Heb. 3.6.
If the Cable break or slip, so as the ship be put from her Anchor, she is
presently a drift in danger of running upon the maine, of striking upon Rocks
or Sands. Thus if the soul have once let go the confidence which it has on
God, and so be put from its Anchor, it is now driven too and fro like a Weafe,
not knowing where to rest, being in continual and eminent danger of
miscarriage. And therefore whatever come, however God be pleased to deal with
us, yet put on this Resolution, not to let him go. Genesis 32.26. Psalm. 42. last.
I will not let thee go, (says Jacob:) But still to hope in him; Still hope
thou in God (says David to his disquieted soul) still to trust in him; ^ob
13.15.
Though he kill me, yet will I trust in him (says Job) A resolution
(methinkes) most lively emblematized and shadowed forth by a ship riding at
Anchor in a stresse: An Emblem of Faith conflicting with Ten^ation.
Where the Anchor brings down her head as if it would pull her under water,
insomuch that the waves and billows oft-times rake over her, it may be from
head to stearne, as if they would sink her, swallow her up; yet for all this
she holds her hold, and will not let the Anchor go: Come what will come she
will ride it out, and if she sink, she will sink at Anchor. A most lively
Emblem of a believing soul conflicting with Temptation. The storms come down
upon it, the waves rise and beat upon it, I, it may be, go over the head of
it: (It is that which Jonah says of himself in a literal sense; All thy
billows and thy waves pass over me, Jon. 2. Jon. 2.3.
And we may hear David saying the same of himself in a metaphorical sense,
All thy billows and waves are gone over me, Psalm. 42. Psalm. 4^.7.
) Threatening to drown, to sink, to swallow it up. Yet for all this, the soul
having cast Anchor, fined its confidence upon God, it will not let it slip:
come what will come, what can come, it is resolved to hold its hold: If it
sink, it will sink at Anchor: If it perish, it will perish with God, and Jesus
Christ in the Arms of it: A Resolution fit for a Christian. A Resolution fit
for the Times.
And such a Resolution let every of us put on at this day. A storm is come
down upon the Kingdom, (the ship wherein we are all embarked) the waves are
up, the Sea is grown, what shall we do? Why, whatever we do, let not our
Cable run out, let not our Anchor slip; let not go the Hold which we have
of our God; cast not away our Faith or Confidence: Remember it is our Anchor,
it is that we must live by; If that be gone, all is gone. It is not here with
the soul as it is with a ship: If a ship be put from her Anchor, yet she may
put into some harbor or other where she may be safe; But if the soul be
wholly put from this Anchor, what harbor shall she put for? Now there is
nothing but Seas, and Rocks, and Sands, nothing but present desperation, and
future destruction to be expected. And therefore, (to close up this point which
has carried away my thoughts through the aptness and sweetness of the
metaphor which I fell upon) having o^^e cast this ^ure Anchor upon this Clear
and firm Ground, having placed our confidence upon God, now hold the head of
the soul to it, wit^ the Cable of a firm and strong resolution, resolving
solving not to let our confidence go. By this means the soul being thus
surely*Anchored, it may come to ride it out in all weathers, and that in some
measure steadily; so as though it be moved, yet it shall not be removed, but
Stand still. And thus I have at length also done with this second Branch of
this seasonable Counsel handled unto us in this word, Consistite, Stand still,
not wavering. I pass to the third.

Stand Still, not Flying.
3. ^. Gods people must stand their ground against all Enemies, Spiritual and
Temporal.
Thus were the Israelites at this time ready to do: Some ready to fly from the
Enemy, could they but have found a passage to break out at; others as ready to
fly to him. Moses interdicts them both with this one word of Command; Stand,
stand-fast, stand-still, requiring them to stand their ground, to keep their
Quarters and Stations. And this should the Lords people do in like cases
against all their Enemies; 1^. Against spiriturall Enemies, Satan and
Antichrist.
be they Spiritual or Temporal. Spiritual, Satan and Antichrist; Temporal,
cruel and bloody Persecutors; all represented and shadowed out here by Pharaoh
and his Host, as I shall show you in the prosecution. And against all these
should the Lords people stand their ground.

1^. Against Satan.
First, Against Satan and all the Power of Hell: Those Principalities, and
Powers, and Rulers of the Darkness of this world, those (...), those
Spiritual wicked^^csses in high places, (as the Apostle describes them, Ephe.
6. Ephe. 6.12.
) These are the chief Enemies (as the Apostle there tells us) that Christians
have to combat and conflict with. Pharaoh and his Army, representing Satan and
the Power ^f Hell.
Enemies represented by Pharaoh and his powerful Army here pursuing the
Israelites. Even thus does Satan, with all the power of Hell pursue the Israel
of God, (so the Apostle calls all faithful Christians, Gal. 6. Gal. 6.16.
) Egypt, I shall not need to tell it you, how it was a figure of our
spiritual bondage, and misery under sin and Satan; No^ yet how Isreal's
deliverance out of Egypt was a figure of our spiritual deliverance by Christ.
These are obvious notions. As also that Pharaoh the King of Egypt was but as a
Viceroy or Deputy, representing Satan the Prince of this world. Joh. 14.30.
It is a representation which we find the Prophets sometimes making use of. So
the Father Saint Iero^e Interprets that of the Prophet Ezechiel, Ezekiel. 29.
Ezekiel. 29. v. 2.
Sonn^ of Man set thy face against Pharaoh King of Egypt, etc. This he speaks
(says the Father) literally against Pharaoh King of Egypt; Hieron.com.ad
locum.
but Allegorically and Mystically, Contra magnam illam Potestatem, against that
Principality and Power, even Satan the Prince Paramont of Egypt. But more
clearly the Prophet Isay in his 27th chap. Prophesying against the Kingdom of
Satan, (as the Contents in your Geneva Bibles lay it down) he expresses it
thus: Isa. 27.1.
In that day the Lord with a sore, great and strong Sword; shall visit
Leviathan, the winding Serpent, etc. and he shall stay the Dragon that is in
the Sea. Where by Leviathan, the Serpent, and Dragon (as Interpreters mostly
agree it) is to be understood properly the King of Egypt, who was a Potent and
mighty Prince, living amongst, and (as it were) upon the waters, viz. the
River of Nilus, and the Red Sea, from whence came the chiefest revenue of his
Country, (as Illicius notes upon the word Leviathan) and therefore there called
the Dragon that is in the Sea, or the Dragon in the waters, as the Psalmist
describes him, Psalm. 74. Psalm. 74.13, 14.
where speaking of Pharaoh and other his Commanders, whom God destroyed in the
Red Sea: Thou brakest (says he) the heads of the Dragons in the waters: Thou
brakest the heads of Leviathan in pieces. In both places, the Dragon and
Leviathan is one and the same, viz. Pharaoh with all the Power of Egypt. So
the Prophet Ezekiell most clearly explaines it, Ezekiel. 29.3. Ezekiel. 29.3.
where Prophesying by name against Pharaoh King of Egypt, he calls him the
great Dragon that lies in the midst of his Rivers. Thus it is properly, but
Mystically and Allegorically, it is to be understood of Satan and his Kingdom.
Hieron.Com.ad locum. and in Cant. Hom.^. Calv. ibid.
So Jerome, so Calvin, so Interpreters generally carry it. Satan, he is the
great Leviathan, so called for his Power and strength; that crooked winding
Serpent, for his poison and subtlety, winding himself every way for his own
advantage: The Dragon that is in the Sea, the Sea of this world, (as Calvin
prosecutes it) playing and sporting himself like the Leviathan in the deep
waters, Job 41.
or like the Crocodile in Nilus, seeking whom he may devour. And he is the
spiritual Pharaoh, who holding all men by nature in a spiritual servitude and
bondage, he prosecutes the Israel of God, all those who are taken out of his
hands, translated out of his Kingdom, in measure freed and delivered from his
Tyranny, with all the power he can make, seeking either to reduce them, or to
destroy them.

Now in reference to him, and all these spiritual Enemies, the counsel in the
Text is very proper, teaching the Lords people what they are to do, Stand fast
against these Enemies.
Consistite, stand, stand fast. So the Apostle presses and inculcateth it in
the place forenamed, Ephe. 6. Ephe. 6.1^.
Put on the whole armor of God, that you may be abl^ to stand, verse. 11. Take
unto you the whole armor of God, that you may be able to with stand, and
having done all, to stand, verse. 13. Verse 13.
(...), to stand, and stand against. Against what? Why, against that Crooked,
winding Serpent, against the wiles of the Devil, verse. 11. against that great
Leviathan, those Principalities and Powers, verse. 12. Against these stand we
fast, no^ Flying, but Resisting, not flying from Satan, but making head against
him; Whom resist steadfast in the Faith, 1 Pet. ^.^.
(says Saint Peter) speaking of that roaring Lion:) (...)* firmi in side, or
per fidem, firm and steadfast by Faith in Faith, by the Power of Faith in the
Profession of Faith. Standfast in the Faith, (says the same Apostle to his
Corinthians, 1 Cor. 16. 1 Cor. 16.13.
)

Q Stand still? And stand fast? Counsel soon given, Satan, a potent Enemy.
(you may say) but not so soon taken. Satan, a Potent Enemy, how shall we
poor striplings ever be able to look him in the face, much more to stand our
ground against him?

A. So was Pharaoh.
Even so might the Israelites here have replied to Moses. Pharaoh and his
Host, a Potent Enemy, and how should they ever be able to stand against him?
Yet for all that Moses here bids them stand, and stand still. This did he, even
as it is said of Abraham, Romans 4.19. Romans 4.19, 20.
Being not weak in Faith, he considered not his own body, etc. He staggered
not at the Promise of God through ^nbeliefe, but was strong in Faith, giving
glory to God* thus did Moses here. Being not weak in Faith, he considered not
the Body of his own Army, which in many respects was f^rre inferior to that
of the Enemies; but being strong in Faith, he gave glory to God, resting upon
the Promise, and upon that ground he bids them stand. True it is, if we look
at our Enemies and our selves, comparing their strength with our weakness, we
shall find a discouraging disproportion. God is able to make us stand.
But here is our comfort, whatever they or we be, we have a strong God who is
able to make us stand, though in our selves never so weak. So says ^aul of
the weak brother, (...), He shall be upheld, Romans 14.4.
he shall be established, why, for God is able to make him stand. And therefore
how conscious soever of our own weakness, yet be we strong in the Lord,
strong, not in our own, but in his strength, going forth against this Enemy as
David against his Goliath, 1 Samuel 17.45.
not in any confidence of our own, but in the name of the Lord, resting upon
his power and faithfulness, 1 Timothy 4.17, 18. Psalm. 138.8. Phil. 1.6.
who having once delivered us out of the mouth of this Lion, will yet deliver
us (as Paul concludes) perfecting his own work where once he has begun it.
Stand we therefore our ground against Satan.

2. Against Antichrist, an Enemy also figured by Pharaoh, etc.
Secondly, And as against Satan, so (in the second place) against Antichrist. A
spiritual wickedness too. Such is the mystery of Antichrist, whatever the
Person be. An Enemy figured and shadowed out also by Pharaoh, and the power of
Egypt here. Egypt, it was a Type and figure of Rome, so the Spirit it self
interprets it, Revel. 11. Revel. 11.
where speaking of the two witn^sses, the faithful Martyrs of Christ that
should be slain under Antichrist, (as it is generally interpreted) he says,
That their dead bodies should lie in the streets of the great City, which
spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt. That great City there spoken of is
Rome, Ve^s. 8.
together with the whole Romish jurisd^ction; and of this City says the
Spirit, it is spiritually called Sodom and Egypt; Sodom, for the Filthiness
of it, the ho^r^d abominations there acted and allowed; Egypt, for her Idolatry
and Tyranny, being a House of Bondage to Gods people, wherein they were held
inthralled for many hundred years together: And being in measure delivered
from that bondage, as Israel here was from Egypts, Pharaoh and his Host, the
Pope the head of the Church Malignant upon earth, with all the power he can
raise both Spiritual and Temporal, ^ee prosecutes and pursues them; seeking
by all ways and means either to reduce them, to bring them back into
Egyptian-R^mish-bondage again, or else to destroy them, to cut them off from
being a people; Psalm. 83.41
that so the name of Israel might be no more had in Remembrance. Now in this
case, what shall the poor Church and people of God do? Why even that which
Moses here advises the Israelites to do in the like condition, viz. stand
still, Consistite, stand fast. I, whatever straits or exigents, whatever
dangers or difficulties they may be brought unto, yet let them stand fast,
stand still.

And this let all of us at this day do. Applic. Stand fast in our liberty
from Antichristian Bondage.
That is my aim still, to bring home this piece of counsel to our selves, as
apprehending it very seasonable, considering the condition into which God has
now cast us. Acondition (as I have often said) not unlike to this of the
Israelites in the Text, and that not only in respect of our present dangers,
but also in respect of our former deliverance. God who here had brought them
out of Egypt, from under the bondage of a Temporal Pharaoh, has wrought the
like, nay a greater deliverance for us, in bringing our forefathers from under
the bondage of a Spiritual Pharaoh, that Romish-Bondage, bringing them and us
into a liberty, and that comparatively a glorious liberty. Having done this
for us, at the present he has brought us (as he did them) to the Red Sea, a
Sea of Blood, where we are in a great strait, encompassed with many
difficulties and dangers. Now in this condition what shall we do? Why, take
the counsel in the Text; whatever become of us; yet stand still, stand fast.
It is Paul's counsel and charge to his Galathians, Gal. 5. Gal. 5.1.
Stand fast in the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free, and be not
again entangled in the yoke of Bondage. Beloved, this is a liberty wherewith
Christ has made us free, this liberty from Romish servitude; and therefore
being delivered, (...), stand fast, not suffering our selves to be again
entangled in the yoke of that bondage. In this case rather choosing to Dye
Freemen then to live slaves. Stand we fast therefore.

Stand still, neither returning nor turn^ng aside.
And Stand still. Neither Returning, nor yet Turning aside. Both these at the
present the Israelites were ready to do. Being in this strait, many of them in
their affections were returned back to Egypt again: Is not this the word that
we did tell thee in Egypt, (say they to Moses in the verse before the Text)
Saying, Let us alone that we may serve the Egyptians, for it had been beetter
for us to serve the Egyptians? Others of them no question were looking out
which way they might turn aside; and could they have found a passage either on
the right*hand or left, they were ready to break out at it. And I would to God
there were not too many in this Kingdom at this day too like unto them in both
these. Some who in their affections are returned back to Egypt to Rome again.
Such who think that there is too great a (...) too vast a distance betwixt
Rome and us, Luke 16.26.
(surely such there were some amongst us of late, and I do not think that
their number is lessened at this day,) and therefore they could be content to
meet them half way, that so there might be a Reconciliation betwixt us and
them. Others turning aside, some to the right hand, others to the left hand,
breaking out at those Breaches which the sad calamity of the Times has made.
It is a branch of that threatening which the Lord denounces against Samaria by
the Prophet Amos, Am. 4. Am: 4.3.
Ye shall go out at the Br^aches, every Cow at that which is before her:
meaning that they should fly confusedly, some this way, some that way. And is
not the like judgment in a great measure fallen upon us of this Kingdom at
this day? How many do we see daily going and flying out at the Breaches which
our sad Divisions have ma^^ (...) the walls of our Jerusalem? Breaking forth
into Errors, some on the left hand, others on the right hand, every one at the
Breach that is before them? Thus it is, but thus it should not be.

And thus let it not be with us (my Brethren. 1. Notreturning to Rome again.
) God has in mercy brought us out of Egypt, delivered us from R^mish Bondage;
Far be it now from any of us to entertain so much as a thought of ever
returning thither again. Stand fast in this our liberty. Whatever liberty it
is that God has vouchsafed us that way, maintain it, standing our ground,
keeping our distance; Beware of Reconcilers and Moderators. 2 King. 20.11.
taking heed of the proditorious counsels of whatever faint-^earted, or
false-hearted Reconcilers or Moderators, who would persuade us to imitate the
Sun (or shadow) upon the Dial of Ahaz, to return some degrees^backwards, to
remit somewhat of our stricknesse and rigidnesse (as they deem and call it)
and to meet our adversaries of Rome halfe-way* by receiving their Traditions,
readmitting their Superstitious Rites and Customs, that so we might at least
hold a fair correspondency and compliance with them: Counsel most pernicious
and destructive to the true Church of God. Stop we our ears against it,
knowing them for false-brethren, who either suggest or promote it. So Paul
calls those I^daizing-christians, who sought cunningly to betray the liberty
of the Churches. Gal. 2.4,
False-brethren (says he) unawares brought in, who came in privily to spy out
our liberty which we have in Christ jesus, that they might bring us into
bondage. Such be we ware of, not harkening to them, not suffering our selves to
be thus inthralled and inslaved again. It is that which Paul blames and checks
his Corin^hians for, that they were so patient, or rather so dull and stupid
this way. ye suffer (says h^) if a man bring you into bondage, 2 Cor. II. ^
Cor. 11. 20. Isac^ars Patience.
Whatever burdens the false Apostles laid upon them (as (...) did many,
pressing Circumcision, with other Ceremonies of the Law, imposing them not as
things indifferent, but necessary) they were content to bear and yield to.
Such patience we may truly call it, Virtus Asinina, Isachars Patience, whom
Jacob herein compares to that dull creature which coucheth down betwixt a
double burden. Genesis 49.14.
Not commendable in those Corinthians, nor yet where ever it is found.

What Burdens may be ^orne, and what not.
As for other burdens, we may bear them, and in some cases ought. Burdens by
lawful authority imposed upon the outward man, upon our persons or estates,
though grievous, yet we may bear them. And when we must do it, do it
patiently; the best remedy in this case, the best way to alleviate and lighten
burdens of that nature. Levius fit Patientia, etc. But when burdens come to be
imposed upon Conscience (as in the Church of Rome they are, where humane
Inventions are imposed not as things indifferent, but necessary; not as matters
of order, but of worship; made parts of worship, or means of worship, and so
directly laid as burdens upon the Conscience) in this case to bear and
suffer, (I mean to show our selves active in obedience) what is it but to
betray the liberty wherewith Christ has made us free? And therefore here stand
we fast.

Keep our distance.
Which that we may do, keep we our distance, not returning unto them. This is
that which the Lord gives the Prophet ^eremy in charge to do. Having once
made a separation, separated the precious from the vile, then (says the Lord)
Let them return unto thee; but return not thou unto them. Jer. 15.1^.
Take we the charge as directed unto us. We through the mercy and goodness of
God, have made a separation from the Church of Rome, having (at least in ^ood
measure) separated the precious from the vile; precious Truths from vile
Errors, precious Ordinances from vile Corruptions, wherewith they were mingled
amongst them. Now what ground we have here got, keep it, keeping our distance.
If they will come and return to us, so it is; otherwise let not us return to
them, no nor yet come nearer to them. Hear the counsel in the Text, and take
it, stand we still.

Stand still not returning, not turning back; 2. Not turning aside to the left
hand or right. Deuteronomy. 5.32, 11* 16.
no nor yet turning aside. A charge which the Lord himself frequently gives
his people; ye shall not turn aside, neither to the right hand, nor to the
left. And this charge,let it inthe name of God be directed unto us, as being
very seasonable for the times: The times whereinto we are fallen, they are
turning times, wherein (as in a pitched Battle) we may see some wheeling and
falling off to the left hand, others to the right hand. Take we heed of both,
neither of which we can do with credit or safety. Even as it was with the
Israelites at the Red Sea, had they turned aside either to the right hand or
left, they had first fallen upon the Rocks, and afterward upon Wildernesses
full of fiery Serpents, (as Aynsworth observes it out of the Chaldee
Paraphrase.) Surely such is our condition at this day: Turn aside we cannot
without both scandal and danger; And therefore take we the counsel here in
the Text, Stand still.

First, Stand still, not falling off to the left hand; 1. Not falling off to
the left hand.
not remitting or abating ought of the stricknesse, either of our Profession or
Practice. Turn not aside from serving the Lord. This is the charge which Samuel
gives the people when they were in a strait, having provoked the Lord by their
sins; and God having manifested his displeasure against them, by such visible
signs and tokens as that they were afraid least his wrath should break ^^rth
upon them to consume them; Yet (says Samuel) turn not aside from following
the Lord, 1 Samuel 12. ^ Sam. 12.20.
Let it be spoken to all those amongst us who have given up their names and
themselves unto God, let not them now turn aside from following the Lord. It
matters not what disgrace the Profession, but specially the Power of godliness
at the present lies under; how those who desire and endeavor to walk most
closely with God, make themselves not only a Reproach, but a Prey to Gods
Enemies and theirs. Let not all this turn us aside. If this render us vile in
their eyes, let us yet be more vile: Better be vile in their eyes, then in the
eyes of God and his Saints, which our turning aside will make us to be. I hate
the works of them which turn aside (says David) Psalm. 101. Psa. 101.3. Psa.
1^5. v. last.
As for such as turn aside unto their crooked ways, the Lord shall lead them
forth with the works of iniquity, Psalm. 125. Take we heed how we do it.
No, though it were to purchase a temporal security. Such counsel carnal
reason will readily suggest in these loose times: for the saving our skin to
cast off our coat, the cloak of our Profession; but take heed how we listen to
it; In so doing (as Samuel tells the people) we shall but turn aside after
vainethings, 1 Samuel 12.21.
which cannot profit nor deliver, for they are vain. Fall not off to the left
hand.

2. Nor yet to the right hand.
Secondly, Nor yet (in the second place) to the right hand. Let not any ^ere be
prejudiced against this piece of counsel. I shall handle it tenderly, but
freely and faithfully as becomes a Minister of Christ, and one that unfeignedly
desires the peace and welfare as of the whole Kingdom in general, so of this
place in particular. Herein taking that counsel my self, which I am now
commending unto you, viz. not to turn aside to the right hand or to the left,
from ought that the Lord has put into my mouth to speak unto you this day.

That there are right hand Errors abroad in the world, Right Hand Errors rise
at this day.
and some of them rise in this Kingdom at this day; I suppose it will be
granted at all our hands. A word of Caveat then can neither be unreasonable,
nor unseasonable. These Errors take we heed of; And so much the rather,
because they are such errors as Gods own people are most subject to. And here
particularly take we special heed of those Errors which are directly
destructive or dangerous to the Community, Beware, specially of such Errors as
are destructive to the Body ofthe Church.
to the whole Body of the Church wherein we live. Such (amongst other) is that
error of the separation (to which I may join that other of Anabaptisme) which
teaches men to forsake the public Assemblies, and to break off Fellowship
and Communion with the Saints of God in public Ordinances, nay to renounce
and disclaim the true Churches of Christ, as false and Antichristian. The
Dangerousnesse of Separation at present.
An error of dangerous consequence at all times, but never more, (I think
never so much) then at this day. For Soldiers to desert and fall off from the
body of the Army at any time it is dangerous, but much more when it is engaged.
That is our condition at the present, the whole Body of the Church is engaged.
Now at this time for any to fall off and turn aside, though they do not go
over, and turn to the Enemy, yet their turning aside is of dangerous
consequence, the next way to let in the common Enemy upon us, and so to rout
the whole Church. And therefore to all such, if there be any here present that
have but an eye that way, let me speak in the language of the Text, Stand ye
still. As ye tender the good and welfare of this Church, and in it of all the
Churches this day under heaven, all which have a venture in this bottom; As you
would not have a hand in betraying of that Church of God, in whose womb you
were once conceived, and whose breasts have given you suck, stand you still.

Magistrates and Ministers, both must bid the people stand still.
And what I here speak as a poor Minister of Christ, in the name of God let
Authority, according to the power committed to them, second. I do not go from
my Text in making this motion: Moses here in the Text, he represents both
Minister and Magistrate; having left a president for both, showing them what
they are to do if at any time they shall see the people in a mutinous
distemper, ready to fly every one his way: In this case they must bid them
stand, stand still.

Obj. 1. May we not fly out of Babylon?
Obj. Stand still will some say, what then, may we not fly out of Egypt, out
of Babylon?

A. Babylon? Yes, we may do it, we must do it; The voice from heaven is
express for it, A. Yes, but take heed we mistake not. Revel. 18.4.
Come out of her my people. But here take heed we mistake not.

First, That we take not Sion for Babylon: To call Sion Babylon, is no less a
fault then to call Babylon Sion. Now as for the Church of England (the mark at
which that arrow is let fly) sure I am, 1. That we take not Sion for Babylon.
Isa. 5.20. Lam. 2.^5.
though it be not Sion the Perfection of beauty, yet she has so much of Sion
in her as will free her from this charge of being Babylon.

Obj. Why, but she has much of Babylon in her, some Relics of Rome yet
remaining, besides many corruptions cleaving to her Ordinances, and much
confusion in her Administration.

A. Suppose all this should be granted, what then, must she presently be called
and counted Babylon? You would think him but an undutifull child, who because,
(as he thinks) he espies some lightness in his mother, should therefore
presently spit in her face, and call her whore. Surely, whatever it is that can
be charged upon the Church of England, make the worst of it, it is but
lightness, lewdness it is not; no sufficient ground for any to sue forth a
divorce upon it, and to disclaim her as none of Christ's Spouse; Babylon she is
not.

Secondly, In the second place, 2. Take heed we fly not from Babylon to it.
let such as call and count her so, take heed least in flying from Babylon they
fly to it, from Babylon to Babylon; I, from a supposed to a real Babylon.
Certainly, if the word ( Babylon) signify Confusion (as it does) then may we
find Babylon amongst those who call the Church of England BABYLON. Amongst them
what Confusion? Confusion upon Confusion; Separation upon Separation; God
writing their sin (as in other cases frequently he does) in the punishment of
it.

Obj. 2. Why, but it will be said, Obj. 2. Being come out of Egypt and Babylon,
are we not to advance?
Suppose it that we be got out of Babylon, and out of Egypt, what, must we now
stan^^ ^^ill? Are we not to advance, and march on Canaan-wards? Are we not to
go forwards, seeking after further degrees of purity and perfection?

A. True, we are so to do; but, A. Tarry till God lay out our way.
Tarry till God lay out our way for us. It was Israells case here in the Text,
being come out of Egypt to the Red Sea, they were not to make a stand and fit
down there, but to advance and march on: I, but being brought into a strait,
they must stay till God lay out their way for them. And the very same is our
case at the present; God having brought us out of Egypt, it is both our duty
and desire to advance, forgetting what is behind (as Paul speaks of himself)
to press forwards toward further purity of ordinances, Phil. 3.14.
and perfection of administrations; But being in a strait, (as at this day we
are) we must tarry Gods time till he have laid our way, till he has divided
the waters for us: This we trust he is about to do, and in his time will do,
and that by the like means as here he divided the Red Sea for the Israelites.
By what means he divided the waters for them, the Story will tell you, viz. by
his own Rodin the hand of his Servant Moses: His own Rod, so Moses calls
it, Exodus 17. Exodus 17.9.
I will stand with the Rod of God in mine hand. The Rod of God in the hand of
his Servant Moses, this was the Instrument to lay out the way for this people
in this strait of theirs, as you shall find it in the 16. verse. of this 14.
chap. Life up thy Rod (says the Lord to Moses) and stretch out thine hand over
the Sea, and divid^ it. Now what was hereby signified? Why, the Rod of God, it
signified the Word of God, (so our Aynsworth most fitly interprets it) which is
sometimes called the Rod of his mouth, Isa. 11. Isa. 11.40.
and the Rod of his Power, (or strength) Psalm. 110. Psa. 110.2.
This Rod in the hand of Moses, what is it but the Word of God in the hand of
lawful Authority? And by this Rod we trust God ^ill in his time divide the
waters, and lay out a way for ^is people to walk in: Which till he do, it is
our duty to do what Moses here requires from the people of Israel, to Stand
still, not running every one his way. Had the Israelites done so here in the
Text, what do we think would have become of the Body of the Armies? And shall
we take the advantage of the times every one to run his way? What do we
think will become of the Body of the Church? And therefore for the present
stand we still, only doing that in Faith, which some of the Israelites here
did out of Fear, Cry unto the Lord, that he would show us the way wherein he
would have us to walk; verse. 10.
to that end, blessing all endeavors for the finding and laying out of that
way.

Why, but what needs that? Obj. 3. Obj. 3. The way is laid out already.
when as the way is laid out already, and that so plainly, as those which have
eyes may see it?

To such who so think and speak, A. Lean not to our judgments.
I shall only commend that of the Wise man, Prove. 3. Prove. 3.5.
Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, but lean not to thine own
understanding, thine own judgment. Surely this it is which has deceived many
a one, and may deceive any one, even leaning to the private judgment, whether
of a man's self, or others. It is Elihues speech in Job, Job 32. Job. 32.7.
I said, Days should speak, and multitude of years should teach wisdom. If
one would rest upon the private judgment of any, in reason it should be upon
the Ancient, those who have greater experience then others; yet even they may
be deceived: So Elihu there found it. True it is (as he there goes on) There
is a spirit in man, Verse, ^.
and the Inspiration of the Almighty gives understanding: Now, were a man
sure of the immediate assistance of this spirit, were he Divinely inspired as
the Prophets and Apostles were, this Judgment of Inspiration he might safely
lean upon, but not upon his own judgment; For (as Elihu there proceeds)
Great men are not always wise, verse. 9.
neither do the aged understand judgment. The Spirit of God only is an
infallible Spirit, that can neither deceive, nor be deceived; Not so with the
spirit of man, no not of the Wisest, no not of the Learnedest, no not of the
Holiest man: And therefore be not over-confident of our selves, resting too
much upon our own opinion, (our judgment is no more; so Elihu there goes on:
Hearken unto me, Verse. 10.
I also will show mine opinion.) Specially in points litigious and
controversall betwixt men, both Learned and Godly, (such as the present
controversies of the times are.) In this case it will be good for us to be
rather jealous of our selves, suspecting and suspending our own judgments,
and so to wait for the decisions and determinations of others, particularly of
those, whom by virtue of their office, Deuteronomy. 17. v. 8, 9, 10, 11.
God has made the proper Judges in differences of that nature.

Wait for the Determinations of those whom God has made Judges. Luke 1.10.21.
Whilst the Priests are within consulting with Gods Oracle, the people must wait
and pray without.
Under the Law the manner was when the Priests were gone in to the Tabernacle
or Temple, there to officiate before the Lord, to offer Incense unto him, (and
so to receive answers from him) the people stood without waiting and praying,
as you may see it in the first of Luke. Here see what we are to do at this
day, and do it. Divine Providence has singled forth some to enter in to his
Tabernacle, to draw near to himself, to consult with his Oracle (his Word) and
to enquire his will for his people. Now, whilst they are within, let us be
waiting and praying without, importuning the Throne of Grace for a blessing
upon their consultations, that when they come forth, they may bring with them
an answer from Heaven, such an answer as may evidence it self to every man's
conscience in the sight of God. Which receiving, so far as we shall find it
agreeable to the Rule of the Word, let us readily embrace and submit unto it.

Taking this course, now our advance will be not confused, but orderly: An
orderly advance, where Leaders go before and people follow.
Such were the Israelites march through the Red Sea, and through the
wilderness, an orderly march, wherein their Leaders went before, and the
people followed after; So the Psalmist describes it, Psalm. 77. Psalm. 77. v. ult.
verse. last. Thou leddest thy people like a flock, by the hand of Moses and
Aaron; God led his people, but it was by the hand of Moses and Aaron; Moses
their Prince, and Aaron their Priest; And by them he led them as a flock, as a
flock of sheep, (so the word in the Original properly signifies.) Now,
anciently sheep were wont not to go before their shepherds, as at this day
they do. (I mean it literally, but if any shall take it metaphorically, they
shall find but too much truth in it) but to follow after. To which custom, our
Savior alluding in that tenth of John, he tells us that his sheep hear his
voice, Joh. 10.4, 27.
and follow him. Thus did the people of Israel, not go before, but follow
after, Moses and Aaron being guided and ordered by those directions which they
had received from God for them. And surely (my Brethren) would we but take
this course, not to run before, but follow after our Leaders, (I mean
following them as Paul would have his Corinthians to do him, 1 Cor. 11.^.
so far as they are followers of Christ) our advance would have both more
beauty and safety in it; whereas being confused and disorderly, it can have
neither.

Thus much I have spoken, (more I shall not speak; wishing, if it were the
will of God, I might never have occasion to speak again of this Subject)
being led to it, as I conceive, very aptly by the word in my Text; Sure I am,
my aim in speaking it, has been proved no other then Moses his here was, viz.
to stay the spirits of the Lords people amongst us, which at this day are so
ready to run out, and to hold them down in a quiet expectation of what God
will yet do for us, that so by their precipitancies and over-hastinesse, they
may not outrunne their own and the Churches mercy.

One Branch of this Point is yet behind, Stand against Temporal Enemies,
bloody Persecutors.
and that is touching Temporal Enemies. Where the Question may be, how
Christians ought to demean and carry themselves in the case of outward and
open Persecution, when they are pursued by cruel and bloody Persecutors, such
as Pharaoh and his Egyptians here were; A case which the Lords people in most
ages of the Church have been well acquainted with; how soon we may be, we know
not: It will not be amiss therefore, to enquire aforehand what to do, or how
to demean our selves in such a case. To which the Text returns an answer,
which being rightly understood will prove not unusefull, bidding us to stand,
stand still.

Q. Whether Christians may fly in time of Persecution?
Q. Stand still, (you may say) what then? May not Christians fly in times of
Persecution?

A question which we find often put up, and as variously prosecuted and
resolved by Divines and Casuists. A threefold answer I find returned to it, A.
A threefold Resolution given by the Ancients.
each having an ancient Father for the countenance of it. The two former
extremes, the third a medium, a middle way betwixt both, which (as in other
cases so here) we shall find to be the viatuta, the safe way, and the way for
us to walk in.

1. That it is simply unlawful.
First, The first and most ancient is Tertullians, who held it simply unlawful
for Christians in any case to fly in time of Persecution, upon which Subject
he has written a whole book, endeavoring to strengthen his opinion with
many Arguments. Herein we find him followed, as by those ancient Heretics,
the Circumcillions, so by some of the Anabaptists of later times.

2. That is simply necessary.
Secondly, A second opinion is Athanasius his, who in opposition to Tertullian,
held it not only lawful for Christians to fly in Persecution, but necessary;
as a thing not only permitted and allowed, but enjoined and commanded;
grounding his opinion upon those words of our Savior, 3. In some cases lawful,
though not simply necessary.
Mat. 10.23. Where speaking to his Disciples, he bids them, When they persecute
you in one City, then flee into another.

Thirdly, A third is Augustines, who in an Epistle to Honoratus, Epist. ad
Hono. ^80.
yields it to be sometimes lawful, though not simply necessary; a thing at
sometimes, and in some cases permitted and allowed, though not enjoined and
commanded. To this judgment of his, Divines generally subscribe, as being
sound and Orthodox, declining the two other, the one as being an Error on the
right hand, the other on the left. And in this middle way we shall go along
with them.

Flight in persecution is not at all times and in all cases simply unlawful.
The third opinion most Orthodox. Christians not always bound to stand still.
Christians are not always bound to stand still. Arguments to evince the truth
of this assertion (if need were) we might soon muster up many; some taken from
Scripture, others from Reason: Scripture will furnish us with Permissions and
Presidents.

For Permission, Proved from Scripture by Permission. Mat. 10.23.
we shall need no other but that of our Savior forenamed, Mat. 10. When they
persecute you in one City, fly into another. An express allowance for flight
in some cases; I, in some cases a Precept, not only permitting, but commanding.

Obj. I know what Tertullian and some others reply to that Text, viz. that it
was a Temporary precept peculiar to that time, and those persons, to continue
only so long till the Apostles should have preached the Gospel throughout the
Cities of Judea, and no longer.

A. This Evasion is groundless, in as much as we no where find any other Text
of Scripture repealing or countermanding that permission. And besides, (as our
Master Perkins further alleges) we shall find the Apostles (to whom this
commandment was given) practizing it after our Saviors Ascension, Perk. Cases.
and not only amongst the Jews, but almost amongst the Gentiles.

To back this warrant we have many Presidents, Presidents.
many Examples, and that both of Christ himself, who being in danger (as the
Story tells us) frequently withdrew himself, Mat. 12.15. Mat. 14.13. Joh.
8.59.10, 39, 40.
escaping out of the hands of his Enemies, not yielding himself to them until
the hour of his Passion was come; and of many other Worthies both of the Old
and New Testament. In the Old Testament, Jacob flies from his brother Esau,
Genesis 27. Moses having slain the Egyptian, and being in danger of his life,
flies from Egypt into Madian; which act of his, the spirit approves,
recording it as a work, not of Fear, but of Faith, Heb. 11. Heb. 11.27.
By faith he forsook Egypt, etc. Elias being threatened by Iezabel, and in
danger of his life, flies to Mount Horeb, 1 King. 19. 1 King. 19.3. 1 King.
18.13.
The rest of the Prophets, many of them betaking themselves unto their Caves
under Obadiahs protection. In the New Testament, Joseph and Mary being
guardians to our Savior during his minority, and being in danger by Herod,
Mat. 2.14.
they fly with the Babe into Egypt. Peter being in prison, and destinated by
Herod to be sacrificed the next day to the fury of the people, the Angel of the
Lord awakning of him in the night, Act. 12.4.6.
bids him be gone. Paul being in Damascus, beset by the Governor and the
Garrison there, he makes an escape, being let down by the wall through a
window in a basket, Act. 9. Act 9.25. 2 Cor. 11.32, 33.
The woman in the Revelation (the Church) being persecuted by the Red Dragon
(Satan and his instruments, Rev. 12.14.
cruel and bloody persecutors) she had given unto her two wings of an Eagle
(means for a speedy escape) that she might fly into the wilderness (a place
of secrecy and safety.) Here is Permission, here are Presidents.

Proved by Reason.
If need were, we might sub-joyne Reasons, proving the Lawfulness of flight at
some times, and in some cases.

Reas. 1. Nature dictates selfepreservation.
First, It is that which Nature dictates to preserve it self, and that not
corrupt, but pure nature. Now what nature dictates, Grace does not contradict;
only it regulateth, and orders it for the way and means of that
preservation, that they be lawful and warrantable.

Secondly, Reas. 2. Christians must serve divine Providence.
Christians are bound to serve the divine Providence, in drawing forth the
thread of their life, and carrying it on to that period which God himself in
his secret counsel has appointed and determined.

Thirdly, It is their duty herein to have a regard, Reas. 3. They must, have a
respect to the souls of their Enemies.
not only to themselves, their own bodies, but also to their Enemies, to
their souls; not permitting them (so far as they can prevent it) to draw the
guilt of innocent blood upon their own heads.

Fourthly, And lastly, Reas. 4. They must do that which may tend most to
Godsglory.
(to name no more) Christians in all their actions, they must ever have an eye
to the glory of God, which sometimes (as I shall show you anon) they may
promote more by their flying then by their standing still.

In some cases then, let it be yielded, which cannot be denied, that Christians
are not bound to stand still, they may fly. As for those Arguments which are
brought against it, I will not spend time in answering of them, rather
referring those who desire further satisfaction in this point to our judicious
Perkins in his Cases of Conscience; as also to our learned Florentine,
Tertullianu^ adversu^ Ecclesiam ^exuithaec volumina, de Pudicitia^, de
Persecutione, etc.
P. Martyr in his Common Places, who returns particular answers to all those
objections alleged by Tertullian in that book of his, upon which Saint Jerome
has passed this censure, that it was written (as some other books of his
were) Adversum Ecclesiam, rather against, Hieron. Catal. viron. Illustr.
then for the Church.

Q Christians sometimes may Fly: Q. When Christians may fly, and when they
must stand*
But when may they fly? And when must they stand still? Two useful questions,
the latter of which will bring us close home to the words of the Text. To both
of them I may return this general answer.

A. Her in they must follow Gods direction. Mat. 8.9:
A. When God bids them fly, they must fly; when he bids them stand,
they must stand. In both, observing the Direction of God their Commander, as
the Soldiers and Servants of the Centurion are said to do his: I say unto
this man, go, and he goes; and to another, come, and he comes; and to my
servant, do this, and he does it. Thus are Soldiers ordered for their
standing or marching, their advancing or retreating, their coming on or
falling off, all by the word which they receive from the mouth of their
Commanders. And thus must Christians be ordered for their flying, and standing
by the command and direction of God himself. When God bids them fly, they
may, they must fly; when he bids them stand, they may, they must stand.

Q. How God bids fly, or stand.
Q. But here the question will run on, when does God bid them fly? And when
does he bid them stand? Or how is the will of God made known to them in this
case?

A. God makes known his will two ways.
A. For a more particular answer, know we that God makes known his will
herein two ways; either in an Extraordinary, or in an Ordinary way.

1. Inan Extraornary way.
First, In an Extraordinary way, by Dreams, Visious, Revelations, immediate
Inspirations. Thus the Angel of the Lord appeared to Joseph in a dream,
saying, Arise, take the young Child and his Mother, and fly into Egypt, Mat.
2. Mat. 2.13.
Thus also an Angel appeared unto Peter in the prison, awakning him, bidding
him shift for himself, Act. 12. Act. 12.7, 8.
Even as the Angels did to Lot when they had brought him out of Sodom, they
did him shift for himself, Flee for thy life, look not behind thee, stand not
still, Genesis 19. Genesis 19.17.
And so on the other hand, by a like means God makes his will known unto Paul
touching his abode at Corinth, promising him a protection there, which was done
in a Vision (as the Story tells us) ( Act. 18. Act. 18.9.
) Afterward when he was to go up to Jerusalem, Act. 20.23.
he went bound in the Spirit, (as himself tells us) put on by a secret
Inspiration. Thus God has made his will known to some of his people
heretofore, and I will not deny but he may do the like at this day. But this
we have no warrant to expect or look for.

Secondly, 2. Ir^ano^dinary way, viz. by his word or work, which Christians in
this case must have an eye to.
That which we are to have an eye unto for the regulating of our Flight or
Stay, is the will of God made known to us in a more ordinary way, viz. by his
Word or Work. These two ways God does ordinarily make known his will unto
the sons of men touching whatever he would have them do, or not to do. By
his Word, giving them at least some general Rules and directions: By his
Work, his work of Providence seconding the word, and giving them at least the
hints of more particular directions. And thus does he make his will known unto
his people in this particular case, the case of flying or staying, viz. by his
Word and Work. Revel. 12.14.
These two (as some Expositors carry it) are the two wings which are said to be
given to the woman in the Revelation in the place forenamed, viz. Gods Oracle
directing, and his Providence protecting. And both these must Christians have
an eye upon in this case.

First, Upon the Word, 1. The Word, which orders Christians in this case to do
what may make most for Gods glory, and their Brethrens good.
which holds forth unto them this general Rule and Direction. Christians in
their flying or standing must do that which may conduce most to the glory of
God, and good of others. These are two of the maine ends which every Christians
should live too, (his own salvation being the third.) And these two he must
have an eye unto, as in all other his actions, so in this.

1. Christians herein must do what may make most for the glory of God.
First, In the first place, he must have an eye to the glory of God, which
should be to the Christian as the Polestarre to the Mariner. Now here
sometimes it may so fall out, that a Christian may glorify God more by his
flying then by his standing: In this case God bids him flee. Sometimes on the
other hand, he may glorify God more by his standing then by his flying: In
this case God bids him stand. And accordingly a Christian is to order himself.

Q. Who shall be Judge of this?
Q. But who shall be the Judge of this?

A. Why, that must every man's own Conscience; Non externus judex, A. A man's
own Conscience.
sed domesticus, (as P. Martyr resolves it) not any foreign Judge, (at least
not primarily and principally; True it is, we may and ought to consult with
others about it, because we are prone to be partial in our own cause) but the
Judge that must give Sentence in this case, must be the Judge in a man's own
bosom, every man's own Conscience. This is that which every Christian in the
case of flying ought first to consult with. Ask Conscience what it is that
induces him to flee, and press it to give a true answer, viz. whether it be
the glory of God or his own safety, his own peace and tranquillity, whether
God or himself that he looks at?

Perhaps here Conscience will answer both; I accept the answer, yielding it,
that where both may stand together, a Christian both may and ought to have an
eye to both, Gods glory and his own good, even his outward peace and
Tranquillity. Conscience to be pressed to enquire.


But here (to press Conscience a little further) let it be enquired; 1. Which
is the maine spring, God, or our selves.


First, Which of these is the maine spring, the first Principle, that which
first sets a man a going? Is it God or himself? Gods glory or his own
safety? This question (my Brethren) put home upon Conscience, it may happily
come near us. We are all naturally near unto our selves, and oft-times too
near. So it is when we set up our selves, our own peace, our own outward
tranquillity as the first and maine thing which we look at; In the mean time,
making the glory of God subservient unto that.

Secondly, Let it be enquired, 2. Whether our providing for our selves be not
some diminution to the glory of God.
whether our providing for our own safety in this way of flight, be not some
diminution to the glory of God? Whether we might not glorify God more by our
standing then by our flying? Here press conscience to give sentence according
to evidence, and according th^reunto order we our selves for our flying or
standing, doing that which may conduce most to the glory of God.

Secondly, 2. Do that which may conduce most to our Brethren^ good.
And (secondly) that which may conduce most to the good of others, specially
the Public good. We are not borne, neither should we live merely for our
selves; all of us for others, all of us for the public. As members do for
the good of the body, so should Christians live for the good of the Community,
the good of the Church. And this we must have an eye unto (as in our whole
course, so) in this case of flying or standing in time of Persecution.

Now here sometimes it so falls out, that Christians cannot fly without both
public scandal and danger; the case specially of public Persons,
Magistrates, and Ministers. Their flight oft-times indangers the Community, as
the flight of the shepherd does the flock, or as the flight of the Mariners in
Paul's voyage would have done the passengers, touching whom Paul tells the
Centurion and Soldiers, Except these abide in the ship, Act. 27.31.
ye cannot be saved. Now in this case, they being thus engaged, God bids
them stand, and therefore they may not flee. Upon this ground, that worthy
Governor Nehemiah took up that Heroic Resolution, Nehem. 6.11.
Shall such a man as I flee? A Magistrate, in whose standing the safety of the
Community of the whole body of the people is bound up, Aug. Epist. 180. ^d
Honorat.
though others flee, he may not. And so Augustine, (in the place forenamed)
determines the case of Ministers. Where they cannot fly without eminent danger
to their flocks, there God bids them stand. A determination grounded upon
that of our Savior, Ioh. 10. Where describing the good Shepherd and the
Hireling, he tells us, the one stands, and the other flees: The good
Shepherd gives his life for his sheep, Joh. 10. v. 11, 12, 13.
but he that is an hireling, etc. He sees the woolfe coming, and leaves the
sheep and flees, and the woolfe ^atcheth them, and scatters them. The
hireling flees, etc. Where the safety and welfare of a flock is bound up in
the presence of the Minister, where his flight tends directly to their
dissipation, or eminently indangereth their seduction, there God bids him
stand. On the other hand, sometimes (as private, so) public persons may
withdraw themselves without any detriment to the Church. Nay, their fleeing may
be an advantage to it: Thereby they may have the opportunity off doing
moregood to the Church then otherwise they could do. In this case God bids
them flee, and they have their Master going before them in it. Our blessed
Savior (as I told you) being in danger by his Adversaries, he often withdrew
himself, this he did for the greater advantage and benefit of his Church, that
he might have opportunity for the finishing of the work which his Father had
given him to do. What himself therein did, he orders his Apostles and
Disciples to do the like: When they persecute you in ox City, flee into
another; And wherefore must they fly? Why, that so by that means they might
have opportunity to do the work which their Lord and Master had given them
to do, viz. to publish the Gospel throughout all the Cities of Judea. This it
either is, or ought to be the desire and design (as of every private
Christian, so) specially of every Minister of Jesus Christ, that they may
finish the work which God has given them to do, Joh. ^7.4.
in doing what good they may to his Church and people* Now that way which may
most conduce unto that end that they must take. If they may be more serviceable
to the Church in their flying, now God bids them flee: If in their staying, now
Gods bids them stand. This is the general Rule which the word holds forth
unto us, God thereby making known his will unto, us touching our flying or
standing in time of Persecution.

Secondly, 2. Gods work of Providence.
For more particular and personal directions herein, taking this Rule of the
word along with us, we must have recourse to the work of God, I mean his
Providentiall work, the passages of his Providence, from whence we may
ordinarily learn somewhat more of his meaning and purpose toward us. This
work of Providence in this case observable is two-^old, viz. Inward or
Outward; his work within us, and his work without us.

First, His inward work, his work upon the inwardman, 1. His inward work upon
the heart.
upon our hearts and spirits, in the ordering and tempering of them. This we
find God doing variously, even as the Smith deals with his Iron, which
sometimes he hardens, sometimes he softnes. Which sometimes he hardneth.
Thus deals God with the spirits of his own people, sometimes he hardens
them, (take it in a good sense) fleeleth them (as it were) with an Heroical
Resolution, putting into their hearts a Spirit of courage and fortitude; so
strengthening them with all might according to his glorious power, unto all
patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse, Col. 1.11.
(as Paul prays for his Coloss^ans) as that they dare look whatever dangers
or enemies in the face. Thus was it with Elias, when he took up that
Resolution, that whatever came he would look his Arch-enemy Ahab in the face:
Notwithstanding that Ahab had vowed his death, and had made a most strict and
narrow search for him throughout all the bordering Kingdoms and Nations, 1
King. 18. verse. 10.
(as Obadiah tells him) yet for all that Eliah is resolved, come what will
come, he will face him; As the Lord lives, before whom I stand, I will surely
show my self unto him this day; verse. 15.
(so he tells Obadiah.) Thus was it with Paul when he went bound in the spirit
to Jerusalem, Act. 20.22.
whatever dangers were represented to him, he weighs them not, his resolution
was to face the worst that could come: Verse. 24.
I pass not at all (says he) neither is my life dear unto me, so that I may
fulfill my course with joy, and the Ministration which I have received of the
Lord Jesus, to testify the Gospel of the grace of God. Such a motion of the
Spirit others of the Martyrs of Christ, in the Primitive times many, in latter
times some have found and felt, strongly inclining and carrying them on to give
testimony to the truth, steeling their spirits against whatever dangers,
whatever sufferings. Now in this case God seems to give the word to such,
bidding them stand, calling them to resist, though it be unto blood; And to
this voice they ought to be obedient.

Sometimes softneth.
But sometimes (on the other hand) God seemet^ (as it were) to soften the
spirits of men, and that by withdrawing, or withholding that Spirit of
strength and courage from them, so as upon due trial and examination, after a
serious dealing with their own hearts about it, they find themselves weak and
faint-hearted, not able to bear the shock of an approaching Temptation, but
see just cause to fear, that if they be put upon the trial, they shall rather
shame the cause of Christ by their cowardice, then any ways grace or advantage
it by their suffering. Now in this case, God seems for the present to give
them a Relaxation, a Dismission, allowing them to withdraw from the present
danger, and to take the opportunity which he shall be pleased to offer them
for their outward safety and security, that so they may live to the glory of
God, keeping faith and a good conscience. Here is the work of God within a
man, which in this case Christians must have a special regard unto.

Secondly, 2. His outward work in ordering of circumstances.
His outward work is the work of his Providence, in ordering of
circumstances, either for the furthering or hindering of flight. Herein the
Providence of God is oft-times very observable and remarkable.

First, E^ther making way for escape.
Sometimes God by his Providence he makes way for his people that they may
escape: makes way for them, that freeing them from outward Encumbrances which
might detain them, and so hinder them from flying: And secondly, offering
lawful ways and means to them whereby they may fly. See them both in Peter in
that 12th of the Acts. Peter being in prison, God intending his rescue and
enlargement, Act. 12. v. 7.
^ends his Angel to him, who brings a light with him to show him the way to
escape; And to that end, he first causes the chains to fall off from his
hands, so taking off impediments and encumbrances; Then he makes way for him,
causing the doors (the prison doors first, Verse. 10.
and afterward the Irongate) to open to him of their own accord, withal,
leading and conducting him in the way by which he should fly. Thus when God
has a purpose to free and deliver his people from the Temptation of
Persecution, he will cause a light to shine unto them in darkness, showing
them the way to escape. And to that end, he will both cause their chains to
fall off, take off outward lets and impediments, and encumbrances, which might
be a clog and a hindrance to them, and he will make way for their deliverance;
opening either a wide door to them (as there he did to Peter, and elsewhere to
Peter and other of the Apostles, Act. 5.13.
who being cast into the common prison at Jerusalem, the Angel of the Lord came
by night and opened the prison doors for them) or else a window, as he did to
Paul when he was beset in Damascus, 2 Cor^. 11. v, last.
2 Cor. 11. providing either an open or a secret way for their escape. Now in
this case, when God thus lays out the way for his people, especially when he
opens a door to them, making a clear and free passage for them, offering
lawful ways and means, and putting into their hands a just and fair
opportunity to fly: In this case he seems rather to bid them serve his
Providence, by making use of the means of deliverance offered and tendered unto
them; which if they do not (especially if they be not more then ordinarily
strengthened to hold out) they may seem to tempt God.

Or^shutting it up. Psalm. 88.8.
Secondly, But sometime (in the second place) on the other hand God may seem to
shut up his people, his Providence so disposing of their condition, as that he
cuts off all safe and lawful ways and means of making escape; either so
clogging them with outward impediments, as that they cannot fly, or else not
showing them any fair or lawful way whereby they may fly. That is the direct
case here in the Text, Israel being come to the Red Sea they were now in a
strait: God had shut them in on every side, so as they could not fly without
eminent advantage to the Enemy, and hazard to themselves. They must (as I told
you) have fallen first upon the Rocks, and then upon the Wildernesses, which
were full of fiery Serpents; And therefore being brought into this condition,
Moses here bids them stand, and stand still.

And this must the Lords People in the like condition do: In which case we
must stand still.
When God by his Providence has so hedged them in, as that they cannot see any
safe or lawful way for their escape, they must now stand still, resigning up
themselves unto God, resting themselves contented with his dispensation,
abiding his good will and pleasure, not adventuring upon any indirect or
unlawful ways or means for their rescue or deliverance. A truth so clear in
These. 1. that indeed it needs no demonstration.

The Ground of it being those general Rules and known Maxims, both in Reason
and Religion.

1. Reason tells us that of two evils, Reas. 1.
the less is ever to be chosen: Now comparing them together, and let Religion
be the judge, we shall find the least sin to be a greater Evil then the
greatest suffering, the one being but a finite, the other an infinite Evil.

2. And secondly, Religion will tell us, That Evil may not be done that good
may come of it; Reas. 2.
no not the least evil for the producing of the greatest good: It was an
imputation cast upon the Apostle, and the Primitive Christians in his time,
that they should say; Let us do ^ill, that good may come, Romans 3. Romans 3.8.
But Pa^l cleares both himself and them, washing his hands of it as a most
foul slander, a Blasphemy; (...), As we are slanderously reported.] A doctrine
most erroneous, soul, and so is the practice.

Applic. General.
Use. Which (in the fear of God) let every of us take heed of. Is it so, that
God at any time shall bring us into straits, hedging us in, so as we see no
door, no window opened, no lawful way or means offered to us for our
deliverance, take heed of adventuring upon any unlawful and unwarrantable. And
this do we, as in other cases.

Particular, in the case of Persecution.
So particularly in that case which the Text more directly leads us unto, viz.
the case of open Persecution. In this case (if ever God shall bring us to it,
as how soon he may, we know not) the first thing we do, Psalm. 85.8.
let us (with the Psalmist) hearken and hear what God shall say unto us,
whether he bid us stand or fly; (which we may for the* most part judge of by
the Rules and Directions before laid down) and accordingly let us order and
demean our selves: If he bid us fly, take heed how we stand, least in standing
we fall, fall into Temptation. If he bid us stand, now take heed how we fly
(that is the case in the Text; When God bid^stand, take heed how we flee.
) which if we do, upon our own peril be it, and so it will be; certainly we
shall find neither comfort nor safety in it. Take one instance for it, and but
one, even that of Zed^^hiah, which you shall find recorded by the Prophet
Jeremy, in his 38 and 39 chapters. In the 38 chap. Jeremy by Gods direction,
Jer. 38.
counsels the King what course to take, viz. to go forth to the King of
Babels Princes and Commanders, having then begirt the City, to yield himself a
prisoner to them, (so you have it, verse. 17.) This counsel Zedechiah rejects,
Verse 17.
yield himself he will not: what then? Why, he will attempt to make an escape
and flee; and this he does with as much privacy and secrecy as might be; Chap.
39.
taking the advantage of the night, he flees by a by-way, Verse. 4.
viz. by the way of the Kings garden, there breaking out at a Sallyport, a
posterne-doore, by the gate between the two walls; so taking his way toward the
wilderness, thinking thereby to elude both the Prophets threatening, and the
Enemies fury. But what was the issue? The Enemy pursues him, overtakes him,
carries him to Riblah, verse. 5.
where NebuchadnezZar gave sentence against him to have his eyes put out, and
himself carried captive to Babel, which was accordingly executed. verse. 7.
No better success can they expect or look for, who when God bids them
stand, yet they will be fleeing. Let such make account that judgment will
follow them, and overtake them. I remember what Zophar in Job says of the
wicked man; Job 20.24.
He shall flee from the Iron weapon, and the Bow of Steel shall strike him
through. Those that flee from the Ironweapon, the Sword of Persecution, when
God bids them stand: God has a steel bow to let fly after them, arrows that
will overtake them, swift messengers to arrest them, judgments as great or
greater then those which they fled from. This is that which the Lord tells the
inhabitants of Moa^, Jer. 48. Jer. 48.43, 44.
Fearc, and the Pit, and the snare shall be upon thee, O inhabitant of Moab,
says the Lord. He that flees from the fear, shall fall into the pit, and he
that gets up out of the pit, shall be taken in the snare. Here is all that a
man shall get by flying when God bids him stand. The Prophet Amos describes it
well, Am. 5.19.
As if one should flee from a Lion, and a Bear met him, or went into the
house, and leaned his hand upon the wall, and a Serpent bit him. The truth
hereof many of Gods Saints have found upon their own experience. Master
Perkins makes report of one, Perk. Case of Cous.
a Professor in the days of Queen Mary, who having first a strong motion in
himself to stand it out, and seal the truth with his blood, afterward
flying, for that very act he felt such a sting in his conscience, that he could
never have peace till his death. God has Serpents and Scorpions to sting the
consciences of men in this case, besides many temporal judgments to meet with
them in their bodies, in their estates, wives, children, or the like; so as it
is to no purpose to fly when God bids stand. And therefore in this case let us
rather imitate the Soldier, who being appointed to stand Sentinel, or lie
Perdue; whatever the danger or hard-ship be, though the bullets fly never so
thick, yet he stands it out all weathers, not stirring from his charge till the
same hand which set him there relieve and fetch him off again. Thus being
called forth by God to this suffering-worke, take heed how we decline it, how
we withdraw our selves. Dreadful is that threatening which we meet with Heb.
10.38. Heb. 10.38.
If any man draw back, ((...), si quis se subdux^rit; If any man withdraw
himself, steal his neck (as it were) out of the collar) My soul shall have
no pleasure in him; there is a Meiosis in the phrase, less said, but more
intended, my soul shall have no pleasure in him, that is, it shall hate and
abhor him. Would we not fall under this displeasure, this disfavour and
hatred from God, take heed of giving back when he bids us stand. In this case,
what ever come of us, stand we fast, stand we still.

Q. Stand still, (you may say? Q. How a Christian may bring his heart thus to
stand.
) A lesson soon read, but not so soon learnt. How shall a Christian bring his
heart to such a holy stabilitie, as that he may be able to stand in this storm
of Persecution?

It is a useful question. A.
In the answer of it I shall not be large, having already laid you down
diverse directions which may be very proper in this case; to them I shall in a
great measure refer you. For the present, I shall only take hold of that
metaphor which the question it self (as I propounded it) puts into my hand.
How shall a Christian be made so stable, as that he may stand still in the
storm of Persecution?

I answer, Illustrated from a House, which that it may stand all weathers,
there are 3 things requisite.
even by the like means as a House may be made to stand it out all weathers,
to look storms and tempests in the face, and not give way. How that may be
done every one can tell. It must have a good foundation, it must be strongly
built, and low built. Apply we all these to our present purpose briefly.

First, The first requisite there and here, in a house, 1. A good foundation.
and in a Christian, is a good foundation. This I take from our Savior
himself, who in that known comparison, Mat. 7. minds us of two houses, Mat.
7.24, etc.
the one built upon the Rock, the other upon the Sand; the one standing, the
other falling in a storm: Thereby representing unto us two sorts of
Christians, the one grounded, the other ungrounded. The one of these stands
it out in the stresse of Temptation, the other gives way. That we may be able
to stand in the storm of Persecution, let our first care be for a good
foundation, that we may be well grounded, Get the Soul built upon Christ. 1
Cor. 10.1.
see that our souls be built upon the Rock. That Rock is Christ; so we have
the Apostle himself interpreting it. Christ the only sure foundation. So
says the same Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 1 Cor. 3.11.
Other foundation can no man lay then that which is laid, Jesus Christ.
Whatever else it is that the soul builds upon, it is but Sand. He is the Rock
firmly sustaining, and strongly bearing up (as his Church in general, so)
every faithful soul that is built upon him by a true and a lively faith. As
ever we would attain this holy stability, to stand still in this storm, make
this sure that our souls be thus built, built upon this foundation; make sure
our Union and Communion with Jesus Christ, from whom must come all our strength
for the supporting, bearing us up, and bearing us out in the stresse of
whatever trials. I am able to do all things, (says the Apostle) (and as to
do, so to suffer) through Christ that strengthens me.

Phil. 4.13. Well principled.
And being thus founded upon Christ himself, labor also to be well grounded in
the Mystery of Christ, I mean in the knowledge and apprehension of
saving-truths, held forth unto us in the doctrine of the Gospel. To get our
understandings enlightened, and our judgments strongly convinced touching the
Princi^les of Christian Religion, which the Apostle calls the laying of the
foundation. With all, labor to get a love of the Truth. Heb. ^^1.
You know who tells it you, that love is strong as death. Cant. 8.6.
Without this foundation the soul will never stand sure, a Christian will
never stand still.

2. Strongly built
Secondly, The foundation being good, now (in the second place) the second
requisite in a house is, it must be strongly built, viz. of good materials
well wrought; good stone or brick well couched and cemented with well tempered
mortar; or strong timbers, sound and substantial principalls, good studs and
joice, and spars, etc. all well joynted and bound together. And even thus must
it be with the soul that would stand it cut all weathers, The Soul must be
well laid in with substantial graces.
and stand still in time of Persecution, it must be thus built and thus laid
in with all requisite variety of sound and substantial graces. A truth which
the Apostle illustrates by another metaphor, very opposite and fit to our
present purpose, Ephesi. 6. Ephesi. 6.11.
where calling upon Christians to stand, and stand fast against their
spiritual Enemies, he shows them what they should do, viz. Put on the whole
Armor of God. I shall not need to tell you from whence the metaphor is taken.
The Soldier that would stand the charge of the Enemy, he must be completely
armed: And thus must the Christian be that would stand fast, and stand still
(as against spiritual, so) against temporal Enemies, against cruel and
bloody Persecutors, he must have Gods Panoply upon him. Now what that Armor
is, the Apostle there shows us; even the graces of the Spirit, viz. Truth, and
Righteousness, and Faith, and Hope, and Love, etc. All these must a Christian
be furnished with, that would stand in the evil day, the day of Persecution.
By this means, it was that the Apostles went so comfortably on, (as in their
doing, so) in their suffering-worke. 2 Cor. 6. v. 4, 5.
In all things they approved themselves the Ministers of God, in much patience,
in afflictions, in necessites, in distresses, in stripes, in impr^sonments, in
tumults, etc. (as Paul tells his Corinthians.) This they did, and how did
they it?*Why, by pureness, by knowledge, by long-suffering, verse. 6.7.
by the kindness, by the Holy Ghost, by love unfeigned, by the word of Truth,
by the power of God, by the Armor of the Righteousness. Would we imitate them
in their constancy, labor to resemble them in their other graces. I hasten to
the third and last particular, which is,

Thirdly, The house which would stand firm must be low built. 3. Low built.
High-towering Turrets are often Castles of Come-downe, in every stresse
shaking and tottering; whereas low-built-cottages stand firm and sure, faceing
all weathers, and feeling little of them. The Application is obvious. A humble
Soul,
The soul that would stand firm and sure in time of Persecution, must be
laid low; It must be brought to learn that great lesson of selfe-denyall.
Taught to deny it self.
It is the first lesson (you know) that our blessed Savior sets his Scholars,
his Disciples to learn; Mat. 16.24.
If any man will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his Cross,
and follow me. Till a man has learned this lesson, he will never take up his
Cross and follow Christ to Mount Calvary: And therefore every of us begin
here. Would we approve our selves Champions for Christ, never rest until we
have brought our hearts in some measure to a selfe-denying frame, that we can
deny our selves in whatever it is that flesh and blood calls or counts dear. It
is the first lesson that a true Soldier should learn when he takes upon him
that profession, he should then learn to deny himself, viz. his Ease, his
Pleasure, his Profit, I, and his Life too; none of these must be dear to him.
A Christian must go further, denying these and more, even that which to a true
Soldier is most dear, his Honor and Reputation. Even this, and all, must a
Christian trample upon, accounting nothing dear for Christ; So says Paul of
his life: I count not my life dear unto my self, Act. 20.2^.
so that I may finish my course with joy, etc. Oh that all our hearts and
spirits were but brought to such a self denying frame.

Which all laid low in the apprehension and acknowledgement of our own
weakness, insufficiency, Sensible of it own weakness.
inabilitie, to stand as of our selves. Such we are, labor we to be sensible
of it, going out of our selves, not standing upon our own bottomes, which if we
do, see the issue of it in Peter, who then fell most foulely when he was most
confident of his own standing. When he was strong, then was he weak; whereas,
(on the other hand) Paul tells us, 1 Cor. 12.10.
that when he was weak, then he was strong: when weak in himself, then strong
in his God, 2 Cor. 12.^.
whose power uses to be perfected in weakness, especially in weakness
apprehended. In this respect therefore, let our hearts lie low. Be we rather
jealous, then confident; jealous of our weakness, then confident of our
strength. The Story of Sanders and Pendleton, recorded in the Book of Martyrs,
is well known. The one jealous and timorous, careful and fearful, very
solicitous what he should do if God should bring him to the trial of
Martyrdom: The other, bold, confident, fearelesse; but in the end, Confidence
gives in, and yields cowardly, whilst Timerousnesse stood it out manfully, and
suffered Triumphantly. These Directions, with other very useful in this case,
I have heretofore enlarged in other expressions, and therefore shall not now
dwell any longer upon them.

Stand still, not Fighting.
4. How Moses here bids the people not to Fight.
Pass we now to the fourth and last Branch of this Direction here given by
Moses to the people, Stan^ still, i.e. not Fighting. Not Fighting (you may
say?) What then? Would Moses have them to yield up their throats to the Sword
of the Enemy? Not so, Moses had no such intent any ways to debar them of
their Inculpata tutela, their just and necessary defense; or yet to tie their
hands, so as that they should lay down their liberties and lives, (both which
God had now given them as a prey to themselves) at the foot of a lawless and
merciless Tyrant. Moses, though educated in Pharoahs Court, yet had he not
learnt that Language: But, in as much as he saw that the people had neither
hands not hearts, neither power nor will to fight, to encounter so Potent an
Adversary, therefore he bids them stand still; thereby intimating unto them,
that for the present there should be no need of their fighting; God would take
the cause into his own hand, fighting for them against his, and their Enemies.
In this sense, the Prophet I^haziel speaks to Ichoshaphat, and to the rest of
the people in that 2 Chronicles. 20. 2* Chron. 20.
When they were in a like condition, their Country being invaded, and in danger
to be over-runne by a Potent Enemy, whom they were not able to oppose; for
their encouragement, the Prophet tells them, that there should be no need of
their fighting. verse. 17.
Ye shall not need to fight in this Battle, set your selves, stand ye still;
Consistite, State, stand still, stand, (says he:) therein no question having
an eye to the words of Moses here in the Text. In both which places, this word
of Command, [stand still] being so understood, it is to be taken not for a
general Rule, but for a particular Direction; 'Fuit ho^ peculiari, quod eo^
quiescere jussit. Lavater, in 2 Chronicles. 20. verse. 17.
not showing what others are to do, or not to do in the like condition, but
only what they were to do at that time. The general Rule does not allow
Christians any such stupid or careless security, as that being in danger they
should stand still, casting themselves upon a naked and immediate Providence,
without the use of any means for their deliverance and safety. This they may
not do without an immediate warrant and direction from God. So had Moses (no
question) here at the Red Sea. So Calvin interprets those words which we meet
with in the 15 verse. of this chapter, where it is said; that the Lord said unto
Moses, Wherefore cryest thou unto me? Exodus 14.15.
Speak unto the children of Israel, etc. Here the question may be, when it was
that the Lord spoke this to Moses? Whether before Moses gave this encouragement
to the people, or after? Calvin inclines to the former, rendering the word, to
avoid ambiguity, (as he says) in the Preterperfect tence, Dixerat autem
Jehovah, And the Lord had said, viz. before that Moses spoke this to the
people. Otherwise (says he) How could Moses have made them such a Promise,
given them such an Assurance? Neq^enim tes^^^ and praeco salutis esse poterat
nisi accept^ promissione. Calv. ad loc.
This he could not have done, had he not first received a promise from God. And
upon that, it was that he grounded this his Direction, bidding them to stand
still. And so for Iehaziel there, the Text is express; God had made his mind
known unto him by immediate Revelation; 2 Chronicles. 20. v. 14.
The Spirit of the Lord came upon him, (says the Text) i. e. the spirit of
Prophecy. And this it was which warranted and required this Consistencie, this
standing still in the people at those times, which at other times is neither
commendable nor allowable. At other times, where we have no such immediate
Direction, the Rule is, up and be doing; wait upon God in the use of means,
serving his Providence by making use of such means, such instruments as God is
pleased to afford, which unless we do, we cannot properly be said to trust
God, but to tempt him.

So then Moses his aim herein, bidding the people to stand still, and not to
fight, is not either to inform them what they might not do, or what others in
a like condition ought not to do, but what they at that time should not need
to do; they should not need to fight. So Calvin (as I told you) here
interprets it; Verbo standi vult quietos manner, in bidding them stand, (says
he) He would have them to rest themselves quiet. As if he had said (says he)
There shall be no need for any of you to move a finger in this service: God
himself will undertake and effect it, He will fight for you, Verse. 15.
(as it follows in the next verse) working your salvation and deliverance in
an immediate way, without any aid or assistance of yours.

Obser. God can, and sometime does work immediate salvations for his people.
He can do it.
This God can do, and this sometimes he does, work immediate salvation and
deliverance for his people. He can do it. God who tyeth us to the use of
means, has left himself free. Being Lord of the creature, he can work with
it, or without it. Such is the absoluteness of his power, that he stands not
in need of instruments to work by. An evidence hereof we see in the first of
his works, his work of Creation, which was the immediate efflux of a Divine
Power, the issuing out of a (...), a power or virtue from God, (like that which
issued out from our Savior in the days of his flesh, Luk* 8.46.
whereby he wrought those miraculous Cures) causing things to exist which
before were not. In this work God had none to cooperate with him, no means,
no instruments to work by. What he did, he did it alone; He alone spreads out
the heavens, (says Job) Job 9. Job 9.8.
I am the Lord that makes all things, that stretches forth the heavens alone,
that spreads abroad the earth by my self, Isa. 44. Isa. 44.24.
Only he spoke, and it was done; what he did in the Creation of the world, the
like he can do in the Government of it; Create Providence, Command
deliverances, that is the Psalmists expression, Psalm. 44. Psalm. 44.4.
Thou art my King, O God, command deliverance, (command salvations) for Jacob.
This God can do, procure full salvation, absolute deliverance for his Church
and people, and that only by his word.

Q. Why then does he make use of instruments and secondary causes? Q. Why then
does he make use of means and instruments?


A. This he does, not out of any need he has of them. (...), It is Paul's
speech to the Athenians concerning the true God; A. Not because he needs
them, but Act. 17.25.
He is not worshipped with men's hands, as though he needed any thing, he
needs neither us, nor our services, being in himself (...),
selfe-sufficient. That he does make use of means and instruments, in
conveying mercy to his Church and people, he does it.

First, Out of the liberty of his own will. I. This he does out of the
liberty of his own will.
God we know is Agens liberrimus, the most free Agent, working all things (as
the Apostle tells us) (...), Ephesi^ ^.1.
according to the counsel of his own will: Not being tied to any const^nt
tenor or manner of working, as natural Agents are, which ever work one and
the same way. True it is, God has set down an order for the creatures to
observe, and work according to, Romans 2.14.
which we call Nature. And this is a law to them, (as Paul says of the
Gentiles, They are a law to themselves, viz. in regard of the law of Nature
written in their hearts, the Rules and Dictates whereof they follow) but not so
to God the Lawgiver; who being above his Law, (so is every absolute Lawgiver)
may dispense with it working above Nature, or against Nature, as it pleases
him, having herein no Rule but his own Will.

2. For the good of the Universe.
Secondly, This he does for the good and benefit of the Universe of the whole.
Making use of means and instruments in conveighing of mercy, that so thereby he
might (as it were) engage the creatures one to another, by making them
beholding one to another: The Heavens shall hear the Earth, and the Earth
shall h^are the Corn, and Wine, and Oil, and they shall hear Iezreel, Hos.
2. Hos. 2.21.22.
One creature beholding to another, as members in the natural body, all for
the good of the whole.

3. To put honor upon instruments.
Thirdly, Again (thirdly) this he does sometimes that he may put some special
honor upon some instruments. Thus he makes use of Moses in this great
expedition, in bringing his people out of Egypt, and dividing the Red Sea, not
that he had any need of Moses, but to the end, that he might put a special
honor upon him.

Fourthly, Again (in the last place, 4. For our example.
to name no more) this he does for examples to us, to teach us what we are to
do, viz. to make use of such means and instruments as his Providence shall
reach forth unto us. For these Reasons (amongst other) God is pleased for the
most part to make use of means and instruments in bringing his purposes to
pass, which yet (if he pleased) he could effect in a more immediate way, only
by his word. This he can do.

And this sometimes he does, command immediate salvations and deliverances for
his people, doing the work himself alone. Thus did the eternal Son of God
effect that great work, that great deliverance for his Elect, their
deliverance from Hell and Death; Heb. 1.3.
this he did alone. He by himself purged our sins. And thus God sometimes
works temporal salvations and deliverances for his people by himself alone,
shutting out the creature; Even as Peter when he went about the raising up of
Dorcas to life again, Act. 9.40.
he put out all that were in the chamber with him, (as the Prophet Elisha had
done before him in raising up the widows son.) Thus God sometimes, 2 King.
4.33.
in working a Resurrection (as it were) for his Church and people, in working
some great work, some eminent deliverance for them, he shuts the creature out
of doors, doing the work himself alone, without their help, or the help of
any instruments. Thus did he work this deliverance here for his people Israel
at the Red Sea, not making any use of them, otherwise then as spectators, as
lookers on; Stand still, and see (says Moses) See what God will do for you,
without you.

God does great things for his people without them.
Great are the things which God does for his people without them* He Made them
without them, he Redeemed them without them. In both which they were mere
Patients, not contributing anything, either to their own Creation or
Redemption; no more do they to the first act of their Conversion, wherein they
are mere patients, only suffering God to work upon them; themselves in the
mean time by their natural power working nothing, unless it be to hinder the
work of Grace what they can. Such they are in the first act of Conversion.
True indeed, afterward being wrought upon, they work. Being quickened and
renewed by Grace, now they cooperate and work together with it. Being
quickened by prevenient grace, they now cooperate with subsequent grace; but in
the first act they were mere Patients. A truth (methinkes) not unfitly
illustrated and shadowed out by the manner of Gods dealing with his people
Israel here in bringing them to Canaan. Being once passed through the Red Sea,
then they march and fight, and make their way by the Sword through the midst of
their Enemies; but before that, they stand still; being in the first work
which God here wrought for them, mere Patients. Thus the Lords people, being
once translated from death to life, being once regenerated and renewed, then
they move and work, fighting against sin, they make their way toward the
Heavenly Canaan, (...), working out their own salvation: Phil. 2.1^.
But before that, when the Grace of God first meets with them, it finds
them standing still, like the Laborers (or rather Loiterers) in the Gospel,
that stood still, Mat. 20.3.
stood idle in the marketplace, (...), doing nothing; nay, that which is more,
having neither will nor power to do anything for themselves, but merely in a
passive capacity, only suffering God to work for them, in them, and upon
them. These works God works for his people without them.

And (to return to the case in the Text) after the same manner sometimes he
works temporal deliverances for them, making little or no use of them, or
their endeavors in the effecting of them.

Which he does (if you will know the Reason of it) chiefly, Reas. That he might
impropriate all the glory.
that by this means he might impropriate all the glory to himself. It is the
Reason which the Apostle gives, why God makes choice of weak and despecable
means to effect and bring to pass great matters by; 1 Cor. 1.17, 28, 29.
the Foolish things of the world to confound the wise; The weak things of the
world to confound the mighty; Base and despicable things, yea, things which
were not, to bring to naught things that are: This he does (says the Apostle)
to the end, That no flesh should glory in his presence. Should God always take
the creature along with him, and make it a sharer or partner in the work,
happily it would be ready to step in, and pretend to a share in the Honor;
but being sometimes shut out from the one, it is thereby excluded from the
other; that, verse. last.
according (as it is written) He that glories, may glory in the Lord. This it
was that God had an eye to here in the Text. His design was to get himself
Honor; Honor upon Pharaoh and his Host in their destruction, So you have it
in the fourth verse of the chapt. repeated again verse. 17. Verse. 4. Verse. 17.
I will be honored upon Pharaoh, and upon on all his Host, etc. Honor upon
his people in their salvation and deliverance. And to this end, he here takes
the work into his own hand, bidding the people stand still, and let him
alone; that so, all the honor of that days service might redound wholly unto
himself, that he might Triumph Gloriously, as you have it in the first verse
of the following chapt. Thus you see the truth of the point, Chap. 15.1.
and with all some Reason for it. God can work salvation for his people
without them, which sometime he does, and that for the impropriating of all the
glory.

Applic.
That which remains is the Application, which I shall direct in the first place
(following the stream of the Text) by way of encouragement.

Use 1. Encouragement in straits
Can God work immediate salvations for his people, saving and delivering them
by his own hand, without their help, or the help of whatever instruments?
Let this meditation serve to bear up the hearts and spirits of the Lords
people in the midst of all their straits and exigents, whether private or
public, when dangers and difficulties surround and incompasse them, and
means and instruments, (such as they looked at) seem to fail them, so as in
the eye of reason their case seems for lorne and desperate, yet even now let
them stand still, not casting away their hope and confidence, knowing that God
is not tied to means or instruments. He can work by them, and he can work
without them. And then is his time to work, when means and instruments fail:
Vbi humanum deficit, ibi incipit divinum auxilium; Where humane help ends,
there divine begins; where the creature leaves, there the Creator takes: When
my father and my mother forsake me, Psalm. 27.10.
then the Lord will take me up, (says the Psalmist.) Though they cast me out
yet the Lord will gather me: The Lord gathers the outcasts of Israel, Psalm.
147. Psalm. 147.2.
Expulsos, Ejectos, those that are cast and driven out as Exiles, from house
and home; Incerta sede vagantes, Heb. 11.3^.
wandering as those Primitive Saints are said to do, not having any certain
habitation, but exposed to the wide world (as we say) such the Lord gathers.
Stepping into his people in the midst of their greatest straits and
extremities; then showing himself to them most clearly, most gloriously,
perfecting his Power, his Goodness, in their weakness, their wants.

Whatever our condition then be, though we be stripped never so naked of all
humane helps and creature-assistances, yet despair not. If God have a purpose
to save us, to deliver us, his counsel shall stand, his purpose shall take
place. Isa. 46.
My counsel shall stand (says the Lord) and I will do all my pleasure. verse.
10. verse. 11.
I have spoken it, I will also bring it to pass, I have purposed it, I will
also do it. Take we this for an universal Truth, and build upon it; whatever
God has purposed to do, whether against his Enemies or for his people, it
matters not; what seeming improbabilities or impossibities may cross the way
of his Providence, it shall be performed. It is that which the Prophet Jeremy
says concerning Babylon, Jer. 51. Jer. 51.2^.
Every purpose of the Lord shall be performed against Babylon. What he there
speaks of the literal, it may as truly be said of Mystical Babylon. Babylon
shall fall.
One purpose of the Lord shall be performed against Babylon. Now we know what
the Lord has purposed concerning it; Babylon, it is fallen, ^evel. 18.2.
it is fallen: It shall certainly fall, it shall speedily fall, both imported
in that phrase and manner of speech. And this purpose it shall be performed. It
matters not what Babylon it self be, though seemingly never so impregnable,
(Such the Eastern Babylon was, and such the Western Babylon is) yet this shall
not frustrate or make void the purpose of God. Babylon the Great is fallen:
Though Great for Power, Great for Jurisdiction, Great for Wealth, Great for
Honor and Reputation, Great for Friends and Allies, yet Babylon the Great is
fallen.

Jerusalem shall be established.
On the other hand, we know what God has purposed concerning his Church;
Jerusalem shall be established, and made a praise in the earth, Isa. 62. Isa.
62.7.
The Mountain of the Lords house shall be established in the top of the
Mountains, and shall be exalted above the Hills, Isa. 2. Isa. 2.^.
Above the Hills, I, above those seven Hills, whereon the woman in the
Revelation is said to sit, Revel. 17.9.
whereon the City of Rome is built; The Church shall be elevated and lifted up
above* all Romish Power and Jurisdiction. This is Gods purpose concerning
Babylon, and concerning Sion; the one shall Fall, the other shall Rise; God can
Create instruments.
and this shall come to pass. It matters not, though at the present we see no
means, no likely instruments to effect this great work: God can if he please
Create both, raise up both in an instant. A truth excellently represented and
set forth unto Zachary in a vision, the vision of the four Horns, and four
Carpenters, Zach. 1. Zach. 1.18, 19, 20, 21.
I lift up mine eyes, (says the Prophet) and saw, and behold four Horns,
verse. 18. And the Lord showed me four Carpenters, verse. 20. Now, what were
those four Horns? Why the Enemies of the Church, as the 19 verse expounds it;
which are called Horns for their Power, and said to be four in reference to
the four parts of the World, East, West, North, and South, from all which they
come, (as the Geneva Gloss explaines it.) And what are the Carpenters? Why,
instruments raised up by God to break and batter those Horns, to oppose, to
overthrow that adverse power, (so the last verse explaines it) and they again
are said to be four, to import an equality of power and strength. Thus when
God has a work to do, be it to ^eat down Babylon, Where God has a work to
do, he can want no Carpenters. Josh. 6.20.
or build up Jerusalem, he can raise up Carpenters, instruments that shall be
sufficient for the work. It may be, making use of mean instruments to effect
great matters by; Trumpets of Rams Horns to lay the walls Jericho flat: Nay
more, rather then fail, he both can, and will work without instruments. He
has done it, he can do it* and rather then his purpose should not stand, he
will do it: Though instruments fail, He can do his work without them.
yet the Promise shall not fail: Though the Carpenters should not strike a
stroke, yet God has ways to take off the Horns of his Enemies: Though the
Church should be destitute of all humane protection, yet God has ways to
deliver it, to secure it. Express is that of the Prophet Esaias, Isa. 4. Isa. 4
5.6.
The Lord will create upon every dwelling place of Mount Sion, and upon her
Assemblies a cloud and smoke by day, and the shining of a flaming fire by
night; alluding (as you know) to the Pillar of the Cloud, and of the Fire which
went before the Israelites in the wilderness, pledges and tokens of Gods
gracious protection and direction. These (says the Prophet) the Lord will
Create. Now to Create, you know what it is, viz. to bring something out of
nothing, to work (as I said) without means, without instruments. And thus,
rather then fail, God will work salvation and deliverance for his Church, he
will Create it, bring it out of nothing, effect it without any such means or
instruments as it may be our eyes are fixed upon.

Which let it serve; as for the bearing up the hearts of the Lords people in
the midst of these drooping and doubtful times; Use 2. Counsel, to take off
our eyes from looking too much at instrum^^ts.
So (in the second place) for the taking off their eyes from looking too much
at means, too much at instruments; a thing which generally we are very act to
do. And there is it that our pulses beat so unequally, that there is so much
unevenness in our spirits; they are up and down, like wells dug upon the
Sea shore near the highwater mark, which rise and fall according as the tide
ebbs and flows. Even thus is it generally with our spirits, they Rise and Fall
with the Tide, and current of means and instruments. When the Tide comes in,
means and instruments appear to us, so as we apprehend things outwardly in a
hopeful condition, then our spirits are up; but if there be a slake of them,
presently they are down again. Thus it should not be, and thus it would not
be, did we not live more by Sense then by Faith. Faith will tell us, that Gods
decrees and purposes, they do not Stand or Fall to secondary causes. That
which God has purposed to do, he can do it, he will do it; he will carry
through his own work.

God will carry through his own work in this Kingdom.
Bring we it home to the particular case of the Kingdom, at the present (as
sad a case as ever this Kingdom saw.) If God have a gracious purpose toward
it, to save and deliver his people, to build, and to plant, and to purge his
Church, to establish his Gospel, to settle Truth and Peace amongst us, it is
not the deficiency of whatever instruments that shall hinder the work. It is
that which Moses here tells the Israelites, that God having a purpose to get
himself honor in their deliverance and his Enemies destruction; this he would
do, though none of them should lift up a hand to the work. Let them stand
still, yet shall not that hinder Gods design. Quamtumvis torpeant velut
examines, (it is Calvin's expression upon the Text) Though they should be so
st^pified and benumbed with their faithless fear, as that they should not be
able to move a hand, to stir a foot; yet, In uno Deo satis praesidii, God alone
was able to do the work for them, and he would do it without them. Apply it
to our own present condition. Suppose it those instruments which hitherto have
shown themselves most active for the good of the Church and State amongst us,
that some of them, nay all of them should fall off, (as some of them have done)
or be taken off, (as others of them have been) yet shall not this hinder Gods
design: Man's design it may, but Gods it shall not. Whatever mercy God has
intended toward his people in this Nation, he will effect it, though there
should be never so great a deficiency in means and instruments. Though both we
and they should stand still, yet God will carry on, and carry through his own
work.

A truth, an undoubted one, No ground of security.
but let it not be misconstrued, as if my aim in delivering it were to make
any of us secure, either careless or fearelesse, or to take off the edge of
whatever warrantable endeavors for the furthering of what we desire, and hope
God is about to do for us. No, I have received no such promise from God, as
Moses here had, to warrant me in giving this advice to you that he does here to
them, to bid you stand still. This direction of his, (as I told you) it was in
this particular an extraordinary, not to be drawn into President by others in
a like condition. In an ordinary way, that of the Father holds true; He that
made us, without us, will not save us, without us. He spoke it (I know) of
Eternal, but it is no less true of Temporal salvation. Ordinarily God makes
use of our endeavors in the obtaining of those mercies which himself
intends to bestow upon us. And therefore, far be it from me to persuade,
much more to command any in this sense, in these busy and active times to
stand still. Some directions I acknowledge (as occasion has been offered) I
have tendered unto you for the regulating and ordering of ^our motions, that
they might be with safety and beauty, as the motions of a well-ordered Army
are: But never did this word of Command yet fall from my mouth in this sense to
bid you stand still; neither was it ever my purpose to take you off from
whatever warrantable endeavors, that might be subservient to the Providence of
God in obtaining what we desire and hope for. Herein I shall rather lift up my
voice like a Trumpet, encouraging you to the work.

Christians called to their Prayers.
Calling you first to your Prayers. These are the most proper and most tried
weapons of the Church; Preces and lachrymae, Prayers and Tears. You that have
done any thing this way, stand not you still. Go on, and advance, making your
approaches nearer to the Throne of Grace, which is at this day strongly
besieged by an Army of Suppliants. Isa. 62.6.
You that are the Lords Remembrancers, give him no rest: You that make mention
of the Lord, keep not silence, do not you stand still: do not you hold your
peace. For Zions sake I will not hold my peace, and for Ierusalems sake I will
not rest, Ibid. v. 1.
until the righteousness thereof go forth as brightness, and the salvation
thereof as a burning Lamp. In this way I shall exhort and stir up all the
Lords people (my self amongst the rest) not only to continue, but to double
their endeavors.

Neither shall I confine you to your Prayers only. But not confined to them.
Josh. 7* 6.
I remember what the Lord said to Ioshuah, when he and the Elders of Israel
were fallen upon their faces to the earth before the Arc, bewailing that
unexpected Repulse which some of their forces had received at Aye, where their
men were beaten off with the loss of some of them, to the discouragement of
the whole Army; Verse. 10.
The Lord finding Ioshuah in this posture, he says unto him, verse. 10. Get
thee up, wherefore lie thou here upon thy face? What, might not Ioshuah do
what he did? Might he not pray and humble himself before God, in such a case
as that? Yes, he might do it, he ought to do it, there being no readier way
to stay or prevent judgment then this. But this was not enough, there was
something else to be done; Alio remedio opus erat, (says Calvin upon it) there
was another Salve to be applied to that Soar. And what was that? Why, there
was an Achan in the Camp, Verse. 12.
who by his meddling with that execrable thing contrary to the express command
of God, had made the people execrable, laying the whole Congregation under a
Curse. And this it was that must be taken away; otherwise Ioshuahs prayers,
though able to arrest and stay the Sun in the Firmament of Heaven, yet could
they not be able to stay the course of Gods judgments. Beloved, thus stands
the case with us at this day: The judgments of God being gone out, and having
broken forth upon us in a most terrible manner, Prayers and Humiliations are
requisite and necessary (never more) but not sufficient. Alio remedio opus est,
There is something else to be done, viz. the taking away of the Execrable thing
from amongst us, Take away the Execrable thing.
that accursed thing which has provoked the eyes of our God against us.
Unless this be taken away, all our Prayers and Humiliations, though never so
frequent, never so earnest, yet will they not be available to the stopping of
the course of judgment. And therefore let me speak unto all the Lords people,
as the Lord there to Ioshuah, Get you up, wherefore lie you upon your faces?
Not but that you may do this, and ought to do it; but this is not enough,
there is more to be done then this. There is an Achan, many Achans amongst us;
Execrable Persons (say some) I excuse not them; Execrable things (say I)
Accursed Sins, Accursed Abominations, which, whatever in the Toleration or
Connivance, sure I am, in the practice they are no less then National, having
overspread all places, and all sorts of persons; Surely these are the Achans,
the chiefest Troublers of this our Israel. Now, until these be taken away,
taken off from the head of the Nation, by a General, a National Reformation,
Endeavoring a National Reformation.
we cannot expect that the course of judgment should be stayed. In the fear
of God, then let all of us up and be doing, doing what we may for the
furtherance of this great work; Every one beginning at home, reforming our
own Hearts, Lives, Families: Then do what we may for the Reforming of others.
Only every one in our places, Private persons in their places, and Public
persons in their places; all moving in their own spheres, none standing
still, but all showing themselves Active for God, and active for the good of
Church and State; And that not only by endeavoring the removal of obstacles
out of the way of mercy (which is a great work) but also by improving all
opportunities, making use of all lawful and warrantable ways and means for
the promoting and furthering of whatever gracious purposes and intentions our
God may yet have toward us. Exodus 14.15.


This let us do. As for others, if any have no Hearts, no wills to the work,
(and, O that there were not too many such every where! David tells us of some
that Hated to be Reformed. Psalm. 50.17.
Would to God there were none of them amongst us, who are so far from
furthering the work of Reformation, as that they would rather do what they
can to hinder it. Others, though happily they could be content with it, and it
may be wish it, yet they would by no means be seen to have any hand in it;
they have no hearts to appear for God in any Cause of his.) Now, as for such,
I shall not stick to say unto them, as Moses here to these faint-hearted or
false-hearted Israelites, (for surely such there were some amongst them) stand
you still; taking notice, that God has no need of you, nor of your endeavors
to carry through his own work; What he has purposed, and determined to do,
he can do it, and he will do it without you. His work shall go on, though
you stand still.

And thus I have at length (as I conceive) given you the full sense and meaning
of this comprehensive word here in the Text, and of the counsel couched in it,
Genesis 2.10.
and intended by it; Which, like that River of Eden, we have seen branching
it self into four streams, and every one of them affording unto us somewhat,
both Seasonable and Profitable. The former I am sure of, the latter I shall
pray for.

FINIS.
Errata.
Page 5. Line 23. Sand, read Stand: p. 9. l. 1. for ques^monia, r. querimonia:
p. 13. l. 28. for and, r are: p. 16. l. 17. for enjoyed, r. enjoy: p. 18 l. 24.
for vulgaries, r. vulgar eyes: p 22. l. 11. for secure, r. sear: p. 24 l. 28.
for commov^ami^is, 1. co^^oveanimis: p. 29. l. 12. for tithe, r. Thite: p. 30.
l. 30. for end, r. ever: p. 32. l. 2^. for hear, r. fear: p. 33. l. 32. for
property, r. properties: p 35. l. 11. for D^ection, r. Discretion: p. 37. l.
^. for ^eedily, r. beadily: l. 29. r. thu quick-sand: p. 38. l. 30. for over^y,
r overly: p. 39. l. 27. marg. for others, ^. ourselves: p. 46 l. 28. dele
first: p. 48. for expressed, r. express: p. 53. l 8. for fined r. fixed: p. 54.
l. 6. for bandled, r. banded: ibid l. 25. for (...), r. (...): p. 71. l. 20.
dele proved: p. 8^. for that, r. it: p. 85. l 18. for These. 1.^. thesi: p. 88.
l. 25. for (...), r. (...): p. 90. l 24. for princicles, r. principles: p 91. l
10. for opposite, r. apposite: p. 91. l. 1. dele the: p. 93. l 7. for Which, r.
With: p. 95 marg. for peculiari, r. peculia^e: p. 97. l. 24. for (...), r.
(...): l. 28. for (...), r. (...): p. 103. l 81. for One, r Every: p. 106. l.
13. for act* r apt: ibid. for there, r* th^^ce: p 108 l 8. dele an: ib. l. last
for p^^ces, r. preces.


