THE INTEREST OF ENGLAND IN THE Present War WITH HOLLAND.

By the Author of The DUTCH USURPATION.

Nulla Potentia Scelere quaesita est diuturna.

LONDON, Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the three Roses in Ludgate Street, 1672.

TO THE KING.
DREAD SIR,
SInce Heaven your Righteous Cause has owned,
And with Success Your powerful Navy crowned;
Silence were now an injury as rude,
As the proud Hollanders Ingratitude:
While the Glories of your Arms, and Triumphs shine,
Not to Congratulate were to Repine.
Your Enemies themselves to Greatness raise,
By disingenious, and inglorious ways;
By means, no Vulgar Spirit would endure,
But such as either Courage want, or Power.
But while your Clemency proclaims aloud
Compassion to the miserable Crowd:
Your Royal Breast with Love, not Anger, burns,
And Your resentment into Pity turns
In Christian Gallantry You Your self out-doe,
And Honor by the Noblest Arts pursue.
THE Interest of ENGLAND In the present War with HOLLAND.
TRade and Commerce are the Pillars of Prosperity, and safety to England: Trade
is the pillar of safety to England.
But how these of late have been shaken by the artifice, and undue practices of
the Hollanders, every sober man may judge: For they have not only made great
diminution of the Merchant Adventurers ancient privileges in their
Jurisdiction, but our Trade to Muscovia (the Hollanders serving the same Market
with our own cloth, carried thither from Hamburgh) we cannot long enjoy. Our
Trade to Muscovia we cannot enjoy long.
We do not vend the one third part of the Cloth in Germany, and the
Low Countries, which we have formerly done: We vend not one third part of our
Cloth we formerly have done.
And that we have transported from North to East of late years, has been sold
to loss, being beaten out by the subtilty and cunning of these men; they having
such quantities of Wool out of England and Ireland (to the exceeding damage of
this Nation) that they make more Cloth and Stuff than we do in England, and
afford it cheaper then we can do.

The Fishing upon the British Seas (then which nothing is more peculiar to this
Nation) they have taken from us by force, The Hollanders have taken from
England the Fishing Trade.
and have defended and justified the same, against his Majesty's greatest power.

And to signalize their Ingratitude to his Majesty, they have not only
undermined the Trade of the English in all parts, to the diminution of his
Majesty's Revenue, and prejudice to his Subjects, but have labored to soil his
Glory, and lessen his Dignity, where the Honor of the King of Great Britain
was justly famous: Although they have received greater Favors and Kindnesses
from this Nation, then all the Kings and Princes in Europe could give them. The
Hollanders have received greater favors from England then from all Kings in
Europe.


In the Molucca Islands the Hollanders exercised great Cruelty upon the poor
Natives there. The Hollanders exercised great cruelties upon the Natives in
India, and they told them they were English.
And when they had done, they declared to them, that they were English; the
Natives asking them, who the English were? the Hollanders told them they were
Christians: Thereby they did not only render the English odious, but the very
name of Christians abominable to the Natives. But when they came to understand
the kindness and behavior of the English to them, they had a very great love
for them, and did much Honor the King of England: the Orankies being often
heard to say, that the King of England was a good King, and his God a good God;
but their Tanto Tanto was an evil Spirit, which did trouble them every new
Moon, and therefore they worshipped him for fear.
and the Hollanders were naught.

Anno 1608. an English Colony was planted by Captain Robert Harcourt in Caripo,
situate on the Banks of Wiapico in Guiana, the Hollanders possess themselves of
Gomeribo on the top of a Hill, near the Mouth of the Bay of Wiapico, but soon
deserted: yet they endeavored nothing more during their short stay, then to
make the Natives disaffected to the English; The Hollanders in Guiana endeavor
to render the English odious to the Natives.
affronting their persons, and defaming the Grandeur and Power of the Kings of
England. But when the Natives found by experience how the King of England, and
his Subjects were abused, they did ever after perfectly hate the name of a
Hollander.

Anno 1614. The Hollanders planted themselves in a Province or Port of
Virginia, having purchased the Charts and Maps of Hudson, and all his right
which he had acquired by that Voyage, and called it by the name of
Nieu-Nederlandt. But being questioned by Sir Tho. Argal, then Governor of
Virginia for his Majesty of Great Britain, were told, that they must quit the
possession of that place, or else pay Tribute to his Majesty; for that Hudson
was an Englishman, and licensed to discover those Northern parts by the King of
England, and could not alienate or dismember it from the Crown of England.
Complaint hereof being made to the States of Holland, it was declared by them
in a publlck Instrument, that they were no ways concerned in the Action; but
'twas a private undertaking of the West-Indian Company of Amsterdam. And though
the Hollanders did seem willing to be gone; yet taking advantage of the
Troubles, which not long after happened in England, they have not only kept
possession thereof, and built a Fortress, and called it by the name of
Orang-Fort, which was Garrisoned, and planted with Cannon, but fell in with the
Natives, and furnished them with Arms, and taught them how to use their
Weapons, The Hollanders instruct the Natives in the West Indies in the use of
arms.
with design to have destroyed all the English Plantation there. A most
mischievous and wicked act, not only tending to the damage and discouragement
of the present Adventurers, but even unto the extirpation of all Christians out
of all those Countries. But the best is, they were the first which smarted by
it. The Natives thus armed and trained, fell foul upon them, destroyed their
houses, and forced them to betake themselves to their Ports and Fastnesses. But
upon all occasions expressed their kindness and obedience to the English.

Ormus, an Island in the entrance of the Persian Gulf, in the possession of the
Portuguez, Anno 1506. was made the Staple of their Trade for the Indian
Merchandises, and so enriched the same, that the Revenues of the Kings there,
though Tributaries and Vassals to the Portugals, amounted unto 140000 Shirifes
yearly. In this flourishing estate it stood, till the Year 1622. when Abas the
Sultan of Persia having received some affronts at the hands of the Portuguez,
and being desirous to remove the Trade of Ormus to some part of his own
Dominions, gave order to Emangoti Chares the Duke of Shiras, to lay Siege unto
it with his Army. But seeing no hopes of mastering it by his Land Forces only,
furnished himself with Ships and Cannon of some English Merchants, and by the
assistance of the English presently subdued it. The City was utterly destroyed,
the Cannons removed to Lar, the wealth thereof to his own Treasury of Shiras,
the materials of the houses to Gunbroon, about nine miles from Ormus, then a
poor village; but since the fall of Ormus, a rich and populous place, and of
vast Trade. For this Service, so much honor was given to the English Nation by
the King of Persia, that he gave to the King of Great Britain the Customs of
all Strangers which should traffic thither; and by his Agent which resideth at
Gunbroon, ought to be received. The Hollanders who have a vast trade thither,
they being strangers, and not trading to the Gulf, till some time after, for
several years paid their Customs; but since the Troubles in England, refused to
pay The Hollanders use to pay to his Majesty Customs given to him by the King
of Persia.
(though all other Strangers pay to the English resident there) which may be
reasonably estimated at 20000 l. per annum: and have been detained by them,
from the King of Great Britain about 30 years.

Anno 1671. when the King of Great Britain at his own charges (for a peaceable
Traffic and Commerce, not only for his own Subjects, but for those of other
Kings and Princes in Europe) made a War against the Pirates of Argiers, and by
his Naval Forces were much disabled, and brought to a Treaty. The Hollanders
writ to their good Friends of Argiers, that they should conclude no Peace with
England, The Hollanders writ to the Pirates of Argiers not to make Peace with
England.
for they wanted Provision, and could not continue long at Sea.

If I should present you with all the Sufferings of his Majesty's Subjects from
these men, they would make a Book of Martyrs; but the image of great things are
best seen contracted into small glasses.

His Majesty out of his Princely Wisdom has left no means unattempted, for
reparation of his own Dignity, and for compensation of the injuries done to his
good Subjects, but could effect none.

Therefore Vltima resolutio est gladius, The War against the Hollanders just.
War is the darrein resort of every wise and good Prince; unto which his
Majesty was necessitated, they being the first Aggressors, The Hollanders the
first Aggressors.
and that upon such clear and pregnant evidence, as no King ever undertook a
more just War. For, as in Capital causes, wherein but one man's life is in
question, in favorem vitae, the evidence ought to be clear; so much more in the
judgment of a War, which is capital to thousands.

They have exposed his Majesty to contempt by their false Libels and Medails:
The Hollanders expose his Majesty to Contempt by Libels.
The Reputation of a Prince ought to be as sacred, as his Person, vita and fama
pari passu ambulant. Life and Reputation are the same in judgment of Law; for,
that person which has lost his Reputation, he does but survive his own
Funerals. Contumely to a private person, is but a private injury; but to a
King, its an affront to a whole Nation; for in the Honor of the King, is wound
up the safety and reputation of the people: and not only his own Subjects, but
all Kings and Princes are obliged to vindicate his Majesty's Dignity. Its not
enough for a Prince to be great among his own Subjects, but he must carry a
Grandezza amongst Kings: there is his Glory; which by the art and malice of
these unmannerly Libels may be much impeached.

They have seized upon his Dominions and Plantations in the East Indies, The
Hollanders have seized upon his Majesty's Dominions in the East Indies.
and do unjustly detain them from him. They have disturbed the Factories of his
good Subjects there. They have disputed his Majesty's Sovereignty of the
British Seas here; alleging, that by the Magna Charta of God Almighty its
free; and that there can be no dominion or propriety in the Sea: which they
urged with much zeal against the Portuguez in the East Indies. But when they
had subdued them, and the Kings there, they make it Death, and Confiscation of
Ships and Goods for any person to pass the South and North Seas there, (the
Dominion of which Seas is of a greater Latitude, then that of all the Kings and
Princes in Europe.) And all the Arguments which they use to assert their Right
and Dominion thereunto, are Sword and Cannon. I do assure you they are smart
Arguments. But we may see, that the unwarrantableness of an action is often hid
in the Glory of the success.

And those men which should have been the Pillars of a State, are become the
Caterpillars of Kingdoms; yea, and worse too: for the Caterpiller as a modest
and sober creature, only makes bold with the Fruits of the Earth, but these
devour the Land and People too.

Now they begin to be looked upon as the Pesti ducts of Europe, the scorn and
indignation of every good man

They have supplanted the Trade and Commerce of his Majesty's Subjects, which
are the vena porta of the Kingdom, Trade is the vena porta of the Kingdom.
and without which the Limbs and Members thereof must be feeble and weak.

All which proceedings of these men, are such pregnant evidence of the Justice
of the War, that there are no learned Doctors (the Gamaliels of the Law) but
must give Judgment against them.

And if Wars in these cases, for the vindication of rights, and repair of
injured Subjects, be not lawful, (for Wars are but suits of Appeal to the
Tribunal of Gods Justice, Wars are suits of Appeal to the Tribunal of Gods
Justice.
when there are no Superiors upon earth to determine the case) we must expect
nothing but Rapines, Injuries, and Injustice here upon earth.

If we set down by reason, the judgment of the learned, and the practice of all
Ages; the increase of their Dominions, and potency at Sea, (if we consider
their Ambition, Avarice, and Insolences) have given just fear to his Majesty,
and other the Kings and Princes of Europe; and so justified his proceedings
against them, before God and man.

For preventive Wars upon just fears, are as just Wars, Preventive Wars upon
just fears are just Wars.
and as truly defensive, as those that are made upon actual Invasion.

And therefore the Greek Orator compares those who make Wars, which are not
preventive, to Country fellows, in a Fencing-School, which never Ward till the
Blow is past. And no Prince can be justly condemned for not staying for the
first blow, or not for accepting of Polyphemus courtesy, to be the last that
shall be eaten up.

The Hollanders are always brooding of War, and there is no firm League to be
had with them, but impuissance to do hurt.

And certainly its a main piece of wisdom in strong and prudent Councils to be
in perpetual watch, that the Princes or States about them, do not too much
aggrandize themselves, Its prudence to watch, that neighbor Princes do not
aggrandize themselves too much.
by new Acquests, or by ruining Confederates, or by the like means. And this
was so exactly observed by that Trium-virate of Kings, Henry the Eighth of
England, Francis the First of France, and Charles the Fifth, Emperor and King
of Spain, that scarce a palm of Ground could be gotten by either of the three,
but that the other two would be sure to do their best to set the Balance of
Europe upright again.

A Republic is nothing but an Engine (erected by Sedition and Treachery to
subvert Monarchy;) A Republic is an Engine erected by Sedition against
Monarchy.
and we see that Holland has been a Retreat for all Rebels, and a Sanctuary to
the worst of men.

All Heresies, Schisms, and Anti-monarchical Principles have been there
hatched, and they fly into the Dominions of Kings and Princes, and on their
wings carry nothing but Poison and Contagion to infect their Subjects.

They are great pretenders to Zeal, and Religion (you shall learn much Divinity
from them, but find no Humanity.) Certainly such as rob God of his Honor, by
tolerating Atheists; and Princes of their rights, by countenancing Rebellion,
shall never be set out for Saints in my Calendar.

Let them plume themselves in their Successes, and triumph in their Grandeur;
if it be once admitted, that Grandeur and Successes be true signatures of
Heavens favor, I shall forbear (as an ingenious Gentleman said) any longer to
think Mahomet an Impostor, and must receive the Alcoran for Gospel.

They are the greatest Patrons of Schism in the world: The Hollanders great
Patrons of Schism.
For my part, I Have ever had a serious abhorrency of that sin, being against a
main Article of my Faith, Schism is against an Article of Faith.
(the Communion of Saints) which makes the Church Militant, and Triumphant one
Parish.

Here they give the people Liberty of Conscience, (as they call it:) But as to
their Estates, they make them the greatest slaves in the world; witness the
Fetters they lay upon them by their Taxes.

Their Government is ill in its Original, Their Government is ill in its
original.
but worse in its Progress; if God and the Wisdom of Princes do not prevent.

And therefore I Am confident nothing can so much establish peace in
Christendom, and make the Belgic people happy, as to reduce them under the
obedience of a good Prince. Nothing can make the Belgic people happy, but a
Prince.


But many of those men think, that a Prince is as unfit a person to govern
them, as Caligula's Horse was, to be a Consul: and you may as soon Convert a
Jew to be a Christian, as persuade some of them to be Loyal.

And therefore it was Oracularly said by a Wit of theirs, That a Prince will
bring an eternal ruin upon them, and their Posterity; and they are to be
accounted Inter homines damnatae memoriae, for the scum of the earth, and to be
remembered with curses and abominations, who shall but once entertain a thought
of setting up a Prince over them.

I know (says one) this will displease the King of Great Britain; yet his
displeasure is no more to be valued by us, then his Alliance: for all Alliance
with England is unserviceable to Holland; and even those Alliances which we
shall be pressed into for fear of a War with England. Bravely said!

These people are like unto the middle Region of the Air, which makes her
Thunderbolts against the Earth, out of the Exhalations she draws from the Earth
it self.

England may complain as the Eagle in the Emblem: Heu patior telis vulnera
facta meis.

But the wrongs and insolences of our Enemies; more then our own discretions,
may sometimes make us both wise and fortunate. The wrongs of our Enemies
sometimes make us fortunate.


Is his Majesty's Alliance unserviceable unto them? well, we may from these men
observe, That the more a Prince weakneth himself by giving, the poorer he is of
Friends. The more a Prince gives, the poorer he is of Friends.


Their Fishing upon the British Ocean (which is by his Majesty's Favor) is the
only basis of their Greatness.

If his Majesty would be pleased to assume that to himself (as he has Right
and Power) and suffer none to Fish there, but such as should come with their
Wives and Families, and live in our Sea-Towns here in England, None to Fish
upon the British Seas, but such as come and live in England.
that great Colossus of their Hogan-Mogan-ship must suddenly decline: for 10000
Vessels at least by them employed in the Fishery would presently decay, their
Mariners want employment; and not fewer then 300000 people thereby employed by
Land would want support. The loss of the Fishery would prove the ruin of the
States.
And for default of the Fish they take upon the British Seas, to fraught their
Ships, they would not be able to maintain the tenth part of the Ships and men
they now set forth to Sea; thereby their Revenues and Customs would become
small, their Intrado would never support their ordinary charges; their Excise
must fail, their Trade to the East Indies, and elsewhere, must faint; the
people who now subsist by their Manufactures, and contribute to the charges,
must be supported by them (which they are never able to do) or else they must
quit their Country for want of maintenance, and come into England, where they
will be sure to be kindly received, and grow rich

Its an humble Address to his Sacred Majesty that he would be graciously
pleased to set up the employment of the Fishery; for then we should establish
our Security and Trade upon our own foundation; (the art and power of our
greatest Enemies cannot take it from us.) Its a Treasure equal to that of both
Indies, in the Riches, Consequence, and Circumstances of it: Insomuch as if we
do but improve that, all other Trades will follow. The benefit of the Fishery
to England.
For our Fish will not only furnish us with such Foreign Commodities as we our
selves want, but besides large returns in money, may store us with quantities of
all sorts to supply other Nations. It would exceedingly increase his Majesty's
Revenues, and be of more advantage to his people then all other Commodities or
Manufactures which they export and vend. It would be an excellent School and
Nursery of Mariners and Navigators, not only for Sea-service, but for discovery
of Foreign parts to vend our Native Commodities: And thereby the Nation would
be much strengthened by Sea, and enriched by Land, both for our own safety, and
terror of our Enemies.

And indeed wisdom of State obliges us not to let a Neighbor grow too powerful
at Sea; for when his Majesty ceases to be absolute Master of the British Seas,
and with his Trident Scepter to give Laws, we must receive them from others.

And how great a diminution this will be to the grandeur and prosperity of this
Nation, let wise men gravely consider. When England has been the
Counter-balance, England the Counter-balance of Europe.
which time out of mind has held the Scales between the great Monarchies of
Europe, for the safety of the rest.

And I doubt not yet to behold his Majesty culminant in the highest Orb of
Glory, and his Dominions fixed upon the Center of a flourishing Happiness.

His Majesty has an Imperial Name; it was Charles that brought the Empire
first into France; a Charles that brought it first into Spain: Why should not
Great Britain have his turn? The advantages England has over other Nations.


It is a great advantage which England has by reason of her many safe and
secure Harbors, and Narrowness of the Seas: for all Ships which go from East
to West, or from West to East, are compelled, because of the dangerousness of
the French Coasts, (except it be exceeding fair weather) to make use of the
English Harbors. His Majesty being Sovereign of these Seas, can at pleasure
command and seize all Ships passing there; especially the Westerly Winds of
those Seas lying on this side the Tropic, and blowing almost continually, do
give his Majesty a great deal of convenience to go to Sea, when he pleases.

So that all the Voyages of the Hollanders to the East and West Indies, Spain,
the Streights, and other places upon his Majesty's Seas (his Majesty being in
hostility with them) may be interrupted, their Ships taken, and their Voyages
obstructed. And by consequence the ruin of that Trade of the Hollanders,
between the East and West, must necessarily follow.

And in case of a War, England may get more Booty from the Hollanders, then
they from England.

His Majesty making War against them by Sea and Land, ruin and confusion must
speedily attend them, A War from England must necessarily prove a ruin to
Holland.
in respect of the vast Charges and Expenses they must necessarily be put unto.
For, look upon the States, they are indigent; they owe no less then a Million
of our pounds for Interest, which they cannot pay, much less the principal when
it shall be required.

Consider, the East India Company by reason of their exceeding Charges in
enlarging their Dominions there, and the vast expenses which must necessarily
attend the keeping of them, cannot be rich For all Countries of new acquest,
till they be settled, are matters rather of burden, then of profit.

And certainly the rich Merchants there (the States being now upon the
disbanding) will not bring their money into their Banks, or lend it to the
States. For if they do, their Security is gone, their money lost, and that which
other Nations have in their Banks. And therefore its prudence to get it out of
their hands as soon as may be, however not to venture more in that Vessel,
which is ready to sink.

The Common people measure the bond of their obedience, by the good always
which they receive.

And therefore they being under such great Oppressions and severities unjustly
imposed upon them by the States, will not long endure their want of Trade; and
those great Taxes will in a short time beget a general Revolt in them all. And
Amsterdam will prove more formidable to them, then any Army of their Enemies.

For that State which subsists not in Fidelity, can never continue long in
Potency.

His Majesty has at present a potent Fleet at Sea, a stout Militia at Land,
and a Magazine of Hearts.

There Is no generous English Spirit, but is ready for the Honor of his King,
and the good of his Country, to sacrifice his Life, and when he has done, will
triumph in the Oblation.

For my part (I thank Heaven) my Veins never knew other Blood, but such as I
should be proud to spend in their Service.

And as they are ready to sacrifice their own lives, so for the vigorous
prosecution of this War (which on his Majesty's part is only defensive, and so
most just and honorable) they will cheerfully expend their Treasure, which is
the life of the Nation.

And indeed true piety binds Subjects to look upon the Burden of Princes with
a bended knee, rather in time so to deserve abatement, then to dispute
Authority.

I hope in a short time, these men will understand their own Interest, which is
Englands good alliance. Hollands interest in Englands Alliance.
For England has always been a Back of Steel to Holland, and has, and yet can
afford them greater Donatives, Riches, and Advantages then all the Kings in
Europe besides.

But they have so surfeited with Englands kindness, that like a bad Spleen, The
Hollanders are like a bad Spleen.
they swell so big as makes all Europe lean.

I praise God, I am not of the complexion of th^se men, my Genius never
prompted me to the least Trillo of Grandeur. Neither am I by my Stars
constellated to be rich, let me enjoy but such an estate as will serve me as a
pass, to travel the world without begging, and have an honest Friend for
Conversation, and one good Book for my Recreation: If Heaven shall vouchsafe me
these Blessings, I can pity the High and Mighty States.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Jonathan Edwin, at the three Roses in Ludgate Street.
THE Dutch Usurpation: or, a Brief view of the Behavior of the States General
of the United Provinces, toward the Kings of Great Britain: with some of their
Cruelties and Injustices exercised upon the Subjects of the English Nation. As
also, a Discovery of what Arts they have used to arrive at their late Grandeur,
etc. By William de Britain.

The Amorous Travelers, or, the Night Adventures. Written Originally in
Spanish, by a Person of Honor. Translated into French by the Exquisite Pen of
the Sieur de Ganes: And into English by J. B.

Great Britains Glory: or, A brief Description of the present State, Splendour,
and Magnificence of the Royal Exchange; with some remarkable Passages relating
to the Present Engagement. Humbly presented to the several Merchants of the
City of London, who daily Meet, Traffic, and Converse in the said place. By
Theophilus Philalethes.

Letters, and other Curious Pieces, relating to the Present State of Europe.

Two Letters, one from the States General to his Most Christian Majesty; the
other from his Most Christian Majesty to the States General. Relating to the
present Conjuncture of Affairs.


