TWO TREATISES.

I. Three Sacred Emblems The Mystical Stars Sword Sun
in the Hand Mouth Face
of the SON OF MAN.

II. TEARS for JERUSALEM. OR, The Compassionate Lamentation of a tenderhearted
SAVIOR over a rebellious and obdurate people.

Both lately delivered to the Church of God at Great YARMOUTH, and now
published as useful and seasonable.

By JOHN BRINSLEY Minister of the Gospel there.

London, Printed by I. L. for Tho. Newberry, over against the Conduit in
Cornhill, by the Exchange. 1656.

THREE Sacred Emblems. The Mystical Stars Sword Sun
in the Hand Mouth Face
of the SON OF MAN. Wherein is held forth the Authority, Dignity, Duty, and
Security of the Gospel Ministry, with the efficacious and powerful opperations
of the Word, and Spirit of Jesus Cirist. With diverse other particulars useful
at all times, and some of them very seasonable for the present.

As they were lately delivered to the Church of God at Great Yarmouth, by JOHN
BRINSLEY Minister of the Gospel there.

TEXT. Revel. 1. 16. And he had in his right hand seven stars: And out of his
mouth went a sharp two-edged sword: And his countenance was as the Sun shining
in his strength.



London, Printed by I. L. for Tho. Newberry, 1656.

To my honored and worthy Brethren the faithful dispensers of the Mysteries of
Christ in the County of NORFOLK.
And especially those who were Assistant, or present at the late public
Ordination of Ministers in the City of Norwich, November, 14. 1655.
(Much esteemed in the Lord.)
HAving made choice of the three first Chapters of the Revelation to be the
subject of a weekly Exercise in the place where God has set me, (if he shall
please so long to continue my life and liberty till I have finished this
task,) and having through his assistance passed through the first fifteen
verses, it pleased his providence so to dispose, as that the sixteenth came to
hand upon that very day, on which some, and (as I since understood many, of
you were assembled together for the Ordaining of certain Candidates for the
Ministry. Being in number parallel to the Stars in my Text, (however one of
them, as it happens sometimes to the Stars,) appeared not.) With this
providential Syncronisme I was then somewhat affected, looking upon the Subject
I had in hand, as far more suitable to that audience where you then were, (and
my self should have been, had not bodily imfirmity, not daring to conflict with
the difficulty of the season, hindered,) then that to which I was then
preaching. And hereupon it is, that I have been since induced to communicate
unto you these my Meditations, which here I put into your hands; wishing that
they may be as useful to you, and others of my Brethren elsewhere, as they are
seasonable and needful for the present times. I shall not need to mind you of
what I presume you cannot but be sensible, what designs there are at this day
on foot against your sacred function, either to render it null, or else
contemptible; either of which will serve the Devils and the Jesuits turn well
enough for the exterpating of Gods true Religion. Against these you shall find
that in this Treatise, which serves to animate and bear up your spirits.
Only let it be your care to answer the first of these Emblems here held forth;
that you be Stars. First, such as are placed by God in the firmament of his
Churh, (whereunto that Ordinance of a solemn Ordination is so necessary a
requisite, as that I suppose no moderate and well advised spirit will blame
what you in this juncture of time have done, though happily therein all things
have not been so regular as might have been wished.) And being thus placed,
then let it be your care and endeavor to approve your selves in measure worthy
of that honor, shining as Stars, giving light to this darksome world by your
doctrine and example, being (like the Pleiades) sweetly influentiall, unto
those over whom God has set you. And then with confidence put your selves into
the hands of this Son of man committing your lives, livelihood, Liberty,
labors to the care and custody of this your Archbishop, who being (...) the
Chief Shepherd, will have an eye, as to the Sheep, so to the Shepherds. In
whose hand, as I find you in my Text, so I leave you, resting

Yarmouth December. 11. 1655. Your unworthy fellow labourer, yet desirous to be
found faithful John Brinsley*

THE Mystical Stars In the Right Hand of JESUS CHRIST.
REVEL. 1. 16. And he had in his right hand seven Stars.
IN this, and the three foregoing verses, we have a Description of that Son of
man, which in Vision appeared unto his servant John in the midst of the seven
Golden ca^dl^sticks, the Lord Jesus in the midst of the Churches. Him our
Apostle here sets forth, as by his Habit and attire, verse 13. so by the
several parts and members of his Body. Three whereof you have in this verse,
whereof the Text is part; viz. His hand, his mouth, his face, or countenance.
It is the first of these I have now to deal with; his Hand, his Right hand,
with the Appurtenances, what he had in it, viz. seven stars; [And he had in his
right hand seven stars.]

Where our first Enquiry must be touching the Mystery, The mystery opened.
what was herein signified. What by these Stars; what by their being in the
hand, the right hand of this Son of Man. Begin with the former.

About which, Seven Stars, what.
if I had any time to waste, I might show you the several fancies and conceits
of Expositors. Some of which hereby understand seven Angels, Vid. Cornel. A
Lapide in Text.
Angelical spirits, such as they conceive those to have been which are said to
stand before the throne of God, verse 4. Others the Spirit of God, that
Spiritus septiformis, whose gifts and graces are sevenfold, many and manifold.
Others the seven Planets, each of which they suit with some eminent person
shining in his Generation. But I shall not trouble you or my self with these
fancies, which I (...) upon as not worth the mentioning, seeing* (...) who best
knew what it was that (...) hand, himself explains the Mystery. Which (...)
does expressly in the last verse of the (...) [The seven stars are the Angels of
the seven Churches.] Not the tutelary Guardian Angels, but the symbolical
Angels, the Mysteries of those seven Churches of Asia. The Angels of the seven
Churches.
These are the stars here in the hand of Christ.

Stars, (...); not precious stores, Orient gems, which shine like stars. So I
find one conce^^ing of it; Stella^us jaspide futro E^sis erat. Virgil. Aeneid.
41.
looking upon these as so many rings upon the right hand of this Son of man;
every of which should have a precious stone in it. Applying it to the ministers
of the Gospel, who being faithful are as the Lord supposes it concerning
Ieconias, Jer. 22. 24. Like the signet upon his right hand, dear and precious
unto him. But let that go among the rest. Take the word here as it founds, in
the proper and literal signification of it.

Stars] Such are the Ministers of the Gospel. Obs. Gospel Ministers, Stars.
Mark it. This is that which I am now to prosecute, Gospel Ministers are stars.
Such was their Lord and Master Jesus Christ himself; he was a Star. There shall
come a star out of Jacob (says Ba^^^m in his prophecy concerning Christ) N^mb.
24. 17. I am the bright and morning star (says Christ of himself Re^. 22. 10.)
A Star, having his birth manifested to the wise men by a Star, Mat. 20 2. to
show that he was that star foretold. A bright star; excelling all others in
glory; and a morning star, b^^ging the day of grace and glory to the Church,
after the night of ignorance and misery. And as the Master so the Servants.
They are also stars. Such were the Apostles whom Saint John saw so represented
R^^l. 12. ^. where he tells us of the woman (...) with the (...), having the
Moon under her feet, and upon her head a crown of twelve stars. And who was
this woman? why, the Church, the true Church of Christ; which being clothed
with the righteousness of Christ, (who is the Sun of righteousness) and
trampling under foot all earthly glory, is beautified and adorned with the
doctrine of the twelve Apostles, who were as so many stars. Such were they, and
such are their successors; all the true Ministers of Jesus Christ. Gospel
Ministers, they are as stars. So called and represented in regard of the
resemblances betwixt the one and the other, Resemblances betwixt them.
which are diverse. I shall only single out some of the chief and principal,
which as I conceive to be most plain, proper and genuine.

1. Stars are set by God in the firmament of heaven. Ministers set by God in
the firmament of his Church.
So we find it Genesis 1. 16, 17. He made the stars also; And God set them in the
firmament of heaven.] And even so has he set the Ministers of the Gospel in
the firmament of the Church, (which is often called by the name of Heaven.) So
the Apostle sets forth their original, 1 Cor. 12. 28. God set some in the
Church] speaking of Gospel Ministers. (...), Constituit; he Constituted, and
appointed them to their places in the Church, the Church Catholic visible (for
so it must be there understood.) So then a Gospel Ministry is a Divine
Institution, not a humane Invention. He that set the stars in the firmament,
has set his Ministers in the Church. And he has set them there as stars;
fixing and settling them by a perpetual ordinance. That is the difference
betwixt Stars and Comets. Comets though they blaze for a time, yet it is but
for a time, and that a short time; but Stars are for perpetuity, to continue to
the end of the world. Such Stars are the Ministers of the Gospel. How else
says our Savior what he does, that he will be with them to the end of the
world, Mat. 28. 20.

2. Stars though they be set in the same firmament, They have their several
Orbs.
yet they have their several Orbs to move in. And so is it with the Ministers
of the Gospel, though they be set in the same firmament of the Church, being
all Ministers of the same Church Catholic visible, yet they have their several
Orbs, their several Charges committed and assigned to them for their inspection
and oversight. Thus Paul wills the Elders, (the Ministers) of Ephesus, to
feed the flock over which the holy Ghost had made them overseers, Acts 20. 28.
And thus those seven stars in the Text, the Ministers of the seven Churches of
Asia, had their several Charges, which were as their several Orbs. And so it is
with ordinary Ministers. That being one difference betwixt them and the
Apostles. The Apostles were universal Pastors, having the care of all the
Churches committed unto them. This was Paul's daily cumbrance, as he tells his
Corinthians, 2 Cor. 11. 28. Even the care of all the Churches. Thus were they
universal Bishops. But so are not their successors. That of the Bishop of Rome
is but a groundless usurpation. Ordinary Ministers have their several charges.

3. Stars have their different Altitudes and Magnitudes. Of different
Altitudes, and Magnitudes.
Some above, others; and some greater then others. One star differs from
another star in glory. 1 Cor. 15. 41. And so is it in the Gospel Ministry.
In the firmament of the Church there are such different stars. Ministers of
different Orders and Dignities. So much we may learn from the Apostle in that
place forecited 1. Cor. 12. 28. God has set some in the Church (says he)
first Apostles, secondarily Prophets, thirdly Teachers, etc. Several Orders,
and Degrees. So there were then. And still there are several Magnitudes even
among Ordinary Ministers. Who differ in respect of their gifts and
ministerial abilities, even as one Star differs from another in Glory.

Thus are these Stars set in the firmameut of the Church, having their sevearll
Orbs, Altitudes and Magnitudes. But wherefore are they thus set? That is a
fourth particular, which I conceive to be here principally eyed and intended*

4. Stars are set up for Lights, Set up for Lights, shining.
like so many Tapers in the firmament of heaven, to give light to this
inferior world in the night season. So you have the end of their first
Creation set down Genesis 1. 16. God made the stars also, and he set them in the
firmament of heaven to give light unto the earth:] This is the office, as of
the Sun and the Moon, so of the Stars, to give light unto the earth, and that
in the night season. And such is the office of the Ministers of the Gospel-God
has set them up in the firmament of the Church to a like end, that they should
be Lights. So it is said of John the Baptist, He was a Burning and a shining
light Ioh. 5. 35. And such all the Ministers of the Gospel either are, or ought
to be. Ye are the light of the world (says our Savior to his Apostles) Mat 5.
14. True it is, such all private Christians in their measure ought to be. This
is that which Paul says of his Philippians Phil. 2 15. Ye do shine) or shine
ye, for so the word may be and is read either Indicatively, or Imparatively,
(...), or (...).) This they did, or should have done. But this the ministers of
the Gospel ought to do in a special manner. They being Lights by office,
which requires this at their hands, that they should give light to others.
Which they are to do two ways; By Doctrine, and by Example.

1. By Doctrine. 1. By Doctrine.
Holding forth to others the word of truth, the word of Life; that so those
which yet sit in darkness may see a marveilo^s light. This was Paul's errand
whereupon he was sent to the Gentiles, viz. to open their eyes, and so turn
them from darkness to light Act 26. 18. Which he was to do by preaching of the
Gospel unto them, whereby they might have their eyes opened to see the
sinfulness and misery of their natural condition; and so might be brought to
the light of Grace here, and glory hereafter. And such is the office of all the
ministers of Jesus Christ. Which the same Apostle sets forth 2 Cor. 4. 6. God
has shined into our hearts, (speaking of himself and other Gospel Ministers)
that we should give the light of the knowledge of the glory of God in the face
of Jesus Christ, that being our selves effectually illuminated, we might be
isntrumental in the inlightning of others. This are the Ministers of Christ to
do by word.

2. And as by word, 2. By Example.
so by work. As by Doctrine so by Example. Thus are they to shine before
others in an Exemplarie Conversation. So indeed ought all Christians to do.
It is the Commendation which the Apostle gives of his Thessalonians 1 These. 1.
7. They were ensamples to all that believed in Macedonia and Achaia. But the
Ministers of Christ in a special manner. They being by their office
shepherds, they should (as shepherds anciently were wont to do) go before
their flocks. Or (to hold to the Emblem in the Text, from which I would deviate
as little as may be) as that Star did which was given for a guide to the wise
men, to direct them to the place of Christ's nativity, It went before them
(says the Text) until it came and stood over where the young child was, Matthew
2. 9. Such Stars should the Ministers of God be unto the people. Being given
them for Guides, they should not only show them light (which that star also
did to them) but they should go before them, till they bring them to heaven;
being Ensamples to them. So was Paul to the believers of his time. Mark them
(says he to his Philippians) which so walk, as ye have us for an ensample,
Phil. 3. 17.] Whereupon he there propounds himself unto them as a pattern for
their Imitation. Brethren, be followers together of me.] And such all Gospel
Ministers either are, or ought to be. This is that which Paul requires from
Timothy. 1 Timothy 4. 14. Be thou an example to the believers in word, in
conversation, etc. And the like from Titus, Tit. 2. 7. In all things show thy
self a pattern of good works.] And it is Saint Peter's charge to all of that
Tribe. Neither as being Lords over Gods heritage, but being ensamples to the
flock, 1 Pet. 5. 3. The Ministers of Christ though they be as stars, set over
others by God, yet they may not (as Astrologers tell us some of the stars do)
Lord it over their Brethren. Whether over their Consciences or Person^, by an
imperious obtruding of their own dictates instead of Gods Commandments (as the
Pharisees did) or by carrying themselves Magisterially toward any under their
charge. But Patterns they should be; teaching the people as by Doctrine so by
Example. Here is a fourth resemblance, to which add a fifth.

5. Stars have light and give light, but it is a borrowed light. In that
differing from the light of the Sun, 5. Their light is borrowed.
whis is originally in the body of it. The Sun being the fountain of light, it
has light in, and from it self. But so have not the stars. Their light is a
borrowed light which they receive from the Sun. And such is the light which the
Ministers of Christ communicate unto others, it is but a borrowed light.
Therein differing from that light, which is in Christ; who is the Sun of
Righteousness (as he is called, Mal. 4. 2.) the fountain of all spiritual
light. That was that true light, (says Saint John, speaking of Christ, John 1.
9.) (...), light it self; Original light. So was not John the Baptist (as the
verse foregoing has it) [He was not that light.] A light he was, and that a
shining, an eniment one, but not that light, that Original light. This was
only Jesus Christ. He is the Sun. As for his Ministers they are but stars,
receiving their light from him. I have received from the Lord that which also I
delivered unto you, says the Apostle to the Church of Corinth, touching the
Doctrine of the Sacrament. And the like may be said of the whole doctrine of
the Gospel. This the Ministers of Christ receive, before they can deliver it:
Being themselves enlightened, before they can enlighten others. God who
commanded the light to shine out of darkness, has shined into our hearts
(says the Apostle) that we should give the light etc. (in that place
forenamed, 2 Cor. 4. 6.) Hence is it that sometimes they are compared to
Candl^s or Lamps. Ye are the light of the world (says our Savior to his
Apostles) Matthew. 5. 14. But what light? why, not Sun-light, but Candlelight.
So the verse following explains it. [Neither do men light a Candle, and put it
under a bushel:] meaning that he had not communicated unto them that light, to
the end that they should hide it. And thus it is said of John the Baptist, that
he was a shining light, John 5. 35. But what light? why, a Lamp, or a Candle;
for so the word there properly signifies, (...), (whence comes the Latin
word Lychnus, and the English Link.) And such were these Angels, the Ministers
of these seven Churches of Asia; the Churches being the Candlestick (as they
are here represented to John in this vision) they were the Candles in them. Now
a Candle or Lamp, how great soever the light be that it gives, yet it is but a
borrowed light. And so is it with the Ministers of the Gospel; Their light is
but a borrowed light. Here is a fifth resemblance. Take one more.

6. Stars are Influentiall. They are Influential.
As they all give light, and the same light, so they have their several
Influences. What those Influences are, it is in a great measure a Mystery, a
secret to us. But that they have such Influences, it is not to be questioned.
So much we may learn from God himself, who Puts the Question to Job, (Cap.
38. 31.) Can thou bind the sweet Influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands
of Orion? Pleiades and Orion, two of the Constellations of heaven. Pleiades,
the seven stars, which rising in the spring bring warm showers for the
moistning and refreshing of the earth. Orion, a winter Star, which brings with
it hard frosts, which are there called the Bands of Orion, because the earth is
as it were bound with them. Thus are they both Influentiall; changing and
altering the Earth and the Air. And like Influences have these Stars, the
Ministers of the Gospel, upon the Persons and places over which they are set;
working upon them, as by their Doctrine, so by their Examples. Both which are
very Influentiall, and operative for the changing and altering of the people,
either for the better, or the worse. Hence is it that they are compared to
salt, Mat. 5. 3. Ye are the salt of the earth.] Salt being laid upon a piece
of flesh, it has in a little time a great influence upon it, in altering the
taste of it, seasoning it and making it savorie. And thus the Ministers of
Christ, by their wholesome and savorie doctrine and holy example they season
others; changing and altering them for the better. And on the other hand, being
bad themselves, they infect others. So as what the Lord speaks of the Prophets
and people of Israel in another sense. Hos. 4. 9. We may use it in this, Like
Priest, Like people. Surely it was not without cause that the Lord sending his
destroying Angel to Jerusalem, he orders him to begin at the Sanctuary Ezekiel.
9. 6. From thence came the rise of all those Abominations, that were done in
the midest of that City (of which he speaks verse. 4.) they began at the
Priests; who if they had not been first corrupted themselves, the people had
not been what then they were. Thus are the Ministers of God like Stars, for
those Influences which they have upon the people.

To which I might add (did I not fear the straining of this string) as an
enlargment, They have a power of Binding and Loosing.
or further improvement of this Resemblance. Stars having such an Influence
upon the earth, they have also a power of Binding and Loosing. Such are the
properties of those two a foresaid Constellations. Pleiades and Orion. The one
binds the earth with the hard frost, the other loses it by the warm air
and showers. And such a power has Jesus Christ given to these Stars, the
Ministers of his Gospel, a Binding and a Loosing power. This power he gave to
Peter Mat. 16. 19. I will give unto thee the keys of the Kingdom of heaven;
and whatsoever thou shall bind upon earth shall be bound in heaven; whatsoever
thou shall loose upon earth, shall be loosed in heaven.] But not to Peter
alone, but to the ^est of the Apostles and Disciples as well as to him. So you
shall find it Ioh. 20. 23. Where explaining what he meant by binding, and
loosing, with their solemn Mission he gives them this Commission, [Whosoever
sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them, and whosoever sins ye retain,
they are retained. This power did Jesus Christ give unto them, and their
successors; putting the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven into their hands, the
Keye of Doctrine; and the Keye of Discipline; whereby they open and shut, bind
and loose; bind the Obstinate, loose the Penitent; both which they do in a
Ministerial and declarative way. Even as it may be conceived of those two
foresaid Constellations, Orion and Pleiades; the one binds the earth, the
other loses it. But how? Not merely by their own influence, as being the
sole, or yet principal Cause of that Change, for that is to be attributed to
the Sun, which by his Recess, and return makes that alteration; but they by
their rising notify those changes. Even so is it with these Stars the
Ministers of Christ, what herein they do, they do it not by their own power
or virtue (as Peter said of his healing the Cripple Act. 3. 12.) but by
Anthoritie from Jesus Christ, in his name declaring what his will and pleasure
is. Here is a sixth Resemblance. To which I might yet add some other, which are
reached unto me by other hands. But I would not seem to strain the
Allegory, by drawing that from it which it will not naturally and voluntarily
yield. And I shall have occasion to touch upon some; and diverse other in the
Application. Which let it be directed both to Ministers and People.

1. For the former, Applic. To Ministers.
were the Audience suitable, I might from hence take a just occasion to speak
largly to the men of my own Tribe; minding them of their Duty, and exciting
them to the discharge of it. But however, give me leave here to present to you,
Ministers Duties, why to be opened before the people.
what more immediately and properly concerns them. Hirein I shall preach to
my self; and you must give us leave sometimes so to do. Whereof you may have
the benefit afterward. Besides, you hearing what the duties of Ministers are,
may be the better able to do, what you are (...) only allowed, but in some
cases required to do, viz. to say to Archippus (as Paul bids them Col. 4.
17.) take ^^^de unto the Ministry which thou have received in the Lord, that
thou fulfill it.] I mean, in a Christian and becoming way, to excite and
admonish those whom God has, or shall set over you, in case they shall be
found remiss or negligent in their Ministerial duty and service. Upon this
account I shall give an account to you, of what more properly concerns my
self and others of my Brethren. To whom the sum of what I have to say is
only thus much; that seeing they are set by God as Stars in the firmament of
his Church, Ministers are to do office of Stars.
they would perform the like offices to those committed to their charge, as
the Stars do to this Inferior world.

But before I come to prosecute this Exhortation, let me first premise one or
two Premonitions. Provided first that they be Stars.
Let them first see that they be Stars, such as are so placed by God in the
firmament of his Church* Therein do true Stars differ from Comets. The one is
fixed by God, the other ascends of it self. Let not the Ministers of Set in the
Church* by God.
Let not them ascend into Mose's Chair, (as that new star is said to have
done into Cass^^ p^^^s, in the year, 1572) of themselves; thrusting themselves
whether upon the Ministerial function, or yet particular Charge; without a
regular and warrantable mission. So did those false Prophets in Ieremies time,
of whom the Lord complayns Ier. 23. 21. I have not sent these Prophets, yet
they ran; I have not spoken unto them, yet they prophesied.] Thus did they all
on their own heads, having neither Mission, nor Message from God. Let it not
be so with Gospel Ministers. They who take that office upon them, let them
look to their calling. Noe man takes this honor to himself, but he that is
called of God, as Aaron was, says the Apostle, of the Priesthood Heb. 5. 4.
speaking not de facto, but de jure; not what men do, but what they ought to
do. Uzziah though a King, must not take upon him the office of a Priest 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. No more ought any to usurp upon a Gospel ministry; taking
upon them to dispense Ordinances in a ministerial way, without a warrantable
calling from God. Let them see that they be Stars, not Comets: that they be set
by God in the firmament of his Church.

2. And being thus set, Illuminated themselves.
let them now seek after Illumination, that they themselves may be
enlightened. So are the stars, being set in the firmament they are enlightened,
without which they would be of no use. And this let these mystical stars seek
after; even a supernatural illumination. God has shined into our hearts
(says the Apostle) that we should give the light, etc. Ministers, that they
may inlighten others they must first be enlightened themselves. And this let
them seek after. And where shall they have it? Why, where have the stars their
light, but from the Sun? And where should Gospel Ministers have their light,
but from Jesus Christ. He was the true light which lightens every man that
comes into the world, it is spoken of Christ Ioh. 1. 9. Who ever it is that is
enlightened, whether with a natural or supernatural light, they receive it
from Christ. And to him let his Ministers look; and that not only for the
former, but the latter of these; that they be enlightened with a supernatural
Illumination; having not only their heads but hearts enlightened; that they may
be endued with a clear sound and affectionable knowledge of divine and heavenly
Mysteries. And being thus seated, and thus qualified, then

(In a third place) Let them do the office of stars, Then shining before
others.
holding forth that light which they have, shining before those over whom they
are set. Which they are to do in those two ways forenamed. By Doctrine, by
Example.

1. By Doctrine, By Doctrine, preaching the word,
holding forth the light of Gods truth, the word of life. This are all
Christians to do in a practical way. So Paul wills his Philippians Phil. 2.
16. Holding forth the word of Life; viz. in their lives and Conversations, by
walking answerable to it. But the Ministers of Christ in a doctrinall way;
Communicating that light of saving knowledge which they have received, in and by
the preaching of the word. which they are to do.
Which they are to do.

1. Voluntarily and freely. So do the stars give forth their light.
Voluntarily and freely,
And so should Ministers theirs. Freely you have received, Freely give (says
our Savior to his Apostles, willing them to communicate their gifts for the
good and benefit of others, and that freely. And so should the Ministers of the
Gospel theirs. Not doing what they do by constraint, nor yet out of
Covetousness, or any other by and sinister respect, but willingly, freely. So
Saint Peter gives it them in charg 1 Pet. 5. 2. Feed the flock of God which
is among you (or, as much as in you is, (...)) taking the oversight thereof not
by constraint, but willingly; not for filthy lucre, but of a ready mind.
(...). Four words which I could wish all the Ministers of Jesus Christ had them
written upon their hearts; that remembering them they might practice accordingly.

2. Doing this freely, Faithfully and sincerely.
let them also do it faithfully and sincerely. In doctrine showing sincerity
(as Paul wills Titus Chap. 2. verse 7. First, holding forth no other light
then what they have received. Not their own light. Herein again true Stars
differ from Comets. Comets being set on fire, hold forth their own light; so
do not the Stars; they hold forth no other light then what they have received
from the Sun. So ought the Ministers of Christ to do; not like those false
prophets of whom the Lord complains Ier. 23. 16. that They spoke a vision of
their own heart, and not out of the mouth of the Lord.] Comet-like, being set
on fire with ambition or vaineglory, or some other by and sinister respects,
they held forth their own light. So ought not the Ministers of Christ to do.
Star-like, they are to hold forth no other light then what they receive from
the Sun; no other doctrine then what they receive from Christ. I have received
of the Lord that which also I delivered unto you (says the Apostle.) And then
(secondly) all that light. So do the Stars; they do not hide, or hold back
any of that light which they have received. No more may the Ministers of God
any of the light of divine truth. Such was Paul's faithfulness in his
Ministry, that he did not shun to declare unto the Churches all the Counsel
of God; so he tells the Elders at Miletum Act. 20. 27. All the Counsel, viz.
What was profitable for them (he explains it verse. 20.) And such should the
faithfulness of Gods Ministers be. They are not to hide or hold back any part
of that light which they have received. That which Balaam once spoke against
his will. Numb. 24. 13. Ministers should freely and conscientiously resolve
upon, and practice. What the Lord says unto them, that to speak. Only that,
all that.

Thirdly, Constantly and assiduously.
And in so doing let them be assiduous, and unwearied. So are the Stars in
their Motions and operations, in giving light to the earth, they are unwearied,
holding on their courses, night after night. A fitting pattern for the
Ministers of the Gospel, who should be thus unwearied in their Ministerial
services. So was Paul, who tells his Corinthians that the Care of all the
Churches came upon him daily. 2 Cor. 11. 28. (...), a multitude of cares,
which came like an Army upon him (for that is the proper signification of the
word,) these came upon him (...), daily. So should the Care of those
particular charges over which God has set his Ministers, come upon them, and
that daily. They should be assiduous in seeking of their good; unwearied in
their Gospel Ministration, in the work and services of their God. This is
that which Paul requires from all Christians 1. Cor. 15. last. Finally my
brethren, be ye steadfast unmovable, always abounding in the work of the
Lord.] And let it be directed in a special manner to the Ministers of Christ,
who are employed in the service of the Lord after a special manner. Let them
be therein unwearied; (...), not giving in, not fainting (as Paul says of
himself that he did not 2. Cor. 4. 1.)

And so doing let them now for their Encouragement, An encouragement for
faithful laborers.
take notice of what there follows. For as much as you know that your labor
is not in vain in the Lord] So shall not the labor of private Christians be:
much less the labor of Gods Ministers. Who thus shining as stars here, shall
shine as Stars hereafter. So runs the Promise in express terms Dan. 12. 3. They
that be wise (Teachers (says the Margin, and so the word (Hammashkilim) may be
taken transitiuely, for facientes intelligere, such as make others wise) shall
shine as the brightness of the firmament, and they that turn many to
righteousness, (which is properly the Ministerial work) as the Stars for ever
and ever. Being honored both of God and men; shining in their memories upon
earth, (the Apostles are as twelve stars upon the Churches head Rev. 12. 1.)
and in their persons in heaven.

2. I have done with the former and chief part of the Ministerial office;
Example.
which is to shine before others in Doctrine, to which (in the second place)
they are to join Example. Which (as I have already shown you) is not a little
influential upon the people especially upon the vulgar common sort: who are for
the most part more led by Example then Precept. Praeceptis ducimur, Exemplis
trahimur. Precepts lead, Examples draw. And of all examples, none more then of
Ministers. They being to some as the Sun-diall, by which men set their Clocks;
or as the Stars to the Seaman, by which he steareth his course. The
consideration whereof should make them the more wary and circumspect in the
ordering of their lives and conversations, that they may he exemplary to
others. That is that which both Paul and Peter require from them in the places
forecited, 1 Timothy 4. 12. Tit. 2. 7. 1 Pet. 5. 3.

Quest. But wherein should they he so exemplary unto others? Ministers wherein
they are to be Examples to others.


Answ. In setting forth of this I will not go from the word I have in hand.
Only send them to the Stars, which I shall propound as patterns to them in
those things wherein I would have them to be patterns to others.

Purity. Such are the Stars, In Purity.
pure creatures. Not a spot, not a blemish to be seen in any of them, (I mean
in the fixed stars. True indeed in the Moon there are spots, but not so in any
of the fixed stars, which are most properly the Ministers Emblem. They are all
pure.) And such all the Ministers of Christ should labor to be, Pure. The
Priests under the Law must not have a blemish, Levit. 22. Patterns of Purity.
This is one thing wherein Paul would have Timothy to be a Pattern (in that
place forenamed, 1 Timothy 4. 12.) Be thou an example of the believers. But
wherein? why, among other things, in Purity. And again Chap. 5. 22. Keep thy
self pure: And herein should all the Ministers of Christ be exemplary to
others. In purity of Conversation; keeping themselves unspotted of the world;
free from the evils of the times and places wherein they live: that their lives
be not spotted with any scandalous crimes. Which if they be, they will be (like
those spots in the Moon) obvious to every eye, and no small blemish to their
holy function.

Purity, so in Zeal. In Zeal.
Stars as they shine, so they sparkle. Therein differing from the Moon, as a
Diamond does from a Crystal. The one shines, but it is but with a pale, wan
light. The other both shines and sparkles. And so should it be with the
Ministers of Christ Whilst they shine in purity, they should sparkle with
zeal. Such a light was John the Baptist, not only shining, but burning, John
6. 35. shining with holiness, and burning with zeal. And such should all the
Ministers of God be; as pure, so zealous. That is the thing which the Spirit
requires from one of these seven Angels, the Minister, or Ministers of the
Laodicean Church, Rev. 3. 19. Be zealous. And so should all the Ministers of
Christ be; zealous for God, for his truth, for his worship and service; zealous
against Errors, Heresies, all kind of doctrinal or practical wickedness. Such
were Moses and Phineas, whose zeal stands upon record to their eternal
honor. And such was Paul, of whom the story tells us, Acts 13. 9. that when he
saw Elimas the Sorcerer opposing him as he did, not so much his Person as his
Doctrine, Being filled with the Holy Ghost (says the Text) he set his eyes
upon him. His eyes even sparkled with a holy indignation against him. And so,
when he came to Athens, and there saw the City so wholly given to Idolatry, his
spirit was stirred within him (says the Text, Acts 17. 16*) (...). Exacerbabat
spiritus ejus, his spirit was sharpened, it had an edge set upon it; it was so
stirred that he could not but break forth into an open and tart reproof. And so
was it with our blessed Lord and Master, the Lord Jesus. However in his own
personal concernments none more patient [that Lamb of God,] yet in the cause of
his father none more zealous. The zeal of thine house has eaten me up. It is
spoken of Christ, John 2. 17. Such was his holy zeal for the service and honor
of God his Father, that it was as a fire in his Breast, continually feeding
upon his spirits, so busying and taking up his thoughts that it made him even
regardless of himself. And such should be the zeal of his servants, his
Ministers.

Only let them see that it be a well tempered zeal. Their zeal must be well
tempered.
Not fiery, not furious. In this do Stars differ from Comets, Blazing-stars;
Both sparkle; but the one in a temperate, the other in a furious way, as if
they would set the world on fire. Such zeal the Ministers of God must be ware
of. When James and John, having had some affront offered them, and their
Master, by the Samaritans, woe refused to receive them, propound to him this
course of proceeding against them, will thou that we command fire to come down
from heaven to consume them? he presently makes answer to them with a Check, ye
know not what manner of spirit ye are of, Luke 9. 54, 55. Giving them to know,
that their counsel did not suit with their calling; neither did it favor of a
truly Ministerial spirit; which should be a spirit of meekness and gentleness.
Zealous the Ministers of God may be, ought to be. But let it be for God, and
not for themselves. And then let their fervor be tempered with a wise and holy
discretion. Let them sparkle where need is, but let it be like Stars, not like
Blazing-stars.

Thirdly, In Humility.
As in Purity and Zeal, so in Humility. Hereof the Stars are very proper
Emblems (as Lapide hints it upon the Text.) Which though they be vaste bodies,
most of them far bigger then the Earth, yet how little do they seem to be. And
such should the Ministers of the Gospel be; what ever they be for place, for
parts, for gifts, yet they should be little in their own eyes^ So was Paul;
however not Inferior in place or gifts to any of the Apostles, (which being
thereunto provoked by his emulous Adversaries he sometimes asserts and stands
upon. 2 Cor. 11. 5. I suppose I was not any whit behind the chiefest of the
Apostles. And again in the Chapter following verse. 11. he inculcates the
same. In nothing am I behind the very chiefest Apostles,] Yet in his own eyes
how low was he? Even the least of them. So much we may hear him elsewhere
acknowledging; 1 Cor. 15. 9. I am the least of the Apostles.] Yea the least of
Saints. So he tells his Ephesians, cap. 3. verse. 8 Unto me who am least, then
the least of all Saints is this grace given.] (...), a double diminitive Less
then the Least, i.e. for the least. So little was this great Apostle to
himself. Even as nothing. That is his Expression elsewhere, in that place
forenamed, 2. Cor. 12, 11. In nothing am I behind the very chiefest Apostles,
though I be nothing. Thus whilst he took notice of the abundant grace of God
to him in bestowing such gifts, as he had done, upon him, yet with all he
acknowledges his own nothingness. How in, and of himself he was nothing,
nothing without Christ; even as the stars are nothing without the Sun, of no
use, good for nothing. Such was Paul in his own eyes, And he would not seem
over great in the eyes of others. It is the reason which he gives why he did
forbear to speak somewhat of himself which otherwise he might justly and
truly have done 2. Cor. 12. 6. Now I forbear (says he) lest any should
think of me above that which he sees me to be.] So would he have those his
Corinthians; and others to look upon him, as men do upon the Stars. which
though great in themselves, yet make but a little show. And such should the
humility of Gods Ministers be, the more eminent they are in place and gifts,
the more humble should they be (Even as the stars the higher they are, the
lesser they seem.) So serving their God in all humility of mind (as Paul
says of himself that he did Act. 20. 19.) A grace which is no small Ornament
to private Christians: Whom therefore the Apostle presses to seek after it.
Ephesians. 4. 2. Phil. 2. 3. But specially to Ministers; who of all other should be
most humble. Not thinking highly of themselves; not seeking after popular
applause, nor yet affecting any worldly grandur. Let them leave this to the men
of this world, (whereof the Moon is an Emblem, which though less then any of
the Stars, yet being nearer the earth, seems far greater:) Let them, such as
mind earthly things, let them seek after an earthly greatness. But let it not
be so with the Ministers of Christ. That is the interdict which our Savior
gives to his Disciples, Mat. 23. Where he forbids them to do as the Scribs
and Pharisees did. Be not ye called Rabbi, verse 8. Neither be ye called
masters verse 10. He would not have them ambitiously to affect high and
swelling titles of honor and preeminence. And afterward when his Apostles
were contesting about a supremacy; reasoning among themselves which of them
should be greatest (as Saint Luke has it, Luke 9. 46.) greatest in the kingdom
of heaven (as Saint Matthew explains it, Mat. 18. 1.) that is, in that temporal
Kingdom of Christ, which they then dreamed of, our Savior instead of answering
that Question which they propounded to him, (which they did in a covert and
reserved way, as Saint Matthew there sets it down, At the same time came the
Disciples unto Jesus, saying; who is the greatest in the kingdom of heaven?
Thus they propose the Question in a general way, afar off, as being ashamed to
speak out, to speak what they meant, and to let their Master know what it was
that they had been parling about) he perceiving the thought of their heart (as
Saint Luke there has it verse. 47.) taking notice of their Ambition, he takes
a Child, and set him by him (says Saint Luke) set him in the midst of them
(says Saint Matthew) so presenting him to them as an Emblem, and Pattern of
that which he would have them to learn, viz. true Humility and kowliness. Not
to think highly of themselves, nor to seek great matters for themselves; not to
affect earthly greatness, temporal honors and dignities and promotions. So he
there explaineth his own meaning in the verses following, Matthew. 18. Except ye
become as little children, verse 3. whosoever shall humble himself as this
little child, the same is greatest in the Kingdom of God, verse. 4. Thus does
he point them out the way to true greatness; to be great in the eyes of God and
his Saints, viz. to be little in their own. And so it is. As pride makes way
for a downfall, so humility is the way to preeminence. And in this grace let all
the Ministers of Jesus Christ be exemplary to others. Patterns of Humility. I
will be brief in the rest.

Fourthly, In Sobriety, Modesty, Gravity.
As of Humility so of Sobriety, Modesty, Gravity. Hereof also the Stars may be
looked upon as Emblems. This being a difference betwixt true Stars and Comets.
Comets, Blazing-stars, they do diffluere, fly out, in a loose way, having
their long trains and streamers, their tresses and hairy bushes, from whence
they are called Stellae Crinitae, or Comatae, hairy Stars with their loose
locks and long mains. No fit patterns for the Ministers of the Gospel, who of
all others may not so fly out in any loose way, so as to be in any kind
exorbitant, whether in meat or drink, or apparel, or hair; But in all, patterns
of Sobriety, Modesty, Gravity, therein resembling the true fixed stars, which
are of a plain and simple aspect.

Ffthly, In Regularity and Constancy.
Of Regularity, and Constancy. In this the fixed stars differ both from Comets
and Planets. The one are regular and constant in their motion, the other
varying and wandering. Now such should Gospel Ministers be. Not (...) (as Saint
Jude says of some in his time, Jude 13.) Planets or Comets, wandering stars;
but fixed; Fixed as in their places and charges (which they ought not to
desert, so as to remove from place to place, without just, weighty and
warrantable cause; Being stars let them keep their Orbs) so in their Judgments
and Practices; not changing or turning with the times; not entertaining every
new Doctrine under the name and notion of New-Light. No the Stars keep their
old light. And so let the Ministers of Christ do their old Doctrine, the old
truths of God. What though the world have heard of them never so often? So it
has seen the light of the Stars; and yet they still hold forth the same.

Sixthly, In Patience, and undanted Resolution.
and lastly, of Patience, with a courageous and undaunted resolution. Hereof
again the Stars are Emblems; which shine in the dark of the night, and sparkle
most in the coldest seasons. And such should be, as the Patience, so the
Courage of Gods Ministers. It is that which the Spirit takes notice of in some
of those Angels, the Ministers of these seven Churches; I know thy works, and
thy labor and thy patience, (says he to the Ephesian Angel Rev. 2, 3.) I know
thy faith and patience (to the Thyatirian, v. 19. And as their Patience, so
their Courage in appearing for Christ in those sad times. I know thy works,
and where thou dwell, even where Satan's seat is, and thou hold fast my
name, and have not denied my faith, even in those days where in Antipas was my
faithful Martyr,] that is the testimony given to the Angel of the Church in
Pergamus verse. 13. And the like to the Philadelphian Angel, cap. 3. 8. Thou
have kept my word and have not denied my name,] Thus did they shine as stars in
that dark night; in that ^ad persecution under Domitian the Emperor, yet
still they stood by it, holding forth the word of truth. Like Patience and
Courage there should be in all the Ministers of Christ, In evil times they
should stand by their flocks. So do the Stars; when neither Sun nor Moon
appear, yet they stand by it, and show themselves. So should the Ministers of
Christ even in times of persecution stand by their Charges. It is the Character
which our Savior gives of the hireling shepherd Ioh. 10. 12. When he sees
the wolf coming (in times of danger) he leaves the sheep, and flies.
Whereas the true shepherd is ready to lay down his life for his sheep, verse
13. Thus should the Ministers of Christ in evil times, in the dark night of
Persecution stand by the people committed to their charge. And standing by
them, they are then to show themselves, then appearing for Christ. That was
Peter's resolution, and it was a good one, had he not taken it up in his own
strength. Though all men shall be offended because of thee (says he to his
Master) yet will I never be offended, Mat. 26. 33. And such should be the
resolution of the Ministers of Christ, which they should take up in the name
and strength of their Lord and Master; Though all others should forsake him,
yet to stand by him. Though Sun and Moon withdraw* the Rulers and Potentates
of the earth do not appear for him, but it may be against him (which too
often they do, as the Psalmist sets it forth Psalm. 2. 2.) then let these stars
show themselves, the Ministers of Christ then appearing, then shining, shining
as lights in the midest of a froward, crooked perverse generation.

Thus have I shown you the duty of Ministers in reference to the people over
whom God has set them. Before whom they are to shine as stars, as Lights
both by doctrine and Example. To these I might yet add some other useful
admonitions. One in reference to themselves. And two in reference to their
fellow Brethren, And yet one other in reference to their Flocks. I shall still
hold to the Emblem in hand, prosecuting the same Allegory.

1. In reference to themselves. Ministers should be heavenly minded.
Let them be heavenly minded. Stars are inhabitants of heaven, having their
abode there, not descending upon the earth, nor coming near it. So should it be
with Gospel Ministers. Our conversation is in heaven (says Saint Paul) Phil.
3. 20. True it is, such should the Conversation of all Christians be. Being
heaven-borne, borne from above, (...) (as our Savior has it Ioh. 3. 3.) they
should mind and seek the things which are above (as the Apostle elsewhere
exhorts them Col. 3. 1, 2. But the Ministers of Christ in an especial manner.
They should have their (...), their Converse in heaven. Thither it was that
Paul was once wrapped in an Ecstasy. 2 Cor. 12. into the third heavens. And
thither should the Ministers of Christ frequently ascend by divine Meditation
and Contemplation. Entering into that holy of holies, not as the High-Preist
did into that Typical one, once in the year, but often, daily; nay living
there, having their constant abode there. Not being (...), men of the earth,
plunging themselves into the affairs and business of this world; but so using
it as if they used it not, living a bove it. This in reference to themselves.

Secondly, In reference to their fellow Brethren let them take heed of two
things.

1. Of Clashing with them. Not clashing with their Brethren.
Who ever saw the Stars do so? True indeed, Meteors we may see sometimes
spitting and shooting and darting, but not so the stars. Among them what a
constant harmony and agreement do we see? And O that there were the like
amongst all the true Ministers of Jesus Christ! that there might be no such
clashing, no such spitting, darting or shooting one against another, whether
from the Pulpit or the Press. But that all of them might think, and speak,
and write the same thing, so keeping the unity of the spirit in the bond of
peace. Which all Christians should greatly affect, so the Ministers of Christ
in a special manner. In the mean time all cumbring against the common Enemy,
even as the Stars in their courses fought against Sisera, Judge. 5. 20. But
having peace one with another (as our Savior gives it in charge to his
Apostles, Mark 9. last.)

Not but that in some cases Ministers both may and ought to reprove their
Brethren. In what cases Ministers may and must ap^eare* against their Brethren.
So did the Apostle Saint Paul; who not only appeared against the false
Brethren, who went about to introduce their dangerous doctrines, to whom (as
he says) he gave not place by subjection, no not for an hour Gal. 2. 4. 5.
But even Peter also. When he saw that he did not (...), walk with a right and
even foot, but inclined to an unwarrantable separation, tending to a dangerous
schism in the Church, now he with stood him to the face, appeared openly
against him Gal. 2. 11. 14. And the like the Ministers of Christ not only may,
but ought to do; When they see the fundamental truths of God undermined, or
the peace and unity of the Church endangered, in these cases they not only
may, but ought to speak, who ever it be that appears against them. But in the
mean time let them not affect such clashing; nor yet undertake them unless it
be in matters of great and weighty concernment.

Secondly. Not pragmaticall Busibodies.
Let them take heed of being Pragmaticall, Busy-bodies. As of running into
other Professions, which are Eccentricall to their own, of no affinity with
their Ministerial function, so of intermedling in other men's charges. This is
that which Saint Peter forbids all Christians. Let none of you suffer as an
evil doer, or as a Busy-bodie. 1 Pet. 4. 15. (...), the word properly
Signifies, a Bishop in another man's Diocese. Such should not private
Christians be. Such let not Ministers be. Being Bishops let them keep within
their own Diocesses, even as the Stars do within their own Orbs and Spheres.

Thirdly, Vigilant over their flocks.
In reference to their Flocks. Let them be vigilant, watchful. Hereof also (as
Lapide notes it) the Stars are Emblems, which watch over the earth in the
night season. And so vigilant should Gospel Ministers be over their Flocks.
Even as the story tells us of those shepherds, to whom the Angel appeared with
those joyful tidings, Luke 2. 8. They were keeping watch over their flocks by
night. And such watchmen should these spiritual shepherds be. To this end are
they set over their flocks by God, that they should watch over them. Son of
man, I have made thee a watchman unto the house of Israel, (says the Lord to
his Prophet Ezekiel) Ezekiel. 3. 17. To watch over their souls. Obey them that
have the rule over you (says the Apostle) for they watch for your souls, Heb.
13. 17. And this let them do. That is the word which Saint Paul gives to the
Elders of Ephesus, Acts 20, 31. Watch. And this let all the Ministers of Christ
do. And that as at all times, so specially in the night, in times of danger,
when Foxes, and Wolves, false Teachers, Heretical seducers walk abroad, seeking
to make a prey of the flock. Such was that time when Paul gave that watchword
to those Elders, as we may learn from the verses foregoing, ( verse 29, 30.) I
know this says he) that after my departure grievous wolves (wolves in
sheeps-cloathing, false teachers) shall enter in among you not sparing the
flock. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking pervese things
(broaching and venting false and Heretical doctrine) to draw away Disciples
after them. Therefore Watch. Ministers should be vigilant at all times, knowing
that that Roaring Lion is still walking about. But when such Wolves and Foxes,
subtle and dangerous Seducers are abroad, they had need then to look out
sharp, as the STARS (heavens sentinels) do in the dark of the night.

But I fear I have wearied your attentions with what, (I confess) does
immediately concern but a few of this present Audience. You have have heard
what ones the Ministers of Christ ought to be.

But shall we now give way to an Enquiry? A modest enquiry touching the
Ministers of the Church of England.
Are the Ministers and Teachers in this our Church, (I mean the Church of
England) at this day such? Such Stars? Blessed be God such there are, and that
not a few. But how many far otherwise. Such as go for Stars, being set in the
firmament of the Church, Some not deserving the name of Stars.
but are unworthy of that name; having little light, or if they have, yet
hiding it; less zeal; no purity, but are rather like those spots in the Moon,
no small blemish in the Churches face. I might go on; But I have no pleasure in
discovering of what I have here no opportunity to rectify.

Besides these how many Meteors? Many Meteors Comets.
such as would be taken for Stars, but are nothing less in truth. Comets they
are.

firmament of the Church. ascending of themselves, Intruders upon the Office,
Exhalations.
But mere Exhalations, ascending of themselves, and drawn up by some sinister
respects of Honor or Profit, or the like, and fed with those earthly vapors.
I mean men taking this office upon themselves, not being called thereunto by
God, not being set apart to the work, whether Actually or yet Intentionally.

Blazing-stars. Such were the false Apostles in Saint Paul's time; Blazing Stars.
and such there are too many in ours. Men who make a great glare, a great show,
and (as Gamaliel once said of Theudas, Acts 5. 36.) they boast themselves to be
some body, no ordinary Teachers. And thereupon they hold forth new and strange
lights, new and strange doctrines, such as the world cannot but stand amazed at
the beholding, hearing of; as much as in them lies setting the Church on fire
therewith. By which means it comes to pass, that the truly Orthodox Ministers
with their old light, their old truths, comes to be the less regarded, and by
some slighted. Even as it is when there is a blazing-star flaming in the
heavens, the world stands at gaze at that, all tcome out of their doors to look
upon that, whilst the true Stars in the mean time are little passed by without
any observation.

3. To these add (in the third place) Falling-stars. Comets, Falling-Stars.
they shine for a time, and that it may be very brightly, out-shining all the
stars about them, but in a little time, having spent their stock of vapor,
they fall down to the earth from whence they came, and thereby are discovered
to be what they were, not stars but Comets, Quae cecidit, stella non fuit,
Cometa fuit. And such stars how many have we seen of late times? falling-stars.
Time was when they shone, and that brightly, like Lucifers, sons of the
morning, but now how are they fallen from heaven (as the Prophet says of the
Babylonion Monarch and Empire, Isaiah 14. 13)? Fallen from their Principles.
Such a Star we read of Revel. 9. 1. I saw a star fallen from heaven (says
Saint John) which some understand of some eminent Minister of the Church, who
fell from the true Religion of God and turned Apostate. And elsewhere he tells
us of the Stars of heaven falling to the earth, Revel. 6. 13. Ministers falling
from the truth into Errors. And such stars how many have we seen or heard of?
Men sometime of special note in the Church, shining like Stars in the firmament
thereof. But now are they fallen from heaven to earth, (I had almost said, to
Hell, but I would be as charitable as I may, hoping, however desiring, that God
would give them repentance unto salvation, that they remembering from whence
they are fallen, may repent and do their first works (as the spirit counsels
the Angel of the Church of Ephesus Revel. 2. 5.) fallen from the truth of God
into dangerous, desperate, damnable Errors and Heresies, some of them even
denying the Lord that bought them (as Saint Peter foretells it of some, 2
Pet. 2. 1. Besides these, how many fallen from their purity, and how many from
their zeal, being with the Laodicean Angel, grown remiss, Lukewarm; having
lost their first love, (as the spirit charge it upon the Angel of the Church
of Ephesus, Rev. 2. 4.)

4. To these I might yet add many more. Bitter stars.
Among other I take notice of one star, which being fallen from heaven, was a
bitter star. Of this you read Rev. 8. 10. 11. There fell a great Star from
heaven, and his name was called Wormwood, Of whom that is there meant, I
shall not now stand to enquire, which if I should, I should find it very
mysterious. Verily I wish there were but one such a star to be found in this
our Horizon. But alas how many of this kind, such as being fallen from their
principles, do now justly deserve that name to be called Wormwood, (as it is
for the most part with Apostates.) having their spirits imbittered against the
truths of God, and the ways of God, and the servants of God, (sometimes their
fellow Brethren) against whom they shoot their Arrows, even bitter words (as
David says his Enemies did against him. Psalm. 64. 3.) upon all occasions
letting fly bitter Invectives against them. And others there are, who though
they be not so fallen, but may be looked upon as stars still, yet they have too
much of this Wormwood in them, too much of that (...), (which the Apostle
speaks of James. 3. 14. Bitter Zeal. Which upon all occasions they are
ready to express against their Brethren who differ from them, though it be but
in matters of lesser concernment. Now surely this does not favor of a truly
Ministerial spirit, which should be (as I have shown) a spirit of gentleness
and meekness. Not a bitter spirit: But I will not weary you and my self in
following of this Chase any further. I shall rather now come to that which may
be more useful unto you.

And that shall be, Use 2.
to show you what your duty is in reference to these stars, Application to
the People, who ought,
in reference to the true Ministers of Jesus Christ. Which take in three or
four particulars.

1. Take notice of them as set over you by God. Stars, To take notice of their
Ministers as set over them by God.
and so are these Stars, both set over you by the same hand. And that both to a
like end, viz. to overlook you, and to guide you. To these ends are the Stars
set over this inferior world; as Overseers, and Guides, to overlooke it, and
Govern it, which in some sense they do, Astra regunt homines --. And to a like
end are the Ministers of God set over the Church, as Overseers, as Guides.
Overseers. so Saint Paul calls them, Act. 20. 28. Take heed unto the flock,
whereof the Holy ghost has made you Overseers, (...); Bishops, which properly
signifies, as there (but how properly I will not say) it is rendered,
Supervisors, Overs^ers. Guides. So the Author to the Hebrews styles them. Heb.
13. 7. 17. Where speaking, not of Magistrates, but of Minister, (as is plain
enough to those that will not festucam quaerere, seek straws to put out their
own eyes with all) he calls them (...), Rulers, Guids, [Such as have the
rule over you.] Such the Ministers of Christ are, thus set over you by God; and
do you know them as such. That is Paul's request to his Thessalonians 1 These.
5. 12. We beseech you, brethren, to know them that labor among you, and are
over you in the Lord.] (...), set over you. Ministers being set over their
flocks in the Lord, by God himself, to deal in those things which concern
his worship and service, let them be known and acknowledged for such. This take
you notice of.

2. And (secondly) thus taking notice of them, Bless God for them if able and
faithful.
bless God for them. This we have all cause to do for the Stars. Which are not
only an Ornament to the heavens, but very beneficial to the Earth. And this
do you for the Ministers of God, which are not only an Ornament to the Church,
but very beneficial to your souls. Many are the Benefits which men receive
from the stars, which they take little notice of. And many are the benefits
which you do, or (if you be not wanting to your selves) may receive from the
Ministers of Christ. And therefore bless that God who has set them over you.
These are the Gifts which Jesus Christ upon his Ascension is said to have
given. He gave gifts to men (says the Apostle) viz. Some Apostles, and some
Prophets, and some Evangelists, and some Pastors and Teachers Ephesians. 4. 8. 11.
And a greater (next to himself) he never gave unto his Church. So look you
upon it, blessing God for this Gift. Bless him for the office of Ministers.
And, if they be in measure able and faithful, burning and shining Lights,
Stars, bless him for their Persons. And with all, bless him for their Liberty;
that these Stars are not so clouded, but that yet they may shine forth. It was
a sad time with the Mariners in Paul's voyage to Rome, when they could not see
so much as a Star for many nights together, Act. 27. 20. And it is a sad time
with the Church (as in time of Persecution it sometimes falls out) when these
stars appear not. Such storms there have been. But blessed be he who holds
these Stars in his right hand, that it is not so with this Church at this day.
Astorme it has felt, and that sad one, but blessed be God, these Stars yet
shine forth.

3. Which that they may still do, Praying for their Lives and Liberties.
be you earnest with God on their behalf. It is a mercy which the Lord makes
promise of to his people, Isaiah 30. 20. Though the Lord give you the bread of
Adversity, and the water of Affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed
into corners any more, but thine eyes shall see thy Teachers. And that this
promise may be made good unto you, and to your Brethren in this Nation, be you
earnest with God in this behalf. This Paul begs from his Colossians on his own
behalf, Col. 4. 3. And this let me beg from you, as in my own and
fellow laborers here, so in the behalf of all the Ministers of Christ in this
Nation, that God would open (keep open) unto them a door of utterance, to speak
the mystery of Christ.

Fourthly. Giving respect to their Office and Persons.
Thus praying for them, give unto them those respects, which upon the account
of their office is due unto them. Whatever their persons be, yet their office
is venerable. Stars are no despicable creatures. And for their office sake;
have also a respect to their persons; Giving unto them that double honor,
which upon the account of a double work, their Teaching and Ruling, the Apostle
tells you is due unto them, 1 Timothy 5. 17. This yield you unto those who desire
and endeavor to be found faithful in this Ministration. This Paul begs from
his Thessalonians, and in them from you, 1 These. 5. 12. We beseech you, know
them that labor among you, and are over you in the Lord, and to esteem them
very highly in love for their works sake.

Fifthly and lastly, Making use of their Light,
having them thus in respect, now show this respect, as in other ways, so
specially by making that use of them for which God has set them up. Making use
of their light. First, Of Doctrine.
Their light of Doctrine. Not playing by it, as children sometimes do by their
Candle, till they are fain to go darklings to bed. And the like let them make
account of, who shall so play by this light, not regarding, not making use of
it, whilst it is held forth unto them, let them make account to go to bed in
the dark, to die without comfort. Neither (secondly) think it enough to gaze
upon it, to let this light into the eye of the understanding. I mean content
not your selves with a mere speculative knowledge. Nor yet (thirdly) think it
enough to be a little affected with it. So was Herod with looking on that
burning and shining light, hearing John's Doctrine. He observed him (says the
Text) and when he heard him, he heard him gladly, Mark 6. 20. And the like did
many of the Jews. They were willing to rejoice in his light for a season (as
our Savior tells them) John 5. 35. But do you walk by this light. Such use men
make of the Stars in the night season, they walk by the light of them. And such
use make you of the light of these stars. While you are here in the night of
this world, walk by the light of their Doctrine. As ye have received Christ
Jesus the Lord, so walk ye in him (says Paul to his Colossians, chap. 2. 6.)

2. And as by their Doctrine, Their Example.
so also by their Example. Such use Seamen make of some of the Stars, they
stear their course by them. And such use make you of the Examples of the
faithful Ministers of Christ, whose lives are truly exemplary. Stear your
course by them, follow them. This Paul calls for from his Corinthians, 1 Cor.
4. 16. Wherefore I beseech you be ye followers of me. And the like from his
Philippians. Brethren be ye followers together of me ((...), joint imitators)
and mark them which so walk as you have us for an Example, Phil. 3. 7. And thus
should Christians be of their Ministers. Remember them which have the rule over
you (says the Apostle to his Hebrews, chap. 13. 7.) who have spoken to you the
word of God, whose faith follow (the faith which they preached and professed)
considering the end of their conversation; viz. that you may imitate them.

Only here remember that Limitation, Following them as they follow Christ.
which the same Apostle elsewhere explaining himself holds forth. 1 Cor. 11.
1. Be ye followers of me as I am of Christ. Thus do fixed stars move, all
following the motion of the primum mobile; the first mover. And thus should the
Ministers of Christ follow him, making him their Example. I have given you an
example: says our Savior to his Apostles) that ye should do as I have done
unto you, John 13. 15. And so far as they follow him, let their Example be
followed by those committed to their charge. And thus have I done with the
former of these particulars here held forth in the Text, which informs us, that
Gospel Ministers are Stars. Come we now to the second.

Obser. 2. Gospel Ministers are in the right hand of Jesus Christ. Gospel
Ministers in the right hand of Jesus Christ.
So were these seven Stars, the Angels of the seven Churches, they were in the
right hand of this son of Man; in the hand of Jesus Christ. And so are all
other Ministers of the Gospel. Where let our enquiry again be concerning the
Mystery, what was hereby signified. To which take the Resolution in three or
four particulars. The Mystery explained.


First, Hereby we may conceive to be intimated that Interest and Property
which the Lord Jesus has in the Ministers of the Gospel. Christ's properties
and interest in his Ministers.
They are his Ministers. Though Ministers to the Church, yet not properly of
the Church. But the Ministers of Christ. Let a man so account of us as of the
Ministers of Christ (says the Apostle 1, Cor. 4. 1.) And so they may be called
upon a threefold Account. In as much as they have their Office, Mission,
Commission, all from him from his hand.

First, Their Office is from him.
Their Office is from him; their Ministerial function. Which was given by
Christ unto his Church When he ascended upon high (says the Apostle speaking
of Christ Ephe. 11. 8.) he led Captivity Captive, and he gave gifts unto men.
Even as Kings sometimes upon the day of their Coronation and solemn installment
use to scatter their donaria, giving gifts unto their Subjects; Even thus the
Lord Jesus upon this day of his Coronation, entering upon his Kingdom, he gave
gifts unto his Church. But what Gifts? why, among other a Gospel Ministry.
So the 11. verse there informs us. He gave some Apostles, and some Prophets,
and some Evangelists and some Pastors and Teachers. All Ministers offices, the
three former Extraordinary and temporary, to continue but for a time, during
the Infancy of the Church; the two latter (if they be two) Ordinary and
perpetual, to continue to the end of the world. Thus did the Church receive
the Ministerial function as a Gift from the hand of Jesus Christ.

And that from his Right hand. There were these Stars, Right hand Blessings
special blessings.
in the Right hand of this Son of man* Now Right hand blessings are the twice
blessings. The wise man speaking of the Gifts and blessings which Wisdom as a
Queen bestows upon her servants and followers, says, Length of days is in
her right hand, and in her left hand riches and honor, Prove. 3. 16. Length of
days, a long life, being of more value then riches or honor, is placed in
wisdoms right hand. And such is this gift which Christ has given to his
Church, the Gospel Ministry, a right hand gift, a choice blessing.

And so it may well be looked upon, Gospel Ministry a great Blessing to the
Church.
if we do but consider the end, wherefore it was given, and for which it
serves; which the Apostle also there sets down in the following verse, Ephesians. 4.
12. He gave some Apostles etc. But wherefore? For the perfecting of the Saints,
for the work of the Ministry, for the edifying of the Body of Christ] This
is the proper work of the Ministry, even the completing and perfecting of
the Saints, and edifying of the Body, the Mystical body of Christ, building
up of the Church in Knowledge, faith, and Holiness, until it be made a complete
and perfect Body, perfect both with perfection of Parts and Degrees, as it
there follows verse. 13. Till we all come in the unity of the faith of the
Son of God, unto a perfect man etc. Now considering this work, and the high
import of it, well may this be looked upon as no common, no ordinary Gift,
that Christ should give unto his Church those who may be isntrumental in this
service. The Gospel Ministry is a right-hand-blessing. To pass on.

2. In the second place. Their Mission from him.
Gospel Ministers, as they have their function from Christ, so also their
Mission. As their Office is instituted and appointed by him, so their Persons
are designed and sent by him for the executing of this Office. So were his
Apostles. As my father has sent me, even so send I you, (says he to them)
Ioh. 20. 21. Thence was it that they were called Apostles, (...), Messengers
persons sent by Christ as Extraordinary Ambassadors. Such were the twelve.
And such was Paul, Am I not an Apostle? 1 Cor. 9. 1. Being sent by Christ.
Christ sent me, (says he) not to Baptize, but to preach the Gospel. 1 Cor. 1.
17. Understand it Compartively, not so much to intend the one, as the other,
chiefly to apply himself to that which he looked at as the principal part of
the Ministerial service, to preach the Gospel. And thus are other Ordinary
Ministers sent. Though not in such an immediate way as they were, yet sent by
Christ; as by his Ordinance, so by his special Providence. He is that Lord of
the harvest, which sends forth Laborers into his Harvest, Ministers into his
Church. Mat. 9. last. These are of Christ's sending, have their Mission from him.

Thirdly, Their Commission from him.
And as their Mission, so their Commission. Hence termed his Ambassadors. Now
then we are Ambassadors for Christ (says the Apostle, speaking of himself,
and other Gospel Ministers) 2 Cor. 5. 20. And elsewhere he calls himself an
Ambassador in bonds, Ephesians. 6. 20. Ambassadors are special Messengers sent
with Commission from their Masters to act in their names. And such Messengers
are the Ministers of Jesus Christ, they are sent by him with a Commission, with
Authority from him to act in his name. As though God did beseech you by us, we
pray you in Christ's stead be ye reconciled unto God (so it there follows. 2
Cor. 5. 20.) (...), Christi nomine, in the name of Christ, as being deputed and
authorized by him. So are all true Gospel Ministers; being sent by Christ,
they are also empowered by him; having the Keys put into their hands. Even as
Eliakim who was made High-Steward of the Royal family, is said to have the Key
of the house of David laid upon his shoulder. Isaiah 22. 22. Importing that
power and authority which should be given to him for the executing of his
Office. Even so the Ministers of Christ are said to have the Keys put into
their hands: I give unto thee the Keys of the Kingdom of heaven, (says our
Savior to Peter) Matthew. 16. 19. that is, a Ministerial power and authority.
And this he gave not only to him (as Romanists would have it) but to other his
Apostles and Disciples, and in them to their Successors, even to all the
Ministers of the Gospel (as I touched before:) Into whose hands he has put a
double Key. The Key of Doctrine and discipline of Doctrine, giving them not
only leave, or allowance, but power to preach the Gospel, Go teach all
Nations, Matthew. 28. 19. Go preach the Gospel to every creature, Mark 16. 15.
And that (in measure) as himself is said to have done, Matthew 7. last, with
Authority. These things speak, and exhort, and rebuke with all Authority,
(says Paul to Titus. Tit. 2. last. And as the Key of Doctrine (which is
elsewhere called the Key of Knowledge, Luke 11. 52. because it opens the
door, and lets men into the saving knowledge of God in Christ) so of
Discipline and Government. Jesus Christ having given a Ministerial power to
them, partly by the Application of that Doctrine to the consciences of men, and
partly by the censures of the Church, as it were to open and shut the Kingdom
of Heaven, the Kingdom of Grace and Glory, to open it to penitent believers,
to shut it against obstinate sinners. Whatsover ye bind on earth, etc. Whose
sins ye remit, etc.

Thus have Gospel Ministers their Office from Christ, their persons also being
sent by him, with Authority from him. And upon this account are these stars
here placed in the hand of this Son of Man, to intimate the interest and
property that Jesus Christ has in the Ministers of the Churches; who are his
Ministers. Here is a first thing hereby signified; Pass we to a second.

Secondly, Gospel Ministers ordered and governed by Jesus Christ.
As they are Ministers, his Officers, so they are ordered and governed by him.
And upon this account again they may be said to be in his hand, in as much as
they are disposed of, and directed by him: As are Ambassadors by their Masters
that send them, together with their Commission they receive particular
directions and instructions, both whither they are to go, and what they are to
say and do. Even so it is with the Ministers of Christ, being sent by him, they
are also directed by him. As whither to go, so were the Apostles, whose
Commission was first restrained to one particular Nation, viz. to the Jews; Go
not into the way of the Gentiles, Matthew. 10. 15. afterward enlarged, Go teach
all Nations, Matthew. 28. 19. And so was S. Paul, sent to the Gentiles by Christ
who appeared to him, Acts 26. 18. And so are ordinary Ministers; though not in
so immediate a way, yet still they are directed by Christ, viz. by his special
Providence, whither to go, where they are to be employed. It is this hand that
fixes these Stars in their several Orbs, that places Ministers in their
particular charges; where also he continues them during his good pleasure;
disposing of them both for life and liberty as he sees fitting. So also, what
it is that they are to speak in his Name. To which end he as it were puts
his word into their mouths. So the Lord is said to have done into that falls
Prophet Balams, Numb. 23. 16. The Lord met Balaam and put a word in his mouth:
And so he did in the mouths of his true Prophets; Behold I have put my word
into thy mouth, (says the Lord to the Prophet Jeremy, Jer. 1. 9.) And the like
does the Lord Jesus into the mouths of his Ministers, he puts his word into
their mouths, sending them to preach, he orders them what they are to
preach; Go preach the Gospel. Thus he gives them directions and instructions
from his Word, the Scriptures, whereby the Man of God comes to be perfect, (as
the Apostle tells Timothy,) 2 Timothy 3. last.

And with his word he gives them his Spirit. This is that which our Savior
makes promise to his Apostles and Disciples, John 14. 16. 17. I will pray the
Father, and he shall give you another Comforter, even the Spirit of Truth,
which Spirit he afterward tells them should guide them into all Truth, chap.
16. 13. And this Spirit Christ gives in measure to all their Successors the
true and faithful Ministers of the Gospel, whereby their Heads and Hearts come
to be enlightened with those saving and useful truths, which they are to hold
forth uuto others. God has shined into our hearts (says the Apostle in that
place forenamed.) Thus are they in their ministerial work and service disposed
of, ordered, governed by Christ. And upon this account again may be said to be
in his hand.

hand, his right hand, being powerfully supported and upheld, Supported and
maintained by him.
defended and maintained by him. In this sense all the Saints of God are said
to be in his hand. All his Saints are in thy hand (says Moses) Deuteronomy. 23. 3.
Gods Saints in the hand of Jesus Christ, under his custody and protection. But
so are his Ministers after a special manner. They are in his right hand, under
his powerful and gracious protection and support. So the Psalmist often uses
this phrase. Thy right hand upholdeth me, Psalm. 18. 35. v. 63. 8. O thou that
savest by thy right hand them that put their trust i^ thee, Psalm. 17 7. The
right hand is a member strong and active, whereby a man shows, and puts
forth the whole strength of his body. And thence is it that Gods power
manifested in the protection or deliverance of his people is called the
strength of his right hand. The Lord saves his anointed with the saving
strength of his right hand (says the Church speaking of David her king) Psalm.
20. 6. And such is the salvation which the Lord Christ shows unto his
servants, his faithful Ministers. First, maintaining their office: which he
will do in despite of all opposition to the end of the world. I am with you
always to the end of the world. And then, so far as he sees it expedient,
defending their persons continuing their lives and liberties. Thus was this Son
of man with those stars, the Ministers of the Asian Churches. He held them in
his right hand, protectiug them, keeping them either from or in the hour of
Temptation. That is the promise which he makes to the Philadelphian Angel,
Revel. 3. 10. I will keep thee from the hour of temptation, which shall come
upon all the world. Such was the state of the Church then under the reign of
that cruel Tyrant the Emperor Domitian, it lay under a general persecution.
yet the Lord Jesus promises to the Church, and in particular to the Ministers
thereof an exemption and immunitie. And thus does Jesus Christ hide his
Ministers sometimes as it were in the hollow, or shadow of his hand. Thus was
he himself hid by his Father as the Prophet Esaias says of him, Isai. 49. 21. In
(or with) the shadow of his hand has he hid me. So protecting him against all
the might and malice of his capital enemies, that they could not lay hold upon
him, or do ought unto him, before the time that God fore-designed was come, as
St. John observes it, Joh. 7. 30. and 8. 20. Thus did his Father still uphold
him in the work of his Ministry in despite of all opposition. Behold my
servant whom I uphold (it is spoken of Christ) Isai. 42. 1. And thus is Jesus
Christ pleased sometimes to uphold his Ministers; being with them as he was
with those three worthies in the midst of the fiery furnace, keeping them from
persecution in the midst of it, so as whilst they see or hear of it, yet they
feel not of it. Or if they do, yet even then standing by them, supporting,
strengthening, delivering them. So was he with his servant Paul. At his first
appearing before Nero (as he tells Timothy, 2 Timothy 4. 16, 17.) No man stood by
me, but all forsook me, yet notwithstanding (says he) the Lord stood by me,
and strengthened me, and I was delivered out of the mouth of the Lion. Thus did
his Lord and Master then stand by him, holding him in his right hand,
preserving and delivering him from the hand of that cruel tyrant, still
continuing both his life and liberty. And the like has he done for other of
his servants. This is that the Lord tells his servant Jeremy, chap. 1. verse.
18, 19. Behold I have made thee this day, a defenced City, and an iron pillar,
and brazen walls against the whole land, against Kings, Princes, Priests,
People. And they shall fight against thee, but they shall not prevail against
thee, for I am with the^^ (says the Lord) to deliver thee. And the like may
all the faithful Ministers of Christ comfortably assure themselves of, that so
long a^ their Lord and Master has any work for them to do, he both can, and
will uphold them; he has them in his right hand.

The efficacy and success of their labors is from him.
he has them in his right hand, giving Influence to these stars, giving
efficacy and success to the labors of his Ministers making them effectual for
those ends, for which they are designed. This is that which the Lord promises
to the Philadelphian Angel, Rev. 3. 8. Behold, I have set before thee an open
door, and no man shall shut it. Though your adversaries at that time were many,
and those both potent and violent, yet they should not be able to hinder the
passage of the Gospel, but the Ministers of the Church should have both
liberty, and great success in their Ministry. This is also the work of Christ,
to set open such a door (as Paul says was opened to him at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 16.
9.) a great and effectual door. This is the hand (as it is said in that text
forecited, Act. 11. 21) The hand of the Lord was with them that preached the
Gospel, and a great number believed, and turned unto the Lord. To him it is the
Apostle ascribes the efficacy and success of all the Ministerial labors of
himself or others, 1 Cor. 3. 5. Who then is Paul (says he) or who is Apollos,
but Ministers by whom ye believed, even as the Lord gave to every man. As he
was pleased first to dispense his gifts, and then give success to the
endeavors of his servants; who are but as Instruments in his hand: (...), (as
he says of servants) Reasonable instruments; and so may use their endeavors,
but in the mean time the success and efficacy thereof depends all upon the
hand that holds them. So the Apostle goes on. I have pla^^ed, Apollos
watered, but God gave the increase, v. 6. Paul had laid the foundation,
converting them from loganisme to christianity; and Apollos, and others had
built upon that foundation, watering what he had planted, but is was God that
gave the blessing to both their endeavors. Thus are Ministers (as I said) no
other but instruments in the hand of Christ: the efficacy of their ministry
depending wholly upon his Cooperation. Not able to do any thing of themselves.
But through the hand of Christ assisting of them they are made instrumental for
great services. So are weak instruments sometimes in the haud of a skilful
Artificer; great and curious pieces are wrought by them. And even so are the
Ministers of Christ, being acted by his hand, though weak and impotent of
themselves, yet their ministry is made powerful for the effecting of great
things. Even their foolishness of preaching (as the Apostle calls it) is now
made the power of God to the salvation of them that believe

And thus you see the mystery also of this Representation. Application.
Which let it now be useful as the former was; first to Ministers, then to
people.

Remember whose Ministers they are. To Ministers, Let them remember whose
Ministers they are.
From whom it is that they have received their office their power, their
omssion, their commission. Even from Jesus Christ; in whose hand they are to be
disposed of by him according to his good will and pleasure. He it is that is
their Lord, they his servants: instruments in his hand. And being so,

approve themselves unto him, in doing his will his work. Even as Christ
himself did the will and works of his Father. Approve themselves unto Jesus
Christ.
I came down from heaven not to do mine own will, but the will of him that sent
me. Joh. 6. 38. I must work the works of him that sent me, Joh. 9. 4. During
his will and work.
Even so let the Ministers of Christ do, being sent by him, let them not do
their own wills, their own works, but the will and works of him that sent them.
Following those directions and instructions, which they receive from him, not
speaking or acting of their own heads. Of my self I can do nothing, as I hear I
judge (says Christ to the Jews) Ioh. 5. 30. And again, v. 19. The Son can do
nothing of himself, but what he sees the Father do. Being sent by his Father,
he followed his instructions, his directions, both in Dostrine and Practice.
And so let his Ministers do, renouncing their own judgments and wills, let
them attend his directions.

In all seeking his Glory, not their own, so did their Lord and Master. Seeking
his glory.
I seek not mine own glory (says he) Ioh. 8. 50. Whose then? why the glory of
his Father, who had sent him. I have glorified thee on earth, Joh. 17. 4. And
so let all the Ministers of Christ, in their whole Ministration, let them not
seek themselves, but him. It is a foul imputation which the Apostle charge
upon most of the Ministers of his time, that they were self seekers. All seek
their own things, not the things which were Jesus Christ's, Phil. 2. 21. All,
that is the greatst part preferred their own profit and honor, before the
glory of their Lord and Master. Let is not be so with us. Hereby shall the
ministers of Christ approve and evidence themselves to be his Ministers indeed,
viz. by doing his work with an eye to him, seeking his glory. He that seeks
his glory that sent him, the same is true, Joh. 7. 18.

Commit themselves to him.
let them then Commit themselves unto him: commending themselves into this hand
of his. So did their Master dying, he commended his Spirit into his Fathers
hand. Into thy hand I commend my Spirit, Luke 23. 46 And so let his servants do
both living and dying, commend themselves, their lives, their liberties, their
labors, their all, into the hand of this their Lord and Master: by faith
putting themselves into the hollow of that hand, and lying down under the
shadow of it. Commit thy way unto the Lord (says David unto all) Psalm. 37. 5.
And this let the Ministers of Christ do in a special manner.

Submit unto him.
let them also submit unto him. Taking notice that they are in his hand, let
them yield up themselves unto him, to be disposed of by him according to his
good will and pleasure. So did the blessed Apostle St. Paul. So long as his
Lord and Master Christ might be glorified in him and by him, he did not much
weigh in what way it was, whether by life or by death, (as he tells his
Philippians) Phil. 1. 20. And let their be the like mind in all the Ministers
of Jesus Christ. In all things let them comply with his mind and will, Being
willing to go whether he calls or sends them: like the Centurions soldiers and
servants, Mat. 8. 9. I say to one go, and he goes, and to another come, and he
comes, etc. And to do what he will have them. Peter though he had fished all
night and caught nothing, yet nevertheless, at his Masters command he will let
down the net, Luke 5. 5. And as doing, so suffering for him. I am ready not
only to be bound but also to die at Jerusalem, for the name of the Lord Jesus
(says Paul to the Disciples) Act. 21. 13.

And thus committing and submitting themselves to him, let them now encourage
themselves Encourage themselves in him.
So did David in that great distress of his, when he knew not what to do, he
then Encouraged himself in the Lord his God, 1 Samuel 30. 6. And this let all the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ do, Remembering that they are in his hand,
yea in his right hand; which may serve as a grand Encouragement, to bear up
their hearts and spirits.

First, Against the contempt of the world, that Against the contempt of the
world.
Let the world judge and think, and speak of them as it will. It is not this
judgment which they are much to regard; with me (says the Apostle) It is a
very small thing to be judged of you, or of man's judgment, 1 Cor. 4. 3. Whose
judgment then was it that he regarded? Why, the judgment of his Lord and
Master Christ; so it follows in the next verse, He that judges me, is the
Lord. What then, though the world have a low, a mean base estimation of the
Persons and calling of the Ministers of Christ? So it had of Paul, and the rest
of the Apostles, as he sets it forth in the sequel of that Chapter; We are
made a spectacle unto the world, and unto Angels, and unto Men; verse 9. We are
made the filth of the world, and are the offscouring of all things, v 13.
(...), the very sweepage and dross, the off all and shreds of the world. Such a
mean and base esteem had many in those times of Paul and his Colleagues, the
blessed Apostles, and other Primitive Ministers. And it is but too apparent,
that such and no better is the esteem which many even among our selves have of
them at this day; whose tongues and pens speak what their thoughts are. But let
not this be regarded by the faithful Mininisters of Christ. It is enough that
their Lord and Master Christ thinks otherwise of them. Let the world (as it
does) set them upon the left hand; He has taken them into his right hand, and
there he holds them; thereby declaring both how near and dear they are to
him; near in Relation, dear in Affection; Even as the Signet upon his right
hand, (as the Lord says of Eliakim, Ier. 22. 24.) or as the men of his right
hand; (as the Psalmist says of David, Psalm. 80. 17.) his Benjamins, the sons
of his right hand, (as that word signiefith.)

And secondly, as against the contempt, so Opposition which they meet withal,
Against Opposition in and from the world.
in and from the world, which often time is not little. Paul met with affronts
more then a few: Being to preach to the Deputy Sergius Paulus, Elimas the
Sorcerer withstood him, Acts 13. 8. And elsewhere he tells us of his fighting
with beasts at Ephesus, 1 Cor. 15. 32. which some, and not a few, understand of
brutish, bestiall, savage and cruel bloody minded adversaries. And such he
sometimes conflicted with, as appears from that request of his, which he
makes to his Thessalonians; 2 These. 3. 2. Where he desires them to pray for
him, that (among other things) he might be delivered from unreasonable and
wicked men.

And such conflicts the rest of the Apostles had frequent experience of;
finding that to be true, which their Lord and Master had foretold them, Matthew.
10. that they were sent forth as sheep among Wolves, verse 16. and that they
should be hated of all men for his Names sake, verse 22. because they were his
servants, his Ministers, employed in his service. And what if the Ministers of
Christ shall meet with the like at this day? Which at not a few hands they
already do: There being many who are desperately engaged, not only against
their Persons, but against their Profession, their Calling, crying that down as
useless and unnecessarie, nay destructive and pernicious; seeking by all ways
they can to extirpate and root it out. But let not all this discourage the
faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ; knowing that they are in his hand, not in
the hand of man. If so there were just cause to fear their standing. But in the
hand of Jesus Christ; and that in his Right hand, which is both a gracious and
a powerful, a sure and safe Custody and Protection. And who is it then that
shall take them out of his hand? Neither shall any man pluck them out of my
hand (says our Savior concerning his sheep, John 18. 20.) And if not the
sheep, surely then not the shepherds; He that has such a vigilant eye over the
one; will not be regardlesse of the other. Pan curatoves oviumque Magistros.
Yea then let men and devils do their worst, yet let not them fear. That was
David's resolution, which he took up upon this very ground; Psalm 56. 6, 4. In
God have I put my trust, I will not fear what flesh can do unto me. Such is
the Arm of man, how long, how strong, how potent soever it be, yet it is but
an Arm of flesh (as the Prophet tells it, Jer. 17. 5.) Flesh, not Spirit, (as
the Prophet Isaiah says of the Egyptian horses, Isaiah 31. 3.) a weak Arm.
But such is not this hand, the right hand of Jesus Christ. This is a powerful,
a mighty hand: Thou have a mighty Arm, strong is thy hand, and high is thy
right hand (says the Psalmist) Psalm 89. 13. Such is the hand of this Son
of Man, whom the Prophet describing calls El Gibbor, the mighty God, Isai.
9. 6. His hand, his right hand is a mighty hand. And therefore let not those
his Ministers, whose desire is to be found faithful in their ministration, in
any thing fear their adversaries.

I might go on putting them in mind, Looking for success unto Jesus Christ.
whither it is that they are to look for success in their Ministry. Even to
that hand which sends them forth, Vna eademque manus, The same hand that
gives gifts to them, and them to the Church, must give success to their
labors. these stars receive their influence from this hand wherein they are.

Withal, Going on cheerfully and courageously in their work.
I might excite them to go on cheerfully and courageously in that work which
their Lord and Master sets them about, being assured that his hand shall be
with them. This is the encouragement and incitement which the Lord gives unto
his servant Joshua, Josh. 1. As I was with Moses, so will I be with thee; I
will not fail thee, nor forsake thee, be strong and of a good courage, verse. 5,
6. And again, verse. 9. Have not I commanded thee? Be strong and of a good
courage; be not afraid, neither be thou dismayed, for the Lord thy God is with
thee, etc. And in a like way that good King Iehoshaphat bespeaks the Judges of
Judah, Chron. 19. last. Deal courageously, and the Lord shall be with the good.
And let the like be said to all the Ministers of Christ in this Nation. Let
them be courageous, being assured the hand of the Lord, their Lord and Master
will be with them, Take heed of provoking him, in whose hands they are.
I will be with you always to the end of the world.

Only let them take heed of provoking him to displeasure against them, which
if they shall dare to do, then let them know they are in his hand to correct
and punish them. As Aoraham said unto his wife Sarah concerning her servant
Hagar, Behold thy maid is in thy hand to do to her as it pleases thee, Genesis
16. 6. So let these servants of Christ know, that they are in his hand, to do
to them as it pleases him. And therefore let them take heed of offending, of
displeasing him; As by any sinful impiety in their conversation, (this hand is
too pure to hold any impure thing in it) so by remissness and negligence in
their calling, or by neutrality and indifferency not appearing, not standing
for Christ as they ought to do. He that threatens the Laodicean Angel that for
his lukewarmnesse, his Neutralitie and indifferency in the business of
Religion, neither appearing against it, nor much for it, neither being a
professed enemy; nor yet by a zealous professor, but complying with the times
upon politic reports, he would therefore spue him out of his mouth (which he
does, Rev. 3. 16.) he will not hold those in his hand whom he shall find to be
of the like temper. But I pass to the second head, that which concerns: Use
2.


The people. To the people.
Let them also (in that place) take notice whose Ministers they are which are
set over them; Take notice whose Ministers they are which are set over them.
not properly their Ministers their servants. So indeed many at this day do
look upon them, who use them accordingly. And in some sense indeed they may be
so called; in as much as their office is to Minister unto them. Thus these
seven stars here are said to be the Angels, the Ministers of the seven
Churches, in the last verse of this Chapter. And Paul writing to his
Corinthians acknowledges himself, and his fellow Ministers, their servants, 2
Cor. 4, 5. Ministers and Servants to them; but properly their Ministers, their
servants. Even as it is with the heavenly Angels, they may see in some sense
called the Churches, the Saints Angels. Their Angels do always behold the face
of my father (whih our Savior speaking of believers to whom the Angels are
guardians, Matthew. 18. 10. Their Angels, ministering for them, Are they not all
ministering spirits, sent forth to Minister for them, who shall be^heirs of
Salvation, Heb. 1. last. Yet properly Gods Angels, Gods Ministers, who makes
his Angels spirits, and his Ministers a flame of fire, verse. 7. of that
Chapter. Even so is it with these Angels, the Ministers of the Churches, they
are so the Churches Ministers, as that yet they are the Ministers of Christ,
sent by him, empowered by him. And so let the people look upon them. Let a man
so account of us, (...) as the Ministers of Christ, and Stewards of the
Mysteries of God, 1 Cor. 4. 1. Stewards are Servants, ministering to the meanest
in the family, yet not properly their servants, but their masters, (I mean
their Masters servants.)

And secondly, so looking upon them, Not daring (...) oppose them*
let dare to oppose them, not their persons, if faithful, much less their
Calling, which to do, what a madness is it? What is it but to go about to pull
the stars out of the right hand of Jesus Christ? which I wish it were seriously
considered by all those who are open, or secret enemies to the Ministerial
function. Of which it is too apparent there are not a few in this Nation at
this day. Some openly professing themselves such, crying down the Ministry,
yea, and (which is strange) some preaching it down; and others bearing no good
will to it, but seeking secretly to undermine it, to extinguish the Lamps by
withdrawing their Oil. O that all of them would but consider with whom it is
they have to do in this business; not so much with man, as with him that is
more then man, Jesus Christ. This is his Institution, which as he has set up;
so he has also undertaken the maintenance of it, holding the stars in his
hand, showing himself engaged in this cause against whoever shall oppose it.
How is it then that any shall dare herein to appear against him; specially such
as acknowledge him to be (what Socinians the chief undertakers in this
Antiministerial quarrel, will not allow) truly God, as well as man. So as in
this opposing his servants, what do they better then (to use Gamaliels word
used by him in the same case, Act. 5. 39.) (...) fight against God.

To deter all from such daring attempts, Arguments to deter men from such
oppression.
let me but desire them to go along with me a little, and take a view of this
Son of man here as he was in this vision represented unto his servant John,
where I shall desire them to take notice but of three or four of the parts and
members of his body, viz. his Eyes, his Feet, his Hand, his Mouth. For the
first of these, his Eyes, they are described, to be like a flame of fire, verse.
14. Piercing eyes, so as nothing can be hid from them, No more can the
machinations and designs of these his enemies, how closely, how covertly soever
they be carried. Though covered under never so specious pretenses, yet cannot
they be hid from these piercing and alseeing eyes. Next, for his Feet, they
were like unto fine brass burning in a furnace, strong and terrible; terrible
to look upon, much more to feel, able to trample upon all his enemies. And in
his right hand are these stars, which also is (as I have showed you) a powerful
and a terrible hand when it meets with his enemies. Thy right hand shall
teach thee terrible things, Psalm. 45. 4. And for his Mouth behold a sharp two
edged sword going out of it. Now who is there that beholding these will be so
hardy as to dare grapple with such an adversary? to attempt the pulling of
these stars out of his hand? which whilst they go about, let them take heed of
his feet, and take heed of the sword in his mouth, both which are engaged for
the defending of these stars. This by way of Dehortation.

In the third place, Faithful Ministers to be* s^ught from Jesus Christ
by way of Instruction let repair for them. Go uuto Jesus Christ, and beg them
from him, So they are by him directed to do in that place forecited, Matthew. 9.
last. Pray ye therefore the Lord of the harvest, that he will send forth
laborers into his harvest. Now who is this Lord of the harvest, but himself?
whose field the Church is, whereof he is the Lord. O beg it from him! that he
would send forth laborers, able and faithful laborers into it. And truly
great reason there is why all that wish well unto the Church of God in this
nation should do this at this day, in as much as what our Savior says there
in the ve. following, suits but too well with the present times. The harvest
truly is great, but the laborers are few; Laborers indeed, such as have both
skill and will to labor, able and faithful Ministers. Yea, and like to be
fewer. There being diverse of them already fallen asleep; and some others
following after them, being already laid aside as broken vessels, no longer
useful. Besides those, many discouragements cast in the way by those that are
no wellwillers to a learned Ministry, so as that there may be just cause to
fear a dearth, a scarcity of such laborers. O pray the Lord of this harvest,
that he would give out of this store which he has in his right hand; that he
would furnish his Church in this Nation (as elsewhere) with an able and faithful
Ministry, sending forth store of such as may gather in the rest of his
harvest; that so the number of his Elect being brought in, there might be an
end made of these sinful and miserable days. This in the want of Ministers.

Fourthly, In the inoying of them give these to them which are due to them upon
this account; Due respect to be given to faithful Ministers.
so esteeming of them as the Ministers of Jesus Christ. This Paul requires for
himself and fellow laborers in that place fore^ited; 1 Cor. 4. 1. Let a man,
(i. e. every man, (...) put for (...)) so account, (or esteem) (...) us, as of
the Ministers of Christ. And so let all (...) of their successors.

First, Not undervaluing them.
Not undervaluing them, not esteeming (...) meanly of them, but highly: Know
them says the Apostle in that Text forementioned; (...) These. 5. 13.) Which
labor among you, and are ^ver you in the Lord, and admonish you; and esteem
them very highly in Love for their works sake.] Though not for their own sake,
yet for their ^orkes, their office sake. For this esteem them, and ^^at highly,
yea very highly, (...)* ^nely let it be in Love: Men often times esteem ^ery
highly of men in high place, but it is for ^ar, fear of their power.

Now there is no reason why the Ministers of christ should thus be feared, who
do not lay ^aim to any secular jurisdiction. Let that esti^ation which is
afforded them be the issue of love; Love for their Masters sake, and their
^orks sake. For which let them be respected, ^noured. Honor to whom honor,
(says the A^ostle) Romans 13. 7. Now that this is due to the ^ithfull Ministers
of Christ, such as are (...) and (...) such as Rule well, and ^^bour in the
Word and Doctrine; (as the Apostle describes them in that known forecited
Text, 1 Timothy 5. 17. He will there also tell you: They are worthy of honor;
yea, double honor, both of Reverence and Maintenance; which let them not want.

And great Reason there is, Christ honored in his M^nisters.
why the faithful Ministers of Christ should be thus honored, seeing Christ
himself has honored them. So it was proclaimed before Mordecay, Hest. 6. 9.
Thus shall it be done to the man, whom the King delights to honor; him
should the people honor also. And so let it be done to the men whom the King
of Heaven, the Lord Jesus delights to honor, his faithful Ministers, whom
he holds as Stars in his right hand. The right hand is a place of Honor and
Dignity. Hence it was that Solomon placed his Mother there, 1 King. 2. 19. She
sat on the right hand. And his Queen: Upon thy right hand did stand the Queen,
Psalm. 45. 9. And this is the honor which Christ will give to his sheep, his
Elect at the last day, to set them on his right hand, Matthew. 25. 33. Now such
is the honor which this Son of man here gives the Stars, he places them in
his right hand. And seeing their Lord and Master thus honored them, to afford
them his right hand, let not his servants set them on the left, thinking too
meanly of them.

Secondly, Nor yet, on the other hand, too highly: Not esteeming too highly of
them.
not above that which is meet. Remembering still, that they are but Ministers;
Instruments in the hand of Christ, by whom he operateth works. Is it so then
that their Ministry is made effectual for the good of any, let them see
whither to give the glory. Not to them: Who is Paul? who is Apollos, but
Ministers? etc. But unto Christ, in whose hand they are, and who is pleased
thus to put forth his power in them and by them.

Thus when we see a curious piece of manifacture, we admire not the tool, but
the hand that wrought it. Such are the Ministers, Tools, Instruments in the
hand of Christ; what work is done by them give the honor of it not to them,
but him. S. Peter directed the people; Act. 3. 12. when they stood gazing upon
him, as ready to adore him for that great Cure which he had wrought upon the
lame man. When he saw it (says the Text) he answered unto the people: Ye men
of Israel, why look ye so earnestly on us, as if by our own power or holiness
we had made this man whole. By what power then? why the power of Jesus Christ.
So much he declares to the Rulers, being by them interrogated concerning it in
the Chapter following; v. 10. Be it known unto you, that by the Name of Jesus
Christ, does this man stand here before you whole. (...) Through the power of
Jesus Christ: And so much all the faithful Ministers of Christ will readily
acknowledge concerning the success of their labors. If so be their Ministry
has been effectual for the gaining and bringing in of any souls unto God,
this is not their work, but the work of Jesus Christ, putting forth his Right
hand, manifesting his power, in, and by them, his poor, weak and worthless
Instruments. And therefore, whilst any shall think highly of them, yet not too
highly. Let them not sacrifice to them, as those Lystrians would have done to
Paul and Barnabas, whom they Deified for healing of the Cripple, Act 14. 13.
But give the glory to their common Lord, in whose hands these his Instruments
are, and without whom (as the Apostle says of himself) they are nothing.

Receiving them, specially their Doctrine.
let them be received. Receive us (says the Apostle) 2 Cor. 7. 2. Received as
the Ministers of Christ. Being Prophets, let them be received in the name of
Prophets (as you have it, Matthew. 10. 40.) Eo nomine, because they are such, the
Ministers and Messengers of Jesus Christ: which who so does, receives Christ
himself in them. So he tells his Apostles, John 13. 20. Verily, I say unto
you, he that receives whomsoever I send, receives me. Thus let their Persons
be received with such respects as may become the Ambassadors of Christ; but
especially their Doctrine. This is that for which Paul so highly commends
those Bereans, Act. 17. 11 They received the Word (preached by him) with all
readiness of mind. And thus let all hear and receive the Ministers of Christ.
Receive their Doctrine, harkening to it, believing it (so far as it is
consonant and agreeable to Scripture, which was all that those Bereans did, who
are there commended for searching the Scripture upon that account, so bringing
Paul's Doctrine to that Touchstone) and yielding a ready obedience to it. So
doing, now shall Christ be glorified in them and by them; and both they, and
those who thus receive them in the Kingdom of Grace, shall be glorified with
Christ hereafter in his Kingdom of Glory.

FINIS.
THE Mistical Svvord In the Mouth of JESUS CHRIST.
REVEL. 1. 16. And out of his mouth went a sharp two edged Sword.
HAving seen what was in the hand, come we now to take notice what was in the
Mouth of this Son of Man. Where we shall find a Sword, a sharp Sword; a sharp
two edged Sword. Each a considerable circumstance. So much is intimated to us
in that 12 v. of the 2 Chapter; where this Son of Man Jesus Christ) is set
forth^by this character this mark. These things says he, which has the sharp
sword with two edges. So our translation renders it, not well knowing how
otherwise to express it. But the Original is more emphaticall. (...). Which
Beza renders; Qui habet romphaeam illam ancipitem, acutam illam; yet still
falling short of the Original, which runs thus: He which has that sword, that
two edged, that sharp sword: Giving us to take notice of his several Emphasis
and mystery in every of these. Which what it is let us now make inquiry. The
Mystery opened.
Beginning with the first, which will be as a Key to let us into both the rest.

Q. What was the Mystery of this sword? What signified by this sword.
What was hereby signified?

A. About this Expositors are not all agreed. Some understanding hereby, Some
understand hereby Divine judgment.
not the Word of Christ, for of that story (say they) our Apostle had spoken
before, comparing it to the sound of many waters, but) his divine judgment and
vengeance which he is ready to execute upon his enemies. Corn. a lapid. ad Text
And indeed not unfitly may it so be looked upon. In as much as the sword,
specially such a sword as this was, a sharp two edged sword, is a Symbol and
Engine of Revenge. Romphaea symbolum vindictae. Such is the like sword in the
hand of the Magistrate, (or carried before him) it declares him to be what he
is, a Revenger to execute wrath upon him that does evil; (as the Apostle sets
it forth, Romans 13. 4.) And so may this sword here be looked upon not
improperly, not unfitly.

But I shall rather choose here to keep the common road, Others the Word.
and to go along with the stream of Expositors, the greatest part whereof by
this sword understand the Word: the Word of Christ in the mouths of his
Ministers. Which in phrase of Scripture is sometimes thus set forth, under the
name of a sword. The Word a Sword.
So it is most commonly looked upon, Psalm 45. 3. where the Psalmist speaking
unto Christ, calls upon him to gird on his sword; Gird thy sword upon thy
thigh, O most mighty, meaning his Word. And so the Apostle expressly tells us
that the Sword of the Spirit, (or spiritual sword) is the Word of God. Ephesians. 6.
17. And I am rather induced here so to look upon it in the Text, in regard that
this sword is said to go out of the mouth of Jesus Christ; and so is properly
not the sword of his hand, but of his mouth. So it is called in the Chapter
following, verse 16. (...). The sword of his mouth.

Such properly is the sword of Jesus Christ, Christ's Sword the Sword of his
Mouth.
not the sword in his hand, but the sword of his mouth. Therein does the King
differ from other Kings. Earthly Monarchs, they are represented with a sword in
their hands, as an Ensign of civil Authority and Power which they have for
the punishing of offenders, and that if they deserve it Capitally. But Christ
bears his sword in his mouth. As also the Scepter, which is called the rod
(or scepter) of his mouth, Isai, 11. 4. both to show, that his Authority, his
Jurisdiction, which he exercises in his Church, is not secular (My kingdom is
not of this world) but Spiritual. Exercised rather upon the souls of men, then
upon their Bodies. His sword is his Word.

And not unfitly may it be so represented and set forth. The word a cutting and
killing Instrument
The sword is not only a cutting but a killing weapon, wherewith men fight
against their enemies. So much the Etimoligist will tell us the Latin word
imports. Gladius quasi Cladius, quod cladem inferat hostibus. It is a
destroying weapon, wherewith men kill their enemies. And so the sword in the
Text properly signifies (...), a kind of dart, a deadly weapon made use of by
the Thracians, (as Grammarians inform us.) And such use does Jesus Christ make
of his Word. Thereby not only cutting and wounding the heads, but the hearts
of his enemies, killing, slaying them. So the Prophet Isaiah sets it forth
in that place even now named, Isai. 11. 4. where speaking of Christ, and his
Kingdom, he says, He shall smite the earth with the rod of his mouth, and
with the breath of his lips shall he slay the wicked* which Calvin, and diverse
others, understand of the Word of Christ. Virga or is tantundem valet ac
sceptrum verbale; The rod of his mouth is the scepter of his word, the breath
of his life, (which a word is). Herewith does Jesus Christ not only smite, hut
also slay his enemies, doing Spiritual executions upon them. In this way and by
this means it is foretold that Christ shall destroy that Arch enemy of his, the
great Antichrist, 2 These. 2. 8. And then shall that wicked one ((...), that
lawless one, a term fitly agreeing to that Antichrist of Rome, who by himself
and his party is voted to be solutus omni lege humana, not subject to any
humane law, daring also to dispense with the divine Law) be revealed, whom the
Lord shall consume with the Spirit of his mouth] that is, by his word, the pure
and powerful preaching of the Gospel; thereby giving him a deadly and incurable
wound. Such use does Jesus make of his word; he uses it as his sword to
destroy his enemies with. With this sword it is that he goes forth against
those grand enemies of his Kingdom, Sin and Satan, as also against all other
his adversaries. This is the Bow wherewith he that sat upon the white horse
went forth conquering, and to conquer, Rev. 6. 2. even the powerful preaching
of the Gospel; which is elsewhere called his Arrows. Psalm. 45. 5. (as both
those places are by many expounded). And this is the axe and sword, wherewith
he heweth and slays obstinate sinners, as the Prophet Hosea has it, Hos. 6.
5. Therefore have I hewed them by my Prophets, and slain them by the word of my
mouth. Hewed them by sharp reprehensions, which are as the strokes of the Axe
to a crookd or knotty piece of timber. And slain them by terrible
denountiations of judgment and vengeance; threatening them with death,
Temporal, and Eternal. Thus does Jesus Christ slay his enemies, first by the
sword of his mouth, before he do it by the sword of his hand; first threatening
and denouncing judgment, before he execute it. Thus is the word a sword.

And secondly, a sharp sword, (...). Such Arrows before spoken of by the
Psalmist. Thine arrows are sharp in the heart of the Kings enemies. The Word a
sharp sword, peircing the heart.
His word penetrating and percing into the souls and consciences of men. And
such is this sword, a sharp sword. So the ProPhet Esaias describes it, Isai.
49. 2. where speaking in the person of Christ, and of his being sent by his
Father, he says, He has made my mouth like a sharp sword, i. e. By the
powerful operation of his Spirit he has made my word effectual. And such is
the efficacy of the word when it is thus accompanied, now it is like a sharp
sword. That is the Apostles comparison, Heb. 4. 12. For the Word of God is
quick and powerful, and sharper then a two edged sword. And wherein so? The
next words explain it. Piercing even to the dividing asunder of soul and
spirit, and of the joints and marrow, etc. This does the Word of God, not only
Christ himself, who is sometimes so called, Ioh. 1. 1. his essential word; to
whom that properly agrees which there follows in the next verses. Neither is
there any creature that is not manifest in his sight, but all things are naked
and open unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. But also (...), the word
written and preached. This is also of such a penetrating nature, like a sharp
sword, it goes through a man: pierces the heart, enters into the soul,
discovering a man to himself, showing him what before lay hid. So the Apostle
says of it in that known place, 1 Cor. 14. 25. where speaking of prophesying,
preaching, and the efficacy thereof, he says, that thereby the unbeleever
comes to be convinced, judged, so as the secrets of his heart are made
manifest. Those wicked lusts, and false persuasions which before lodged and
lurked in the secrets of his heart, unespyed of others, and undiscerned of
himself, by this means they come to be discovered. Thus does this sword
(likewise as the soldiers spear did to our Savior) it enters the
pericardium, the Call of the heart, nay, the heart it self, piercing it through.
As Simon told the blessed Virgin in another sense, that a sword should pierce
through her soul, meaning that sharp sorrow and heart grief which she should
suffer for her Sons sufferings, Luke 2. 35. Even so may it be said of this
sword, the word being accompanied by the Spirit, now it pierces through the
soul, working compunction, and contrition in the hearts of poor penitent
sinners. Such effect it had upon those converts, of whom the story tells that at
Peter's Sermon they were Pricked at their hearts, Act. 2. 37. This does the
word. Which also it does with great facility and ease. Even as a sharp sword,
though there be but a weak hand to manage it, it enters with ease. So does this
word though it be dispensed by the hands of weak instruments; (which are the
Ministers of the Gospel) yet through the power of the Spirit it setting an edge
upon it, it now becomes mighty through God (as the Apostle says of it 2 Cor.
10. 4.) mighty to do great and wonderful executions. Thus it is a sharp sword.

And thirdly, The word a two edged sword
A sharp two edged sword, (...). Such a sword is looked upon as the sharpest
sword, penetrating more easily then a Back-sword will. And in this respect the
word is fitly represented by it. So the Apostle forms the comparison in the
place even now named, Heb. 4. 12. The word of God is sharper then a two edged
sword. But besides there may be conceived yet to be a further Mystery in the
frame and fashion of this sword.

First, Law and Gospel the two edges of this sword.
A two edged sword; Such is the Word, which consists of Law and Gospel, being
as the two edges of this sword, and both going out of the mouth of Christ (as I
shall show you anon.)

Secondly, A two edged sword in regard of the double execution which it does.
The word having a double execution.
Not only upon the Bodies, but also upon the Souls of men. Therein does the
Spiritual differ from the Secular, Temporal sword. The one reaches only to
the Body, Fear not them which kill the Body, but are not able to kill the soul
(says our Savior, speaking of tyrants) Matthew. 10. 28. But the other (as the
Prophet Jeremy in a borrowed sense says of the sword of war, Ier* 4. 10.) it
reaches unto the soul, denouncing judgment against both, both body and soul.
Both which are as it were slain by this sword.

Thirdly, The word having a double and contrary operation.
A two edged sword (as our juditious Perkins goes before me) in regard of the
twofold operation of it. A two edged sword cutteth two ways; yea, two
contrary ways. And so does this sword going forth of the mouth of Jesus
Christ, his word, it has a double, yea a contrary operation, being both a
killing and a q^ickning word. Both these does the Lord in a literal sense. The
Lord kills, and makes alive (says Hannah in her song) 1 Samuel 2. 6. And both
these does the Lord Jesus in a Spiritual sense, and that by his word. So the
Apostle sets forth the twofold property of it, 2 Cor. 3. 6. The letter
kills, but the Spirit gives life. The letter, The letter of the Law, which
is litera occidens, a killing letter, in as much as it requires part from man,
which in his now corrupted estate he is no ways able to perform, and so is a
sword at his heart, giving him a deadly wound. Whence it is that is called in
the verses following (...), the Ministry, or Ministration of death, verse. 7.
and in the 9th. verse (...), the Ministration of condemnation. Because it
lays men under the sentence of eternal condemnation. Such is the Ministry of
the Law. But now the Spirit, and the Ministry thereof in the preaching of the
Gospel, that gives life, (...), it quickneth, makes alive. First, putting a
new life into a dead soul; raising it up from the death of sin to the life of
holiness, to the life of grace here, and glory hereafter. Whence it is called
by the Apostle (...), the word of life, Phil. 2. 16. And then reviving and
chearing it with the sweet promises thereof. Thy word has quickened me (says
David) Psalm. 119. 50. Thus has the Word, like a two edged sword, a double and
contrary operation upon the soul.

And so it has (to prosecute this point yet a a little further) both upon
different subjects, and upon the same.

First, Upon different persons, believers, unbel^vers.
In different subjects or persons it has a different opperation* So it has
upon believers and unbeleevers, Elect ones, and Reprobates. Working upon both,
but in different, yea contrary ways. This the same Apostle sets forth most
clearly in the chapter there foregoing, 2 Cor. 2. 15, 16 For we (says he,
speaking of himself, and other Gospel Ministers) are unto God a sweet savor of
Christ in them that are saved, and in them that perish. Their service in
preaching of the word is acceptable unto God through Christ, though it do not
produce the same effect in those that hear them, but have a contrary work
according as it needs with different subjects, So it follows. To the one we
are a savor of death unto death, and to the other the savor of life unto
life. Such contrary smells and savours there are in nature (as Grotius notes
upon it) some poisonous and deadly, as of those Lakes, Avernus, and Asphalties;
others again, so recreating and refreshing, that being put to the nose, they
will revive the spirits* of a fainting person. And of such a contrary operation
is the sword in the preaching of it. Meeting with persons of different
dispositions, it is to the one (...), to the other (...), to the one a sweet
savor, a savor of life. So is it to Gods Elect, to whom, believing it, it is
made the power of God to their salvation (as the same Apostle elsewhere says
of it) Romans 1. 16. A savor of life unto life; quickening them up (as I said
before) to the life of grace here, and glory hereafter. But on the other hand
to unbelivers, it becomes a savor of death unto death. A deadly savor; Not
that the Gospel is so of it self, being in its own nature (as I said even now)
the word of life; but accidentally it becomes so to them, through their
rejecting of it. Now it is to them not only an occasion, but a cause of their
just and greater condemnation. Even as it is with the Proclamation of a Prince
which he makes to his rebellious subjects, wherein he makes offer not only
of pardon, but of grace and favor to those that will lay down their arms, and
forthwith come in, showing themselves loyal and obedient; but on the other hand
threatens extremity of punishment to those that shall yet stand out. This
Proclamation with the same breath, breaths both life and death. Life to those
which will hearken to it (which is the proper end and intent of proclaiming it,
but death to those that oppose themselves against it. Even so it is with the
Evangelicall Proclamation, the Doctrine of the Gospel, it preaches life and
death after the same manner. Life to penitent believers, who readily accept the
offers of grace and mercy there tendered: Death to obstinate and rebellious
sinners, who reject them: Thus is Jesus Christ (who is the proper subject of
the Gospel) according to Simeons Prophecy at his Birth, Luke 2. 34. Behold
(says he) this child is set for the fall and rising again of many in Israel.
Even as the same Star (as our new Annotators glosseth upon it) is at the same
time both (...), and (...) both morning Star, and evening Star. To some the
morning Star, bringing the light and day to them. To others the evening Star*
bringing darkness and night. Thus is the Lord Jesus that Star of Jacob) being
held forth in the Gospel to some, those that believe on him; he is what he
calls himsel, Rev. 22. 16. The bright morning Star, bringing to them the light
and day of Grace here, and Glory hereafter. But to others such as reject him,
will not receive him as their Savior and Lord, as the evening Star, bringing
to them a night of everlasting darkness. Such is the different and contrary
operation of the word upon different persons.

2. And (in the second place) such is the operation of it in, Upon the same
persons.
and upon the same Persons. A different, nay, a contrary operation. So it has
in and upon Gods Elect, upon all true believers; of whom it may be said, not
only that they were dead and are alive. This my son was dead, and is alive
again, (says the Father of his Prodigal son being returned home) Luke 15.
24. And you has he quickened, who were dead in trespasses and sins, (says Paul
of his believing Ephesians) Ephesians. 2. 1.

But also that they are dead and alive, Believers dead and alive at the same
time.
both at the same time. So that the Apostle tells his Romans, Romans 6. 11.
Likewise reckon ye your selves to be dead indeed unto sin, but alive unto God.

And both these, Both the effects of the word which
they are the effects of the word. Which first kills them; which it may be
said to do two ways.

First, by showing them their natural state, Kills them, and that two ways.
state of death. Such effect it had in and upon the Apostle, as he sets it
forth, Romans 7. 9. I was alive without the Law once, but when the ^ommandment
came, sin revived, and I died. Whilst he was a Pharisee, he thought well and
highly of himself, that he was in a happy condition, he apprehended himself to
be in perfect health as to the estate of his soul. But the commandment coming
the Law being brought home to his conscience, now he died, he felt this word as
a sword wounding him to the heart, giving a deadly wound to that his false
persuasion, and making him to see himself a dead man, in a state of sin and
death. And such operation the Word has upon all those whom God intends to
manifest his grace upon. They are in this sense first killed. And then again,
the Body of sin is killed in them. So as whilst they are dead as to
themselves, so they are also dead unto sin, (as both Paul and Peter say of
all regenerate persons, Romans 6. 2. 1 Pet. 2. 24.) the Body of sin having
received a deadly wound in them; which is also done by the Word; which Jesus
Christ makes use of as his Sword to slay this old man with, Quickens them.
as his instrument in the mortifying of sinful corruption.

And so again, in quickening them, in making them alive unto God, and unto
righteousness. This is the able work of Jesus Christ, who is the principal
efficient in it. The Son quickneth whom he will (says he of himself) John 5.
21: But how does he do it? why, by his Voice, his Word: So he explaineth
himself, verse 25. Verily I say unto you, the hour is coming and now is, when
the dead shall hear the voice of the Son of God, and they that hear it shall
live. Thus did Christ quicken Lazarus body by his Voice, by his Word; He cried
with a loud voice, Lazarus come forth; John 11. 43: And thus shall he quicken
the dead bodies of all men at the last day, The hour is coming, in the which
all that are in the graves shall hear his Voice, and shall come forth, John 5:
28: His voice, not the voice of Christ himself immediately, but of his Angel
sounding the Trumpet at his command, so the Apostle explains it, 1 These 4: 16*
The Lord himself shall descend from Heaven with a shout, with the voice of an
Archangel, and the Trumpe of God. The Archangel, having received the watch
word from Christ (so the word (...) (as Grotius observes upon it) is there
rendered by Tertullian, (...), in jussu.) he sounds the Trumpet whereby they
dead shall be raised from their graves. And by alike means it is that dead
souls are raised from the grave of sin, by the voice of Christ, the trumpet of
his word, at his command sounded by the Angels of the Churches, the Ministers
of the Gospel. Thus has the word different and contrary operations, as upon
different, so in and upon the same persons. And upon this account it may fitly
be represented (as here it is) by a two edged sword.

Thus you have seen the three first particulars moralized, and opened unto you.
There is yet one behind, which is no less considerable then any of the former.
And that is the sheathe from whence this sword is drawn, which is here said to
be the mouth of this Son of man. (...). Out of his mouth went a sharp two
edged sword.

And so does the word out of the mouth of Jesus Christ* And that both Law and
Gospel which are (as I told you) ^like the two edges of this sword. This sword,
the word going forth of the mouth of Jesus Christ; both Law and Gospel.
Both these we shall find going out of the same mouth, the mouth of Jesus
Christ. So did the Law at Mount Sina. He it was who there spoke, if not
immediately by himself, yet by his Angel. This is he (says Stephen speaking of
Moses) who was with the Angel which spoke to him in Mount Sina, Act. 7 38. What
Angel? Why (as it commonly looked upon) the Angel of the Covenant, the Lord
Christ. This is he who then spoke on earth (as the Apostle has it) Heb. 12.
25. Whose voice then shoke the earth (as it follows,) viz. at the giving of
the Law; Thus the Law came out of the mouth of Christ.

And so does the Gospel. He it was that spoke and by his Prophets under the Old
Testament. As he spoke by the mouth of his holy Prophets, which have been since
the world began (says Zacharias in his song), Luke 1. 70. It was not so much
they, as the Spirit of Christ in them, which signified to them, and by them,
what they foresaw, and foretold (as Saint Peter has it) 1 Pet. l. 11. And he
it was that spoke to, and in, and by his Apostles under the New Testament. Paul
blames his Corinthians (some of them) for questioning, seeking a proof of
Christ speaking in him, 2 Cor. 13. 3. And so he still speaks in and by his
Ministers; who speaking in his name and delivering his mind, are as it were his
mouth. Thou shall be as my mouth (says the Lord to the Prophet Jeremy) Jer.
15. 19. And thereupon it was that what the Prophets promised or threatened from
God, they tell the people the mouth of the Lord had spoken it, Isai. 1. 26. and
40. 5. etc. viz. by them. And as the Ministers of Christ are his mouth, so the
word spoken by them is his word* the word of Christ. Let the word of Christ
dwell in you (says the Apostle to his Collossians) Col. 3. 16. And thus is
this two edged sword said to go forth of the mouth of Jesus Christ. That which
now remains is Application.

Which let it still be directed, Application
as the former; first to Ministers, then to People.

For the former, To Ministers, what sword they are to use.
Ministers, Let them here see what sword it is that they are to make use of.

First, But one sword; But one sword.
It is looked upon as an Apostles returned to their Lord and Master, when
notwithstanding what wars, and weapons he had spoke to them of, they tell him,
Ecce duo gladii, Lord, behold here are two swords, Luke 22. 38. And so much
their masters reply imports, who said unto them, It is enough] Thereby giving
them to take notice that it was not bodily arms which he meant; for so,
considering the enemies which they should have to encounter with many thousand
swords had been too few. But it was a wider Inference which that Bishop of Rome
made from hence, who laid this as a ground of that change, which he made a
double sword, the Secular and Spiritual, both to be welded by his hand. This
Son of man (whose vicar that man of sin styles himself) showing himself to
Saint John as the great Protector of the Churches, appears but with one single
sword. Though a two edged sword, yet but one sword. Giving the Angels of the
Churches, his Ministers to take notice, that they are to lay claim to no more.
But one sword.

And Secondly, The sword of the mou^h.
Let that be Gladius oris, the sword of the mouth, not of the hand, not the
secular sword; leave that to the Magistrate, into whose hand God has put it;
But Spiritual: Such are the weapons of their warfare, (as the Apostle will tell
them, 2 Cor. 10. 4. (...), Not Carnal: but Spiritual. And great reason they
should be so, In as much as they have to deal with the spirits of men; which no
sword will enter, unless it be of the like metal, ye like kind with
themselves. And secondly, with Spiritual enemies. We wrestle not (says the
Apostle, Ephesians. 6. 12.) against flesh and blood, (humane and bodily power) but
against principalities and powers, and spiritual wickednesses; (...), the
spirituals of wickednesses; that is (as the Syriack reads it) (...), which to
the Hebrews is all one with (...), wicked spirits. Such are the chief enemies,
which as all Christians in general, so the Ministers of Christ in a special
manner have to deal with. And therefore most proper it is, that they should
make use of that sword, which the Apostle there wills all Christians to take
unto themselves, verse. 70. The sword of the Spirit: The word of God.

And Thirdly, The sword goingforth of the mouth of Christ.
Let them take this sword out of the mouth of Christ. So it is held forth to
the Angels of the Churches: And here let the Ministers of Christ receive it,
preachiug no other doctrine then what they receive from him, from his mouth,
either immediately, or mediately It was that which our Savior charged upon the
Scribes and Pharisees as no small presumption, that they taught for doctrines
the commandments of men, Matthew. 15. 9. and the like did these false Apostles
in Saint. Paul's time; they obtruded upon their hearers the commandments and
doctrines of men (as he charge it upon them) Col. 2. 22. their own
traditions. A bold and high presumption. Let not any who call themselves the
Ministers of Christ dare to attempt the like. If they be his Ministers, Let
them be as his mouth, speaking his word; using no other sword but this which is
gone forth of his mouth. As for other swords, let it be said to those (I mean
such as take upon them the Ministerial function) who use them, as our Savior
said to Peter concerning that sword which he had unadvisedly drawn upon the
high Priests servants, Put up thy sword into thy sheath. This, this only is
the sharp sword, the two edged sword. As for other swords, (other doctrines I
mean) they may do as Peter's sword did, strike the ear; Only this will pierce
the heart. Of this sword may it well be said as David once said of Goliath, 1 Samuel 21. 9. There is none like that. And therefore let the Lords worthies,
Ministers of Christ, who are to fight his battles against those spiritual
enemies, Sin, Satan, the World, make choice of no other sword but this. Other
Doctrines like whiflers swords, may serve to make a show and flourish with. So
the Apostle says of those Doctrines of men, held forth by the false Apostles,
that they had indeed (...), a show of wisdom in will worship, and humility,
Col. 2. 28. And so have some of the Romish Doctrines. And I may say the same of
some of those doctrines which are held forth at this day among our selves, by
those reputed great Masters of Reason, Arminians, and Socinians. They have a
show of wisdom, and Reason, and it may be of Religion in some of them, which
renders them taking with those who have no other but natural principles in
them. But let not the Ministers of Christ meddle with these, or any other
doctrines which they have no warrant for from the word, otherwise then to
confute them. Let them rest contented with that simplicity that is in Christ,
(as Saint Paul calls the doctrine of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 11. 3.) making use of
no other sword, but that which goes out of his mouth.

And Fourthly, Ministers to make use of this sword.
Let them make use of this sword. Not suffering it to rust in the scabbard: As
those do who hide those talents, which they have received from their Lord, in a
Napkin. But drawing and using it; Preaching the Gospel: which the Apostle
requires all the Ministers of Christ to do in season and out of season, 2 Timothy
4. 2 And that under the penalty of a woe. Necessity is laid upon me (says he)
yea, woe is me, if I preach not the Gospel, 1 Cor. 9. 16.

And Fifthly, Ministers to preach both Law and Gospel.
Whilst they preach the Gospel, let them not altogether forget the Law.
Remembering that this sword is a two edged sword. And therefore let them preach
both; both Law and Gospel So I am sure did our blessed Savior; and so did his
Apostles after him. He that reads but Saint Paul's Epistles, and in particular
that to the Romans, shall see what use he makes of both these. And shall any
preach only the one of these, the Law without the Gospel, or the Gospel
without the Law; he may be said to make use of a Back-sword with one edge, not
of this two edged sword, which went forth of the mouth of Jesus Christ.

Sixthly and lastly, Let them see that they use it for Christ, This sword to be
used for Christ.
So that Emperor bad his officer do, into whose hands he delivered a sword,
with these words, Hoc pro me utere, use this for me. And thus let all the
Ministers of Christ use that sword which he has committed unto them; use it
for him, not against him, as too many at this day do; who snatching this sword
out of the mouth of Christ, set it at his heart; making use of the word for the
wounding of the Religion of Christ. But use it for him, in defense of this
truth, against all Errors and Heresies, and what ever is contrary to sound
doctrine. And for the destroying of the Kingdom of sin and Satan; and setting
up of the Kingdom of Christ. This for Ministers.

Secondly, To the people.
For the People; Let them also rest content with this sword, This sword
sufficient for them.
this sword of the spirit, which comes out of the mouth of Jesus Christ, his
word: not seeking after new doctrines. It was Paul's jealousy concerning his
Corinthians in that place forenamed, 2 Cor. 11. 3. I fear lest by any means
you minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ: lest they
should be taken with Philosophical speculations, or Jewish traditions,
wherewith the false Apostles blinded and mingled the doctrine of the Gospel.
And the same Apostle Writing to Timothy, foretells him of an Epidemical disease
that should infect many in after times, 2 Timothy 4. 3. The time will come (says
he) when men will not endure sound [doctrine, but after their own lusts shall
they heap to themselves teachers, having itching ears] Itching after noveltie,
being cloyed with, and weary of old sound savorie, soulsearching truths, they
should hearken after new dostrines. And is not this prophecy fulfilled at this
day among us in this nation? O what itching ears are there every where to be
found! men affecting of novelties, new lights, new doctrines. As for that
(...), that form of sound and wholesome words, which the Apostle delivered to
Timothy, willing and requiring him to hold it fast, 2 Timothy 1. 13. the sum of
which he there reduces to those two heads, Faith and Love in Christ Jesus,
which are as the 2. hings upon which all Religion turns, like the Vrim and
Thummin in the breastplate of the high Priest, this will not now content many,
unless there be some other mixtures with it. O far be this itching humor from
all you who hear me this day! You see what sword it is that is held forth to us
the Ministers of Christ to make use of; that, and no other but that, which
comes out of the mouth of Jesus Christ. And let this content you, being
assured that this will sufficient to all intents and purposes, which either
you, or we shall have occasion to make use of it for.

And Secondly, Private Christians to make use of this sword.
Let them also be exhorted to take unto themselves this sword. Take the sword
of the Spirit, which is the Word of God (says Paul to his Ephesians) Ephesians. 6.
17. Take it, and make use of it; I do not mean in a public way, Not in a
public way.
as too many at this day do, who will be meddling with this sword, having no
skill to handle it. I mean such as take upon them to teach, being no (...), no
ways fitted for, and so not called to that service. For first, I could wish
that they would but take notice what kind of sword this is, which they thus
meddle with; a sharp, and a two edged sword: and therefore not fit to be put
into every hand, to use in such a way. It was not for nothing, that the Apostle
gives that charge to Timothy, which he does, 2 Timothy 2. 2. The things which
thou hastheard of me (even that form of sound words, which he had spoke of in
the chapter foregoing) the same commit thou to faithful men, who shall be able
to teach others also. The word being a two edged sword he would not have it put
into every hand, nor left loose for every one that would to take it up; but he
would have it put into choice hands, such as might have some skill how to welde
and use it. It is not for every one to make use of this sword in a public way.

But in a private way they both may, But in a private
and ought: This is that which the Apostle not only allows, but injoynes in
that place even now named, Ephesians. 6. 17. where he wills private Christians to
take the sword of the Spirt to themselves. This is one and a principal piece of
that Christian panoplie, that complete Armor, wherewith every private soldier
of Jesus Christ ought to be furnished; The word of God: which all Christians
are to make use of as a sword, to defend themselves with against all their
Spiritual enemies. And such use do you all make of it. Seeing Christ has
provided this sword for yoru, e^^heth it forth unto you, take it, and make use
of it for the killing of your own corruptions, the wounding and mortifying of
your own sinful and inordinate lusts; therewith repelling all the assaults, the
temptations of your grand adversary Satan. This was the sword which Christ
himself made use of in that combat with this enemy of his in the wilderness.
He makes use of no other weapon, but a scriptum est, It is written, It is
written, Matthew. 4. And with this sword did he foil that enemy. Such a tried
sword is this, never did it fail any that made right use of it. And therefore
let it in this way be useful unto you. First girding this sword about you. In
dangerous places, which use to be haunted with Thieves and Robbers, travelers
will not ride without their swords. Much less will the Soldier go into the
field without his sword by his side. Truly such is this world, whilst you are
here; you are in the midst of enemies, I mean those spiritual enemies, the
world, the flesh, and the devil; whereby you are in danger of being assaulted
every moment. And therefore do not go without this sword. Get the word into
your hearts, and directions, promises, threatenings thereof. And then draw it
forth, and make use of it as occasion is offered. Which if you do, going out
against your enemies under the conduct of this your Commander, in the Name and
strength of Jesus Christ, fear not the success. This is a sharp two edged
sword.

Diverse other duties yet there are which Christians from hence may learn in
reference unto Christ and his word. Take some few of them.

In the Third place, All to stand in awe of Christ and his word.
Let them all stand in awe of him and it. This is that which the Psalmist
calls for at the hands of all, Psalm. 33. 8. Let all the earth fear the Lord,
let all the inhabitants of the earth stand in awe of him. And David speaking of
himself, says; My heart stands in awe of thy word, Psalm. 119. 161. And such
respect let all that profess the Name of Christ yield unto him: stand in awe
of him and him words. To this end (among other) he here shows himself in the
midst of the Candlesticks with the sword in his mouth, to teach the Churches,
both Ministers and People, all to stand in awe of him. This will men do of the
Magistrate; seeing the sword in his hand, or the hand of his officer, they will
stand in awe of him, not daring to trangresse the Law in his prefence. And this
respect let all both Ministers and people give unto Jesus Christ, who has his
sword in his mouth. Let all stand in awe of him, not daring to sin against him.
Stand in awe and sin not (says the Psalmist) Psalm. 4. 4. which who so shall
willingly dare to do, let them fear this sword, which the Lord Jesus bears
not in vain. So says the Apostle of the civil Magistrate, Romans 13. 4. (...),
He bears not the sword in vain. It is not only an ensign of honor and
dignity to his person, but of his Authority and Power over offenders: giving
all to take notice if they shall dare to transgress the Law, what it is they
must expect: So it there follows: For he is a Minister of God, a revenger to
execute wrath upon him that does evil. And to a like end is this sword put into
the mouth of Jesus Christ, to show his Authority and power which he has over
the sons of men, and to intimate unto them what they must expect from him in
case they shall stand out against his word, carrying themselves stubbornly and
disobediently against him, now this sword shall go forth of his mouth, he will
now fight against them with it. Christ fig^^^ng against ^^stinate s^^^^^s.
So he threatens those Sectaries, the Ba^lamites and Nicolaitans, which were
not tolerated in the Church of Pergamus, Rev. 2. 16. Repent or else I will come
unto thee quickly, and will fight against them with the Sword of my mouth.
Taking vengeance upon them, (as it is by some expounded) And thus will this Son
of man, the Lord Jesus Christ, sooner or latter come forth against all his
enemies; specially those that have rejected his word. He will fight against
them with the sword of his mouth, executing upon them those judgments which he
has threatened in his word, Temporal or Eternal.

It may be temporal; By temporal judgments.
Thus is he said to slay the Isralites with the words of his mouth in that
place forecited, Hos. 6. 5. And thus shall he go forth against Antichrist and
his party, as you have it set forth, Revel. 19. 15. Out of his mouth goes a
sharp sword, that with it he should smite the Nations. Thus shall the Lord
Jesus execute upon that grand enemy of his, that man of sin and his adherents,
the judgments denounced and threatened in his Word. And thus let all obstinate
and rebellious sinners fear; lest Jesus Christ whose Word they now contemn,
should thus come forth against them here, thus fighting against them with the
sword of his mouth, executing upon them Temporal judgments.

But if not so, By eternal judgment.
yet let them know there is a judgment to come, which they shall not escape,
even that last and Eternal judgment. And then shall they both see and feel
this sword coming out of the mouth of Jesus Christ; when they shall hear that
terrible sentence put out of his mouth, As for those mine enemies that would
not that I should reign over them, bring them hither and slay them before me,
(as you have it, Luke 19. 27.) O how will this sword then pierce through their
soul? Now, thus knowing the terror of the Lord (as the Apostle speaks, 2
Cor. 5. 11.) taking notice of this sharp two edged sword going out of the
mouth of Jesus Christ, the refore we persuade men (and that it might take place
with all you that hear it) that they would stand in awe, fearing before him.

Fourthly, The word of Christ to be ^eceived as his word.
And thus standing in awe of his Person, now hear and receive his word:
Receiving it from the mouth of his Ministers. The Priests lips should keep
knowledge and they should seek the Law at his mouth (says the Prophet
Malachy,) Mal. 2. 7. And this let the people do, seek the Law of Christ at the
mouth of his Ministers. Receiving it as his word. Though spoken by man, yet so
have and receive it as coming from the mouth of Jesus Christ. So did those
believing Thessalonians receive the word which came from Paul's mouth, as he
gives testimony of them, 1 These. 2. 13. When ye received the Word of God which
ye heard of us, ye received it not as the word of men, but (as it is in truth)
the Word of God. And thus let the word which is spoken to you by the Ministers
of Christ in his Name, be heard and received, not as their word, but as his
word, as coming out of his mouth.

Fifthly, And being so looked upon, let it be heard and received with holy fear
and trembling. The word to be received with fear and trembling.
To this man will I look (says the Lord) even to him that trembles at my
Word, Isai. 66. 2. letting it into the heart, laboring to find and feel
effectual working of it upon your souls, to find it there as it is here
represented, and set forth, as a sharp two edged sword.

First, The word to be felt as a sharp two edged sword.
Pricking your hearts with Godly communication and contrition for sin. Which
who so have not in measure felt, they may conclude they have not yet heard
Jesus Christ speaking to them. Pricking.
His word is a sword.

Secondly, Piercing
And thus pricking, suffer it to pierce further, even to the dividing a sunder
of the soul and spirit, and of the joints and morrow; making a full and through
discovety of the frame and temper of your hearts, and souls; so as the secrets
of your hearts may thereby be made manifest to your selves; that you may be
thoroughly convinced of the corruption of your natures, the lusts of your hearts,
and error of your lives.

Thirdly, Killing
Thus piercing, labor also to find and feel the killing and mortifying
property of it; as in making you to see your selves dead men by reason of sin,
so in killing the body of sin, mortifying all sinful and inordinate lusts in
your souls.

Fourthly, Quickening
And thus feeling the killing, labor also to find the quickening power of it.
This is the two fold operation of this two edged sword (as I told you) it both
kills and makes alive. Labor to feel this efficacy of it; that whilst you
are dead unto sin, you may be alive unto God through Jesus Christ. Thus feeling
the power of this sword of Jesus Christ, the sword of his Word here, yea shall
then feel of that other sword of his, the sword of judgment and vengeance,
which he is said to whet against all obstinate sinners, Psalm. 7. 12. and
wherewith he will wound the head of his enemies, and the hairy scalp of every
such a one as goes on in his trespasses* Psalm. 68. 21.

FINIS.
THE Mystical Sun In the Face of JESUS CHRIST.
And his Countenance was as the Sun shines in his strength.
HEre have we the last branch of this Description, which our Evangelist and
Apostle gives of this Sun of Man, which appeared unto him in the midst of the
seven golden Candlesticks, Christ's face shows him to be no ordinary person.
Jesus Christ in the midst of the Churches. Wherein he gives us an account of
the most noble and principal part of his Body, his Face, his Countenance. That
ordinarily shows what the the man is. And so it here did what this Son of man
was: No ordinary person; but one far surpassing all other of the Sons of men.
His face had a radiant Majesty in it such as never was seen in the Face of
any mere man; The Sun in his face, Mystical.
It was as the Sun, as the Sun shining, as the Sun shining in his strength.

Quest. And what was hereby represented and signified? What hereby signified,
various co^jectures about it.


Ans. Here again I find different apprehensions among expositors.

1. Some looking upon this as a representation of the glory of the mystical
body of Jesus Christ, Church, The glory of his mystical body.
which is and shall be Glorious here. Thence are called the Glory, Isai. 4.
5. upon all the Glory shall be a defense, (says the Prophet speaking of Gods
protection and his Church under the Gospel: which is called the Glory, in as
much as it is the habitation of the God of glory (as the Arc upon the same
account, also was called; The glory is departed, 1 Samuel 4. 22.) where, he
manifests his presence in the midest of his ordinances. The Church glorious
here, much more hereafter. As glorious in the Kingdom of grace, so much more
in the Kingdom of glory. where all the members of the mystical Body shall
be made conformable to their glorious head. when Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory, Col. 3. 4. And this
glorious condition of theirs some look upon as represented here by this glory
in the face of Jesus Christ.

2. One, and but one, Of the Roman Church. Aleazac ad lec.
I meet with who in this Roman Church; which in regard of external pomp and
state must be acknowledged to be paramount, for surpassing all other Churches
that ever were, or shall be. But I find him herein deserted by his fellows; who
though ready enough to cry up the glory of their mother, and to lay hold upon
ought that may seem to look that way, yet in this they are not willing to
own such palpable flatteries. And not without cause, for, (as Pareus
animadvertes upon it) If that had been our faviours design and meaning in this
his Apparition, to set forth the glory of that Church, how is it that he
should be so forgetful as not to direct aparticular Epistle to it, as well as
to those seven Asian Churches?

3. In the ninth place, our Mr Brightman Glory of these Churches, Of the
Asi-Churches. Brightman.
in the midst whereof this son of man now appears, manifesting his presence
there in the midst of his Ordinances, and that after a glorious manner; all
things being there so constituted and ordered both for worship and Dicipline,
as made those Churches (at least some of them) truly glorious. There did the
face of Jesus Christ shine (says he). So the worship of God (says he) is
sometimes called; his face. Instancing in that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 105. 4.
Seek his face evermore. To which that other Text answers, Psalm. 27. 8. when
thou saidest seek ye my face, my heart said unto thee, thy face, Lord I will
seek. Where, by the face of God is understood by diverse Expositors the Arc;
where God manifested his presence in the Temple. And The like he does still in
his ordinances. which where they cease, God may be said to with draw his face.
And where any are excluded from them, they may be said to be banished from the
face of God. So that of Cain may be expounded Gen 4. 14. where he complains
that he was driven from the face of the earth, and hid from the face of God. By
the former understanding the place of his habitation; where he had kept his
former residence, or the society of men, the inhabitants of the earth, who
would now be afraid of his company; By the latter the presence of God in his
Ordinances, from which he was now secluded, beiug under the sentence of
excommunication, cast out of the Church, But I shall also let that pass, though
having somewhat more color then the former.

4. Some others (in the fourth place) look upon this as a representation of
the glory of the Church under the Gospel, Of the Evangelical Church.
which is a transcendent, a surpassing glory, for exceeding that under the
Law. A mystery not unfitly represented by this shining of the face of this
Son of man here after this manner, which is said to shine as the Sun. Under
the Law we read of the shining of Moses's face, Exodus 34. 40. Moses his face
shone. A passage which the Latin Enterpreters by a mistake of the word in the
Original ( Karan for Keren,) renders, Cornuta erat Facies, his face was
horned. From whence some infer that Moses's face at that time was like the
Moon, which in the increase and decrease appears in that form and fashion.
But here the face of Jesus Christ (says one) was like the Sun. Leting that
gloss pass, as grounded upon a false bottom. In the mean time for the maine it
is true. Moses's face at that time did shine, and that gloriously, insomuch as
the children of Israel could not steadfastly behold him for the glory of his
countenance, (as the Apostle clearly expounds it 2 Cor. 3. 7. yet did it not
shine like the face of this Son of man the Lord Jesus; whose face shone as the
Sun, yea as the Sun in his strength, at noon day. So far does the glory of the
Gospel excel that of the Law. There was a glory in that Legal ministration,
but not like the Evangelicall. So the Apostle sets forth the difference most
fully by comparing one with the other, in that place last named 2 Cor 3. 7, 8,
9, 10, 11. under the Gospel there is a far more glorious light broke forth,
then that was under the Law. The one as the Moon, the other as the Sun. So
the Prophet Isaiah. expresses that surpassing glory that should come upon the
Church in Gospel times (as it is contained) Isai. 30. 26. The light of the
Moon shall be as the light of the Sun. Such is the glory of the Church under
the Gospel, far exceeding that which was under the Law. So not a few expound
that of the Prophet Haggai, chap. 29. where he foreteleth that the glory of the
Later house (or Temple) should be greater then the former. Major erit Ecclesiae
gloria quam Syn^^gogae; the glory of the Church under the Gospel should be
greater then under the Law. And this Interpretation, I confess, may learn to
fuit more fitly with the Text then any of the former, but yet I cannot look
upon it as so genu^ne and Proper, as to fasten upon it.

5. And therefore (to hold you no longer in suspense) what was hereby signified
refer we it unto Christ himself, Of Christ himself which is insisted on.
looking upon this as a Representation of some Perfections and Excellencies in
the Person of Christ: whose face is here said to be as the Sun, as the Sun
shining, as the Sun shining in his strength. Three particulars, each of which
has is several Emphasis, Three branches of this description.
and will afforde us some what worth our taking notice of. Begin with the first.

1. His face was as tho Sun] A fit Hieroglyphick, Branch 1.
or Emblem of Jesus Christ; who is sometimes so called, Christ as the Sun.
the Sun; [the Sun of righteousness Mat. 4. 2. It is spoken of Christ, who is
fitly resembled by the Sun; and that in many respects. Of these Analogies and
resemblances I meet with noe less then eleven reached forth by one hand
writing upon this Text. Cornel. a Lapide ad Text.
But of them I find some so far fetched, as that I shall leave them where I
find them not so much as taking notice of them. Take some of those which I
conceive to be most genvine and Proper. These I shall refer and reduce to two
heads. In respect of his Personal properties, Powerful operations.
Jesus Christ is as the Sun in respect of his personal properties, and in
respect of his operations and effects.

For the former, his Personal Properties; Of these I might name diverse.
Personal properties.


1. The Sun is but One. Thence it takes his Latin name (say some.) Sol, His
Oneness.
quia Solus. In the firmament there are many Stars, Many stars, one Sun.
but one Sun. Thus in the firmament of the Church there are many Stars, of
several, magnitudes, many Saints in earth and heaven, some out shining others.
as one Star differs from another in glory; And in the Church upon earth there
are some of more eminent place then others. Such were these stars in the right
hand of Jesus Christ, the ministers of the Churches; but in the mean time but
one Sun, mark the vision. Seven stars, but one Sun. Seven stars in the hand of
this Son of man, but one Sun, which was in his face. Thus, though there be
never so many eniment lights in the Church, yet is there but one Sun, but one
Lord. One Lord in the Church.
[One Lord, one faith (says the Apostle, Ephesians. 4. 5. True it is, there have
been others, which have been so called, and owned. This the Apostle elsewhere
takes notice of, 1. Cor. 8. 5. There be Gods many, and Lords many, (says he)
viz. so called (as he there explaines himself.) Such were the Gods of Baal,
(to which the Apostle may be conceived there to allude) all which were called
by their masters name. Bagnatim, which signifies, Lords. As Baal-Zebub Zebub,
Baal-Peor, Baal-Berith, Baal-Berozim, and diverse others. These were the
Heathens Lords, which they worshipped and served as their Patrons and
Protectors; But these were all, as the name of the first of them ( Baal-Zebub)
imparts, Flye-Lords, Mock-Lords, not unlike some of those, Lords, which were
wont to be set up at this Preached December. 26.
season of the year (a strange honor to such a Master) Lords of misrule, as
(they were vulgarly, but truly called,) Lords in name, nothing less in truth.
In truth, in the Church there is but one Lord

In the Church, I say. In the commonwealth indeed there are many Lords; and
those not only Titular, but Real. Thus we read of the Lords of the
Philistines; and of the King and his Lords, Dan. 5. 10. Such are all Rulers and
Governors who have Authority and dominion over the estates, liberties, lives
of others. But in the Church but one Lord; which is Jesus Christ. So the
Apostle there goes on in that Text forenamed 1 Cor. 8. 6. Unto us there is but
one God, One Lord Jesus Christ. Whatever there be to others, to us Christians
there is but one Lord, One Mediator. [ There is one God, and one Mediator
betwixt God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2. 5. One Savior. [Neither
is there salvation in any other, for there is no other name given among men
whereby we must be saved, Acts 4. 12. But one Sun. One true Sun, (I mean;)
Romish Mediators. (...).
sometimes indeed there are (...), (as they call them) half Suns appearing in
the heavens, which are nothing but reflections of the Sun shining upon some
thick clouds; And so there are false mediators, such as those which Romish
superstition has set up as (...), partners with Jesus Christ, as sharing with
him in the office of his Mediatourship. But one true Sun; and one true
Mediator, both of Redemption and Intercession, even the Lord Jesus, who upon
this account is fitly resembled by the Sun. Sol quia solus.

2. As the Sun is but one, His transcendent excellency.
so it far exceeds and excels all the other stars. Exceeds them in
Quantity, excels them in Quality. In Quantity, in the magnitude of the Body,
which is vast and great, even beyond belief, being (as by the masters of the
Astronomical science it is voted) no less then one hundred and sixty times
bigger then the whole Globe of the Earth and Sea, and far exceeding any other
of the Stars. And so in Quality, in the greatness of the light; which is
greater, not only then the light of any one star, but of the Moon, and all the
stars being put together. And such is the transcendency of Jesus Christ above
all other creatures, whether men, or Angels. All which he excels in dignity
and power, in majesty and glory. To him is given that nomen super omne nomen,
that name above every name, Phil. 2. 9. supereminent power, transcendent glory,
and that above all creatures. Yea, even above those Angelical spirits; which in
themselves are glorious creatures, yet compared with Jesus Christ they are but
as stars to the Sun. So the Apostle sets forth his transcendency and
preeminence, Ephesians. 20. 21. where speaking of the exaltation of Christ, he
shows, how God the Father having raised him from the dead, set him at his own
right hand in the heavenly places, far above all principality, and power, and
might, and dominion, and every name that is named, not only in this world, but
also that which is to come. In the whole firmament of heaven no star to be
compared with the Sun. Among men and Angels, in earth, or heaven, none to be
compared with this Son of man; the Lord Jesus.

3. Again, His Omniscience. (...). Poet.
the Sun it is (as it were) Oculus mundi, the Eye of the world, seeing and
beholding what is done upon earth; As it were viewing all places and passages.
His going forth (says the Psalmist, speaking of the Sun) is from the end of
the heaven, and his circuit unto the ends of it, and there is nothing hid from
the heat thereof. Psalm. 19. 6. And therein is it a fit Emblem of Jesus Christ,
who whilst he keeps his residence in heaven, yet has a universal inspection
and oversight of all things here upon earth; being absolutely omniscient,
taking notice of all persons in all places, and of all their several
transactions and actions. I know thy works (says this Son of man to the
Churches in the Chapters following.) And not only their actions, but their
thoughts, their counsels. When he was upon earth he was able to look through
the Breasts of men. He needed not that any should testify of man (says St
John) for he knew what was in man, John 2. last. And elsewhere we read of his
seeing and knowing the thoughts of men, Matthew. 9. 4. 12. 25. And this he still
does. Like as the Sun looks through the window, and so (as it were)
discovers what is within doors, which those that stand without take no notice
of: Even so does the Lord Jesus, he being as God (...), the searcher of hearts,
he looks into the most secret corners of them, looking through whatever
lattices, whatever specious pretenses, their words or actions are glazed with,
taking notice of their most secret counsels, and intentions; seeing their
thoughts, yea before they arise in their hearts, Thou understandest my thoughts
a far of, Psalm, 139. 2. This was the mystery of those fiery eyes of the Son of
man, in the verse before the Text. His eyes were as a flame of fire] intimating
the perspicacity and omniscience of the Lord Jesus.

4. Yet again, His Purity.
the Sun is an Emblem of Purity. Being pure in it self, and not capable of
contracting any impurity from elsewhere. Though the beams of it pass through
the impurest channels, yet they receive no taint, but still retain their native
purity. And such was this Son of man, the Lord Jesus in the days of his flesh.
He then passed through the womb of the Virgin, which was not so pure as those
that Idolatrize her would make it; she being no more free from that Original
contagion then others of the sons and daughters of Adam; yet he received no
tincture from it. Whilst he partaked of her nature, taking flesh from her, yet
he was free from the taint of that corruption which cleaved to her nature.
Thence called by the Angel (...), That holy thing that shall be born of thee,
Luke 1. 35. Such he was in his Conception and Birth; And such he was in his
Life. During which he continually conversed with sinners, yet he received no
infection from them. Being every way such as the Apostle describes him, (...),
Holy, harmless, ^ndefiled, separate from sinners, (viz. in respect of any
participation in that sin which is common to all other of the sons of men.)
Heb. 7. 26. Thus Jesus Christ was and is as the Sun in respect of his personal
properties.

From them come we to his operations and effects. Powerful operations of Jesus
Christ.
Christ being unto his Church as the Sun is to the world, present with it. Even
as the Sun is in the midst of the Planets; and being in his strength (at noon
day) it is in the midst of the heavens, His presence with his Church
and yet so as it is vertually and vigorously present in all places of the
hemisphere, that part of heaven and earth wherein it appears. Even so is the
Lord Jesus in the midst of his Ch^rches. So this Son of man here appears unto
our Apostle in the midst of the seven golden Candlesticks. A representation of
the presence of Christ in the midst of those seven Churches, (as the last verse
of this Chhapter expounds it.) And so he is in all other his Churches, in the
midst of them. Being present not only with his Ministers, to whom he has
promised his presence after a special manner. Behold I am with you always to
the end of the world, Math. 28. 20. But also with all true worshippers. That is
his promise to his Disciples, and in them to all believers, Matthew. 18. 20.
Where two or three are met together in my name, there am I in the midst of
them. Coming together in the name, by Authority, with commission from Jesus
Christ, and being occupied about the business of his worship and service, there
is he in the midst of them; viz. by his grace and spirit. Even as the Sun,
whilst the Body of it is in heaven, yet by the beams of it, it is upon earth.
Thus the Lord Jesus, whilst his body is in heaven, yet by his grace and spirit
he is present with his Church upon earth, and that efficaciously present; not
only eying and observing, but acting. Christ performs the like offices to his
Church, that the Sun does to the earth.
Exercising many operations in, for, and upon his Church resembling those
offices which the Sun performs unto the earth. Of these instance in three or
four of the principal.

1. Enlightening it. This does the Sun; being the fountain of light, it
inlightneth both earth and heaven; as the dark places here below, so the moon
and stars above, Inlightning it.
all with what light so ever they have, they receive it from this great
Luminary, the Sun. This is Jesus Christ the light of the world. So he styles
himself once, and again, I am the light of the world, Ioh. 8. 12 and 9. 5.
viz: of the Reasonable world, the world of mankind. In him was life, and the
life was the light of men, All light coming from Jesus Christ.
Ioh. 1. 4. Of all men. What ever light they have, whether Natural, or
Supernatural, they receive it from Jesus Christ. For Natural light, even that
common light of reason and understanding, Natural light of reason.
that is a beam from this Sun. So that Text is commonly understood, Ioh 1. 9.
where it is said of Christ. He is that true light that enlightneth every man
that comes into the world, [viz: with that common light of Reason, which as
their Creator he bestows upon them. Much more supernatural light. And that
both of Grace and Glory. Reason.
The light of grace where with the souls of Gods elect are enlightened,
Supernatural light; of Grace.
it is an effluxe from this Sun. The light shines in darkness (says Saint
John in the fifth verse of that Chap] Thus does Jesus Christ inlighten the minds
of men with supernatural knowledge, which of themselves are full of darkness,
of ignorance. And so that ninth verse there may be read and construed [That was
the true light, which coming into the world inlightneth every man.] So Grotius,
following Cyrill and Augustine, there looks upon it, referring the participle
(...), Coming, not to the word (...), Every man, but to the word (...). Light.
This Jesus Christ coming into the world inlightneth every man, viz. that is
enlightened. Communicating the light of divine and supernatural knowledge to the
world. And that as the Sun does his light unto the earth, which in a little
time, in the space of twentie-foure hours, inlightneth, the whole world. So
the Psalmist sets forth both the swift motion and vigorous operation of it,
Psalm. 19. 5. In the heavens God has set a Tabernacle for the Sun, which is as
a Bridgroome coming out of his Chamber, and rejoiceth as a strong man to run a
race. His going forth* is from the end of the heavens, and his circuit unto the
ends of it; and there is nothing hid from the heat thereof. Even thus the Lord
Jesus coming out of the womb of the virgin (his Bride-chamber) in a little
space, by himself and by his Apostles, caused the light of his gospel to shine
forth through the world, in so much as the Apostle says, that in his time it
was and had been preached to every creature under heaven, Col. 1. 23. So as in
this he was like unto the Sun. So the Apostle applies that of the Psalmist
concerning the Sun unto him, Romans 10. 18. Thus does the light of grace come
from Jesus Christ, in whom (as the Apostle says) are hid all the Treasures of
wisdom and knowledge. Col. 2. 3. And that as of Common, so specially of saving
grace. This light comes from the face of Jesus Christ, being beheld by faith:
So much we may learn from that Text of the Apostle. 2. Cor. 4. 6. God has
shined into our hearts, that we should give the light of the knowledge of the
glory of God in the face of Jesus Christ.] The glory of God shines in the face
of Jesus Christ, which being held forth unto Gods elect in the Glass of the
Gospel, and there beheld by them by faith, they come thereby to be changed into
the same Image from glory to glory, (as the same Apostle has it 2 Cor. 3.
last) By thus beholding of the face of Christ they come to be made like unto
him in the glory of holiness, which work is still in progress here, until it
come to perfection in heaven. Thus is the light of Grace derived from Jesus
Christ.

And so is the Mystical Glory. Of Glory.
Which is but, as it were, a reflex from that glory which is in the face of
Jesus Christ, which being beheld by the Saints of God in that beatificall
vision, they thereby are made partakers of the same glory. Even as so many
looking glasses being set before the Sun, by the reflex of the Beams thereof,
every one is changed into the same Image, and made like unto it. Even so shall
it be with the Saints in heaven. We know (says Saint John) that when he shall
appear, we shall be like him, for we shall see him as he is. 1 Ioh. 3. 2. Like
him in Glory. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye also
appear with him in glory. Col. 3. 4. Thus is Jesus Christ fitly resembled by
the Sun in regard of his illuminating property, being fons luminis the
fountain of all light; inlightning all that are enlightened in what kind so
ever.

2: And inlightning, Inlivening.
he also enliveneth, quickneth. This does the Sun in a natural way, it
quickneth vegetables, herbs and plants and trees, and some other creatures,
which seem dead in the winter; yet by the return of the Sun they are quickened
in the spring. And the like does Jesus Christ in a supernatural way. He
quickneth men. Thence called their life in that place last mentioned. When
Christ who is our life shall appear, Col. 3. 4. Quickening them, and that both
in their souls and Bodies. Their souls: The Son quickneth whom he will Ioh.
5. 21. This does he here to the souls of men. Finding them dead in trespasses
and sins Chap. 2. 1.) he quickneth them. Which he does by sending his spirit
into their hearts; as the Sun quickneth the herbs and plants by sending his
warm beams into the bosom of the earth. And as the souls, so the Bodies of
men. Having quickened the souls of his elect here, he shall quicken their
Bodies hereafter. This is the Fathers will who has sent me, (says our
Savior) that of all that he has given me I should loose nothing, but should
raise it up again at the last day. Ioh 6. 39. And this shall he do by the
same spirit. So the Apostle tells his Romans, C. 8. 11. If the spirit of him
that raised up Jesus from the dead dwell in you, he that raised up Christ from
the dead, shall also quicken your mortal bodies by his spirit that dwells in
you. That spirit of Christ, which here quickneth the souls of his elect, in the
first resurrection, shall by the like power also quicken their bodies in the
second. Upon which double account he is called by the Apostle (...), a
Quickening spirit. 1. Cor. 15. 45. The last Adam was made a quickening spirit.]
The last Adam, Jesus Christ, who is the head and root of all his elect, as the
first Adam was of all mankind, he is ordained by God to be the fountain and
Author both of a spiritual and Eternal life unto them, quickening them by the
Communication of his spirit unto them; quickening their Souls here, and Bodies
hereafter. Thus is he as the Sun, vivifiying quickening.

3. Quickening, Comforting.
he also cheareth and comfort. This does the Sun, which is as it were the
Joy and comfort of the world, without which there is nothing but melancholy
darkness and sadness. Such is Jesus Christ, the joy and comfort of his Church.
The Consolation of Israel, (as he is styled Luke 2. 25.) refreshing, chearing,
comforting the hearts of his people. Even as the Sun by the warm beams of it
cheereth and refreshes the herbs and plants, making them lift up the head
which drooped before. Even thus does this Sun of righteousness arise with
healing in his wings. Mal. 4. 2. Comforting the hearts of his people, chearing
up their drooping and dejected spirits, comforting them. I, even I am he that
comfort you (says the Lord Christ to his people,) Isai. 51. 1. This is the
proper office of Jesus Christ, as the same Prophet sets it forth, Isai. 91. 1.
2. The spirit of the Lord is upon me, and has anointed me to preach good
tidings to the meek. He has sent me to bind up the broken hearted to comfort
all that mourn: To appoint unto them that mourn in Sion, to give unto them
beauty for ashes, and the oil of joy for mourning, and the garment of
gladness for the spirit of heavines.] Even as the Sun arising upon the earth
puts a new garment upon it, instead of that sable mantle of darkness
wherewith it was covered, it put on it a robe of ^ight, and so alters the habit
of it, making all things cheerful and comfortable. So does Jesus Christ coming
to a dejected soul, he causes light to shine forth into it, even the light of
spiritual joy and comfort, so changing and altering the state of it. Which
also he does by his spirit. Even as the sun whilst the body of it is in heaven,
yet by sending down its beams, it cheareth and comfort those creatures
which are here below. Thus does the Lord Jesus, though he be in person in
heaven, yet by sending his spirit he comfort the hearts of his people. That
is the Promise which he makes unto his Apostles, when he was to take his leave
of them as to his bodily presence, yet he would not leave them comfortles. Ioh.
14. 18. I will not leave you comfortless, I will come unto you;] viz. by his
spirit. Even as the Sun though at a vast distance from the earth, yet daily
comes to it, and vi^iteth it, by sending down his beams upon it. Thus ^he Lord
Jesus, though keeping his residence in heaven, yet he comes to his people upon
earth by sending his Spirit to them, which is their Comforter. When the
Comforter is come, whom I will send unto you, even the spirit of truth, etc.
Ioh. 15. 26.

4. Again, Making fruitful.
Thus chearing the hearts of his people, he also makes them to fructify. So
does the Sun to the earth, to trees and plants, by ^hining upon them, it makes
them bear fruit, which otherwise, standing in the shade would be barren. What
ever fruits the earth brings forth it may thank the Sun for it. And thus
the Lord Jesus by sending his spirit into the hearts of his people, he makes
them fruitful, who otherwise without him would be barren, as he himself sets
it forth fully Ioh. 15. 4, etc. By this means they who of themselves are not
sufficient so much, as to think a good thought (as the Apostle has it 2 Cor.
3. 9.) come to abound in good works, and to be filled with the fruits of
righteousness, which are by Jesus Christ to the Praise and Glory of God (as the
same Apostle prays for his Philippians, Phil. 1. 11. Which fruits are the
fruits of the spirit, so called, Gal. 5. 22.

5. To which I might yet add; Purifying.
As he causes them to fructify, so also he purifieth them. Thi^ does the Sun,
rising upon the earth, it clarifieth and purifieth the air, freeing it from
those annoyances which in the night season had fallen upon it* And this does
the Lord Jesus, rising upon the heart of his people by his spirit he purifieth
them* Thence compared to a refiners fire, Mat. 3. 2, 3. But I shall not give
way to further inlargments.

Thus you see how Jesus Christ is as the Sun to his Church, performing the like
office to his people that the Sun does to the world. I might yet go on and
show you how he is and will be as the Sun to all others, even to his Enemies,
and that whether open or secret, Christ as the Sun to his Enemies, how?
For his secret Enemies, Hypocrites, he shall discover them. Even as the Sun
rising upon the earth it makes a discovery of what lay hid before. Thus shall
the Lord Jesus, when he shall arise upon the earth, as he shall do at his
second coming, he shall then make a discovery of all men, of their Persons,
Actions, Counsels; though now never so secret. So the Apostle lays it down,
1. Cor. 4 5. Judge nothing before the time, until the Lord come, who both will
bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and will make manifest the
counsels of the hearts. And both secret and open Enemies he shall then
confound; who shall not be able to look him in the face at the last day, when
he shall (appear in his glory, no more then a bleare eye can endure to look
upon the Sun shining in his strength. But then shall they fly from his
presence. Even as the Psalmist says of those beasts of prey. Psalm. 104. 20,
21, 22. Thou make darkness, and it is night, wherein all the beasts of the
forest do creep forth, The young lions roar after their prey, etc. But the
Sun arising they gather themselves together, and lay them down in their dens.
Thus shall it be with the Enemies of Christ and his Church. During the night of
the Churches afflictions, they forage and make prey of the poor Lambs of
Christ, exercising all kind of savage cruelty upon the Saints of God. But when
this Sun shall arise upon the Earth, as one day it shall, the Lord Jesus
appear in his glory, then they will fly from his presence, running to their
dens. So we have it described and set forth Rev. 6, 15, 16. Where our Apostle
speaking of the manner of Christ's coming, his coming to judgment at the last
day (as it is commonly looked upon,) at this day (says he) The Kings of the
earth, and the great men, and the rich men, and the chief Captains (those who
had before been the most robustious, and daring enemies of the Church,) they
shall then hide themselves in the dens, and in the rocks of the mountains;
saying to the rocks and to the mountains, fall on us and hide us from the face
of him that sits on the throne, and from the wrath of the lamb. So terrible
shall the face of Jesus Christ be ^o his Enemies when they shall see him; As see
him they shall; Every eye shall see him (says the seventh verse of this
Chapter.) And see his face, and that as Saint John here does, shining as the
Sun. And how terrible will this face be then to all those, who have formerly
done that metaphorically, which some of the Jews did literally, Math. 26* 67.
Spit upon it. But I hold back.

Thus have I done with the first of these particulars. I shall be more brief in
explicating the two other, and so put altogether in a joint Application.

The face of this Son of man was as the Sun, and as the Sun, shining.] Branch
2. The face of Christ as the Sun shining.
So does not the Sun always. Though it be above the Horizon, yet it does not
always shine forth; being sometimes veiled with a cloud, or eclipsed by the
interposure of the Moon. And such was the estate of this Son of man, Jesus
Christ, here upon earth. He was then a Sun. To you that fear my name shall the
Sun of righteousness arise, (says the Prophet speaking of the coming of Christ
in the flesh, Christ upon earth like the Sun under a cloud.
Mal. 4. 2.). But he was then under a cloud; the glory of his Divinity being
hid under the veil of his Humanity, under a mean outside. Insomuch that they
who then looked upon him, saw nothing extraordinary in him. He has no form nor
comeliness, and when we shall see him there is no beauty that we should desire
him.] So the Prophet sets forth the state and condition of this Son of man upon
the earth, Isaiah 53. 2. which was so mean and despicable, as that there was
nothing sightly, much less glorious to be seen in him.

Such it was in his life, In his death Eclipsed.
much more in his death. Then was this Sun under a sad and almost total
Eclipse. Then was this Son of man no other, but a ruful spectacle of deformity
and misery. His face, his countenance, was then marred. So the same Prophet in
the Chapter foregoing expresses the sadness of his condition. Many were
astonished at him (says he speaking of Christ) his visage was so marred more
then any man, and his form more then the sons of men, Isaiah 52, 14. So was it
with him in his Passion; wherein the person of Christ was subjected to the
greatest indignity that could be cast upon it. His face was then far from
shining.

But now, behold, this Sun is broke forth. Christ being risen from the dead, In
his Resurrection breaking forth.
and ascended into heaven, now his face shines. So it did in his
Transfiguration upon the Mount, Matthew. 17. 2. His face did shine as the Sun. A
preludium of that Glory, which he was to enter into after his Passion was over.
Of which he tells those Disciples traveling to Emmaus, Luke 24. 26. Ought not
Christ to have suffered these things, and to enter into his glory. And what he
therefore tells them was to be done; here he shows unto his servant John
that it was done; making him an eyewitness of it, showing him his face, which
was as the Sun shining.

Such was the change of his condition. In his state of Humiliation mean, and
despicable, none more; in his state of Exaltation, glorious, none so much. His
Humanity, his flesh being clothed with a singular and admirable clarity and
brightness, so burnished that it shines like the Sun.

And herein shall the members be made conformable to the head. Herein the
members conformable to their head.
Whatever the state and condition of Gods Saints here be, though never so mean
and inglorious, yet hereafter shall they be glorious creatures, shining, yea
shining as the Sun. So our Savior himself expresses it, Matthew. 13. 43. Then
shall the righteous shine forth as the Sun in the Kingdom of their Father.
Being exceeding glorious. And that even in their Bodies, which shall have a
singular clarity and luster put upon them, being made glorious bodies. It is
sown in dishonor, it is raised in glory, (says the Apostle of the Bodies of
Gods Saints,) 1 Cor. 15. 43. who shall change our vile body, that it may be
fashioned like unto his glorious body, Phil. 3. last.

Quest. But what then, Partaking of the same glory for kind, though not degree.
shall their glory equal the glory of Christ?

Answ. Not so. Head and members shall both be glorious; Christ and his Saints
shall both be made partakers of the same glory, the same for kind, but in a
different degree. So much we may learn from the third Particular, which informs
us that the face of the Sun of man shined as the Sun, yea,

As the Sun shines in his strength.] Branch 3.
(...), In vigore suo, as the Sun at noon day, The face of Christ, as the Sun
shining in his strength.
or in the height of Summer, when it is in his greatest vigor and strength.
Such a difference here is betwixt the head and members of the mystical body.
The glory of Christ transcendent.
The Saints they shall shine, yea shine gloriously, shine as the Sun, Etiam
justi fulgebunt sicut sol in regno patris; Christi vero corpus fulget, ut Sol
in vigore suo; quo excellentia capitis prae membris significatur. Pareus ad
Text.
but not so as Jesus Christ does; he shines as the Sun in his strength. Such
is the transcendent glory and excellency of the Head above the members (as
Pareus observes it from this word in the Text.) He being (as before I said) the
Head of the Church, and the firstborn, it is meet that he should have a double
portion, as he had of grace, so of glory, having the preeminence in all things.
Here is his Personal property.

Besides which we may yet conceive some other operations of his hereby
insinuated. His efficacious operations.
I shall touch upon two or three, and that briefly.

1. The Sun in his strength dissipates and dispels all mists and fogs,
Dissipating and dispelling, fogs and mists of Heresies and Errors.
which were before upon the earth, hiding the face of it. And so will the Lord
Jesus, this Sun of righteousness, when he shall show himself in his strength,
he shall dissipate and dispel all those mists and fogs of Heresies and Errors,
which do infect the Church* and darken the truth of God. So the Apostle tells
us concerning Anti-Christianisme, in that known Text, 2 These. 2. 8. Where
speaking of that Mystery of Iniquity, which began to work (as he says) in his
time, there being then some Errors and Superstitious doctrines held forth*
which served as materials for the building of mystical Babel, he says, Then
shall that wicked one (meaning that man of sin, the Romish Antichrist) be
revealed, whom the Lord shall answer with the spirit (or breath) of his mouth,
and shall destroy with the brightness of his coming.] He shall consume him,
(...), wasting him by little and little, till he come to nothing, (as that word
does properly signify.) Thus does the Sun, arising on the earth, by little and
little it consumes and wastes the fogs and mists which were upon it, till at
length they disappear, and come to nothing. And thus shall the Lord Jesus do to
that man of sin, and all those Antichristian mists which have in so great a
measure overspread the face of the Church, he shall consume them by little and
little, by the preaching of his Gospel, till at length by the brightness of his
coming, (...), a powerful manifestation of his presence, he shall utterly
destroy both him and them, (...), abolish, and bring them to nothing, (as that
word signifies.) And so shall it be with all other erroneous doctrines It may
be for a time they overspread the face of the Church, and darken the truth of
God, but in his time the Lord Jesus shall dissipate them all, being unto his
Church as the Sun shining in his strength.

2. Again the Sun shining in his strength resolves and melts what was before
congealed and frozen. Melting frozen and congealed hearts.
The Summers Sun resolves the Winters Frosts, loosing those bands of Orion,
wherewith the Earth and Waters before were bound. And such operation has the
Lord Jesus upon the hearts of poor sinners. Though frozen (as it were) and
congealed in sin, yet he arising, and coming upon them by the powerful work of
his Spirit, he thaweth, melts, resolves them, bringing them into a relenting
temper. Such operation had the eye of Christ upon the heart of Peter. After he
had denied his Master, and was grown stiff in his denial, standing to it,
though pressed again and again (like the water, which being hard frozen, bears
whoever treads upon it) adding Abjuration to his Abnegation, forswearing to his
denying, yet no sooner does his Master turn and look upon him, but presently
his heart forgave. So Saint Luke expressly notes it, Luke 22. 61. 62. And the
Lord turned and looked upon Peter, etc. (looked upon him (...), with a benign
aspect, a gracious eye, even as the Sun looks upon the frozen earth) and
Peter went out and wept bitterly. Such a sudden thaw, there was upon the
appearing of this Sun, his heart melted. And so did the heart of that Mary,
whom the same Evangelist denominates a sinner, Luke 7. 37. a sinner (...), a
notorious lewd woman, a trumpet; upon her appearing and coming nigh unto
Christ, virtue also going out of him (as it did for the healing of the Bodies
of those that touched him, Lu. 6. 19.) her heart also melted, melted into
tears, wherewith she washed her Saviors feet. Such operation has the spirit of
Christ upon the most obdurate and obstinate sinners. Though before through long
custom and continuance in sin their hearts were hardened, even frozen in their
wickedness, yet he coming to them in the power and strength of his spirit,
meleth and softneth them, making them pliable and tractable, fit and ready to
receive the impressions of his grace; so setting them at liberty from those
bonds of sin, wherein before they were bound. This is the proper office of
Jesus Christ, as the Prophet sets it forth, Isaiah 61. 1. The spirit of the
Lord God is upon me, etc. he has sent me to proclaim liberty to the captives,
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound; to set them free both
from the Guilt and Power of sin, which he does by the Application of his Merit,
and the communication of his Spirit unto them.

3. Again, Warning and heating them with joy, love, zeal.
the Sun in his strength, not only loses and softeneth the earth, but also
warms it, heats it, whereby it comes to steame upwards, exhaling and sending
forth a warm vapor out of the bottom of it toward the Sun from which it has
received that warmth. And the like operation has the Lord Jesus upon the
hearts of his people, shining upon them, giving them some clear and
comfortable evidences of his love and favor, some sense and feeling of it,
there with he Warmeth their hearts. So it was with those Disciples forenamed,
whom our Savior fell with as they were going to E^^maus, while he talked with
them opening to them the Scriptures, their hearts (as they say) burned within
them. They felt a holy fervor in their spirits, kindled there, by that Spirit
of Christ which accompanied his word. And such effect has the Spirit of
Christ, where he is pleased graciously to communicate himself to the souls of
his people, he causes a holy fervor in their hearts; Warming them with inward
Joy; which is the immediate fruit and effect of the face of Jesus Christ
shining upon the soul. Lord, lift thou up the light of thy countenance upon
us, (says the Psalmist,) adding, Thou have put gladness in my heart more then
in the time that their corn, and their mine increased. Psalm. 4, 6, 7. No
warmth so kindly as the warmth of the Sun. No joy like that which is caused by
the light of Gods countenance, the shining of the face of Jesus Christ upon the
soul. And breeding Joy, it also produces Love and Zeal. Love to Christ; Zeal
for Christ. The aforesaid Mary, having had experience of the great love of
Christ in forgiving her so many and great sins, she returns an answerable
affection, she loved much, Luke 7, 47. And Paul after he had seen that great
light shining round about him from heaven, and heard the Lord Jesus speak unto
him, how Zealous was he ever after for Christ? Not more Zealous against him
before, then now for him. Now he calls out, Lord what will thou have me to
do? Act. 9, 3, 6. And not only do, but suffer. I am ready not only to be
bound, but to dye at Jerusalem for the name of the Lord Jesus, Act. 21, 13.
Thus does this Sun shining upon the heart in its strength, it draws up ardent
Affections toward it self.

I might go on, Drying up sinful corruption.
and yet instance in some other particulars, wherein the Lord Jesus is like the
Sun in his strength; As viz. In drying up of sinful Corruption, and inordinate
lusts in the soul, even as the Sun in the Summer season dries up those waters
wherewith the face of the earth, was before surcharged to the prejudice of it.
And so in diverse other. But I shall harken to the Counsel which Aretius,
writing upon the Text, giving to those that handle it; which is, that whilst
they prosecute this Allegory betwixt Christ and the Sun, wherein he
acknowledges there are many very apt resemblances to be found, yet, ne modum
excedant, they take heed of following it too far, so as to extort that from it
which it will not naturally yield. Taking this advice, I shall pass to
Application.

That consists of many Branches; Applic. Seek we the face of Jesus Christ.
but I shall graft them upon one stock, reducing all to one head, which shall
be only to exhort and excite every of us to seek the face of this Son of man;
Seek the face of Jesus Christ. This is that which the Lord calls upon his
people to do in that foresaid Text, Psalm. 27, 8. Seek ye my face. And
wherefore was it that this Son of man here showed his face in this glorious
manner in the midest of the Churches, but that they should be invited to seek
his face. And this do we. Having heard how glorious this face of Jesus Christ
is, let all of us seek it. This is the Psalmists resolve there, in the Text
last named; Hearing what God said unto him, and other believers, Seek ye my
face, his heart ecchoeth back again, Thy face O Lord I will seek. And let
there be the like mind in every of us. Hearing how Christ showed his face here
unto his servant John in the midest of the Churches, seek we this face of his.

Q. How seek it? Quest. How seek it?
A. Take the Answer in two words Seek it that we may See it; and seek it
that we may feel it.

1. That we may See it. Answ. That we may see it.
A sight worth the seeing. His face was as the Sun, (says the Text) Now what
more desirable sight then this. Truly the light is sweet (says the Preacher)
and a pleasant thing it is to behold the Sun. Eccles. 11. 7 How pleasant to
behold this Sun, the Sun of righteousness. It is so to the Saints in heaven
who behold this Sun shining in his strength, see Jesus Christ, as he is in the
fullness of his glory, they are never weary of beholding him. That we may also
in due season be made partakers of that beatificall vision, to see Christ in
his Kingdom of glory, seek we his face now in his Kingdom of grace, that we
may see it. This was that which some were so desirous to see when he was upon
earth, to see the face of Christ; though then to the bodily eye it was scarce
worth the seeing, there being no beauty in him that he should be desired (as
the Prophet has it.) Yet Zacheus gets up into a tree to see him as he passed
by Luke 19. 3. And this is the request which those Greeks which came to
worship in the Temple, made unto Philip, Sir, we would see Jesus, Ioh. 12. 21.
What they desired to see with the bodily eye, every of us labor to see with
the eye of our souls.

This is the vision which makes the eye of the beholder happy and blessed.
The Beatifical vision upon earth.
Blessed are your eyes for they see (says our Savior to his Disciples) Math.
13. 16. And what did they see, that should make them so blessed? why, they saw
Christ in the flesh, But did not others so also? Yes, but not as they did. They
saw him not only with their bodily eyes, (as the multitude did, many of which
saw him but believed not in him, as our Savior tells some of them, Ioh. 6.
36. Ye also have seen me, and believe not; nay, multi viderunt and oderunt,
many saw him and hated him,) but they saw him also with the eye of their
mind, they saw his inside, who he was, and what he was, they so saw him as
that they believed on him; which is the true seeing of Christ. This is the will
of him that sent me, that every one which sees the Son and believes on him,
may have everlasting life (says our Savior) verse. 40. of the same Chapter.
They saw not only that mean out side of his, as others did, who were thereby
prejudiced against him. Is not this the Carpenter? Mark. 6. 3. but they saw the
glory which was hid under that veil. The word was made flesh and dwelt
amongst us, and we saw his glory, the glory as of the only begotten son of
the father, (says Saint John) Ioh. 1. 14. O that all our eyes may be blessed
with this vision, with the beholding of the glory of Christ, that we may see
this face of his, shining as the Sun! That so we may give unto him the glory of
those Personal Properties, wherein he resembles the Sun; the glory of his
Sole Lordship and Mediatorship, by submitting to him and resting wholly upon
him; the glory of his transcendent Dignity, by adoring and Worshipping him;
the glory of his Omnisciens, by endeavoring to approve our selves unto him,
and that not only our actions, but our secretest Counsels and intentions;
Quest. How Christ is to be seen upon earth.
^he glory of his absolute Purity, by striving to be like him, holy as he is
holy.

Q. But where, or how shall we thus see him?

A. Take the Answer, Answ. 1. Neg. Not by way of vision.
first, Negatively. Do not look to see him as Saint John here did, by way of
vision, immediate Revelation. Thus indeed Christ here showed himself to this
his servant, but this was an extraordinary favor, and so not to be expected
by us. Nay thus we cannot see him, see his face. When Moses desired to see the
glory of God Exodus 33. 18. The Lord returns him answer verse. 20. Thou can
not see my face, for there shall no man see me and live. And our Apostle here,
upon the sight of the face of this Son of man fell down as dead. Such is the
glory of this face, that no mortal eye is capable of beholding it in an
immediate way.

Q. How then? Answ. 2. Affirm. In the Glass of the Gospel.
A. Take the Answer Affirmatively.

1. Would we see the face of Christ, look into the glass of the Gospel. Here
may we behold it both safely, and clearly. So may we behold the Sun, which
shining in his strength, (being excellens sensibile,) cannot be looked upon
without indangering of the eye, yet in a glass we may see it, and that (as I
said) both clearly, and safely. And thus behold we this Mystical Sun, the
face of Jesus Christ, in this glass, the glass of the Gospel. Here it was that
Paul says of himself, and other believers of his time, that they beheld this
face. 2 Cor. 3. last. But we all with open face, as in a glass, behold the
glory of the Lord. And what Glass was this? why, the glass of the Gospel;
wherein Christians do, or may behold the glory of God shining in the face of
Jesus Christ, the glory of his mercy, Justice, power, goodness, all manifested,
in, by, and through Christ; And that with open face, far more clearly then the
Jews did under the Law, where this Mystery of Christ was hid, under the
veil of Types and figures, as the Arc was under its diverse coverings. And in
this Glass, behold we this Sun. Here behold we the Mystery of Jesus Christ, as
it is held forth unto us in the doctrine of the Gospel; which acquaints us with
his one Person, two Natures, three Offices, His Incarnation, Conception, Birth,
Life, Death, Resurrection, Ascension, sitting at the right hand of his father;
As also with the many and great benefits which he has obtained for us, as
Redemtion, Justification, Adoption, Sanctification, Glorification. And withal,
showing us the way and means whereby we may come to be made partakers of them;
so setting before us the whole mystery of Christ, which it does most clearly
and fully; Insomuch that there is not a line as I may say) in this face, which
is not here drawn forth to the life. All of us then, if we would have a view of
the face of this Son of man, look into this Glass, study the doctrine of the
Gospel, the History, the mystery of it.

2 Wait upon Christ in his ordinances. In his Ordinances.
When the Parents of our Savior had sought him three days, at length they
found him in the Temple, Luke 2. 46. And here, this Son of man shows his face
in the midest of the Candlesticks. Would we see the face of Jesus Christ, seek
him in his Ordinances, in his public worship and service. Here is the face of
Christ to be seen (as I showed you.) Seek his face, says the Psalmist in
that forecited Text Psalm. 105. 4. Speaking of the Arc of the Covenant; where
God manifested his presence. The like does the Lord Jesus now in the midst of
his Ordinances, his Word, his Sacraments. There does Christ show his face unto
his people, communicating himself to them that seek him, in a gracious
manner. Here then seek we his face, and that (as the Psalmist there has it,)
Evermore. Being constant in this our attendance upon the Ordinances of Jesus
Christ. That so we may see him; see him in his Sanctuary; as David says he
did. Psalm. 63. 1, 2. O God, thou a^t my God, early will I seek thee. My soul
thirsts for thee, etc. To see thy power and thy glory, so as I have seen
thee in the Sanctuary. Here had David seen more of God, then elsewhere; in his
Sanctuary, in his Ordinances. And would we have a sight of Jesus Christ, so as
to see his face, seek it in his Sanctuary, in his Ordinances. Where content
not our selves to hear of him, but labor to see him with our own eyes; Yea,
to feel him.

2. That is the second Particular. Answ. 2. Seek the face of Christ that we may
feel it.
So seek the face of Jesus Christ, that we may feel it, or feel of it. Not
contenting our selves with a bare simple intuition, a mere speculative knowledge
of Jesus Christ, but labor also for an Experimental knowledge of him. This is
that superexcellent knowledge which the Apostle speaks of, Phil. 3. 8. I count
all things loss, for the excellency of the knowledge of Christ Jesus. To (...),
put for (...), that knowledge of Christ which is most excellent. And what
knowledge was that? why not merely a Contemplative, but an Experimental
knowledge. So he explains himself in the tenth verse. That I may know him, and
the power of his resurrection. (...), Not only to know by what power it was
that Christ was raised from the dead (as Grotius there so dilately expounds
it,) but to know it in an experimental way, to feel the power and virtue of
Christ's Resurrection, working the like effect in and upon himself, in raising
up him from the death of sin to the life of Grace here, and Glory hereafter.
This is the Excellent knowledge of Jesus Christ. And this let every of us look
after. Not contenting our selves with the bare beholding of this Sun, to see
the glare and shine of it; but labor to feel that (...), that strength, that
virtue wherewith it shines. To find and feel Jesus Christ unto us, unto our
souls, as the Sun is to the Earth. To find and feel his gracious and
efficacious presence with us, putting forth his power and virtue in us, The
operations of Christ to be felt in the soul.
exercising the like Operations upon us, that the Sun does upon the Earth. What
those operations are, I have already showen you. Let me now reflect upon them,
minding you of them again, Exhorting you to endeavor to find and feel every
of them in and upon your own souls.

1. The first is Illummination, Illumination.
Inlightning. This was the Alpha, the first work in the first Creation. God
said let there be light, and there was light, Genesis 1. 3. And so it is in the
second, the new Creation. New creatures must have a new light. Upon the account
whereof they are called, (...) Sons or Children of light, Luk 16. 8. 1. These.
5. 5. Having been sometimes darkness, now they are light in the Lord. Ephesians. 58.
Being called out of darkness into a marveilous light. 1. Pet. 2. 9. And see
that every of you be such. Being co^vinced what by nature you are, not only
dark, but even darkeness it self, wholly in the dark as to what concerns
your eternal happiness, seek after a new light, that you may be enlightened;
that you may see a light shine forth unto you. This was the preparative to
Peter's inlargment [The Angel of the Lord came upon him, and a light shined in
the prison, Act. 12. 7. And so it was to Paul's Conversion; [There shinned
round about him a light from heaven. Act. 9. 3. And the like course God takes
with all those whom he has a gracious purpose toward, to set them at liberty
from the Captivity of Sin and Satan, and to bring them home unto himself, he
causes a light to shine forth unto them, a light from heaven. I mean a
supernatural light, revealing and making known to them that which is hid to
nature; as viz. the Misery of their natural Condition, by reason of sin, and
the punishment due thereunto, together with the means of deliverance by and
through Jesus Christ; as also showing them the way wherein they are to walk,
so as they may please God. Now is it so that any of you are as yet strangers to
this light, (which it is to be feared too many among us are, poor ignorant
Creatures, whose souls are like dungeons, into which the Sun never yet looked,
as dark as midnight, they know nothing of God, of Christ, of themselves,
nothing of the mystery of salvation,) be you awakened to look up and to look
out for it. This is the watchword which the Apostle Saint Paul, (having
received it from some of the prophets) the prophet Isaiah (as it is conceved)
gives to such as were in that dead sleep of sin, Ephesians. 5. 14. Awake thou that
sleep, and stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee light. (...),
he shall shine upon thee, inlighten thee. And let me hand it to every of you,
who are thus asleep. Awake you, and stand up from the dead that Christ may
give you light. Be you awakened and roused out of that bed of sinful
security, wherein you have been sleeping, and being convinced of your own
ignorance and blindness look out for that light of knowledge, without which the
heart cannot be good. That the soul be without knowledge, it is not good
(says the wiseman) Prove. 19. 2. Or (as the former Translation, not without the
consent of the Original reads it,) without knowledge, the mind is not good.
Of what use is a dungeon? fit for nothing but to make a prison of. And such is
a soul without knowledge. And therefore in the fear of God now awake, open your
eyes. Behold, the Sun is up, the Sun of righteousness is risen, the Lord Jesus
shows himself to you in the preaching of the Gospel; do not now shut your
eyes against the light. Men will not do so by the light of the Sun. When that
arises they will not shut their doors and windows against it to keep it
out, but rather set them open to let it in, that they may receive the comfort
and benefit of it. And so do you by that light, the light of the Gospel,
which now shines forth to you. Let it not be said of you, what our Savior
charge upon the Jews, Ioh. 3. 19. That Light is come into the world. and men
loved darkness rather then light. This if you shall do, it will be unto you,
(as our Savior there says it was unto them,) a just Condemnation. This is the
Condemnation.] Were it for heathens, who never heard of the name of Christ to
be ignorant and blind, as to what concerns their eternal happiness and
salvation, this would be some extenuation, as of their sin, so of their
punishment: But for Christians, such as are borne in times and places of light,
having the Sun (as it were) standing over their heads, for them to love
darkness rather then light, still to continue in their natural blindness and
ignorance, so shutting out the light, they are here in (...), self-condemned,
and were there nothing else to be laid to their charg, this is to them a
matter and ground of a just Condemnation. That it may not be so to any of you,
be you persuaded to set open the doors and windows of your souls, and to let
in the beams of this Sun of righteousness into your hearts. Be you enlightened
by the light of the Gospel, which as yet shines forth unto you.

And being thus enlightened now reflect that light. Light received is to be
reflected, how.
So do the Stars. Having received light from the Sun, they reflect it upon the
earth. And the like do you. Having received light from Jesus Christ, show
forth that light, and that by walking as children of light. That is the
Apostles Exhortation to his Epehsians, Ephesians. 5. 8. Ye were sometimes darkness,
but now are ye light in the Lord, walk as children of the light. And let it be
mine to you, All of you to whom Christ has been as a Sun, inlightning of
you, walk you as children of light. Has Christ shined upon you, do you
shine. Arise, shine, for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen
upon thee (says the Prophet to Jerusalem) Isai. 60. 1. And let me in his words
(though happily in somewhat a different sense) speak unto you. Arise you, and
shine, for the light is come, and the glory of the Lord is risen upon you. The
Lord Jesus, who is the true light, the Sun of righteousness, he is risen upon
you in the preaching of the Gospel. And therefore do you arise, and shine,
shine as lights. That is Paul's Commendation of, or Exhortation to his
Philippians (for it is read both ways) Phil. 2. 15. Ye do shine, or shine ye,
as lights in the world. And this be you also exhorted to do. The night being
spent, and the day come unto you, do you cast off the works of darkness, and
put on the armor of light, (as the same Apostle exhorts his Romans. Romans.
13. 12.) Those sinful ways and courses which heretofore you have walked in
(which may fitly be termed works of darkness, in as much as they both
proceed from darkness, and tend to darkness; proceed from the darkness of
ignorance, and tend to the darkness of Hell, whither they will bring them that
go on in them) lay them a side, cast them away. Putting on the Armor of light,
that bright shining Armor, Even the graces of the Spirit within, shining forth
in an answerable Conversation without. Thus, Let your light shine before men,
that they seeing your good works, may glorify your father which is in heaven,
(as our Savior presses it, Math. 5. 16.) Here is the first of these
Operations. Inlightning.

2. The second is Enliuening. Vivification.
This also does Jesus Christ (as I have shown you.) Being like the Sun, the
fountain, as of Light, so of Life. In him was life. Ioh. 1. 4. As Natural, so
Supernatural life, both Originally in him, as in the fountain. Having then
received the former, seek also the later from him. That living the life of
nature in him, ( In him we live Act. 17. 28.) So we may live the life of grace
by and through him: finding and feeling him living in us. Now I live (says the
Apostle) yet not I, but Christ lives in me. Gal. 2. 20. Thus the Sun lives in
the plant, vertually, by causing it to live. And O that Jesus Christ may thus
live in every of us! by communicating unto us his quickening Spirit, whereby
being raised from the grave of sin, we may live unto God; living the life of
grace.

Which that we may be made partakers of, be we united unto him. No life from
Christ without union with him.
All Communion is from union. And such is the Communion which the members of
the mystical Body have with their Head, it flows from that Union which they
have with him. Being made one with him, they come to participate of what is in
him. Now this Union is by and through faith. Hereby Christ comes to dwell in
the soul. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by faith. Ephesians. 3. 17. And
dwelling there he communicates, and gives forth this quickening spirit to
believers, whereby they come to live. Thence says the Apostle of his new
life; The life which I now live, I live by the faith of the Son of God, (...)
for (...), not only in the faith, that is, in the hope and assurance of
obtaining eternal life which Christ has promised (as Grotius expounds it) but
by the faith, this being the isntrumental cause of that life which he then
lived. Being by faith United unto Christ, he came to be made partaker of that
new life, whereof Christ was the root and spring, even the life of grace. And
in this way seek you this life. Being convinced that by nature you are dead,
dead in trespasses and sins, and so unable to do any thing as of your selves
toward your quickening, come unto Jesus Christ that you may have life from him;
never giving rest unto your souls until you find this new life begun in
them, that you can say with the Apostle. Now we live.

And having received a Principle of Spiritual life from Jesus Christ, Spiritual
life, as begun, so maintained and increased by Jesus Christ.
then look unto him both for the preserving and increasing of it. Both these
does the Sun to the plant; having quickened the seed, it maintains that life,
and increases it, until it come to full maturitie and perfection. And for
both these look we unto this Sun of righteousness the Lord Jesus; that having
received such a principle of Spiritual life from him, we may through the
continued efflux of that Spirit of his, have that life preserved and maintained
in us, which otherwise of it self is ready to dye. And not only maintained but
increased. I am come that they might have life, and that they might have it
more abundantly (says our Savior speaking of his Elect, all true believers.)
Ioh. 10. 10. that is, that that spiritual life, which they have received from
me, may always increase in them, until it come to its perfection, till grace
be swallowed up of glory. This benefit have believers by Christ. He being the
Author, he is also the finisher of their faith (as the Apostle describes him.
Heb. 12. 2.) And so of all other graces. And therefore look we up unto him for
this: every day (as it were) fetching new life from Jesus Christ. This does the
plant. Drooping in the evening, in the morning it receives a new life from the
Sun, to which lifting up the head, it looks. And thus, do we feel any
decaying or weakness of grace. look we up unto the Lord Jesus, who is full of
grace (as Saint John says of him Ioh. 1. 14. As full of grace as the Sun is of
light. To him lift we up our heads, looking unto him by faith, that so of that
his fullness we may receive grace for grace, (which the same Apostle there says
all true believers do, verse. 16.) One grace after another, and one degree of
grace after another, until we shall have (...), Graces answerable, and in some
measure proportionable to those graces that are in Christ, and in the end for
the grace of free Justification receive the grace of Eternal Glorification (as
that Text is by some expounded) Here is the second of these Operations.

3. The third is Chearing, Consolation.
Refreshing. This operation has the Sun upon herbs and flowers. And the like
has Jesus Christ upon the hearts of his people. He is their Comforter. And
here seek we our Consolations. Not from Creatures; which what ever they be,
are but like the Stars, which though they be many yet they give but a dim
light. Such and no better is the Comfort which the Creatures are able to yield.
Though a man be surrounded with never so great a conflvence of them, yet is it
but a poor comfort which they are able to afford him. If the Sun be absent, it
is night for all the Stars. True comfort not to be found in the creatures.
And so is it with the soul; what ever other comforts it enjoys without
Christ, it is but in a sad condition; And so it will be found, when God comes
to open the eye of it, so as to make a man truly apprehensive of it, Now, for
all those sparks, he sees himself in the dark. And therefore think not to
derive true comfort from them.

Nor yet from any thing in our selves, Nor in a man's self.
our own Righteousness, our own graces or works, what ever we have done or
can do. The Lord speaking by the prophet Isaiah to the Jews concerning their
false-confidences, Isai. 50. last. Behold (says he) all ye that kindle a fire,
that compass your selves about with sparks, walk ye in the light of your
fire, and in the sparks that ye have kindled. This shall ye have of mine hand,
ye shall lie down in sorrow. They hearing the Judgments of God denounced
against them by the Prophets, comforted themselves with their vain
apprehensions that they should escape those evils by their own wit and policy,
their Arts and Inventions. These were the sparks which they compassed
themselves about with; seeking comfort from them. Even as men in a cold wet
winter season gather sticks, and make a fire of them to warm themselves with.
But what says the Lord? This shall ye have at my hand; ye shall lie down in
sorrow. What ever they fondly flattered themselves with, they should find this
in the end, that notwithstanding all those false fires, they should wander in
the dark, meeting with nothing but perplexity and confusion in the end. And no
better may they expect and look for, who seek for comfort from any thing in
themselves, from their own good works, works of righteousness, or holiness
which they have done, trusting in them and resting upon them, let them look to
lie down in sorrow in the end. They who shall make a fire of these sticks to
warm themselves by, may well expect the like event to that which happened to
Paul, from that fire which he, having gathered a bundle of sticks, made to
warm himself withal after his shipwreck, out of which there came a Viper and
seized upon him. Act. 28. 3. Such will be the issue of those false confidences
which men place in, and comfortes which they take up from their own works
without Christ, they will prove dangerous, and if not shaken off, deadly to
them.

And therefore renouncing our selves, All true comfort to be sought from Christ
with all sublunary comfortes, as to any trust and confidence in them, seek we
the warmth of comfort from this Sun, from the face of Jesus Christ. Here is the
fountain of all true Consolation. If there be any consolation in Christ (says
Paul to his Philippians) Phil. 2. 1. Supposing that to be the choicest,
cheifest consolation. And so it is. Even as the warmth of the Sun excels the
warmth of what ever fire; which of what ever materials it be made, yet is it
not so kindly, so chearly, so comfortable, as that warmth which comes from the
Sun. Nor yet is it so durable. The warmth which a man receives from the fire
in the winter season it is presently gone, so as he returns to his former
temper again, nay is the colder after it, and for it. Truly so is it with the
Consolations of this world, they are fading, vanishing; though the heart may
thereby be cheared for a time, yet they afterward leave it sad, yea sadder
then before, especially where there has been any inordinacie in the use of
them. A truth which needs no other proof but the experience of those, who
solace and drown themselves in carnal pleasures; when they have spent the day
in them, their hearts are often sad and melancholy in the evening, the cause
whereof is, because they find themselves gulled and deceived by them, not
meeting with what they expected, finding only a shadow, where they looked for
a substance. But it is otherwise with the warmth of the Sun. That, as it is a
kindly and comfortable, so it is a lasting and durable warmth. And such is that
Consolation which a Christian has in and from Jesus Christ. It is a sweet, a
substantial, a durable, lasting, everlasting, Consolation. That is Paul's
Epithet, 2 These. 2. 16. (...), Everlasting Consolation! O let every of us
seek after this Consolation; that we may but see the face of Jesus Christ
shining upon us through the promises of the Gospel, so as we may have
assurance of our interest in him, and his love to us, being able upon good
grounds to say with the blessed Apostle, that, We live by the faith of the Son
of God, who has loved us, and given himself for us. Gal. 2. 20. this will be
to us a spring of Consolation, a comfort both in life and death. I pass to the
fourth and fifth particulars, of which briefly.

4. The Sun makes plants and trees to fructify. Fructification.
And this benefit also seek we from this Sun, the Lord Jesus; that by and
through his spirit we may be made fruitful in every good work (as the Apostle
prays for his Colossians. Col. 1. 10.) This it is to walk worthy of the Lord
(as he there speaks.) And hereby shall we evidence our union with Christ, and
interest in him; our being in him, and his being in us. He that abides in me,
and I in him, the same brings forth much fruit (says our Savior) Ioh. 15.
5. This God expects at the hands of all those upon whom the name of Christ
is called; specially from those (to whom Christ is more clearly revealed, upon
whom his face shines in the preaching of the Gospel.) And that is our
condition. This Sun stands over our heads. See that our fructification be in
some measure answerable to the means enjoyed.

5. Again, Purification.
the Sun (as you have heard) purifieth the Air. O that we may all of us find
and feel the like efficatious operation of this Sun of righteousness the Lord
Jesus upon all our souls! That his Spirit may be to us a purifing; Sanctifing
spirit; purging and purifing our hearts from these sinful and inordinate
lusts, ^mpure and corrupt affections, which do in any kind^ anoy them. This is
the proper work of ^he spirit of Jesus Christ, which being a pure and holy
spirit, makes the soul where it comes a (...) lodging for it self, by
clensing and purifing (...) (in measure) from all spiritual anoyances. O that
we may all of us find this blessed Operation! That we may feel Jesus Christ
thus coming to us by water. Which he does wherever he comes by blood. This is
he that comes by water and blood (says Saint John) 1. Ioh. 5. 6. washing away
the filth of sin by his Spirit, where he takes away the guilt of it by his
blood. Every of us who would be assured of the one, labor to find and feel
the other.

Thus seek we the face of Jesus Christ, Christ to be felt, as the Sun in his
strength.
that we may not only see him, but feel him; feel him to us as the Sun, as
the Sun shining, yea (which is yet behind) as the Sun shining in his strength.
Exercising those other Powerful Operations upon us. Of which briefly.

1. Dissipating and dispelling of what ever mists of Ignorance, Dispelling
mists of ignorance infidelity.
or Infidelity, or inordinate fears which lie upon our souls. Such mists the
best of Gods Saints are here subject to. Being sometimes exercised with fears
and doubtings, touching their spiritual and eternal condition. Such a conflict
we find the holy Psalmist ( David or Asaph, uncertain whether) under; Psalm.
77. Where we may hear him sadly complaining of Gods casting him off verse 7.
and of the failing of his promise verse. 8. of his forgeting to be gracious
unto him, and shutting up his tender mercies in anger against him verse 9. And
Heman the like, Psalm. 88. 14. Where we may hear him after the like manner
expostulating the matter with God, Lord, why castest thou off my soul? why
hidest thou thy face from me? A good man under a sad desertion. And such
temptations are the dearest of Gods Saints subject to, which lie as mists upon
their souls, clouding and darkning of them, bringing them into, and holding
them in a disconsolate condition. Now for the dissipating and dispelling of
these, look we up unto Jesus Christ by faith, earnestly begging that he would
show us his face, causing it to shine forth to us as the Sun in its strength;
clearing up unto us the evidences of his love and favor toward us, Confirming
in us our faith. This is the boon which the father of that Demoniack beggeth
from our Savior Mark. 9. 24, Lord I believe, help mine unbeleife. And the
Disciples put up the like request, Luke 17. 5. Lord increase our faith. And
thus feeling the infirmity and weakness of that grace in our selves, seek we
the Confirmation and Augmentation of it from Jesus Christ, that by the clear
revealing and manifesting himself to us he would dispell all mists of
Infidelity.

Secondly. Thawing and melting of the heart.
Thawing and melting our frozen hearts, not suffering them to lie under any
sinful obduracie, but bringing them to, and keep them in a melting, relenting
frame and temper; making them truly tender (as Iosia's heart is said to be 2
Chro. 34. 27.) So as they may always be ready and willing to yield to what
ever impressions the Spirit by the word shall make upon them.

Thirdly. Warming and heating it.
And lastly, warming and heating of them with the sense and apprehention of his
love, so as (with Mary) we may feel our spirits rejoicing in God our Savior;
joying in him in all estates and conditions; doing what the prophet Habakkuk
resolves upon, Hab. 3. 17, 18. Although the figtree shall not blossom, neither
shall fruit be in the vines, etc. Yet will I rejoice in the Lord, I will joy in
the God of my salvation. In all conditions, when all other comforts fail, yet
there is matter enough of Joy in the Lord Christ; as when the Candles are all
blown out there is light enough in the Sun: Rejoice we in him. Seeking how to
make answerable returns unto him. Answering his love with love, loving him
above all; which who so does not, Saint Paul has denounced an Anathema
Maranatha upon him, If any man love not the Lord Jesus let him be had in
execration even unto the death. 1 Cor. 16. 22. And loving him, be Zealous for
him. Zealous for his truth, Zealous for his worship and service, Zealous for
his honor and glory. Thus labor we to find and feel these and the like,
efficatious and powerful operations of this Sun of Righteousness. The
appearing of Christ not to be feared by those who have felt these his powerful
operations.


Which whilst we do, now fear not the rising of this Sun, the coming and
appearing of the Lord Jesus at the last day. Which indeed unto all his enemies
(as I showed you,) both open and secret, shall be a terrible appearing, in so
much as they shall not be able to abide it. So says the prophet Malachie
concerning his first coming, Mal. 3. 2. Who may abide the day of his coming?
Which to others will be terrible.
and who shall stand when he appears? Such was the day of his first coming,
his coming in the flesh, a dreadful day to obstinate and obdurate sinners, for
whom it had been better he had never come. How much more the day of his second
coming, his second appearing, when he shall come like the Sun in his strength,
in the glory of his power and Majesty; come purposely to render vengeance to
them that would not know and acknowledge him, nor obey his Gospel. Then shall
all the kindreds of the earth wail because of him (as you have it verse. 7. of
this Chapter. Rev. 1.) Then shall the sinners in Sion be afraid, fearefullness
shall surprise the Hypocrites (as the prophet speaks) Isaiah 33. 14. And why?
Because then they shall be discovered. That shall be a day of Revelation, when
God shall bring to light the hidden things of darkness, and make manifest the
counsels of the hearts of men (as the Apostle has it, 1. Cor. 4. 5.) Then
shall all masks and vizardes be pulled off. And then shall they, who have here
stood out against the Government of Jesus Christ, would not stoop to his
scepter, to be guided by his word, they shall be dragged before his dreadful
tribunal, Christ's second coming to believers a joyful day.
brought to appear before the Judgment seat of Christ, that they may receive
the things done in the body (as the same Apostle tells them 2 Cor. 5. 10. So
terrible shall that his second appearing be to all his Enemies. But to others,
who have here owned him in the Relations of a Savior and Lord, it shall be a
joyful day. Such was his first coming to these that believed on him. So it was
to Abraham, who only saw it afar off, by faith in the promise; your father
Abraham rejoiced to see my day, (so our Savior tells the Jews) Ioh. 8. 56. And
so it was to John the Baptist, who being then in his mothers womb yet leaps for
joy at the salvation of Marie, Luke 1. 41, 44. by a secret sympathy exulting
in the Incarnation of Christ. And the Angel bringing the tidings of the
Nativity unto the shepherds, tells them. Behold I bring you tidings of great
joy which shall be to all people, Luke 2. 10. The greatest Joy that ever
sounded in the ears of men or Angels. Such was his first coming to all
believers. And such shall his second coming much more be unto them. When they
shall see their King coming to them, not as he did to Jerusalem in that mean
and despicable garb, but in his glory, coming with clouds (as the seventh
verse of this Chapter has it,) sitting upon them as on a throne of glory, his
face shining like the Sun in his strength, this shall be a joyful and a happy
day to them; all them, who having been in their measure made comformable to him
here, shall then be transformed into his Image. When he shall appear, we shall
be like him, for we shall see him as he is, 1 Ioh. 3. 2. Having been like unto
him in grace, we shall be like him in glory. When Christ who is our life shall
appear, then shall we also appear with him in glory Col. 3. 4.

And so have I now done with this verse. Wherein we have met with three sacred
Emblems, The, Mystical Stars, Sword, Sun; the first in the Hand, the second in
the Mouth, the third in the Face of this Son of man, the Lord Jesus; Each
holding forth unto us many useful truths and some of them very seasonable for
the present times. My prayer shall now be that they may be in like manner
profitable to you, to whom they have been delivered.

FINIS.
Reader, besides some other Literal and Punctual mistakes, pardon and Correct
these more considerable Errors of the Press.
FIrst Part. p. 2. l. last, Errata to the three Sacred Emblems.
for Mysteries. r. Ministers. p. 3. marg. r. ^aspidefulvo p. 4. l. 14. dele, as
p. 17. l 13. r. affectionate, p. 19. l. 17. r. as he. p. 25. l. 22. r. am less.
l. 24. r. far the least, p. 32. l. 14, r. (...). p. 33. l, 3, for cumbring, r.
combining, p. 35, l. 24. dele, have. p. 37 l. 6. dele, little, p. 40. l. 21. r.
(...). p. 46. l. 17. for twice, r. choice. p. 50. l, 11. r, his Ministers. l.
15. r. Ambassadors are, p. 56. l. 27. r. mission. p. 57. many r. doing his
will. p. 62. l. 21. r. tells us, p. 64. l. 18. dele by p. 20. for reports r.
respects. p. 65. l, 6. r. but not. l. 8. for see r. be, l. 11. r. says our.
Part 2. p. 2. l. 7. r. (...). l. 12. for his r. a. l. 21. dele. story. l. 28.
for Engine r, Ensign. p. 3. l. 22. r. (...). l. 26. r. th^s King, p. 4. l. 11,
r, Etymologist. l. 28, r. Virga oris. l. 30, for life r. lips. p. 7. l, 2. r.
(...) l. 17. r. like as. l. 20, r. Simeon. p, 8, l. 28. marg, r. The word
doing. p. 9. l. 22, for part, r. that, l. 25. r. it is called, p, 10. l, 28,
for needs r. meets. p. 11, l* 6. for sword r. word p. 13. l. 10. del. that,
p, 14, l. 13, r, This is also the, p. 16. l. 9, r, in and by. p. 17, l, 22 for
change r, challenge, ibid. r. to a p. 19. l 3. r. did those. p. 21. l, 22. r,
his truth, p. 22. l. 6. for blinded r. blended. l. 26. r. two hinges, p. 23. l.
4. r, will be, l, 16, for first r. such. p. 25. l. 8. r. the directions, p, 26,
l, 30, del. not. p. 27. l. 32, for put r, pass, p. 28, l, 9. r. O that l, 20,
r, so here p, 29. l, 5, r, the effectual l. 9, for communication, r,
compunction. p. 30, l, 4, for then r, never. Part 3. p. 1, l, 3, r, Son of man
p. 2. l, 14, del, are l, 16, r, over his Church, p, 3. l, 5. r, far surpassing
l. 19. r, In the third place, p, 4, l, 25. r. far exceeding. l, last, r.
Interpreter p, 5, l. 28, r, as it is conceived p, 6, l, 8, r, may seem, p, 7.
l, last, r, Bagnalim, p. 8, l, 1, r* Baal-Perazim l. last, r, false. 10, suns,
pmarg. r. (...), p. 13. l. 27. r all which l, 29, r, Thus is, p. 14* l, 16
marg. del. reason* l, 27. r, Thus Jesus p. 16. l. 8. r, the light of glory p,
18. l* 24, r, Isai 61, p, 19, l 2, r, puts p. 26, l, 17. for answer. r,
consume p. 27. l, 2, r. (...) p 29. l 5 for bottom r, bosom, p. 30, l, 26. r,
gives p, 37, l, 9, r, too dilutely expounds p, 44, l, 6, r, salutation.

TEARS FOR JERUSALEM; OR The compassionate Lamentation of a tender hearted
Savior over a rebellious and obdurate people. A subject entered upon on the
late day of solemn Humiliation, December 6. 1655. afterward prosecuted, and
now published, as useful at all times, but very seasonable for the present.

By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel at Great Yarmouth.

Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
your children,

Luke 23. 28. LONDON, Printed by I. L. for Tho. Newberry, 1656.

To the Mourners in Sion, Such as being truly sensible of, are cordially
affected with the present sad and calamitous condition of the Church of God in
the Island of Great Britain.
(Much esteeemed in the Lord.)
THe last year, I sent forth a Groan, a Groan for Israel; I now here second it
with Tears, Tears for Jerusalem. And whether there be cause for both these, I
appeal to you, whom God has in any measure made sensible of the present state
of the land of your Nativity, and specially of the Church therein. When
Nehemiah heard that sad report concerning Jerusalem, that the remnant which
were left therein were in great affliction and reproach, and that the Wall
thereof was broken down, etc. It came to pass (says he) when I heard these
words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned, Neh. 1. 4. And is not this the
Condition of the poor Church of God among us in this Nation at this day? Is not
the Wall thereof broken down? All Church Government levelled? By reason whereof
all kind of dangerous and damnable Errors and Heresies, and enormious
practices, with unbrotherly and unchristian divisions, have broke in upon us,
to the rendering of us a scorn and derision to the Nations round about. Thus
does Englands sore run in this night of her Affliction, and cease not, her
calamity every day increasing. And yet (which is no small addition to her
misery,) how few are there who so lay it to heart, as to seek out for cure and
remedy? Nay, how many who refuse it being offered? not enduring to hear of any
such thing as Church Government. Insomuch as the servants of God, some and many
of them, may take up the like complaint concerning this Nation, that Babylons
friends once did concerning her (Ier. 51. 9.) We would have healed her, but
she is not healed. Nay, that which is far worse, she refuses so to be. So
deplorable, and almost desperate, is her condition now become. Now in this case
what shall Sions friends, do? What? desert and forsake her? This indeed is the
resolve of Babylons friends there. Let us forsake her (say they,) and let us
go every man into his own Country, for her Judgment reaches unto heaven, and
is lifted up unto the skies; They will give her over, and every one shifteth
for himself. But far be such thoughts from all the servants of God in this
Nation. How ever (it must be acknowledged) they have cause enough to fear the
event, having so many sad symptoms before their eyes, yet (not knowing but
that there may be hope in Israel concerning this thing) let them not in the day
of her adversity forsake their Mother, in whose womb they were conceived, and
whose breasts have given them suck; But let them with faith and patience, yet
look out, look up (for from thence must come Englands cure,) being importunate
with the God of Israel, that he who has in his just judgment for our
unfruitfulnesse, broken down the hedge of his Church amongst us, so as the Boar
out of the wood does waste it, and the wild beast of the field does devour it,
would in his free grace and mercy, return and look down from heaven, and visit
this vine, and the vineyard which his own right hand has planted. Which that
all may be excited to do, is the design of this small Treatise. To which end if
it may be in any degree serviceable to any. I have that I aimed at. In the
hopes whereof I rest,

Great Yarmouth, Feb. 2. 1655. Your Brother and Companion in the Kingdom and
Patience of Jesus Christ, John Brinsley.

TEARS FOR JERUSALEM; OR The compassionate Lamentation of a tender hearted
Savior over a rebellious and obdurate people.
Luke 19. 41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over
it.

42. Saying, If thou had known; even thou, at the least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes.


THis portion of Scripture I now take up, The text upon what occasion tak^ up.
not that I look upon it as Prophetical to England. So indeed it was to
Jerusalem, to which it is, was spoken. I wish it may not be so to this Nation.
But as concerning it both useful and seasonable for the present times, and as
proper to the present occasion as any I can meet with, finding it put into my
hands by that Declaration, which has upon this day called us together, where
we are directed to make this one chief part of our arrand at the throne of
grace, to beg it of God that he would give his people in this nation to know
the things which belong unto their peace, Declaration Novem. 21. 1655.
which is the very thing which our blessed Savior here wishes to Jerusalem,
and that with tears in his eyes. And when he was come near, he beheld the City,
etc.

In the words we have a short History, reported only by this one Evangelist,
Division.
setting forth unto us the Passionate lamentation of our blessed Savior over
Jerusalem; wherein the occasion of it, Parts three.
the expression of it, the ground or cause of it. We may take notice of three
things.

First, the occasion of that lamentation; his approaching and beholding of the
City [ And when he was come near, and beheld the City.]

Secondly, the expression of it, by tears [He wept over it.]

Thirdly, The ground or cause of it; the sad state of the City in regard of a
twofold evil, the one of sin, the other of punishment: of sin, the stupidity
and blindness of the inhabitants of that City in not laying hold upon the
offers and tenders of grace and mercy held forth to them. [ If thou had
known, etc.] The punishment first generally declared [But now they are hid from
thine eyes] Then more particularly explained in the verses following. These are
the severals, some of which I have now to deal with. Begin with the first. The
occasion of this lamentation.

And when he was come near, Part 1. The occasion of this lamentation.
he beheld the City] So he did, and that Oculis tam animi quam corporis, with
the eye both of his body and mind. With the eye of his body he beheld the
place. And beholding it wept over it. Thus is the eye of the body oftimes as a
window to let in affection and passion into the soul. The eye lets in affection
to the heart.
Love and hatred, joy and grief, they often enter at this door. Among other; in
this way is pity and compassion often let into the heart. The good Samaritane,
he saw the man that was fallen among thieves; And when he saw him (says the
text) he had compassion on him, Luke 10. 33. And thus our Savior here saw the
City of Jerusalem, and when he saw it, he was thus affected with it. Seeing
it, as with his bodily eye, so with the eye of his mind, considering the state
and condition of it.

Q. But what was it that he there saw, What Christ looked upon in Jerusalem,
that so affected him.
or looked upon that did so affect, and move him.

A. Why, first with his bodily place, The City it se^f, magnificent for
structure.
the City it self; where he beheld as goodly a prospect as the earth could
afford. A magnificent City, beautiful for situation. Beautiful for situation,
the joy of the whole earth, is mount Sion, Psalm. 48. 2. Beautiful for edifices
and structures, which were rich and stately. Among which the Temple rebuilt by
King Herod was the most sumptuous and magnificent pile; that then the world was
owner of. So as had there been nothing else, this alone had been enough to move
compassion; to think that so goodly a City as that, should within a short time
be ruined: such stately edifices laid level with the ground. This is conceived
to have affected the Disciples of Christ, as the story sets it forth, Matthew.
24. 1. His Disciples came (says the text) to show him the buildings of the
Temple. This they did, as by way of admiration, being much taken with the rich
magnificence of the structure, so also out of pity and commiseration, in as
much as their master had but a little before given them a hint of the
destruction thereof; cap. 23. 38. [Behold, your house is left unto you
desolate] intimating that both the City and Temple should be destroyed.
Hereupon they now showed him the buildings thereof, as pitying that sad fate,
that so stately a fabric should be ruined. This moved them; And I will not say
but it might also at the present affect their master, when he had this goodly
prospect in his eye: to think what afterward he speaks verse 44. that the
enemy should lay that City and Temple even with the ground, not leaving one
stone upon another. This possibly might move some compassion in him.

But this was but the least grain in the balance: There were diverse other
considerations besides this of greater importance, which our Savior might then
have in his thoughts: As viz.

In the second place, The number of people devoted to destruction*
the number of people in that City, which was great and populous. All these
generally he looked upon as destinated to ruin and destruction either by sword
or famine or pestilence (Gods three stringed whip,) Magis tamen subversionem
planxit animarum quam ruinas parietum: Carthus ^d lot.
or by exile, or else miserable slavery. And this questionless, could not but
much affect him. So it did in another case, as the Evangelist reports the story
once and again, Matthew. 9. 36. When he saw the multitude he was moved with
compassion in them because they fainted, and were scattered abroad as sheep
having no shepherd. And again, ^ap. 15. verse. 32. he tells his Disciples: I
have compassion on the multitude, because they continue with me now three days
and have nothing to eat. Thus did he pity the condition of the people, having
compassion both on their souls and bodies; the one because they wanted
instruction, the other because they wanted refreshment. How much more then
might this stir the like affection in him, when looking upon this populous
City, he considered how many were like to perish in that desolation which hung
over the head of it. As it is reported of that great Commander Xerxes, that
from a hill beholding his numerous Armies consisting of some hundreds of
thousands of able fighting men, and considering how that with in a short time,
40. or 50. years, not a man of them should be left alive, he could not refrain
from weeping. And even alike consideration might here draw tears from the eyes
of our blessed Savior; Which also himself gives a hint of in that 44. verse
after the Text, where speaking how the City should be laid level with the
ground, he adds, and thy children within thee.] meaning that they also should
perish, the very little ones being (as the Psalmist says of the Babylonians,
Psalm. 137.) dashed against the stones.

Thirdly, The quality of the people: Gods people.
To this (in the third place) add the quality of the people, which as they were
numerous, so also they were a select, a choice people, Gods people. A people
whom God had chosen out of all the nations in the world; whom he had adopted,
and taken into Covenant with himself. To whom belongs the adoption and the
Covenant (says that Apostle, reckoning up the privileges of the people,) Romans
9. 4. Now that they through their own ingratitude and obstinacy in refusing the
offer and means of grace held forth to them, should perish so miserably.

This (as Calvin notes upon it) could not but exceedingly affect him who came
into the world to seek and save them. Q^um populum qui in spem vita ae^ernae
ad^pius (...), suae ingrati^udine and ma^i^ia misere perire videret, nihil
mirum si lachrym^s non tenuit. Call. ^d. loc.
This thought exceedingly affected the blessed Apostle, as he tells his
Romans, Romans 9. 1. 2. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, etc. That I have
great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart.] viz. for his countrymen
the Jews; to think of their obstinacy, and consequently their rejection. So it
follows. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.] So was Paul affected with the
miscarriage of that people, that he could even have wished the greatest of
evils to himself, so as he might have prevented it in them. And the like
thought (no question) could not but exceedingly affect our blessed Savior, to
think that such a people, the hope of the world, the only people in Covenant
with God at that time, that they should miscarry, they should perish

Fourthly, Jerusalem the (...), the head city upon which the whole Nation had a
dependence.
To this add (in the fourth place) that that City as it was the Metropolis, the
head City of the Kingdom of Iudaea, so the whole Kingdom was concerned in it,
and depended upon it. Yea, the whole Nation of the Jews. As it went with that
City so it was like to go with the whole body of that nation. If that
miscarried, it could not but prove fatal to that whole kingdom, and to all the
people of God in it, who had all an adventure in that bottom, nay were
themselves imbarqued in it. And so were like to swim or sink with it. As it was
with Babylon, being the head City of the Persian Monarchy, the peace of the
whole Kingdom and all the subjects in it depended upon that; And therefore the
Prophet advises the Jewish captives, to seek the peace of that City, and to
pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace, Jer.
29. 7. Even thus was it with Jerusalem.

Yet again (in the fifth place;) Jerusalem the City of the great King, the city
of God.
This City it was the City of the great King, so called by the Psalmist, 48. 2.
The great King; but what king? why not only the City of David (as it is
sometimes called, Luke 2. 4. 11.) the Emperial City, where David and his
successors had sat upon the throne for many Generations, almost five hundred
years together before the Captivity of Babylon. There are set thrones of
judgment (says the Psalmist) the throne of the house of David, Psalm. 122. 5.
Not only so, but it was the City of the great King, of the King of heaven, the
City of God. So our Savior means it, Matthew. 5. 35. where forbidding to swear
by Jerusalem, he gives this reason for it, for it is the City of the great
King, i.e. of God. So the Psalmist explains himself in the 8. verse of that
psalm, (Psalm. 48.) As we have heard so have we seen in the City of the Lord of
Hosts, in the City of God. As also in the first verse, God is greatly to be
praised in the City of our God. So was Jerusalem, There God dwelt. The Lord
has chosen Sion, he has desired it for his habitation; This is my rest for
ever, here will I dwell, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. This was the place, the only place
upon earth, where God manifested his presence in a fixed and constant way. Here
formerly was the Ark of the Covenant, the pledge and token of Gods presence;
The glory of Israel, and of the world, and therefore called, The glory. Romans 9.
4. Here was the Sanctuary, where God dwelt betwixt the Cherubins, and from
whence the light of salvation went forth unto all the world. This was urbs
sacris dicata (as Grotius says of it) a place dedicated to the worship and
service of God, a place which God had chosen to put his name there; the place
whither the tribes came up to worship, Psalm. 122. 4. where the Ordinances of
God were set up in their glory, majesty, and held forth in a public way. So
as, this place miscarrying, it could not but go ill with the Churches of God,
and with the Religion of God.

And this it was (as Gualter and Calvin note it upon the Text) which above all
other things our blessed Savior took to heart. Quum expenderet illam divinitus
electam esse sacram sedem, in quae resideret salutis aeternae foedus;
Sanctuarium unde prodiret salus salas toti mundo, fieri non potuit quam ejus
interitum graviter* doleret* Call. ad loc.
The other considerations might move him, but this above all, to think that
that place, which God had made choice of to put his name in, where he had
dwelt, where his Temple, Part 2.
the place of his public worship was, that that should be brought to such a
miserable desolation; The expression of Christ's compassion, by weeping.
as he by the eye of his divinity saw to hang over the head of it; Lachrymae
sunt legati doloris. Cyprianus lib. Ep. 7.
this, this it was that pierced his heart, and stirred up his compassions in
him, drawing tears from his eyes. When he beheld the City, he wept over it.

Wept over it] There is the expression of his compassion. Let me touch upon
that also, Weeping a passion not unsuitable to Christ. Mutarunt homines
temerarii and delicati, quibus flere Christo indignis videbatur Grotius at Text.
and I shall put the application of both these together.

He wept] This Passion some look upon as unsuitable to the person of Christ. And
thereupon (as both Beza and Grotius take notice of it from Epiphanus) in diverse
of the ancient Copies this passage was left out. Gorranus ad Text. and alli.
Alii septies Chri^^um flevisse a^^erunt: Gerhard Harm. ad loc.
But without any just cause. To hear of Christ's weeping, is not such a rarity,
that any should boggle at it. Four several times (says one Writing upon the
Text) we read hereof. The first at his Nativity, his Birth. For this he cites
that Apochryphal Text, Wisd. 7. 3. Where wisdom (whereby he understands
Christ, who is so called, Prove. 8.) says, that she was Borne crying and
weeping, as all other do. Thus Infants are commonly born, crying; whether
weeping or no, I will not say. And thus that pretended Solomon is conceived to
set forth the birth of Christ, who was therein conformed to the rest of the
sons of men. But that (being Apocryphal) I leave it, as I find it, uncertain,
so as it may be believed or rejected without any prejudice to the faith. The
three other are clear. The first, at the raising up of Lazarus; where we read,
Joh. 11. 53. And Jesus wept. The second here, in this his Procession to
Jerusalem (as he calls it) He wept over it,] The third and last in his
Passion in the Garden, concerning which the Author to the Hebrews tells us, that
he offered up prayers and supplications, with strong cryings and tears, Heb. 5.
7. Thus (says he) did our blessed Savior, who was the fountain of life, water
the world with his tears, which he compares to the four Rivers, which went out
of Paradise to water the earth. But letting that pass, as more witty then
weighty.

Weeping (we see) was no new or strange thing with our Savior. That ever he
laughed, that we read not; that he wept we meet with it more then once.

Q. But it may be said; Why Christ lamenteth what he could have remedied.
Wherefore should our Savior here weep over Jerusalem? what ever calamities
he saw impending, hanging over the head of it, he could have prevented them, if
he had pleased. And why then does he lament that, which with a word he was able
to have remedied?

A. To this it is answered: To show the truth of his humanity.
First, This he did, to show the truth of his humanity: Carne
humanacircundatus, vere humanos induit affectus, Call. ad loc.
Taking upon him our nature, he took upon him also all Passions and Affections
common to that nature. Being made like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted, (as the Apostle has it, Heb. 4. 15.) subjected to all our not sinful
infirmities. Thus he slept, eat, and drank, which the nature of man requires.
And thus we read that he was weary, hungry, thirsty; and thus he wept. All to
show himself truly man; and that, together with our nature, he had also taken
our Infirmities (as the Evangelist Saint Matthew has it, Matthew. 8. 17.)

But secondly, Hereby he testified his affection toward those for whom he was
made man, To testify his affection to the Jews.
and for whose sake he came into the world. Hoc fletu testatus est fraterne se
diligere eos in quorum gratiam fuerat homo factus, Calvin ad Text. Viscera
misericordiae suae per fletum osstendit. Theophil. ad loc.
This he did first for the Jew; I am not sent save only to the Lost ^^eepe of
the house of Israel (so he tells the woman of Canaan) Matthew. 15. 24. His arrand
was first to the Jews, to seek and save them. And hereby he expressed his
indeared affection unto them. This was the contrition which the Jews made of
his weeping over Lazarus his grave. Behold, how he loved him (say they) Ioh.
11. 36. And the same construction may we make of this his weeping over
Jerusalem. Hereby he showed that tender affection which he bare unto them, and
the desire which he had of their welfare and happiness.

Q. But if he loved them so, Why did he not then help and save them.
why did he not help them? Why did he not divert those inpending evils? This
had been a greater expression of love to them, to save them, then to weep over
them.

A. True, as God he could have helped them. Christ here in acts as man.
He could have prevented all those evils and miseries. But we must here look
upon him as acting the part of a Mediator. In the execution of which office the
Divine nature often rested, and hid it, not putting forth that power which
otherwise it could. Thus in his Passion the Godhead slept, while the Manhood
suffered. And thus here, the Divine nature rested, while the humane acted. And
he acting according to that nature, lamenteth the miseries of (...) people,
which in respect of his absolute power, as God, he could have prevented. He
could have done it, but he would not. And why? Because he came not to do his
own will, but the will of him that sent him. As he came to preach his Word, not
his own, My doctrine is not mine own, but his that sent me, Joh. 7. 16. So he
came to do his work, his will, not his own. I seek not mine own will, but the
will of the Father which has sent me, Joh. 5. 30. Now this was the will of the
Father, that that ungrateful people refusing and rejecting his Son, and the
offer of grace and mercy through him, should smart for that their ingratitude.
And this he, as man, here lamenteth and bewaileth, weeping over them. [When he
saw the City, he wept over it.]

And what shall we observe from hence that may be useful to our selves? Obs.
Why here see, Christians to be tenderly affected toward the Churches of God.
what affection there ought to be in all those that profess the name of Christ
toward the Church and people of God. How they ought to be affected, deeply
affected, with their miseries, their calamities. So was our blessed Savior, as
we see, with Hierusalems. Foreseeing that calamity which hung over the head of
it, the thought thereof melts his heart, and wrings tears from his eyes, He
wept over it. (...) (says the Original) which word coming from (...) (as the
Etimologist tells us) which signifies to break, it imports a breaking of the
heart with sorrow, which dissolveth it self into tears. And like affection
should there be in all Christians. It is that which Paul presses upon ^is
Philippians. Let the same mind be in you, which also was in Christ Jesus, Phil.
2. 5. Now what mind was in him we see. He was affected not only with his own
private condition, but with the condition of others. He not only wept when the
bitter cup was coming toward himself, but he did the like when he saw it
coming toward Jerusalem. And let there be the same mind in all the Lords
people. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others; So the Apostle there presses it in the verse foregoing, (verse. 4.)
Thus should Christians look upon the condition of others, specially of the
Church and people of God, with an affectionate eye: as rejoicing in their
welfare, so condoling their misery and calamity. The Churches misery to be
mourned over.
So should they look upon private persons, pitying them in their misery. Have
pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends (says Job to his kindred) Job
19. 21. much more upon the Church. Not looking upon her calamity with delight,
as a pleasing spectacle. So indeed the Edomites are said to have looked on the
day of their brother, Obad. 12. When their brethren the Jews were carried into
captivity, they rejoyed at it; but this was in them barbarous inhumanitie, for
which the Lord there threatens to be, even with them, verse. 15. As thou have
done, it shall be done unto thee; But with pitiful and compassionate eyes and
hearts, mourning over their miseries, whether present or imminent, felt or
found.

Thus shall we find the Saints of God to have been affected. That of Jeremy is
well known ^ho wishes his head waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that
he (...) weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of his people, Jer.
9. 1. So great was his compassion toward the people of the Jews, that he
thought he could never sufficiently bewail the miseries, which by his
prophetical eye he saw ready to befall them. So was he affected therewith as if
they had fallen upon himself. So he expresses (...) in the chapter foregoing,
(cap. 8. verse. 21.) For the hurt of the daughter of my people, am I hurt (I am
broken, his heart was broken) I am black (like a mourner clad in sable, or I am
in heaviness) astonishment has taken hold of me] Like affection, like
compassion ought there to be in all Christians toward their brethren; they
ought to sympathize with them; Weeping with them that weep, as the Apostle has
it, Romans 12. 16. Christians to mourn for those who do not mourn for themselves.


Yea, weeping for them, whilst it may be they do not weep for themselves. This
does our Savior here for Jerusalem. They thought their state and condition
good and happy. Being not sensible of the evils which hung over their heads,
they were not affected with them. I, but our Savior who foresaw those
judgments as God, he weepeth over them as man. Thus should Christians be
affected with those judgments of God which they foresee ready to fall upon
others; they ought to mourn for them. This will the Prophet Isay do for Moab,
as himself most pathetically expresses it. Isai. 15. 5. My heart shall cry for
Mo^^, cap. 16. 9. I will bewai^ with the weeping of (...) the vine of Sibma; I
will water thee with my tears O Heshbon. Again, vers^ 11. My bowels shall sound
like a harp for Moab^ i.e. with pity and compassion. And the lik^ will the
Prophet Jeremy do. Therefore will (...) homle for Moab, etc. Jer. 48. 31, 32.
Now were the Prophets of God thus affected with the condition of Moab, who were
strangers, nay enemies to God and his people. O how ough^ Christians to be
affected toward Jerusalem, toward the Church and people of God?

Great reason why they should mourn wit^ them, Reas. Christians members of the
same body.
for them. In as much as they are member^ of the same body. Now such a sympathy
(...) know there is betwixt the members of the natural body. If one member
suffer, all the members suffer with it, (as the Apostle observes) I Cor. 12.
26. And such a sympathy there ought to be betwixt the members of the Mistical
Body.

Appli.
That it should be so I presume it will readily be granted. But then, The
present times to be mourned over.
why is it not so? Let that be the first branch of the Application. How is it
that there are no more mourners in this our Sion? Surely it is not for want of
just cause of mourning, I presume that among those who are most in love with
the present times, yet there are none that so doat upon them, but they will
acknowledge there is yet somewhat among us, which deserves both sighs and
tears. So much that Instrument which has this day called us together has
proclaimed to the world. And surely so we shall find it, if we seriously
consider the state of things both abroad, and at home.

Look a broad, In regard of the state of the Church abroad.
we may see or hear of that which deserves to be laid to heart. The sad state
of our poor persecuted brethren in Piemont; whose condition not long since has
been recommended to the needful charity of this Nation. As also that hand of
God which has lain so heavy upon our neighbors on the other side, where the
destroying A^gel has been, and yet is at work, doing sad executions. To which
I might add the present state of our brethren in Scotland.

But we shall not need to go abroad: The presen state of England a matter of
just lamentation.
It was that which our Savior said to the woman of Jerusalem, whom he saw out
of a feminine temper, and some of them happily out of affection unto himself,
lamenting him going to his Passion. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for your selves and your children, Luke 23. 28. And truly the like may
be said unto us at this day; weep not so much for others as for your selves.
Such is the state of this nation that if rightly considered, it may be
conceived to deserve a weeping over* which that you may be brought to do, let
me desire you to approach and take a veivv of it. This it was that drew tears
from your Saviors eyes, viz. his approaching and beholding of Jerusalem. When
he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it That you may be like
affected toward this your native country; let me give you a sight of it:
Which I shall do in a three fold prospect, Englands condition looked upon three
ways.
desiring you to look upon it these three ways; considering what it was, what
it is, and what, unless God be pleased graciously to step in by a timous
prevention it it is like to be.

First, What it has been.
What it was, how happy under that long continued peace, which for so many
years together it enjoyed, to the admiration, if not envy of other Nations. But
again how unhappy under the late Civil Commotions, which like a fire breaking
forth in our own bowels, what sad devastations did it make, to the effusion of
much precious blood, which is yet so fresh, as that the memory of it cannot but
deeply affect the hearts of all those who bear any true love to the land of
their Nativity. Such it has been.

Secondly, But what is it? What it is.
Here I shall not go upon any private account, whether my own, or yours; which
if I should, I might draw up a large Catalogue of sins and judgments, under
which at the present this nation lies, and groans, deserving to bewept over.
Set forth in the late Declaration,
But I have a public one put into my hand. That Declaration which has
occasioned this our meeting, I find it taking notice of three or four
particulars. Besides the late Rebukes, (those I suppose received on the other
side of the world, Iamaika,
where not a little English blood was shed, to the no small dishonor of the
Nation, which has not been acquainted with such repulses ( The tares of
Division, Abominable blasphemies, Dreadful appostacies, Four particulars justly
to be mourned over,
with the Impediments of Settlement and Reformation. These are held forth as
the just occasions and grounds of this days Humiliation. And truly if rightly
looked upon, as we see a reality in every of them, so we shall find that there
is never a one of them but gives the people of God to do over this Nation,
what their blessed Savior here did over Jerusalem to weep over it.

First, Tares of division,
The tares of Division, which vvhilest the Husbandmen slept, the envious man
has sown; and that so thick, as the whole field is over run with them,
insomuch that they threaten to eat out the heart both of Church and State,
Divisions of all sorts. Divisions both of Heads and Hearts, in jugdement and
affection, in Church and State. So as it may now be said of the people of
England as once it was of Israel, Hosea ^. 2. I Their he arts is divided. God
haing taken away his spirit of unity and concord from them he has given them
over to Seditions, Factions, Sects, and Schisms: And is not this a just cause
of mourning? Such are divisions in the State* (In or for.) The divisions of
Reuben there were great thoughts of heart, Judge. 5. 15. Much more in the
Church. O what means that noise of Axes and Hammers in the Temple? In the
building of it there were none of these heard, 1 King. 6. 7. Surely this is for
the breaking down of the carved work thereof at once, Psalm. 74. 6.

Secondly, Abominable blasphemies.
Abominable blasphemies; And those not only the sudden eruptions of profane
and impious tongs, by cursing and swearing, for which the Prophet says the
land of Israel mourned, Jer. 23. 10. But deliberate blasphemies, studied and
resolved blasphemies. Blasphemies against Jesus Christ, and against his holy
Spirit, divesting both of their Divinity; denying the satisfaction of Christ;
blasphemies against Scriptures, Ordinances, Ministry; even spitting in the
face all religion. And is not this a just ground of mourning? The Jews of old
never heard a blaspemous word, but their manner was to rend their garments, 2
King. 18. 37. 19. 1. Matthew. 26. 65. Act. 14. 14.) O what cause have Christians
then to rend their hearts at the hearing and seeing of such blaspemies, as
daily fly abroad among us! The like whereunto are not to be found in Rome it
self, though she be the mother of abominations, Revel. 17. 5. And has the name
of blasphemy written upon her forehead, Rev. 13. 1. 17. 3.

Thirdly, Dreadful apostasy.
Dreadful apostasy and backsliding among many, who being like stars fallen from
heaven; fallen from their Principles into dangerous, destructive, desperate,
damnable errors and heresies, have not only forsaken, but also persecute that
truth, and that way, which themselves before made profession of and walked in.

Fourthly, The hindrance of settlement and reformation.
And (in the last place) The hindrances of settlement and reformation in the
Church. This the people of God in this Nation have desired, looked, longed for,
earnestly wrestling with God and man for the obtaining of it. And they
conceived to have had some return of their prayers in a hopeful beginning of
it. But now, how are all those hopes dashed? Reformation being turned to
Deformation: the walls of Jerusalem being broken down, and no Nehemiah as yet
undertaking the rebuilding of them. And are not these just grounds of mourning?
A sufficient cause why they who wish well to Jerusalem, to the Church of God in
this Nation should with their Savior here, weep over it? Such is the present
state thereof.

Thirdly, What like to be.
Beyond which if it be lawful for us to look, what can we see or expect,
unless God in mercy step into us by way of a gracious prevention, but even
Jerusalems fate, utter ruin and destruction? were there no other but the first
of these, those many and sad Divisions which are on foot, daily increasing
among us, what do they presage? If we know it not, let our Savior tell it us,
Mark 3. 24. If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom cannot
stand. And the naturalist will tell us ^o less. Cor divisum mors est; If the
heart be divided the body cannot live.

Now then having thus approached to and looked upon this Nation, what remains
but that our eyes should move our hearts to pity and compassionate it, to mourn
over it. Little else it is that private persons can do. And this let them do.
Preces and Lachrymae, Prayers and tears are the Churches weapons, which every
one both may, and ought to make use of. And this let us, as at other times, so
this day do. All of us pouring forth our souls before the Lord in an humble
confession of our own sins, and the sins of the Nation which have justly
deserved, what ever we either feel or fear begging it from him, that he would
graciously return unto us, undertaking the Cure of this Sin-sick nation,
healing our breaches; sanctifying and removing the judgments which lie upon
us, diverting those which further threaten us: yet showing us his salvation, in
carrying on that great and blessed work of Reformation, in despite of all
opposition from those accursed Balaamits, whether Romes emissaries, or others,
who seek and endeavor to frustrate it, setting up the kingdom of his dear Son
among us in a right way, so making us yet a people to praise his name.

Thus have I done with the two first of these particulars. The third is yet
behind, which my eye is principally upon, which we have in the verse following.

VERSE XLII. Saying, If thou had known; even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace.]

A Most Affectionate and Pathetical Exclamation; Part 3. The cause of Christ's
weeping. Pathetica est ratio, ideoque abrupta Calvin ad loc.
and therefore abrupt and defective. Such oftimes are the speeches of men in
Passion. Specially in the passion of grief and sorrow; wherein oftimes Vox
faucibus haeret, the tongue cleaves to the roof of the mouth, not able to
express and utter what is in the breast. Sorrow is a compression of the heart;
whereas joy does dilate and open it: grief does compresse, Passionate
expressions often abrupt.
congeal and straighten it, so as that which is within cannot readily get
forth. Hence is it that the expressions hereof are abrupt and broken. And such
is our Saviors here in the text. His heart being full of grief and sorrow for
the sin and misery of this people, he expresses himself in such an abrupt and
broken way. If thou had, etc. so leaving it with an Aposiopesis, a
Reticentia, keeping in what should have made the sentence entire and full.

This defect is variously supplied by Expositors: The defect here how supplied.
By some thus. If thou had known, etc. Known so well as I, thou would have
wept as well as I. By others thus. If thou had known, etc. thou would not
have done as thou have done; thou would not have gone on to die and perish in
thy sins. By others thus. If thou had known, etc. thou would have hearkened
to my counsel, thou would have been more studious of thy peace. By Beza and
Piscator (with whom I choose to go along) thus. If thou had known, etc. Quam
foelix esses and beata. How happy and blessed then might thou have been! But
this he leaves out beaking off bruptly; which he does to intimate the
greatness of his affection, to show how earnestly he both wished their
good, and bevvailed their misery. If thou (or O if thou as the former
Translation has it) had known; (...). Obser.


Behold here then the affection of a tender hearted Savior toward an
obstinate and unworthy people. Christ's affection to an unworthy people the Jews.
The people of the Jews a rebellious people. A people that had deserved as ill
at the hands of Jesus Christ, as ever people did, o^ could have done. They had
abused his messengers, his Ministers. They had killed his Prophets, and stoned
those whom he sent unto them (as he charge it upon them, Matthew. 22. 37.) And
they intended to do no less to himself. They had already rejected him, and all
the offers of grace and mercy which he had made unto them. So unvvorthy of all
grace and favor were they. Yet see how he pitieth and compassionateth them;
how earnestly he wishes their welfare, how passionately he bevvails their
misery. Oh if thou, etc.

Like affection shall we find the Lord elsewhere expressing to this people,
breaking forth sometimes into such affectionate exclamations, professing his
earnest desire of their happiness and welfare. So he does, Deuteronomy. 5. 29. O that
there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their children
for ever! And again, Deuteronomy. 32. 29. O that they were wise, that they understood
this, that they would consider their latter end! How should one chase a
thousand, etc. elsewhere we find him bewailing their obstinacy and misery, as
Psalm. 81. 13. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in
my statutes! I should soon have subdued their enemies, etc. And the like Isai.
48. 18. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments! then had thy peace been
as the river, etc. Thus does the Lord as it were bewail the obstinacy, and
lament the misery of that people, wishing it had been otherwise with them. God
not taking pleasure in the death of sinners.


So far is he then from taking pleasure in the death and destruction of poor
sinners. This do tyrants sometimes, they take pleasure in their bloody
executions, feeding their eyes therewith, as with pleasing spectacles, But so
does not our God in the destruction of his creatures. To this purpose that of
the Prophet Ezekiel speaks fully, Ezekiel. 18. 31, 32. Where the Lord bewayling
the perverseness of the people of the Jews in running on headlong to their own
destruction, he expostulateth the matter with them, verse. 31. Why will ye die O
ye house of Israel! then he professes that he was not delighted iu their
destruction, or the destruction of any other, verse. 32. I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dyeth] No, though wicked persons, and so most worthy to
die, yet God takes no pleasure in their death. So he elsewhere explains it,
Ezekiel. 33. 11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked.

Object. Why, How God wills the death of the wicked.
but does not God will the death of the wicked?

Answ. True, he wills it, but he takes no pleasure in it. He wills it as
an act of Justice, ordaining them to just condemnation for sin. But he is not
delighted in their destruction, their misery. Even as a just, but merciful
Judge, he pronounces the sentence of death upon a guilty malefactor, but it
is with tears in his eyes. God is delighted in mercy, mercy pleases him, (as
the Prophet has it, Micah. 7. 18.) but so does not the misery of his creature.

Let it be taken notice of by every of us. Appli.
Not to the end that we should abuse this mercy, Gods grace not to be turned
into wantonness.
turn this grace into wantonness (as Saint Jude says of some in his time did,
Jude 4.) taking occasion thereby to go on and continue in sin. What shall we
say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. (says
the Apostle) Romans 6. 1. Shall we therefore go on to provoke this God because he
is so compassionate toward us, so loath that we should perish; what were this
but to abuse this his lenity and goodness to our own just condemnation? But
on the other hand, let this goodness of God lead us unto repentance. Gods
goodness leading to repentance.
This is the right use of it, (as we may learn from the same Apostle, Romans 2.
4.) Be we hereby provoked to break off the course of our ways provoking sins,
and to come in unto this God by serious and unfeigned repentance. This use will
an ingennous child make of the indulgent affection of a tender hearted parent.
When he sees the bowels of his father or mother yearning toward him,
bewailing his destructive courses, if there be any spark of ingenuity left,
this cannot but work upon his heart, and make him think of betaking himself to
a new course, which may be pleasing and contenful to so affectionate a parent.
Behold thus is our heavenly Father, and thus is our blessed Savior affected
toward poor sinners. And therefore let it have the like work upon every of us,
to provoke us to break off those sinful ways and courses, which are so
offensive to those pure eyes; and come in unto our God by serious and unseigned
Repentance.

So doing, Christ still retaining the same affection toward poor sinners.
now doubt not but we shall have comfortable experience of his grace and mercy.
What, was the Lord Jesus so affected toward a stubborn and rebellious people,
that he so earnestly wishes their good, and so passionately bewaileth their
calamity, and will he not show the like affection to poor penitent sinners?
such as by coming unto him seek for mercy from him? Surely the Lord Jesus has
carried his bowels to heaven with him; still retaining the same affection
toward poor sinners that here he had upon earth. How ever he be not capable
of expressing it in the like way: He can hence forth weep no more; All tears
being wiped from his eyes, as they shall be from the eyes of all his Saints,
when they shall be translated to that blessed and glorious condition. Yet
still he retains the same affection toward poor sinners. He that wept over
Jerusalem here, wishing that it had been otherwise with them then it was,
and was like to be, he does earnestly desire that those tears, and that blood
which he here shed in the days of his flesh, may be made effectual for the
washing away the sins of poor sinners; Which also they shall be to all those,
who turning away from them, come unto him, receiving him as their Savior and
Lord. But I shall not any longer dwell upon this; which I take up from the
general consideration of the words, or from the manner of speaking.

Come we now to the matter; The matter of this lamentation; where the evil
lamented, Aggravations of it.
taking a nearer and more particular veivve of this Lamentation. Wherein we
shall take notice of two things: the Evil of sin it self which our Savior here
bewaileth; and secondly the Aggravations of that evil. The evil bewailed is
their stupidity, their not knowing of what belonged to their peace. The
aggravations of that evil are two, the one taken from the persons, the other
from the time. The persons who were thus stupid Jerusalem. [If thou, even thou]
The time, the day of their visitation [At least in this thy day.] These are the
severals, we have now to deal with. The evil lamented.
Begin with the first. The evil lamented; their not knowing the things which
belonged to their peace.]

Here, Expli. Three things.
by way of explication three things are to be unfolded. 1. What is here meant by
peace. 2. What were those things which belonged to Ierusalems peace. 3. How it
is said that they did not know those things.

Q. For the first, What here meant by peace; viz. All kind of happiness.
by Peace here understand we prosperity, felicity. So the word was familiarly
used among the Hebrews. In as much as Peace is a comprehensive blessing, they
set forth all blessings under this. Thus in their ordinary salutations they
were wont to wish Peace. Peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thy house, and
peace be unto all that thou have. It is the salutation which David sends to
Nabal, 1 Samuel 25. 6. And thus our Savior sending forth his Apostles, he puts
this word into their mouths, directing them to salute the families where they
came after that manner, with an apprecation of peace. Into whatsoever house ye
enter, ye shall first say, Peace be to this house, Luke 10. 5. i.e. all kind of
happiness. And so look we upon the word here in the text. By peace
understanding here all kind of felicity; Omnes foelicitatis parts (as Calvin
has it) all the parts, and kinds of happiness. Happiness both present and
future; temporal and eternal.

Q. 2. But what were the things which belonged unto this their peace. What were
the things which belonged to their peace; viz. Christ and his Gospel.
A. (...), why, in one word, Christ himself, and the doctrine of salvation by
and through him Christ and his Gospel. These were the things which conduced to
their peace, to the making of them a happy people, and that both here and
hereafter. Other things there were, which in a Political and civil way might
have tended to the outward peace, the temporal prosperity of that place. But
none like this, none like Christ who is the Prince of peace, Isai. 9. 6. And
our peace, Ephesians. 2. 14. In him is the salvation of a people bound up. This it
is which makes a people truly happy: The knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And this knowledge the inhabitants of Jerusalem were destitute of. They
neither did, nor would know this their Peacemaker. Moses they knew, he being
read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act. 15. 21. But Christ they knew
not.

Q. 3. But what did not they know him? had they not heard of him? How they are
said not to know these things, viz. in not owning of Christ.
Nay had they not both heard and seen him? heard his Doctrine, seen his
Miracles? A. True, but they did not receive him. He came unto his own, and his
own recived him not, Joh. 1. 11. He came unto his own, to Israel his own
peculiar people, to the land of Canaan his own Country, he being of the seed
of Abraham, to Jerusalem his own City, he being the Son of David, but they
received him not, they would not own him, they would not acknowledge him to be
their Messiah; they would neither believe on him, nor submit unto him. This it
is truly to know God and Jesus Christ, To know God and Christ, what.
to know them in an affectionate way. Not barely to know and believe that there
is a God, and a Christ; no nor yet to know that Jesus is that Christ. This
knowledge the Devils had and have. I know thee who thou art, even that holy one
of God (says that unclean spirit to our Savior, Mark 1. 24. But to know them
affectionately with a knowledge of approbation. So the word ( knowing) in
Scripture is frequently used. In this sense Saint Paul says of himself, Romans
7. 15. that the things which he did, he knew not. So the Original has it,
(...), I know not, meaning (as our Translation gives the sense of it) that he
did not allow, or approve of them. In this sense God is said to know, or not to
know men. If any man love God, the same is known of him, 1 Cor. 8. 3. that is
approved of him. Verily I say unto you^* I know yon not (says the Bridgroome
to the foolish virgins, refusing to own them, Mat. 25. 12.) And in this sense
man is said to know God and Jesus Christ. This is life eternal, to know thee
the only true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, Joh. 17. 3. O
righteous Father the world has not known thee, verse. 25. Now in this sense
the inhabitants of Jerusalem did not know Jesus Christ. A general knowledge
they had concerning the Messia, that he should come. And many of them might
know Jesus, but they did not know him to be the Messia, they did not
acknowledge him to be the Christ.

Q. No (it may be said) did not they acknowledge him? Christ acknowledged by a
small party.
What meant then that Acclamation of the people who at this time brought him
into Jerusalem in triumph, as Saint Matthew more fully reports the story, Mat.
21. 8. where he tells us how a very great multitude spread their garments in the
way, etc. And they cried, Saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; Blessed is he
that comes in the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Now did not they
own, and acknowledge him. How is it then, that he here exprobrates them with
their disowning, sleighting of him?

A. To this it is answered, By whom it was.
True, Christ was thus acknowledged by some and many at this time. But by whom
was it? Probably by some of the neighboring villages not by the inhabitants of
Jerusalem. So much seems to be intimated in the tenth verse, where it is said,
when he came into Jerusalem, all the City was moved, saying, who is this? To
whom the multitude which came along with him return answer, This is Jesus the
Prophet, etc. But again, However some there were in Jerusalem, that did so
acknowledge him; so did the Children in the Temple, A party inconsiderable both
for quality and number.
which sung the same song, Hosanna to the Son of David, verse. 15. yet who, or
what were they? No considerable party whether for quality or number. For
quality, they were such as were of no account, being of the vulgar and meaner
sort; Not any of eminent place, whether in Church or State that appeared any
more for him. Have any of the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? (say
the chief Priests to their Officers, Joh. 7. 48.) At that time when those
Queristers sung that Antheme in the Temple, it is said, that the chief Priests
and Scribes were sore displeased, Matthew. 21. 15. And it was no otherwise with
the body of the people, who were generally led (as for the most part they are)
by the example of their Rulers. They did not receive him and his Doctrine. And
this it is which here he so passionately bewailes in them, that they had not
done it, and so affectionately wishes that they had done it. Obser.
O if thou, etc.

Lo then, How deplorable a thing it is, for a people not to receive Christ and
his Gospel being offered and tendered unto them. Not to receive Christ and his
Gospel, a most deplorable thing.
This is the observation I am now to prosecute. For a people not to receive
Christ and his Gospel, not to give entertainment to the messengers of peace not
to embrace the offers of grace and mercy, being held forth unto them in the
preaching of the Gospel, this is a most sad and deplorable thing. This is the
thing which our Savior here so passionately laments and bewails. And the same
we find him doing again elsewhere, Mat. 23. 37. where he breaks forth into
the like pathetical exclamation. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have
gathered thy children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her
wings, and ye would not.] O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! the word is doubled to
intimate the strong affection of the speaker. How often would I have gathered
thy children? meaning the people of the Jews, whose mother City was Jerusalem.
This he had attempted by sending his messengers, his servants unto them, then
coming himself, to admonish them, warn them, exhort them, so striving to bring
them to faith and repentance, that so they might have been sheltred from the
wrath of God, and secured from those imminent evils which hang over their
heads. But they would not. They rejected the offers of grace made unto them.
And this is the matter of our Saviors, lamentation, the thing which drew these
tears from his eyes. And indeed there is nothing more to be lamented then this.

And will you have the Reason of it, take it from the Text. This is that which
belongs unto the peace of a people.
This is the thing which belongs unto their peace. Upon this it is that the
woe or welfare, the felicity or misery of a people does depend. This is their
making or marring; the receiving or rejecting the Gospel of peace. This being
entertained brings peace along with it. It was the commission and direction
which our Savior gave to his Apostles, when he sent them forth, Matthew. 10. 12,
13. When ye enter into a house, salute it, and if the house be worthy (that is,
such persons as are willing and ready to entertain you and your message) now
let your peace come upon it. Now preach the Gospel of peace to them, and
therewith wish all good and happiness unto them: which also accordingly shall
come and rest upon them. So Saint Luke expresses it, Luke 10. 6. If the son
of peace be there, (meaning such persons as were readily disposed to receive
the doctrine of peace; the Gospel) your peace shall rest upon it, (...), God
will bring upon that family all the good that you wish unto it; your
apprecation of peace shall be as effectual as your preaching of it. Thus is it
with a family, And thus is it with a City, and thus is it with a Nation. The
receiving of the Gospel is the happiness of it.

On the other hand, The rejecting of the Gospel the undoing of a people.
the rejecting of the Gospel is the undoing of a people. So it there follows,
Matthew. 10. 14. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear your words, when ye
depart out of that house, or City, shake of the dust of your feet. This were
the Apostles to do as a token of Gods shaking them off. Even as we read of
Nehemiah shaking his lap, Nehem. 5. 13. Also I shook my lap, and said, So God
shake out every man from his house, from his labor, that performs not this
promise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied. Thus were the Apostles to
shake off the dust of their feet against those that rejected them: Or to shake
their garments at them. So did Paul against the Jews, Act. 18. 5, 6. He
preaching Christ unto them, when they opposed themselves and blasphemed, he
shook his raiment, etc. Thereby intimating not only his deserting, but Gods
rejecting of them. Of such sad consequence is it for a people not to give
entertainment to the Gospel, and the messengers thereof. This lays them under
a curse; rendering them justly obnoxious to the vengeance of God. I shall not
dwell any longer upon Confirmation, or Illustration. Bring we it home to our
selves by way of Application.

Where (in the first place) see we what cause we have to mourn and vveep
over this Nation wherein we live, Applic. A just cause of mourning over this
nation, the slight entertainment given to the Gospel.
wherein Christ and his Gospel have found such slight and slender
entertainment as generally they have done, and yet do. A long time it is that
the Gospel has been held forth among us. Christ has sent unto us his
messengers, the Ministers of reconciliation, offering peace unto us upon Gospel
terms, upon our receiving him as our Savior and Lord. But what is the
reception, what is the entertainment that for the most part he has met with?
Is it any more then a formal reception, a formal profession of his name? This
indeed has generally obtained. The name of Christ is called upon us. But is
not this all? What is there more to be found among the greatest part, but a
naked profession without any power? How few are there that have received Christ
into their hearts? Truth is, our acknowledgment of Christ has been, and is
generally more in Ceremony then in reality. Not unlike that of the Jews, many
of which at his entrance here in to Jerusalem, were full of Ceremony and
outward expressions; They spread their garments in the way, as a Carpet for him
to ride upon. They cut down branches of trees, and strowed the way with them,
as tokens of festivity and solemnity. And they cry Hosanna; saluting him by the
name of a Savior. But yet they were far from taking him to be their King. No;
when he was propounded to them under that notion, as he was by Pilate, John 19.
14. the chief Priests make answer for the rest, we have no King but Caesar,
verse. 15. And they who had even now cried out Hosanna, now change their note,
crying out as loud Crucifige, Away with him, away with him, Crucify him. And
is it not so with the greatest part of this Nation? In a formal way they have
acknowledged Christ for a Savior, complementing him with some Ceremonial
observances (such and no better have been the services which they have
performed unto him, mere shadows without any substance) but as for taking him
to be their King, how are the greatest part resolved with those Citizens in the
Parable, Luke 19. 14. Nolumus regnare, we will not have this man to reign over
us.

And O what a sad and deplorable thing is this! Calling for deep lamentation.
what cause have we to sit down and weep over England upon this account? This
was the thing which belonged to our peace. Had we thus received Christ and his
Gospel, had we yielded up our selves to be governed and regulated by his Laws,
how happy a people might we then have been? Then might we have hoped that God
would have subdued our enemies, and turned his hand against our adversaries:
Then had our race been as a river, and our righteousness as the waves of the
Sea (as the divine Psalmist and Prophet have it in the places forecited, Psalm.
81. 13. Isaiah 48. 18.) Then had there been peace within our walls, and
prosperity within our Palaces. But sleighting and rejecting him, not submitting
to his Government; not to his outward Government (which the greatest part stand
out against; having cast off those golden reins, they will not now endure any
Government in the Church;) much less to his inward Government, to rule in their
hearts; what evil have we cause to fear? Nay, what may we not fear?

In the fear of God let this be seriously laid to heart by every of us this
day. We see how our blessed Savior laid to heart this wretchlesness in
Jerusalem. How he lamenteth over it, for it. O if thou had known the things
which belong unto thy peace! And have not we just cause to take up the like
Lamentation over this Nation! O England! if thou had known in this thy day
the things which belong unto thy peace, O how happy, how blessed had thou
been! But now, what God intends toward thee, who knows? Should he remove thy
Candlestick, take away the Gospel from thee, (which is cause enough to fear;)
should he bring the like evils upon thee, as our blessed Savior here threatens
against Jerusalem; should he make our Houses, Cities, Temples, desolate; should
he bring utter desolation both upon Church and State; should he give a near and
larger Commission to the Sword to eat fiesh and drink blood, seconding it with
those ordinary attendants (which through a wonderful providence we have
hitherto been freed from;) Famine and Pestilence, so sweeping us as dung off
from the face of the earth, yet must we acknowledge the Lord to be just and
righteous.

In the humble acknowledgment whereof, Use. 2.
let all of us seriously set our selves for the diverting and preventing of
these Judgments. What to be done for the preventing of judgment. (...) hic est
utinam. Grotius ad loc.
To which end be we admonished and exhorted, yet to hearken to this wish in the
Text. So some here look upon the words in the Text, reading them Optatively,
utinam nosses! O that, or would to God that thou had known! And O that
England would yet hearken to this wish, so as to comply with it! Then which,
what can be more desirable for it? What those things are you have heard; viz.
to receive Christ and his Gospel; to give such entertainment to him and it as
he requires. Now let all of us, as we wish well to our own souls in
particular, and to this Nation in general, seriously apply our selves hereunto.
As yet through riches of grace the Gospel of peace is held forth unto us; As
yet we enjoy the Ordinances of Christ, Word and Sacraments, with liberty and
purity. O let us now make much of them, and make use of them: with holy care
and conscience waiting and attending upon them; thereby making it manifest what
esteem we have of them. Specially endeavoring to profit by them; to find the
power and life of them inwardly in our hearts in the changing and transforming
them, and to express that power in the course of our lives and conversations by
so walking as becomes the Gospel. So doing, now may we yet comfortably hope
that he who does here so compassionately mourn over a rebellious people
rejecting him and his Gospel, will much more pity spare a repenting people
that is willing to hearken to his voice; So pity us, as to turn away those
threatened evils, continuing the Gospel of peace, with the peace of the Gospel
to us and our posterities after us, so long as the Sun and Moon endures.

Thus I have done with the substance of this Complaint, The Aggravations of
this complaint.
come we now to the circumstances; the Aggravations of this Evil. Aggravation,
1.
Which (as I showed you) are two, the Persons and Time. Begin with the former.

If thou had known, The Persons.
even thou] (...). Si vel tu nosses. Si cognovisses and tu. Not, If thou had
even known] (as the former Translation renders it, putting the Emphasis upon
the word, Known) but if even thou had known, with reference to the Persons,
or Place.

Even thou] Thou also (say some) thou Jerusalem, Thou as well as others.
as well as others; as well as this poor troop of my Apostles and Disciples;
Diodate Annot. ad loc.
or as diverse other lesser Cities and Villages have done; or as this company
now does, which acknowledges me to be what I am, crying Hosanna; or as some
other places heretofore have done; some of which have been so happy, as timely
to take notice of what belonged to their peace. So did that great City Nineveh,
at the preaching of Jonah they repented, John 3. 5. whose example elsewhere we
find propounded by our Savior to the Jews, Mat. 12. 41. The men of Nineveh
shall rise in judgment against this generation, and shall condemn it, because
they repented at the preaching of Jonah. And the like had some other places and
persons done. And O that Jerusalem had also done the like! If thou also had
known! Thou as well as others. Or,

Secondly, Thou, rather then others.
Thou rather then others. So Calvin, and diverse other Expositors here conceive
of it. As if our Savior did here compare Jerusalem with other Cities of Judea;
Yea with all other Cities of the whole world. All which Jerusalem excelled in
respect of many privileges! (...)] Vel tu urbs illa supr^ omnes terrae urbes
Dco dilecta, urbs David, urbs Regia, urbs sacris dicata. Grotius ad loc.
This was the City of David, the Emperial City, yea the City of the great King,
the City of God; a City beloved of God above all other places upon the earth;
Coeleste in terris Sacrarium (as Calvin says of it) a heavenly Sanctuary upon
earth; Jerusalem a Non-such in respect of spiritual privileges.
where God had betrusted his Oracles, his Ordinances; where he had manifested
his presence after a special manner, dwelling between the Cherubins, according
to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 132. 13, 14. For the Lord has chosen Sion, he
has desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever, here will I
dwell. Such was Jerusalem, Heavens favorite, Earths Non-such; a City paramount,
preferred and advanced above all other Cities and places upon earth in respect
of spiritual privileges. And this our Savior here takes up as an Aggravation
both of his Sorrow and her Sin. An Aggravation.


Sorrow. Of Christ's sorrows.
Even thou.] As for other places, other Cities, suppose Chorazin, Bethsaida,
Capernaum, the Gadarenes or Samaria, or the like, for any of these to perish
and miscarry as they did, this were no other but a sad thing, deserving to be
lamented over. But that Jerusalem should do so, this went nearer our Saviors
heart then any other. Even as Brutus his stab did to Caesar's, which made him
cry out, (...), and tu Brute; what, thou my son, thou Brutus? Even so did
Ierusalems obstinacy and ingratitude here to our Savior. And thereupon he
cries out after the same manner. (...). Even thou.] Like as it is with a
natural parent, he cannot but be offended with the miscarriage of any of his
children, but that his darling, the son of his delights, whom he has set his
love upon and shown most affection to, that he should miscarry, this goes
near him. So was it with Jacob, when he apprehended some sad disaster to have
befallen his son Joseph, his dear son, the son of his age, to whom he had
expressed more affection then the rest of his Brethren, (as appeared by his
party colored garment) this went near his heart, insomuch that he refused to
be comforted, resolving to go down to the grave to him mourning, (as we have
the story Genesis 37. 3. 35.) And so was David affected with his Absolon; He being
his darling, whom he had tendered and cockered, when he understood what a fatal
end he by his Rebellion had brought himself unto, this makes David break forth
into that passionate Lamentation. O Absolon my son, my son, etc. 2 Samuel 19. 4.
Thus did Ierusalems carriage and miscarriage, her sin and punishment which our
Savior saw and foresaw; affect him more then if it had been any other place. O
if even thou had known]. This was an Aggravation of his Sorrow.

2. And so (secondly) of their Sin. Of her sin.
This also If Even thou.] Thou which have enjoyed such means, so many mercies;
that have been lifted up to heaven, preferred before al places in the world in
respect of spiritual favors and Gospel privileges, that thou should be
thus stupid, thus blind, as not to see, not to regard the things which
belonged to thy peace and happiness, this renders thee of all others most
miserable, and makes thy ingratitude most superlative. So he here charge
this upon them as a heinous aggravation of their Sin, calling for an answerable
Judgment.

And so indeed it is, Obser.
(as Calvin makes the observation) the more means, Means and mercies not
answered, great aggravations of sin and judgment.
the greater mercies a people enjoy, the greater is their sin, and the greater
shall their punishment be, in case they do not walk answerably to them, and in
some measure worthy of them. Mark it, this is the Observation which this
passage naturally yields; Means and Mercies, not regarded, not improved, not
answered, are dreadful aggravations both of Sin and Judgment. For this, express
and full is that obvious Text, Mat. 11. 20. where our Savior breaks forth
into a like Exprobration against those Cities which he had honored with his
presence and doctrine, as here he does against Jerusalem. Then (says the Text)
began he to upbraid the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done,
because they repented not] verse 20. In the verses foregoing he had taxed the
general morosity and frowardness of that people, upon whom no means could work,
neither John's austerity nor his own Comitie; this he does verse. 16, 17, 18, 19.
But now he comes more specially to deal with those particular places, where he
had been most conversant, taxing them as being most faulty of all the rest.
Their sin was greater, and so should their punishment be. So it follows,
verse. 21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty
works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes,] Chorazin and Bethsaida, two Cities
upon the Lake of Gennezareth, where Christ conversed much, taught often,
wrought many miracles; yet they repented not, they were not thereby wrought
upon to embrace the Gospel. What follows? you have it in the next verse, v.
22. I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of
judgment then for you.] At the day of general Judgment, there shall be
appointed unto men different measures of punishment. Now at that day, our
Savior gives them to take notice, that it would go worse with them, who had
rejected the Gospel, then with those that never heard of it, though they lived
more profanely then themselves did* and the like he charge against Capernaum
in the verses following. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven
(lifted up above other places in this temporal condition, i^ regard of wealth
etc.) shall be brought down to hell] depressed, and brought to the lowest
degree of poverty aad misery. So Grotius (not amiss) expounds both these
expressions, looking upon them as Proverbial phrases; Ad astra tolli. Sublimi
feriens sydera vertice.
the one signifying the highest pitch of outward felicity, which is called a
lifting up to heaven; the other the lowest degree of misery, which is called a
casting down to hell. This the Prophet Isaiah speaking of Babylon, Isai. 14.
describes the change of her condition in the like langvage. How art thou
fallen from heaven, O Lucifer; verse 12. Thou have said in thine heart I will
ascend into heaven, I will exalt my self above the stars of God, verse 13. Yet
thou shall be brought down to hell, verse 15. And so Hanna in her song,
speaking of Gods various dispensations and dealings with the sons of men, she
says that he brings down to the grave (Sheol, (says the Original) ad
infernum, (to Hell) and lifts up, 1 Samuel 2. 6. In a like sense says our
Savior here of Capernaum; though she was lift up to heaven, flourishing with
all kind of outward prosperity, being a great Port Town, (not unlike unto this
where we now are) famous for fishing, and other merchandise, yet she should be
brought down to hell, brought to extremity of misery. Which accordingly
afterward came to pass in the days of the Emperor Vespasian, who overran the
whole Country of Galilee, spoiling that place amongst others. And what was the
cause of this so sad a change? why, her not answering the means afforded her;
so it there follows, verse 24. For if the mighty works which have been done
in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day; (In all
likelihood they would have been converted thereby from their wicked ways, and
so have escaped that judgment;) But I say unto you it shall be more tolerable
for the land of Sodom in the day of Judgment, then for thee, verse 24. Sodom,
a place of monstrous and most flagitious wickedness, infamously famous for
those three things, Pride, fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness, Ezekiel.
16. 49. besides many other horrid abominations which were therein, it being a
sink of uncleanness, insomuch that God made it a spectacle of vengeance to all
posterity, destroying it with fire and brimstone from heaven. Yet Capernaums
portion of judgment at that day should be greater then hers. And why so?
Inasmuch as she enjoyed those means which Sodom did not. True, there was a
righteous Lot in Sodom, whose Example might have had some influence upon them;
But in Capernaum was Christ himself preaching unto them, and confirming his
doctrine by miracles. And this it was which aggravated Capernaums sin, and so
heightened her judgment.

Thus the more light, The more light the greater sin.
the more means a people sin against, the greater is their sin. This is that
our Savior says of the Jews, John 15. 22. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin; that is, comparatively, their sin had been nothing
in comparison of what now it is. Express to this purpose are those two known
Texts of the Apostle to the Hebrews; the former Heb. 2. 2, 3. where comparing
the times of the Law with those of the Gospel. If (says he) the word spoken by
Angels (the Law given upon mount Sina by the ministry of Angels, (as it is
commonly expounded) or any other message sent by the Angels (as some conceive
it) was steadfast (was of such force, and authority, that none who violated it
escaped unpunished) and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward; How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him,] that is, the doctrine of salvation, the Gospel, which is
(...), the word of Salvation, Acts 13. 26. being (...), the way of Salvation,
Acts 16. 17. bringing so great salvation as no other way can, even eternal
salvation; which was preached and published first by Christ himself, then by
his Apostles. This doctrine being of such consequence, and so clearly held
forth, it makes the sin of those who shall not hearken to it to be more
heinous then of those under the Law* for which they must expect an answerable
judgment. Consonant hereunto is that other place, Heb. 10. 28, 29. He that
despised Moses his Law died without mercy (the crime being Capital. and so
declared by the Law, it was not in the power whether of King or Senate to
pardon it;) Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall be thought worthy,
who has trodden under foot the son of God, etc. and has done despite to the
Spirit of Grace? Thus sins against the Gospel are greater and more heinous then
those against the Law. The more light the more grace a man sins against, the
greater is his sin, and the greater shall his punishment be.

R: R.
And it must needs be so as Calvin gives the reason of it,) Grace abused a
high contempt.
inasmuch as here is an addition of one sin which is greater then any of the
rest, viz. Sacrilega caelestis gratiae profanatio, a Sacrilegious profaning and
abusing of the grace of God. Of all Sins none more heinous, none so heinous as
this. This is the Attribute, which God is most tender of, his Grace; To have
that slighted, disregarded, trampsed under foot by a contemptuous disrespect,
this is a heinous addition to all former sins and offenses. As suppose a
Malefactor standing guilty of some capital crime, and adjudged to dye, should
so far slight the grace and favor of his Prince, as to reject his pardon
being tendered to him, casting it away, and trampling it under his feet, so not
accepting the benefit of it, who but would look upon this as a high
aggravation of his former offenses, and adjudging him most worthy to die and
perish in that his wilful contempt, and refusal of mercy. Thus stands the
case. All the sons of men standing guilty before God by reason of Adams sin,
and their own, and so obnoxious unto eternal death, it has pleased God out of
his abundant grace and mercy to grant a pardon to all those who repenting of
their sins shall believe on the name of his Son. This pardon he holds forth
in the preaching of the Gospel. Now for any to slight this Gospel, and the
offer of grace and mercy in it, how can this be looked upon but as the highest
contempt, and greatest ingratitude, against the Majesty of God, and as a
dreadful addition to all other offenses, so calling for a proportionable weight
of Judgment? That it is so it cannot, (I presume) it will not be denied. Bring
we it home to our selves by way of Application. Applic.


Let that be directed only two ways, by way of Conviction, by way of
Exhortation.

1. Use. 1.
By way of Conviction, Reflect we upon our selves, Application to the nation in
general. Jerusalem and England pararelled.
we of this Nation, we of this place, in Ierusal^ms glass beholding our own
face; beholding our ingratitude, our sin, what mercies, what favors, whether
temporal, or spiritual, was Jerusalem blessed with which England has not been?
Was Jerusalem lift up to heaven in respect of Spiritual privileges, has not
England been In respect of spiritual privileges.
so? were the Oracles of God committed unto them, and have they not been so to
us? was Christ clearly held forth unto them, and has he not been so unto us
in the preaching of the Gospel, even evidently set forth, and crucified, before
our eyes (as Paul tells his Galathians he was to them, Gal. 3). was Ierusalems
light greater and clearer then that which shone upon other Cities, and has not
Englands light (I may speak it without flattery) out shined the light of any
other Nation in the world? was God pleased to send a continued succession of
Prophets and Apostles unto them, and has he not done the like to us in this
Nation, sent a succession of able and faithful ministers to declare and make
known his mind, and will to us? Thus has England been exalted above other
Nations in regard of special privileges.

To which also add temporal favors, Temporal favors.
which how many, how great? what nation under heaven might compare with England
upon that account? what peace, what plenty of all things? what tranquillity and
prosperity did England for many years together enjoy, to the wonder if not
envy of most other nations. Thus was England for a long time the favorite and
darling of heaven, as Jerusalem.

But now what return has she made of these mercies, Unanswerable returns.
these favors? Is not that too like Ierusalems? Have we not generally been an
ungratful and rebellious people, as they were? A people that have not known the
things which belong to our peace* Temporal, and Eternal? A people which have
not given that intertainment to Christ and his Gospel, that he expected* and
other nations probably would have done? A people that have rather cast off the
yoke of Christ, not enduring his government, any Government that looks like
his; And for our temporal mercies, our peace, our plenty, have we not been even
surfeited with them? have we not waxed wanton by their Abusing our peace to the
making of us secure, settled upon our ^ees; abusing our plenty (as evil
stomachs turn good meats into ill humors,) turning it into pride, Luxury,
riot, and Excess. Thus has this nation under these long continued mercies been
like unto a piece of ground, which being overmanured and grown too lusty, runs
wild, bringing forth a crop of weeds. Thus has this abundance of mercies
amongst us through the abuse of them brought forth abundance of sins. Neither
are we to this day hettered by all those sharp rods, those severe corrections
wherewith of late years God has corrected us, but, Israel like, we even
revolt more and more; as it were hating to be reformed. Such is the requitals
such is the return which England (I speak as to the greatest part therein)
has made unto her God.

And what an Aggravation of her sin is this? That any nation should thus deal
with their God, A great Aggravation of Englands sin.
to walk stubbornly and rebelliously against him, it is inexcusable; but that a
people so favored, so honored of God, as England has been, should do this,
this is a thing which God cannot but take more heynously at our hands, then at
others. So the Lord makes his complaint concerning Israel Isaiah 1. 2, 3. I
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The
ox knows his owner etc. But Israel does not know, my people does not
consider. And may not he take up the like complaint against England? God has
nourished and tendered us as children, yet we have rebelled against him; England
has not known, England has not considered. Now this he cannot but take worse
at our hands, then at the hands of any other nation. (...)! And thou O England,
that thou should do this that thou should make such a return to thy God,
for all his mercies and favors! This is an heinous aggravation of Englands sin.

And aggravating the sin, Threatening a proportionable judgment.
what can we expect but that it should also aggravate thy Judgment? So it did
Ierusalems here. Her sin being upon this account greater then the sin of any
other place, so was her Judgment (as the verses following set it forth.) No one
place that the hand of God fell so heavy upon, as it did upon Jerusalem. And
have not we of this nation just cause to fear the like; that in as much as our
sins have exceeded the sins of other nations, our judgments should exceed also.

And what is said of the Nation in general, Application to the Town of Yarmouth
in special.
let it be applied to this place in special. Upon which it cannot be denied,
but God has bestowed many singular mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal. Among
other, preserving us in the midst of this late fiery furnace, which has burnt
so hot in most parts of the nation; to this day continuing our peace and
liberty, not suffering the sword (though shaken over us) to break in upon us in
an hostile way, as it has don upon ma^y other Cities and Towns. Now shall we
still persist and go on in our sinful provocations, in sleighting of Ordinances,
profaning Sabbaths, abusing creatures, etc. what can we expect but that as our
sins upon this account shall be greater then the sins of other places, who
have not enjoyed the like mercies, so should our judgments be.

Use. 2.
For the preventing of which suffer a word of Exhortation. Exhortation. To
endeavor an answerable return to mercies.
All of us be we excited to endeavor an answerable return to the mercies and
favors bestowed upon us. Public mercies, Private mercies; Spiritual,
Temporal, Take notice of all, and study to answer all: Looking upon these
differencing and distinguishing mercies, as so many obligations, and
Engagements upon us, binding us to duty above others, let it be our care to
walk answerably. In as much as God has been pleased to exalt and prefer us
above and before others, let it be our endeavor to go before others in all
grateful and exemplarie obedience. That so these blessings which through the
mercy and goodness of our God we have, and do yet in so great a measure enjoy,
may not be (what otherwise they will) as so many testimonies against us,
affording matter of a just Exprobration. Which is a sad thing, when God comes
to upbraid a people with his favors.

Mark it. That is Ierusalems case, the Text, to whom our Savior here speaks
(as both Calvin and Beza (taking it from Budaeus) conceive of it) not only by
way of Commiseration, A sad thing for God to upbraid a people with his favors.
but also of Exprobration. As pitying, so upbraiding them. Pitying them in
regard of the Calamity which he saw coming upon them, but withal upbraiding
them with the mercies and favors which God had bestowed upon them above
others, to which they had made a most unworthy return. Even thou!] Thou whom I
have done thus and thus for; thou for whom I have done more then for any other
place upon earth, O, it is a sad thing when God shall come thus to upbraid a
people with his favors.

A thing which he is not ready and forward to do. A thing which he is not ready
to do.
So much we may learn from St. James* Jam. 1. 5. If any man lack wisdom, let
him ask it of God, who gives liberally, and upbraideth not; viz. those who
receiving his blessings thankfully, endeavor to make a right use of them. But
as for those who, being ungrateful for them, shall not walk in measure worthy
of them, them he will upbraid, So he often does ungrateful Israel; as
elsewhere, so Isaiah 5. 1, 2. where comparing Israel to a vineyard, Yet being
provoked by ingratitude he will do it.
he reckons up what offices he had done to it, in fencing, and planting, and
mannuring of it, etc. accommodating it with all necessaries and conveniences.
And this he does by way of exprobration, upbraiding them with those favors for
which they had made so ill a requital. And the like again Ier. 2. 5. Thus says
the Lord, what iniquity have your fathers found in me? etc. Neither said they
where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt; that led us
through the wilderness. And so he goes on, reckoning up the many favors he
had done for that Nation, which he does in an upbraiding way; inasmuch as they
had showed themselves so ungrateful and forgetful as they had done. And the
like does our Savior to those Cities in the Text forenamed, Mat. 11. 20.
(...), He began to upbraid them. Be thankful for, and walk worthy of public
mercies.
O take we heed that we do not give God just cause to do the like by us. And
therefore what special mercies and favors God is pleased to bestow upon us,
take notice of them, be thankful for them, endeavor to walk worthy of them.
This do we for public.

And this do we for private mercies. Is it so that God is pleased to bless any
of us above other of our brethren in any kind. Private mercies.
Be it in our Bodies with health and strength; In our Estates, with larger
portions of this worlds goods, advancing us above the common rank; In our
minds, enriching us with inward gifts and indowments of wit, wisdom,
knowledge, etc. O take we heed that these be not a matter of exprobration to us;
that by our abusing of them, not improving them, not walking worthy of them, we
do not give God just cause to upbraid us with them. Considering that in this
case every of these mercies will be as so many several aggravations of our
ingratitude. This is that which the Lord by his Prophet Nathan tells King David,
2 Samuel 12. 7, 8. Where reckoning up the many favors he had done, and was ready
to do for him; how he had delivered him out of the hand of Saul, how be had set
him upon the Throne of Israel, giving him his Masters House and Wives, and the
House of Israel and of Judah. And (says he) if that had been too little, I
would moreover have given unto thee such and such things; then he comes to
expostulate the matter with him, why he should so deal by his God as had done.
Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in his
sight? Thus God takes the sins of his favorites more unkindly then the sins
of any other. And therefore, is it so that God has indeared any of us to
himself by any special favors, wherein he has preferred us before others, let
us be so much the more watchful and careful over our walkings, that so he may
never take up the like complaint against us, as our Savior here does against
Jerusalem; O that thou, even thou should do thus and thus! This it was that
David took most heinously, that his favorites and familiars should prove
treacherous to him, Psalm. 41. 9. Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I
trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me.] Some of
his Courtiers and friends. Which our Savior applies unto Iudas's dealing with
himself. Ioh. 13. 18. He that eats bread with me has lift up his heel
against me.] This did exceedingly aggravate Iudas's sin. Had some of the
Scribes o^ Pharisees done what he did, it had been no strange thing. But that
Judas should do it; one whom Christ had so far honored as to admit him to so
near an attendance upon his person, to make him one of his Privy Counsel (as it
were) this highly aggravated his offense. O take heed lest the like aggravation
lie against any of us. And therefore, the more gracious God has been or shall
be to any of us, let us be the more grateful, the more watchful, the more
careful to walk worthy of his mercies. I have done with the former of these
Circumstances, these Aggravations.

Come we now to the latter, Second Aggravation, from the time.
which is taken from the Time, and the Season, [In this thy day.]

Q. And what is here meant by Ierusalems day?

A. Day in Scripture it has diverse senses and significations. The word (Day)
explained.
Literally and properly we meet with a Natural day, and an Artificial day. The
one consisting of twenty four hours, the Suns Revolution; the other of the time
of light, from morning to evening. Both which we find in that one verse, Genesis
1. 5. And God called the light day, and the darkness he called night. And the
evening and the morning were the first day. By the first understanding the
Artificial day, by the latter the Natural. But to let these pass as nothing to
our purpose.

Tropically and improperly the word is diversely used.

1. Sometimes for the time of man's life, that space which he lives upon earth.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day (says our Savior to the Jews) John
8. 56. the time of my manifestation in the flesh, and abode upon earth. I must
work the work of him that sent me whilst is day, John 9. 4. that is, whilst I
live here upon earth.

2. Sometimes it denotes the time of grace under the Gospel. So the Apostle is
conceived to use the world Romans 13. 12. where he says, The night is far spent,
the day is at hand.] The night, the time of the Law, which was a time of
darkness and Ignorance, wherein spiritual and heavenly mysteries were all
clouded and veiled under shadows and figures. In opposition thereunto the time
of the Gospel is called, the Day, in regard of the clear manifestation of the
grace of God, and of the mystery of salvation to all sorts, not only to Jews
but Gentiles, And so that other Text of the same Apostle is looked upon, 1
These. 5. 5. Ye are the children of the day; living in Gospel times. As also
that other prophetical Text, Heb. 4. 7. To day if ye will hear his voice,
(says David speaking of the time of the Gospel, as it is there expounded.)

3. Sometimes it denotes any special opportunity, apt and proper season for any
transaction. So that forenamed Text may be understood, John 9. 4. I must work
whilst it is day; that is, whilst I have opportunity. And so that other. To
day if ye will hear his voice; whilst the time and season of grace lasts,
whilst salvation is offered.

4. And lastly, by Day sometimes we are to understand a set time determined and
appointed by God for some special purpose. In this sense we find the word
frequently used by the Prophets.

And in these two last senses understand we the word here in the Text.
Ierusalems Day, what, the time of special grace.
Ierusalems Day was the time destinated and foreappointed by God, and foretold
by the Prophets, wherein the light of the Gospel should shine forth unto her,
and that more clearly then ever heretofore, and the offer of grace and mercy
should be held forth unto her after a special manner. Of this day, this time,
the Prophets make frequent mention. As the Prophet Isai. Chap. 60. 1. Arise,
shine (or be enlightened) for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee. So Zachary 9. 9. Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion, for thy
King comes unto thee. Both which had their accomplishment in the coming of
Christ in the flesh; and particularly in his coming to Jerusalem at this time,
in this manner, presenting himself to it as a King. So he himself applies the
latter of these Texts, Matthew. 21. 4, 5. And hereupon is this here called
Ierusalems day; the day that had been so often foretold; the time wherein God
did offer grace and mercy to her after a more special manner then ever he had
done heretofore. Before he had often made offers of that kind unto her (as to
the whole Nation of the Jews) by sending his Prophets to her. But now he does
it by his Son. So our Savior sets it forth in that known parable of the
Vineyard, Matthew. 21. 33, etc. A certain man planted a vineyard.] This vineyard
was the Church of the Jews (Isaiah 5. 1.) whom God took to be a peculiar people
to himself, performing like offices thereunto that the Husbandman would do to
his vineyard. Being thus planted he let it forth to husbandmen, and went
himself into a far Country;] God seemed to leave that Church wholly to the
care of the Priests. In process of time he sends his servants to the
husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits thereof, verse 34.] God sends
his Prophets to this Church, whom (by the Parable goes on) they beat and slew,
verse. 35. So they did the former Prophets many of them. Again he sent other
servants, more then the first, and they did unto them likewise, verse 36. Before
the Captivity he sent more Prophets to them then formerly, who found no better
entertainment then the former. But last of all he sent unto them his son, verse
37. God the Father sends his Son Christ into the world, with a special message
unto the Jews, to require from them the fruits of all that grace and favor
which had been shown to them. And this was Ierusalems day. The time of special
grace and mercy offered unto them after a special manner* and that by Christ
himself, wherein she had a special opportunity tendered unto her, if she had
but had the wisdom to accept it, to lay hold of it, and make use of it
accordingly. Even the time of her visitation, as the 44th verse after the Text
explains it.

But, hinc illae lachrymae, this was a matter of just lamentation. The day was
come, and even now spent, but Jerusalem had not an eye to see it, a heart to
make use of it. And this it is which our Savior here bewailes in them, and
exprobrates to them; pities them for, and upbraids them with. O if thou, even
thou had known, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace.]

At least] There is yet a further Emphasis in that Interjection. At least] what
it here imports.
(...). Et quidem in hac die tua (says the vulgar) even in this thy day. Hoc
saltem tuo die (says Beza, whom our Translations follow) At least in this thy
day] That is; though thou have along time stood it out, refusing and rejecting
many offers of grace, yet O that at the length thou were wise^! Or [If at
least] If after that thou have slain so many Prophets, so many servants of
mine, which have been sent unto thee with conditions of peace, yet thou
would receive me their Master, harkening to the message which I bring. Or,
[at least] If after all the unkind and ungrateful repulses which my self has
hitherto met with, by thy obstinate rejecting of my Person and Doctrine* yet if
now at the length in this my last Expedition, the last journey that ever I
shall make unto thee, the last time of asking, now at the day of grace and
salvation as to thee is expiring. If now at last thou might yet know etc.
Thus our Savior here makes use of this circumstance as a further aggravation
both of his sorrow, and their sin, their stupidity and obstinacy; that in this
day of grace, wherein God was pleased to make such a gracious offer of mercy to
them, they should yet stand it out to the last, so neglecting and letting slip
the present opportunity, (as they had done many other) by the embracing whereof
they might yet have been happy.

So sad a thing it is for a people not to take notice of the seasons of grace
and mercy vouchsafed unto them, Obs.
for their spiritual and temporal felicity and welfare, Not to take notice of
the seasons of grace, a sad thing.
so as to make a wise use and improvement of them. This our Savior here so
sadly lamenteth in Jerusalem. And this we shall find the Lord elsewhere sadly
complaining of in this people, the people of the Jews. As Jeremy 8. 7. Yea the
storke in the heavens knows her appointed times, and the turtle, and the
crane, and the swallow observes the time of their coming, but my people know
not the judgments of the Lord.] Those poor creatures, (with many other) merely
by a natural instinct, they observe the times and seasons of the year, and so
order their going and coming accordingly; but that people knew not the judgment
of the Lord, they took no notice of the seasons of mercy and judgment; they
saw not the judgments of God hovering over their heads, that so they might use
timely means for the diverting of them. And this the Lord there charge upon
them as gross stupidity. And the like regardlesness of seasons and
opportunities, and the workings and dispensations of Providence, he elsewhere
complains of against them, for by the same Prophet, Ier. 5. 4. Surely these are
poor, they are foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment
of of their God. And by the Prophet Isaiah the like, Isai. 5. 11, 12. Where he
denounces a woe upon that people for not regarding the work of the Lord; not
considering the operation of his hands; they had no regard of providential
dispensations; no regard of times and seasons, whether of mercy or judgment.
This is a gross and deplorable stupidity; a just ground both of Lamentation and
Exprobration. This is the thing which our Savior upbraideth the Pharisees and
Sadduces with. They were curious observers of times and seasons in natural
things, but in spiritual and heavenly they were altogether stupid. So he
tells them, Matthew. 16. 2, 3. When it is evening ye say it will be fair
weather, because the sky is red, etc.] They were very observant of the usual
prognostics of fair or foul weather, they could discern the face of the sky.
But (says he) can ye not discern the signs of the times.] They were not so
wise as to take notice of the choicest times and seasons, such as that then
was, being the time of the Messiah his coming unto them. So Saint Luke has it
(as the Syriack also renders that of Saint Matthew) Luke 12. 56. How is it
that ye do not discern this time?] This time of grace, wherein the promised
Messia comes unto you, whom you professed to have so long looked and waited for;
and which the Prophets have so clearly pointed out to you, and is now evidenced
unto you by so many manifest signs and tokens, as were you not wilfully blind,
you could not but see this to be that time. This he charge them with, as
gross stupiditie. And so indeed it is, when men shall not take notice of the
accepted time, the day of salvation; not see what belongs to their peace in
their day, in the times and seasons of Grace which God vouchsafes unto them.

Especially when God is pleased to manifest and make known his mind and will
to them after a more clear and evident manner. Especially when more clea^ly
held forth.
That was Ierusalems case ^ere in the Text. God had made known to them the
things belonging to their peace formerly; he had sent his Prophets to them from
time to time for that purpose; but now he did it more clearly, by send^ng his
Son to speak to them, to tender himself to them in person. Now this rendered
their neglect and contempt a great deal more heinous and inexcusable; that even
in this their day they should not know, etc. For them to have been ignorant
hereof at any time heretofore under the Law, had been inexcusable, but much
more under the Gospel. Even as for men to stumble in the twilight, it argues
heedlesnesse; but much more to stumble at noonday (as the Prophet speaks of
Israel in another sense, Isa. 59. 10). Thus where God is pleased to afford men
but a little light, (such as that was under the Law, which Saint Peter
compares to a Candle, a Light shining in a dark place (as that place is by
some expounded) 2 Pet. 1. 19.) for men not to give heed unto that light, and
take notice of the mind of God which is held forth by it, is a great neglect;
but when the day star arises, a clear light breaks forth, such as
Gospel Light is; now for men to shut their eyes against the light, or not to
make use of it by walking answerably to it, this is an high contempt, of which
Calvin here says rightly, Contemptum manet severior vindicta; it has a
greater vengeance waiting upon it, then if it were a simple neglect. That it is
so, I presume, it will not be questioned. Bring we it home by way of
Application, which I shall direct (as formerly) only by way of Conviction and
Exhortation. Applic.


First by way of Conviction, how many are there who lie open to this just
Exprobration? Use 1.
They have not known, A just Exprobation to many.
they do not know, even in this their day, the things that belong to their
peace. Not to speak of others; bring we it home to our selves, and see whether
the charge do not lie too justly against many of us. None of us but have had
our Day, a day of grace and salvation, a time which God has allotted unto us
to look out for our spiritual and eternal welfare; which to some of us has
been a Summers-day, a long day. And not only a long, but a clear day wherein
God has vouchsafed to us the means of grace and salvation in a comfortable
manner, causing the light of his truth to shine forth most clearly unto us. And
yet how many of us are there of whom it may be too truly said, That yet even
in this our day we have not known the things which belong unto our peace, to
our eternal peace and happiness. But still we remain in our natural
blindness, and ignorance, and unbelief having made little or no improvement of
these precious times and means.

Nay, notwithstanding God has come unto some of us after a more special
manner, come near unto us in a more clear manifestation of his Will to us by
some special providence, visiting us with special mercies, or special
chastisements, thereby calling us unto Repentance, yet have we not known the
time of our visitation.

Now what stupiditie, what blindness, what regardlesnesse, what wretchlesnesse
is this? A heavy aggravation of our sin for present, and (if not timously
prevented) of our judgment for future. So does many a soul in hell at this day
find and feel it; over whom (if it would any ways profit or advantage them)
we might justly weep and lament, as our Savior does here in the Text; O! if
they had known in their day the things which belonged unto their peace, how
happy, how blessed might they have been? But now how wretched, how miserable?
these things being now for ever hid from their eyes. Time was when they had
their Day, they had their time of grace, wherein they injoied the means of
salvation, so as had they but had the wisdom to have made use of them; happy,
happy had they been to all eternity. But letting slip that time, neglecting
those means, trifling away, that Day, now the night is come upon them, even a
night of blackness and darkness, an everlasting night, so as the Sun shall
never rise unto them again; they are put into a hopeless, helpless and
remediless condition. Not making use of the light whilst they injoied it, they
are now (as Saint Peter says of the Apostate Angels, 2 Pet. 2 4. Cast down to
Hell, and delivered into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.
Such is their condition now.

Which that it may never be ours, Use 2.
give way to a word of Exhortation. All exhorted to know what belongs to
their happiness, in their day.
Every of us suffer our selves to be awakened and stirred up to take notice of
our day, and so to take notice of it, that therein we may see and know the
things which belong unto our peace, to our welfare and happiness, and that
both temporal and eternal.

Temporal happiness. O! that we and all others in this Nation were but yet so
wise, Temporal happiness of the Nation.
as in this our day to know the things belonging thereunto; so to know them as
that we might complie with them.

Q. But here (it may be) some of you will be ready to ask me, What belongs
thereunto.
What are these things?

A. A Question not unuseful. In the resolution whereof I shall give you no
other directions then what the Text it self gives me the hint of.

1. Seek Peace it self; I mean external peace. Peace is here, Seek peace it
self.
and so often elsewhere in phrase of Scripture, put for prosperity and
happiness. Peace, as in it self it is one of the chief blessings upon earth,
one chief part of this external happiness, so it is a thing which does much
conduce to the completing of it. As War makes a people miserable; so Peace
happy, making them flourish in all kind of outward blessings. And upon this
account seek we after this Peace, making this our Motto, Pacem te poscimus
omnes; all of us seriously desiring and indeavoring after peace.

1. Civil Peace; the Peace of the State. Civil peace
It Ieremies Counsel to the Captives in Babylon, that they should seek the
peace thereof, Ier. 29. 7. Seek the peace of the City, whither I have caused
you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it; for in the
peace thereof shall ye have peace. And the like do we for England. Pray for
the Peace of it. Upon that depends her welfare and happiness. Divisions
hastened Jerusalem ruin. O! pray that Englands divisions may not do the like
to her. Seek the peace of the State, Civil peace.

2. And as Civil, so Ecclesiastical, Eclesiastical peace.
the peace Church, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122. 6. Peace be
within the walls, and prosperity within thy palaces, ver. 7. Upon Ierusalems
peace depended the peace of the whole Nation of the Jews. And surely upon the
Churches peace in a great measure depends the peace of this Nation. And
therefore seek after this peace; seek it from God; being earnest with him that
he would heal our breaches, giving one heart and way to his people. And promote
it by all holy ways and means. But I shall not dwell upon this which I do but
meet with by the by, taking the hint from the word in the Text. For the
procuring the welfare of this Nation, seek Peace it self.

sons of Peace. It is the direction which our Savior gives to his Disciples
when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel (in that forecited Text) Luke 10.
5, 6. Embrace the Gospel of Peace.
Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house. And if the
Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest upon it.] The Son of peace, (...),
that is, (as before I have explained it) such persons as were disposed to
receive and embrace the Doctrine of Peace, the Doctrine of the Gospel; where
they met with such persons, there their Peace should rest; all the happiness
which they had wished to them, should come upon them. Now would we in like
manner that that peace which is to be wished unto this Nation might thus rest
upon it; be we in this sense (...), Sons of Peace, readily embracing this
Doctrine of peace, the Gospel. This it was (as I have shown you) which above
all other things belonged to Ieusalems peace, her receiving of Christ and his
Gospel. Had she but done this, happy had she been. That England may be so,
have we a regard unto this. In this our day make much of God's Religion, make
much of the Gospel, which as yet through the goodness of God is continued unto
us. Let that at the length find such entertainment amongst us as it deserves.
Let the Messengers thereof be received. Let their feet be accounted (as they
are said to be, Isa. 52. 7.) Beautiful, which bring good tidings, which publish
peace. This do the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who are Messengers of peace,
bringing those glad tidings of peace and reconciliation with God through
Christ, publishing salvation O! let their feet be beautiful. Let their persons
be welcome, much more their message. While you receive them into your houses,
receive that into your hearts; showing forth the power of it in your lives and
conversations, by so walking as becomes the Gospel. In this way seek we the
External peace, welfare and happiness of this Nation.

However, Use 3.
in this our day, seek we our own peace, Spiritual and Eternal Peace to be
sought above all, and that whilst the Day of Grace lasts.
Eternal peace; being all of us wise for our selves, so wise as in this our
day, to know what belongs to our peace; the peace and happiness of our own
souls, our eternal salvation. As yet through the mercy and goodness of God
our day is continued to us. The day of our lives. Whereas the Sun is set upon
many others before our eyes: every day it goes down upon some or other of our
brethren, our Relation, our friends, our associates, and Companions. It is
night with them. It is yet day with us. And as the day of our lives, so the day
of grace and salvation is yet continued to us; Yet does the Sun of right
eousnesse stand over our heads; yet does the light of the Gospel shine forth
unto us; yet is the Golden scepter of grace and salvation held forth unto us;
our day is yet continued. Oh that in this our day, whilst the means of grace
are continued unto us, and we to the means, we might all of us see and know
the things which belong nuto our peace. Which word of Exhortation I desire it
may come home to every soul that hears it. It may be (and I fear it is
so,) some and many of us have a long time shut our eyes against the light; we
have not seen; we do not to this day see these things which do so n^arly
concern us: How many offers of grace and mercy have we slighted and rejected?
God has offered conditions of peace to us, it treating, beseching us by his
Ministers to be reconciled unto him; striving with us by mercies, by
chastisements, by word, by the secret motions of his own Spirit. And yet for
all this we still stand out against him, harden our hearts against him, so as
we will not receive Jesus Christ upon Gospel terms, as our Savior and Lord.
Now unto all such be it spoken in the language of the text. Oh that you even
you, at least in this your day, did but know the things which belong unto your
peace! How ever you have most rebelliously and ingratefully withstood many
offers of grace, yet that now at the length, whilst this day of grace last's,
before the Sun set upon you, and your eyes be closed up with everlasting
darkness, you would come in and accept of these offers of grace, not standing
out any longer.

To that end consider, Motives:
first, that the time of your life, and of Gods grace, is but a day. [This The
time of man's life and Ggds grace but a day.
A Day is of no long continuance, specially a winters day. A few hours the Sun
is above the Horizon, but then it sets, and leaves a sable darkness upon
the face of the earth. Such is the life of man, a day; and that (to make the
best of it) a winters day; stormy and short, Brethren the time is short (says
the Apostle, speaking of the time of man's life upon earth) 1 Cor 7. 29. How
short who knows? oftimes does the Sunn go down upon man before it be well up.
Oh therefore now up and be doing? The day is a time for Action, the night for
rest. Man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor until the evening,
Psalm. 104: 23. And so is the day of this life. This is the time for the working
out of our salvation. And therefore now set upon this work. I must work the
works of him that sent me whilst it is day (says our Savior in that John 9.
4.), the night comes when no man can work. The night of death. There is no
work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave, whither thou go
(says the Preacher) Eccles. 9. 10. And therefore (as he there makes the use
of it.) whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy might. Thus do we the
work of the particular calling, much more of the general; the working out of
our salvation, the making of our Calling, and Election sure. This do we? and
that in this our day. To day if you will hear his voice, harden not your
hearts, whilst the day of life, and the day of grace lasts; Behold now is
the accepted time, now is the day of salvation, (says the Apostle to his
Corinthians) 2 Cor. 6. 2. And therefore (as he there presses it upon them ver.
1. Let not us receive the grace of God in vain. This do they who enjoy the
outward means of salvation, but are not bettered by them; like the earth which
receives the seed which is cast into it by the hand of the Husbandman, and
drinks in the former and latter rain, and yet remains barren; Let not us so
receive the grace of God tendered and held forth unto us in the preaching of the
Gospel. But let it into our hearts, that taking root there it may bring forth
Gospel-fruits in our lives. And this do we now; Now whilst it is called to
day. Remembering that the time of grace, and of our life, is but a day.

our day. [In this thy day.] Our Day.
This was Ierusalems day, the Jews day wherein grace and mercy was offered
unto them. The next was the Gentiles day; or the next was Gods day, wherein he
would visit them after another manner, in judgment, not in mercy. And therefore
says our Savior here. Oh if at least in this thy day! And hear we him
speaking the like to every of us this day. Oh that you in this your day! The
time of this life is our day; A day that has no morrow. And the time of grace
is our day. Shall we let slip this day, then expect we God's day, even that
diem ultionem, the day of vengeance. Such days our Savior foretells were
coming upon the Jews, Luke 21. 22. These be the days of vengeance; speaking
of the time of Ierusalems destruction, wherein the Lord would severely revenge
all those indignities offered to his Son. And such days of vengeance God has
for all obstinate sinners. It may be in this life: If not, yet at that last
day, which will be a day of blackness and darkness, a day of wrath and
revelation of the righteous judgment of God. Now knowing the terror of that
day, Oh! that all of us would be persuaded now in this our day to look out, to
take notice of what belongs to our peace and comfort at that day.

This is our day, a time allotted us by God But one day.
to husband for the good of our souls. And 3ly this is but one day. As for the
Labouring-man he has many days allowed him to do his work in. And so, if he
have lost one, he may yet recover it, get it up again at another time. But as
for us, we have but one day. If that day be past, there is no recovery. Soles
occidere and redire possunt; The Sunn sets and rises again upon the earth.
But if the Sunn of our life, and the Sun of God's graee be once set upon us,
never look that it should rise upon us again. O! therefore, in the fear of God,
be we all of us awakened, and stirred up, that we may not sleep nor trifle
away this our day, either in doing of nothing, or that which is worse, Remember
that upon this our day depends our Eternity. And therefore now whilst it is
called to day, all of us look out to what belongs to our eternal peace.
Behold, at this day the Lord Jesus is riding in triumph in the midst of his
Ordinances, as here he did to Jerusalem, in the midst of his Apostles and
Disciples; O that there were such a heart in every of us! that we might now
Lift up, set open those everlasting doors, the doors of our souls that this
King of Glory might enter in; that the Lord Jesus might come and take a full
possession of all our hearts, so as to rule thereby his Word and Spirit. Then
quam faelices and beati, how blessed and happy shall we be? Such use make we
of this General day, this day of Grace.

Wherein there are also particular days, Particular days in the general day.
particular times and seasons, in which Christ comes unto men (as here he did
to Jerusalem), offering himself to them after a more special manner. This is
that which he tells the Laodicean Angel. Rev. 3. 20. Behold I stand at the
door and knock. So he does at the doors of men's Consciences, where he knocks
both by Outward means, by his Word, by mercies and Chastisements, every of
which is a knock at this door; and by inward motions of his Spirit. Now is it
so that Jesus Christ thus knocks at any of our hearts, at this, or at any
other time; let us forthwith open unto him. That is the meaning of every such
knock. It is the voice of my beloved that knocks (says the Spouse) saying
open unto me, Cant. 5. 2. And this do we, receiving him into our hearts by
Faith, that he may dwell theare as a Savior and a Lord. And this do we
forthwith. Not knowing but this may be the last knock (as this was the last
time that ever our Savior knocked at Ierusalem's gates): which if it be and
shall be slighted, then what remains but a just retaliation, even that which
we meet with Luke: 13, 25. That the door being shut, we should stand without
and knock, receiving no other Answer but that which is there returned, I know
ye not, whence ye are. Or that which we find in the close of the Text, that
ihe things which belong to our peace should be from thenceforth hid from our
eyes. So it follows.

But now they are hid from thine eyes]. Jerusalem^ doom.
In which words we have Ierusalem's Doom, or Judgment, (the spiritual part of
it, for that only I intend to deal with). A Judgment answearing to their sin.
Their Sin was, that they had not seen, they would not, when they might; Their
judgment is, that as they did not, so should not see what they might have done,
But now they are hid from thine eyes]

Q. But what was thus hid?

A. (...). It is hidden. Vide Gerhardi Harmon. ad loc.
A verb of the Singular number; admitting (say some) of a twofold reference.
Either to what went before, or what follows after.

1. To what follows after. So it is looked upon by some, Judgment hidden from
Jerusalemseies.
as relating to what our Savior in the subsequent verses foretells
concerning the final destruction and desolation of Jerusalem. The days shall
come upon thee, etc.] This was hid from their eyes. A truth. It was so, and
that through their incredulity. Often had they heard the judgments of God
denounced against them, as by the Prophets, so by Christ himself, but they
gave no credit to what they heard. Their eyes being blinded with their present
temporal prosperity, and with the spiritual privileges which they then
enjoying, looked upon as intailed upon them and their posterity, they were
ready rather to make a mock of all threatenings of that nature. Flattering
themselves, even as Babylon is said to do, Isa. 47. 8. which said in her heart,
I am, and none else besides me (she was a Nonsuch), I shall not sit as a Widow,
neither shall I know the loss of Children. Thus did Jerusalem; what ever was
told her, by whomsoever, yet she did not, she would not believe that ever
such a change should happen unto her. This was hid from her eyes. And even this
was a sad thing, deserving to be lamented over, in as much as hereby their
condition was rendered the more desperate. But I shall not insist upon this.

2. More properly these words are conceived to look backwards, Things belonging
to Jerusalems happiness hid from her eyes.
relating to what went before. And so much those particles do intimate unto
us; [But now], as looking back to the words precedent. If thou had known,
even thou, at least in this thy day the things which belong to thy peace? But
now they are hid from thine eyes; viz. the things themselves, or the knowledge
of those things.

Q. But how is this here said to be hid from their eyes?

A. Why, And that both for the present and future.
it was so for the Present, and it was so for the future. For the present, they
did not see it; for the future, they should not see it.

Q. But how came it thus to be hid?

A. Hereof a double ground or Reason may be assigned.

1. Their own wilfulness 2. God's righteous judgment. The ground thereof
double.
Through the former it was, that they did not see, and through the latter it
was they should not see what belonged to their peace. Upon these two I shall
insist severally.

1. This was hid from their eyes, through own wilfulness. Their own wilfulness.
They would not see what belonged to their peace, their temporal and eternal
happiness. Notwithstanding that it had been clearly revealed and held forth
unto them, yet they shut their eyes against the Light. This is that which our
Savior charge upon this people, the people of the Jews in that known place,
Ioh. 3. 19. Light is come into the world, but men loved darkness rather then
light. So was it with the generality of that Nation. Christ, who was the light
of the world, he was come into the world, and in particular come unto them,
declaring and making known to them what belonged to their peace. But they loved
darkness, the darkness of sin and ignorance, preferring it before the
heavenly light of Divine Truth, which shone forth unto them. Such was their
obstinacy, that they even closed their eyes, and would not see. So our Savior
himself sets it forth, Mat. 13. 14. where citing the prophecy of the Prophet
Isaiah, he shows how it was verified in that people of the Jews in his time.
In them (says he) is fulfilled the prophecy of the prophet Isaias, which
says, Behold, hearing ye shall hear, and shall not understand; and seeing ye
shall see, and shall not perceive. (though they daily heard the Word, and saw
the Works of Christ with their bodily ears and eyes, yet they did not believe
him, or in him). How so? The reason follows in the next verse. For this
peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull of hearing, and their
eyes they have closed; left they should at any time see with their eyes, and
hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts, etc. Such was the
wilful obstinacy of that people, that they even stopped their ears against the
Word of Christ, and closed their eyes against his Works, they would not see
what belonged to their peace; and in this way it came to be hid from their
eyes. And this our Savior here takes up as a just matter of Lamentation to
him, and Exprobration to them; bewailing them for it, and upbraiding them with
it.

And so it is, Obs.
Wilful ignorance is a matter of just Lamentation, Wilful ignorance asad and
sinful thing.
and Exprobration to a people. So our Savior here takes notice of it in
Jerusalem. But now these things are hid from thine eye. Hoc non dicitur ad
levandam Hierosolymae culpam (says Calvin upon it.) our Savior does not
speak this any ways to excuse, or extenuate Ierusalem's fault, but to
aggravate and highten it. Such is wilful and affected ignorance. True indeed,
as for simple ignorance, where men are ignorant through the want of the means
of knowledge, that excuses a tanto, in part. The servant which not knowing his
Masters will, did commit things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few
stripes (says our Savior in the Parable) Luke 12. 48. In as much as he should
have known it, and might have known it, had he enquired after it, (which he
ought to have done,) therefore his ignorance does not wholly excuse him, yet
being an extenuation of his fault, it is so also of his punishment. Simple
ignorance of the mind and will of God as concerning what we do or believe, is
no just plea for any, no just excuse, in as much as they are by duty bound to
know it, and might know more of it then they do, were they not wanting in the
inquiry after it. But wilful affected ignorance, when me^^refuse to know, close
their eyes against the light, and stop their ears against instruction,
shutting it out of their souls, this is an high aggravation of the sin and
punishment of those that are guilty of it.

R. And well may it so be looked upon, R.
in as much as it is not a mere neglect, but carries a contempt with it. Being
a contempt against God.
Now we know wi^h what an eye Conten pts are looked upon in the Courts of men
upon earth. When men refuse to take notice of their Orders and decrees, this is
highly taken as being an affr^nt to the Court, and the offenders are severe^y
pro^eeded against. And so is it in the Court of heaven; when men shall refuse
to take notice of the mind and will of God clearly intimated unto t^em, this
being a contempt, an affront to heaven, God cannot but take it highly at the
hands of those that are guilty of it, and make them know that he does so. So
much we have fully expressed in those words of Wisdom, Prove: 1. 24. Because I
have called and ye have refused etc. ye have set at naught all my counsel, and
would none of my rep^oof; I will laugh at your calamity etc. And again verse.
29, For that they ha^ed knowledge etc. Therefore shall they eat the fruit of
their own ways etc.] Of such dangerous and desparate consequence, is it to shut
out any beam of divine light, To close the eyes against Gospel Light ahigh
contempt.
out of the fou^, to stop the ear against any word of God*

Specially when men shall close their eyes against Gospel Light, stop their
ears against the word of life, the word of grace and salvation. This was
Ierusalems case here. She did not, she would not know the things belonging to
her eternal peace, notwithstanding he who was the Pr^nce and Lord of peace, the
great Peacemaker, the Son of God himself came to preach peace unto them, to
show them what it was that was of so great concernment to them, yet they would
not hearken to him. And by reason hereof these things were now hid from their
eyes. And upon this account the Lord Jesus, as a tender hearted Savior, here
so passionatly weepeth over them. And surely of all things that can happen unto
man up on earth, there is no one thing more deplorable then this, when men are
thus wilfully blind, obstinately ignorant.

And (to make some Application of this Branch) Is not this the case of too many
among our selves at this day. Applica.
Alas, Too many among our selves guilty hereof.
how many such poor ignorant souls are every where to be found? Men and women
willingly and wilfully ignorant of what concerns their eternal peace. They
cannot say it is for want of light that the are blind; that they do not see.
No, the light of the Gospel has for a long time shone forth unto them. They
have been born and brought up in Gospel Times and places; where they have
enjoyed the means of grace and salvation in a plentiful manner: So as in this
respect they may be called Children of the light, and Children of the day. And
yet for all that they walk in darkness; the things which belong unto their
eternal peace are hid from their eyes. They do not see, because they will not
see. They have no desire to be acquainted with the mystery of salvation; and
so continue strangers to it. A most deplorable state and condition.

So let it be looked upon by others; by those whose eyes God has opened to see
what they do not. A thing to be lamented by others.
Whil^st they see these things hid from them which God has revealed to
themselves, let them, (blessing God for this his free grace which has caused
them thus to differ) in imitation of their blessed Saviors pity and
compassionate this their wilful obstinacy and blindness. This we may find the
Lord sometimes sadly bemoaning in this his people, the people of the Jews, Jer.
4. 22. my people is foollish, they have not known me; they are sortish
children, and they have no understanding. And the like we may heat the Prophet
doing in the Chapter following, Ier. 5. where complaining of the
incorrigiblenesse of that people (the generality of them) under the Judgment of
God; how notwithstanding God has stricken them yet they were not sensible,
they had made their face harder then a Rock, (as he speaks ver. 3.) he then
bemoaneth and pittieth this their condition in the next verse, Therefore I said
surely these are poor, they are foolish etc.] of all folly none like this;
when men do (as it were) sanis insanire, they are wittingly mad or foolish.
They will not see what belongs to their peace. O pity we them that are in
this condition!

And O that they might be persuaded to pity themselves! Much more by
themselves.
to mourn over this their desperate obstinacy. This they shall do, sooner or
later; it may be when it is too late. So they may hear some of their Companions
doing; as viz. that impure Adulterer, whom the Wiseman speaks of, Prove. 5. Who
having given his honor unto others, and his years to the cruel (as the 9 ver.
has i^) having spent both his reputation, and estate, and strength upon
Harlots, who seeking nothing but themselves, care not how they make a prey of
others, ofttimes with their honesty putting off also all kind of humanity;
then he comes to mourn at the last, when his flesh, and body are consumed (as
it follows ver. 11.), finding nature decayed and spent, and his body (it may
be) seized upon by some foul and loathsome disease, (some of which (it may
seem) were wont to attend this sin in those times, as well as in these,)
feeling his hones full of the sin of his youth (as Zophar speaks, Job 20. 11.)
now he comes rugire in novissimis (as the Original has it). (...) Rugiit.
proprie Leonum; Bux torf:
At his last, seeing how he has by his lewd and dissolute courses brought
himself to an untimely and infamous end; now he roareth, roareth as a Lion (as
the word there properly signifies). Seeing himself ready to go to hell, now
his soul is filled with more horror, then ever his body was with pleasure. And
mark what follows, ver. 12. And say, How have I hated Instruction, and my
heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor
inclined mine ears to them that instructed me.] Lo here the true original of
all his misery; which though before he would not, yet now when it is too late
he is brought to acknowledge, even his not harkening to Instruction. O take
heed that it may never be so with any of you! that you be not at your latter
ends brought to mourn upon any such account.

Which that you may not, Instruction and reproof not to be slighted.
do not any longer what he did, hate instruction, despise reproof. Do not stop
your ears against the truth of God held forth unto you in the Ministry of his
Word, discovering unto you the sinfulness of those ways and courses wherein
you have walked, and showing you how you ought to walk so as you may please
God, do not shut the counsel which the word gives you, out of your hearts. Do
not any longer say unto God, Depart from us. This do all obstinate sinners, who
living under the means of grace, do yet go on in their sins. So Job describes
some of them, Job. 21. 13, 14. They spend their days in wealth, (living in
jo^litie, and mirth, and pleasure, happily enjoying an interrupted course of
prosperity, not being acquainted with those crosses and afflictions which
befall others), Therefore they say unto God, depart from us, for we desire not
the knowledge of thy Law. This do too many even among our selves; though with
their tongues they dare not, yet with their hearts, and in their lives they
speak as much; plainly manifesting to the world by their words and actions,
what the thoughts of their hearts are; viz. That they do not desire to have any
acquaintance with God, or his Word; to know his mind and will that they may do
it. And thus are the things which belong unto their everlasting peace hid from
their eyes.

O most sad and deplorable condition! what hope can there be of such an one?
The desperate contion of obstinate sinners.
Upon this account our Savior here looks upon Ierusalems estate as most
forlorn and desperate. She neither had, nor would see what belonged to her
peace. So as through her wilful ignorance this was hid from her eyes. And
therefore let her now make account of what follows; The days shall come upon
thee, when thine enemies shall cast a trench about thee, etc. And even such is
the condition of all wilful and obstinate sinners, who shut out the light of
Gods truth out of their hearts, will not give way to the admonitions,
directions, convictions of the Word and Spirit, so as to be wrought upon by
them, to be changed and reformed in their hearts and lives, let them make
account that the like days shall come upon them; days of blackness and
darkness, days of judgment and vengeance; it may be temporal, (which they
have just cause to fear, continually hanging over their heads) however, eternal.

And O that now the terror of the Lord might fall and take hold upon every one
of you, An alarm to such.
whose condition this is! that being awakened, you may be also persuaded to
open your eyes, to set open the doors and windows of your souls, to let in the
Sun of righteousness, to let in that heavenly light which shines forth unto
you, that so the things which belong unto your peace, your eternal peace and
happiness, they may be no longer hid from your eyes; which if they still be
through your obstinacy and wilfulness (for other cause you can assign none),
then take heed lest that God whose patience you have abused, and whose grace
you have rejected, do in his most righteous judgment seal up your eyes, passing
an irrevocable sentence upon you, that seeing you will not see, therefore you
shall not see, but that these things be now from henceforth for ever hid from
your eyes.

And so I am fallen upon the second Particular, ground and cause of this
blindness in Jerusalem.. The second cause of Jerusalems blindness, Gods
righteous judgment.
The things belonging to her peace were hid from her eyes, as through her own
wilful obstinacy, so also through Gods righteous judgment. And thus they were
hid not only for the present, but also for the future. (...), But now they are
hid from thine eyes;] That is, from henceforth; so as now thou shall not see
them, and that through the righteous judgment of God, hiding them from thee.

Thus it is, Obs.
Days of Grace have their dates. Days of grace have their dates.
Mark it. This is the Observation which this passage naturally yields us:
Days of Grace have their dates. Times and seasons, wherein the Grace and
Mercy of GOD is offered and tendered to the Sons of men for their acceptance;
they are limited, they have their terms and boundaries, beyond which they shall
not extend. Hence is it that they are called by the name of Days. If thou
had known in this thy day]. Now a Day is a determined time. However there are
Winter-daies and Summer-daies, some shorter, others longer, yet each is limited
and measured by the motion of the Sun. And so are the Seasons of Grace which
God vouchsafes unto the Sons of men upon earth: though some are longer then
others, yet all limited, all determined by God. What the Prophet Habakuk ^aith
of Prophetical Vision, Hab. 2. 3. The Vision is for an appointed time, the same
may be said of these gracious dispensations, the offers and tenders of grace
and mercy; they are for an appointed time. Days of Grace have their dates,
their limits.

National and Personal days 1. National days, wherein God offers mercy to
communities of men, National days.
these are limited. So it was we know with the old world, concerning which we
may hear God declaring his purpose, Genesis 6. 3. My spirit shall not ever strive
with man, for that he also is flesh, yet his dates shall be an hundred and
twenty years. A long time God had striven with the men of that generation. He
had so done, and that both outwardly and inwardly. Outwardly, as by his Works,
so by his Word, which was preached to them by Noah, whom Saint Peter calls,
(...), a Preacher, or publisher of Righteousness; of the righteous judgments
of God in case they should not repent, to which in the name of God he persuaded
them. By him it was that Christ went and preached to the spirits in prison (as
the same Apostle has it) 1 Pet. 3. 19. This he did by the Ministry of Noah,
or some others, who were inspired by him; In and by them he preached to the men
of that generation, who were then alive, but at this time, when Peter wrote
that Epistle, dead, and their spirits, their souls (many of them) in the prison
of Hell. And besides this Outward striving by his Word, he did also strive with
them Inwardly by the inward motions and operations of his Spirit, pressing and
urging their consciences to Reformation and Repentance. Thus he had striven
with them, and that long, but he will not ever so do. My Spirit shall not ever
strive with Man]. And thereupon he limits them a time for their Repentance:
The days of Man shall be an hundred and twenty years]. Not that the time of
man's life should not afterward exceed that number of years, for we find
diverse after the Flood living much longer; but so long should their day of
grace and mercy last. So long a time out of his gracious indulgence God would
yet allow to that generation to bethink themselves, to reform their hearts and
lives in; which if once past and not improved for the end to which it was
allotted them, then they must look for no more mercy, but a deluge of
vengeance should sweep them off from the face of the earth. To this I might
subjoin that of Nineveh, which had her forty days, and no more allowed unto
her for the same end. Forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, Ion. 3. 4.
viz. except within that time they repented, which condition God reserved to
himself. Thus there is a time appointed and determined by God, which though he
do not declare to others, yet he has set down with himself, how long he will
strive with a Nation, a people, how long he will wait for their Repentance;
which time being past, then the date of mercy is out. So it was with Jerusalem
here; she had had her Day, a day of grace, and that a long day; wherein she
might have seen what belonged to her peace, but that day being now spent, Now
these things are hid from her eyes.

Personal days. The times and seasons allotted unto particular persons,
Personal days.
for their accepting the offers of grace and mercy held forth unto them, these
also are limited. So is not only the Common and General day; The time of this
life, beyond which the tenders of mercy do not extend. Now is the accepted
time, The general day, the time of this life.
now is the day of salvation (says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 6. 2. speaking (as he
is conceived) of the time of this life). This is the day of grace. If this day
be gone, mercy is gone. As for those who have here abused the patience and long
sufferance of God, not considering that it should have led them to repentance;
so fleighting the offers of Mercy, let them look for nothing but Justice
hereafter. That rich Glutton who would not out of his abundance spare poor
Lazarus a crum of bread, being in hell may call and cry for a drop of water to
cool his tongue with, and yet go without it. The Sacrifices of Grace and Mercy
are only so long as this day of grace lasts, during this life. If this be
gone, then as the tree falls (toward heaven or hell) so it lies. Death
closing up the eyes of impenitent sinners, then are the things which belong to
their peace, their happiness, for ever hid from them.

But also Particular days, Particular days.
particular times and seasons, and that during this life. Certainly such times
and seasons there are: As there are appointed times for all other occasions. To
every thing there is a season, and a time to every pupose under heaven, (says
the Preacher) Eccl. 3. 1. So it is to things Natural; however to us they may be
Casual, and in themselves Contingent, or it may be Voluntary, left to the will
of man; yet they are all determined, as for other circumstances, so for the
time, and that by God, who does by his Providence order and limit them for
their beginning, duration, ending. And surely so it is in things supernatural;
he who has thus bounded and limited all other things upon earth, has not left
his own gracious dispensations sine die, at an uncertaintie; but he has also
set down with himself a day, a time for them, beyond which they shall not
extend; so as if that be expired, there is no more room for mercy. The truth
of this we may see in those Rebellious murmurers amongst the Israelites. A long
time God striveth with them. Forty years long was I grieved with this
generation (as the Psalmist has it) Psalm. 95. 10. All that time they tempted
God, and proved him, and saw his works (as the Apostle goes on) Heb. 3. 9. So
long experience they had of the gracious presence of God in the midst amongst
them, manifesting his power and mercy in delivering, protecting of them, and
providing for them, yet they tempted and proved him, not believing what he had
said unto them, nor yet so considering what he had done for them, as to trust
in him, and rest upon his Providence. Thus did they err in their hearts, not
knowing the ways of their God (as it there follows, ver. 10.) Now herewith
the Lord was (as well he might be) grieved, offended, provoked, yet bearing
with them; but so he would not ever do. Having born it so^tie years, then he
will bear it no longer; [ So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my
rest, ver. 11.] They should never come into the earthly Canaan, the land which
he had promised unto Abraham as a resting place for his Posterity. Which
sentence was accordingly executed upon those murmurers, whose carkases fell in
the wilderness (as it follows ver. 17.). None of them who came out of Egypt,
from twenty years old and upward, entering into Canaan, save only Caleb and
Joshua, (as you have it foretold Numb. 14. 29, 30.). So was it with them as to
the Earthly Canaan, and so shall it be with all obstinate and obdurate sinners
as to the Heavenly Canaan, that eternal rest (whereof the earthly Cannaan was a
Type): However God may strive with them for a time, and it may be a long time,
yet there is a time when he will st^ive no more, but will pass a peremptory
sentence upon them, that they shall never enter into his rest; so shut^ing the
door of mercy against them.

Which he does, The door of mercy sometimes shut in this life.
and that (as I said) often in this life. We know how it was with Esau, that
profane Esau, so stigmatized and branded by the Apostle, Heb. 12. 16. for his
so far undervaluing of that high privilege of his primogeniture, his
Birthright, to which was annexed the Covenant, as to sell it for a morsel of
meat, (or a mess of Pottage) when afterward he came to make suit for it, he
was rejected. So you have it in the verse following, ver. 17. For ye know
(says the Apostle) how that afterward when he would have inherited the
blessing, he was rejected; for he found no place for repentance, though he
sought it carefully with tears. Thus however before he slightly esteemed that
privilege, yet being better advised, upon second thoughts, he seeks it, and
that earnestly, but all in vain, For he found no place for repentance; viz. in
his Father Isaac, who had conferred that blessing upon his other Son Jacob; he
could not with all his tears move him to repent of what he had done, so as to
recall his grant, and confer the blessing upon him. Herein was he a Type of
profane obstinate sinners, who slight and despise the grace of God when it is
offered and tendered unto them. Afterward it may be, when God comes to open
their eyes, to awaken their consciences, and to convince them of what they have
done, and to discover to them the misery of that state wherein they are, then
they seek and cry for mercy, and yet go without it; the Decree then (as it
were) falling in travel, and beginning to bring forth (as the Prophet speaks,
Zeph. 2. 2.) the door of mercy is shut against them:

R. Which God does (as I said) in his most just and righteous judgment; R.
thereby vindicating the contempt of his grace and mercy: which is an attribute
that God is tender of, The contempt of grace hereby vindicated.
and will not endure to have ^rampled upon. So as where that will not take
place, Justice shall* Hence is it that God shuts the door of mercy against
those that have rejected i^ when it was offered to them; refusing to hear them,
who have refused to hear him. So wisdom sets it forth in that Text, which I
willingly repeat, Prove. 1. 24. Because I have called and ye have refused, etc.
Therefore I will also laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when your fear
comes. When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction comes as a
whirlewinde, etc. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer, they
shall seek me early, but shall not find me. ver. 28. 29. A just retaliation and
requital, that whilst men shall let Jesus Christ stand at the doors of their
hearts and knock (as he tells the Church of Laodicea that he did Rev. 3. 20)
and yet not let him in, that he should shut the door against them, so as though
they knock, yet they shall find no audience, no entrance.

Obj. 1. But is not this directly contrary to the promise which our Savior
makes, Obj. I.
Mat. 7. 7, 8? The promise of opening to them that knock cleared.
Where encouraging his Disciples to Pray, he bids them, Ask* and it shall be
given you, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opended unto you.
For every one that asks receives; and to him that knocks it shall be
opened.

A. 1. For Answer to this, Answ. 1.
Take we notice (1) Who they are to whom our Savior here speaks, This
promise made to believers.
viz. to his Disciples, such as had received him, and believed on him. Now such
indeed have the promise of audience and acceptance at all times. Being
favorites of heaven they have always free entrance to the Throne of grace, so
as they may come thither at all times with confidence and boldness (as the
Appostle exhorts them to do, Heb. 4. last); This being a privilege purchased
for them by the blood of Christ (as the same Apostle shows, Heb. 10. 19.) But
not so others. Not so rebellious and obstinate sinners. What have they to do to
take the name of God into their mouths, by invocating of him? seeing they are
such as hate to be reformed. What have they to do to press upon the throne of
grace, who are despisers of it, and enemies to it.

A. But (Secondly) this Promise must be looked upon not as Absolute, Answ. 2.
but as Conditional, God must be sought in due time.
admitting of many restrictions and limitations. Among other, of time. They who
would seek God so as he may be found, they must seek him timely, whilst he may
be found. So the Prophet Isaiah directs the Jews. Seek ye the Lord whilst he
may be found. Isai. 55. 6. with which agrees that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 32.
6. For this shall every one pray unto thee, in a time when thou may be
found: Tempore inveniendi, in a time of Finding. Clearly intimating, that there
may be a time wherein God, though he be sought, yet will not be found. This is
that he tells the Jews, Isai. 1. 15. When ye spread forth your hands, I will
hide mine eyes from you, and when ye make many prayers, I will not hear. Not
hear them when they pray; no, nor yet hear others praying for them. So the Lord
tells his Prophet Jeremiah, upon that account willing him to surcease his
intercession, on their behalf. Therefore pray not for this people, neither
lift up cry, nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to me, for I will
not hear thee, Jer. 7. 16. And elsewhere he tells the Prophet Ezekiel
concerning that Land, Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job were in it,
they should deliver but their own souls, Ezekiel. 14. 14, 20. So irrevocable is
the sentence which God sometimes passes upon obstinate and rebellious sinners,
such as have despised his grace and mercy, that all means used for the
procuring and gaining his favor toward them, shall be ineffectual, and to no
purpose.

Replic. True, Replic.
it may be said, Repentance at all times finds mercy.
so long as they continue in their sins, they can expect no other: but
repenting and forsaking them, there is mercy to be found. So it there
follows, in that of Isaiah 55. 7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and the
unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and to o^r God, for he will abundantly pardon. And the
Lord gives all sinners to know so much by his prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 18. 21.
and 33. 14. which Tex^s for substance (though not in express terms) speak
what the former of them was cited for in our late public Lyturgie, that At
what time soever a sinner repents him of his sin, God will put away all his
iniquities out of his rememberance.

A. True plenty of such promises we meet withal, Answ.
assuring mercy to repenting sinners; Repentance not promised to men at all
times.
but where is that promise that assures unto them Repentance when they will.
Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non promisit peccanti poenitentiam; He that
has promised pardon to the sinner whenever he repents, has not promised
to give him grace to repent whenever he will. Saint Paul speaking of the
Repentance of men ill affected to the truths and Ministers of Christ, he puts
in a Peradventure about it, 2 Timothy 2. 25. If God peradventure will give them
repentance. This is God's gift; and being so, it depends not upon Man's will,
but His Will. And elsewhere he tells us of an heart that cannot repent. So our
former Translation (not amiss) renders that Text, Romans 2. 5. where the Apostle
speaking of, and to such as despise the riches of Gods goodness, not knowing
that it should lead them to repentance, he says that, After their hardness
and impenitent heart, they treasure to themselves wrath against the day of
wrath, etc. (...), Cor resipiscere nesciens (as Beza translateth it) A heart
that knows not how to repent, knows not how to go about this work. And
elsewhere we read of some upon whom this doom is passed, That it is impossible
for them to be renewed again unto repentance, Heb. 6. 6. Such is the case of
desperate and malicious Apostates, whom God in his just judgment gives up unto
impenitent hearts, that they cannot, at least shall not repent: Thus does God
in his just and righteous judgment. (as I said) sometimes withold his grace
from those that have slighted and rejected it when it was offered: Thenceforth
hiding from their eyes the things that belong unto their peace. That he does
this, and why he does it, you have seen.

Q. But how does he do it? Quest.
A. Here I shall not dare to attempt to follow God too close, Answ. 1.
in tracing of those paths of his, How God hides from men the things belonging
to their peace.
which Saint Paul calls, (...), viae impervestigabiles, Romans 11. 33. How
unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out* ^y the former
[Iudgments] (as Grotius distinguishes them) understanding the Decrees of God,
by the latter, the ways and means which he uses in the executing and bringing
those decrees into act. Both are to humane understanding inscrutable and
untraceable; fitter to be admired and adored, then curiously pried into. Yet
where God is pleased to hold forth a light unto us, we may safely follow him,
though it be a far off. And so shall I at the present in opening this great
mystery to you, showing you only what is revealed, and so may safely be
asserted concerning it. God hides from the eyes of men the things belonging to
their peace.

1. By taking away the light, Answ. 1.
withdrawing and withholding the means of grace from them. By withdrawing
the light.
This is one thing which the Lord threatens against this unfruitful Vineyard,
the people of the Jews, Isaiah 5. ver. 6. I will also command the clouds, that
they rain no rain upon it. That is, (as some safely, if not somewhat too
curiously, expound it), the means of grace and salvation should not be
continued unto that people as formerly. He would be^eave them of their
Prophets, take away their Teachers. Which accordingly he did; as may be
collected from that Promise which the same Prophet makes to the Church,
Isaiah, 30. 20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water
of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more,
but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. So it had been with that people.
Prophets had been very scarce among them. So much we may take notice of from
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 74. 9. where the Church lying under a sad
desolation, is brought in complaining; We see not our signs, there is no more
any Prophet, neither is there a-mong us any that knows how long. They wanted
their Seers (as the Prophets sometimes are called). And by this means were the
things which belonged to their peace hid from their eyes.

And by a like means came they here to be hid from Ierusalems; Means of grace
withdrawn from Jerusalem.
by withdrawing those means of grace from them which formerly they had injoied.
Christ himself being taken away, he also ordered his Apostles after a while to
withdraw from them. So much is insinuated in that Parable of the Marriage feast,
where the first guests that were invited, though solicited by messenger after
messenger, refusing to come, the servants are then ordered by the Master of the
Feast to go into the Highways, and Hedges, and By-lanes, and to bid new
guests, as the Evangelists have it, Mat. 22. 9. Luke. 14. 21. 23. The meaning
of the Parable seems to be obvious. This Marriage is the marriage betwixt
Christ and his Church. The first invited guests were the Jews; to whom God
sends his servants one after another; first the Prophets, then John the
Baptist, with the Apostles and Disciples of CHRIST, who persuaded them to come
and receive Jesus Christ, and to have Communion with him: but they refusing,
the Apostles, with their Successors, are afterward sent to the Gentiles. Which
accordingly, sometimes after our Saviors Ascension, came to pass. For however
at the first, according to their Masters direction, they applied themselves
only to the Jews, yet afterward finding them unworthie, and being rejected
by them, they shook off the dust of their feet against them, turning to the
Gentiles. So Paul and Barnabas expressly tell them, Act. 13. 46. When they heard
the Jews contradicting them, and blaspheming their doctrine, Then they waxed
bold (says the Text) and said, It was necessary that the Word of God should
first have been spoken unto you; but seeing you put it from you, and judge your
selves unworthie of eternal life, lo we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the
Lord commanded us. Thus when men do abuse the light of the Gospel, Christ often
removes the Candlestick, (as he threatens the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2.
5.) takes away that light, takes away his Ministers and Ordinances, and so
leaves them in the dark, by which means the things belonging to their peace
are hid from their eyes, and that through the want of means.

2. But ( Secondly) sometimes the the Spirit is withheld, Withholding the
Spirit.
not accompanying, not going along with the means. Even as the Church
complains Psalm. 44. 9. that God did not go forth with her Armies. Her Armies
went forth; but God did not go forth with them, as formerly, to direct, assist,
bless, and prosper them, to make them victorious. Thus God sometimes sends
forth his Ministers, but he does not go forth with them; he does not
accompany his Ordinances with his Spirit. This is that which the Prophet Isaiah
complains of; he lift up his voice like a trumpet, he spared not to his
duty, But who has believed our report, to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed, Isaiah, 53. 1. His Ministry was for the most part ineffectual; few
there were that were wrought upon by it, He had (as elsewhere he bemoans it,
Isaiah 49. 4.) even labored in vain, and spent his strength for naught: Now
whence was this? Why God did not concur with him by the efficacious work of
his Spirit; he did not put forth his power, reveal his Arm, hence was it that
his endeavors became so ineffectual to the greatest part. And thus God is
pleased sometimes to enervate his Ordinances, by withdrawing his presence from
them. Even as it was in Ezekiels Vision, he saw the Glory of the God of
Israel going up from the Cherub to the threshold of the house, Ezekiel 9. Verse
3. The Cherub stood still in his place, but the glory was departed, God had
withdrawn his presence from it. Thus Ordinances may be continued, and yet the
Spirit withdrawn, whereby they become ineffectual. So as though the light shine
forth unto men, yet wanting that Spirit of Illumination which should open their
eyes, and let that light into their hearts, they still remain in the dark. So
fared it with the Scribes and Pharisees; though the mystery of Salvation was
as clearly held forth unto them as unto others, yet whilst others saw it, it
was hid from them. How so? Why this was God's work, to put a differencee
betwixt the one and the other. So much our Savior takes notice of, and
acknowledges, Matthew. 11. 25. I thank thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth
(or, I confess unto thee, or, acknowledge before thee, (...)) because (or
that) thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed
them unto Babes. The same Word was preached by the same persons unto both, but
it had not the same effect in both. To the simpler sort of persons, men and
women of weak apprehensions, altogether unlearned and ignorant, very children
in understanding, the mysteries of eternal Salvation were clearly revealed by
the Ministry of Christ and his Apostles; but not so to the wise and prudent,
great and learned Clerks, men wise in their own and others opinions, as the
Scribes and Pharisees were. To them were these things hid. Now whence was this?
Why God did not cooperate with the Word as to them; he did not work upon
their minds by his Spirit, by which means the Word became ineffectual unto
them.

Blinding the eye and hardening the heart.
not only in Negative or Privative, but also after a sort in a Positive way.
Not only by not opening their eyes and hearts, but by blinding and hardening
them. So it was with this people, the people of the Jews, as our Savior also
takes notice of it, giving this as a reason why they did not believe, John 12.
39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, (says he) because Isaias said
again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that they should
not see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and be converted,
and I should heal them. Thus dealt God with that people, justly punishing their
wilful obstinacy, by giving them up unto a reprobate sense, to a spiritual
blindness and obduracie. In as much as they had first blinded themselves,
closing their own eyes against the light [Their eyes they have closed] (so
Saint Matthew has it, Matthew, 13, 5. As also the Apostle, Act. 28. 27.)
therefore God in his just judgment blinds them. They blinded themselves
first, they would not see, therefore God in his justice blinds them, that
they should not see: So giving them up to spiritual blindness; which (as that
Apostle tells us) still rests upon that people until this day. I would not,
brethren, that ye should be ignorant, that blindness in part is happened to
Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in, Rom 11. 25. (...),
Blindness, or Hardness (for the word signifies both) is happened [in part],
unto the greatest part, the generality of that Nation; insomuch that they do
not, nay, till the time appointed be come, they shall not see the things which
belong to their peace. This is the reason which the same Apostle gives, why
those of that Nation did not see what was so clearly held forth unto them in
the preaching of the Gospel, 2. Cor. 3. 14. Their minds were blinded, there
was a veil upon their hearts (as the next ver. has it). God has given them up
in his just judgment for their contempt of the means of grace to a fearful
exceration and obduration, blinding their eyes, and hardening their hearts. Thus
the Lord is said to have done Pharaohs, Exodus 4. 21. And the like is said of
Sihon King of Heshbon, that refused to let Israel pass by him, Deuteronom. 2.
30. The Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart obstinate, that he
might deliver him into thy hand. This he did, not only by withholding his
grace from them, but by delivering them up unto the perverseness of their own
spirits, and to Satan, to be acted by him unto their ruin and destruction.
And after the like manner may God be said to have hardened the hearts of this
people, the people of the Jews; not only by withholding his Spirit from
them, but also giving them up unto their own hearts lusts (as the Psalmist)
has it, Psalm. 81. 11, 12. My people would not hearken unto my voice, and
Israel would none of me, So I gave them up to their own hearts lusts; (or, as
the margin reads it, to the hardness of their hearts) and they walked in
their own counsels), and to the power of Satan to be acted by him, to be
blinded and hardened by him. Yea, even giving Commission to his Word to have
such an accidental effect upon them; even as the Sun has upon the Clay, to
harden it. So much we may learn from that Text of the Prophet Isaiah, cited by
our Savior, Isaiah 6. ver. 9, 10. Where the Lord giving him his Commission to
go unto that people, he bids him (or rather foretells him what he should
do) that he should make their heart fat. Make thou the heart of this people
fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their eyes, etc. Now how should he
do this? Why only by preaching the Word to them. But what then, had the Word
any such proper Operation of it self? Not so: neither had the Prophet any such
intention in the preaching of it; but through their obstinate tempers it become
so to them, an occasion of their further blinding and hardening. God in his
just judgment suffering and ordering that his Word should have such a direful
effect upon them, as that they should grow worse and worse by it, until they
should attain to that height of impenitencie, as should be irrecoverable. This
it is, The Word will have it work, one way or other, being (as the Apostle
says) the savor of life, or of death, 2 Corinthians. 2, 16. Where it does not
open and clear the eye, it will close and blind it: Where it does not soften
the heart, it will harden it. And in this way, and by this means does God in
his most righteous Judgment, hide from the eyes of men the things which belong
to their peace, which they have refused to see.

To these I might add, Sending false teachers.
his sending of False Teachers among them; such as those the Prophet Jeremy
speaks of, who cried unto the people, Peace, Peace, where there was no peace,
Jeremiah 6, 14. So lulling them asleep in carnal security, that they shall
not see what belongs to their peace in truth.

As also his sending of strong delusions, Strong delusions.
that men should believe a lie, because they have not received a love of the
truth (as the Apostle has it, 2 These. 2. 11. Sending a Spirit of Error, a
lying spirit to them, such as that was which seduced Ahab, to his destruction,
2 King. 2. 22. These and many other ways God has to carry on this his most
just and righteous design. But herein I shall follow him no further. That which
has been spoken may be sufficient for doctrinal Confirmation and Illustration.
What now remains is Application.

Where (in the first place) set me design you to make a stand a little, Applic.
and look upon this Nation wherein we live as our Savior did here upon this
City Jerusalem, Application to the Nation in general.
and see whether there be any just cause to do what he did, to weep over it,
mourn over it upon any such account. Touching which let me first declare for my
self that not having my Saviors eyes, a prophetical eye as he had: I dare not
pronounce the like sentence upon this, that he does upon that, viz. that the
things which belong unto Englands peace are now hid from her eyes. No, as my
prayers have been and shall be, so my hopes yet are to the contrary; that God
will yet be merciful to this Nation; and I want not some grounds to bottom
these hopes upon. But yet let me show you what two just causes of fear may be
apprehended, Her sad prognostics; paralelled with Jerusalems.
that God has a sad controversy with it. In the declaring whereof I shall (as
far as I may) parallel it with this City of Jerusalem; which I shall do
altogether upon a Religious account, not meddling at all with the Civil of these
sad prognostics I might reckon up diverse. But I shall content my self to
single out some of those which are most obvious.

our not seeing the thing which belonged to our peace in our day. Not seeing
what belonged to peace in his day.
Where I shall not do (what happily with too much evidence of truth I might),
descend to those particular times and seasons wherein mercy has been held
forth and offered unto this Nation, in a more signal and remarkable manner.
Surely such Critical days England has had, and some of them within our
mememorie, seasons and opportunities, which had they been laid hold of, and
improved as they might, how happy might she have been? I shall content my self
with generalities. Only taking notice of that long day of grace and mercy
which this Nation has had; during which the light of the Gospel has shone
forth to it, and that in so clear and glorious a manner as (I suppose without
flattery I may speak it) it has not done to any other nation under heaven.
Now, have we in this our day known the things which belonged to our peace? Has
Christ and his Gospel found that intertainment among the generality which he
expected, and it deserved? The Generality (I say) True it is, some there have
been, and at this day are, who have sincerely embraced both; And so there were
in Jerusalem, some that cried Hosanna to the Son of David, Hosanna in the
highest, Matthew. 21. 9, 15. But how is it with the greatest part? do not they
yet love darkness, rather then light? setting light, by the light of the
Gospel, and the Ministry thereof; even Gadarene like preferring their swine
before Jesus Christ. A charge, wherein I wish there were not too much truth,
Such slight and slender entertainment has the Gospel, with the faithful
messengers thereof, found among the greatest part of this Nation. A sad
prognostic.

Specially if it be considered to what a height this disaffection is at this
day improved, Disaffection to the persons and Calling of Ministers a sad
prognostic.
and risen even to the disclaiming and crying down of the Ministry it self. So
is it with some, and not a few. They are grown disaffected, not only to the
persons of Ministers, but even to their function and calling, disclaiming that
as Antichristian. Thus are the feet of them who bring glad tidings of peace,
which sometimes were, and in themselves are beautiful, now become in the eyes
of many black and deformed. A sad symptom. So it was in Jerusalem, of which we
read, 2 Chr. 36. 16. The Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his
Messengers rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had compassion on
his people, on his dwelling place; But they mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose
against his people, till there was no remedy, (no Healing.) This made their
disease incurable, and the wrath of God implacable. When sickmen being
distracted, shall fly in the faces of their Physicians, and there be none to
bind them, what hope of Cure can there be? This was Jerusalems case, as the
Parable sets it forth, Matthew. 21. 33. God the great Householder, having planted
a Vineyard, (the Jewish Church) and let it forth to Husbandmen, (so the
Priests) he sends his servants, some after other, to receive the fruits
thereof, (his Prophets former and latter, to require that people to bring forth
fruits meet for repentance) but they beat one, and killed another, and stoned
another, (so did they use the Prophets) Hereupon he sends his son (Christ
himself) who met with the like usage. Now what follows hereupon? That you may
hear first from the mouths of the Jews themselves, to whom our Savior here
propounds this Parable, making them judges in the cause, that so he might
co^demn them out of their own mouths, They say unto him he will miserably
destroy these wicked men, and will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen,
which shall render him the fruits in their season, v. 41. which afterward you
find explained and applied by our Savior to themselves, v. 43. Therefore I say
unto you the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruit thereof. When the Ministers of God come to meet with
such intertainment, and that for doing their office, it is a sad presage that
the Kingdom of God, the Gospel shall not long continue there, and that
Judgment is not far from such a people. Upon this account our Savior looks
upon Jerusalems condition as desperate. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; How often
would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathers her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your house is left unto you desolate.
Matthew 23. 37, 38. Here is a first Prognostic and that a sad one.

Secondly. Let a second be that which I have Gods withdrawing the l^ght, by
putting out the Candles.
Gods withdrawing the light, by putting out the Candles, I mean taking away his
Ministers, who are said to be the light of the world. Thus was it done to
Jerusalem. And whether this be in any degree applicable to this Nation or no, I
shall leave it to those who are privy to the present state of it, to judge. Of
late how many able and faithful Ministers taken away? Now when a Prince begins
to call away his Ambassadors, it is ordinarily looked upon as a Passing Bell
to the peace of that Nation.

Repl. But howsoever (it may be said) some be by Providence taken away, yet
others by the like providence are substituted in their rooms.

A. True it may be in some places, Many places destitute of true Gospel
Ministers.
but not so in all. Some Candlesticks there are at this day, (and I suppose not
a few,) destitute of Candles; not well knowing where to find a supply.

Again, as for those which are thus substituted by the providence of God, are
they also all substituted by his Ordinance? Are there not some (and not a few)
Ambassadors without their commission? men running before they are sent; not
called nor empowered to do any Ministerial act, which yet ( Vzziah like) they
attempt to do; that not only to preach, (which the Apostle will tell us none
can do except they be sent, Romans 10. 15. speak they may, but not Preach, which
is an act of office) but also (some of them) to administer the Seals, the
Sacraments. And by this means the Church in many places comes to be deprived
of an Ordinance, upon which all other public Ordinances have a dependence; I
mean of a true Gospel Ministry, with which Jesus Christ has promised his
special countenance.

Thirdly. To this add (in the third place) that Spirit withdrawn? The Spirit
with drawn from the means.
So was it with Jerusalem; they enjoyed Ordinances, but there was no life in
them; the Glory of the Lord was gone up from the Cherub. And is it not so in
many parts of this Nation at this day. Ordinances remain, but is not the glory
of the Lord departed from them? where is that life, where is that power, which
heretofore appeared in them? God has yet his Armies of Prophets, many
faithful and powerful Ministers, who may be looked upon as the Chariots and
Horsemen of Israel, but he does not go forth with these his Armies as formerly,
giving such success unto the labors of his servants as heretofore he has
done. How is it that in many places where the word is purely and powerfully
preached, there are such thin Auditories as there are (specially upon the week
days) in comparison of what they have been, some refusing to come, not willing
to lend an ear to any but their own; others neglecting to come out of an
irreligious profaneness: and among those that do come, yet how few constant
conscionable attendants upon this Ordinance? A plain evidence that this
ordinance has lost much of that respect, as also of that power that sometimes
it has had.

And what I say of the word, I may also apply it to the Sacrament, the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Which though held forth in the purest and most
comfortable way of Administration, according to Christ's Institution, and the
Churches primitive practice, yet how is it by many fleighted and neglected? So
as those who heretofore were wont to come (as it now seems) for fear or
fashion, being now left to themselves, will not come for love. The feast is
prepared, and the Guests invited, but they find some excuse or other to keep
them away. A thing which I wish there were not too just cause to complain of
even in this place. Now surely, among other, this is also a sad token.

4. To which let me add those other which I The eyes of many blinded.
Gods blinding the Eyes, and hardening the hearts of many, sending so many false
Teachers, with strong and strange delusions amongst us, giving up many to the
believing of them. All sadly remarkable in this Nation at this day; I think
never more in any. And what may we conceive these to portend? Surely, sad Omens
they are; giving us too just cause to fear, lest God should be about to depart,
to take away his Kingdom, his Gospel from us, which meets not only with such
sleightings, but such affronts and oppositions as it does.

Judgments not profited by.
our not profiting by Judgments, but rather being made worse by them. This is
that which the Lord complains of against Israel, Isai. 1. 5. why should ye be
stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more. Gods judgments had a contrary
effect upon them to what they were intended. He corrected them for their
amendment, thereby to bring them home to himself, but they took occasion
thereby to go further away from him; so as his Corrections were in vain to
them, (as elsewhere he complains) Ier. 2. 30. In vain have I smitten your
children, they received no correction.] viz. so as to be bettered by it, but
rather waxed worse and worse. And would to God that this did not lie as too
just a charge against this sad Land and Nation wherein we live! That God has
stricken us, I suppose there are few but are in some kind or other sensible.
But what effect have these Rods, these Judgments had upon us? Are we better by
them? Are we thereby reclaimed, reformed, brought home to God? Are we made the
more humble, the more careful, the more watchful, the more fruitful? O that
these effects were to be found amongst us, But is it not clean contrary? Are we
not grown more proud (a sin I think never so visible in this Nation as at this
day) more remiss, more loose, more barren and unfruitful then ever? And if so,
what just cause have we to fear lest the Lord in his most righteous judgment do
unto us, as there he threatens unto Israel; give us over, striving no longer
with us, but leaving us to our selves, letting us alone (as elsewhere he
threatens unto Ephraim, Hos. 4. 17.) to go on in our sinful provocations, until
there be no remedy.

These are some of those grounds upon which we may build our too just fears. To
which I might yet have added some other. But I forbear any further charge:
Coming rather to enquire,

Q. What shall we now do for the Land of our Nativity? What to be done for this
Nation.


A. 1. Do what our Savior here does for Jerusalem; Mourn over it, weep over
it, Mourn over it.
with England, fearing lest it should be so with it.

2. But tears alone will not help. When Ioshuah was fallen upon his face, Take
away the Action by feeling a National Reformation.
mourning for the discomfiture which had happened unto Israel, Josh. 7. 10. the
Lord takes him up with these words, Get thee up wherefore lie thou upon thy
face? Intimating unto him, that it was not his humbling and afflicting himself,
without somewhat else, that would heal that breach, which Isreal's sin, their
violating and transgressing the Covenant of their God, had made upon them (as
it follows in the next verse.) There must be some other course taken for the
reconciling of them unto God, and making their peace with him. And what was
that? Why the people must be sanctified, and the Accursed thing must be taken
from among them, (as the 13. verse has it.) And O that England might take the
like course? It is not all our falling upon our faces before the Lord, all our
days of public Humiliation (though that be a sacrifice acceptable unto God)
that will serve to appease his wrath, and to procure his favor; that alone
will not do it, unless also the people be sanctified, and the Accursed thing
removed from among us. This then let every of us in our several places,
endeavor. Beginning first with our selves. Every one searching and trying our
own ways, that we may find out the Action in our own hearts and lives, our own
personal sins. Which having found out, now take them away, putting away the
evil of our doings from before the eyes of our God by serious and unfeined
repentance and reformation; renewing our Covenant with our God, cleaving unto
him with full purpose of heart. Then endeavor we the like for others; every of
us in our places (as I said,) Magistrates in their places, Ministers in theirs,
Masters of families in theirs, private Christians in theirs contributing what
we may toward a real and National Reformation; that so the Accursed thing,
even all kind of wrath, provoking abominatious, may be taken away from the
midst of us, and that we may be a people sanctified, dedicated and consecrated
unto the Lord.

So doing, God not willing to cast off a people in Covenant*
now know we for our Comfort, that we have to deal with a God gracious and
merciful, slow to anger, and of great kindness, ready to repent of what ever
evil he intends against a people; Especially his own people; not willing to
reject and cast off a people that are in Covenant with him. So much he
expressed to this people, the people of the Jews before the Captivity, by
making so many removes before his final departure from them, so the Prophet
Ezekiel saw it in his Visions; in which the glory of the Lord removed not less
then five several times before it took its leave; First, from the Cherub to the
threshold of the house (the Temple) Ezekiel. 9. 3. 2. It removed higher standing
over the door; cap. 10. 4. 3. From the threshold it returned and stood over the
Cherubins, which were mounted up from the Earth as ready to take their flight,
v. 18, 19. 4. From thence to the midst of the City, and 5ly. From thence to the
Mountain on the East side of the City, the Mount of Olives, Cap. 11. v. 23. Now
what did these frequent removes import? Surely a great unwillingnesse in God to
depart from that people. And so it is, so long as there is any remedy; God is
not willing to forsake a people, whom once he has taken into Covenant with
himself. So much we may hear him passionately, declaring concerning Israel,
Hos. 11. 7, 8. My people (says he) are bent to back sliding from me, (So was
Israel, yet mark what follows.) How shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall
I deliver thee O Israel? How shall I make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee
as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within me, my repentings are kindled together.]
So loath is God (as it were) to cast off a people whom once he has struck a
Covenant with, if there be any hope of teturning unto him, and demeaning
themselves as becomes his people. And who knows what his thoughts may yet
be toward this sinful and most unworthy Nation? Only turn we unto him with
all our hearts and souls. And then (as the Prophet Joel goes on, Joel 2. 14.)
Who knows if he will return, and leave a blessing behind him?

And thus have I done with the first branch of the Application, Application in
particular.
as is directed to the Nation in general. Come we in the next place to bring it
nearer home, applying it to every of our selves in particular.

And this I shall do (in the first place) by way of Terror to some. Use. 1.
Terror to obstinate and obdurate sinners.
Is it so, that days of grace have their dates? what terror may this strike
into the hearts of all obstinate and obdurate sinners? of which kind. I wish
there were none before me this day;) Despisers of Grace; such as have had their
Day, their day of grace and mercy, wherein God has shown unto them the things
belonging to their peace; but they have not known them, they would not know
them; they have done what the Jews did, stopped their ears, closed their
eyes, hardened their hearts, refusing to hearken to the counsel which Wisdom
gave them, to hearken to Jesus Christ speaking to them in and by his Ministers,
not regarding the counsel which the word held forth to them, sleighting those
offers of grace and mercy, tendered to them in the Gospel upon their receiving
of Christ, but still going on in their wonted Rebellions. Now to all such be it
spoken, how do you know but that the date of your day may be out? the time of
grace and mercy may be past, and the dreadful doom passed upon you in heaven,
which our Savior here denounces against Jerusalem upon earth, that, Now the
things belonging to your peace are hid from your eyes; so as you shall never
see what you have refused to see. Certainly so it has been with some others.
And why not so with you for ought that you, or others know? How ever, a just
and righteous thing it is with God God that it should be so; that seeing you
have closed your eyes, and would not see, that he should seal them, so as you
should not see. And if so, how deplorable, how miserable is your condition? So
we loook upon a poor blind man whose bodily eyes are put out, past hope of ever
recovering his sight again. What is it then to have the eye of the soul
blinded? So as it shall never see, never se what belongs to its peace and
hapines, but is shut up under an everlasting darkness. Miserable and deplorable
is the condition of every such a soul, in as much as it is now desperate,
helpless, hopeless. So is it with a person upon whom this doom is once
passed. Now he may call and cry for mercy, with Esau seeking blessing with
tears, but all in vain. Neither his own, nor yet the prayers of any other shall
be available on his behalf. Though Noah, Job, and Daniel, the chiefest
favorites of heaven, should undertake to intercede for such a one, yet shall
they not be able to procure a revocation and reversement of that sentence which
is past upon him. Such was Saul's case upon whom Samuel denounces that
irrevocable sentence from the Lord, 1 Samuel 15. 26. Thou have rejected the word
of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected thee. A sentence not to be reversed. So
he tells him, v. 29* Also the strength of Israel will not lie, nor repent, for
he is not as man that he should repent. No, though Saul himself sought God, by
confessing and bewailing of his sin (as he does, v. 24.) begging pardon for
it, desiring Samuel to go along with him that he might worship God, (as it
follows, v, 25.) which accordingly he did ( v. 31) Yet would not all this
avail. No nor yet though Samuel was an intercessour for him, praying, and
mourning for him (as we find him, v. last.) So irreversible was that sentence
which the Lord had passed upon Saul, that what ever he did, or Samuel could do,
all could not change the purpose of God concerning him. Rejected he was for his
Rebellion, and rejected he should be.

O fear and tremble you obstinate and rebellious sinners, who stand guilty of
the same sin, that is charged upon him, of rejecting the word of the Lord, not
harkening to his voice, not yiedling obedience to his Commands, but doing what
is good in your own eyes, fear ye and tremble (I say) least the Lord should
have passed or should pass the like sentence upon you; which if once done, I
and others may do for you what Samuel there did for Saul, mourn for you, but
cannot help you.

Obj. But what, Whether Gods decrees be so absolute as not to be reversed.
is Gods decree so absolute and peremptory concerning any particular person
here upon earth, that what ever means shall be used by themselves, or others
for them, shall not be able to reverse it? It was not so with that barren
Figtree in the Gospel, upon which the owner had passed his doom, that it should
be cut down, giving order to the dresser of his vineyard that he should execute
what he had decreed, Cut it down, why cumbreth it the ground? Yet
notwithstanding at that his servants request it was reprived, and spared one
year longer, Luke 13. 7, 8, 9.

A. True, thus God is pleased to deal sometimes with some; to exercise great
long sufferance and forbearance toward them: Gods dealing not alike with all.
Yea sometimes reverting the sentence which is past upon them. Thence it is
that he is said sometimes to Repent of what he has done, or intended to do.
Sometimes he is said to Repent.
So he did concerning the Ninevites, which Jonah supecting, takes up as his
excuse for his not going to the City according to Gods direction, to denounce
that sentence against them, but rather fleeing to Tarshish, Jon. 4. 2.
Therefore (says he) I fled before unto Tarshish, for I knew that thou art a
gracious God, slow to anger, and of great kindness, and repentest thee of the
evil; the evil intended and threatened, which accordingly he did, reversing
that sentence which was passed upon them. And the like he did to Israel, at
Moses's intercession, the Lord repented of the evil which he thought to do unto
his people, Exodus 32. 14. But it will not hence follow, But not always.
that because God deals thus with some therefore he will do so to all.
However that Figtree was spared for a year, yet the other Figtree which we read
of was not spared an hour* So the Story tells you, Matthew. 21. 19. Jesus passing
by the way and espying a figtree or which he found no fruit, however (as St.
Mark notes it, Mark 11. 13.) the time of Figs was not yet, yet he presently
blasteth it, passing that doom upon it, let no fruit grow on thee hence forward
for ever. which sentence was accordingly executed, and that forthwith. So it
follows, And presently the figtree withered away. Thus though God may for
time spare some, and seem to repent of what he has threatened concerning them,
yet as he will not ever do so to any so neither will he do so to all. He that
spa^ed, Israel at that time, yet afterward swear in his wrath that they should
not enter into his rest. And he who spared Aaron at Moses request, when he was
angry with him to have destroyed him (as you have it, Deuteronomy. 9. 20.) would not
spare Korah, and his Company of whom you read Numb. 16. Upon their Rebellion
against Moses and Aaron there was a sudden and dreadful execution done upon
them, The ground clave a sunder that was under them; And the earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed them up, etc. So as They went alive into the pit v. 31.
32. 33. And so for those others who at the same time usurped the Priests
Office, taking upon them to offer Incense presently, There came out a fire from
the Lord and consumed them; v. 35: As it was also with the Sons of Aaron,
Nadab and Abihu* they daring to offer strange fire before the Lord, presently
there went out a strange fire from the Lord and confounded them, Lev. 10. 1. 2.
Thus however God belong suffering toward some, yet not so to all. And however
he does (as it were) repent over some, yet not over all. Cain, Esau^^ and Saul
could find no place for such repentance. And what know thou who take up
this plea but that this may be thy case? thy lot?

Obj. why, whereupon man's repentance, God will always repent.
but has not God engaged himself to do the like to all that shall repent and
turn to him? This is that which Jeremy assures the Princes and all the people
of Israel. Ier. 26. 13. Amend your ways, and your doings, and obey the voice
of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evil which he has
pronounced against you. And what he promised them, he likewise assures unto
others, all others in the like case: Cap. 18. 7, 8 Where the promise is
indefinite, At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down and destroy it, If that Nation against
whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil which
I thought to do unto them. If they repent of the evil of sin, he will repent
of the evil of punishment, And if it be thus with a Nation; why not with
particular persons?

A: To this I answer as before. Repentance not in man's power.
True, it is so, upon man's repentance God will also repent. But how know thou
(as before I said) whether ever God will give thee that grace or space to
repent? How know thou but that in his just judgment he either already has,
or suddenly may give thee up to that impenitent heart, that shall not, that
cannot repent; Not repent truly and sincerely, Possibly in an hypocritical or
Legal way thou may; So did Cain, so did Esau, so did Saul, so did Judas;
being sensible of what they had brought upon themselves, they bewailed their
condition, yet were far from true repentance. Their countenance was changed,
(as it is said of Cain Genesis 4. 5. his countenance fell) but not their hearts.
And so may it be with thee. True Repentance, Repentance unto life and salvation
is Gods gift, which he bestows freely upon whom he will, and when he will.
And being so, he may justly deny it, which hold it from those, who have
slighted and despised his grace, when it was offered and held forth to them.
To all such this doctrine upon this account speaks abundance of terror. Use. 2


Which let it serve (in the next place) as a Needle to draw in a thread after
it, Take heed of receiving the grace of God in vain; by hardening the heart
against it.
making way for, and now letting in a word of Advise and Counsel, and that to
all that are here this day before the Lord. Take you heed that you do not
receive the grace of g^d in vain. This is Paul's Obtestation to his
Corinthians 2. Cor. 6. 1. We then as workers together with God, beseech you
also that you receive not the grace of God in vain. And let it now be mine to
you, all and every of you, who hear me this day. I, as a poor Minister of
Christ, working together with him as his unworthy Instrument, exhort and
beseech you that you receive not the grace of God in vain, this Gospel grace,
the offer of grace and mercy held forth unto you in the Ministry of the word;
see that you do not receive it in vain, by only giving it the hearing, and so
letting it dye and perish in the ear, not having any such affect in, and upon
you, as is intended by it, viz. to bring you home unto God and Jesus Christ, to
receive and embrace him as your Savior and Lord, to believe on him, to submit
unto him. This is the end of all our preaching, thus to some this good seed
(as the doctrine of truth is called Math. 13. 24.) the seed of the word* for
the begetting of faith and obedience in the hearts of those that hear us. Now
see you to it, that this seed do not fall, like that in the Parable, which
fell by the high way side, Math. 13. 4. where the ground being hardened by the
feere of the Passengers, the seed cannot enter, but lies above ground, and so
is sown in vain, being spilt and lost. Take heed that the word be not so
spilt upon any of you; that your hearts be not hardened against it, that you
should not receive it into them. This is that which the Apostle presses upon
his Hebrews, Heb. 3. 7. 8 wherefore as the Holy Ghost says. Today if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts* And let me press the same upon you.
Today if you will hear the voice of the Son of man the voice of Jesus
Christ, so hear it as that you may live, do not harden your hearts, do not
oppose, do not resist the call of God, by shutting the word out of your
hearts. This did the Israelites in the wilderness. When God spoke unto them by
his servant Moses, they hardened their hearts, not regarding what was said to
them. But what was the issue? Hereby they exceedingly provoked God against
them. This was a day of Provocation, as the Apostle there calls it. Harden
not your hearts, as in the Provocation, etc. (...) Such was that day of
Temptation in the wilderness, the time where in the Israelites tempted their
God, by not harkening to his voice, it was a day of Exacerbation, and
Exasperation. So it was not only to Moses, betwixt whom and the people there
was a sharp contention, (as we find it Exodus 17. 2.) But also unto God, who by
that their not harkning to his voice was exceedingly greived (as it there
follows Heb. 3. 10,) yea so provoked and exasperated* that he swear in his
wrath that they should never enter into his rest. v. 11. Now take you heed
that it be not so with you, that you do not thus provoke God by hardening your
hearts, not receiving his word, not embracing his Gospel. Which if you shall
do, know that this will be a greater Provocation then that of theirs was, So
much you may learn from the Apostle, Heb. 12. 25. Where upon this ground he
exhorts his Hebrews to give ear to the Gospel. See (says he) that ye
refuse not him that speaks, (viz. Christ speaks to you his word,) For if
they escaped not who refused him that spoke on earth, (the Israelites who
hearkened not unto Moses) much more shall not we escape, if we turn from him
that speaks from heaven; viz, from Jesus Christ who came from heaven, and now
speaks in and by his Gospel Ministeries. And upon the same ground let me
persuade you. Take you heed how any of you turn away from Jesus Christ thus
speaking unto you; turn away your ears, turn away your hearts, so as not to
receive, not to embrace the doctrine of the Gospel held forth unto you. This if
you shall do, how know you but that God may justly retaliate, and requite this
contempt of yours, by turning away his face from you, for ever hiding from your
eyes the things which belong unto your peace?

Which that he may not do, Offers of grace to be presently accepted.
Know you these things: And that Now, in this your day. Now whilst it is
called to day (as the Apostle there has it, Heb. 3. 13.) embracing the present
time; Not putting off this work till the Morrow. It is the Wisemans Council,
Prove. 27. 1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou know not what a day
may bring forth. And St. James speaking to men, who lay out their business,
what they will do such a day, and such a year, not considering what cross
providence may happen, Go too now (says he) Ye that say, to day, and to
morrow, we will go into such a City, and continue there a year, and buy and
sell, and get gain, whereas ye know not what shall be to morrow. N^mo la^
Diivos habut faventes, Crastini m ut possit sibi polli^^^ senec.
Such is the uncertainty of man's life, that no man can assure unto himself the
succeeding day. And therefore now, whilst it is called to day, now harden not
your hearts. Now that God is pleased to knock at the doors of your hearts, to
call upon you in, and by the Ministry of his word, do not send him away as
Foelix did Paul, with a complement, that you will hear him again another time.
What know you whether ever he will vouchsafe to speak unto you again, so much
as to your ears? Probably here are some present before the Lord at this time,
who shall never hear him speak unto them again after this manner; not speaking
to their ears in the Ministry of his word. But if he do, how know you
whether ever he will knock at the doors of your hearts by his spirit again?
And therefore now hear and hearken, and set open those everlasting doors, the
doors of your hearts, that the King of glory, the Lord Jesus may enter in, and
take a full possession of them, henceforth to rule and reign in you, and that
for ever.

Obj. But what need such haste? May not old age be soon enough? Do we not read
of some who came into the Vineyard at the eleventh hour, Some called at the
eleventh hour.
the last hour of the day, and yet received their penny as well as those that
came in at the sixth, or third, or first hour? Matthew 20. 6.

A. True, there were so; But who were they? Such as had not been called before.
Such as had not been called before.
That is their excuse, when they were questioned by the Lord of the vineyard,
why they stood all the day idle, They say unto him, because no man has hired
us. v. 7. And so it may be with those who either have wanted the means of
salvation; or else have had no such workings upon their hearts at to awaken
them; and convince them. Possibly God may have mercy upon them, (as he had
upon that penitent thief upon the Cross,) calling them home at the last hour
of the day, in their old age. But let not others promise to themselves the like
indulgence. Those who were brought into the vineyard at the eleventh hour were
none of those that had been called at the first, third or sixth hour, but such
as had not been hired before. What ever may happen to others who have not
enjoyed the means of grace, or have not been acquainted with the Motions of the
Spirit of God, It is not for you who have enjoyed the former, and have been
acquainted with the latter, and yet withstand both, to promise the like unto
your selves. No, you that have rejected the call of God again and again, in
your Childhood, Youth, Manhood, you have no ground to hope that God should come
unto you, and bring you home to himself in your old age; but you may rather
fear that if he do not cut you off before, he should then hide from your eyes
those things, which formerly you have refused to know.

Obj. But is there not still hope so long as there is life? The day of grace
and life, how said to be of equal extent, how not.
And is not the day of life, and the day of grace, of an equal latitude and
extent? Does not the Apostle say, Now is the Accepted time, now is the day of
salvation? meaning the time of this life; 2 Cor. 6. 2. does not the one last as
long as the other?

A. Yes, in some sense they may be said so to do. And these two may be looked
on as of an equal extent.

1. Because the one is the utmost limit of the other; The day of grace is
bounded by the day of life, not extending beyond it. When the one is ended, the
other is ended also.

2. As to others, they are so to judge of it. Not being of Gods counsel, not
acquainted with his secret decrees; they are to hope well of others so long as
they live: Not shutting the door of mercy against any while they are here. So
long, as private Christians both may and ought to pray for them, so the
Ministers of Christ are to hold forth the tenders of grace and mercy to them
upon Gospel terms.

3. And (3ly.) as to themselves, so long as they live they stand obliged to
accept of these offers, which still refusing to do, their sin is thereby
aggravated, and heightened through that continued contempt.

4. But yet (in the 4th. place) If we speak of Gods secret decree and purpose,
questionless the day of grace may determine unto a man before the day of his
life. So it did there to Jerusalem. She still lives and flourishes for a
time; Her day of prosperity was yet continued but her day of grace was now at
an end. Now are these things hid from thine eyes. And questionless so may it
be with some particular persons, whom God in his just judgment has given up to
final impenitence, so delivering them up unto Satan and themselves, as that
from thenceforth they never shall know the things belonging to their peace.

Obj. But what then (may some say,) The doubtful supposal of a despairing
sinner answered and satisfied.
may not this be our case? And if so, then it is in vain for us to strive, to
seek for what is not to be found, to knock at that door which is shut upon us
as it shall not be opened.

A. In answer to this I shall deal as tenderly as I may; so as I may not
discourage or dishearten any soul that intertaines but a thought of returning,
and coming in unto God; that begins so much as to cast a glance heavenward.
Wherein I shall do no other then what the Lord Jesus himself does, of whom it
was prophesied that he should not quench the smoking flax* Matthew. 12. 20. Such
was and is the gracious lenity and clemency of the Lord Jesus in his dealing
with poor sinners, in whom there are as yet only some weak desires after
grace, some slender beginnings of conversion and faith. And so shall I deal
with all such.

1. Willing them (in the first place) to take notice what is their Rule to walk
by. Gods revealed will the only Rule to walk by.
Not the secret but the revealed will of God. Secret things belong unto the
Lord, but those things which are revealed, to us and to our children for ever,
Deuteronomy. 29. 29. This is that which we are to look at, and take notice of. And
therefore let not any upon this account disquiet and trouble their own souls
with such anxious disquisitions, as neither they, nor any other for them,
whether man or Angel, is able to resolve. But apply themselves to the use of
means. This will men do as concerning their temporal estates. They neover
stand prying into Gods decree, to enquire what portion in his secret purpose he
has laid out for them, but they set about the work of their calling, applying
themselves to the use of means. And so do you touching your spiritual and
eternal estates. Stand not to enquire how God has disposed of you in his
secret purpose; but go about the work of your general calling, apply your
selves to the use of such means as God has appointed to bring you home to
himself by, so waiting upon his good will and pleasure. This is that which the
Lord requires you to do. And therefore in obedience to his command, do it, with
that Poor impotent person (John 5.) lying at the pool, until the Angel shall
come down and stir the waters; attending upon Ordinances, until God by his
spirit concurring with them shall please to work effectually by them, inclining
your hearts to look toward himself; giving you a sight and sense of your own
sinfulness and misery; making you to see and feel the need you have of Jesus
Christ, and heginning to draw your hearts toward him. Which when you find, let
this be a comfortable evidence unto you that your day is not yet past.

Only be not you now wanting to this grace of God, The motions of the Spirit
to be entertained.
in giving intertainment to these motions of the spirit, in opening of the
door of your hearts, that so the Lord Jesus, who is now knocking at them, may
enter in, Which, in the fear of God, be ye now persuaded to do, Not knowing
but that this may be the last knock; this the last sermon that ever we shall,
hear, or the last mention of the spirit that ever you shall feel. Now
therefore, even now before you go from this place, strike up the Covenant
betwixt Jesus Christ and your souls, accepting and receiving him in all those
Gospel Relations, not only as a Savior casting your souls upon him, so as
to rest upon the al sufficiency of his merit for the pardon of sin and
eternal salvation, but also as a Lord, a Husband, a Head, giving your selves
up unto him to be guided and governed by him, by his word and Spirit, so
receiving him into your hearts, as that he may dwell in you, and rule over you,
and that for ever.

This being done, Where Christ is received the day of grace is not past.
now know you for your comfort that you are through grace and mercy exempted
out of this black list, out of the number of those from whose eyes the things
belonging to their peace are hid. God having thus revealed his Son Christ not
only to you, but in you (as the Apostle says of himself Gal. 1. 16.) not
only revealed him to your ears, but to your hearts, as by his word so by his
spirit, inclining your hearts to close with him, to receive him upon these
Gospel terms, now he has made you to know the things which belong unto your
peace. Which whilst he has hid from others, he has revealed to you.

For which differencing mercy (to close up all in a word) bless you God; Use.
giving unto him the glory of this his free grace, Bless God for his
differencing mercy.
which has put such a difference betwixt you and others. This does our Savior
in the behalf of his Disciples, in the Text forecited. Math. 11. 25. I thank
they O father Lord of heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from
the wise and prudent, and have revealed them unto babes. The great mysteries of
this Kingdom God had revealed them unto the poor and simpler sort of people,
the poor received the Gospel, whilst in the mean time they were hid from
the Scribes and Pharisees, men worldly wise and learned. And this our Savior
there acknowledges to be his work, an art of his mere good will and pleasure.
Even so father, for so it seemed good in thy sight. v. 26. And the like do you
for your selves. Seeing God has now revealed unto you those things, which he
has hid from others, many others, who upon a Natural, or Civil account, are
far your betters* being preferred before you, as in place and estate, so in
understanding and worldly wisdom. Give ye unto him the glory of this mercy,
acknowledging it to be an art of his free grace, a singular favor vouchsafed
unto you. For which let your souls for ever bless him; prasing and magnifying
him, who has thus now made you Children or light, whereas others, the greatest
part of the world, still sit in darkness in the shadow of death; some of them
having their eyes already closed up, so as they neither do, nor ever shall see
the things belonging unto their peace, being already doomed and adjudged to
everlasting darkness. You are now called into that mavelous light, (as Saint
Peter calls the grace of the Gospel. 1 Pet. 2. 11) (...) not undeservedly so
styled, in as much as therein are revealed those (...) the wonderful things of
God As the Apostles auditors of them at the day of Penticost, that they heard
them speak the wonderful works of God (...) magnifica, the magnificent,
great and admirable things of God. Such are the ministers of the Gospel,
wherein those wonderful acts and Counsels of God touching the salvation of his
Elect by Christ are revealed and held forth. A mystery which the Angels
themselves do earnestly desire to look into (as Saint Peter tells us. 1 Pet.
11. 2.) Being much taken there with, when they saw it more clearly revealed
under the Gospel then it had been under the Law, they even stooped, bowed down
(as it were, for so the word there used properly signifies, (...) as desirous
to pry and look narrowly into it. Now these are the things which God has
revealed unto you, And for this do you praise and magnify his name for ever.

Taking this as a pledge, Faith an assurance of Vision.
and assurance of what hereafter you shall see. Your eyes being thus opened to
see Christ by faith here, you shall see him hereafter, when you shall have a
full sight of him, see him as he is, see him in his glory; Which when you shall
do, then shall ye be made like unto him, (as St. John assures you, 1 Ioh. 3.
2.) like him in glory. When Christ who is our life shall appear, then shall ye
also appear with him in glory. Col. 3. 4. Which beautiful vision, the Lord of
his free grace and mercy in Jesus Christ vouchsafe to every soul of us; Amen.

FINIS.

