Mr. J. BRISCOE, A Director in the National Land-Bank, his Defense of Dr. Hugh
Chamberlen's Bank or Office of Land-Credit. In a LETTER to the DOCTOR.

TO THE READER.
HAving written so much in Defense of the Office of Land-Credit, which has not
yet been Answered, much less Confuted; I am, I confess, very unwilling to
trouble myself or others any farther in this matter: But (having by me a Letter
in favor of my said Office, wherein the length of Time, and Reasonableness of
it, are sufficientl justified, written sometime since by my said old Friend Mr.
J.B. upon occasion of some Objections against my Proposal for Scotland, (of the
same Nature and length of Time) sent me by some anonymous, bashful, Scotch
Author, as unwilling to stand the shock of the Contest, as seems to be a late
Nameless Author of a Bank-Dialogue betwixt Dr. H. C. and a Country Gentleman) I
suppose Publishing the same will, by reason of the Great Reputation M. Briscoe
has among some of our Senators, as well as our Citizens, more strongly
recommend this Bank or Office of Land-Credit, and give more Satisfaction to the
World, than anything I can say or write: Which Justice of Publishing the same,
I thought was owing to Mr. Briscoe, and for which I hope he will not grudge me
his Thanks: For, though, by his setting up an Undertaking of Less Advantage to
the Subscribers, he may seem to have changed his Mind, yet he, who best
understands his own meaning, has declared to a Friend, That he was sure there
lay no good Objection against my Undertaking; but, if the People could not see
their own great Advantage, perhaps it might be prudent to treat them according
to their Understandings, or indeed their Wilfulness; and so much the rather,
because such a small Essay might possibly by degrees introduce the Greater: So
that he thought the Nation fitter to be fed at first with Milk, thvn with
strong Meat. Farewell.

H: CHAMBERLEN.

The Letter follows, which was sent me to be Published, as I saw occasion.
SIR, London the 23th of October, 1693.
I Received a Paper from you, which I have returned you again here enclosed,
entitled, Observations upon Dr. Chamberlen's Project of Trade; upon which you
desire my Remarks: But upon Reading the Paper, I find the Objections so weak,
and so ill digested, that I thought it not worth my while to spend either Time
or Paper upon them. However, to gratify your Request, I have sent you my
Observations upon them, and I think have fully Answered them; only I have not
done it in order, as they stand in his Paper, but as I found it was proper for
the fully stating and clearing of the Business.

I doubt the Gentleman, who sent you this Paper, has not read your printed
Paper; if he has, Mr. J. B's Commendations of the Design, tho 'twas for 150
years.
surely he does not understand it, else he would not have laid down so false a
Position, and from thence have drawn as erroneous a Conclusion: I do profess,
without Flattery, the Design seems to me so well laid, that I did not believe
that any Person born beyond the River Tweed, (as I find by the Gentleman's style
he was) could have objected against it. Has a Man a clear Estate in Land?
Further Commendations.
His Estate will certainly be improved by this Project, and he shall have
undoubted Security to have This mistaken for 40, as in the Printed Proposal.
30 years purchase paid him for his Estate, the same day the Act passes. Is a
man's Estate encumbered, and without hope of Redemption? Here is a fair
Opportunity to clear his Estate. Has a Man Money and no Land? He will have an
Opportunity (which he never yet had) to improve his Money in the National Trade
to be established, Commendations continued.
although he has no Skill or Understanding in Trade, as in our East India and
African Companies, where a Widow or Orphan may have as great an Interest in the
Trade, as the Skilfullest Merchant. The General Benefit by it.
Has a Man neither Land nor Money? If he has Credit, he will find (if the
Project succeeds) such Plenty of Money, that he cannot fail of Money upon easy
Interest to raise his Fortunes. But if a Man has neither Land, Money, nor
Credit, he may indeed, with the Fox in the Fable, who had lost his Tail, advise
the others to cut their Tails off, It Is a piece of wisdom not to reject this
Proposal without solid Reasons. Opposing this, was an Argument it was not
understood.
because they were too cumbersome: But I do not in the least doubt the Scotch
Nation will be so wise that, as they will not Receive, so they will not Reject
this Project, without solid Reasons. And because the Gentleman, who has sent
these Observations, has entered upon a Business he does not at all understand,
I think it highly requisite he be undeceived; and therefore what I have said is
enough by way of Preliminary. I shall proceed now to make my Remarks upon his
Observations.

In his First, Third, Sixth and Seventh Observations, which are all of one
Piece, and therefore I shall answer them together. The Gentleman says,

That Money being the common Measure of Commerce, The Gentleman's Objection.
all Nations are scrupulous in introducing new Species, or Value of Coin, and
no Nation have bettered their Trade, by making considerable Alteration in their
Coin; it being the Prudence of a Kingdom to preserve such a Standard of their
Coin, as does in some measure agree with that of their Neighbor Nations, which
this Copper Coin does not; And whatsoever lessens the Credit of Coin, does
proportionably lessen and weaken the Credit of Trade, and consequently must
tend to the loss and damage of the Nation.

The Doctor in the Fourth Consideration of his Printed Paper tells you, Credit
is here allowed by Mr. J. B. to answer Money. He prefers Land Credit to the
Dutch, and acknowledges it may be an Instrument for greater Trade h^n the
Dutch. Credit serve, for Money.
That the greatest Tradings in the World are carried on not so much by a
Species of Money, of Stock and Cash, as by a great Credit; and he instances the
United Provinces, where Credit is the chief Instrument of their Commerce; and
that their Credit is raised more upon an Opinion or Reputation, than upon a
real Fund; and thereupon the Doctor in the Fifth Consideration proposes an
Evident and Firm Security upon Land, as a more Substantial Fund of Credit, for
the carrying on and establishing as great or greater Trade in the Kingdom of
Scotland; And this New Species of Credit the Gentleman terms a New Species of
Coin, and frames his Arguments and Observations thereupon; Whereas these
Talleys are no more a Species of Money than Bankers Bills, or the Bank-Money of
Amsterdam. As for Example: The States of Holland, who are a wise and cunning
People, to supply the Exigence of the State, and want of Money for Commerce,
did Erect a Bank of several Millions of Money, which is at this time no more
than an Imaginary Credit, Mr. B. finds no fault with the largeness of the sum,
tho for Scotland, a poor Kingdom, destitute of Trade.
established upon little or no other Fund but the Public Faith. The intended
Project for Scotland, (for the same Reasons, especially the latter) is to coin
as many Millions of Money upon the Public Faith of the Kingdom, and a solid
and permanent Fund of Land, over and above. The Bank at Amsterdam makes use of
Paper to transfer and make passable the Credit thereof from one to another. The
intended Bank in Scotland proposes to make use of some Metal, as more durable,
to transfer their Credit from one to the other. Now the Gentleman might with as
much Candor and Reason have argued thus: Proof of the goodness of Credit, as to
its serving the Uses of, Money. Mr. B's indignation at the Argument, and
further proof of the benefit of Credit.
A piece of Paper is not of equal value with one hundred, or one thousand
Pounds Sterling Money, Ergo the Dutch introducing a New Species of Coin, viz.
their Paper-Money, which bears no Proportion to the Standard of the Coin of
other Kingdoms, must consequently lessen their Trade, and tend to the loss and
damage of their State.

Now what a parcel of Stuff is this? And yet the Parallel is as plain as it is
Day at Noon; and it is as visible to all the World that by this their new
Species of Credit (or Paper Money you may call it, if you please) together with
their Industry, they are grown to be as great Traders, and as Opulent a People
as any in the World.

Yes, Amsterdam, and Goldsmiths Notes, and Wooden Tallyes, is a mere Fallacy:
For these have a true and solid Foundation of Credit; Whereas the Credit on
Copper Tallyes is unusual and imaginary, and is to depend upon a Statute which
may prove impracticable, and destructive to the Commerce of the Kingdom at Home
and Abroad.

Had one of our Nation said that the Lands of Scotland, L^^^ he believes the
(...) what is here done by Law, is equal to an A^^ of Parliament in Scotland,
especially where Credit is not imposed, as was intended by the Scotch Act; but
to be free as Goldsmith Notes and Bank-Bills.
settled for the aforesaid Uses by Act of Parliament, as a Fund for a Bank of
Credit, are imaginary; I believe the Gentleman, if he has any value for the
Honor and Reputation of his Country, would have highly resented it: But let
the Gentleman take what Freedom he pleases with his Country, I am of opinion,
That the Lands of Scotland, settled by Act of Parliament for a Fund of Credit,
are better, and a far more substantial Fund, than the bare Promise or Public
Faith of any Kingdom or State, without any real Fund to answer it. And as to
the Bankers Bills and Timber-Tallyes, the shutting up the Exchequer in England,
and the failure of so many Bankers, are too fresh in our Memories, for us to
believe that they are a better and more substantial Fund than the Land in
Scotland, settled by Act of Parliament.

As to the Second Observation, That plenty of Money and Riches is the genuine
Effect and Product of Trade; The Value of Credit.
this we readily grant: But by the Gentleman's Favor, Credit is the Causa sine
qua non; No Nation was ever known to grow rich by Trade, where the Current or
Intercourse by Credit is stopped; and that Credit, which is the Primum Movens, or
chief Engine of Trade, can ruin it, I confess to me is a Paradox. But the
Gentleman says further, That these Tallyes are Copper, and of a fictitious
Value, to be decreed only from a new Statute. I am afraid the Legislators of
Scotland have disobliged this Gentleman: I thought only an Act of Parliament
had been all that a reasonable Man can desire, in order to confirm his Title;
and for my part, I shall never seek after a better Title to any Estate I have,
if I have only an Act of Parliament to confirm the same to me and mine.

As to the Fourth and Fifth Observations,

The Doctor in his Printed Paper Proposes, Mr. S. believes it not be^ow the
Best ^n the Kingdom to be Trustees. ^o that it is no indecent presumption in the
Dr. to submit his Office to Visitation of such as are Trusted for State, Law,
and Equity. M. B. justifies the Pro^ect against all Objections. Mr. B's further
good opinion of my Design.
That Trustees should be appointed by Parliament, who alone were to have Power
to Authorize the Covnage, and order the Distribution of them; and therefore it
is plain there is no Trust reposed in the Doctor, but in the Trustees, who are
proposed to be the most considerable Persons in the Kingdom, to be appointed by
Parliament. And as to the Advantage the Sellers of Land may reap by this
Project, this Gentleman needs not envy them, since he and as many of the Nation
as have Land, may reap the like Advantage, if they settle their Land in the
said Fund. But since the Objector does not think the Lands of Scotland any more
than an Imaginary Security, being settled only by Act of Parliament, I must
desire his Pardon, if I do not believe that this Project will be Ruinous,
Dangerous, Destructive Loss, Damage, of Ill Consequence to the Nation (as he is
pleased to represent it throughout his Paper) only upon his ipse dixit, when
the contrary is so palpably visible.

Sir, I doubt I have been too prolix; This I have said, being what at present
occurs, for I have not time to spend upon thinking of this your Design, as it
merits: As is the Scotch Nation, so consequently the thing will be Foreign to
me; only if I may be admitted to fling my Mite into their Joint Stock, if it
succeeds, This were to be wished.
I shall be not only Industrious, but faithful to the Interest in which I
embarque; and my desire after the settling this in Scotland is the greater, The
Design is so good, that it wants not Mr. B's good With^s for it^ (...) in (...).
because I flatter my self, it will consequently introduce the same in England,
which will render it the most flourishing Kingdom in the Universe. I shall only
add, That I am,

SIR, To my Honored Friend Dr. Chamberlen: at his House in Essex-Street,
present. Your Real Friend and Humble Servant, JOHN BRISCOE.

As a stronger Confirmation of the good Opinion Mr. B. had of the Doctors 100
Years Proposal, he Subscribed 200 l. per Annum to it.

AT Numb^^ in the New Buildings in Lincolns Inn, Every Monday, Wednesday, and
Friday after Six in the Evening, Attendance is given, and will be continued, to
remove every Doubt or Objection offered by any against Dr. Chamberlen 's Office
of Land-Credit. It is therefore presumed no Persons will make Objections in
other Places, where none are present to Answer them: Or at least that no
ingenious Person will esteem either the Person making, or the Objection so
made. Valor is more valuable in the Face, than in the Absence of an Enemy.

London, Printed and Sold by T. Soil in White H^rt-Court in Grace-Church
Street, 1696.


