THE SAINTS Solemn Covenant WITH THEIR GOD.

As it was opened in a Sermon preached at BECCLES in the County of Suffolk, at
the taking of the National Covenant there, by the Ministers and other Officers
of that Division.

BY IOH: BRINSLEY Minister of the Word at Great Yarmouth.

IER. 50. 5. Come and let us join our selves unto the Lord in a perpetual
Covenant, that shall not be forgotten. Imprimatur,

IOS: CARYL.



London printed by Andrew Coe, MDCXLIV.

To the much honored, Sir JOHN WENTWORTH, and Sir JOHN ROWSE Knights: With the
rest of the Right Worshipful the Commissioners for the County of Suffolk,
Council and Strength.
RIGHT WORSHIPFUL,
BY the appointment, and in the presence of some of you was this Sermon
preached. And at the like request it is now published together with an addition
of a Supplement to the Applicatorie part, which was then through straitness of
time left imperfect. My aim in both was, and is to promote the public
service of the Kingdom, and in particular the service of that day. If herein I
have not done what happily some would have had me, by speaking their conceptions,
I would have them and the world know, I have done what I conceived most
expedient for the promoting of the service which then I was put upon, and (as
far as I apprehend) the great design of the Kingdom. That I have herein
concealed my own private judgment in the point of Church Government, It is not
because I am afraid or ashamed to give account of it, but only that I might not
by an unseasonable anticipation of the judgment of that venerable Assembly now
convened for the deciding and stating of that controversy, both render my
self seemingly presumptious, and lay blocks in my own way, by sowing of
scruples, which my work was to remove and pull up. What success God was
pleased to give unto my poor labors at that time, some of you are witnesses.
My hopes are, that being not altogether unsuccessefull in the hearing, they may
prove not wholly unusefull in the reading. Such as they are, I presume to put
them into your hands; laying both them and my self at the Churches feet.

Whose I am, and ever shall be JOH: BRINSLEY.

THE SAINTS SOLEMN COVENANT.
PSALM. 50. 5. Gather my Saints together unto me, those that have made a
Covenant with me by sacrifice.
THe same occasion that has this day brought you together in this place, has
also brought this Text to my hand. Wherein (as Expositors for the most part
conceive of it) you have a general Citation, or Process issuing out of the
high Court of Heaven against the Church and people of the Jews, summoning and
requiring them to come and appear before the Tribunal of the great God, there
to make answer to somewhat that should be objected against them. The Quarrel
in brief was this. In that Church (as in every Church there ever have been, and
will be) there were many formal Hypocrites, such as stood much upon legal
Ceremonies and Sacrifices, in so much as they placed all their Religion in
those external observances, in the mean time over-looking those (...) (as our
Savior calls them)* Mat. 23. 23.
The weightier things of the Law; Judgment, Mercy and Faith (or
Faithfulness,) with the exercises of true Piety, and Charity not regarding
the true inward Spiritual worship and service of God. Hereupon the Lord by his
Prophet here cites and summons the whole Church to come, and give an account of
the general formalitie. Gather my Saints together unto me, etc.

In the words we might take notice of two particulars* the Process, and the
Persons. The Process, or Citation it self in the first words, Gather together
unto me (or before me.) The Persons cited, summoned, you have them here
described, first, by their Quality, they were Saints, Gods Saints. Gather my
Saints together unto me.] Secondly, by their Act, they were Covenanters; which
Act is amplified by the Manner and Solemnity of it, they were such as had made
a Covenant with their God, and that a solemn Covenant, Those that have made a
Covenant with me by Sacrifice.

It is this last branch of the Text that my eye is upon at this time, being led
to it by the present occasion; wherein you have the Saints of God described to
be such as had made a Covenant, a solemn Covenant with their God: [Those that
have made a Covenant with me by Sacrifice.]

By Sacrifice,] Gnales Zabach, (says the Original) super Sacrificium, Over
Sacrifice: This Clause I find diversely construed by diverse Expositors, some
carrying it one way, some another, according to a threefold interpretation of
the precedent word Saints.

1 By Saints some here understand the Faithful people of God among the Jews,
the select company of True VVorshipers. Taking the word in that sense, they
conceive this latter clause to be a description of them. They were such as had
made a Covenant with God over Sacrifice, that is (say they) over and besides
Sacrifice, or in stead of Sacrifice. So they explain the words, super
Sacrificium, i.e. praeter Sacrificium, or pro Sacrificio. Besides Sacrifice;
they were such as did not rest themselves contented in any Legal Ceremony,
they did not subsistere in cerenis umbris (as Calvin speaks,) sit down in those
shadows; they apprehended that there was aliquid altius, somewhat of a higher
nature in the Covenant betwixt God and his people, and that they mainly looked
at, and applied themselves unto. Or in stead of Sacrifice. In stead of those
legal Sacrifices, and ceremonial observances, (wherein the greatest part
placed all their Religion,) they consecrated themselves unto the Lord, gave up
themselves unto God by a solemn Covenant. Romans 12. 1.
In stead of those dead and unreasonable Sacrifices, of bruit beasts, they
offered up unto God that (...), that (...) (as the Apostle describes the
Sacrifices of Christians) that Living Sacrifice, that Reasonable service;
devoting themselves to the true inward spiritual worship and service of God,
whereunto they had bound themselves by solemn Vow and Covenant. This
Exposition I find Calvin and Mollerus after him, not wholly disallowing.

2 Others in the second place, taking the word [Saints] in a clean contrary
sense, understanding by it formal Hypocrites, (who are here called by the name
of Saints, either by way of (...), of else because they were such (...),
Species Ironiae subest quoad degeneres and simulatos Iudaeos.
(as the Apostle faith of them) Jews and Saints outwardly in the outward
appearance, Saints by Profession, they look upon this (...) clause as a
Character of them. They were such as had made a Covenant* with God* over
Sacrifice, or with, or by Sacrifice* (...) (say they) they so offered Sacrifice
to God, as if that had been all that his Covenant required, Calv* ad loc.
which when they had done, they now thought that God could not but be well
pleased with them; nay, they thought that hereby they had tied and bound God
after a sort unto them, viz. by their Sacrifices. Ex opere operato putant se
Deo placere, Scultet* ad loc.
A true Character of a formal Hypocrite, who so pleases himself in the opus
operatum of a duty, as that he thinks God cannot but be well pleased with
it. He so looks upon his services and duties; as if God were beholding to him
for them, and obliged to him by them. Thus Scultetus, and some others here
carry it.

3 But not to rest in either of these: There is yet a third, and a last sense,
which I rather incline unto, apprehending it both more simple and genuine. The
persons to whom this Citation is here directed they were not any select
company, whether of True Worshippers, or Formal Hypocrites, but the whole
body of the Jewish Church, collectively considered, consisting of both these,
yet here called by the name of Saints, Because there were some, and no question
many such amongst them, Saints in truth as well, as in appearance. Now the
determination here (as often elsewhere) is taken from the better part. It is an
honor (says Calvin, writing upon the Text which God puts upon his Saints,
to denominate a promiscuous multitude consisting of good and bad from them; I,
though they be the far less number. That was the case here in the Text. In the
Jewish Church at this time, the greatest part were no better then formal
Hypocrites, yet in as much as there was a party of Saints amongst them, God
calls them all by this name. Secondly, If they were not all Saints, yet they
ought to have been so. They were all Saints by calling, called to be Saints,
and so called Saints, and that to put them in mind of their Duty, what ones
they all ought to be. Now taking the word in this sense, we shall find this
subsequent clause to be a description generally of all the visible members of
that visible Church, they were such as had made a Covenant with God over
Sacrifice; with Sacrifice, by Sacrifice.

For the full and clear understanding whereof we might take notice of an
ancient custom in use both amongst the people of the Jews, and other Nations
also, who were wont in their making of Covenants, for the greater solemnity of
them, to make them, with or by Sacrifice. Which they did after this manner.
Having slain the Sacrifice they divided, laying the parts one over against the
other, and so the Covenanters went between them. Thus the Lord himself (who was
the first instituter of this Ceremony) made a Covenant with Abraham, Genesis 15.
18.
Genesis 15. Intending there to make a solemn Covenant with him, Ver. 9, 10.
he directs Abraham what to do, viz. Take an Heighfer, and a Goat and a Ram,
etc. And what should he do with them? Why divide them in pieces, parting them
asunder, laying the parts one against the other. And to what end was this? Why
that the Lord might pass betwixt them, which accordingly he did in that
visible sign of a Burning Lamp in the midst of a smoking furnace, Ver. 17.
Verse 17. Behold a smoking furnance and a Burning Lamp passed between those
pieces. Thus did God make this Covenant with Abraham, a Covenant with, or By
Sacrifice.

And thus the Lords people, the people of the Jews, were wont to make Covenant
with him. Bringing a Sacrifice before the Lord they cut it in pieces, and so
passed betwixt the parts. Such a Covenant the Lord puts the Princes and
People of Israel in mind of that they had made with him, Ier. 34. 18.
Ier. 34. 18. The Covenant which they had made before me, when they cut the
Calf in twain, and passed between the parts thereof. This it seems was their
Custom, which as they took it from God himself, so the Heathens borrowed it
from them, who were wont to make their Covenants also after the same manner.
(...) jungebant foedera Porca. Virgil. (...)
Killing, and cutting a Swine in pieces. (Similis labris lactucae, a fit
Sacrifice for such Sacrificers) they struck their Covenants. And from this
Custom (as our Aynsworth elsewhere well observes it) comes that phrase of
Striking or Cutting a Covenant. Aynsworth, sup. Psalm. 25. 10. Ps. 89. 3.
I have made a Covenant with my chosen, (says the Lord, Psalm. 89.) The
Original has it, Karati Berith, Exciosi foedus (as Montanus renders it) I
have Cut or Struck a Covenant. Which phrase is also here retained in the Text.
Those that have made a Covenant, Corethi Berithi, Ferientes Pactum, that have
Cut or Struk a Covenant by Sacrifice, viz. by cutting of the Sacrifice and
parting it a sunder have made a covenant with me.

Such a Covenant had the people of the Jews entered and made with their God, a
Covenant, and a Solemn Covenant. And such a Covenant must all the Lords People
enter with their God, Doct.
all that would be owned and acknowledged of God as his People, as his Saints,
they must strike Covenant, and a Solemn Covenant with their God. Upon these
two I shall insist severally, briefly by way of Explication, putting them
together in the Application.

The Lords people are all Covenanters, snch as have struck a Covenant with God.
Such were the members of the Jewish Church; and such are the true members of
Christian Churches. A truth which needs no confirmation. This it is that
gives both Esse, and Distinguere, that makes a people to be Gods people, and
distinguishes them from all other people; Even the Covenant betwixt God and
them. This it was that distiuguished the seed of Abraham, and the people of the
Jews from all other people in the World, and that made them Gods people, even
the Covenant betwixt God and them, the sign and seal whereof they carried in
their flesh, the Seal of Circumcision, Genesis 17. 13.
which is therefore called The Covenant. My Covenant shall be in your flesh:
that is a sign of the Covenant. And this it is that now distinguishes the
true Church of Christ, and the true members thereof from all others, even the
Covenant betwixt God and them; the signs and seals whereof are the two
Sacraments of the new Testament, Baptism, and the Lords Supper; both Seals of
this Covenant; the one of their entrance into Covenant, the other of their
continuance in that Covenant.

Q. For the opening and illustrating of this, Q.
the Question will be; What is this Covenant betwixt God and his People?

A. To this the Prophet Jeremy will return us an answer in a few words, A.
Ier. 31. This is the Covenant that I will make with the house of Israel, Ier.
31. 33
etc. I will be their God, and they shall be my People, This is the Covenant
which God makes with them; and from thence we may easily learn what is the
Covenant that they make with him, the one being but a Counterpaine to the
other, viz. That he shall be their God, and they will be his People. It is the
nature of Covenants to be mutual. And such is the Covenant betwixt God and his
people, consisting of two parts; the Covenant on Gods part, and the Covenant on
their parts.

The Covenant on Gods part is, that he will be their God, and they shall be
his People. So ran the Covenant that God made with Abraham. I will be thy God,
and the God of thy seed: And such is the Covenant that God makes with his
Church and people in all ages, (it being still one and the same Covenant for
substance) viz. that he will be their God; Their God? What is that? Nay, what
is it not? their Father* their King, their Savior, Genesis 17 1.
their Deliverer, their All, a God Alsufficient; such a one he is in himself,
and such a one he will show himself to all that are in Covenant with him; And
They shall be his People, acknowledged of him, favored by him: He will pardon
their sins, he will heal their infirmities, supply their wants, sanctify
their natures, bestowing upon them all good things requisite for the^. That is
the Covenant on Gods part.

But what is the Covenant on his People part? That is the Covenant we have now
principally to deal with. That Covenant wherein the Lords people do bind
themselves unto him. Now this is nothing but an Echo to the other, a
Restipulation. When the hearts of a people come to close with God, taking him
for their God, and giving up themselves to him to be his people: When to Gods
[I will be your God, and you shall be my People] their Souls Echo back again
[Lord, Thou shall be our God, and we will be thy People.] Now is this Covenant
made up. Such was the Covenant that Jacob promised to renew with his God upon
his safe return from his journey, Genesis 28 21.
Genesis 28. If the Lord will be with me, etc. so that I return safe to my
fathers house, etc. Then shall the Lord be my God. Now what is it for a people
to take God for their God? Why to engage themselves in the solemn Vow purpose,
and resolution of their hearts that they will set him up as God, and that both
in their Hearts, and Lives, giving all those respects unto him which are due to
a God* viz. to Love him above all, to Fear him above all, to Trust in him
above all, to Worship him according to his will, to walk before him in the
conscionable endeavor of an universal obedience. This it is for a man to take
God for his God. And this must all the Lords people do; striking such a
Covenant with God, even a Covenant of Obedience. Such was the Covenant which
the Israelites entered with their God at the giving of the Law. Upon Moses his
coming down from the Mount, having received the Tables of the Covenant, and
the Book of the Covenant, (the Moral, Judicial, and Ceremonial Laws) from
God, he calls the people to enter a Covenant with God. And what was that
Covenant? Ex. 24. 7.
Why a Covenant of Obedience. He read the Book of the Covenant in their ears,
And the People said, All that the Lord has said we will do it, and be
obedient. This was the Covenant, for the confirming whereof Moses then
sprinkled upon them the blood of the Covenant, viz. the Blood of the Sacrifices
wherewith they made that Covenant. And such a Covenant it is that all the Lords
people have made, and are to make with their God. A Covenant, and that

A solemn Covenant; a word of that, and but a word, my Application. Such a
Covenant it was that the people of the Jews had made and often renewed with
their God, not a slight but a solemn Covenant, a Covenant with Sacrifice. Many
were the Sacrifices instituted by God, and observed by his people under the old
Testament. Of these Sacrifices, as there were diverse kinds, so there were
diverse ends and uses; Amongst other, this was common to them all, they were all
as so many sigilla, syngraphae, so many signs and seals of the Covenant
between God and his People. Signs, Commemorative signs and tokens, putting
them in mind of the Covenant. Seals for confirmation of that Covenant, the
Covenant on Gods part, the Covenant on their part. On Gods part. Hereby did God
assure them that he would be their God. On their part. Hereby did they bind
themselves unto him that they would be his people. This was one common end of
all their Sacrifices; the proper and particular end of some of them.

These Sacrifices they are now ceased: But in the mean time God has not left
his Church without signs and seals of this Covenant. Such are the Sacraments
of the New Testament; Baptism and the Lords Supper; both seals of this
Covenant, the one (as I told you) a Seal of our Entrance into it, the other of
our continuance in it. And with or by these do the Lords people now strike a
Covenant with their God* Giving themselves to the Lord in Baptism, they
confirm that gift in the receiving of the Supper, both which are appurtenances
to this Covenant, annexed to it as for the testification, and confirmation, so
for the solemnization of it. I might add Christians now, as they have their
Sacraments, so also have they their Sacrifices, their Propitiatory Sacrifice,
and their Eucharisticall Sacrifices. Heb. 9. 26
Their Propitiatory Sacrifice, viz. Christ himself the substance of all those
Ceremonial shadows, at whom all the Legal Sacrifices looked. Their
Eucharisticall Sacrifices, their Spiritual Sacrifices of Prayers and Praises,
1 Pet. 2. 5
and other spiritual Oblations, which as spiritual Priests they offer up unto
God. Now by and with these Sacrifices they are to make their Covenant with
their God.

1 By and through that Ilasticall, Heb. 8. 6
that Propitiatory Sacrifice, the Lord Jesus Christ, who is the Mediator of
this Covenant, bringing God and man together, and that by by Passing (as I may
say) betwixt the Parties. An observable difference betwixt those Sacrifices and
this Sacrifice. There the Covenanters passed betwixt the parts of the
Sacrifice: Here the Sacrifice passes betwixt the Covenanters, Christ
interposing himself as a middle person betwixt two disagreeing parties,
bringing them together; Reconciling God to man, and man to God; first,
meriting, then applying that Reconciliation. And by and through him it is that
Christians are now to make this Covenant with God; viz. with an eye to Jesus
Christ the Mediator of this Covenant; Taking God for their God in Christ, and
giving up themselves to be his people in Christ, Thus are they to Covenant by
Christ, and (as I may say) over Christ. Even as under the Law, the person that
came to offer a Burnt offering to the Lord, to make an Atonement for his sin,
(and so to renew his Covenant with God) he was to stand over his Sacrifice,
Levit. 1. 4.
putting his hand upon the head thereof, thereby disburdening himself of his
sin, and laying it upon the Sacrifice. Even thus now under the Gospel,
Christians coming to make or renew their Covenant with God, they must bring a
Sacrifice with them, even the Lord Christ* (represented and shadowed out by
those typical Sacrifices) presenting him unto God his Father; withal, laying
their hands upon the head of that Sacrifice, by faith resting and relying upon
Jesus Christ, upon the merit of his death and obedience, for the pardon of all
their sins, the acceptance of their persons, the salvation of their souls.
Having thus laid their hands upon this Sacrifice, now are they to make a
Covenant with God, a Covenant of obedience. And thus may they be said to
Covenant By and Over Sacrifice.

2 And as Over, so with Sacrifice. As over this Propitiatory, so with
Gratulatory Sacrifice. Such a Sacrifice it is the Psalmist calls for from
this Covenanting people in the fourteenth Verse of this Psalm. Offer unto God
thanksgiving, and pay thy vows unto the most high: And call upon me in the day
of trouble, Verse 15. These are Evangelicall Sacrifices, more worth then all
the Sacrifices of the Law, Prayers and Praises. And these Sacrifices must they
offer up that will make a Covenant with God; so making a Covenant with
Sacrifice. But my promise was not to give way to doctrinall Enlargements. The
service of the day calls for Application, which let it be directed only by
way of Exhortation, whereof Take these three Branches.

1 That we would all of us strike such a Covenant with our God.

2 That having struck this Covenant, we would be mindful of it.

3 That being mindful of it, we would be faithful in it.

Begin with the first, which putteh us all upon this act of As many of us as
desire to be owned of God as his people, let us strike a Covenant, a solemn
Covenant with him. This is that which the Prophet Jeremy says of the children
of Israel, and the children of Judah returning out of captivity should do, and
excite one an other to do it: Ier. 50. Come (shall they say) and let us join
our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten.
Ier. 50. 5,
And this in the fear of God let all of us here present this day do, and
encourage one another to do it. Come let us join our selves unto the Lord in a
perpetual Covenant that shall not be forgotten.

Object. Why but happily you may say, what needs this Exhortation to a people
that are in Covenant with God, already? This work is not now to do; we have
all of us done it already. We have given up our names, and we have given up
our selves unto the Lord. This we have done in Baptism, and this we have done
in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, both Seals of this Covenant. Thus are we
a people in Covenant with God already.

Answ. And were not the children of Israel, and the children of Juda so? They
were a people in Covenant with God before, and in their captivity, being the
seed of Abraham, and carrying the seal of the Covenant in their flesh. Yet for
all that we find them there taking up thoughts and resolutions of joining
themselves to the Lord in a Covenant, and that by renewing the same Covenant.

A practice frequent amongst the people of God in the old Testament. Many
instances we meet with, holding forth to us presidents for this practice, the
renewing of Covenant. This we find the people of God doing upon diverse
occasions. Specially in these two cases.

In case of Defection. Affliction.

1 In case of Defection when by falling away from God they had broken this
Covenant. Secondly, In case of Affliction, when having broken his Covenant, the
Judgments of God were out against them, either present or imminent, feared or
felt. In these cases we shall see them ordinarily applying themselves to this
Remedy, the renewing of Covenant. Take but two instances for both; the first
of Asah, the second of Hezekiah, both obvious. The former 2 Chronicles. 15. There
you shall find King Asah and his people making a solemn Covenant with God: 2 Chronicles. 15. 12.
Verse 12. And they entered into a Covenant to seek the Lord God of their
fathers, withal their heart, and with all their soul, etc. This they did, and
upon what occasion did they it? Why, at that time they stood guilty of a great
Defection; Ver. 3.
so you have it, Verse 3. Now for a long time Israel has bin without the true
God, and without a teaching Priest, and without Law. A wonderful defection;
And behold Affliction following it, great Affliction, great Distraction, great
vexation; so it follows. Verse 5. And in those times there was no peace to him
that went out, Ver. 5.
nor to him that came in, but great vexations were upon the inhabitants of the
Countries. Such was their condition. In this condition what course take they?
Why they apply themselves to this as the most sovereigne remedy, They entered
into a Covenant to seek the Lord their God, etc.

The like did Hezekiah, as you may see in the 29 chapter of the same Book. Now
it is in mine heart to make a Covenant, (says Hezekiah) Verse 10. Not a
Personal, 2 Chronicles. 29. 10.
but a National Covenant. And what occasioned it? Why first, the Kingdom at
that time lay under the guilt of a great Defection: The Worship of God had been
neglected, the Temple ruinous and polluted: Ver. 6.
So you have it in the 6 and 7 Verses of that Chapter, Our fathers have
trespassed and done that which was evil in the eyes of the Lord our God, and
have forsaken him, and have turned away their faces from the habitation of the
Lord, and turned their backs; Also they have shut up the doors of the Porch,
and put out the Lamps, and have not burnt Incense, nor offered burnt offerings
in the holy place unto the God of Israel. Ver. 15
Thus was the Temple-worship neglected, the place unfrequented, nay polluted.
In the fifth Verse of the Chapter, Hezekiah calls for the Levits, requiring
them to sanctify themselves, and to sanctify the house of the Lord, and to
carry forth the filthiness out of the holy place. Lying under this great
Defection, they were also under great Affliction; Ver. 8.
So it follows, Verse 8, 9. Wherefore the wrath of the Lord was upon Judah
and Jerusalem, and he has delivered them unto trouble, to astonishment, and
unto hissing. For lo our Father have fallen by the sword, Ver. 9.
and our sons, and our daughters, and our wives are in Captivity for this.
Such was their present condition. And hereupon it is that that worthy Reformer
betakes himself, and his people to this course, the renewing of Covenant. Now
it is in my heart to make a Covenant, etc.

To these instances (if need were) I might add that other in the days of
Nehemiah. The people were generally guilty of a great Defection. So much the
Levits in their names confess, and acknowledge. Nehem. 9. 34, 35. Neh. 9. 34.
We have done wickedly: Neither have our Kings, nor our Princes, our Priests,
nor our Fathers kept thy Law, Ver. 35.
etc. For they have not served thee in their Kingdom, and in thy great
goodness that thou gave them, and in the large and fat land which thou
gave before them. That Defection was followed with great Affliction: so you
have in the Verses following. Behold we are servants this day, and for the land
that thou gave unto our Fathers to eat the fruit thereof, Ver. 36.
etc. behold we are servants in it: Ver. 37.
And it yields much increase to the Kings whom thou have set Over us, because
of our sins: also they have dominion over our bodies, and over our cattle at
their pleasure, And we are in great distress. Now in this condition, behold
them betaking themselves to the same course. And because of all this we make a
sure Covenant, Ver. 38.
and write it, and our Princes, Levits, and Priests seal unto it. Verse 38.

This were they wont to do upon these occasions. Now whether there be the same
occasions to be found amongst us, us of this Nation, or no, I suppose there is
none of us here present, will make any question of it. Alas the Evidence is but
too clear* and that as for our present Affliction, so for our former Defection;
the one of which usually attends upon the other; Affliction upon Defection, so
you find it in all the places forementioned; and so we (at least many of our
brethren) in this Kingdom find it by sad and woeful experience at this day.
Our Defection went before, and that a great Defection. The Temple of God
amongst us scoured (blessed be God) the doors thereof were not shut up, yet we
cannot say but it was polluted, and that by bringing in humane Inventions to
thrust out divine Ordinances. The Lamps some of them extinguished, and put out,
the most of them burning dim, either for want of oil, or snuffing. How few
Burning and shining Lamps? The Worship of God for the most part how was it
turned to a mere Formalitie? our condition therein being but too like that of
Isreal's herein the Text; little to be seen in most places but a (...), the
meager carcass of a cold and formal devotion, The heart of Religion being
well nigh eaten out: Little power of it to be found in the hearts and lives of
the greatest part. Multitudes of scandalous persons swarming every where, and
yet continued members of the Church. Ps. 50. 17
Swearers, Drunkards, Unclean Persons, Profane Persons, such as hated
Reformation, yet even they taking the Covenant of God (the Seal of his
Covenant) in their mouths, polluting the holy Ordinances of God by their
unworthy partaking in them. For the rest, how have the greatest part been
either merely Civil, or else Lukewarm. Little Heat, little Life, little
Power of Godliness to be felt or seen. Surely our Defection, and our
Provocations have been great. And our Affliction at this day seems to answer
it. Our case being now the very same with Isreal's in the days of King Asah; 2 Chronicles. 15. 5, 6.
In those times there was no peace to him that went out, nor to him that came
in, but great vexations were upon all the Inhabitants of the Countries; And
Nation was destroyed of Nation, and City of City, for God did vex them with
all adversity. So was it with them: And is it not so with us at this day? Now,
in this condition what shall we do? Why, Now let us join our selves to the
Lord in a perpetual Covenant. Now; never was Covenant more seasonable, more
needful for any people, then it is for England at this day. Let us now make a
Covenant with the Lord our God, and that a Perpetual Covenant. Covenants we
have made, but alas they have been temporary, momentanie, soon forgotten.
Let us now join our selves to the Lord in a perpetual Covenant that shall not
be forgotten. No way so hopeful as this to appease the wrath that is gone out,
smoking against us, and burning amongst us, to put an end to our present
Afflictions, and Distractions, to remove the Evils which we feel, to prevent
the judgments which we fear, to procure the mercies which we want, to continue
the mercies we enjoyne, to stay our God amongst us.

Ob. True (you may say) were it only such a Covenant, Object.
a joining our selves to the Lord in a Covenant, then might we hope for such
an issue. But alas this Covenant here propounded and tendered to us, we
find it to be of another nature, containing in it somthings to us impertinent,
and others scarce warrantable.

A. A.
Here I know some thing will be expected by way of satisfaction. Give me leave
as briefly and as fully as I may, or can, Liber are animam to discharge
conscience, both mine own and others, by resolving such scruples as are most
obvious, and as I conceive) of greatest importance. In the General take the
resolution thus. Though this be not the only thing in this Covenant, yet I
take it (and so would I have every one here present to look upon it) to be the
main, viz. The joining of our selves, and the whole Kingdom to the Lord. What
else means this grand Design of a through Reformation, a Personal, a
National Reformation Personal of our own hearts, lives, Families: National
of the Kingdom, the three Kingdoms. The former we promise to perform, the
latter we engage our selves by all lawful ways in our several places, and
Stations to endeavor. And what is this but a Joining our selves to the Lord by
Covenant.

Some particulars, I confess, here may be found, which at the first sight may
seem to be heterogeneall, some of them Foreign, and others of them of mere
Civil concernment, but upon a review we shall find most of them (if not all of
them) to lie in a way of tendency unto that great and maine end, (like so many
lesser streams which though happily they have their several windings and
turnings, yet at the length they all discharge and unload themselves into the
same common Channel) All of them conducing either Immediately or mediatly to
the promoting of this desired Reformation.

1 To this purpose tends that first branch of the first Article, where we
promise to endeavor the preservation of the Reformed Religion in the Church of
Scotland against the COMMON ENEMY. A clause which seems to look directly upon
them, but withal it reflects and looks back upon us, who are much interssed
and concerned in their (whether woe, or) welfare. In their peace we may the
rather hope for peace. In their Ruin we cannot look long to survive. Such are
the mutual engagements and concerments of both Kingdoms, as that in all
probability they are like to stand or fall, sink or swim together. And such
is that other Clause in the Close of the same Article, where we promise to
endeavor the bringing of all the Churches in the three Kingdoms to the
nearest conjunction, and uniformitie in Religion, Government, etc. A Design of
high concernment. No one thing tending more directly to the settling and
establishing of the true Religion of God in all of them.

2 To like purpose is the obligation in that second Article, which ingageth all
to endeavor the extirpation of Popery, and the eradicating of such other evil
weeds, as may endanger the sucking out the heart of Religion; how ever hinder
the growth of it.

3 To the same purpose, (as truly; though not so immediately) tends that
engagement in the third Article, for the mutual preservation of the RIGHTS and
PRIVILEGES of PARLIAMENTS, and the Liberties of the Kingdoms, with the
joint-preservation and defense of his Majesty's person and authority. Which,
of what concernment they are for the establishing, and preserving of the true
Religion of God, I shall not need to tell you. The Laws, and just Liberties of
a Kingdom, they are as the outworks to Religion. If these be surprised, or
stormed, taken in, it is not to be expected that Religion should long hold
out. And therefore not only expediencie, but necessity requires, that they
should be taken into the same counsels with Religion it self. Of these Laws,
and Liberties, the Kings Majesty with his Parliaments, are by office the
proper Guardians, the grand Conservatours. Great Reason then their should be a
special respect had unto them upon whom under God we have such an immediate
dependence either for our welfare, or we.

I might go on, and show you the like in the three other Articles. The
discovery of Incendiaries, persons dangerous to the Church, or dangerous to the
State, such as shall seek and endeavor the breeding, or fomenting of
Divisions in either, and consequently endanger the Ruin of both; of which you
may read, Article 4.

The endeavor of preserving the Cevill Peace and Union betwixt the two
Kingdoms, a mercy denied to our Forefathers, now settled and established by the
mutual agreement of both Parliaments, spoken of Article 5.

The mutual defense and assistance of all that are or shall be confederated
with us, in the lawful pursuit of this Covenant, mentioned, Article 6.

All these how conducible they are to the maine end here propounded, I suppose
there is none that looks right upon them with an impartial and unprejudiced
eye, but will readily see. And being subservient thereunto, no reason why any
should scruple the admittance of them within the verge and pale of a Religious
Covenant.

Ob. Why, Object.
but it may be said; In this Covenant there are some things which may seem not
only heterogeneall to Religion, but incompatible and inconsistent with it:
Passages subject to just scruple, which a tender conscience cannot but stumble
at. In the taking of an Oath there are three main requisites. We find them
all together in that known Text, Ier. 4. Ier. 4. 2.
Thou shall swear the Lord lives. in Truth, in Judgment, and in
Righteousness. Now, as for the first of these (may some say) it is possible to
observe it; (and I wish it may be so by all that shall adventure upon this
Covenant this day) viz. to swear in Truth, in the uprightness, and sincerity
of the heart; But how the second? how the third? How in Judgment? how in
Righteousness?

Alleg. 1. How in Judgment? When as there are some particulars here, which the
greatest part understand not, know not what they mean. Such is the Doctrine,
Worship, Discipline, and Government of the Church of Scotland; And such are the
Right and Privileges of Parliaments, with the Liberties of the Kingdoms;
things which the greatest part are wholly, or in a great part ignorant of. And
how can they engage themselves to defend and maintain what they know not.

A. I answer; as well as to maintain the Laws of the Land, or the Prerogatives
of the Prince, neither of which are obvious to every vulgar eye, few having an
exact and distinct cognizance of them: And yet none (upon that ground) scruple
the engaging of themselves by solemn Oaths (such as the Oath of Allegiance,
Supremacy, etc. to defend, and maintain them.

2 But secondly, how ever we may be ignorant of some particulars, yet I
suppose the generals of both, either are, or may be known by all that are not
affectedly ignorant.

3 But thirdly; Take notice that, as for the Dostrine and Discipline of the
Church of Scotland, we are not bound to Observe, but to Preserve it. Not to
observe it here, but to preserve it there, and that only against the common
Enemies of both Churches, both Kingdoms. Which is no more, then (for ought I
know) we may engage our selves to do to any other of the forregne Reformed
Churches, notwithstanding their Doctrine, Worship, Discipline be not exactly
known unto us, or (it may be) in some particulars not approved by us.

4 An in the fourth place, As for Parliament-Priviledges, and
Kingdoms-Liberties, the oblgation here laid upon us for the maintaining of
them, it binds us no further, then as they shall be declared, and evidenced
to us to be such. The like whereunto I may say of those ill weeds mentioned in
the second Article, Superstition, Heresy, Schism; which we here engage our
selves to endeavor the Extirpation of. Here the engagement reaches not to
what ever shall be called by these names, Acts 25 19.
(The Jews Religion. Festus calls it Superstition, Acts 25. The Christian
Religion by the Jews is called Heresy, Acts 24 14.
Acts 24. And our Just separation from the Church of Rome, is by them called
Schism,) but what shall be evidenced so to be by the light of the Word, and
consent of the Churches.

Alleg. 2 But you will say (in the second place,) Though happily we may swear
in Judgment, understanding what we swear to; yet, how in Justice? how in
Righteousness? Here is the Pinche, Seeing there is somewhat in this Covenant,
which we engage our endeavors for the extirpation of, which the Law has
planted; If not the Law of God, yet the Law of the Land. It is Prelacie, by
name a Plant (say some) of Gods own planting, planted by the hands either of
Christ himself, or his Apostles, or at least of Apostolical men in the times
of some of the Apostle, And as planted them, so watered by the Churches of Ghost
in all succeeding ages. And shall we find our selves to endeavor the rooting
out of a plant thus planted, thus watered?

A. Mistake it not. It is not Prelacy, (at least not this Prelacy,) that ever
yet made this Claim. True it is, Episcopacy has done it, (with what right, I
leave it to those who are able, to judge,) but Prelacy never. Prelacy (as the
word has been commonly taken amongst us) for my own part (if I have not
mistaken it) I have ever looked upon it as an Exorbitancy of Primitive
Episcopacy, an Excresence from that first Stem, and a thing distinct from it.
Sure I am, the Prelacy here spoken of is: Which, what it is, the next words
explain, viz. the present Church Government by Archbishops, Mr. Case.
Bishops, Chancellours, Commissaries, etc. This is our Prelacy; The totum
conjunctum, the whole body of the present Hierarchy, being thus clothed, thus
circumstanced, thus attended with such a subordination of Officers, some of
which (most of which) never yet had the face to plead a Ius divinum, or yet
Apostolicum; neither has the Church of God at any time found them (to say no
more) any such (...), 1 Cor. 12. 28
Helpers, Governors, or (as the new Translation renders it, putting them
together) Helpers in Government, that it should have any reason to desire the
continuance of them. This is the Prelacy which we here engage our endeavors
against.

Not every, Master Coleman in his Hearts Engagement Preached and published by
Order, and Master Cases Quarrel of the Covenant.
not all kinds of Prelacie, or Episcopacis, (I speak now in the language of
others, such as being of Counsel in flaming and contriving this Covenant,
should know the meaning of it, and no friends to this Prelacy I am sure.) Not
Prelacy in the latitude of the notion thereof. No. Some Materials of Prelacy,
what ever Government we have must yet be left. There cannot be a Parliament
without a Speaker, nor yet a Committee without a Chayr-man, nor yet an Enquest
or Jury without a Foreman; Thus in the State, and thus in the Church. There
cannot be a Synod, an Assembly, a Classis, a Presbytery without a (...), a
Praeses, a Primus Presbyter, one first in Order. And this in the latitude of
the word) is Prelacy. Not all Prelacy then, nor yet all Episcopacy. Paul
speaking to the Elders at Ephesus, Acts 20. 28.
and writing to the Elders at Philippi, he calls them (...), Phil. 1. 1.
Bishops. And should it be supposed that Episcopacie being Circumcised (to use
the word of my Author) from these exuber ant Members, and Officers; stripped
of this unnecessary Equipage, and reduced to the primitive simplicity of
Bishops and Presbyters, should by Authority be conceived to be a meet and
convenient Government for the Church in this Kingdom, it is not conceived that
any man should stand engaged by virtue of this Oath and Covenant to oppose
Authority, in endeavoring the extirpation of it; That being not this
Government, but a new Government. Now we do not swear against what is not.
Neither can a man properly be said to endeavor to eradicate that which as yet
is not planted. Nay more. Shall there be an Episcopacie or Prelacie found in
the Word as the way of Gospel-Government which Christ has bequeathed to his
Churches, and this be made appear; we are so far from swearing to extirpate
such a Prelacie, as that rather we are bound by virtue of this Oath to
entertain it as the mind and will of Jesus Christ. This I have spoken, (not
in my own but in other words) not to declare my own private Opinion in this
great controversy of the Times, the point of Church Government, (accounting it
in my self in this Juncture of times too high presumption to anticipate or
forestall the Judgment of that Venerable Convention, before whom this
controversy now depends, expecting a speedy and fair Decision according to
the evidence of the Word) but only to endeavor a satisfaction to those of my
Brethren or others, who possibly may conscientiously stumble at this stone, the
supposed Ius Divinum, or Apostolicum of Episcopacie.

Obi. But though a Ius Divinum be not stamped upon this Government, yet a Ius
humanum is. Though it be not of a Divine foundation, yet it stands
established by the Law of the Land. And being so planted, how can we engage our
selves to endeavor the rooting of it out.

A. Here, not to dispute what I cannot determine, (nor, as it is supposed, any
other) whether it be in every part of it established by the Law or no. Let it
be yielded that it is. What then? Shall we conceive our selves thereby so
concluded and shut up, under this Government, as that what ever inconvenience
we shall find therein, yet we may not by lawful ways and means, seek, and
endeavor the alteration of it. It is a case which Subjects scruple not in the
Laws of the Land; nor yet Freemen and Burgesses of a Corporation, or Members of
the like Society, in the forms of their Government. Though sworn to defend
and maintain them, yet finding by experience some evident and notable
inconvenience in them, they will make no scruple (neither need they) to
endeavor by lawful ways, and means a Change and alteration in them. Laws,
and Ordinances and Forms of Government though very useful in the first
institution of them, yet afterward, through change of times, they may
degenerate; and become unusefull, it may be prejudicial and detrimentall,
crossing that very end for which they were ordained. Thus is it with humane
Laws and Constitutions, the best, the wisest of them; they are like the men
that made them, mutable; not unlike those liquours, which will grow flat and
sour with standing. It is the Privilege of Gods Laws, they never degenerate,
never prove unusefull, much less detrimentall to the persons to whom they are
given, and by whom they are observed. But Humane Laws and Constitutions may,
which when they do, no reason why men should be so irrecoverably concluded
under them, as that they should not by lawful ways and means (let that still
be carried along) seek an alteration for the better.

Obi. For the better? I, (may you say) were we assured of that we would not be
unwilling with such an exchange. But in the mean time Alterations of this
nature are dangerous, as in the State, so in the Church.

A. True, they are so; viz. where they are managed by precipitate or sinister
counsels, not carried on with due deliberation, and advice, specially where
this exchange is made by Guess and not by Rule; But that (I trust) will not be
found to be our condition. If multitudes of unbyassed Counselors promise
safety, (blessed be God) as yet the Kingdom wants them not, whether for Church
or State. And with what deliberation they have hitherto proceeded in agitating
the business of both (specially of the Church,) let their Enemies judge,
wherein their Protestation is (and I think we are bound to believe it) that
all shall be done (as need as may be) by Rule; And that not by a Lesbian,
leaden Rule; (such as the Rule of Prudence is, which every one may, bow and
bend to his own interests) but by the inflexible Rule of the Word. Which if
this work be framed by, we shall have no cause to fear the alteration.

Specially if we consider the condition of the present Church Government (no
Government) amongst us, which indeed is little better then a Nullitie, an
Anarchie, a mere name and shadow of Government, the Coercive power (which
animates any Government, (being indeed the very soul of it, without which it is
but a cadaverous, and livelesse Corpse) being already by an overruling hand of
a most immediate providence, taken away, and that by unquestionable authority.
Now, it is a received Maxim, Better any Government, then no Government;
Tyranny then Anarchy. What the inconveniences of the one (the present
No-Government) are, the Church of God amongst us already feels to her eminent
hazard. What ever the succeeding Government shall be, yet may we promise to
our selves in it a comparative happiness.

Some other scruples possibly may be started, but I want time now to let slip
after them. Neither are they such (I suppose) but that a little charity
yielding to the present necessity, will soon take them up, affording them a
fair construction, and Resolution.

What then remains, but that this first branch of the Exhortation should take
place with every of us, that we would all of us Ioyn our selves to the Lord
this day in a Covenant, in this Covenant, the maine drift and scope whereof the
Preface and Introduction to it will assure you, is, The Glory of God, the
advancement of the Kingdom of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Honor
and Happiness of the kings Majesty, and his Posterity, the true public
liberty, safety and peace of the kingdom.

And striking this Covenant with God, Use.
Let us then (in the second place) be exhorted to be mindful of it. So the
Psalmist presses it upon all the Lords People, 1 Chronicles. 16. 15.
1 Chronicles. 16. Be ye always mindful of his Covenant. None of us here present
but have made a Covenant with our God. Upon our admission into the Church to be
visible members of it, we entered this Covenant, the sum whereof is (as I told
you) that he should be our God, and we would be his People. This Covenant many
of us, (most of us I suppose) have ratified and confirmed in our receiving of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Happily some of us (many of us) have upon
occasion renewed this Covenant; It may be in some special distress, or upon
the receiving of some special mercy, we have laid new engagements upon our
souls, binding them with new cords, new Vows, new Resolutions. And this is the
service which this day our God by the hand of Authority calls us unto. O let us
not then be unmindfull of this Covenant. Take we heed of forgetting it. It is
that which Moses charge upon the people, Deuteronomy. 4. Take heed unto your selves
lest ye forget the Covenant of the Lord your God. Deuteronomy. 4. 23.
A Caveat very necessary; this being a thing which we are very subject to
forget; and the forgetfulness thereof being of dangerous consequence.

1 Subject we are to forget it. As for our Covenants with men, we easily
remember them; especially if they make for our advantage. But this our Covenant
with God, (though most advantageous to us, all the advantage being ours; God is
no ways advantaged by our Covenants; They are neither, Honor nor Profit to
him, both to us. That we may be confederated with the great God of heaven and
earth, what an Honor? And that we may be interested in all the promises of
this life, and a better, what a Benefit? yet (for all this) how subject are we
to forget it? An infirmity which we have drawn from the loins of our first
parents. They being placed in Paradise, in state of Innocence, yet how soon
did they forget the Covenant of the Lord their God? This are we much more
subject to. A truth which experience will make good to every ones soul. Those
Vows and Covenants which some of us have made with our God in time of distress
and trouble, how soon are they forgotten? Not unlike Seamens vows, which in a
stresse at Sea they make freely, but no sooner come a shore but they forget
all. Such are our Vows and Covenants for the most part which we make in our
distresses; Numb, 18. 19.
Not Covenants of Salt, (such was Gods Covenant with Levi, and such should his
peoples Covenants be with him, Covenants for perpetuity) but rather Covenants
of Snow, which as soon as ever the Sun shines upon them they presently melt and
vanish away. This forgetfulness we are very subject to, and therefore great
need of this Caveat, Take heed least we forget the Covenant of our God.

2 The Forgetfulness whereof (in the second place) is of such dangerous
consequence. An intes to all Evils, and that both of sin and Punishment. See
both in our first parents. They forgetting the Covenant made with their God,
and so venturing upon the eating of the forbidden fruit (a seal of that
Covenant) they thereby let in all those evils which have overrun and drowned
all their posterity; even a deluge of sin and misery.

1. No such an inlet to evils of sin as this. Whence is it that Christians, (I
mean nominall Christians) they dare let loose the reyns to licentiousness,
yielding up themselves servants to sin and Satan in the obeying and fulfilling
of diverse inordinate Lusts, in adventuring upon foul, and (it may be)
scandalous evils? Certainly they have forgotten the Covenant, of their God.
Pro. 2. 16* 17.
It is that which the wise man says of the Adulterous woman, Prove. 2. She
forsakes the guide of her youth, and forgets the Covenant of her God. The
latter a Reason of the former. She forsakes the guide of her youth. gives
over herself to adulterous loves, and inchast embraces of strangers. Why? She
has forgotten the Covenant of her God; that is, her conjugal vow, and promise
made in the presence of God. And whence is it (my brethren) that our hearts
generally are so ready to run out inordinately after the Creatures, bestowing
those affections upon them which we owe peculiarly to God and Jesus Christ?
Surely we have forgot; at least do not, as we ought, remember the Covenant of
the Lord our God, wherein we have engaged our selves to take him for our God,
to set him up in our hearts, to love him, fear him, honor him, trust in him
above all other things.

2. No such an inlet to the Evils of Punishment. For this cause it is that God
threatens his people with the sword (of temporal judgments the worst) I will
bring a sword upon you that shall avenge the quarrel of my Covenant. Levit.
26* 25.
What was the Quarrel of his Covenant? Why they had forgotten it, and
forgetting had violated it. This lets in the sword, and with it Pestilence, and
Famine; as attendants upon it, (as it follows in the next words.) Of such
dangerous consequence is it to forget this Covenant which we have made.

On the other hand, the Remembrance of it is of great use. Useful in
restraining us from sin; Useful in putting us on to duty. In the one a Bridle,
in the other a Spur; both ways very useful.

And therefore (in the fear of God) give way also to this second branch of the
Exhortation. Remember ye the Covenant of the Lord your God. This it is that
the Lord here in the Text puts his people in mind of, giving them a hint of
the Covenant which they had forgotten, that being put in mind of it, they
would be faithful in it, not thinking that Ceremonies, and Sacrifices, and
those external observances would serve the turn, but that they would apply
themselves to perform the Conditions of the Covenant.

Use 3. And this let every of us (in the third and last place) be excited to
do. Use 3
So Remember we the Covenant of our God, that we may be faithful in it.
Faithful in performing the conditions of our part; the sum whereof is bound
up in this one word, Obedience.

True it is indeed, when we have done all we can do, yet we shall fall short of
that exactnes of Obedience, which the Law requires; there will be many
failings, many infirmities. But let not these discourage; knowing this for our
comfort, that these failings, where they are not allowed, but bewailed, and
striven against, they are not properly a breach of this Covenant. The Covenant
that Gods Saints are under (being in Christ) it is not a Covenant of Works, but
a Covenant of Grace. In the first Covenant the condition of our parts was, an
exact and perfect obedience; so as the least failing, the least deviation or
swerving from the Rule was a breach of that Covenant. But this Covenant it is
established upon better promises, and better conditions; the Lord herein
requiring from us not Exactness but Truth, Genesis 17. 2.
Sincerity, Uprightness. Walk before me, and be upright. So as every failing,
every straying from the Rule is not a Breach of Covenant, so long as the heart
is upright with God, not allowing it self in any known evil, any sinful
Commission, or Omission. These are the breaches of this Covenant when the heart
shall sit loose from God, taking in any sinful lusts to give entertainment to
them. And this take we heed of. How ever there may be, and will be many slips,
many failings in our course, yet take heed of sins against Light, against
Conscience. Take heed of letting in, and setting up any sinful lust in our
hearts against the Convictions of the Word. This were indeed to deal falsely
with God in his Covenant. A Crime which the Church washes her hands of, Psalm.
44. All this is come upon us, Psalm. 44. 17.
yet have we not dealt falsely in thy Covenant. At that time the Church lay
under great pressures, great afflictions. All this is come upon us, All these
evils, these sufferings. Yet she professes her integrity. She had not dealt
falsely in the Covenant. What is that? The next words explain it. Our heart is
not turned back, neither have our steps declined from thy way. Verse 18
This it is to deal falsely in the Covenant. When a man's heart is turned back,
and thereupon his steps decline from the way of Gods Commandments, so as he
walks on in any sinful way. O (my Brethren) let it not be laid to the
charge of any of us, that we should thus deal falsely in the Covenant of our
God. And therefore, though perfest we cannot be, yet labor we to be upright
and sincere. Let not our hearts be turned back from our God, but let us walk
before him in the constant, and conscionable endeavor of an universal
obedience.

Thus remembering and keeping our Covenant with God, now be we assured, that God
will remember his Covenant with us. He remembers his Covenant for ever, Ps.
105. 8.
says the Psalmist in that 105 Psalm, which Text if we compare with the
forenamed place. 1 Chronicles. 15.
1 Chronicles. 16. where the former part of this Psalm is recorded, and from whence
it is taken, we may take notice of an observable difference in the reading of
this passage. In the Psalm, the words run in the third person, as spoken of
God, He remembers. In the Chronicles you have them in the second person, as
spoken to his People. Remember ye. Put them together, they will afford us this
useful observation. That if we Remember our Covenant with God, God will
remember his Covenant with us; And because he Remembers his Covenant for ever,
therefore let us Remember it for ever. Herein God for his part will not be
forgetful; unfaithful. It is the first branch of Solomon's prayer at the
Dedication of the Temple. 2 Chronicles. 6. 14.
O Lord God of Israel there is no God like unto thee, etc. which keep
covenant and mercy to thy servants, that walk before thee with all their
hearts. Mark it. Though there may be many slips and failings in the walkings
of Gods people, their foot may often tread awry, yet walking before God with
all their hearts, in uprightness and sincerity, the Lord will keep Covenant
with them, and show mercy to them in pardoning their sins, accepting their
services, healing their infirmities supplying their wants; performing unto them
all the conditions of the Covenant on his part. Verse 15.
What he has spoken with his mouth, he will perform it with his hand (as it
follows in the next Verse.)* And therefore let all our care and solicitude
be, how to perform the Conditions on our part. How we may keep close to God,
and walk before him. Walk before me and be upright. This is that which we have
bound our selves to by Baptism, and confirmed in the Lords Supper. And this is
one main thing which we are now to engage our selves unto in this Covenant
which we are now to enter. So much you shall find in the Close of it, the
last Article, (which you may observe to be set forth in a different Character,
(as I conceive it) purposely to set a note of observation upon it,) the sum
whereof is Personal Reformation, the Reformation of our own Hearts, Lives,
Families. Now every of us (in the fear of God) have a special eye upon this,
looking upon it in the first place, though here set last, beginning our
practice, where the Covenant ends (as it is the Rule of Genesis, and Analysis).
Every one beginning at and with himself, each one endeavoring (as the words of
the Article run) to go before another in the example of a real Reformation.
Having practiced upon our selves first; our own Hearts, Lives, Families; Then
be we, as we may, all of us in our places, and according to the opportunities
offered us, subservient unto the Public indevouring to promote the great work
of a Public Reformation of what is amiss in Church, or State; which we are
to do, all of us by our Prayers; those that have abilities, by their Purses;
those which are called to it, by their Counsels; Magistrates by their
Authority, Ministers by their Doctrine; People by their Obedience. This do we
for the general.

Withal, having an eye to the several particulars contained in this Covenant,
which may any ways conduce unto that great and blessed end, the establishment
of the true Religion of God amongst us, with the restoring and settling of a
true peace, and happiness both in Church and State.

And to that end let me direct your eyes to three or four particulars of
great consequence, tending directly to that end. You find them altogether in
four words of the second Article, where we engage our selves to endeavor the
extirpation (as of Popery and Prelacy) two things obvious to every eye;) so, of
Usurpation, Heresy, Schism, Profaneness. Four words of great importance.
Happily some of you do not so clearly understand the meaning of some of them.
Give me leave to touch upon them a little, that you may both know them, and
your duty concerning them.

1 Superstition, Will Worship, when men shall worship God by ways, Mat. 15. 3,
6, 9.
and means of their own devising; establishing their own Traditions,
Teaching for Doctrines the commandments of men: Introducing humane Inventions
into the Room of Divine Ordinance, making them either Pars or Medium, a Part or
Means of Divine Worship. Teaching, or practizing the fear of God by the
precepts of men. Ioh. 29. 13*
This is Superstition, whereof what ever relics may befound amongst us, and
evidenced to be such, we all stand obliged by virtue of this Covenant to seek
and endeavor by lawful ways and means the Abolition and Extirpation of them.

The second and third we may put them together (being near akin, Cosen
German;) Heresy and Schism: The one an error in Judgment, the other in
Practice.

Heresy. An erroneous opinion touching some Article and principle of the
Christiand aith, obstinately maintained against the evidence of the word. This
is properly Heresy to which there are these three things required. 1. It must
be an error about some Article of Christian faith, which is either of or near
the foundation. 2. It must be an error evident to be such by the light of the
Scriptures, and gtnerall consent of the Churches. 3. It must be an error
obstinately maintained and pertinaciously held after conviction and lawful
admonition. Put these together they make up formal Heresy, Heresy properly
so called. An evil weed; not to be suffered in the Garden of God. One of those
works of the flesh which Saint Paul speaks of, Gal. 5. The works of the
flesh are Heresies. Gal. 5. 20.
Of dangerous consequence* pernicious, not only to the person tainted with it
but to the Church wherein it is tolerated. An infectious evil spreading
Gangrene of a diffusive nature, very apt to spread and communicate it self,
insinuating it self into the breasts and bosoms of men, for the most part, by
way of fair and smooth pretenses and enticements. Rev. 7. 4.
The Whore of Babylons Cup wherein she gives her poison to drink, is a
Golden Cup. In this respect (amongst others) it is that Heresy is elsewhere in
the Revelation compared to whordome, Revel. 14. Those which follow the Lamb,
(the true professors of the Gospel) they are said to be such as (...) were not
defiled with women, Rev. 14. 4*
for they are Virgins. The simplicity and purity of the Orthodox faith, that is
virginity. Heresy is whordome; A secretly enticing, sutablely seducing evil;
conveying it self (as poisons for the most part are) with some sweet
mixtures, the mixtures of some sweet and precious truths. And surely such are
some of those Errors which fly abroad in the world at this day. That (amongst
other) of Antinomianisme, which under a color of exalting of Christ, and
setting up free grace (the most glorious pretext in the world) trample upon
Moses, beating down the Law, that Law which Christ came to establish, not
allowing it any directive power, to be so much as a Rule of our obedience,
withal, taking away all sense and conscience of sin (as sin) in the
Regenerate, An Heresy of that dangerous consequence, that unless it be
extirpated, and rooted out, it will endanger the eating out the heart, and
bowels of all true Religion.

3 Schism. The word signifies a Rending, a taring, ((...), a (...)) and it is
nothing but a Rending and taring of the Unity of the Church. As when men shall
make divisions, and factions in a Church, breaking it into pieces, and parts.
Such were those Schisms in the Church of Corinth, (so the Apostle calls
them, I beseech you brethren that there be no divisions amongst you: 1 Cor. 11.
10, 11, 12*
1 Cor. 1. 10. (...), (says the Original,) Schisms) where some were
followers of Paul, others of Apollos, a third of Cephas, a fourth of Christ; so
breaking the unity of that body, that Church. Or when any shall separate from
Communion with a true Church. Such a Separation (says our Learned Doctor Ames)
by a special appropriation most rightly deserves the name of Schism. Ames Cas.


Which yet must be warily and tenderly understood. Not that every withdrawing
from some particular act, or acts* of Communion with a Church, wherein men
conceive that they cannot participate without sin, should be presently called,
and accounted a Schism. It was the Case of many of late times in the point of
Kneeling at the Sacrament: They durst not hold communion with the Church in
that particular act, because of that Gesture, about which they were not
satisfied. This partial, and peaceable, withdrawing, merely out of tenderness
of Conscience, cannot properly be called Schism, so long as the Church still
owned and acknowledged, and communion held with it in the mayn. But, where
there is a totalis seccessio, a total departure and Separation, an absolute
renouncing and rejecting of all Fellowship and Communion with a Church, a true
Church, and that upon this ground, because they adjudge it to be no Church, or
an imperfect and defective Church; defective in her Constitution, or
Administrations, and Ordinances, Certainly; if there be any Schism in the
world this is Schism, and that most properly so called.

An evilweed also, no less dangerous then the former. Some comparing them
together, Heresy and Schism, have aggravated this above the other, Muscul.
loc, Com.
as conceiving it to be the more dangerous of the two.

And surely dangerous it is, not only to the person himself who makes this
Schism, who hereby

1 Excommunicates himself, cuts off himself from Fellowship, and Communion with
the Church and People of God; depriving himself of Church Priviledges, as also
of the public Ordinances, the means of his Edification and salvation, to which
God has promised a special concurrence.

2 Besides, running out of the fold, he thereby exposes himself to the Wolf.
And hence it is that those which have made such a total seccession, and
separation, they seldom stay there, but are carried on to further and more
dangerous errors, as to gross Anabaptisme, and F^^^ilisme, and what not?

2 But dangerous also the Committie, to the Body of the Church, which by this
means is rent and torn, and dismembered. Which what it is to the Natural body,
what danger, and what Torment, they which have felt it, can tell. I wish they
which stand guilty of this evil were but as apprehensive and fensible of what
it is to the mystical body, how detrimentall, how dangerous: What it is thus
to divide Christ; thus to despise and contemn the Church of God, (or despise
ye the Church of God? says Paul to some of his Corinthians); 1 Cor. 11. 22.
A thing of sadder Consequence, then I believe it is generally apprehended by
most of those; who upon every slight dislike, presently fall to Partial, and
from Partial to Total Separation. The Lord heal these breaches.

In the mean time, who ever they are that have taken, or shall take this
Covenant, let them take notice, how by virtue hereof they stand engaged to
endeavor the Extirpation of both these evil weeds, Heresy, and Schism. A
charge which as it lies upon all, so after especial manner upon public
Persons, Magistrates and Ministers. If we then speak against both the one and
the other, you must bear with us: It is no more then we are bound to do. And
if you that have Authority in your hands, do not improve it; for the
suppressing, and eradicating of both, see you to it, for my part I do not see
how you can be acquitted of this Oath, wherein the obligation is so expressed,
that you shall endeavor the extirpation as of Heresy, so of Schism.

4. The fourth and last is Profaneness. A bitter and poysenous weed. A Root
that bears Gall and Wormwood (as you have it described, Deuteronomy. 29* 18.
Deuteronomy. 29.) Such a Root none will suffer to grow in their Gardens, much less
God in his. O let it be the joint endeavor of all and every of us to pull it
up, to root it out, Private persons, every one root it out of his own, Heart,
Mouth, Life. Parents and Masters root it out their Families, not suffering it
to grow within their walls. Every one taking up David's and Ioshuahs resolution.
Ps. 101. 7 Ios. 24. 15*
He that works deceit shall not dwell within my house, he that tells lies
shall not tarry in my sight, Psalm. 101. As for me and my house we will serve
the Lord. Josh. last. Ministers endeavor to root it out of their
Congregations, laying the Axe of the Word to the Root of it. Magistrates to
root it out of their Jurisdictions, and that by a due execution of the Laws
upon public offenders. Such Laws you have diverse; Laws against Swearing,
against Drunkenness, against Sabboth-breaking, etc. all branches of the same
Root, Profaneness. Now take ye notice of it, that this Covenant binds you to
a more strict, and impartial execution of those Laws, then ever heretofore.
Thus joining together, Word, and Sword, Ministers and Magistrates, there may be
some hope of extirpating of this bitter and deadly weed, which has overrun and
almost overspread the whole Garden of God, being so rife in every City, every
Town: And that that being extirpated, and rooted out, Piety and true Religion
may come to put up head, and flourish. Which let it be the Joint desire, and
mayn Design of every one that either has, or shall join himself to the Lord
in this Covenant.

FINIS.

