A SPEECH Made by the RIGHT HONORABLE, JOHN Earl of BRISTOLL, IN THE HIGH COURT
OF PARLIAMENT; May 20. 1642.

Concerning an ACCOMMODATION.

Whereunto is added, THE COPY OF A LETTER Sent from the Right Honorable, the
Lord PAGET, Lord Lieutenant of the County of Buckingham, to the Right Honorable
the Earl of Holland; showing the great readiness of that County, to obey the
Ordinance of the Parliament touching the MILITIA.

LONDON, Printed for W. G. 1642.

A SPEECH made by the Right Honorable JOHN Earl of Bristoll, in the high Court
of Parliament, May 20. 1642.
MY LORDS,
I Have spoken so often upon the subject of Accommodation, with so little
acceptance, and with so ill success, that it was in my intention not to have
made any further assay in this kind; but my zeal to the peace and happiness
of this Kingdom, and my apprehensions of the near approaching of our
unspeakable miseries and calamities, suffer me not to be master of mine own
resolutions.

Certainly, this Kingdom has at all times many advantages over the other
Monarchies of Europe. As, of Situation, of plenty, of rich commodities, of
Power both by Sea and Land: But more particularly at this time, when all our
neigbouring States are, by their several interests, so involved in war, and
with such equality of power, that there is not much likelihood of their
mastering one another, nor of having their differences easily compounded. And
whereby, we being only admitted to all trades, and to all places: Wealth and
Plenty (which ever follow, where trade flourishes) are in a manner cast upon
us.

I shall not trouble your Lordships by putting you in mind of the great and
noble undertakings of your Ancestors: Nor shall I pass higher then the times
within mine own remembrance.

Queen Elizabeth was a Princess disadvantaged by her Sex, by her age, and
chiefly, by her want of Issue: yet if we shall consider the great effects which
were wrought upon most of the States of Christendom by this Nation under her
prudent government; (The growth of the Monarchy of Spain chiefly by her
impeached; The United Provinces by her protected; The French in their greatest
miseries relieved; Most of the Princes of Germany kept in high respect and
reverence toward her and this Kingdom, and the peace and tranquillity wherein
this Kingdom flourished; and which has bin continued down unto us by the
peaceable government of King James of blessed memory, and of his now Majesty,
until these late unhappy interruptions) We cannot but judge this Nation
equally capable, with any other, of Honor, Happiness, and plenty.

Now, if in stead of this happy condition, in which we have been, and might be,
upon a sober and impartial inquiry we shall find our selves to have bin for
some few years last past involved in so many troubles and distractions, and at
the present to be reduced to the very brink of miseries and calamities; It is
high time for us to consider by what means we have been brought into them, and
by what means it is most probable we may be brought out of them.

This Kingdom never enjoyed so universal a peace, neither has it any visible
enemy in the world either Infidel or Christian: Our Enemies are only of our
own house, such as our own dissentions, jealousies, and distractions, have
raised up: And certainly where they are found (especialy betwixt a King and his
people) no other cause of the unhappiness and misery of a State need to be
sought after: For civil discord is a plentiful Sourse, from whence all
miseries and mischiefs flow into a Kingdom.

The Scripture tells us of the strength of a little City united, and of the
instabilitie of a Kingdom divided within it self; So that upon a pruden^
inquiry, we may assign our own jelousies, and discords, for the chief caus^
of our past and present troubles, and of our future fears.

It must be confessed, that by the counsel and conduct of evil Ministers, the
the Subject had cause to think their just liberties invaded; And from thence
have our former distempers grown: For it is in the body politic of a
Monarchy, as in another Natural body, the health whereof is defined to be,
Partium Corporis aequa temperies, an equal temper of the parts: So likewise a
State is well in health and well disposed, when Sovereign powers, and common
right, are equally balanced, and kept in an even temper by just and equitable
rules.

And truly, (My Lords) by the goodness of his Majesty, and by the prudent
endeavor of the Parliament, this State is almost reduced to that equal, and
even temper, and our sickness is rather continued out of fancy and conceit
(I mean fears and jealousies) then out of any real distemper or defect.

I well remember, That before the beginning of this Parliament, some Noble Lords
presented a Petition unto the King, and in that Petition did set down all or
most of the grievances and distempers of the Kingdom, which occurred to them.
To these (as I concieve) the Parliament have procured from his Majesty such
redresses as are to their good satisfaction.

Many other things for the ease, security, and comfort of the subject, have
been, by their great industry, found and propounded, and by his Majesty's
goodness condescended unto. And now we are come so near the happiness of
being the most free and most settled Nation in the Christian world; Our dangers
and miseries will grow greater and nearer unto us every day th^n other if they
be not prevented.

The King on his part offers to concur with us in the settling of all the
liberties and immunities either for the propriety of our goods, or liberty of
our persons, which we have received from our ancestors, or which himself has
granted unto us; And what shall yet remain for the good and comfort of his
Subjects, He is willing to hearken to our just and reasonable proportions: And
for the establishing of the true Protestant Religion, he wooes us to it: And
the wisdom and industry of the Parliament has now put it in a hopeful way.

The rule of this government, he professes, shall be, The Laws of the Kingdom,
And for the comforting and securing of us he offers a more large and more
general pardon then has been granted by any of his Predecessors.

And truly (My Lords) This is all, that ever was or can be pretended unto by us.

We on the other side make profession, That we intend to make his Majesty a
glorious King, To endeavor to support his dignity, and to pay unto him that
duty and Obedience, which, by our Allegiance, several Oaths, and late
Protestation we owe unto him, and to maintain all his just Regalities and
Prerogatives, which I conceive to be as much as his Majesty will expect from
us.

So that (My Lords) we (being both thus reciprocally agreed of that which in
the general would make both the King and people happy) shall be most
unfortunate, if we shall not bring both inclinations and endeavors so to
propound and setle particulars, as both King and people may know what will give
them mutual satisfaction, which certainly must be the first stepp to the
settling of a right understanding betwixt them. And in this I should not
concieve any great difficulty, if it were once put into a way of preparation.
But the greatest difficulty may seem to be, how that which may be settled and
agreed upon may be secured. This is, commonly, the last point in Treaties
betwixt Princes, and of the greatest niceness, But much more betixt a King and
his Subjects, where that confidence and belief which should be betwixt them, is
once lo: And to speaee clearly, I fear, that this may be our case, and herein
may consist the chiefest difficulty of accommodation: For it is much easier to
compose differences arising from reason (yea even from wrongs, then it is to
satisfy jealousies, which arising out of the diffidence and distrust, grow and
are varied upon every occassion.

But (My Lords) if there be no endeavors to alay and remove them, they will
every day increase and gather strength; Nay they are already grown to that
height, and the mutual replies to those direct terms of opposition, That if
we make not a present stay, it is to be feared, it will speedily pass further
then verbal contestations.

I observe in some of His Majesty's Answers, a Civil War spoken of. I confess
it is a word of horror to me who have been an eyewitness of those
unexpressible calamities, that (in a short time) the most plentiful, and
flourishing Countries of Europe have been brought unto by an intestine war,

I further observe, that His Majesty protests against the miseries that may
ensue by a War, and that he is clear of them. It is true, what a
protestation of that kind is no actual denouncing of War, but it is the
very next degree to it, Vltimo admonitio, as the Civilians term it, The last
admonition; So that we are upon the very brink of our miseries; It is better
keeping out of them, then getting out of them: And in a State, the Wisdom of
Prevention, is infinitely beyond the Wisdom of Remedies. If for the sins of
this Nation, these misunderstandings should produce the least Act of Hostility,
it is not almost to be believed, how impossible it were to put any stay to our
miseries: For a Civil War admits of none of those Conditions, or Quarter, by
which cruelty and blood are amongst other enemies kept from extremitiss; Nay,
if it should but so happen (which God of his goodness avert) That mutually
forces, and Armies should be raised, Jealousies and Feats would be so much
increased thereby, that any Accommodation would be rendered full of difficulty
and length; and the very charge of maintaining them, (whilst first a cessation
of Arms, and then a general Accommodation were in treating) the Wealth of the
Kingdom would be consumed.

And of this we had lately a costly example, for in those unhappy troubles
betwixt us and Scotland, after there was a stop made to any further Acts of
Hostility, and a desire of peace expressed on both sides, Commissioner
nominated, and all the Articles propounded, yet the keeping of the Armies
together for our securities (whilst the cessation at Rippon, and the peace at
London were in treating) cost this Kingdom not much less then a Million of
pounds. And if two Armies be once on foot here in England, either a sudden
encounter must destroy one of them, or the keeping of them both on foot must
destroy the Kingdom.

I hope therefore we shall make it our endeavor by moderation, and calmnesse,
yet to put a stay to our so near approaching miseries, and that we shall
hearken to the wise advice of our Brethren of Scotland, in their late Answer to
the King and Parliament, wherein they earnestly entreat us, That all means may
be forborne which may make the breach wider, and the wound deeper; And that no
place be given to the evil spirit of Division, which at such times works
uncessantly, and rests not: But that the fairest, the most Christian and
compendious way may be taken by so wise a King and Parliament, as may (against
all malice and opposition) make his Majesty and his Posterity more glorious,
and his Kingdom more happy then ever. And in another place they say, That
since the Parliament have thought meet to draw the practice of the Parliament
of Scotland into example, in point of Declaration: They are confident that the
affection of the Parliament will lead them also to the practice of that Kingdom
in composing the unhappy differences betwixt his Majesty and them, and (so
far as may consist with their Religion, Liberties, and Laws) in giving his Man

Certainly (My Lords) this is wise and brotherly advice; And I doubt not but we
are all desirous to follow it. We must not then still dwell upon generals (For
generals produce nothing) But we must put this Business into a certain way,
whereby particulars may be descended unto; And the way that I shall offer with
all humility is, That there may be a select Committee of choice persons of both
Houses, who may, in the first place, truly state and set down all things in
difference betwixt the King and the Subject, with the most probable ways of
reconciling them. Secondly, to descend unto the particulars, which may be
expected by each from other, either in point of our supporting of him, or his
relieving of us. And lastly, how all these Conditions, being agreed upon, may
be so secured, as may stand with the honor of His Majesty; and the
satisfaction of the Subject.

When such a Committee shall have drawn up the heads of the Propositions, and
the way of securing them, they may be presented unto the Houses, and so offered
unto His Majesty by such a way as the Parliament shall judge most probable to
produce an Accommodation.

(My Lord) What have I yet said unto you, has been chiefly grounded upon the
apprehensions and fears of our future dangers. I shall say something of the
unhappiness of our present estate, which chiefly stands in as much need of
relief and remedy, as our fears do of prevention; for, although the King and
people were fully united, and that all men that now draw several ways, should
unanimously set their hand to the work, yet they would find it no easy task to
restore this Kingdom to a prosperous and comfortable condition: If we take into
our consideration the deplorable estate of Ireland, likely to drain this
kingdom of men and treasure; If we consider the debts and necessity of the
Crown, the engagements of the Kingdom, the great and unusual contributions of
the people, the which, although they may not be so much to usual contributions
of the people, the which, although they may not be so much to their discontent
(for that they have been legally raised) yet the burden has not been much
eased: Let us likewise consider the distractions (I may almost call them
confusions in point of Religion) which of all other distempers, are most
dangerous and destructive to the peace of a State.

Besides these public calamities, let every particular man consider the
distracted and discomfortable estate of his own condition; for mine own part, I
most ingeniously profess unto your Lordships, That I cannot find out, (under
the different Commands of the King and the Parliament) any such course of
caution and wariness, by which I can promise to my self security or safety. I
could give your Lordships many instances of the inconsistancie and
impossibility of obeying these commands: But I shall trouble you with only one
or two.

The Ordinance of Parliament (now in so great agitation) commands all persons
in Authority, to put in execution, and all others to obey it according to the
Fundamental Laws, of the Land; The king declares it to be contrary to the
Fundamental Laws, against the Subject, and Rights of Parliament; And
commands all his Subjects of what degree soever upon their allegiance not to
obey the said Ordinance, as they will answer the contrary at their perils.

So likewise in point of the King, commanding the attendance of diverse of us
upon His person whereunto We are obliged by several relations of our service
and oaths: In case We comply not with his Commands, We ate liable to his
displeasure, and the loss of those places of Honor and Trust, which We hold
under Him: If we obey his Commands without the leave of the Parliament, (which
has not been always granted) We are liable to the censure of Parliament; and
of ^oth these We want not fresh examples; So that certainly, this cannot but be
acknowledged to be an uncomfortable condition.

I am sure I bring with me a ready and obedient heart to pay unto the king all
those duties of loyalty, allegiance, and obedience which I owe unto him: And I
shall never be wanting toward the Parliament, to pay unto it all those due
Rights, and that obedience which we all owe unto it: But in contrary Commands,
a conformity of obedience to both, is hardly to be lighted on. The
Reconciliation must be in the commanders, and the Commands, and not in the
obedience, or the person that is to obey. And therefore until it shall please
God to bless us with a right understanding betwixt the King and Parliament,
and a conformity in their Commands, neither the Kingdom in public, nor
particular men in private can be reduced to a safe or comfortable Condition.

I have said thus much to give occasion to others, to offer likewise their
opinions: For we shall sit st^ll, and nothing (tending to the stay of the
unhappy misunderstanding betwixt the King and his People) be propounded: It is
to be feared, That our miseries will hasten so fast, and opportunity of
applying remedies may be past.

I have herein discharged my conscience, suitable to that duty which I owe to
the King my Sovereign and Master, and suitable to that zeal and affection,
which I shall ever pay to the happiness and prosperity of the Kingdom,
toward which I shall ever fully contribute my humble prayers, and honest
endeavors. And I shall no way doubt (whatsoever success this my proposition
may have) it will be accompanied with the good wishes of your Lordships, and of
all peaceable, and well minded men.

The Copy of a Letter sent from the Right Honorable the Lord Paget, Lord
Lieutenant of the County of Buckingham, To the Right Honorable the Earl of
Holland; showing the great readiness of that County, to obey the Ordinance of
the Parliament touching the Militia.
I Have received so great expressions of my Countrymen of Buckinghamshire, of
their good affections to the Public, and ready Obedience to the commands of
Parliament, in the present Master this day begun for a fourth part of this
County, that I held it my duty to make your Lordship acquainted therewith, to
the end an account may be given of it to the Parliament, if your Lordship shall
think fit.

Ten of my Deputy Lieutenants met me this morning at Beckonsfield, where we
called over the Train Band, consisting but of one hundred and fifty men, who
made a very good appearance, with their Arms and supplies, and as full as they
have been formerly upon any other summons. Besides these, eightscore Volunteers
and upwards within this Division, presented themselves to us very well armed,
and exercised in two Companies; more in number then the Trained Band, summoned
to this place I am also informed of another Company of an hundred and fifty
Volunteries more within this Division, that intend to show themselves in our
way to the next place of meeting, and of another Company of an hundred more,
who there intend to meet us, besides the Trained Band.

This public testimony of my Countrymens good affections, for the safety of
the King and Kingdom, I thought not unfit to make known. And rest

Your Lordships most dutiful son, and humble servant, WILL: PAGET.
Beckonsfield 23. May. 1642.

FINIS.

