The Bristol Address.
To the Right Worshipful Sir RICHARD HEART, Knight. and THOMAS EARL, Esquire NOW CHOSEN
Representatives in Parliament For this City of BRISTOL.
WE Citizens and Freeholders of this City, hold our selves obliged to return
you our hearty thanks for your exemplary Loyalty to the King, and present
establishment in Church and State, notwithstanding all the Designs, here or
elsewhere, to vilify or subvert them under the specious pretenses of Arbitrary
Power and Popery, hoping you will act with all expressions of Duty and
Allegiance to the King, of whose good affections to his people and the
established Religion, we have no doubt, though ill men have endeavored to
suggest other opinions to his Subjects. And, as you are our Representatives, we
lay before you these severals.

I. That some expedient by Law may be endeavored to punish such as shall
insinuate into the people any designs in our King or Government to set up
Arbitrary Power, or shall calumniate the professed Sons of the Church of
England (His Majesty's most Dutiful and Loyal Subjects) as Papists, and men of
Arbitrary Principles.

II. That no Laws be Repealed whereby the Church or State may be less secured
against their Enemies, but such new Laws may be added to those now in force
that may effectually defend them from the Horrid and Hellish Plots of the
Papists, and from a second Ruin and Desolation by the underhand-contrivances,
and restless endeavors, of ambitious and Fanatical Parties.

III. That you preserve the Prerogatives of the Crown, and the Propety of the
People: That the King and His Successors may be assured of our Duty and
Allegiance, and we receive from them Mercy and Justice: Then will God bless us
whilst we serve him and his Anointed, and Righteousness and Peace shall kiss
each other.

IV. That you endeavor to preserve us from illegal Imprisonments and exactions
of Fees by our Fellow Subjects, lest we be enslaved under Arbitrary Power (as
in the late Rebellion) contrary to Magna Charta, and other good Laws; but if
any shall offend let them be punished in such sort as the Law directs.

V. That the King be supplied with money to secure us from the power of France
at Land and Sea, that what Alliances the King has or shall make for defense of
Europe, and the Protestant Religion, may be performed; and our Merchants
encouraged to send forth those large Adventures they are inclined unto, if they
could be secured by good Fleets in the four Seas and remoter parts: They being
at present greatly apprehensive that the French may possess their Estates at
pleasure at Sea, as he does those of the Subjects to the Empire on Land, from
whence comes a Diminution of Trade in the Kingdom.

In endeavoring these particulars you will truly represent Us.

Bristol, this 7th. March 1680. Subscribed by most of the Aldermen, Council,
and several Hundreds of His Majesty's Loyal Subjects of the same City.



LONDON: Printed for Henry Brom. 1681.


