A COMMENTARY ON THE CANTICLES OR THE SONG of SOLOMON.

Wherein the Text is Analised, the Native signification of the Words Declared,
the Allegories Explained, and the Order of times whereunto they relate Observed.

By THOMAS BRIGHTMAN.

Unto which is added brief notes out of several Expositors of the Revelation,
touching the rising and fall, progress and final destruction, of the Enemies
of the Church; with some other Observances out of diverse Writers.

LONDON, Printed by John Field, for Henry Overton, in Popes-head-Alley. 1644.

TO THE READER.
THat which the Queen of Sheba once affirmed before Solomon, is very true; The
Instruments 1 King. 10. 9.
of Gods blessings are the arguments of his love: whence it is apparent that
God did wonderfully declare his tender love to the Church upon earth, in
continually raising famous men, who like burning lights in golden
Candlestickes, did shine forth to the honor and glory of his Sanctuary. And as
no age (since the Apostles time) has been so glorious for the light of truth,
and the abundance of lights as the present, so I hope (without prejudice to
any) our Brightman of blessed memory, for names sake, may deservedly find a
place among those that were most famous in this kind; for truly whilst he
lived he was, as Christ said of John Baptist, A burning and a shining light. He
was Ioh. 3. 33
famous in Preaching, and for his conversation making himself an example to the
Church, by practicing what he Preached, living according to the rule of his
Doctrine. Yea and that which is wonderful, this light of ours being extinct,
still shines brightly, for what else is his Apocalypse of the Apocalypse, but a
Light shining in dark places? for surely so mysterious is that parcel of
Scripture, that it is not to be interpreted by wit, but by the Spirit of
Divination. But our Brightman has made such plain interpretation thereof,
that thou may easily behold the great mystery of Iniquity of the Beast of
Rome, as also Gods great mercy in calling the Jews. And although many learned
men have (to their glory) ^^ent their whole time in the interpreting this part
of Scripture; yet this our Author has interpreted this and other most
difficult places; witness the Song of Solomon, and the latter part of the
Prophecy of Daniel. Concerning the Song of Solomon, the Law of the Jews is
very well known by which young men under the age of thirty (before which time
they did not enter into the Priesthood) were interdicted to read it, le^t
those things which were mystically set forth, should by the swaying of their
passions, be enterpreted in the worst sense. But our Brightman amongst others
that have deserved well in this also* expresses every word spiritually, whereby
thou may receive Divine and heavenly pleasures. All things are expounded
with great labor, and applied with great Judgment; insomuch, that in this new
path, you may walk in the foote-steps of the Spouse, Jesu Christ: or as the
Jews call it, enter the Sanctum Sanctorum.

The manner of his handling this Scripture, especially in the application, is
universal; for he held this prophecy to be wonderfully difficult, whence it
is no marvel, if some doubt whether he did attain to the genuine
interpretation of the Song: but since the diffiulty of the Allegory has
occasioned such variance amongst the Interpreters, that it may almost be said;
as many men, so many minds: I hope it will not be distastefull to the Church
of Christ, that the labors of this her godly son are published in Print,
whereby the Reader may perceive the Authors great knowledge in this mystery:
he does acknowledge a marriage beween Christ and his Church; but in this he
differs from the rest of the Interpreters, that what they conclude to be
always, he restrains to certain times. I confess, he that for sakes the
ancient opinions of learned and godly men, and propounds to himself a new way,
in which he walks all alone, may (in good manners) be thought to err; but
because sometimes he that reads understands that, which the Prophets
themselves which Prophesied it did not know, and because our Brightman, for his
singular meekness, humility, and godliness, was thought by them amongst whom
he lived and had to do, to be free from all manner of affectation of Noveltie;
as also because he is not singular in his manner of interpreting: for amongst
the Hebre^es, Aben Ezr^ conceives the mystery from Abraham to the Messiah, to
be here set forth; And some amongst us from the Messiah to the Churches
freedom under Constantine: And in this they all agree, that some things are
particularly to be applied. And lastly, because our Author does not desire
credence in any thing, but where it may be grounded upon 1 These. 21. 1 Cor. 14.
33.
a sure foundation, therefore fear not, try all things, and hold fast that
which is good; The spirits of the Prophets are subject to the Prophets.

But admit this Prophetical and particular application does not please you;
yet to behold the whole condition of the Church from the time of David, till
time shall be no more; and this set forth in a short and easy table, cannot
choose but be both profitable and delightful unto thee.

Reader, I thought good to premise these things for thy sake, and for the
Authors praise; (at which I chiefly aim) much more might be spoken, but read
the Author, who in the Explication of the first verse, does by way of Pro^m^,
admirably set forth the authority, excellency and use of this Song of Songs.

By the way, I pray take this caution, if you once enter the Portall, come not
back until you have surveyed the whole building, the curiosity of whose
structure, surpasses my expression.

Let God so shine upon us with the light of his Countenance, that there may
always be a Brightman in Britain, to the setting forth of the glory of God in
his Son Jesus Christ: Farewell.

A Table of the whole book of CANTICLES.
The parts of the Song Inscription, v. 1. A song of the Church Legal Before
the Captivity. v. 1. In Captivity, cap. 2. ad v. 15. After to Christ -- his
birth ad cap. 3. 6. his death ad cap. 4. 6.

Evangelicall Begun ad cap. 4. 6. Finished, and this In its parts, that is, in
its Former Age, pure obscure cap. 5.
with a mist with darkness
restored ad cap. 6. 9.
Latter Age, its Prince borne. grown up.
Inferiors first, cap. 8. 5. 6. 7. second, cap. 8. 8. 9. 10.


In the whole, cap. 8. 11, 12, 13, 14.




A Prophetical Exposition of the whole Book of the CANTICLES.
CHAP. I.
1 LET him kiss me with the kisses of his mouth: for thy love is better than
wine. 2 Because of the favor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an ointment
powered out: therefore the virgins love thee* 3 Draw me, we will run after thee:
the king has brought me into his chambers: we will rejoice and be glad in
thee: we will remember thy love more than wine: the righteous do love thee. 4 I
am black, O daughters of Jerusalem, but comely, as the tents of Kedar, and as
the curtains of Solomon. 5 Regard ye me not because I am black: for the sun
has looked upon me. The sons of my mother were angry against me: they made me
the keeper of the vines: but I kept not mine own vine. 6 Show me, O thou whom
my soul loves, where thou feedest, where thou lie at noone: for why should
I be as she that turns aside to the flocks of thy companions? 7 If thou know
not, O thou the fairest among women, get thee forth by the steps of the flock,
and feed thy kids by the tents of the shepherds. 8 I have compared thee, O my
love, to the troop of Horses in the chariots of Pharaoh. 9 Thy cheeks are
comely with rows of stones, and thy neck with chains. 10 We will make thee
borders of gold with studs of silver* 11 Whiles the king was at his repast, my
spikenard gave the smell thereof. 12 My welbeloved is as a bundle of myrrh
unto me: he shall lie between my breasts. 13 My welbeloved is as a cluster of
camphire unto me, in the vines of Engedi. 14 My love, behold, thou art fair,
behold, thou art fair: thine eyes are like the doves. 15 My welbeloved,
behold, thou art fair and pleasant* also our bed is green: 16 The beams of
our house are cedars, our rafters are of Fur.
A Prayer.
O Merciful Father in Jesus Christ, I (...) th^e (...) thy holy Spirit for a
guide unto me, to (...) these thy ^idden Mysteries. All the knowledge of (...)
is exceeding delightful and pleasant: yea that which stands before the door,
and offers it self freely to every one: how delicious then is that which thou
have laid up in the inward treasuries, shut up with so many locks and bolts,
that no mortal man can break through unto it, but he to whom thou will
vouch^a^e an entrance for thine only sons sake. Be present, I beseech thee,
and thou which have poured forth fiery tongues in times past upon thy servants,
grant that I may understand the language of the Bridegroom and of the Bride,
and may declare their speech pu ely and holily to thy servants; to the glory of
thy Name, and the edifying of thine Elect, through our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ.

Amen.
The Analysis, or Resolution.
THe Authority of this Song is declared by the Inscrittion. Then he prosecuteth
is purpose in verse, which is wholly employed in describing (...) condition of
the Church, as well as it was Legal, from the time of David to the death of
Christ, in the 3* first chapters, and to the 6. verse of the 4. chapter. As
also, as it is Evangelicall unto the second coming of Christ to the end of the
book. The Legal Church is set forth in a diverse fortune, which for plainness
^ake we divide into 3 times. First what it should be till the Captivity, in
the whole first Chapter, and the 2. first verses of the second. Secondly, what
in the Captivity it self, to the 15. verse of the same Chapter. And lastly,
what i^ should be afterward to its last abrogation or dissolvi^g, which
reaches to the 6. verse of the 4. chapter. Before the Captivity, beginning at
his Father David, he shows what condition that enjoyed under him, verse 1. 2.
afterward under himself, verse. 3. And from thence what it should be under his
son Rehoboam, to the 9. verse: under Abija and Asa, verse. 9, 10, 11. under
Iehosaphat, verse. 12. under Iehoram, Ahazia, Ioash, Amaziah, Huzijah, Iotham,
and Ahaz, verse 13. under Hezechia, verse 14. under Manasses and Josias, verse
15. and 16.

THE EXPOSITION.
Verse. 1. Let him kiss me with the kisses of his mo^th, for thy love is better
then wine.
THis Prophecy following agrees well near in all things with that of Saint
John in the Revelation. They fore-shew the same events in the like times. And
either of them directs his course to the same mark. They differ so much in
beginnings as Solomon exceeded John in age. They also follow somewhat, a diverse
manner of handling it. John sets forth the strifes and battles of the
Church more at large, and exactly painteth out her enemies with a greater
caution or heed taking. But this Prophetical Paranymph (or marriage maker)
touches these things more sparingly, desirous only to set forth the joyful
events of the Church, he scarcely mentions at all any accidents, whereby this
nuptial song might be disturbed: or at least so seasoning her troubles, that
much pleasure may always appear in them.

But first let us weigh the words, then let us see the Application: Kisses are
sometimes taken for saire, mild, and pleasant words, as chidings and brawlings
are compared to wounds, as Solomon says, Prove. 27. 6. The wounds of a lover
are more faithful then the flattering kisses of an enemy. The Church then
desires to be instructed with the words of her Bridegroom, which she calls
Kisses, as the most assured pledges of the Bridegroomes love; neither can any
thing be compared with this love; therefore she prefers it before wine,
which is chiefly esteemed among those things which taste most pleasantly: for
the comparisons of this song are taken from such things which do chiefly
tickle up the senses: because our infirmity is such, that we commonly feel no
greater pleasure in this life, then in those things which pertain to these
inferior senses. This is the sum: the company of the faithful do chiefly
desire to be altogether overwhelmed in a most familiar conversation with
Christ, and to be most plentifully instructed with the words of his mouth:
which they confirm to be the great^st pleasure that can be. Now for the
Application. Solomon begins from the Church of his time, and shows the
face of it as it was in the Reign of his Father David, in this and the next
verse. Christ then by the mouth of David (bearing his Type) kissed the Church,
instructing it with most sweet Odes, Psalms and Songs, wherein that time was
most excellent above all others. David is called the sweet singer of Israel by
the Testimony of the Spirit, 2 Samuel 23. 1. Whereof the book of Psalms is a
plentiful witness. Solomon also composed 1005. songs, but very few of them
are recorded in the Sacred Treasury.

The Prophets, which were many then* and at other times, did chide very often;
but not kiss: They reproved sins, they thundered out Judgments, they terrified
with threatenings: whereas this sweet singer of Israel, powered out almost
nothing but prayers, thanksgivings, promises and Exhortations: worthily were
these the times of kissing and embracing* chiefly, if ye add all that care and
diligence, which he applied to ordain the worship of God most fitly, 1. Chro.
23. etc. With these kisses, which even burned with love of the divine word and
of all piety, the people had then no less desire to be embraced (if ever at
any time.) David rejoiced, when they said unto him, Let us go into the house of
the Lord. And seeing the readiness of the people, preferring the worship of
God before all Wine, Psalm. 122. 1. The King himself likewise in the sweetnes^e
of singing (a figure of the Bridegroom,) with diligence and desire of Religion,
(one of the company of the faithful) did not he desire one thing of the Lord,
that he might dvvell in the house of the Lord all the days of his life? Psalm.
27. 4. He manifestly confirms the Law of the mouth of God, to be betteer to
him* then many thousands of Gold and silver. And his judgments to be sweeter
then honey to his mouth, Psalm. 119. 72. 103.

Verse. 2. Because of the savor of thy good ointments, thy name is as an
ointment poured out, Therefore the virgins love thee.
Here, with an elegant Periphrasis, is set forth the consi^eration of the name
of the Bridegroom, from the effects: whose force is weak^ed by the similitude*
For the sense is, Thy name is an ointment poured out, very well answering to
the smell of thy ointments. Ointments signify the gifts of the spirit; and the
smell of these gifts, is that fruit and sweetness, which is received by the
Communication of them. Now whereas the Church publishes the ointments of the
Bridegroom, it properly pertains unto Christ, which is a most replenished
treasury of the inf^nitn^sse of all graces. Yet it is not to be doubted, but
here together with Christ, David his type may also be beholden, who being
repleni^hed with great abundance of most divine graces, breathed out their
sweetness to Gods people which he governed.

He was a man after Gods own hear., by whose example the Kings following are
commended. He was ordain^d to be the a^nointed of the God of ^acob, 2. Sam. 23.
1. God anointing him with his holy oil, Psalm. 89 21. Neither was it without
cause, that he was three times anointed. First privately by Samuel, secondly by
his own Tribe, thirdly by all Israel: whereas the other Kings were only
anointed but once. Whence that name is worthily given him, Psalm. 2. 2. The
Kings of the earth stand up, and the rul^rs take counsel together, against the
Lord, and against his anointed. Wherefore, in these words Solomon de^l^reth the
happiness of those times, which had a King so well furnished with all the
gifts of the spir^t.

The virgins are the citizens of the Church, that people of God, which obeyed
his government, who therefore loved his King exce^dingly, because they saw him
anointed of God, and enr^^hed with sucn notable and excellent gifts. The love
of the virgins first showed it self, when Saul persecuted David, ^econdly in
his two yee^s wars with Ishbosheth, and thirdly in Absolons conspiracy, when
the true citizens divinely smelling the Odor of the anointed King, could not
be terrified by any dangers, from ^leaving to him with firm minde^. So short,
but lively, is the image of the Church in David's reign. Notable in kisses: In
the figurative M^ssias: In the peoples desire of those kisses, and the love of
the virgins in the true Subjects, a most happy Kingdom wherein these four
reigned.

Verse. 3. Draw me, we will run after thee* The King has bro^ght me into his
Chambers: we will rejoice and be glad in thee: we will remember thy love more
then wine: the righteous do love thee.
In this one little verse, Solomon entreats of the Church during his reign,
whose whole condition is divided into six members.

First, the King drawing by his example, and the spirit working together in the
faithful. The first authority of his reign began with the published meeting
at Gibeon, 2. Chro. 1. 2. Of what force was this attraction? There followed
most calm peace, such abundance of wealth as no where the like: wisdom
almost more then mortal. Glory which amazed all other Kings: and (which
exceeded all) a beholding next unto God. These were enough to have drawn the
most unwilling. But the people followed willingly: We will run (say they) after
thee.

Secondly here is taught, that the people drawn by the Kings example, do fly
with a swift course: He commanded the meeting at Gibeon: they flocked thither
in great troops, 1 Chro. 1. 13.

Thirdly, the chamber, whereinto the Bride is brought: was that most
magnificent Temple built by Solomon. This house is the inner chamber; nay
rather the couch and Bed (as it is afterward called) wherein the Bridegroom
converseth with the Bride most familiarly: whither Solomon brought the Church,
when for her sake he built and adorned it so beautifully; and especially by
drawing the people into the Temple, on the day wherein he dedicated the house,
going before them with sacrifices, prayer and thanksgiving, as 1. Kings 8.
through the whole chapter.

Fourthly and fifthly is declared, how joyful all the people were of those
things, so happily begun and continued for many years.

Lastly he says, the upright love thee. But why does he mention the upright,
as though there were any in those times whose hearts were not sincere and
sound? verily he seems by these words to pass over privily those blessed
times to a sorrowful falling away. We know how grievously Solomon fell in the
last years of his reign, by bringing in strange wives, 1. King. 11. His heart
was not found toward the Lord, but he followed Ashtaroth and M^lcom, and built
an high place for Chemosh and Molech. But did not many of his flattering
courtiers run before, whither they saw the King ready to decline? But the
faithful and upright in heart, remained firm in the truth, howsoever destitute
of the Kings authority. Here then we may behold the beginning and middle of his
reign very pleasant. The King leading, the people following, The Temple built
m^st magnificently, the great mirth and rejoicing of all m^n. But the most part
in the end were defiled, yet* the love of the upright was constant, though many
fell away to Idolatry.

Verse. 4. I am black, but comely (O ye daughters of Jerusalem) as the Tents of
Kedar: as the Curtains of Solomon.
Having spoken before of the flourishing est^te of the Church: now the
withering age follows, which is wholly prophetical, and so are all the rest
which follow. Brightness and light are tokens of mirth and gladness, and are so
used in the Scriptures. Black and darkness are applied to grief and mourning.
And truly there happened mournful times presently after Solomon, when his son
Rehoboam by an undiscreet answer, drove ten Tribes from the Church. No marvel
then if she mourned in black: a matter so full of offense, that it might make
the strongest to stagger, and the weak to fall altogether: wherefore least any
should split his ship against this Rock, the whole rage of that time, is not
described in a word, as before, but in full five verses. He begins at the
falling away of the Tribes, where a great alteration happened, as well in the
Church as in the Kingdom. The Church affairs are first declared briefly in
this verse, afterward severally in the 6, 7. and 8. verses. The state of the
Kingdom in the 9. verse. As concerning the brief explication.

The Church confesses her self made brown and black by the loss of her
children, and much of her former beauty; The two similitude^ in the end seem
to agree with the two distinct members in the beginning of the verse, I am
black as the Tents of Ked^r: but co^ely as the Curtains of Solomon. The
Kedarens are Arabians, living i^ hair-cloth Tents, made of Goats hair.
Solinus, chap. 45. which they carried with them whither they would. Pliny. lib.
6. chap. 28. But the curtains of Solomon were such as did not only exceed the
Kedaren haircloth by almost infinit^ degrees, but also they had a settled abode;
whence the Jews figur^^ively used them for every part of the house, as with
Jeremiah, chap. 4 20. Suddenly are my Tents spoiled, and my curtains in a
moment. This also shows that he wrote this song after his repentance: for i^
he had known these things before his fall, A prophet needed not to have been
sent to admonish him of renting the Kingdom from hi^^, and giving it to his
servant, 1. Kings 11. 11.

Verse. 5. Look not upon me because I am black, because the sunn^ ^ath looked
upon me: my mothers children were angry with me; They made me the keeper of
the vineyards: but mine own vineyard have I ^ot kept.
In this verse is a special description of the two Tribes, as there is of the
other, and in the two verses following* In this verse in the first words, he
preventeth the contempt which might be objected* and then shows the causes of
her calamity. Look not upon me (says she) that is to say, behold me not
disdainfully; which words do not only command but also foretell in what
e^timation she should be among her own people. The causes are three; first the
principal: because the Sun has looked upon me, that is, heaven has inflicted
this calamity on me, as God has threatened it before, 1 Kings 11. 11. 30. and
31. And Rehoboam regarding not the hand that smote him hears of Shemaiah,
Thus says the Lord, this thing is from me, 1 Kings 12. 24. The wrath of God is
here very well described by the heat of the the sun.

Secondly, the in^trumentall cause, My mothers children, (not only by kindred,
but also by Religion) being grievously offended at me, have broken off their
former conjunction with me, and consulting privately by themselves, are
altogether separated from mine acquaintance. See the History, 1 Kings 12. 16.
etc. The third cause gives occasion to the former causes, They made me the
keeper of the vineyards, but mine o^n vineyard have I not kept, do you ask the
cause, why God and her brethren were so offended? Thus it was. The chief
authority deferred to the Tribe of Judah, both by Gods decree, and the consent
of their brethren, was ill administered by her: The Lords vineyard was committed
to her to be kept: For ^e despised the tent of Joseph, and chose not the Tribe
of Ephraim, but chose the Tribe of Judah, even mount Sion whom he loved, Psalm.
78. 67. 68. yet through Solomon's Idolatry, and defiling Gods worship (by the
just judgment of God) the other Tribes were offended at Judah, and by
separating themselves made the Church deformed and polluted.

Verse. 6. Tell me (O thou whom my soul loves) where thou feedest, where thou
make thy flock to rest at Noon: for why should I be as one that is veiled by
the fl^cks of thy companions?
Having spoken of the state of Religion in the two Tribes, how, and for what
cause they were afflicted; Now he speaks of the scattered relics in the other
ten. This verse contains a question of the beloved, and the next, the Lovers
answer. This has a petition in the first part, and an inquiry in the rest: The
Petition shows the great care of the godly; their minds were inwardly
inflamed with his love, though he were out of their fight. They ask of him
himself (but whom should they ask else) where he is whom they seek. They knew
he was always in heaven; but not without cause they doubted where he fed and
folded his flock on earth. They saw their brethren fallen away from Judah; yet
they knew there was neither God, nor Priesthood, nor Law in Israel, 2 Chr. 25.
3. The question is, Why should I be as one that is covered among the flocks of
thy companions? A woman veyled or covered, is taken for a Whore, as Genesis 38.
14. Their manner was to cover themselves: It is also much used in mourning; as
the Leaper was commanded, Lev. 13. 45. and Mich. 3. 7. It signifies in this
place, as if he should say, Why should I be like a woman, pining my self with
grief and sorrow, in beholding the wiked Idolatry of the Israelites? Why should
I live among these Idolaters? Where I am enforced to hide and cover my self,
not daring to speak what I think? It is to be observed, that the seducers of
the people, are called his fellows: not by a true name, but by reason of their
ambition, whereby they boasted to be equal to the high Shepherd, and carried
themselves as his fellows. For the ten Tribes had forsaken the true God, and
coined a new Religon at their pleasure, as yet they had the same right which
the chief Shepherd had, to make laws for their flocks, how God should be
worshipped of them. As the Pope now boasts to be Christ's fellow, making new
Religions, with punishment inflicted on those which observe them not. Such was
the pride of Jeroboam and the other Israelites, who would be fellows with him,
to whom all are servants.

Verse. 7. If thou know not (O thou fairest among women) go thy way forth by
the footsteps of thy flock, and feed thy Kids beside the Shepherds Tents.
This is the answer of the Bridegroom, comforting his beloved in her grief; who
(whilst she, which was defiled with such deformity) was adjudged by him to be
the fairest of women, and to excel all other congregations in the world. For
although these relics lurked here and there in the Kingdom of Jeroboam, yet
made they but one Church with the two Tribes. Then he shows her the path where
she should go, and with his finger points to the pastures where he rested
whom she sought. The flock are the two Tribes, among whom the Church was more
apparent; the Kids are the scattered relics of the Israelites. When he
appoints them pasture besides the Shepherds Tents, he bids them go into
Judea, and worship the Lord, after the institution of the true Priests.

Verse. 8. I have compared thee (O my Love) to my Mare, or to my Troop of
horses in Pharaohs Chariots.
This comparing of his Love to a Mare, may seem a gross similitude to
distressed Lovers, but to the Counsel of the Spirit most sweet and Divine.

We have seen in what case Religion was, as well among the two Tribes, as among
the dispersed relics. This one verse touches the Civil state, what can be
more servile, then to be joined like a Horse to a Chariot, to draw therein at
the Drivers pleasure, and against thy will to endure the Harness, the Bridle
and the Whip? Such was the condition of that Kingdom, by whose aid and succor
his Love was protected. For in the fifth year of the reign of Rehoboam, when
they had a little breathed after their former troubles, Shishak the king of
Egypt made war upon them, having twelve hundred Chariots, and a very great
Host. He took many fenced Cities, and had proceeded to the utter wasting of
the Land, had not the Lord at the length pitied them, and turned away the rage
of his wrath from Jerusalem, so that he would not utterly destroy it, but only
bring it in bondage to the Egyptians. As he says by the Prophet Shemaiah, 2 Chronicles. 12. 8, 9. Nevertheless, they shall be his servants, that they may know
my service, and the service of the Kingdoms of the countries. This Shishak
entering into the City, took away the treasures of the House of the Lord, and
the treasures of the Kings house: he carried away also the shields of Gold
which Solomon had made. Behold the Church now like a Mare in the Chariots of
Pharaoh. The drawing Mare betokens servitude: The Chariot, that they should
be compelled unto it by war. Pharaoh (by a common name) the King whom they
should serve, how brief and plain it is described? yet, lest the Saints should
faint altogether under the weight of such calamity, their comfort is, that he
calls her his Mare, as if he should say, although I deliver thee over to
Shishak, yet understand, I have a care of thee. I do challenge thee for mine
own, and thou shall be safe under my protection. Note that he, whom the holy
Scripture calls Shishak, is called by profane Writers Steroosis: And he
joined Kings together to draw his Chariot, Diod. sic lib. 1. page 37. lin. 23.

Verse. 9. Thy cheeks are comely with Turtles, or withrows of Jewels, Thy neck
with chains of Gold.
We heard in the Analysis, that this, and the two next verses, did belong to
the Kingdom of Abijah and Asa. Abijah ruled but a while, and therefore no great
variety of matter happened in his time: therefore that which is common to both,
is delivered in the beginning of this Vers^, but that which concerns the
affairs of Asa, is afterward set forth more at large. The Jewels like
Turtles, be^oken chastity and carfulness: The two Cheeks are the most
conspi^uous parts of the body; these were the Tribes of Judah and Benjamin, in
whom the Church at that time was chiefly known unto men. This chastity and
carfulness appeared first in Abijah, who making war with Jeroboam,
endeavored with gentle speech to call back the ten Tribes from their wicked
purpose, warning them of their falling away from God. There are with you (says
he) Golden Calves, which Jeroboam made you for gods; but we have the Lord our
God, whom we have not forsaken; and the Priests which minister unto the Lord,
are the sons of Aaron, and the Levites wait upon their business, 2 Chro. 13.
8. 10, etc. for although this integrity was not pure without any pollution, as
appears, 1 King. 15. 3. yet was it Turtle-like chastity to that filthy
whoredom of the Israelites: so when Abijah and the two Tribes were beset both
behind and before, they cried unto to the Lord, Behold the voice of Turtles,
careful, doubtless, in so great a strait, but adorned with holiness as with
Jewels; the Lord heard them, and stroke Jeroboam, and all Jsrael before Abijah
and Judah, with a great slaughter, 2 Chronicles. 13. 14, 15. So Asa beset with
almost infinite hosts of Zerah the Ethiopian, called upon the Lord, in the
voice of a Turtle, saying, It is nothing for thee to help, either with many, or
with them that have no power; help us, O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and
in thy name we go against this multitude; O Lord, thou art our God, let not
man prevail against thee. Whereby the enemies were put to ^light, and the
Church greatly enriched with their spoils, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11. etc.

Verse. 10. We will make the borders of Gold with studs of Silver.
The Spirit proceeds to show the condition of the Church under Asa, that he
might give her yet a more comely ornament, as it is declared by the taking
counsel of adorning the Spouse; We will make thee (says he) borders of Gold;
that is wont to be better, which is brought to pass by the conjoined studies
of many, then that which is done by one alone. Furthermore, Gold is now also
added, no less excellent in the singular workmanship, then in the price it
self, for it should be chequered with silver studs. This did openly foreshew
that constrained meeting of the Kingdom by Asa; and that consultation made by
the common consent of the people, and of all orders in the fifteenth year of
^is reign, of taking away all abominable gods out of the whole Land of Juda
and Benjamin; and a penal^y imposed on him that would not seek the Lord, 2
Chro. 15. 9. 10. etc.

Now was order taken for adorning the spouse, not by the Kings authority alone,
but by the decree of all orders. And that Reformation which was begun, in the
beginning of his reign, was now more fully grown to a ripeness. The silver
studs were that faithful executing of the decree, whereby the Kings
grandmother Mahaka was put from her regency for her horrible idolatry. 2 Chro.
15. 16.

Verse. 11. Whilst the King was at his repast, my Spik^nard gave smell thereof.
Ye have heard before that the gifts of the spirit, are shadowed by ointments:
and Spikenard (which is chief among ointments) rightly betokens the most
excellent gifts. Therefore while the King sat, the spouse as it were opening a
Box, perfumed all the neighborhood, with breathing out most holy graces.

But if any ask who the Prophet says sat at this repast? Behold King Asa,
compassed with a large garland of Jews and Israelites, in that assembly, where
he made borders of gold with studs of silver, 2 Chr^. 15. 9, 10. A covenant was
made: but wh^t mirth of a banquet could be compared with this delight?
Furthermore the joy in sacrificing (which was great at that time) had the holy
pleasure of banqueting conjoined to it by the Law. As concerning the smell of
the Spikenard: how pleasant was it to make a covenant among so many people, to
worship the Lord, with all their heart, and with all their mind. Many of
Ephraim, Manasses and Simeon, stirred up by the sweetness of this smell, clave
to Asa, seeing the Lord his God to be with him, etc. As it is said, 2 Chr. 15.
9. Therefore whatsoever is spoken of the Church in the reign of A^a, is
contained in these 3. little verses.

Verse. 12. My w^lbeloved is as a bundle of Myrhe unto me: He shall lie between
my breasts.
Herein are three things signified: sweetness of knowledge by Myrhe:
Administration of doctrine by breasts: and the quiet and continual use thereof
by lying or resting. All which concern the times of Iehoshaphat: who besides
that care of preserving the chaste and pure Religion which he had received of
his father, he was also excellent in the study of teaching, sending governors
and Levites, with the book of the Law to all the cities of Judah and Benjamin,
that they might teach the people, the will of God, 2 Chro. 17. 7, 8, 9. He also
appointed Judges through all the fenced cities, and in Jerusalem, of the
Levites and Priests, and elders of the families, for the judgments of the
Lord, and for controversies: which Judges were as breasts, yielding the
pleasant knowledge of Gods will. And also Iehoshaphat (diligently laboring
that each one should perform his duty holily and faithfully) showed a lively
image of the Bridegroom, lying between the breasts of his love, 2 Chro. 19. 5,
6. etc. This resting was only called a provocation, because that since the
Kingdom was rent under Rehoboam, a grievous darkness covered the Church,
howsoever it seemed more pleasant at one time then at another, yet this rest
was quiet, because the fear of the Lord fell upon all the kingdoms of the lands
that were round about Judah, that they should not fight against Iehoshaphat. The
Philistians also brought tribute, and the Arabians flocks, 2 Chro. 17. 10. 11.
the Moabites made war against them, but were soon overcome. After which they
returned to their former rest. 2 Chro. 20. 29. 30. pleasant then was that rest,
which was mol^sted by no troubles.

Verse. 13. My welbeloved is as a clustre of Camphire unto me, in the vines of
Engedi.
In these words is excellently declared what next succeeded Iehoshaphat: in the
times of Iehoram, Ahazi, Joast, Amazia, Huzzia, Iotham and Ahaz, whereof some
were apparently wicked, some obscurely godly; he stays not to remember them
all severally (least he should thereby pollute the marriage Feast, and cause
the guests to loath the banquet) but briefly binds them up altogether in a
bundle. And where he adds in the end, in the vines of Hengadi: he teaches,
that this company should spring up in the midst of the chief Princes, who
for their pleasant and plentiful fruit, may worthily be compared to most
fruitful vines. Now the Princes before them, were Asa and I^hoshaphat; after,
H^zekiah and Josias, between whom this cluster of Camphire, with their berries,
sprung up among the vines.

Verse. 14. My love, behold thou art fair, behold thou art fair: Thine eyes are
like the doves.
The doubling of the words, declared her excellent beauty, especially with the
Hebrews, who use it familiarly for Superlatives. The eyes of Doves are chaste
and shamefaced, which wander not hither and thither to seek new loves. Such is
the chastity of the Church, when as contented with one true God, she turns
not her eyes to idols, or any other invented worship. These things then
undoubtedly pertain to Hezekiah, which restored true and pure Religion to the
Church, casting out all Idolatry. Then truly the Church did wonderfully shine,
when by the testimony of the spirit it self, the like had not been in Jerusalem
since the days of Solomon, 2 Chro. 30. 26. But were there not dove-like eyes,
which when he considered their wanton looks even toward the Brazen Serpent,
he commanded it be broken, though it had been Gods own ordinance, and an
excellent Monument of former memory, 2 Kings 18. 4. Lo here excellent chastity
joined with like wisdom.

Verse. 15. My welbeloved, behold thou art fair and pleasant: Also our Bed is
green.
How coherent is this praise? which as well instructs the mind in knowledge,
as it endueth the heart with Religion. It is one thing for us to be thankful
to Christ, and another thing for Christ to be thankful to us. He accounts us
thankful by reason of election, we feel not him sweet and pleasant, before we
be called to the knowledge of the truth: and our hearts be kindled with a
desire of godliness. But if any godly one desire to know the state of the
Church after the death of Hezekias, the Bride declares it in commendations of
the Bridegroom. She then flourishes, when she may freely behold and set forth
the beauty of her beloved, which verily happened in the time of Josias, in whose
excellent sanctity the Church saw the sweetness of her beloved, 2 Chro. 34.
and 35. At sixteen years of age he began to seek the God of his father David,
four years after, to clear Inda and Jerusalem from the high places and the
groves: and from carved and molten images, 2 Chro. 34. 3. Religion adorneth
every age but especially that tender age as well for the present and unexpected
ripenes of it, as for a greater hope thereof in time to come.

But the latter part of the verse, declares more fully the History of Manasses
and Ammon. Also our bed is green. The Kings chamber (before) signified the
Temple. Neither is it to be doubted but (Bed) is here used for the same, which
is wont to be placed in the more inward and privy Chamber, where the godly may
enjoy Christ most familiarly. This Bed waxes green like the meadows, in the
beginning of the spring, whose beauty the winter had defaced, if they had
always kept their greenness, it had been unnecessary to make mention of it.
And if Josias had succeeded next after Hezekias, it had been as superfluous to
make mention of the Temples flourishing, as of green grass in summer. The
words then declare as well that winter which miserably afflicted the Church
under Manasses and Ammon, which shook off altogether the flowers of godliness,
and exposed Christ's Bed to all injuries and tempestuous storms, 2 Chro. 33. As
also the pleasantness of a milder time, under Josias, who beautifully repaired
the winters spoils. And the event very well answered the prophecy, for the
purity of Religion was the first care of Josias, when he was yet a child: but
after in the eighteenth year of his reign he applied his mind to re-edifie
the house of God, desirous to leave the Bed green, which he had found
grievously rent and torn with storms and tempest, 2 Chro. 34. etc.

Verse. 16. The beams of our house are of Cedar, our Rafters are of Fur.
This more fully sets forth that which was begun before, d^clared by the green
bed, for first the grass is green which afterward arises into a talk, and
forthwith grows till in the end it come to it is full ripeness. The infancy
of Josi^u was pleasant, but his riper age yielded more pleasant fruit, whereof
there was hope, even from his cradle. He sent Shaphan, M^aseiah, and Joah to
repair the house of the Lord his God. He gathered money of the Tribes of
Manasses and Ephraim, and all the rest of Israel, and of all Juda and Benjamin,
to repair the common house of the Bridegroom and the Bride; Wherein they might
mutually delight themselves; He gate workmen and builders to hew stone and
timber for beams, and for couples of the houses which the Kings of I^da had
destroyed, 2 Chro. 34. 8. Worthily was it now foretold that the beams should
be of cedar, when the building was set forward with such cost, care and
diligence, whereby the first beauty of it might in some sort appear, though
perhaps it could not fully be restored. And hitherto the condition of the
Church was tolerable, oftentimes afflicted with many miseries, but now and
then refreshed again, when religious princes ruled. The following times were
more subject to calamities; To which deservedly a new chapter is given,
bringing new fortune with it.

CHAP. II.
I Am the rose of the field, and the lilly of the valleys. 2 Like a lilly
among the thorns, so is my love among the daughters. 3 Like the apple tree
among the trees of the forest, so is my welbeloved among the sons of men:
under his shadow had I delight, and sat down: and his fruit was sweet unto my
mouth. 4 He brought me into the wine cellar, and love was his banner over me. 5
Stay me with flagons, and comfort me with apples: for I am sick of love. 6 His
left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does embrace me. 7 I charge
you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the ro^s and by hindes of the field, that ye
stir not up, nor waken my love until she please. 8 It is the voice of my
welbeloved: behold, he comes leaping by the mountains, and skipping by the
hills. 9 My welbeloved is like a roe, or a young heart: lo, he stands behind
our wall, looking forth of the windows, showing himself through the grates. 10
My welbeloved spoke and said unto me, Arise my love, my fair one, and come thy
way. 11 For behold, winter is past: the rain is changed, and is gone away. 12
The flowers appear in the earth: the time of the singing of birds is come, and
the voice of the turtle is heard in our land. 13 The figtree has brought forth
her young figs: and the vines with their small grapes have cast a savor: arise
my love my fair one, and come away. 14 My dove that art in the holes of the
rock, in the secret places of the stairs, show me thy sight, let me hear thy
voice: for thy voice is sweet, and thy sight comely. 15 Take us the foxes, the
little foxes, which destroy the vines: for our vines have small grapes. 16 My
welbeloved is mine, and I am his: he feeds among the lillies, 17 Until the
day break, and the shadows flee away: return, my welbeloved, and be like a
roe, or a young heart upon the mountains of Bether.
The Analysis.
THere remain yet other Kings unto the last Zedekias, whose times are
described, verse. 1. 2. And such should the Church be until their carrying
away. In the Captivity it self, there should be some comfort at well to some
few left in their Country, verse. 3. as to the whole multitude in the enemies
country partly, that the Bridegroom should marvellously preserve the Church
there, verse. 4. 5, 6, 7. partly that at length he should deliver thence,
whereof there is an appearance more remote, verse. 8. 9. near at hand, verse. 10,
11, 12, 13. and at length the effecting of it verse. 14. Hitherto the Captivity,
the state of the restored condition should be diverse, which we have divided
into two times. One to the birth of Christ, the other from thence to ^is death.
The time next after the return, should be some what troublesome in the times
next following, verse. 15. which after a little while should receive a
tolerable rest, verse. 16. and 17. Then more afflicted in the latter age,
showed in the beginning of the Chapter following.

THE EXPOSITION.
Verse. 1. I am the Rose of the field, and the Lilly of the valleys.
IN this complaint the Church declares her calamity, as if she should say: I
smell most sweetly as the Rose, and am most beautiful as the Lilly: yet to
the Cropping and trampling on of every one, I lie no less open then the
flowers in the valleys, and those which grow in pasture grounds. My wall is
broken down, my hedge plucked up by the root* and every one feeds on my beauty
at pleasure, as the Herds on the grass in the fields. Yet I despair not in
these afflictions, being assured, that to my Beloved I am most sweet and
pleasant. And so is the Church wont to be, who is never so much cast down, but
is now and then lifted up and refreshed, by thinking on the excellency which
God has be^towed on her. Those times which followed the restoring of the
Temple by Josias, do teach us that this complaint was just. First, Josias
himself, a most pleasant flower of piety, sweeter then any Rose, was cropped by
Pharaoh Neco, and slain at Megiddo. I^hoahaz his son when he had reigned only
three months, was carried away Captive by the same Pharaoh, and the Country
made tributary. Iehojakim served Nebuchadnezzar. Ie^ojazin also after three
months* Reign was carried into exile with ^is Courtiers and the Mightier men
of the Country. But most apparently under Zedech^^s, in whose reign,
Jerusalem was taken and mi^erably spoiled. The Temple burnt, the houses pulled
down, the walls overturned, the City made equal to the ground, and the people
(pulled from their Country seats,) carried Captive into bondage: as free
liberty given to the enemy of making havoc in the Church, as in the open
fields. The enemy has stretched out his hand, (Zame^teth Jeremy Chap. 1. 10)
upon all her pleasant things* for she has seen, etc.

Verse. 2. Like a Lilly among the thorns, So is my L^ve among the daughters.
The Bridegroom answers the former complaint, and teaches plainly how his
beloved is not d^stitute of that comfort which she thought she wanted: If she
would truly consider that. He acknowledges her to be a Lilly, naked of her
former fences, exposed to the prey as in the open fields: Yet not void of all
su^^our but as it were, so guarded every where with a thick hedge of Briers and
Bushes, that neither the herds of Cattle, nor the wild beasts could approach
to do her injury: For the similtude does not only set forth her excellency,
but chiefly her succor and safety. That the Church should certainly be
preserved safe and sound, remaining in the midstof her Enemies, and that she
should be no less defended by her very enemies, then flowers are wont to be
among the thorns, who beset them about with pricking branches. It is manifest
that the Church made trial of this comfort in those hard times, when her
safety was maintained by the help of them, by whose hostile hatred she
seemed, utterly destroyed. Pharaoh defended her against Nebuchadnezzer, and
Nebuchadnezzar against Pharaoh. Neither of them would root out the Nation, as
long as there was hope of faithful obedience, but supposed to defend it for
himself, as a sound resuge against the breaking in of Enemies, with these
briars for a time, she put away extreme calamity.

Verse. 3. Like the Appletree among the trees of the forest, so is ^^y
vvellbeloved among the sons of men: under his shadovv had I delight, and sat
down: and his fruit was svvete unto my mouth.
Hitherto the state of the Church, until they were carried away Captive by
Nebuchadnezzer. Now the Captivity fo^loweth: whose first ^omfort is rest
granted to the miserable Relics, which (when the rest were carried away) had
leave granted to remain in their own country. This comfort is declared by the
similitude of an appletree, which is but a low tree, neither in length of body
or in far spreading of limbs may it compare with many others, yet her fruit
excels many others in profit and pleasantness. The similitudes are always
fitted to the times and the diverse conditions which the Church enjoys, This
apple tree betokens Gedaliah whom Nebuchad-nezzer made governor over the
people which were left in the land, 2 King. 25. 22. He was low in regard of the
tallnesse of the former Kings, or of those high cedars which flourished in the
Babylonian mountains, yet in shadow he was very pleasant, and in fruit
wholesome, so that all the scattered Church flocked under his covering, chiefly
when he had joined the Prophet Jeremy to him, Ier. 40. For now were the cedar
beams and the fur crafters broken, and no leave granted to remain, no not in
the rubbish of the city. They dwelt at Mizpah in the open fields, or at least
under the shadow of trees. As also the prophet Micha foretold, Chap. 41. 10.
Iohanan and the other Captains so rejoiced in this shadow, that they disclosed
the treason of Ishmael desirous to prevent his wicked purpose with just
punishment*, Ier. 40. 13. 14. etc.

Verse. 4. He brought me into the wine-seller, and love was his banner over me.
Such was the condition of the small company remaining. The other captived
multitude were kept in the enemies country 70. years: as it is declared in
these four verses. He brought me (says she) into the wine-seller, that is a
place under ground, where wine is laid and kept for use, as if she should say
he brought me into a sorrowful and dark hole as it were into a cave, and a
place under ground, where notwithstanding I found wine laid up, which was no
less appearance of his love toward me, then the ensign or Banner carried
before the soldiers is wont to be a sign of the captains presence.

This wine-seller was partly Babylon, whither the people were carried away by
Nebuchad-nezzar: and partly Egypt, whither the rest went of their own accord,
when Gedaliah was slain. Ier. 41. Neither did the Church want comfort in these
miseries, whose prison was furnished with wine. For the word of the Lord,
(which is many times compared to wine) was plentiful in this prison: and the
love thereof as conspicuous, as the Banner carried before the Army in the time
of war, Jeremiah sending letters to those that were carried away began this
wine unto them* showing them of the prosperity which God would give them in the
land of their captivity. Chap. 29. But that which is here briefly spoken is
de^l^r^d more at large in the verses following. Here let us consider the
wonderful mercy of our God, who seasoneth his corrections, toward his Church
with such gentleness, that when they think^ themselves, as it were,
overwh^lmed and buried in the grave, yet there they find wine and great plenty
o^ delights.

Verse. 5. Stay me with Flagons, and comfort me with apples, for I am (...) of
love.
These words more plainly show that the house of wine was no banqueting house,
but a cellar wherein wines are laid up. For the lover is not wont to languish
with desire, where plenty of the thing loved is present: and such is that
banquet where the Master of the Feast is absent. The Bride therefore faints,
because she finds not her beloved present in this wine-cellar, (for in
adversity God is said to be absent from us) so that she had need to be upholden
of her fellows, l^st she should f^ll for want of strength, wherein was most
elegantly d^clared, what desire the Church should have tow^rds God during the
captivity, and by what means she should be satisfied until the full
restitution. For in that she desires Flagons and apples, she shows that
these were sufficient helps for her; Apples are the fruit of a low shadowing
tree, as before: Flagons are vessels wherein wine is put, and out of which it
is powered to drink; the apples betokened some inferior persons with power,
under whose defense the captived people might lurk in safety. The Flagons
noted the prophets and priests, full of sweet and wholesome doctrine: whereof
there should be some, which only like Flagons should yield the wine of heavenly
knowledge to the people, when plenty of hogsheads could not be had in exile and
such adversity. God bestowed the commodity of both in the caprivity, for he
wonderfully exalted Daniel, Hananiah, Mishae^ and Hazaria^, who like wholesome
apple trees, shadowed the afflicted Church with their boughs, and fed and
refreshed the miserable people with pleasant fr^it. God gate them favor with
the Median and Persian Kings, by whom (being appointed gover^our of the
Provinces*) they procured much rest to their people, Dan. 1. 19, 20. and 2. 48,
49. These were the apples by whom their feebleness was supported. The Prophets
were the Flagons. Ezechiel in Babylon, to whom the Lord joined Daniel, who
supplied both the parts of the apple and of the flagon, being advanced to great
dignity and most excellent in the gui^t of prophecy; He suffered also Jeremy
to be drawn into Egypt that either people might have flagons, out of which the^
might draw the wine of God^ word, both to quench their thirst, and to succor
their fainting strengths decayed.

Verse. 6. His left hand is under mine head, and his right hand does ^mbrace me.
By this gesture of embracing is plainly showed, that God manifestly declared
at that time how he loved his Church: for he did not only preserve her by man's
aid, but also defended her with his own stretched out arm from heaven, which
we know was done, in the wonderful deliverance, first of the three children
out of the fiery furnace, who loved Religion more then life, Dan. 3. Then of
Daniel himself out of the Lions den, Dan. 6. For whiles Gods by such
wonderful powerful power preserved the trees from all danger, which he had
planted for a shadow to his Church, he might worthily seem to hold the Church
in his hands, and to embrace her with both his arms.

Verse. 7. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the Hindes
of the field, that ye st^^re not up, nor waken my love, until she please.
The daughters of Jerusalem, are the citizens of the Church. The Roes and the
Hindes, are those nations which held the Church in captivity. The meaning of
this verse is, as if she should have said (for they are the words of the
Church, as the learned Tremelius and Iunius observe,) I require of you, ye
daughters of Jerusalem, that ye swear to me by the Roes and Hindes of the
field, that if by your fault, ye drive away my love, from my embracing; Those
Roes and Hindes shall revenge it on you with deserved punishment. Not that it
is lawful to swear by enemies, or by any other then God, but figurativesy by
the form of an oath, she teaches it should be as certain that the citizens of
the Church should avoid all grievous offenses, with no less diligent heed
(namely, for fear of the enemies among whom they lived) then if a convenant had
been undertaken of that matter, and confirmed by an oath, wherefore the history
of this oath is the rest of the time of the captivity.

Verse. 8. It is the voi^e of my w^lbeloved* behold, he ^ommeth leaping by the
mountains, and skipping by the hills.
Now after the seventy years captivity, follows the delivery; whose
prepartion a far off is contained in this and the verse following, consisting
of a threefold circumstance: Of the voice of her beloved. His swift coming; and
his presence. The voice of my beloved: She falls into this speech abruptly,
as if she had heard the voice of her beloved, ^alling her from a far off, and
had been smitten with a sudden joy for the newness of the matter, even that
which she chiefly desired. Now in this whole preparation, King Cyrus
represents the person of her beloved, whom God had stirred up to deliver the
Church: Then after a long time, was the voice of the beloved first heard, when
the rumor began to be spread abroad, that the Medes and Persians would make war
against Babylon. The Prophets noted out Cyrus by name, many years before; that
when they should hear him preparing for war, they might not doubt, but it was
the voice it self of the beloved, Isay 44. 28. Thus says the Lord of Cyrus, He
is my Shepherd, and shall perform all my pleasure: and 45. 1, 2, 3. Thus
says the Lord, to his anointed Cyrus, whose right hand I have holden to subdue
nations, etc. that thou may know, that I the Lord* which call thee by thy
name, am the God of Israel. But the report was spread far and wide, before the
Kings brought their hosts to Babylon: Isay* 21. 3. I was bowed down at the
hearing of it, I was dismayed at the seeing of it, my heart panted, etc. under
the person of the Babylonians. And Jeremiah 50. 43. The King of Babylon has
heard the report of them, and his hands waxed feeble, anguish took hold of him.
And 51. 29. As Babylon has caused the slain of Israel to fall, so at Babylon
shall fall the slain of all the earth. But this voice so fearful to the
Babylonians, was most pleasant and acceptable to the oppressed and banished
Church. Now for the swiftness of his coming it is said, He came leaping, as
it were, hastening over the Mountains on stilts, so passing over the little
hills, that he did not at all touch them. In this manner was the coming of
Cyrus, swift and sudden. How much business he brought to pass after he once,
undertook it; he subdued the Armenians and Craesus the Lydian, in a trice; the
Hyrcanians, Bactrians, Susians, Carians, Phrygians, and Cappadocians; he scarce
touched with the tops of his toes, they so readily yielded to him of their own
accord: See Herodotus, Clio, Xenophon, Cyropaed.

Verse. 9. My w^lbeloved is like a Roe, or a young* Heart, lo, he stands behind
our wa^^, looking forth of the windows, showing himself through the grates.
The first part of this verse declares the swiftness of the coming of Cy^^s;
the later part part describes his presence, and that by three circumstances:
His standing behind the wall; his looking through the window, and showing
himself th^row the grates; All which set forth unto ^s, tho be^ieging of
Babylon by C^rus and Darius: for these mountains and hills quickly past over;
the Tents were pitched at the walls of Babylon, there Cyrus stood a while behind
the wall, doubting what to do: his retinue charging him, and nothing prospering
after his desire; at length, he looked forth through the letties of the
windows; that is, he took crafty counsel, and considered secretly, how he
might gain the City; when turning the river Euphrates, he brought his army into
the City by the channel so privily, that the City was take before any force of
battery was felt. Neither should any marvel, that the name of the beloved is
given to a heathen King: for what, and soever the Church has, the beloved
himself yields it, but he uses diverse instruments, on whom he bestows
his own Name, that all help may be properly understood to be of him whose name
the instruments bear.

Verse. 10. My welbeloved spak^, and said unto me, Arise my Love, my fair one,
and come away.
Such was the preparation farther off; that which is nearer follows: First,
declared universally in this verse, then severally by parts in the verses
following* This sweet and pleasant salutation happened at that time, when Babylon
was taken, and Balshazzer slain; the Medes and Persians obtaining the Empire.
See how the Edict of C^^us, of delivering the people, agrees with this
pleasant calling, Ezra 1. 3. and. 4. Who is there among you of all his people?
his God be with him, and let him go up to Jerusalem, which is in Jud^, and
build the house of the Lord God of Israel, (he is the God) which is in
Jerusalem. And whosoever remains in any place where he s^^ourneth, let the
men of his place help him with silver, and with gold, and with goods, and with
beasts, besides the free will offering for the house of God which is at
Jerusalem. Here the welbeloved boasts or glories in the beauty of the
Spouse, and while he breaks the bonds of her servitude, and gives her leave
to depart, he makes proclamation, Arise, and come away. And verily, though
Ezra, a most learned Priest, relates that matter for the worthiness of it,
most plentifully in the whole Chapter; yet there the thing done is scarce more
plainly declared, then it is here foretold to be done.

Verse. 11. For behold, Winter is past, the rain is changed and is gone away.
The several explication is manifested either in removing the hindering causes
in this verse, or by setting down the helping causes in the two verses
following. Winter, or the violent storm is changed. This Winter is twofold,
proper, and figurative: properly, it teaches that about the end of Winter the
people prepared for their return, stirred up thereunto by the Edict of Cyrus,
which may be conf^^med by probable reason; for their first feast after their
return, was the Feast of Tabernacles. To the celebrating of which Feast, some
time passed before the people could come together, scattered through the fields
and Cities* Ezra 3. 1. Then after certain ye^rs Hezra himself departing from
Babylon, with a readier or more prepared band, spent four Months in the
journey, Hezra 7. 9. whence it is likely that those first betook themselves to
the journey in the beginning of the Spring, or not long after. The figurative
Winter is the wrath of God, which (of late) fell upon the Jews, like a
horrible ^torm, and scattered them hither and thither, like straw or stubble.
This wrath at length pacified, was changed into a great calm and quietness^.

Verse. 12. The flovvers appear in the earth, the time of the singing of Birds
is come, and the voice of the Turtle is heard in our land.
This, and the verse following, show the helping causes, which are also proper
or metaphorical. Proper, the commodity of the time, most pleasant; whereupon
happened the decree and the counsel of returning, and the preparation thereof,
whereof was spoken in the former verse. Metaphorical, God was not only
merciful, (as already has been said) but partly also the reconcised will of
strangers, partl^, the exceeding readin^sse of the Jews themselves. The
nations harkening to the Edict of Cyrus, and God inwardly stirring up their
hearts, with how great desire did they further the return, helping them
abundantly, and furnishing them plentifully with gold, and with silver, with
aid, and with cattle, and with other precious things, Ezra 1. 6. The Jews
delight and pleasure therein, no doubt was, that it might well be compared with
flowers, with singing of Birds, and the blooming of trees: Also among the
Jews were diverse orders of men, which seem here to be signified by the
several ornaments of the Spring, which Ezra divides into three ranks: The
Elders of Families, The Priests and Levites, and the Common People, Chap. 1. 5.
and 2. 70. Here Solomon proceede^h by an inverted order, making no reckoning of
the dignity, but of the deed* and of the nature of it. I supp^se the common
people are the flowers appearing in the earth, which grow confusedly, here and
there, one among another, and prevent the trees themselves in their hasty
ripening. Well, expressing the headlong study of the common people* who are
wont to run before the industry of the Magistrate: The ^^nging Birds and
Turtles, are men of the Leviticall Order, which went before the people, some
with holy songs, and some with sa^rifices, etc.

Verse. 13. The Fig Tree has brought forth her young figs, and the Vines with
their small grapes have cast a savor: Arise my love, my fair ^ne, and come
away.
Hitherto the mean^r helping causes; here we have the mightier, and more
principal: As if he should say, not only the Flowers of the grass, but also
the shrubs and tallertrees, which should guide and govern the people and
multit^de, should set their hands to work, and bend all their force to bring
back the people. Cyrus restored to them every instrument of silver and gold,
which Nebuchadnezzar had taken away. Zerubbabel, Joshua, Nehemiah, and other
excellent men, made themselves Captains over the people, that by well ordering,
they might bring all their desires to a wished end. So in this preparation
here, shine as Stars, the Edict of Cyrus, the time of the year, the office of
the Nation^, and the diverse orders and degrees of the people returning, which
are all declared more at large in the first and second of Ezra; he uses the
same compellation or calling by name, in the end, which he did before, that
he might show, as it were, with bounded limits, in what space of time, this
description of the Spring is included.

Verse. 14. My Dove, thou art in the ^oles of the Rock, in the secr^t places of
the stairs, show me thy countenance, let me hear thy voice, for thy voice is
sweet and thy sight comely.
The delivery it self is declared in this one verse, which that it might
appear and sink the deeper in their minds, he remembers them of their late
Condition by the holes of the Rock and the secret places of the stairs* that
the Church should as well remember to attribute her received safety to God, who
all this while yielded her no less refuge from the rage of her enemies, then
the high rocks and dark lurking places are wont to be to the Doves. As also to
put her in mind that the was not in her own habitation, but in a lurking
place, ^it to keep her in safety in Exile, and not appointed to dwell in. ^he
must therefore depart out of that prison, and make haste to the Palace, which
her beloved had built her. No doubt, they exhorted one another at that time,
that they should pre^er the promise of God in their Country seats, before the
delights of the place, whereinto they were banished, wherewith many were so
taken and ^^^nared that they altogether neglected a return. Now whereas he
requires that she should show him her countenance, and should cause her voice
to be heard; he shows them that at length the Church should be seen again
openly, which had long lain hid from men's sight in darkness. And that voice
which her lover is so desirous to here, is the voice of mourning and weeping,
whereby the faithful in the time of deliverance, should acknowledge their
former offenses, whereby they had provoked God, and should ^arnestly and
heartily bewail them. When ye shall call upon me (says the Lord by Jeremy)
that ye may go and pray unto me, then will I hear you: and seeking ye shall
sinde me, when ye shall search for me with all your heart, Chap. 29. 12, 13.
This is that countenance all overwhelmed with tears, in whose sight God is so
much delighted: this is that mournful and suspicious voice, then which nothing
is to him more sweet or pleasant: for so the second company which Ezra brought
back, beginning their progress with a Proclaimed fast, showed the same aspect
to their lover, causing him to hear a most sweet voice of the confession of
sins, Ezra 8. 23.

Verse. 15. Take us the Foxes, the little Foxes, that spoil the vines: for our
Vines have tender Grapes.
Hitherto of the Captivity, now follows the restored condition of the Church.
And first of that State which it obtained next the return in this, and the
verses following. It appears not plainly, whether these be the words of
Christ, or the Church, or of both: truly that which is here commanded
concerns them both: yet seeing it belongs to his government and authority, to
take away all h^rtfull things, which may damnifie the Church, they seem rather
to be his. These words teach three things of the Church of that time. First,
she has little Foxes lying in wait. Secondly, those Foxes are to be taken and
their deceipts made vain. Thirdly, the beginnings of the restored Church were
so tender, that they might be grievously hurt by the feeblest enemy. As to the
first, The Foxes betoken a craf^y, subtle and dissembling enemy* whereunto
also the Hebrew word very well agrees, which signifies to destroy under a show
of friendship. As Usurers use, who seeming to help poor men, utterly undo
them with borrowed money. How to the life happened these things. For we know
with what craft the Enemies endeavored to hinder the building of the Temple,
craftily offering aid, and corrupting the Counselors with rewards, as long as
the Kings favored the Jews, but when they saw their favors a little to
decline, they spared no reproaches, and false accusations, whereby they might
procure hatred to the new returned Jews: yea to their fraud they added force,
endeavoring to hinder the begun work by Arms, Ezra 4. 23. Now these Enemies
are called little Foxes, in regard of the Syrian, Assyrian and Babylonian
Kings, which afflicted them in former times. These Governors were base and
obscure persons, yet could these little wild beasts do much in such tender
beginnings of the Church, whereby the work of the house of God was hindered,
and being begun lay still about 27. years* Ezra 4. 24. But at length those
little Foxes were taken, when Dariu^ confirmed the building, and imposed a most
grievous punishment on those that by any means hindered the work, Ezra 6. 11.
Yea there wanted not Foxes, for Nehemiah found Sanballat, Tobia^* and the rest
of that crew as troublesome as the former. First, craft^ly studying privily to
oppress them, Nehem. 4. 7. But missing thereof they attempted violence under
color of conference, having hired the Priests, Prophets, and chief of the
people to deliver them Nehemiah. These were Fox-like times, by the Testimony of
Tobia himself, who said, Nehem. 4. 2. Although they build, yet if a Fox go up,
he shall even break down their stony wall, etc.

Verse. 16. My welbeloved is mine and I am his; he feeds among the Lillies.
That is to say, we rest quietly in one another love. He is contented with me
only, and I with him alone. Her lover ^ath such care of his flock, that not
like other heardsmen, he seeks only grassie Pastures for his sheep, but
also the delights of gardens for them. Then at length those Fox-like times
received a reasonable happy condition, the holy Ceremonies were used, and all
wicked superstitions were valiantly and constantly refused, to the which while
the Church applied her study, she showed her self to depend wholly on the love
of her only Lover. Before the Jews were bani^hed to Babylon, they were wont
to follow strange gods, wherefore they were so grievously and often reprehended
by the Pr^phets, and which brought upon them almost utter destruction, and so
long Captivity. In all which time they seemed no less to have forsaked God,
then God himself to have forsaken their services. But now at length called
back to their Country seats, they would preserve chaste piety with a more
firm purpose, constant will and desire. Neither would they ever hereafter
depart from Gods holy Religion, even with the hazard of their lives, which came
to pass acco^dingly, for we read of no troubles afterward in the Church until
the time of Alexander the great. Wherefore these 2. verses comprehend the
history of about two hundred years, namely from the restoring of the Church by
Cyrus to Alexander the great, that is, during the whole Monarchy of the
Persians, as appearech by Ezra and Nehemiah.

Verse. 17. Until the day break, and the shadows fly away, turn my beloved
and be thou like a Roe or young Heart upon the mountains of ^^ether.
The 2. former verses showed the condition of the Church next after their
return: this verse entreats of time a little farther off, yet with a
continued order joined with the former. Herein first he sets down certain
bounds in the beginning of the verse, and then delivers the sum of it in the
rest. The bounds define that space in the compass whereof this consideration
is contained: namely until the day break, etc. Which words signify that most
renowned day of Christ's death: as it shall after appear: whose morning and
midday are here most elegantly declared by adjuncts. All agree, that the air
or wind is usually more troublesome in the morning and evening then in the
rest of the day, as also Aristotle teaches in his Problemes. But why is this
day described unto us, by the troublesome windy morning, and the vanishing
shadows? Because it was chiefly to be noted in both these propricties. The
morning blew turbulently, for straightway in the morning, the Highpriests with
the Elders and Scribes, held a Council and delivered Jesus to Pilate, Mark 15.
1. but at the 6. hour that is to say, noone it self, the shadows flew away
overwhelmed with darkness in a strange manner, so that the Jews saw not yet
an end put to their old shadows, Mark 15. 33. But then especially they
vanished, when the third hour after, at the death of the Messiah, the veil of
the Temple rent in two parts, and the handwriting of the Law (as well of all
the Ceremonies as that which was against us) was altogether cut off. This is
that day so famous in the Scripture, and so exactly defined, Dan. 9. 24. 25. Of
this Christ* himself makes often mention, I^h. 7. 30. and 8* 20. and 13. 1.
The time is here set forth of the condition of the ancient Church from
Alexander the great to the death of Christ. So was that time limited. Now if ye
seek what the whole state of the Church was during all that space* The swift
return of her love, like a Roe on the mountains of Bether, shows it us. The
Mountains of Bether are in Gilead beyond Jordan, whence they take their name*
for they are divided from the rest of Iud^a by the River ^ord^n. And that whole
Tract is called Bithron, 2 Samuel 2. 29. as Tromelius and I^nius do observe. This
similitude teaches that ^er beloved seemed sometimes to withdraw himself, yet
no farther then the neighbor mountains of Bether, seated in the borders of
the holy land, whence he could quickly come to her aid, like a Roe or a young
Hind. Ptolemeus Lagi grievously afflicted Judea, but is lasted not long. Nor
was there any violence done to Religion. Afterward Antiochus the great, strove
with the Ptolemees, Eupator and Epiphanes with doubtful fortune of the wars,
so that the ^ewes were sometimes constrained to change their Masters, yet they
always prospered without great danger of perishing. Her beloved was not
always ready to help her, these first 137. years, but he suffered her not
long to complain, running, ready to help her, from the bordering Mountains
as need required.

CHAP. III.
IN my bed by night I sought him that my soul loved: I sought him, but I found
him not. 2 I will rise therefore now, and go about in the city by the streets,
and by the open places, and will seek him that my soul loves: I sought him,
but I sound him not. 3 The watchmen that went about the city, found me: to whom
I said, Have you seen him, whom my soul loves? 4 When I had past a little
from them, then I found him whom my soul loved* I took hold on him and left him
not, till I had brought him unto my mothers house, into the chamber of her that
conceived me. 5 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, by the roes and by the
hindes of the field, that ye stir not up, nor waken my love until she please.
6 Who is she that comes up out of the wilderness like pillars of smoke
perfumed with myrrh and incense, and with all the spices of the merchant? 7
Behold his bed, which is Solomon's ^ threescore strong men are round about it,
of the valiant men of Israel. 8 They all handle the sword, and are expert in
war, every one has his sword upon his thigh for the fear by night. 9 King
Solomon made himself a palace of the trees of Lebanon. 10 He made the pillars
thereof of silver, and the pavement thereof of gold, the hangings thereof of
purple, whose mids was paved with the love of the daughters of Jerusalem. 11
Come forth ye daughters of Zion, and behold the king Solomon, with the crown,
wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his marriage, and in the day of
the gladness of his heart.
The Analysis.
HItherto has been spoken of that milder time of the Church after the return*
from the Captivity, both of the time near and farther off. Now shall be
showed a more troublesome time by the absence of her beloved, which in vain
she seeks in her bed, verse 1. in the City, verse 2. or among the watchmen
of the City, verse 3. but at length she finds and holds him, verse 4. and 5.

And thus ^ar to the birth of Christ* The rest of the time unto his death is as
it were an overseeing of the marriage, whose preparing is in respect of the
Bride, verse 6. in respect of the beloved and his bed, verse 7. 8. His Litter,
verse 9. 10. The solemnity of the Marriage which gives us a King Crowned,
verse 11. And his love very comely, etc. Chap. 4. 1, 2, 3, to the 7.

THE EXPOSITION.
Verse. 1. By night on my Bed I sought him whom my soul loves: I sought him,
but I found him not.
OF all the space of time until the break of the day (that is to say, that day
wherein Christ dyed) worthy of memory is that night, which the Spouse now
speaks of. The weaker sort might be afraid, lest Christ had altogether
forsaken them, now they could not find him to help them* whom yet they hoped
to be near at hand in the bordering mountains, as is generally showed in the
last verse of the former Chapter. This calamity is declared in seeking her
beloved, which is first begun in her bed, in this verse. Now her bed is the
Temple, as before Chap. 1. 16. Our bed is green. This search was made in the
night, namely when the true worship of God was much obscured, and altogether
overwhelmed with night-like darkness. The Church therefore complains it was
such a time, wherein true Religion was trodden down, so that Christ whom the
faithful thirsted for, was no where to be found in his true worship. These
things then belong to that desolation which Antiochus Epiphanes brought upon
them, who robbed the Temple, forbad Sacrifices, offered Swines flesh in the
Temple, constrained them to worship strange gods, compelled them to leave
circumcising their children, burned their holy Books, and left no manner of
wickedness unattempted. This woeful spectacle Daniel did manifestly declare
almost 300. years before, Chap. 8. 9, 10, etc. and 11. 28, 29, etc. And it is
said to be done, 1 Maccab. 1. from the 23. verse, to the end of the Chapter.
The Temple was not cast down as by Nebuchaduezzar, but woefully deformed and
shut up from the true worshippers, whence she says, She sought him in the Bed,
but found him not. The Bed remained empty and Christ was gone.

Verse. 2. I will rise now, and go about the City, in the streets and in the
broad ways: I with seek him whom my soul loves, I sought him but I found him
not.
The second search which shows that Christ was not only absent from the
Temple, but likewise was not to be found in the holy city. If every corner were
sought never so diligently, there could be found no footstep of piety. The
cruelty of Antiochus wrought this effect, who, after he had sacked the city,
burnt it with fire, overthrew the houses and walls, carried away the women and
children captives, guarded the upper city with murderers, put the citizens to
flight, and made the city an habitation of strangers, etc. 1 Macta^* 1. 33. 34.
35. and 40. No marvel if among the dregs of such most desperately wicked men,
her beloved could not be found. But what could be more elegantly spoken to
foreshew this desolation of the city?

Verse. 3. The watchmen that go about the city found me, to whom I said: Saw ye
him whom my sout loves?
She seeking the city in vain, ligh^eth on the watchmen of whom she enquireth
of her beloved, saying, Have ye seen him whom my soul loves? She stays not
till they examine her, but begins to question them; The watchmen and keepers of
the city, are the holy Priests who (as much as they may) hold fast and keep the
truth in these dark times. And are said to have found the Church wavering,
being driven from her seats. The chief of these were Mattathias the father of
the Maccabees and his sons; who valiantly answered the Kings servant, requiring
them to sacrifice, If all Nations fell away from the worship of their elders:
yet be and his children and brethren would walk in the Covenant of their
eld^rs, and not transgress their worship to the right hand or to the left. 1.
Macca. 2. 19. 20. Such faithful men then found the Church, which yet gave her
no answer, they were so astonished as their silence here declares.

Verse. 4. It was but a little that I passed from them, but I found him whom my
soul loves: I held him and would not let him go, until I had brought him into
my mothers house, and into the chamber of her that conceived me*
Now she departs from the high priests and governors of the city, getting no
comfort of them at that time, suffering with the rest a common destruction. But
going a little from them, she chances on him whom she should have: whereby is
taught that the Church did not long lie in these miseries, but was in short
time delivered from those chastisements. Neither was this comfort vain, but at
length fully showed by Judas Maccabeus, 1. Match, 4. 47. In the 142. year of the
reign of the Greeks, Antiochus began to afflict Judea. In the thr^e and forty
year he spoiled the Temple. After two whole years he took away the daily
sacrifice and all divine worship for the time, 1. Maca. 1. 21. 30. 47. In the
eight and fortieth year the nineth month, were the holy houses purged and
divine worship restored again, 1. Match. 4* 52. 53. etc* Now was her beloved
found and brought into the house of her mother. For we have him present with
us, as long as we keep his public worship, or as often as we recover it being
lost: wherein he has promised to show himself to his. These darknesses for
the time they lasted were very bla^k, but not long. After 2300 days (limited
by the Angel, Dan. 8. 14.) The sanctuary shall be purged Wherefore her beloved
delayed not long to aid her* but came swiftly from the mountains of Bether;
whom the faithful doubted to be farther off.

So these few verses are an Epitome of the whole history of the Mac^abees* and
those books a j^st commentary of this place. Now that she would ^ot let her
beloved go till she had brought him into her mothers chamber, thereby is
signified (this darkness driven away) divine worship should be no more
interrupted, until Christ came in the flesh. The Church is said to bring
Christ into this chamber, because he descended into it and took our nature upon
him for her sake, for he is said to do any thing, for whose cause it is done.
Then from the time of the Maccabees to the coming of the Mo^^ias, the course
of Religion was constant, which no common calamity interrupted. Not, but those
times were most corrupt.

But in the midst thereof, was free leave to worship God rightly, whereby the
Church might nourish her faith, and might cherish her self, with the sweet
familiar acquaintance of Christ.

V. 5. I charge you, O ye daughters, of Jerusalem, by the Roes and by the
hindes of the field, that you stir not up, nor awake my love till she please.
This verse shows that there should be no great trouble in the Church from
the time of the Maccabees, till the birth of Christ as was said in the end of
the former verse. Now there should be silence and a tolerable rest, whereby the
Saints might be defended (in their true studies) from fear of their enemies
which are here noted by Roes and hindes of the field. For though they were come
home, out of the enemies land and settled in their own proper seat^: yet they
found at home, all places full of enemies. Now the Romans oppressed them, and
Herod's tyranny bridled them. These wild Roes caused Gods people to worship him
more diligently, and to be the more careful, le^t with any noise of apparent
impiety (which only disturbeth our beloved from his rest) she should lose the
enjoying of him howsoever.

V. 6. Who is this that comes out of the wilderness like pillars of smo^k,
perfumed with myrrh and frankincense with all powders of the merchant.
Hitherto has been showed, the condition of the Church before the birth of
Christ; Now what it should be while he lived on the earth. This description
contains a prophecy, especially of things done from the conception of Christ
until thirty years of his age: when the beauty of the Church should cause
admiration in the beholders. Who is this? (say they) which seem to be the words
of the legal Church, wondering at the excellent smell of the new smoke stirred
up. For at this time, the Church in outward form was twofold. The legal
continued yet, and the Evangelicall was new begun. Her threefold propriety was,
her admirable coming out of the desert; her smokie enlarging and increase; and
lastly her sweet smell* She came first out of the desert, by the message of the
Angel to the virgin Mary living then in Nazareth of Galilee: a solitary place
i^ respect of others more fr^quented. And divinely revealed to Elizabeth in the
mountains of I^dea: as she testified when Mary came to see her. This report is
compared to pillars of smoke, for as smoke goes before the flame, breaking
forth and arising up like branched pillars, yet quickly avoideth and vanishes
in the air, how thick soever it were: So shall we find this report and men's
expectation thereof altogether like unto it. As by the prophecy of Zachary of
raising up a hor^e of Salvation in the house of David. Confirmed by miracles,
as well of a Son born unto him in his old age, as of his speech restored after
ten months. What fear came upon all the inhabitants of the hill country? Luke
1. 65. 68. 69. etc. This smoke arising in the wilderness, how pleasantly smelt
it, to all the godly waiting for the consolation of Israel, yet foulded up in
such thick obscurity that men could not see the greatest part of it, whither
the thing so much desired would tend. But afterward by the former when the
shepherds and the wise men came seeking ^o^ the newborn King, all ^erusalem
was troubled Luke 2. 1* 8. Mat. 2. 3. Then the branched smoke flew upward,
breaking forth with such force, by reason of the increased hea^e, that it
ascended like a Pillar, yet this smoke quickly vanished. Not that the Church
ever failed, but because this rumor ceasing, there was so deep a silence from
that time until the baptism of J^h^, as if all these things had vanish^d into
smoke. But who can declare how sweet this rumor was to all the godly thirsting
for the Messiah? Sime^n taking the (...) in his Arms and praising God very
joyfully, desired to die having obtai^ed that which was most to be desired in
this life, Luke 2. 29. And truly all M^r^he, Frankincense, and all manner of
perfumes are un^avo^y in re^^ect of this sweetness. Those things which hap^ed
about the bir h^^f Christ, could not more significantly and briefly be declared.

Ver^. 7. Behold his bed which is Salomons: threescor^ valiant men are about
it, of the valiant of Israel.
Here is described the provision of her beloved before the marriage, which is
twofold, A bed, and a Chariot. Of the bed is ^rtreated in this verse and the
next. His bed (^aith she, namely her bel^veds) wherein he lay himself alone.
Not a common bed, such as before, (Our Bed) Chap. 1* 16. As also speaking of
her own ^ed, Chap. 3. 1. Wherein her beloved was not found. This bed resembles
that of Solomon's, for it was waited on with as strong a guard, as we shall see
in the verse following.

Verse. 8. They all ^old swords, being expert in war: every man has his sword
upon his thigh, because of fear in the night.
Here the guard is described, to whom the watch and'a custody of this bed is
committed. Their number and nature was expressed in the former verse. Now their
readiness, skill and diligence is showed, together with the end of their
watching in these words. First, they are called swordmen, ready and
strong-men, whose virtue fears no danger. Secondly, they are expert in war;
that is to say, old, hardy, skillful soldiers: every one has his sword. Beds
are appointed for rest and sleep, whereby a man for the time is deprived of his
strength, and all power to defend himself; wherefore Kings and Princes, (to
sleep the more safely) ordained watchmen, such as Solomon is here said to have
had. Which teaches, that this beloved, all the time that he gave himself to
rest, was fenced with such a guard, as could keep him safe from all fear in
the night; that is, from all secret deceipts which the wicked could invent.
This time of rest, was the whole infancy of Christ, which makes a man no
less able to avoid dangers then the deepest sleep that is. Herod making use of
this night, endeavored (most wickedly) his destruction: But the Angel (one of
the mighties of Israel) warning Joseph to fly with the child into Egypt,
delivered him from the jaws of Herod, and the cruel slaughter of the
Bethlehemites. Truly this bed was better guarded then Salomons.

Verse. 9. King Solomon made himself a Chariot of the wood of Lebanon.
Such was the bed: Now follows a description of the Chariot in this and the
next verse. The bed was enough to show, what did belong to private use; but by
this Chariot is declared with what Majesty he would show himself to the
multitude. The King made this Chariot for himself alone, although the dignity
th^reof belongs to the Spouse also. The general matter of it, is wood of
Lebanon, whereof likewise the Temple was built, 1 King. 5. 6. Other things that
concern the beauty of it, are mentioned in the verse following where ye shall
see the application of the Prophecy.

Verse. 10. He made the Pillars thereof of silver, the bottom thereof of gold,
the covering of it of purple, the midst thereof being paved with love, for the
daughters of Jerusalem.
Such was Salomons stately Chariot, wherein he was wont to be carried in
public, whose beautiful and glorious structure is here declared, to express
that high and incomprehensible excellency of Christ's humane nature; for this
was that triumphall Chariot which he built for himself of the wood of Lebanon,
conceived in the womb of Mary of N^azareth of Galile, at the foot of Lebanon,
that rightly the matter may be said to be taken from thence, whence his
humanity was built up or framed, yet he made this Chariot for himself, not
begotten by the company of man, but by virtue of the most High overshadowing
the Virgin. Whose pillars were silver, the seats were gold, the coverings
purple; all the frame from head to foot, most pure, most precious, most divine,
and within the ground and pavement, and that which was (as it were) the
foundation to all the rest of the frame, was wholly love of the daughters of
Ierus^lem: he had them drawn with the needle, or rather engraven in his heart
and bowels; seeing for his elects sake only, he made him this Chariot of
humanity, wherein he would openly be carried in the sight of the world for men
to behold him.

Verse. 11. Go forth, O ye daughters of Sion, and behold King Solomon with the
Crown wherewith his mother crowned him in the day of his espousals, and in the
day of the gladness of his heart.
It seems here, it was the custom for parents at such a solemnity, to bestow
some singular ornament upon their children; and that Bathsheba bestowed this
Crown on Solomon, when he married Pharaohs daughter, (though the Scripture
speak not of it) for David was dead before; But it shall better appear in the
new Solomon then in the Type: For the Crown which the daughters of S^on are
commanded to behold, is that great glory which the Father gave the Son,
entering into his office, testifying from heaven, This was that his beloved
Son, in whom he was well pleased. And likewise annoynting him above his
fellows by the Spirit, himself descending in a visible shape, and resting on
him, Matthew. 3. 16, 17. The Church (whose husband he is, and by some reason her
son, as we have seen before) put this Crown on his head, by acknowledging him
to be King and Head of the Church. The Son of God, the Lamb which took away
the sins of the world; the Messiah himself, who had all power in heaven and in
earth, and whom the faithful sought, and obtained of him, to be dispossessed
of devils, healed of diseases, and a remedy in all their troubles. It was
manifest what opinion they held of him, and of what incomprehensible Majesty
indeed he was. All the time from the beginning of his office, until his
passion, was the day of his espousalls or marriage, as he has taught himself,
calling his Disciples the children of the wedding chamber, and himself the
Bridegroom, Matthew. 9. 15. and by the Parable of a certain King, which made a
M^r^iage for his son, Mat. 22. 2, etc. This was the day of the gladness of his
heart, when with a ready and willing mind he earnestly endeavored to effect
all those things which belong to our salvation; that he preferred the care
thereof before meat, and all other necessaries of his life, John 4. 32. The
daughters of Jerusalem should not be moved with this glory, but only the
daughters of Sion, the Citizens and free Denizens of the City of the heavenly
Jerusalem; these moved with the divine beauty and excellency of this King and
Crown, should slock unto him every where by heaps, making the hypoc^^tes
afraid, lest all men should believe in him, John 11. 48.

CHAP. IIII.
1 BEhold, thou art fair my love: behold, thou art fair: thine eyes are like
the doves: among thy locks thine hair is like the flock of goats, which look
down from the mountain of Gilead. 2 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep in good
order, which go up from the washing: which every one bring out twins, and none
is barren among them. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of skarlet, and thy talk
is comely: thy temples are within thy locks as a piece of a pomegranate. 4 Thy
neck is as the tower of David, built for defense: a thousand shields hang
therein, and all the targets of the strong men. 5* Thy two breasts are as two
young roes that are twins, feeding among the lillies. 6 Until the day break,
and the shadows flee away, I will go into the mountain of myrrh, and to the
mountain of incense. 7 Thou art all fair, my love, and there is no spot in
thee. 8 Come with me from Lebanon, my spouse, even with me from Lebanon, and
look from the top of Amanah, from the top of Shenir and Hermon, from the dens
of the lions, and from the mountains of the leopards. 9 My sister, my spouse,
thou have wounded mine heart, thou have wounded mine heart with one of thine
eyes, and with a chain of thy neck. 10 My sister, my spouse, how fair is thy
love! how much better is thy love then wine, and the savor of thine ointments
then all spices! 11 Thy lips, my spouse, drop as honey combs: honey and milk
are under thy tongue, and the savor of thy garments is as the savor of
Lebanon. 12 My sister, my spouse is as a garden enclosed, as a spring shut up,
and a fountain sealed up. 13 Thy plants are as an orchard of pomegranates, with
sweet fruits, as camphire, spikenard. 14 Even Spik^nard, and saffron, calamus,
and cinnamon, with all the trees of incense, myrrh, and aloes, with all the
chief spices. 15 O fountain of the gardens, O well of living waters and the
springs of Lebanon. 16 Arise, O North, and come, O South, and blow on my
garden, that the spices thereof may flow out: let my welbeloved come to his
garden, and eat his pleasant fruit.
The Resolution.
We saw in the end of the former Chapter, how the Bridegroom was adoro^md in
the solemnization of his marriage: Now the beauty of the Spouse is showed by
her* Eyes, Teeth, Lips, Temples, Neck* Breasts, verse* 1. 2, 3* 4, 5. The praise
whereof at length is stayed by passing to a greater perfection, Verse. 6. And
hither^^ of the legal Church and the Euangel^call: the beginning of one joined
to the end of the other* Now of the Euangeli^all Church, full and perfect* what
a one it should be after our red^mption* by the death of Christ and his
resurrection. Of this Church, in the rest of the Can^icles, ^s a double
description; divided and ^^njoyned. The first considers the p^ou^ar and
different Churches which should be upon ^arth, (...) the second coming of
Christ; which* for the more plainness, we cull them sisters: the one ^lder,
the r^st younger sisters: We call her elder and first begotten, which was
conceived and brought forth in the Discipl^s, whom Christ collected, which
forthwith after his resurrection, increased wonderfully, and is yet growing
inour this time: The younger shall spring up in the last age of the world,
which we yet exspect. The eldest is described in a diverse fortune,
flourishing, decayed, and restored: Flourishing, V. 7. 8. 9, 10, 11. Decayed,
partly inclining to ruin, in the rest of this Chapter; partly lying dead* in
the whole fifth Chapter: and restored at length, in the beginning of the sixth.

THE EXPOSITION.
Verse. 1. Behold, thou art fair my Love, behol^, thou art fair: thou have Doves
eyes within thy locks, thy hair is as a flock of Goats that ^ppear from Mount
Gilead.
IN the last verse of the former Chapter was taught how the solemnity of the
Marriage began. Now the Bridegroom in his own words shows how the Bride was
adorned. All which is but to let us see the state and condition of the Church
which Christ himself chose present here in earth: whose first arising was like
a pillar of smoke; but after he began his office, he came forth in a most
divine glorious show, as sliding from heaven* She is first commended for her
eyes; by the sight whereof, is often understood Indgement, and U^derstanding:
for the which she was commended by Christ himself, who published those eyes
blessed that saw the things which the Bride then saw, Luke 10. 23. He also gave
thanks to his Father, that he had hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and revealed them to Babes, Luke 10. 21. Her eyes were Doves eyes, that is,
chaste and shamefast, looking only on her own Husband, as appeared by the words
of Peten himself. (when others fell away) declared he knew not whither else to
go, John 6. 68. yet though these eyes were clear, they were within her locks,
that is, they were so covered with harre, that the brightness thereof was
somewhat hindered: the multitude of the faithful being contemned and despised.
This Dove*like chastity of the Bride was so covered, that she seemed a
disorderly company to the proud Pharisees: Do any of the Elders, or of the
Phari^es believe on him? but this common people which know not the law are
accursed, Joh. 7. 48, 49. Yet this sight was not so sharp at first, but grew by
degr^es, it was always pure and true, bu^ small in the beginning: They were
ignorant of the death of Christ, much more of his resurrection; his doctrine
also was oftentimes little understood: Are ye not without understanding? Mat.
15. 26. Neither does he upbraid them only that once with ignorance and
dullness, their hair scatteringly and disorderly hanging, hindered their sight.
Her second praise is of the hair it self, that she might not be thought
deformed by it. Now this hair betokens the whole multitude of the faithful
of those times, fitly set forth by their number: her comparison to a flock of
goats, may be understood (if I be not deceived) partly of that which goes
before, and partly of that which follows.

Before, the godly Israelites scattered through the ten tribes are called
Goats. Chap. 1. 8. Whose flocks are said to be less and thinner, because they
scatter themselves and keep not together as sheep do. As Varro says in his
second book of husbandry. Christ indeed had many hearers, but few amongst them
which truly believed: of many called few were chosen. The head whereon the
faithful depend is Christ, which was thought then to be with as great danger,
as the Goats hang on the sides of Mount Gilead, or any other steep hill or
rock. If any did confess him to be Christ, he should be cast out of the
Synagogne, John 9. 22. Therefore Nicodemus durst not be seen in this mountain
of Gilead in the day time. Such was the: condition of the Church at that time,
her piety quick of understanding and chaste, but covered with hair and hid
from the world, not having yet obtained ripeness, it was yet thin and
reproachful, not daring to join together without great danger.

Verse. 2. Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep that are even shorn, which come
up from the washing: whereof every one bear twins and none is barren amongst
them.
These teeth (compared to a flock of sheep) are the disciples of Christ, whom
he appointed as faithful and wise disposers to give every one of his household
their allowance in due season, Luke 12. 41. They must also be strong and of a
kind of bonie nature, to whom the care was committed of preparing, and as it
were, chewing meat for others the better to digest it. These sheep are even,
like the cherubi^s, 1. King. 6. 25. If it be asked why Christ sent his twelve
Apostles two and two to preach, instructed all with like power, of teaching, of
working miracles, etc. Mark 6. 7. It was because he would truly set before us
the two golden cherubims just of the same length, breadth and largeness of
every part equally. So that Peter was not more excellent then the rest, but
there was one commune administration, one authority, one jurisdiction; And the
same measure had the 70. Disciples, afterward, both among themselves and among
the twelve, whom he also sent out two and two, with the very same Laws and
commandments which the former had, Luke 10. 1. The disciples came up from the
washing instructed by baptism: cleansed from all filthiness of ^in by faith in
Christ. Lastly, their fruitfulness is declared by every one bearing twins
and none barren among them. This belongs to the fruit which followed their
preaching: for the disciples having performed their message, returned with joy*
because the devils were subject to them by that name which they declared. But
Christ shows them of a larger fruit, which they durst not hope for. I saw
(says he) Satan as it were lightning falling down from heaven. As if by some
violence (at the voice of the Gospel) he had been driven out of his Kingdom,
Luke 10. 18.

Verse. 3. Thy lips are like a thread of scarlet, and thy speech is comely: Thy
temples are like a pe^ce of a Pomegranate within thy locks.
The lips figuratively do signify speech, whose praise is twofold: slendernes
and color. As small as a thread and as red as scarlet, which two, show the
doctrine of those times. As in form it was most pure, sincere and m^st divine,
and therefore compared to a small silk thread: So the matter in a special
manner setting forth his death is compared to scarlet. Who would not kiss and
reverence those lips, which spoke not of the earth, but of heaven from whence
they came? John 3. 31. 32. Blessed were those times which sounded with the
voice of God himself: when all his words were dipped in scarlet, and all his
doctrine as it were colored with blood, by often mentioning of his sufferings,
Mat. 16. 21. etc. But these (you will say) are the lips of Christ himself and
no^ of the Church. He is the head of this body, and therefore the Church then
spoke with his lips. He that hears you, hears (...) and he that despises
you, despises me: and he that despises me, despises him that sent me, Luke
10. 16. And thy speech is comely. This some translate, Thy solitarines is to be
desired, for the word in the original signifies both, which word it seems
the wise Solomon uses advisedly to signify both, for though his words seemed
harsh to the Scribes and Pharis^es, ^scoming out of a desert, stopping their
ears at his w^rds, ^^e the deaf adder, as it was foretold, Psa. 58. 5. etc.
yet their servants conf^ssed, that never man spoke like him. John 7. 46. No
marvel then though the godly hearers were so taken with his words that they
oftentimes forgot to provide things necessary for themselves, Mark 6. 36.
Hitherto of the speech, now followe^h of the Temples like a piece of a
P^megranate within her Locks. The Temples are that part of the head which
extends it self from either part of the forehead, between the eyes and the
ears, even to the crown of the head, and being next unto the head and placed
above the eyes, teeth and lips, they seem to signi^ie those which are appointed
to be Ecclesia^ticall governors in the Church, which should refresh the flock
with sweet and pleasant juice, distilling from them with a fragrant smell like
a piece of a Pomgranate. Notwithstanding, the Church in those days lived
contemptuously in the sight of the world, and, as it were, hid and covered, as
the temples are with locks of hair.

Verse. 4. Thy neck is like the to^er of David, built for an Armory, whereon
there hang a thousand Bucklers, all shields of mighty men.
So were the lips and the temples: Now the neck is compared to the tower of
David. This tower seems to be that in Nehemiah, Chap. 3. 19, 25, 26. which is
called, The Armory of the corner: The neck is that bond wherewith the head is
joined to the body. Now that bond whereby Christ is joined to the Church, is
partly of the Spirit, partly of the Humanity received, Ephesians. 2. 21, 22. and 4.
16. and 5. 30. The spiritual is common to all things. The other then first
began, when putting on our nature he lived here on earth, which seems best to
agree with the Metaphor in this place. The beauty of this neck is set forth as
well in regard of the end, as of the use. The end, that it should be as a
tower, built to hang swords in, that kind of weapons wherewith enemies are
beaten and vanquished. The use, that it might be an Armory for all mighty men.
As concerning the first, He therefore took our humanity, that the world, the
law, sin, the devil, hell, and all the crew that fight against our salvation
might be overcome and conquered. Be of good cheer (says Christ) I ^ave
overcome the world, Joh. 16. 33. The devil was foiled in many combats, while
the only begotten lived in our frailty, he brought many large spoils into this
Armory, immortal publishers of his divine virtue: But this true Sampson, by
his death overcame his enemies, he consecrated the sword of Goliath to the Lord,
and overspread and covered this whole Tower with spoils. In this triumphant
Chariot he spoiled principalities and powers, etc. Col. 2. 14, 15. These were
the chains and collars wherewith the neck of the Church was adorned in those
days. The use of this Tower is that, here should hang a thousand Bucklers, and
all Shields of the mighty. These Arms are of that kind wherewith every one is
covered and defended. All the ancient mighty ones, which from the beginning of
the world have triumphed over sin and death, have been abundantly supplied
with weapons out of this Armoury, which was only faith in Christ, as it is
plain, Heb^. 11. through the whole Chap.

Verse. 5. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes, that are twins which feed
among the Lillies.
These two breasts are the Apostles and Disciples which Christ sent before him
into every City and place whither he himself would come. They were of a low
condition and simple at first, like young Roes new yeaned, called from their
nets to the office of teaching: They were twins sent forth two and two, all
alike in disposition and manners, many in person^, one in doctrine: see before,
verse 2. They spread abroad the knowledge of salvation through the whole
Country as swiftly as the Roes are wont to run over the hills. It was but a
little time that they spent in their legacy, yet left they nothing undone
which was given them in command. If you ask how these breasts were supplied
with milk, which they should yield to others, The young Roes feed among the
Lillies. In the company of the Elect, which smell most sweetly and pleasantly
in Christ, (for such are the Lillies afterward, Chap. 6. 1.) they drew
abunda^tly which they taught to others: These things shall su^fice to declare
the conditions of those times.

Verse. 6. Until the day break, and the shadows fli^ away: I will get me to
the mountain of myrrh, and to the hill of frankincense.
Here is the same time repeated which was spoken of, Chap. 2. 17. The Jews
interpret this mountain of myrrh, the mountain of Moriah, where Isaac was
bound to be sacrificed, Genesis 22. 2. and whereon the Temple was built in the
place that David had prepared in the threshing floor of Ornan the Jebusite, 2 Chronicles. 3. 1. Also in these few words is comprehended that whole History from
Mat. 16. 21. unto the end of that Gospel. Neither are these words (I will get
me) without Emphasis: for thereby is showed, that Christ ascended into this
mountain of his own accord, not drawn thi^her by force of enemies, nor
compelled by persuasion of friends, for they rather exhorted him to favor
himself, Mat. 16. 22. and were moved with great grief at the mentioning of his
death, John 16. 6. This Hill of Frankincense was Mount Golgotha, whereon that
only sacrifice was offered to God the Father by Christ the Son, whereby he
is reconciled to the Elect for ever, Mark 15. 22. Here was the sword of that
triumpha^t Emperor hung about the neck of the Church, wherewithal our deadly
enemies were slain at once. Now we see how this skillful craftsmam has painted
out the state of the Church so long after his time, with more then mortal wit,
describing the ornaments of her flourishing estate, comforting the calamities
of her afflicted estate, and sweetly rejoicing at the felicity of her estate
restored. With how divine words has he comprehended the birth, infancy, office
and death of Christ? Here is the last end of the old Church, and the beginning
of the new: For the death of Christ brought that midday, wherein the old
shadows utterly vanished, never to return again.

Verse 7. Thou art all fair my love, there is no spot in thee.
So far of the Legal Church* Now of the Christian Church only as it was at
Christ's resurrection, (A. D. 34.) and from thence has increased unto this day,
the flourishing condition whereof is declared in these five next verses: for
Christ departing into the hill of Frankincense by his death and burial, was
not long absent, but rose early the third day by power of the Spirit, and
returned to his own, with whom he conversed 40. days, showing them all things
which belong to the Kingdom of God; making and acknowledging the Church by his
instructions: sound, perfect and absolute. She was never all fair till now,
she was many times before commended for her beauty* and by the divine mercy,
wherein the Father beholds her in the Son, she is always glorious, Ephesians. 5.
26. 27. Sanctified and cleansed with the washing of water, by the Word. But now
she was in her most pure and flourishing estate, Not having spot or wrinckle,
or any such thing, but holy and unblameable. Now she obeyed Christ only,
adding nothing of her own, neither changing or omitting any of those things
which he required to be done and observed. This perfection lasted the first
300. yeere^: though somewhat declining toward the end* yet tolerable all that
space, without any great spot of deformity.

Verse 8. Come with me from Lebanon (my Sp^use) with me from Lebanon, look
from the top af Amana, from the top of Shenir and Hermon: from the Lions Dens,
from the mountains of the Leopards.
The meaning of this verse will be the better understood if we first run over
the words. Lebanon is a famous hill on the North borders of the Land of Israel.
Amanus far more Northerly, toward the West of Syria* being a parcel of the
Mount Taurus, and stretching to the River Issicus, from whence one may behold
Syria, Mesopotamia, Cilicia, and all the lesser Asia. Shenir and Hermon are two
hills on the East side, Deuteronomy. 3. 9. These hills are called Lions dens and
mountains of Leopards, not so much because wild beasts did live in them, but
rather men of fierce and cruel dispositions, Heathen Idolaters, void of all
knowledge and fear of God. This inviting then, whereby the Bridegroom
solicite^h his spouse to look down upon him from these mountains, teaches the
propagation of the gospel after Christ's resurrection, whereby the fierce and
cruel nations should be admitted into the Church of God. Now the woolf should
dwell with the Lamb etc. Isa. 11. 6. The Church was before shut up in the
narrow bounds of Indca; The doctors were breasts indeed, but they yielded milk
only to the Israelites, they were dry to strangers. Now the Jews and Gentiles
should draw together of the same fountain, so that by Christ both had an
access by one Spirit unto the Father, Ephesians. 2. 18. Christ led his spouse as it
were by the hand from Lebanon and the other mountains, when the brethren
dispersed by persecution, preached Christ first to the Grecians, Act. 8. 1. and
11, 20. At that time he was preached to the Samaritans, the Eunuch was baptized
and Peter warned by a vision to call nothing common or unclean, Act. 10. 15.
This joyful mess^ge went all the world over, but the first report of it flew
toward the north and East, Philip (the Spirit commanding him) went near unto
Gaza, but straightwayes returned from thence to Azotus* Acts 8.

Verse. 9. Thou have ravished my heart (my sister, my spouse) thou ^^st ravished
my heart, with one of thine eyes, with one chain of thy n^ck.
This eye and chain are the Church of Antioch enclosed with the mountains
Amana and Lebanon: who by the labor and diligence of Paul and Barnabas, and
the working of the Spirit, the Bridegroom was with good cause ravished with
this eye which shined with so great light, yet the beauty thereof chiefly
glistered, when some contending to have the Law joined with Christ, this Church
withstood them, and by Barnabas* and Paul in the Synod of the Apostles at
Ieru^alem, maintained faith only in Christ sufficient to salvation, Act. 15.
And then was the chain hung about her neck, when she was first called a
Christian, Act. 11. 26. The humanity of Christ was before the neck of the
Church, now the name of Christ is the chain of that neck. And being a Gentile,
yet is now a sister to the Jewish Church. And to show that she is as deer to
him as the Jewish, He ^^lleth her also his spouse.

Verse. 10. How fair is thy love (my sister, my spouse,) how much better is thy
love then wine and the smell of thine ointments then all spices!
Love is taken figuratively for the effects whereby it is showed* O^ntments are
gifts of grace, which the Father bestow eth on the Church for the Sons sake, he
acknowledged her love before this time, yet now (in the space remaining of the
flourishing Church) in this and the next verse, she shows most apparent
arguments of high^st and most unsained love. For love that cannot be withdrawn
by adversity is ever most precious and pleasant. But no times yielded more
matter of trial of*constancy, then those (An. D. 60. etc.) of Nero, Domitian,
Trajan^ and the other Roman tyrants, who left nothing unattempted that either
hatred of the truth might yield them, or power might perform, whereby the
Christian name might be altogether extinct. But it was wonderful, how the
tyrants were wearied with killing, and the Christians encouraged in dying. So
that it was no marvel, if (these boxes being broken) the smell of the
ointments most pleasantly spread it self far and wide. The ten books of
Eusebius his Ecclesiastical history are full Commentaries of this and the next
verse.

Verse. 11. Thy lips (O my spouse) drop as the honycomb: Honey and milk are
under thy tongue: and the smell of thy garments is like the smell of Lebanon.
The honycomb of the lips is sweetness of speech. Honey and milk, pleasantnes
of Doctrine; milk is chief among those things that nourish, and honey in the
faculty of preserving. The garments are chiefly the covering of Christ's
righteousness, with which only the nakedness of the Saints is covered, that they
dare appear in the sight of God; the hem of which garment is outward honesty
and soundnes of manners and discipline. The mount Lebanon reaching many miles,
set full of cedars and other sweet smelling trees, yielded such a strong
fragrant smell, that no ill favor whatsoever could take away the sweet perfume
thereof. So in this Church faith embracing the righteousness of Christ, and
holiness of life, breathed forth such a sweet smell, that he which would
endeavor to quench that, should be less able to do it then to exceed all the
odoriferio^s perfumes of Lebanon joined together by a greater smell. Wherefore
that we may see the application: first we know that the Greek eloquence now
chiefly attended on the truth, for God raised up Dionysius the Areopagite,
Quadratus, Aristides the Athenian, Dionysius of Corinth, Melito, Apollinarius,
Polycarpus, and many other eloquent men, by whose pleasant Orations the Lips of
the spouse dropped like a Honeycomb, and her tongue flowed with profitable speech
as with a most pleasant fountain of milk. Then concerning the smell of her
garments; no times were ever more fruitful of Heretics, which labored with
their filthy comments, to take away the most divine favor of truth* and bring
it to nothing. But this sweetness of Lebanon could not be overcome. But the
smell of her garments was afterward weakened, therefore no marvel if filthy
errors prevailed. The holiness of the Church was t^stified as well by enemies
(such as was Pliny the second, in Eusebius lib. 3. chap. 33.) as by friends,
Justine, Tertullian, and Cyprian, which mervellously set forth the sweetness
of her garments. This dignity continued in some measure, until the time of
Dioclesian the Emperor. Indeed the truth and regard of manners and honesty by
little and little began to decay, pride privily creeping in; yet the smell of
the garments for the first 300. years remained sound and uncorrupted, without
any notable change as the Spirit foretold it.

Verse. 12. A Garden enclosed is my sister, my Spouse, a spring shut up, a
fountain sealed.
Ye have heard how the Church in her flo^rishing estate was all fair: Now
follows her declining Condition, and first how she ran to ruin, threatening a
fall, before she fell away altogether. In this verse is propounded her double
estate, one in respect of stran^ers, the other in regard of her own household.
As to strangers, it is a garden enclosed: To her own, A spring shut up, a
^ountain seal^d. The Church is often compared to a Vine, her safety (wherewith
God vouchsafes to defend her from the rage of her enemies) to a Wall, a Hedge
or Enclosure, as Psalm. 80. 8 12. and Is^y 5. 1, 2. But now the Church was void
of such defense for three hundred years. Fortified by no power of Princes, or
authority of Magistrates, or any Ordinance of Laws. Yet at length God stirred
up Constantine the Great, who fenced this Garden with a wall, rooting out the
Tyrants, and restraining all hostility that might disturb the peace, and
^quietnesse of the Church. And not only freed her from the power of her
enemies, but confirmed her liberty by Laws and Ordinances, and also advanced
her to great honor and dignity, Eusebius. lib. 2. Now the Garden was enclosed and
fenced from the invasion of all her enemies. But what was she then in respect
of her own household? A spring shut up, a fountain sealed. From common Thieves,
we defend our fortunes with walls and houses; from private thieves, which live
with us in the same houses, we keep our goods in Chests with locks. Therefore
the fountain sealed shows, that all had not leave to draw and to drink,
which lived within the enclosure of the Garden: for seeing the fountain and
spring yields lively juice to herbs and trees, many which had room
appointed them in the Garden wanted this wholesome watering of true life. Which
altogether agrees with that in the* Revelation, Chapter 7. 2, 3. and 11. 2,
etc. and 12. 6. The fountain was sealed to many given over into a reprobate
sen^e to embrace Arianisme, and others given wholly to superstitions newly
sprung up, wherewith miserable men were so blinded, that they had no more power
to come to this spring of salvation, then if they had bin shut out with bars
and bolts. Now was the glory of the Church much diminished, which of late was
all fair.

Verse. 13. Thy plants are an Orchard of Pomegranats with pleasant fruits,
Camphire with Spiknard.
Verse. 14. Spikenard and Saffron, Calamus and Cynamon, with all trees of
Frankincense, Myrrh and Aloes, with all the chief Spices.
This description is according to the proprieties which are wont to be seen in
a pleasant Garden or Orchard. First well senced, and after set with choice
trees, then watered plentifully with sweet water, fourthly placed in a fresh
air, and lastly, fruitful and profitable. In the former verse we have the
fencing: Now behold the planting which consists of two sorts of Trees: some for
fruit, some only for pleasure. The one plainly showed in the first words, an
Orchard of Pome-granates, the other in the words following, with pleasant
fruits. As there are two sorts of Trees: so are there two orders of the Members
in the Church, one public, the other private. The Pomegranates signify those
which labor in the word and doctrine, or in the politic government of the
Church. The pleasant fruits are the Christian Congregations, ready to obey
their Governors, which though they are not to be compared to the fruit Trees,
yet by reason of their obedience and consent, they much adorn this Orchard. Of
these pleasant fruits there are two sorts, some more common, as Camp^ire, or
Cypres, and Spik^nard, some more scarce, as Spiknard and Saffron, etc. Verse.
14. The more vulgar show the unlike measure of gifts, wherein all are not the
eye, nor all the ^are, ^s the Apostle speaks* but endued with great variety
of graces profitable to the perfecting of the body of Christ, 1. Cor. 12. 4. 5*
etc. The more scarce are of three sorts (for the diverse degrees of private men)
Herbs, Shrubs and Trees, all of sweet and pleas^nt perfumes: which sh^weth
that the Christians inc'osed within the compass of this fenced Garden abounded
in graces, as well the lowest and the midlemost a^ the highest, every one in
their several degrees. The ornaments which Constantine bestowed upon the
Church, as Riches, Honor, Immunities, magnificent buildings, of Temples, and
the like were mere delights, like an Orchard set with Pomegranate plants. The
trees and fruits here mentioned seem to signify those countries where they
grew, to be first enclosed within this Fence. As by Pomegranates Carthage and
other places in Africa; Camphire and Spikenard our European Nations. Neither
was it rashly done to reckon these in the first place, for Europe was then the
chief part of this garden, most famous for the multitude of the faithful and
purity of the truth.

Verse. 15. A fountain of Gardens, a well of living waters and streams from
Lebanon.
To the fencing and planting is added watering, without which the beauty of the
garden would soon decay. The fountain is commended, because it is of Gardens,
because it is a well of living waters, and which flow from Lebanon. He
speaks now of many gardens, because the garden is common, that is to say, one
Church divided into many* particular Congregations and Parishes, like beds or
borders in a Garden. Now also it is called a Well, which of late was but a
Fountain and spring, because it is dug deep against the heat of the Sun, for
drying it up. Living water^, which flow continually and never fail: whose
Spring the Church has never wanted. Nay the Head it self of the fountain
whence we all draw, and those most pure Conduite-pipes (the Apostles) which
received the water flowing from the first Fountain, lived not long before. Now
is mention first made of Living waters in regard of the Council of Nice, of so
many learned and Religious men out of all parts of the earth. By whom the
rivers of living waters run into each part of the Church, much dried up with
the Arrian heat. Constantine himself was that Lebanon from whence these
waters did flow. He called the Council, maintained it at his own cost, and
confirmed it by his authority.

Verse. 16. Awake, O North Wind, and come thou South, blow upon my Garden, that
the spices thereof may flow cut. Let my beloved come into his Garden, and eat
his pleasant fruit.
The first member of this verse seems to be the words of the Bridegroom: for
the Lord of the Garden speaks, saying, Blow upon my Garden: But the Bride is
the Garden her self, and not the Mistress of i^: for inviting him into the
Garden, she truly and modefily confesses it to be his, not hers* Let my
beloved (says he) come i^to his Garden, etc. Here is the temperature of the
^yre added to the watering. Neither does the Bridegroom entreat that a supply
should be made from any but himself of that which should be fit for the garden;
but to show what air the Garden should use at those times. By the North and
the South* are meant Europe and Africa, who stoutly defended the truth in those
times, against the Arrian heresy. Lastly, of the fruit whereunto he is
invited: for it is no idle invitation, only for f sh^ons sake, but for great
use, to express the condition of those times. Let my love (says she) come
into his Garden, and eat his pleasant fruit; which words, no doubt, are of the
Spouse, giving the Garden to her beloved, not challenging it to her self, as is
said before: for without doubt, she perceived that her beloved had withdrawn
himself, otherwise, had the invitation been in vain. There was an excellent
outward show, but within, all things were defiled with Moss and Rust; Envy,
Brawlings, Contentions Ambition and Heresies, had almost abol^shed true piety:
so that the Church necessarily (leaving the multitude, who preferred a bare
name only) lurked, as it were, in darkness, with a few Citizens. This
solitariness happened when the fountain was sealed, as is said at the 12.
verse: for then many more were within the bounds of the Church, then had leave
to drink of the Fountain. Then was the Dragon thrust out of heaven, and the
woman fled into the Desert, as we have showed in the Revelation. The meaning
is, the Church much flourishing outwardly, Christ left her* vold of true piety,
as more plainly will appear by his answer in the next verse.

Verse. 17. I am come into my Garden, my Sister, my Spouse, I have gathered my
myrrh with my spice: I have eaten my hon^-comb with my honey; I have drunk my
wine with my milk. Eat, O friends, drink, yea, drink abundantly, O beloved:
Or, and be drunken with loves.
They commonly expound it, as if (yielding to her request) he should say, Thou
do^st entreat me to come into the garden, Lo, I come, thou have thy desire.
But the History directs us to another exposition, as if he should say,
whereas thou desire that I should come into the Garden, to what end should I
come? my harvest and my vintage, and time of delights are past: I was t^ere
long since, and gathered my myrrh with my spice, etc. I have laid up as*much
as I pleased, now nothing remains wherein I should take pleasure. Thus says
the Bridegroom. This harvest and vintage were presently at the fencing of the
garden, as soon as Constantine obtained the Empire: for then the fruit
(getting heat of the Sun) was quickly ripe; And the good Husbandman lost no
opportunity* but gathered infinite store of all kind of fruits while the time
served* But after he departed from the Garden, he returned no more* till a
thousand two hundred and threescore days were ended* Rev. 11. 3. For the
Bridegroom must be so long absent, as the Bride hid her self. Therefore these
words teach no short and swift return into the garden* but yield a reason why
he was not in a long space to be expected. The second part of the answer
belongs to his fellows or friends. Eat (says he) O friends, and be drunken
with loves. This word be drunken, is sometimes in Scripture taken for drink
abundantly, Genesis 43* 34. or sufficiently, but most commonly (in the worser
part) for overmuch drink, depriving the senses: These words very well express
the state of those times, declaring those which boasted to be the Bridegroomes
friends, to be puffed up with too much prosperity, most basely abusing it;
giving themselves wholly to the throat and the belly, as if they were out of
their wits. So that whatsoever the godly Emperor gave for the comeliness and
commodity of the Church, they changed all to her shame and destruction. It is
most pleasant to consider how expressly the Holy Ghost long before painted out
these things, which at length should happen in the Church, the like whereof we
see still continues. And hitherto of the Church inclining to fall, it ceased
to flourish, when the Bridegroom first departed the garden, and as soon as
Constantine came to the Empire: As long as he lived she was in great glory,
but presently after followed the darkness.

CHAP. V.
I Am come into my garden, my sister, my spouse: I gathered my myrrh with my
spice: I ate mine honey comb with mine honey, I drank my wine with my milk:
eat O friends, drink, and make you merry, O welbeloved. 1 I sleep, but mine
heart waketh: it is the voice of my welbeloved that knocks, saying, Open unto
me, my sister, my love, my dove, my undefiled: for mine head is full of dew,
and my locks with the drops of the night. 2 I have put off my coat, how shall
I put it on? I have washed my feet, how shall I defile them? 3 My welbeloved
put in his hand by the hole of the door, and mine heart was affectioned toward
him. 4 I rose up to open to my welbeloved, and mine hands ^id drop down myrrh,
and my fingers pure myrrh upon ^he handles of the bar. 5 I opened to my
welbeloved: but my welbeloved was gone and past: mine heart was gone when he
did spe^ke: I sought him, but I ^ould not find him: I called him, but he
answered me not. 6 The watchmen that went about the City, found me: they smote
me and wounded me: the watchmen of the walls took away my veil from me. 7 I
charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if you find my welbeloved, that you tell
him that I am sick of love. 8 O thou the fairest among women, what is the
welbeloved more then other welbeloved? what is thy welbeloved more then another
lover, that thou do so charge us? 9 My welbeloved is white and ruddie, the
chiefest of ten thousand. 10 His head is as fine gold, his lock^s curled, and
black as a raven. 11 His eyes are like doves upon the rivers of the waters,
which are washed with milk, and remain by the full vessels. 12 His cheeks are
as a bed of spices, and as sweet flowers: and his lips like li^ies dropping
down pure myrrh. 13 His hands as rings of gold set with the chrysolite. his
belly like white yvory covered with saphirs* 14 His legs are as pillars of
marble, set upon sockets of fine gold: his countenance as Lebanon, excellent as
the cedars. 15 His mouth is as sweet things, and he is wholly del^ctable* this
is my w^lbeloved, and this is my lover, O daughters of Jerusalem. 16 O the
fairest among women, whither is thy welbeloved gone? whither is thy welbeloved
turned aside, that we may seek him with thee?
The Resolution.
HItherto of the Church declining and running to ruin. Now l^ing prostrate she
is doubly described: First how she neglected her beloved calling her, verse. 1.
2. 3. Then how she ^ought him in vain b^ing gone: the fruit thereof is showed,
^oth how she was used of the watchmen, verse. 4. 5. 6. and how of the daughters
of Jerusalem, who kindled with her mervellous praises of him, promi^e their
fellow labor to seek him: in the rest of the Chapter.

THE EXPOSITION.
V^r^e 1. I ^^eep, but my heart waketh, it is the voyc^ of my beloved that
knocks ^aying, Open to me my sister, my love, my dove, my und filed; for my
head is filled with dew, and my lock^s with the drops of the night.
THe negligence of the Church lying thus is declared; First by her drowsinesse,
then by his enticing call, and lastly by the flight causes of her excuse.
Sleep caused her outward sen^es to be benumbed, that she neither regarded nor
consi^ered how superstitions arose, as it happened to the Householder, Mat. 13.
25. Neither could it be otherwise, (when the Bridegroom left the garden, and
his friends or fellows drunken with prosperity, wholly gaping after riches and
honors, all common good despised) but sleep would overcome the Spouse,
wherein outwardly she should not differ from a dead woman, howsoever the heart
should move and liv^, the seed of faith not altogether quenched. This
drow^inesse crept in in the time of Constantine, when a gap^ng heaviness^ with
a continual desire of sleeping, so oppressed the Spo^se, that the sharpest
sighted P^stors could not use their outward senses: not perceiving how ambition
crept in among the Bishops; and not only that, but now they began to
consecrate Temples to Saints, earnestly to seek their Relics, to worship
them with prayers; and to believe that prayers made in the honor of Saints at
their Sepulchers did profit much. Who could now tell whether the Church were
sleeping or waking? who neither loathed nor perceived such things. When
Constantine was d^ad, Christ found the Church asleep, and sought by all means
to stir her up, both by knocking and calling. He knocked by persecutions in the
times of Constance, Julian and Valens, of whom though Julian were a professed
enemy, (A. D. 368.) yet the other two exceeded him in cruelty. After their
tyrannous reign, God stirred up Valentinian in the West parts, by whom Christ
lovingly called his Spouse, that returning unto her former integrity she should
open and let him in. Then taking away Valens, he called more earnestly at both
dcores (as i^ were) as well in the West as in the East, by Gratian and
Theodosiu^ the elder: after by Arcadius and Honorius, then by Theodosius the
younger and Valentinian the third. And lastly (that there might be four pair
as it were answerable to the four voices, My Sister, my Love, my Dove, my
undefiled one) by Marcian alone in the East* These Emperors studied and
labored very religiously to defen^* and enlarge true Religion; but the Church
was in all the fault, who having these helps prepared, would not use them to
r^cover he^ former brightness. To this readiness of the Emperors was added the
voice of the most excellent Bishops and best learned men of that time: As
Basile, Gregory, Nazianzen, Ambrose, Hierome, Chrysostom, Augustin^, and other
the lights of that time. But seeing hi^ profession of love could nothing move
her, he tries what his shutting out of the doors at night would do. My head
(^aith he) is filled with dew, and my ^ockes with the drops of the night. The
locks of hair signified before the congregation of the faithful, among whom
true Religion was now so much decayed by new and foolish Ceremonies, borrowed
partly of the Jews and Gentiles, and partly invented of their own idle
brains, that the grass is scarce more covered with drops of dew in the night,
then the Church was at that time with superstitions.

Verse. 2. I have put off my coat, how should I put it on: I have wa^^ed my
feet, how should I defile them?
It was great negligence in the Spouse to give her self so much to sleep: but
pardon her heaviness. Why opened she not when he knocked and called? was she
so buried in sleep that she heard him not? it is plainly seen, she answered
him quickly. But was she so benumbed that she could neither move hands nor
feet? Neither was that the matter. But when she heard and might open, she made
an idle excuse. I have put off my coa^^ (faith she) and washed my feet. The
coat is Christ and his only imputed righteousness; but as soon as we look on
our selves and seek righteousness in the perfection of our own virtue, we
spoil our selves of this garment, and our filthiness appears presently to
God and the Angels. And so we may wash our feet with other waters, that we may
seem to our selves most clean. So much was the doctrine of free justification
by Christ alone decayed at that time, and another mean of washing and purging
the feet found out besides him: that no coming to Christ by faith alone, was
commonly believed without danger of defiling, etc.

Verse. 3. My beloved put his hand by the hole of the door* and my ^owels were
moved for him.
Here begins the second part of the chapter of seeking the Bridegroom, the
degrees whereof are diverse, the moving of her bowels, his withdrawing of
himself, her opening the door, her enquiring, her crying out, and how the
watchmen entertained her. It is manifest by the first of these words that he
loosed his hand from the hole of the door, whereby appears that he not only
knocked and called, but also sought to put back the bolt, his hand was ready at
the hole when the godly Emperors called sacred councels to pull up the tares
which wicked idle men had sown in the Lords field. It is excellent, how
Marcian the Emperor in the council of Chalcedon exhorted the fathers
oftentimes to apply all their study to root out her^sies and all wicked
instructions, that the true and holy faith might appear, or show it self. What
might not the Bishops then have done if they had known their opportunity? But
one would have thought, it should have been their own chiefest care, without
the Emperors admonition. The like pains took the two Emperors Theodosius the
Nephew and the grandfather in those famous councels of Ephesus and
Constantinople: the Bridegroom did his part to take away the ^arre, but the
spouse would not: therefore he withdrew his hand and took away all power to
remove the bolt. For after Marcian was dead, such barbarous cruelty raged in
the west; and ob^curitie, ^^oth and covetousness reigned in the east, that he
which before sought for entrance was now no where to be found.

Verse. 4. I rose to open to my beloved and my hands dropped with myrrh, and my
fingers with swe^t smelling myrrh upon the handles of the lock or bolt.
After the spouse (afflicted with daily miseries) had learned how great loss^
her negligence had procured: she seeks now to recover it by diligence. And
shaking off floth, goes to the door, which endeavor of hers (her fingers
dropping with myrrh) proves to be to God most sweet and acceptable. The spouse
arose when Leo Isaurus reigned, who endeavored to root out worshipping of
images lately brought in, in the former ages. But Constantine his son (A. D.
755.) in the seventeen council of Constantinople (who soundly condemnning that
heinous abomination by the holy scriptures) set his hand to the bolt or lock
that shut out Christ: which holy enterprise of his flowed with myrrh. Charles
the great assayed the like at Franckford, about forty years after, 795. but
that which was decreed in the council wanted success, ^o^ no reformation
followed.

Verse. 5. I opened to my beloved, but my beloved had withdrawn himself and was
gone: my soul failed when he spoke: I sought him, but I could not find him, I
called him, but he gave me no answer.
She opened to her beloved, but he withdrew himself and was gone. Her soul
failed when she remembered how lovingly he had called her. He shows himself to
be present and seen of the Church in the worship by himself ordained. This
prophecy agrees with those times, when Leo Isaurus, Constantine his son and
Leo Copronymus endeavored what they could to take away idolatry, to remove the
bolt and open the door to the beloved: but so great and such horrible
corruption of all piety remained, that Christ could not be seen in his outward
worship. The Emperors rightly did their duties to root out that which most
manifestly appeared; but they past by many gross errors untoucht. Whose
contagion the Bridegroom flying, withdrew himself so ^arre off. They which
were awaked out of this idolatry were inflamed with a mavelous desire of
Christ: but it rather increased their grie^e, then recovered their former
happiness.

Verse. 6. The watchmen that went about the City found me: they smote me, they
wounded me. The keepers of the walls took away my vail from me.
These watchmen differ much from those, Chap. 3. 3. who (it is like) knew
whither the Bridegroom was gone, and might be found again; for she asks them
whether they saw him, but she ^^yes nothing to these, assured of their
ignorance, and would have been glad to have passed by them in safety. Likewise
those forme^ watchmen, though they could yield her no help, (sailing in the
same vessel) yet forbear to lay violent hands on her: but these beat and wound
her, and reproachfully take away her vail: who, though they be far unlike in
courtesy* and humanity, yet their common name shows some agreement in Office.
Wherefore they are the Rulers and Governors, Emperors, Bishops, Prelates and
men of such rank, as the event plainly teaches. For as soon as the truth
began to appear: in how shameful a manner was she received of the wicked
world* and especially of those which would be accounted Watchmen of the City?
She was smitten with reproaches, lies and Cursings in the time of Gregory the
second: by whom Leo Isaurus was excommunicated for putting down the worshipping
of Images. But by the council of Nice under Constantine (son of Leo) and
Irene his mother, (by compulsion or Instigation of Pope Adrian and Torasius,
Bishop of Constantinople) (788.) she was cruelly wounded. The watchmen within
the City are the Ecclesiastical Teachers and Rulers. The keepers of the walls,
the civil Governors. But in the time of Theodora, the Empress, and Michael
her son, the veil was taken away; so that the Church had neither Priest nor
Magistrate to defend her. These were the times wherein the Spouse kept her bed,
and was never seen abroad by many years: the worst times that ever she
endured. She was much troubled in mind (her heart failing her) in the
Wine-cellar; as before, Chap. 2. 4, 5. yet then she was supplied with Flagons,
and Apples, nay, her beloved came quickly to her, and embraced her (ready to
fall) in both his arms: but here she is smitten and wounded, her veil taken
away and laid for dead: but no Flagons or Apples, or hope of her beloveds
coming: for no man durst speak or look freely to testify his will, much less
to reach out an helping hand to the truth lying prostrate. The common Harlot of
Rome may then see how far she is estranged from this Spouse, who boasts so
much of her visibility since her first beginning.

Verse. 7. I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, if ye find my beloved, that
ye tell him that I am sick of love.
If ye find my beloved (says she) tell him (do you ask what you shall tell
him) that I am sick of love. After she had conc^aled her self a long time, at
length (impatient of longer delay) she begins afresh to seek her beloved: she
goes to the daughters of Jer^salem, her fellow Citizens, the Elect, and shows
them of her grief, how she had sought him; and though she were without hope of
finding him, yet if they chanced to light on him, they should bewail before
him the miserable fortune of his af^licted Spouse, that by their tears he mi^ht
be the sooner moved to come speedily to her aid; which shows, that after
long silence, some godly men should bewail t^^ calamity of the times and
desire reformation, which was done about the year 110^. after all mention of
the truth ceased, being altogether buried 260. years and more since* the
veil was taken away. For about that time a Florentine Bishop openly began to
lament the Misery of the Church, and doubted not boldly to affirm Antichrist to
be come already. Also one Arnold a Roman could not hold but with the loss of
his head bewailed the grief of the Spo^se. And Hildegarde the Prophetess, to
whom the Church appeared in a vision, in the form of a woman wailing: her face
sprinkled with dust by the Priests* her garments rent and torn: the innocent
Lamb driven from her by their fault, and many the like. Add unto these
Bernards complaints upon the Canticles and others. Afterward there arose many,
and more and more every day, which freely professed their grief. By whose
tongues the Spouse declared her misery to the daughters of Jerusalem.

Verse. 8. What is thy beloved more then another beloved, O* thou fairest among
women? What is thy beloved more then another beloved that thou do so charge
us?
These daughters of Jerusalem were the friends of the Spouse. They call unto
her familiarly and lovingly, and (better sighted then others) they acknowledge
her most beautiful, being naked and compassed with darkness. Yet were they
altogether ignorant of her beloved, otherwise they would not have asked what he
was. They show great desire of knowledge, asking again and again to be showed
him. At the complaint of the godly doctors, the studies of the Elect were
stirred up: so that he which promised only the first lineaments of true piety
and Religion, had great companies following him. See the multitude ^locking to
Petrus Walde^sis (about the year 1160*) a private man, not graced with any
ambitious titles.

Verse. 9. My beloved is white and ruddie, the chiefest among tenn^ thousand.
She willingly yields to their desire, hoping to get what she sought for,
the sooner by their means. The answer is threefold Common, sp^^iall* and
mixte. Which seems to note out so many times, wherein there should be the like
knowledge of Christ. Common in this verse, taken as well from things inhe^ent as
from Circumstances. The things inherent declare the excellent sweetness of the
lively colors of Christ, which concerns those times of the Waldens^s, when
the aforesaid Peter made his house as it were a School of Sacred learning,
where he taught the Ca^^chisme and first rudiments of Religion; turned the
Bible into their own language; translated some writings of the Fathers, and by
his diligence and piety brought it to pass, that at length the beautiful
colors of Christ shining with pure holiness, and Red with the merits of his
death, might be seen of all men which did not wilfully shut their eyes. The
circumstances are 10000. men attending on Christ. For when the truth was
discovered by Petrus Waldensis and his f^llowes, the Roman Antichrist seeking
by all means to abolish the truth, spread it abroad unwittingly in many other
places, whose fruitfulness was such, that about the year 1200. the Albigenses
du^st join battle with the Antichristian Bands, which Innocent the third sent
to destroy them, under the leading of Leopoldus the sixth Duke of Austria* and
Simon Earl of Mountfort. At length Reymond Tolosa^us and Petrus King of
Tarracon came to aid the Albigeuses. Then might ye see the Bridegroom begin to
show himself again to the world, attended with 10000. truly Crosse-bearing
soldiers? Which had wandered many years before solitary and without company.

Verse. 10. His head is as the most fine gold, his locks are bushie and black
as a Raven.
An other part of the knowledge of Christ more plain and evident then the
former. For now the Daughters of Ierusal^m learn of the Spouse the excellency
of the principal members which the world knew not by many ages. The head as
the most fine gold, (or, (as it is in the original) gold of gold) signifies
as much as King of ^ings. For all other wear Crowns of gold upon their heads,
which with their Kingdoms may be taken away: but his head is as pure gold it
self, because it is Eternal and Essential, which teaches that Christ would
now show himself a King in the Earth. As it came to p^sse about the year 1216.
in that long contention of Frederick the Emperor, the second of that name,
with Hon^rius the third, Gregory the ni^th, and Innocent the fourth, then
presently after the Albigens^^n War, that the Kingdom usurped of the Popes
by Tyranny might be restored again to Christ, the right Lord or true owner. The
bushie looks are the multitude of the faithful, very comely and beautiful in
those times for their mutual love and embracing one of another, yet wanting
the brightn^sse of external policy. The blackness of the hair be to keneth
the Wars, troubles and persecutions of those times bewailed by many. As some of
Sweveland at Hallis, Robert Groster Bishop of Lincoln, Matthew Paris,
Guilihelmus de sancto Amore, Arnoldus de villa nova, cried out, that all
Christian people by craft of the devil had gone astray from the truth of our
Lord Jesus Christ, that the faith which the people commonly had was like the
faith of devils: and that all Christian people were led to hell. See how
rightly they are compared to the colors of a Raven, they were so black and
disordered. Neither did this deformity then first invade her, but then she
b^gan first to be acknowledged and bewailed.

Verse. 11. His eyes are as the eyes of Doves by the rivers of water, washed
with milk and fitly set.
Christ carefully looking on his spouse boweth down his head that he may behold
her the more nearly and exactly. As the doves bow their necks with eyes
inclining toward the water when they desire to quench their thirst. And where
the spouse was deformed altogether with dust, he uses no sh^rp remedy, but
applies much mercy and gentleness in cleansing her outward filthiness. His
eyes are f^tly set, not overn^^ch standing out nor too much dipping in, but
fitly placed to behold the whole condition of the Church. These eyes of the
Bridegroom so delectable, were showed to the world by Michael Cesenas and
Petrus de Carbaria about the year 1277. together with John de Poliaco, all
which Pope John condemned: Because first, they taught diligently, that P^ter
was n^n^on^ head of the Church then any other Apostle: neither did Christ ^e^ve
after him any vicar ^r head of the Church. Which evidently declares the first
part of the similitude, that Christ beholds his Church with no less
attention, then the thirsty and drinking doves beho^^ the waters with
^ttentive eyes. Secondly, they taught plainly, that The Church has no power to
correct any one with coactive punishment (as they ^^ll it) much less has the
Pope any such power to correct, punish, institute or remove any one in the
magistracy. Whereby they* prove the Pope clean contrary to Christ* the one
washes away spots with milk, the other with saltpeter, the one restraine^h
and pu^isheth faults with the word, the other with the sword, etc.

Thirdly, they taught that Priests and elders had all a like authority* power
and jurisdiction: Emperors indeed had given a high degree to the Popes, and
might take it away again at their pleasure. The Pope raged when Michael taught
this, but the holy man proceeded and ^eased not to preach that the Church was a
striving place of piety, not a race of Ambition. And seeing that full vessels
might satisfy ever^ one, it was terrible that the Clergy should so sham^fully
contend for honor either with the laity or among themselves. The covetous and
ambitious have never enough, but their mind always thirsts for something
more: whereby they plainly show, that either they never lighted on that full
river, where the Bridegroom quietly rests, or they are of another
disposition, contrary to him whose name they falsely pretend, etc.

Verse. 12. His cheeks are as a bed of spices, as sweet flowers: his lips like
lillies, ^ropping sweet smelling myrrh.
The greatest part of the countenance is in the cheeks, which of Christ are
most apparent unto us, when he reigns openly in the Church, in holy
institutions, which he has given to be kept by his Church till his coming.
These cheeks are first likened to beds new made in a garden, and presently to
sweet flowers, which elegantly sets forth the swift and speedy increase of
the knowledge of Christ: the flowers immediately following the sowing. The
fruitful ripening of thi^ seed was furthered by the preaching of Robert French
Anno 1290. Who by many visions set forth the lamentable condition of the
Church, and declared openly that the Pope was an Idol, a Serpent, a wooden
head. And the spouse which was presented unto him with a glittering silver
cross very beautiful and excellent as well in life as doctrine. Hitherto the
following member of the verse does seem to belong. His lips like lillies
dropping sweet smelling Myrr^^. Now the Bridegroom began to be famous by the
purity of teaching, which yet durst not but only mutter and whisper without
lifting up the voice boldly.

Verse. 13. His hands are as gold rings set with the Beryll: his belly is as
bright Ivory overlaid with saphirs.
Hitherto has the Bridegroom been set forth to the world in some special
members from Frederi^k the second to Robertus Gallus, by almost 100. years. The
hands are the instruments of Action, and in scripture they figuratively
signify works. The Jems included in the rings seem to signify the ministers
of the word, which elsewhere Christ carries as stars in his right hand, Rev. 1,
20. But these times yielded not such splendor. These things show a change and
alteration of that which Christ would bring to pass by the labor of his
ministers, as it happened about the year 1300. which was called the first
resurrection of the dead. For now the thousand years were ended wherein Satan
was bound, and the dead raised from their graves. Very many now began more
boldly to set forth the truth: As Dan^ the Florentine, Marsilius Pa^avinus,
William Ockam, John of Gaunt, and many others. Philip, the French King,
despised Pope Boniface, Jews of Bavaria, strove long time with these most
humble servants of servants for the right of the Empire. Edward of England made
show unto many, how little he esteemed the Popes authority. By the Bowels or
Belly, bright as Iv^ry, overlaid with Saphirs, may be understood the two
Sacraments. For the Word of God is open to the view of every one, as the month
and countenance, neither is it wont to be hid from strangers: but the
Sacraments serve only for the household, as the bowels, which are appointed only
to that body whose members they are, but serve to no use for strangers. These
things therefore, as it were, with the finger, point to those times of John
Wickliff, (1370) who taught openly, that the substance of materi^ll bread and
wine remain in the Sacrament of the Altar: the accidents of br^ad remain not
without the subject in the same Sacrament: Christ is not really in the
sacrament, in proper presence corporally. Beringarius spoke against this wicked
error, 200. years before, but the time was not yet come, wherein the hands of
the Bridegroom should be seen full of Rings, whence his enterprise wanted
success.

Verse. 14. His legs are as pillars of Marble, set upon sockets of fine gold:
his countenance is as Lebanon, excellent as the Cedars*
The beginning of this verse, se^^eth forth the nether parts; whose chief
praise consists in strength and stablenesse. All would fail, un^esse that
which upholdeth were sufficient to bear the weight. Wherefore the Bridegroom
stands immovable on such strong bases: And lest we should think that his
strength wants beauty, lo, the legs and feet are of gold; So that from the
crown of the head to the soal of the feet, he shines with infinite glory and
Majesty. Yet is there no doubt, but these things belong also to the history:
therefore these two golden bases, whereon the Marble pillars are set, seem to
point out John Husse and Hierome of Prague; as is the perpe^uity of Marble,
such was their con^tancy to endure death willingly for the truths cause,
enduring a trial by fire, as the pure^t gold. They differed from the Popelings
in many things: but this chiefly bit the mitred fathers, that they gravely
reprehended their wicked and lascivious lives. This was the ulcer that could
not endure scratching, which made them rage so fierc^ly against them: this was
about the year, 1415. The other Member of the verse, (...) countenance^s as
L^b^^o^, ex^^llent as the C^dars, His countenance is seen here on'earth, in the
true knowledge of Christ, and by his true worship, which he himself has
appointed. Now the Spouse, com^^ring it to Mount Lebanon, shows thereby that
there should be so great an increase of knowledge and renewed worship, that the
profession of Christ should continue as firm as the hills themselves; and as the
Cedars of ^ebanon exceed other tre^s in length, so should tru^ Religion excel
all scratching and pricking superstitions in reverend Majesty, which most f^^ly
agree with the times presently following, wherein the B^hemians shook off the
Romish yoke, 1420. Now first began the Word to be truly preached, the
Sacraments to be administered in either kind, wicked supe^stitions to be rooted
out, Monasteries to be beaten down, and the Priests constrained to till the
Land, or to yield some better fruit, etc.

Verse. 15. His mouth is most sweet, yea, he is altogether lovely: This is my
beloved, and this is my friend, O daughters of Jerusalem.
His lips (at the 12. verse) dropped myrrh: here the mouth foundeth sweetly;
both lips and mouth betoken the Word and Preaching, only the lips whisper
obscurely: the palate and open mouth yield a more sounding voice. Such was the
voice of the Bridegroom heard in the Ministers of Bohemia, preaching the truth
freely, and without fear, in despite of Antichrist. He is altogeth^^ lovely;
there is nothing in him but that which is most to be desired, with greatest
care and study. This is my beloved, as if she should say, seeing ye have so
earnestly desired to know the excellency of my beloved. Think with your
selves, that I have not trifled, nor done any thing unfit for a modest woman,
in that my earnest endeavor of seeking him and of charging you: but the honor
due to his merits far exceeds all my study. These words do plainly teach, that
the Church in her true members, at that time, bestowed all diligence in seeking
Christ. And now we see by this prophecy (which with noted footsteps has
exactly showed the pathway through this Wilderness) by what degrees the
knowledge of Christ appeared again from Frederick the second, (after infernal
darkness covering the world by the Bishop of Rome) until about the year, 1420.

Verse. 16. Whither is thy beloved ^one, O thou fairest among women? whither is
thy beloved turned aside, that we may seek him with thee?
This shows the great desire of the faithful to seek Christ, offering their
fellowship, and promising common aid in seeking. Which came in fashion, when
the Bohemians got their liberty: for afterward they were helped with the
writings of many learned men, as the Wald^^^es, Albingenses, Wickliffe, John
Hu^^e, and Hierome of Prague, with all those before named. Lastly, the
Bohemians, by* whose diligence the beauty of Christ, by little and little,
appeared in his members to the world. It was wonderful, how they were
presently kindled to seek the truth in England and Germany, and many other
places, so that all corners (of our coasts at least) sounded again with the
voices of them, asking, Whither is thy beloved gone thou fairest among women?
whither turns thy beloved? Yea, this speech was so generally received, that
many daughters of Jerusalem, which knew him not before, nor touched with any
desire of him, now offered their aid to seek him. The Art of Printing happening
at the same time, (1440) by Gods singular benefit, did greatly help to set
forth his fame, which continued 70. years and more, and could not be stayed by
any means.

CHAP. VI.
MY welbeloved is gone down into his garden to the beds of spices, to feed in
the g^rdens, and to gather lilies. 2 I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is
mine, who feeds among the lilies. 3 Thou art beautiful, my love, as Tirza^,
comely as Jerusalem, terrible as an army with banners. 4 Turn away thine eyes
from me: for they overcome me: thine hair is like a flock of goats, which
look down from Gilead. 5 Thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, which go up
from the washing, which every one bring out twins, and none is barren among
them. 6 Thy temples are within thy locks as a piece of a pomegranate. 7 There
are threescore Queens, and fourscore concubines, and of the damsels without
number. 8 But my Dove is alone, and my undefiled, she is the only daughter of
her mother, and she is dear to her that bare her: the daughters have seen
her, and counted her blessed: even the Queens and the concubines, and they
have praised her. 9 Who is she that looks forth as the morning, ^aire as the
moon, pure as the ^un, terrible as an army with banners! 10 I went down to
the garden of nuts, to see the fruits of the valley, to see if the vine budded,
and if the pomegranates flourished. 11 I knew nothing, my soul set me as the
charets of my noble people. 12 Return, return, O Shulamite, return: return
that we may behold thee. What shall you see in the Shulamite, but as the
company of an Army?
The Resolution.
SO much of the Church cast down; now of the Church restored, in the whole and
in the parts. The whole, as well summarily, both in respect of the Bridegroom,
verse 1. 2. and in respect of the enemies verse 3. as severally by reason of
certain members of the whole body, verse 4, 5, 6. The parts are particular
Churches, as Queens, Con^^bines and Virgins, verse 7. amongst all which, one
Dove excels, verse 8. And such is the eldest Sister. The younger are either
a Prince^^e, or other inferior Churches. Her condition is partly growing,
partly of full age: her beginning is summarily delivered, verse. 9. Afterward
severally expressed, and how it was done, verse 10. 11. 12. and what kind of
one she was when it was done, Chap. 7.

THE EXPOSITION.
Verse* 1. My beloved is gone down^ into his garden, to the beds of spices: to*
feed in the Gardens and to gather Lillies.
IN the beginning of the description the Spouse seeks her beloved, not
knowing where he was: as we have seen in the former Chapter. Now she takes on
her to teach that which before she desired to learn. To descend into the
garden, is only (as has been often said) to be present (as it were) to be
taught with the hands, and seen with the eyes in purity of doctrine and
integrity of all ex^e^nall worship. Which happened in the times of Martin Luther,
(...) the (...) 1^^7. At what time the Spouse began somewhat to recover her
health and strength. The Wald^n^es, Wick^i^^* the Bohemi^ns and other daughters
of Jerusalem had taken great pains in seeking the Bridegroom, but the garden
was never prepared with beds and borders for him, till now, when Frederike Duke
of Saxony by his own authority protected and defended the Church newly sprung
up in Wittenberg a City of his dominion. Here was the only garden at the first,
and therefore she faith, My beloved is gone down into his garden. The truth was
plentifully sown there, but little reformation for the first four e years,
therefore is there but one garden mentioned. But shortly after more gardens
were added to this one, as Tigurum, Argentoratum, Basile, Berne, Geneva, and
also the Provinces of Hassia and Prussia, so that the second part of the verse
faith rightly; He went down to feed in the Gardens, for now there were many
gardens made by distinction of fence, yet were all planted with the like
fruit. He came not into this garden any longer to behold the bare and naked
beds, but as it were feeding the elect by the nourishment of his word, he at
the length gathered lillies in baskets and separated them from the wicked
world, which Lillies were first gathered at Wittemberg, when the Mass began to
be discontinued and the Supper more purely to be administered in the year 1521.
The year following the Images were cast out. After three years Tyg^r^m and
Argentoratum were reformed. This coming into the garden and gathering of
Lillies is the harvest spoken of, Rev. 14. 14* 15.

Verse 3. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine: he feed^th among the
Lillies.
She triumphs in the same words as she did upon her return from Babylon,
Chap. 2. 16. by which free profession, she declares the boldness and
constancy of those times, wherein the truth need no more whisper in corners,
in fear and doubting, but might publish her self openly and be publicly
celebrated by the common speech of many men. Neither was the supportation of
the Bridegroom less apparent in defen^ing her mightily against her enemies.
For if the hatred of the multitude, the rebukes of the Doctors, the curses of
the Popes, the condemning of the Emperor, the conspiracies of Princes, the
confiscation of goods, the danger of life, and all other things threa^ning
present death, could have terrified the Spouse from pro^e^^ing her beloved:
faith had bin utterly lost. The Spouse claims her beloved to be h^^s in the
words of Melan^thon to Prince Frederick. Let us go on constantly, howsoever the
world rage. Such was the mutual embracing of Christ and the Church at that
time.

Verse ^* Thou art beautif^ll O my love, as Tir^a^, comely as Jerusalem,
terrible as a^ Jerusalem Army with Banners.
The explanation of this verse is divided into three times. The Beginning,
Middle, and End. In the beginning she was fair as ^i^^^h, which Solomon
without doubt foresaw, should be the chief City of the Israelites after the
ten Tribes fell from the other two. It was a pleasant City, whence it took the
name, (1 Reg. 14. 17.) but (as-well by the estimation of men as in truth) it
was but a l ortresse of Robbers and rebels. And no other was the Church
esteemed to be of her enemies (when her beloved went down into his garden, and
some time after) but a rebellious City, disobedient to ^rinces and Governors,
and to carry a cer^aine show of Tirzah* And thus the Church remained like unto
Tirzah from the year 1529. (when the Argentinenses joined with the
Helvetians,) till the death of Charles the 5. in the year, 1558. And then she
began to be ^omely as Jerusalem, when the unpleasant name of Tirz^h grew out of
use, which hapne^ in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth's Reign in England, in
the year 1558. And in the year following in Scotland, Geneva, the Helvetian
and German Churches, in Denmark, Norway, and Sweveland, and other places of
the reformed Religion. Not that they were altogether free from hostile
invasion, great troubles shortly arising in France and the Low Countries: yet
partly by her own increase, partly her adversaries tired and ceasing somewhat
from outward force, she was so much exalted, that her very enemies could not
but admire her beauty and comeliness, whose beginnings they despised. The last
age of the restored Church, is terrible as an Army with Banners.

She shall bestow all her time in warlike preparations, and undertakings. For
the hellish furies will not suffer her enemies to re^t, neither will she endure
her self to be rent and torn by the Wolves, but resist the injury with an
armed hand* Whereby she shall become fearful to her enemies, as she has done
these many yee^es in England, France, and the Low Countries. But this is
nothing to that terror which shall shortly follow, when Antichrist himself and
his Ensign-b^arer (the King of Spain) and all that carry his mark shall be so
d^^troyed by the Spouse, that no mention of the^ ^^all remain.

Verse. 4. Turn ^way thine eyes from me, for they have overcome me: thy Layre is
as a flock of Goats that appear from Gilead.
Now she enters into a special com^endation of ce^tain members, whereby the
civil government of the Church may the better be understood. This cleernesse
of sight, without doubt, was showed in the doctrine of Justification by faith,
whereby the Church (not with squint but right eyes) beholds Christ, and all
his righteousness and excellency. And whatsoever excels in the judgment of
the world, to be loss and dung to it, Phil. 3. 8. This eye was very dim in
former times, until Martin Luther divinely drew away those dark scales: For
he wiped away all humane satisfa^^ion^, merits, supererogations, indulgences,
confidence in their own received wicked superstitions; and showed the yoke of
the law to be more grievous then all the Popes Bulls were able to uphold;
neither afterward could the wicked Council of Trent, nor the Germane Interim
(forged altogether with fraud and deceit) dazzle the sight of these eyes, but
that they could discern the authors of these deceits, spreading their nets in
vain; neither was our Engl^nd less sharp-sighted, when not only the Pope, but
also the Papacy, was utterly rejected, by the authority of our Josias, that
most holy King, Edward the sixth, of blessed memory. We see the divine beauty
of these eyes, which at this day (God be thanked) is the same in all reformed
Churches. The common people of the faithful, signified by Hair, is altogether
the same, as it was in the first Church, Chap. 4. 1. scattered, contemned, put
in great danger, which yet by no means, could be compelled to leave Gilead, and
return to Bethaven.

Verse. 5. Thy teeth are as a flock of sheep which go up from the washing:
whereof every one bears twins, and there is not one barren amongst them.
The Teeth are always taken for the Pastors and Ministers of the Word, as
Chap. 4. 2. where they were sent forth, two and two* instructed with the like
gifts and messages: As Sheep are of a mild^ and pleasant disposition, and far
remote from all ambition, so should the restored Church shine with faithful
Pastors; the true successors of those former, adorned with the self-same
Ensigns as near as the time would suffer. They which before boasted themselves
to be Pastors, had altogether cast away the charge of preaching, and yet these
men would be heirs of the Apostles* whereas they were strong teeth; these
filthy rotten bones: they Sheep; these Lions. But at the length sound teeth
sprung up again, such as were Luther, Melancthon, Bucer, Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, Capito, Calvin, Peter Martyr, and many others, whose names are
written in heaven. And verily the truth of this Prophecy, seems very
apparent in the decree made at Geneva, in the year 1550. namely, that the
Ministers not only in Sermons, (which some neglected, some heard them with
small profit) but also severally through houses and families, at a certain time
of the year, with a Magistrate of the City should instruct every one, and
require a reckoning of every ones faith. And it is scarce credible what fruit
followed, as Beza shows in the life of Calvin.

Ver^. 6. As a piece of Pomegranate, are thy temples within thy locks.
This is the fourth agreement of this Church with the first, which we have
showed to belong to the Ecclesiastical and civil government, in the use
whereof the Church restored should be happy, which appeared by the holy
Discipline restored again at Geneva, by Gods singular benefit, together with
the Gospel, in the year 1541. Which we also see to be done in other Churches
at this day; as in Helvetia, Rhaetia, France, the low Countries, and Scotland,
wherein the government requiring holiness of life, according to the rule of
doctrine, the truth flourishes fruitfull^ and inviolably. But you will say,
these times which we have described, shine not in all Reformed Churches;
whereunto I answer, It is sufficient if we find some such thing in any one
Congregation: for this by a common necessity, shall belong to the commendations
of all. And this is the sum of the agreement.

Verse. 7. There are threescore Queens, and fourscore Concubines, and Virgins
without number.
Having spoken compendiously of the Church restored; some things are now
briefly propounded, particularly in these two verses, wherein he divides the
several Congregations into three ranks, according to their degrees of purity:
namely, Queens, Concubines, and Virgins or Maids; And ^he that comes nearest to
truth and holiness, the Bridegroom holds her dearest; wherefore the Queens
are mighty, and flourishing Churches, which excel the rest in purity. The
Concubines are of a lower rank; they are admitted to the Bed, but far from the
honor and excellency of the lawful wives; having no dower themselves, nor are
their children to inherit. The Virgins are in the lowest place, as servants
and handmaids, altogether estranged from any familiar acquaintance, they have
employment in the house, they have victuals and clothing; they are reckoned to
be of their Masters household, but are not partakers of his goods; they labor
not for themselves, but for their Masters. It is also to be observed, the
Queens are numbered, and so are the Concubin^s; but the Virgins (as of no
reckoning) are without number. This distraction into such different degrees
happened about the year, 1563. When John Brentius and James Andrews, rent the
Church in pieces, with that unluckie division of that monstrous Vbiquity. It
was before sown by Luther, but he stayed the contention about it as long as he
lived. But Brentius revived it; and three years after, Illyricus, and other
Doctors out of far Countries* came to Antwerp, and renewed that error, whereby
the face of the Church, even in her infancy, was miserably defiled; besides,
Anabaptists and Libertines, Antitrinitarians, new Arians, and I know not what
other monsters, which wasted and spoiled Transylvania, and the Regions
thereabouts. The English, Irish, Scottish, Belgic, Geneva, Helvetique,
Rhetique, do flourish (God be praised) with the dignity of Queens, whereof the
Germane, the Danish, Gotique, and Sweveland Churches, and others cleaving to
their opinions, have taken a crown to themselves, and have gotten the place of
Conc^^^nes. Among the Virgins I reckon the Anabaptists, Libertines,
A^^itrinitarians, Arians, and the like, which now altogether miserably waste
and destroy Moravi^, Polonia, Hungaria, Transylvania, and a great part of
Denmark. To these may be added the Roman filthy sinck, wheresoever dispersed.
We have seen the whole Song mavelous hitherto, but now especially, when we
come to things present. Behold then the condition of the restored truth, into
what unlike degrees she at length should fall by a great separation. The Spirit
foretold a lamentable success: this age feels it, and every day plainly
threatens a farther departure.

Verse. 8. My Dove, my undefiled is but one, she is the only one of her mother,
she is the choice one of her that bare her, the daughters saw her and blessed
her, yea the Queens and the concubines, and they praised her.
Without doubt this Dove was one of the Queens, far excelling in glory, and
more beloved of the Bridegroom then the rest, adorned with a threefold
testimony: Of the Bridegroom, of her mother, and of the rest in the family.
For the Bridegroom terms her, his Dove, his Undefiled one. Any thing may be
one, which is one in manners and disposition, though absent in place and seat;
As the company of the faithful are said to be one, though severed in far
remote plac^s, while they hold the same purity of Doctrine, and the like study
of holiness. The second testimony is of her Mother, which is the Church and
the Word to whose directions this Dove does wholly apply her self. The third
testimony is of the rest in the family. First, of the daughters who are
particular Churches which are begotten of this only Dove, from wh^m they draw
their instructions and the whole course of administration. Next the Queens and
Concubines bear witn^sse both after one manner, but both very sparingly and
more slenderly then the daughters, it may be through envy; They acknowledge
her fair and beautiful, but perhaps they keep the branch to themselves; as
jealous wives often do. All which shows how the wills were conjoined, between
the Dove, the Daughters, the Q^eenes and Concubines. Howsoever there be not the
same degree of purity in all things. But where are the Virgins without number?
Why is there no commendation of theirs rehearsed? Verily as they are further
absent from familiar acquaintance of the Bridegroom, so are they more
spitefully bent against his only beloved Dove, neither (through hatred) can
they say any thing well. Let us see then a more full distinction of the present
Chuches which are either true or titulary. The true, are Queens and
Concubines. The Queens again are either the only Dove, or more: and this
only on^ is partly the Mother, partly the Daughters. The titular Churches are
the virgins. Who this only Dove is, may easily be proved, if we consider the
excellency of the Eyes, Teeth and Temples of the restored Church, for she that
excels in the beauty of these members, must of necessity be that one only
Dove. Wherefore not trusting to mine own judgment but to the judgment of the
Spirit himself: I beheld in this glass the Church of Geneva, shining with the
glory of this only Dove. For first let us consider the excellent comeliness of
the eyes, where sound and incorrupt doctrine shines, spotted with no comments
of filthy flatterers, but especially the chastity of justification by faith,
wherewith the Bridegroom is chiefly delight^d. But this beauty is common to the
other Queens and also the Concubines; Then let us behold the teeth, ^^mely the
doctors, like a flock of sheep, simple; harmless, not d^^dainfull, not
luxurious, but content with a sparing diet: diligent ^n teaching, not so much
troubled with worldly busin^s^e that they can have no leisure for the word and
doctrine. Not undertaking the charge of many Churches and serving none, nor may
he that take^^ the charge of one Church neglect it by his absence. Neither is
any thought fit for that pastoral function which can b^t only read. Lastly let
us view the Temples, like a piece of a Pomgranate very beautif^ll* The
governors together with the Pastors most honest men, watching over the manners
of every man, and correcting them by divine institution, not sending them to
the Romish horse-leaches and the Antichristian decrees, the more to corrupt
them, but ende^vour to redeem their sins and public offenses, rather by
repentance then for money. Neither does she command any idle ceremonies but what
necessary reason only requires. Lastly they which apply all to the authority
which Christ has given to the Church, that every member may perform his duty
hol^ly. The Spirit goes no farther in the elder Church, because (as it
seems) she shall persist in that variety which we now spoke of: of Queens,
Concubines, Danghters, Doves and Virgins unto the end, without any notable
change: and it may happen as corruption daily increases, the Dove and the
Daughters may be shut up in a narrow bound.

Verse. 9. Who is she that looks f^rth as the morning, fair as the moon, clear
as the sun, and terrible as an Army with Banners!
Hitherto of the elder Church, and of things as well past as present. All the
rest of the Treatise respects things to come, which the more obscurity they
have, the more leave and pardon they crave. But nothing is so plain wherein the
vanity of ma^s mind erreth not extremly, unless it be governed by divine
light: nor any thing so concealed that it can lie hid, if this enlighten him.
Thou therefore which have enlightened the former darkness, give light unto
these following, that we being taught thy will, and beholding the glory of thy
children may cheerfully and constantly proceed i^ our begun course of piety,
neither terrified by any dangers, nor deceived by the deceitful allurements of
this world. It plainly appeared before, Chap. 5. 6. that by this manner of
asking is declared the new birth or rising up of some Church, by which
afterward thrice repeated, is signified, to be so many arisings of new
Churches, or rather the approaching of new people to one and the same Church.
Although others also are added, whose a^^cription is not declared in this kind
of speaking, as we shall see in its place. Therefore we divide the younger
sister into three parts, whereof the first (which is the Princess) is
described from this v^ry place, to the fifth verse of the eighth Chap. The
second, from thence to the ninth verse: The ^hird in the tenth and eleventh
verses thereof. The first of the sisters is the Church of the Jews, whose
calling is to be expected within these few ages. After, the seat of Antichrist
(the City of Rome) shall be utterly destroyed, which is to be very shortly.
Hither all circumstances lead, wherewith the Revelation agrees, and many
Prophecies of the old Prophets. This calling shall be do^ble: the first, from
hence to the eighth verse of the seventh Chapter: The second in the rest. The
condition of the first is in part* briefly delivered in this verse, and after
severally in the verses following. The general explication teaches what kind
of beginning and progress there shall be for certain years. The first
conversion shall be like the morning; The first growing age, fair a^ the
Moon: The stronger age, clear as the Sun: The full strength thereof,
terrible, as ^n Army with Banners. It is likened to the morning, because it
shall not only be of a doubtful and obscure light* (as is the first break of
the day) but also, because the first light thereof f^all appear from the East*
for Daniel (speaking of this first calling) says, Rumors out of the ^ast, and
out of the North, shall troubl^ him, Chap. 11. 44. as more plainly (God
willing) shall be said at that place. In which words ^e joyneth the North to
the East, because the J^wes there banished, should gather together with those
of the East to the same faith of Christ. In the Revelation, Euphrates is dried
^p, that a way may be made for the Kings of the East, Chap. 16. 12. After, when
the new Jerusalem shall descend from heaven, the first gate ^^ull be Eastward,
Chap. 21. 13. If you desire the time of this first co^version: God has very
much concealed the moments of time from us; yet I suppose it is certainly noted
out in the Scripture. And the day drawing near, will add a cleerer light unto
it, Dan. 12. 4, etc. But as near as we can attain to it by conjectures, (and
those not light, as they seem to me) it is to be expected about the year 1650*
as at the twelfth of Daniel the eleventh and twelfth verses shall be said more
plainly. Such shall be the beginning of this new light; the progress shall
equal the beauty of the Moon, most clearly enlightening the mighty darkness,
with a swift increase after the first appearing, shining in a few days, like
the full Moon: as Esaias cries out, Who has heard such a thing? who has seen
such things? shall the earth be made to bring forth in one day? or shall a
nation be borne at once? for as soon as Sion traveled, she brought forth her
children, Chap. 66. 8. The riper age shall strive with the Sun, in glory,
light, and cleernesse; the exceeding brightness shall be such* that it cannot
be looked upon; yea, it shall be* ^t length terrible to the enemies, no less
then an Army ^^rnished with Banners. We may observe out of these comparisons,
how much more excellent the condition of this Church shall be, then ever it was
of any other. Great was the dignity of the former, but at the most declared by
similit^des taken from the earth; but here, as if the excellency of ^arthly
things were not sufficient to set forth such glory, he ^^ies upward toward
heaven, taking the Morning, the Moon, and Sun for comparisons: Come Lord
Jesus, let us quickly see that pleasant sight, the gathering together of our
dispersed brethren, that all flesh may acknowledge thee the only Lord; that thy
unmeasurable faith and mercy which exceeds all the straits of a created
mind, may be celebrated and renouned in the mouths of all men.

Verse. 10. I went down into the Garden of Nu^s to see the fr^^s^s of the
Vallie, and to see whether the vine flourished and the (...) ^^dded.
The second part of the description expresses severally what was spoken even
now generally. Hereof are two members* a prep^ration in this and the two next
verses, and the performance of the work effected in the chapter following. Of
the first member ^^e three degrees. A visitation in this verse, sufficient
ability in the next, and an effectual calling in the 12. verse. That which we
translate to the garden of Nuts, Tremelius turns it to the garden of Pr^ning.
How is the word fitted? The Jews a long time have been pruned gardens,
wherein God has exercised most severe loppings and pr^nings, Romans 11. 20.
Neither does this interpretation differ from the disposition of the Jews,
whose hearts were brawny with hardne^^e, Romans 11. 25. whose stubbornness and
obstinacy, Esaias most divinely describes, Chap. 42. 18, 19, 20. He calls
that people deaf and blind, hearing and ^eeing much and observing nothing,
neither laid they the most grievous ch^st^s^ments to heart, ver. 25. Also Chap.
6^. 2, 3. Romans 10. 21. The fruits of the Valley, another note whereby the Jews
are marked out, that they are as it were lateward trees bearing fruit very
slowly, such are they that are planted in valleys, which the hills every way so
hinder, that they cannot be refreshed with the heat of the Su^^e: Such then
shall Christ find the Jews when he shall visit them, like Nuts covered with a
hard shell; neither more excellent, with any branch or bud of true conversion
toward God, whereby they may show themselves to be ind^ed with any vital
strength from heaven, then trees planted in the s^adow of steep rocks, which
(other trees ^^ourishing) remain as half dead: yet are there among that people
both vines and Pomegran^tes. The hard winter as yet keeps back the buds, but
at length in fit time, the Sun of righteousness shall thaw that frozen earth,
and shall afford a more gentle air whereby they may break forth freely.

Verse. 11. Or ever I was aware, my soul made me like the Chariots (or set me on
the chariot) of my willing people.
So shall the people be when Christ shall first visit them. Now he teaches the
sufficient ability of the conversion. The meaning is (that I stand no longer
refuting other men's opinions) as if he should say. I descended indeed into my
garden, but I verily did suppose no such thing as at length hap^ed. I expected
a stubborn and obstinate people, but after that I found them easy and ready to
receive me* my mind infor^ed me to show my self unto them in stead of
chariots, wh^^ewith I might quickly bring them into the Church and reckon them
among her citizens. Undoubtedly he added a spur to them running, neither
would he be wanting to their study, whereby he might supply that which might
help forward the begun work. Therefore* Esaias says* He shall bring all your
brethren out of all nations for an ^ffering to the Lord* with horses and
chariots and litters and mules and swift beasts, to the hi^^ of my holiness,
Chap. 66. 20. These chariots seem to be the ready aid that the Gentiles should
bring the Jews, to recover their former seats. But did not Christ know what the
study and readiness of this people should be? The things are spoken
historically, that their conversion should be beyond all expectation: for as
Esaias says, so that thou may say with thy mind, who has begotten me these?
seeing I am deprived and am desolate. I have been a capt^^e and remain to and
fro, and who has brought up these? behold I was left alone, these* where have
they been? Chap. 49. 21* He shows a thing having great admiration: for time
will reach many things to be in the Prophets, which we commonly interpret as
though they were past whose event is yet to come: and especially (as it seems
to me) in the calling of the Jews* which verily little considered of ours,
has darkened (I will not say, perverted) the proper and natural meaning of the
Prophets in many places.

Verse. 12. Return, return, O Shulamite, return: return, that we may look upon
thee. What will ye see in the Shulamite? as it were the company of two Armies.
The third member of the former c^uses. The effectual calling. Which shall be
earnest and thrust on with great enforcement, as the twice two doubled words do
signify: whether that of Esaias s^^meth to belong, How bea^tifull upon the
mount^ins are the feet of him that brings good tidings, that publishes
peace, that brings good tidings of good, that publishes salvation, that
says unto Zion, Thy God reigns. Thy watchmen, etc. Chap. 52. 7. 8. It is
evident that that whole chapter entreats of the last calling of the Jews,
whose felicity should be eternal, never to be interrupted, verse. 2. He also
makes mention of a threefold captivity. The Egyptian, the Assyrian and a
voluntary, verse. 3. 4. 5. In which last happened the most miserable condition of
the Jewish people: wherein they have been since Christ's time. For they were in
times past enforced into Egyyt by hunger. Into Assyri^ they were drawn by force
of war. Only the Romans did not compel them to t^rn, but they dispersed
themselves here and there through the whole world of their own accord* Or
rather that they were in that place and re^koning in this last ^aptivity, as
held for things of nothing: whose greatest worth any man might purchase at the
vilest price, as Psa. 44. 13. And who seethnot his people, accounted for
nothing in the m^ltitude of captives, partly sent to the Egyp^^an mines, partly
slain upon the scaffolds of cities, where they were compelled to fight
eitherwith wild beasts, or among themselves to kill one another, as it came to
pass at the dcstruction of Ieru^alem by Titus. Or if Adrian straightly forbad
the Jews their country ^oil, yet this captivity was free, because the Romans
aimed not at any benefit by their service as the Egyptians and Assyrians did,
but only the quietness of the province. Christ by the presence of his flesh
brought them not deliverance from this captivity* but will bring it at length,
by turning their hearts to the faith. But perhaps Saint Paul says the
contrary, who applies the same to the Apostles sent in times past, Romans 10.
15. But I think it will seem otherwise if we well con^ider it* his purpose in
that place, is to prevent an offense taken of the Jews incred^lity. Now there
were chiefly two things which might make the Gentiles doubt. The ancient Laws
of the Jews: and the present study of piety* Were not that most like to be
the truth which a nation (vouchafed so much honor before all others, and no
less fervent as yet, with an earnest desire to wor^hip God) should not only
acknowledge, but also pursue it most earnestly. In the former chapter, he
opposes election to the old Law: here he entreate^h of the study of ^iety*
where he grants them zeal, but lest any should be deceived with the show
thereof, he teaches how far distant it is from true piety or Religion. The
only right^ousnesse of God is the righteousness of faith altogether diff^ring
from the righteousness of the Law, which alone while the Jews sought for,
they obtained not, what they desired, and in the mean time missed of the truth.
This effect have the words from verse. 3. to verse. 14. Then making a difference
of saving and legal righteous nesse, lest any doubt should ye^ stick in their
stomachs; he teaches yet a little more plainly, why they could not approach
to this saving righteousness, which he says, is chiefly placed in calling
upon the Lord, verse. 13. How; says he* shall they call ^ that is, How shall
the Jews call, etc. But let us return to Solomon. It is to be observed that
these words yield two arguments, whereby they may appear properly to belong to
the Church of the Jews. First, because the exhortation or encouragement is
expressed in a word of returning: whereby he grants that the Nation which he
now calls, had bin before turned away: which cannot properly take place in
any other, but in the Jewish Nation. Secondly, of set purpose for difference
sake he ^alleth her by her country name, of the Old Sal^m: Whereas before
confessedly through the whole Song, he had notified all the ^itizens of the
Church gathered together as well of the Gentiles as of the Jews, by the name
of daughters of Ierusal^m. That is to say, by this difference it might plainly
appear, that he now turned his speech to the old Country breed, letting alone
the new inhabitants which are free in the City by christ* Fou^thly, after the
Convers^on he shows the Shulamite, by the s^militude of Tents* that she ^^all
^eliver her self by Arms from the power of her enemies, whom she now serves.
For that of Ezekiel, 38. and 39* happens at the same time, when God and Mogog,
that is* the Turk and the Tartar with all the wicked Mahumetanes shall utterly
perish by the sword of the Converted and returned Jews. See Da^. 11. 44. and
45. Reve. 20. 9. Whither also belongs that of Zachary. When I shall stir
up thy sons O Zion against thy ^onner O ^^van, Chap. 9. 13.

CHAP. VII.
HOw beautiful are thy goings with shoes, O Princes daughter! the joints of
thy thighs are like jewels: the work of the hand of a cunning workman. 2 Thy
navell is as a round cup that wants not liquor: thy belly is as an heap of
wheat compassed about with lilies. 3 Thy two breasts are as two young roes that
are twins. 4 Thy neck is like a Tower of Ivory: thine eyes are like the fish
pooles in Heshbon by the gate of Beth-rabbim: thy nose is as the tower of
Lebanon that looks toward Damascus. 5 Thine head upon thee is as scarlet: and
the bush of thine head like purple: the King is tied in the rafters. 6 How fair
art thou, and how pleasant art thou, O my love in pleasures! 7 This thy stature
is like a Palm tree, and thy breast like clusters. 8 I said, I will go up into
the palm tree, I will take hold of her bows: thy breast shall now be like the
clusters of the vine: and the savor of thy nose like apples. 9 And the roof of
thy mouth like good wine, which goes straight to my welbeloved, and causes
the lips of the ancient to speak. 10 I am my welbeloveds, and his desire is
toward me. 11 Come my welbeloved, let us go forth into the field: let us
remain in the villages. 12 Let us get up early to the vines, let us see if the
vine flourish whether it has budded the small grape, or whether the
Pomegranates flourish* there will I give thee my love. 13 The mandrakes have
given a smell, and in our gates are all sweet things, new and old: my
welbeloved I have kept them for thee.
The Resolution.
YOu have heard in what manner the Conversion was. Now is showed the most
glorious condition of the Converted (...) well by the beauty inherent to every
member, verse. 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and the whole body, v^rs. 6. 7. as also the coming
by chance of the Bridegroom, dwelling in her branches, verse. 8. and the savor
of the Nose and Palate, verse* 9* whereby i^ comes to p^^^e that they ^est
perpetually in one another love, verse. 10. And such us the growing condition
of the Princess, the young^r d^^ghter. The riper* age shall bring worshippers
in greater number, the occasion whereof is showed, verse. 11. 12. 13. and the
effect in the beginning of the Chapter following.

THE EXPOSITION.
Verse 1. How beautiful are thy fe^^e with sh^oes, O Princes daughter* The
joins of thy thighs are like jewels, the work of the hands of a c^nning
vvork^man.
A Particular description of each member is here begun from beneath, for such
shall the progress of things be. Heretofore always the beginning was made
from the head. The place of the eyes, ^eeth, and temples: because the first
beginnings were more famous and sooner perceived, in the Doctors and the
administration appointed: but now in a wonderful manner, the feet shall be
first converted, and shall begin to stand and walk in the right way, as some
notable reason shall discover, why such a thing should be done. He therefore
admireth the beauty of her feet, because it was verily a thing full of
admiration. A shoe is applied in the Scriptures to three significations. To
Mirth, Speed, and Liberty. It was a sign of Mirth; from whence in mourning
they either put them off, of their own accord. As David ascended to the Mount
of Oliver, his head covered and barefoot, 2 Samuel 15. 30. Or they were
constrained against their wills as Captives to the victors, who led them naked
and barefoote, Esa. 20. 4. Speed has somewhat a more plain efficacy, for he
that is shod, treads more boldly, and fears not pibbles or ^hornes.
Wherefore God when he assured a speedy return to his people, he pro^iseth to
bring it to pass, that they shall go with shoes on their feet, E^a. 11, 15.
It was also to the Israelites a sign of liberty or rather of obtaining their
redeemed inheritance. Whereas putting off the shoe was for a reproach, Dent.
25. 9, 10. Whither as it seems belongs, how God comm^nded Mo^es drawing
near to him, to put off his shoe, Exodus 3. 5. to put us in mind in how base
a condition flesh is before him. All the significations agree. The mirth of the
people returning, their speed of returning, and the recovery of their ancient
inheritance, will without doubt be a matter of wonderful glory and of great
admiration; so that worthily the Nations may cry out, how beautiful are thy
feet! see Esaias 52. 12, 13, 14, 15. They shall make no haste out of this
captivity, as when one runs away from his master, or as the I^raelites i^
old time out of Egypt: but with great constance of mind and assured
confiden^^* so as the Nations shall be amazed, and the Kings shall ^top their
mouths, when they shall see that which was not told them; for then God shall
bring to pass, that his people may enjoy their desolate possessions. Esa. 49.
8. The second part of the verse signifies that nimble turning joint, whereby
the upper part of the thighs are fitly turned* Or rather perhaps it may more
fitly signify a turning from one way into another; as i^ he should say, the
turning away of thy thighs from thy former stubbornness to true piety and faith
in Christ. Jewels are fitted into many turning Circles, whose artificial
turnings do excellently set forth this wonderful conversion or turning of the
thighs and feet. Moreover they are the work of the hands of a cunning
workman. See how sweetly these words agree with those of S. John, Rev. 19. 11.
where in a larger explication of the sixth vial, that is to say, the calling
of the Jews, the workman is described, by whose hands these Jews and ^oynts
of the thigh^s are framed. First by his name, agreeing with the same in this
place* he was pleased to take this name to himself, that he might at length
declare in very deed, how faithful he was in performing promises, and giving
salvation to his people. But hence see, the conversion of the heart shall not
proceed of themselves, but from this faithful workman, who shall frame these
joints, and work these nimble turnings.

Verse 2. Thy navell is like a round goblet, which wants not liquor* thy
belly is like a heap of wheat set about with Lillies.
Interpreters refer these words to meat and drink; but in this song,
comeliness and honesty is chiefly respected: and nourishment is signified by
those members, which they are appointed to by nature. I judge it rather to
signify fertility, flourishing fresh in them whose bodies are full of juice,
not dry and without blood. A heap of wheat, declares the belly like a furrow,
well stored with the best seed, which watered and made fruitful by mixture of
the Goble^, would at length break forth into an infinite harvest. These things
are more plain with Esaias, cap. 49. 19. 20. The belly set about with Lillies,
shows that this field (unlike other fields) shall not be fenced with bushes
and quicksets, but shall every way lie open, and ^e altogether so pleasant, not
only in the middle* where the more fruitful increase is wont to be, but also
in the uttermost borders. And most ^itly also are lillies joined to the rest,
seeing nothing is more fruitful, bearing often 50. heads upon one Root, Plin.
l. 21. 5.

Ver^. 3. Thy two breasts are like two young Roes that are twins.
Excellent shall this Church be in doctrine: whose ministers God shall water
with fatness, Ier. 31. 14* They shall be ba^e and simple at the beginning,
like young Roes, wallowing in the dust, when they are first brought forth; for
as yet a settled Church shall not be fully gathered together, as by the labor
of some certain Apostles, who staying in no certain places shall go hither
and thither to Preach, according as the cause requires. In the same manner as
it was done in the first Church, as before Chap. 4. 5. See also what has been
observed upon Esaias, at the last verse of the former Chapter.

Verse 4. Thy neck is as a Tower of Ivory, thine eyes like the fishpooles in
Hes^bon, by the gate of Bathrabbim: Thy nose is as the Tower of Lebanon which
looks toward Damascus.
Mer^erus doubts whether there were a Tower of this name. Rabbi Selom and the
Chald^^ paraphrasts think there was. And I am of their mind, for all these
similitudes seem to be taken from true things and not ^eigned. Yea, for most
weighty causes, as anon it will appear, some more eminent places are chosen of
purpose for this part of the description. This Ivory Tower I suppose to be the
Ivory throne spoken of 1 King. 10. 18. The neck of the first Church was also a
Tower, in the same Mount where this Throne was built, namely an Armory for
David and the war: wherein all the instruments of war were put, as before
Chap. 4. 4. But this Tower is Solomon's, of peace, not of war; of Judgment, not
of Armor. That though triumphing, yet afflicted with many troubles of wars.
This, her enemies overcome very easily, shall reign in peace like Solomon: for
such a flourishing estate do the Prophets promise this Church, all her enemies
put to flight, Esaias 41. 14, 15. Ier. 30. 31. Ez^ch. 39. 3, 4. 25. etc. Thine
eyes like the fishpooles in Heshbon. Tremelius translateth it appellatively, to
most artificial fishpooles. But I suppose those places to be noted out by
name, ^^iefely for this reason, that by choosing out of some notable places (as
we shall see) Solomon seems to appoint out the territories and borders of
that land, which the Jews at length (converted to Christ, delivered from the
Nations and restored to their Country seats) shall obtain proper and their
own. But what (will ye say) do thou turn ^^w? God forbid. I dream not of
that return, which as yet they do, That they may renew the Temple, restore the
Ceremonies, and possess the land in times past* promised and given as an
earnest of the heavenly. (These things are eternally buried, not worn out by
time, but utterly abolished by Christ.) But I speak of a re^^oring to their
Country, wherein they shall worship Christ according to his Ordinances: which is
not contrary to Religion every one knows, and all the Prophets seem to
foretell it with one consent. When I think hereof, it seems no light
Argument, that until this day that people remain (although dispersed through
the whole world) divided and separated from the Nations with whom they live. A
thing truly wonderful mavelous, but that it appears plainly to be Gods
doing. We know the Goths, Vandals, Hunnes, and very many other Nations,
forsaking their Countries, have also changed their speech, names, and natures.
So that (were it not for letters) they cannot be disce^ned from the people of
the Country with whom they live. But the Jews, (like the River Roane in the
poole Lausan^) suffer none of our customs to be fastened on them, but in the
midst of us, keep their old name and Ordinance: would we know the cause? First
God would have them, for the ^ale of his despised Son, be a ^pectacle to the
world: then also to advise us, le^t the people commonly accounted
superstitious, should perhaps make saving doctrine suspected by their
consenting. Lastly, that he might make plain his infinite and unmeasurable
favor and truth at length, in restoring this people. We have far digressed
from our pu^pose, but not altogether into a strange matter, and whereof a
brief Declaration was necessary. Seeing then that Hesh^on is to be properly
taken; know that it was once a City beyond Jordan, common to the Gadites and
the Rub^^ites, Numb. 21. 26, 27, 28. At first Noble, known by the Proverb, and
once the Palace of Sihon: which City seems to teach the recovery of their old
possession, of whose Eastern coast this City is placed as it were the
Meere-stone.

And most fitly are the eyes compared to Fishpooles, not so much for the
cleereness^, which shows the brightness of the (...) as for the abundance of
tears flowing from true repentan^^. ^^re. 31. 9, 18, 19. Isay. 46. Z^char. 12.
10. Neither without (...) likewise are the gates mentioned by which these
Fishpooles are seated: which as they are called Bathrabbim, the daughters of
many, or of a multitude, most frequented by resort of people: so they teach
that there shall be at length an infinit^ multitude of this people gathered to
the truth by repentance. It might seem harsh to compare the No^e to a Power,
but that the Counsel of the spirit always puts ^s in mind that things and
places are chosen, whereby the borders of the land may be decribed, ^er. 31. 8.
Esa. 49. 20. The hou^e of Libanus is famous in the Scripture. But that the
Tower thereof looks toward Damascus seems to be added for difference sake.
There were two houses of the forest of Lebanon, one built on the hill as this
place plainly shows, See, 2 Chro. 9. 16, 17, 18. Another at Jerusalem (in
the forest) not far from the house of Solomon, which for likeness was called
the house of the forest of Lebanon whereof mention is made, 1 King. 7. 2. For
the whole provision wherewith Solomon built this house, proves that to be
another from that in Lebanon. 1 King. 10. 17, 21. What need such sumptuous
housholdstuffe in houses so far a sunder: when there was scarce any hope that
the King would see them twice? But most clearly Shishack carried away the
shields of gold which were found in the house of the forr^^t of Lebanon, 1
King. 14. 26. It seems that house was then in the power of Reho^oam and at
Jerusalem; for the ^ing of Egypt went no farther. And doubtless the house of
Mount Lebanon, in the falling away of the ten Tribes, ceased to be of the
Dominion of Rehoboam. But in this place it is used to set forth the North
border of the holy land to the East, as the Hebrews in my judgment do rightly
interpret it.

Verse. 15. Thine head upon thee is like Carmell, and the hair of thy head like
purple. The King is held in the Gutters, or in the Galleries.
Carmel is a Mountain of Phenicia, not far from Lebanon, known to Strabo and
Ptolemy. Here then take the west side, in which nothing falls out more fitly
then this Mountain, which may be compared with the head. Twice before, by the
hair we understood the multitude of the faithful to be signified. There they
were like Goats appearing from Mount Gilead; here like fine flax of purple
die, as if every one then should be a Prince, and endued with Princely dignity,
whereof purple is the sign. This Church before was called a Princes daughter,
and Saint John calls the faithful Kings. But Zachary more plainly saying,
The ba^^st among them shall be as David, etc. Zach. 12. 8. God forbid that I
should through envy conc^al any thing that the Spirit seems to will, and
should not rath^r with my whole heart rejoice at this excellent glory of my
brethren, though beholding it a far off. This place by force of opposition
gives light to that of the Goats, a base stinking creature and full of filth.
Not that Christians are such in themselves, but are accounted such in the
world. Base and simple has their condition been through the whole race of the
calling of the Gentiles, to this of the I^wes, as we have observed, Chap. 4.
The King is held in the gutters. I assent to those learned men which think it
alludeth to that, Genesis 30. 38. But their application seems to me far
otherwise, although that place yet yields the same. For as those pilled Rods
put in the Gutters, and beheld by the sheep (when being very hot they came to
drink) caused to bring forth Lambs so speckled and spotted* even so the King
is here said to be held in the Gutters, that the faithful having him always
before their eyes, in the place where they quench their thirst, shall beget
Kings by his example, a new Christistian offspring. So that these words yield
a very good reason of that which was next before said. For when he had even
now commended the Purple hair, whereunto I applied a Royal dignity of all the
faithful: lest any should marvel he yields a reason why it should be so
done, because all the faithful shall be borne Kings* for the king himself is
held in the Gutterers whither they should come to drink, and to quench their
thirst: it cannot be but they waxing hot at the sight of him, shall bring forth
such Children, as they see him set forth before their eyes. But how can the
King be bound in the Gutters? After the same manner as Christ set forth to the
view was Crucified among the Galatians, by the powerful preaching of the Word,
Galat. 3. 1. This is that stream wherein he is held and from whence they draw
to quench their thirst. Now he is said to be bound in the Gutter, because they
shall never afterward be destitute of him.

Verse. 6. How fair and how pleasant art thou O Love, for delights!
A sententious conclusion, or rather an universal commendation, wherein he
declares the excellent beauty of the other members, which he mentioned not
severally. Every word has its Emphasis or express signification. The manner
of a king has admiration, the same repeated, shows no Common but a most
vehement and singu^^r admiration. The abstract shows pure and perfect love,
not infected with the pollution of any contempt: delights are lastly cast into
the heap, if any thing more could be added. Neither are these things added to
set forth her beauty alone, or only to express with what desire the
Bridegroom pursues the Church, but it chiefly belongs to the History, and
shows this Church to be most excellent, not only in the praise of certain
members, but to be admired in the beauty and propernesse of the whole body.

Verse. 7. This thy stature is like to a Palm Tree: and thy breasts t^ clusters
of Grapes.
These words also belong to the general commendation: for Stature is the
height and tallness of the whole body, whereby it reaches up on high, which
is not* wont to be considered in the first years, but when the body is come to
its full growth* she therefore is said to be like a Palm Tree, which grows up
ward, with what weight soever it be pressed down: So this Church shall be
advanced cheerful and famous, yet after much toil and labor: for it cannot
be, but in the beginning she shall meet with many most mortal enemies, Gog and
Magog, the Mahumetan people, which shall give an occasion of the utter ruin
and riddance of that most mischievous Tyrant; yet shall the Church receive no
loss thereby, but in despite of all, shall rise up, and attain to a just
degree of dignity. Thy breasts (says he) are like clusters of Grapes. Before
the breasts were like young Ro^s; but ^ow, when the Church shall begin to be
settled, the breasts shall be changed into clusters of Grapes* most plentiful
and pleasant fountains: for Grapes full of juice, being pressed, run all into
liquor, yielding abundance of plenty and pleasure, as well for necessity as
delight.

Verse. 8. I said, I will go up to the Palm Tree, I will take hold of the boughs
thereof: also thy breasts shall be as the clusters of the vine, and the smell
of thy nose like Apples.
Now are other ornaments remembered, as of the Bridegroom dwelling in the
branches of this Palm Tree. The declaration of the Breasts, Nose, Palate of the
Spouse, and the mutual desire whereby they wholly rest in one another love:
we have often said, how they both desire to express themselves one toward
another, not only to show their mutual love, but also, how the faithful are
affected toward the Church: As in this place, where the Bridegroom having a
purpose and dettermination to climb this Palm Tree, he shows thereby, what
the faithful shall wish for, after they shall see the Church settled and
confirmed, how desirous they shall be to dwell in her branches, and to gather
her sweetest fruits: As Isay says, Chap. 49. 18. and Zachary, Chap. 8. 23. The
nations shall desire to be exalted in the height of her prosperity; whence it
is said in the Revelations, Chap. 21. 24. They shall bring their glory to this
new Jerusalem, I wish thy breasts were, etc. The words are spoken in the manner
of wishing, that the faithful shall with all their endeavor strive, as well
to have these good things communicated unto them, as to be kept, increased and
enlarged: They shall desire to be fed with these breasts, and shall earnestly
beseech the Lord, that they may never dry up: They also show how this Spouse
ought to behave her self toward these new guests, to whom she is bound to
bestow her breasts, as well as to her own. And the smell of thy nose as Apples.
There words seem to concern holiness of common life. We always breath with
the nostrils, as long as there is any power of life; whence Jeremy says, The
breath of our nostrils, the anointed of the Lord is taken in their pits, Lam.
4. 20. She prays therefore that to the abundant doctrine, which is laid up in
the breasts (as in Wells never to be drawn dry) may be joined the sweetness of
manners and integrity of all holiness.

Verse. 9. And the roof of thy mouth like the best Wine that goes down sweetly,
causing the lips of those that are asleep to speak.
The force of this manner of wishing as yet remains. The palate or roof of
the mouth, signifies words, which are formed by the help thereof; it differs
from the breasts, because they are the closet and storehouse wherein (as in a
treasury) great store of learning is laid up; but the palate and lips are as
keys, wherewith the Treasury is unlocked, and the riches laid up is brought
forth for use: for it little profits, to have riches heaped up, unless they
may be applied to use and profit when need requires. That we may then
understand this Church to be, not only rich and plentiful in all abundance,
but also happy in the use and fruit thereof; he no less foresheweth the
sweetness of the palate, then the fertility of the breasts. I^ causes the
lips of those that are asleep to speak. This is an excellent commendation of
this Wine so strong and powerful, that it can shake off drowsinesse in men
half dead, make the mind and senses more nimble; loose the tongue, before
sticking to the jaws, and make it wonderful eloquent. Esaias expounds this
riddle, saying, Chap. 35. 5. Then shall the the Cripple skip as the Heart, and
the tongue of the dumb shall sing.

Verse. 10. I am my beloveds, and his desire is toward me.
The Spouse at length concludes this place, as if she should say, It needs
not that we should stand reckoning up every thing; that condition briefly shall
be such, that the Church with all study and desire, shall be altogether
affected and consecrated to Christ, and shall find him again so kind and
loving, as if he wholly applied himself to this only Care.

Verse. 11. Come my beloved, let us go forth into the field, let us ^odg^ in the
villages: or* among the Cypress trees*
So much of the first calling, now follows the second: that which remains
of the Chapter, is a preparation of this second calling, which does wholly set
forth the Spouse her inviting the Bridegroom into the country* showing, that
these first fruits of the Jews shall burn with great desire to win the rest
of their nation, and shall not cease till they bring it to pass. But why does
the Spouse desire the country? Is she weary of the city; or does desire a more
fresh air? Indeed they that are long pend up in the city* are wont often
times, for their minds sake, to avoid company, and desire solitary rest; but
this going into the fields or villages, seeks not pleasure so much, as it
stirs up to new work and labor. If she had desired it, to avoid the heat of
the Sun, or for pleasant banqueting, whereto serves this lodging abroad?
She therefore goes a hunting, not to catch wild beasts, but men; very many
Jews were yet busied in the country without the holy City, for whom all this
watching and trouble shall be undertaken; that they may be gathered into one
shee^fold, and fitted into one body of Christ with their brethren. This
vocation shall so much exceed the former, as the open fields exceed the city,
or the whole multitude a small company; Daniel, Chap. 12. 12. appoints the
time thereof 45. years after the first, which will happen about the year 1700.
The exact time cannot be set down, it is enough for us, if we come near the
truth.

Verse. 12. Let us get up early to the vineyards: let ^s see if the vines
flourish: whether the tender grapes appear, and the Pomegranats ^ud forth,
there will I give thee my love.
That which the Bride lately entreated, now she urges with certain reasons.
The end of the journey and the full acquaint^nce in this verse. The perfection
of all delights in the ve^se following. The end of being in the country is that
she might arise earl^ to the vineyard. It was some trouble to watch among the
Cypress trees, but this adds more, to go forth so early to the vines:
wherein we learn, her chiefest care was in gathering these citizens of the
second order, wherein she spared no labor or diligence: she will go into the
country, not refusing the tediousness of the long journey* she will endure the
discommodity of watching in the villages, and that nothing be wanting by her
will, she will arise early in the morning to dispatch the business, and which
is more to be admired, whiles yet no harvest appears which might worthily
require the painful labor; Esaias mentions this desire, when after the
fore-shewed great glory of the reformed and much adorned spouse beholding in
the Spirit the full conversion of the whole nation, he cries out* Go thorovv,
go through ^he gates, prepare you the way of the people: cast ^p, cast up the
highvvay, gather out the stones, lift up a standard for the people, Chap. 62.
10. By which doubled words he shows their incredible desire ofgathering the
relics and bringing them into one Church. The vines, grapes and Pomgranates
are the elect of the Jews, whose prone readiness to embrace the truth is like a
most pleasant spring, the elect had tried their winter, which deprived them of
fruit and leaves, that they could scarce be known from dead trees.

The second member of the verse shows another reason of going into the
country, There (says she) I will give my loves to thee, that it is to say, I
will show my self freely to thee that thou may delight thy self in my
company: for to give one my love honestly and shamefastly, is to give him full
power over me, Therefore the glory of Christ's Kingdom shall not be full till
this rustication.

Verse. 13. The Mandrakes give a smell, and at our gates are all manner of
pleasant fruits, n^w and old, which I have laid up for thee, O my beloved.
Mandrakes says Plini^ have a strong smell, but here is no commendation of the
sent, but mention is made of it only to show the budding and growth thereof. It
is a cold herb drowsy and lateward; it seems it grew in the fields in the land
of Canaan, Ruben found Mandrakes in the field, Genesis 30. 14. They are also
opposed in this place to those more delicate fruits which are planted near the
house, as well for delight as for more easy keeping. The new and old fruits
have a plain meaning. An excellent division of the citizens seems here to be
set forth, whereof some are far scattered in remote colonies, like Mandrakes
growing in the open fields; others like domstique milder fruit, which by
vicinity or near neighborhood yield more plentiful delights. Some again are
newly fresh planted into the Church, like Mandrakes, cold and lateward herbs
springing more slowly, such shall the Jews be lastly called, which shall more
lately shake off their drowsinesse* Some are elder, who shall yield their names
to the first calling, and s^end their time in the received truth somewhat
before the ^^st shall come in. This shall be a most pleasant beholding to the
elders, when they shall see Religion not to decay with the age: which alas, we
behold to our grief, as if the fullness of the gentiles did now approach, every
later generation in their degrees fall away from the sanctity of their parents.
The latter part of the verse teaches that the spouse shall have a time at
length to unlocke her storehouses, and as it were in pomp, openly set forth
her unmeasurable riches in the exceeding great abundance of her citizens.
Thrifty householders do not suffer all things to be used continually and
conf^sedly, but reserve some things for solemn feasts, set apart from daily
uses, which they may bring forth as occasion serves for credit and honesty: So
the Church, howsoever she has oftentimes before declared her self not poor and
needy, but sufficient rich and abundantly ador^ed with all dignity, yet she
has not applied these dainty banquets, delicate dishes and sweet-meates to
common and daily diet, but has reserved them locked up in store for this one
solemnity: whereby we may understand the glory of those times to be such as the
former ages have never seen.

CHAP. VIII.
OH that thou werest as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother: I
would find thee without, I would kiss thee, then they should not despise
thee. 2 I will lead thee, and bring thee into my mothers house: there thou
shall teach me: and I will cause thee to drink spiced wine, and new wine of the
pomegranate. 3 His left hand shall be under mine head, and his right hand shall
embrace me. 4 I charge you, O daughters of Jerusalem, that you ^tirre not up,
nor waken my love, until she please. 5 (Who is this that comet^ up out of the
wilderness, leaning upon her welbeloved?) I raised thee up under an apple
tree: there thy mother conceived thee: there she conceived that bare thee. 6
Set me as a seal on thy heart, and as a ^ignet upon thine arm: for love is
strong as death: jealousy is cruel as the the grave: the coals thereof are
fiery coals, and a vehement flame. 7 Much water cannot quench love, neither
can the floods drown it: if a man should give all the substance of his house
for love, they would greatly contemn it. 8 We have a little sister, and she
has no breasts: what shall we do for our sister when she shall be spoken for?
9 If she be a wall, we will build upon her a silver palace: and if she be a
door, we will keep her in with boards of cedar. 10 I am a wall, and my breasts
ar^ as towers: then was I in his eyes as one that finds peace. 11 Solomon had
a vine in Baal-hamon: he gave the vineyard unto keepers: every one brings for
the fruit thereof a thousand pieces of silver. 12 But my vineyard which is
mine, is before me: to the^, O Solomon, appertains a thousand pieces of
silver, and two hundred to them that keep the fruit thereof. 13 O thou that
dwe^lest in the gardens, the companions hearken unto thy voice: cause me to
hear it. 14 Oh my welbeloved, ^lee away, and be like unto the roe, or to the
young ha^^ upon the mountains of spices.
The Resolution.
THus ^^^re the prep^r^tion of the second c^lling, the calling it self
follows, declared by the wonderful desire of the called, verse. 1. 2. By the
mutual love of the Bridegro^me, verse. 3. and his everlasting continuance,
verse. 4. And such is the princess the younger sister. The other inferiors
which accompany this princess are two: one is described coming out of the
desert, leaning upon her beloved, and with wonderful zeal, verse. 5, 6. 7. the
other is renowned by the great affection of the Sisters, verse. 8* 9. and by her
own readiness, verse. 10. And hitherto of the Churches severally. Jointly, it
shows as well, how carefully the Bridegroom will defend the whole, verse. 11.
12. and what he requires of the whole, verse. 13. as what the common desire of
the spouse shall be, namely, that her beloved would fly hence, and that she at
length might be carried with him into everlasting habitacles, verse. 14.

THE EXPOSITION.
Verse. 1. O that thou were as my brother that sucked the breasts of my mother,
when I should find thee without, I would kiss thee, yet I should not be
despised.
EVery thing now at length fully perfected, and all the faithful Jews fitted
into one body of Christ, their affection is wonderful, made clear by the
Antithesis of the former Jews, with whom Christ in times past had to do in the
earth, that with wondrous skill, with one and the same labor, he sets forth
as well the a^cursed hatred of these, as the willing and ready love of those new
citizens. The old Jews despised* and refused Christ coming in the flesh and
showing himself a brother: but there shall be nothing better ^o those, nothing
that they shall more desire, then that they may enjoy the favor of his
presence whereby that horrible wickedness of despising the Son of God by their
elders, may be recompensed by their faith and diligen^e in holy duties: the old
Jews sought only his death, but fled and followed him not (teaching in the
streets) with kisses, but reproaches. All familiarity with him was accounted
for a reproach and blame; Nicodemus constrained for fear to seek private
conference with him by night. These shall diligently seek him wheresoever he
should be, and finding him shall worship him with great reverence. Neither
shall they any whit regard the mo^ks and skoffes of the wicked: the world shall
then be of another fashion. These later people altogether unlike to those their
wicked elders; Solomon has most divinely comprised in these words, as well the
wickedness of those former in refusing Christas, the pieti^ of those later in
embracing him.

Verse. 2. I would lead thee, I would bring thee into my mothers house, thou
should instruct me: I would cause thee to drink of spiced wine, of the
fruit of my Pomegranates.
He follows the former Antithesis or opposition, for he could not better
express the integrity of those which are to be called, then by opposing them
to such as were formerly called, in vain. The old Jews then sh^t Christ out
adores, and desired to drive him out of the Temple and Synagogues: For they
which raged so much against others which confessed him somewhat more freely;
what would they not ^o to him himself, for whose cause they were so violent
against others? (Ioh. 9. 22.) But these people will not only open the gates
that the King of glory may come in, but will lead him through the streets, and
set him highest in the midst of their assemblies. The same manner of speech we
met with before, Cap. 3. 4. which we interpreted of his coming in the flesh;
otherwise his mothers house is the Church, as we saw in the first Chap. verse.
17. Thou should teach me. Tremelius refers it, to my mother which
teaches me. The words bear it: but the A^tithesis requires such exposition
as I have made. The Jews very much frequented the Temple; they boasted
themselves to be the white sons of their mother the Church, but of the
doctrine of their brother (the man Christ) there will be great difference
between the old and these. They could not abide to hear Christ preaching:
these will hearken to his voice only, they will draw their doctrine from this
only Well they will prefer themselves no other manner of life and salvation
but him alone. Lastly, whereas she will give him spiced wine to drink, thereby
he teaches how far the new people shall differ from the old in cruelty: They
mingled him vinegar and gall to drink, Man. 27. 34. These shall tremble at
such barbarous wickedness, and in, stead of that most bitter cup shall invite
him to most generous wine of Chaste and fervent piety. Their excellent form and
beauty could not be better painted out, then by the opposite deformity of that
old and degenerate Synagogue: the fruit of the Pomegranate may be referred to
some principal men among the Jews, who shall apply all their authority to
advance religion, etc.

Verse. 3. His left hand should be under my head, and his right hand should
embrace me.
The love of the Bridegroom, which rests most pleasantly in the bosom and
embracing of the Church thus settled* he shall carry the Bride in his arms,
and shall keep her safe and sound from all troubles, as before, Chap. 2. 6. but
that the Church was never before so well adorned and protected by the divine
power, as in this last renovation according to that of Jeremy, Chap. 16. verse.
14. 15. and of Esaias, Chap. 43. ver^. 5, 6. The exceeding glory of Gods
presence, shall then obscure all former memory, how famous or renouned ^oever.

Verse. 4. I charge ye, O daughters of Jerusalem, that ye stir not up, nor
awake my love until he pl^^se.
This betokens the perpetuity of this love and condition, as before by the
same kind of oath, he always declares a settled estate of the Church for
some long continuance; here are no Hearts and Roes of the field to disturb the
peace of the Church, as when she living among enemies, had near her (by Gods*
just judgment) revengers of their revolting; but now the Kingdom shall be
yielded to Christ, for this is the time wherein the stone cut out without
hands, etc. Dan. 2. 34. 44. 45. and 7. 27. For in this Kingdom all enemies
shall be far removed, or rather taken away altogether; so that the Church shall
for ever hereafter live free from fear of them. Then all things shall attain
their own ends, and that whole Mystery (Revel. 10. 7. and 16. 17* It is
finished) which was foretold by the Prophets, for hitherto belongs their
sacred Oracles. Neither do they further mention any notable change, till our
Lord shall come from heaven. For this is that fullness, then which nothing can
be farther expected on earth, which seems to be manifested by this removing
of all causes of disturbing the Bridegroom hereaft^r. Let us then leave the
Christian Church of the Jews most flourishing till Christ Translate his hence
into heaven.

Verse 5. Who is this that comes up from the Wilderness, leaning upon her
beloved? Iraised thee up under the Appletrce, there thy mother brought thee
forth, there she brought thee forth that bare thee.
Hitherto has been spoken of the first younger daughter. Another sister
follows: for by this kind of inquiry we have twice seen a new arising of
some Church to be showed. And of this is a double state declared, the beginning
in this verse, the progr^sse in the 6. and 7. The name of this Nation which
comes up from the wilderness (me seems) may easily be supposed out of
other places of the Prophets. As Esaias chap. 19* 23. etc. wherein he treats of
the calling of the Assyrians and the Egyptians: for though many of either
Nation were in former times endued with the saving knowledge of Christ, yet
that small number was nothing to this great assembly now spoken of. Hither
belongs that of Ezekiel. 47. 1, 2. and Joel cap. 3. 18. See Numb. 25. 1. Zachary
extends the limits of this kingdom from sea to sea, Cap. 9. 10. and from the
sloud to to the end of the earth, for the pride of Assyria, etc. Zach. 10. 11.
Wherefore this Church shall be that whole bordering Eastern Region, Arabia,
Chaldea, Babylonia, Assyria, and Persia, and those inmost corners of the East.
The waters flowing into these Regions, is the course of the Gospel wherewith
they shall be watered; leaning upon her beloved, shows her great familiarity
with him, as lovers are wont to cast themselves into the bosoms of their
beloved, and whereas she was raised up under an apple tree, we learned before
that the Apple tree betokens inferior Magistrates, under whose shadow the
Bridegroom covers his Church, as under Tamarisk and lower trees; the high
and lofty Cedars being cut down, Chap. 2. 3. 4. Wherefore the first infancy
of this Church, seems to be governed by some inferior Officer, who though in
the beginning there wanted the chief Princes authority, yet by his labor and
diligence, he shall bring it to pass, that the seed of the truth sown shall
spring up into the light, that men may behold it: yet it seems more likely
that this Magistrate should be given them of the Jews, to whose rule bordering
Regions shall obey. And therefore this Church is raised up under an Apple tree,
because it shall be ruled by such Government.

Verse. 6. Set me as a seal upon thine heart, as a Seal upon thine arm, for
love is strong as death, jealousy as cruel as the grave, the ^oales thereof
are coals of fire, which has a most vehement flame.
Such was the beginning. The progress shall be famous for her mavelous and
earnest desire of piety, which is most elegantly painted out in her desire and
the reason thereof. Her desire is, that she may be as a seal on his heart and
arm, as a note Printed with a seal, whereby the impression of it might be
as well deeply fixed inwardly in the mind, as appear always outwardly to the
sight, wherein she desires that she may cleave to him, as the figure is wont
which the Print of the Seal has made. Most vehement love requires the like
again. The ardent desire of love is expressed by most fit similitudes, for
saying it is as strong as death, she shows thereby that none can resist the
power thereof, death overcommeth the proudest ones by force, so that it should
be folly to contend with her. The grave is also cruel without pity,
discourteous and in^xorable, who despises all supplications, nor is ever
filled with prey: it daily devoureth an infinite multitude, and yet always
gapeth for new spolies. Neither is jealousy less insatiable.

Verse 7. Many waters cannot quench love, neither can the floods drown it: if
a man would give all the substance of his house for love, it would utterly be
contemned.
Therefore this love shall be eternal, which neither adversity nor prosperity
shall be able to weaken or any whit impair: for the chief scope hereof is to
teach us that the light of the truth once kindled, shall never be quenched
again in these countries, whereby it manifestly appears that here is
something expected to be done, and not to show any thing past. Some knowledge
of Christ has overspread the Eastern Countries many ages since, but the
floods have overwhelmed it, and the wealth and riches of the world have
altogether choked it; for not the least part of true religion has there been
seen by many ages. But at the length by Gods mercy the truth shall plant her
roots in these lands, which no storm or tempest shall pull up, nor fair
allurements shall cause it to wither.

Verse 8. We have a little sister, and she bath no breasts: what shall we do
for our sister in the day when she shall be spoken for?
He comes now to the calling of a new Nation, we said was another of the
younger sisters. Our Divines suppose these to be the words of the old Church,
and her wishes to us Gentiles. But we have seen this Prophecy many years
ago, carried beyond the age of that old Church, and now exercised in the
farthest borders of our earthly babitation. Esaias seems to teach (chap. 19.
18. 23. etc.) who this people may be in the latter times approaching; he
joyneth three nations in a common profession of the truth. The Assyrians,
Jews, and Aegyprians. Of the Jews and Assyrians, has the Paranymph spoken
before, and seems to have reserved the Egyptians for the last, which nation
verily embraced Christ many ages since, and was in times past very famous in
Churches much frequented; yet without doubt, the former times are not here
respected, but times yet to come, as the course of things sufficiently shows.
It is very likely that their own proper places were certainly given to each
one in this song. Neither can it be that such careful order should fail now
at the last. Esaias expressly coupleth Assyria and Egypt in the society of one
Religion: which never happened in times past, when Egypt flourished with true
piety: whereunto Assyria was then altogether a stranger. This is especially to
be noted, that she calls Egypt a little sister, exceeded by Assyria only in
the latter times, which was but a barren and thirsty land whilst Egypt abounded
with full channels. But at length Assyria shall be overflowne by a swift
stream issuing from the Temple, to whose Rivers the Egyptian Nilus will be a
very small fountain. But Joel says, chap. 3. 19. Egypt shall be desolate: and
Zachary, chap. 10. 11. says, her Scepter shall be removed. It is very likely
that all Muhumetans shall be destroyed there, before those places shall obtain
the Kingdom of Christ: but this blotting out of the wicked does not signify
an utter destruction, but a laying the way open to better inhabitants, yielding
their power and authority to Christ his government. Esaias mentions the
foregoing calamity and forthwith their following happiness, whilst he gives
the knowledge of the language of Canaan to five Cities, chap. 19. 17. He
shows why it is called a little one, by bounding that Church in so few cities.

Verse. 9. If she be a wall, we will build upon her a palace of silver, and if
she be a door, we will enclose her with boards of Cedar.
A wall before, Chap. 5. verse. 7. was the safeguard of the Civil Magistrate:
and they which executed that office were called keepers of the wall: compare it
with Chap. 6. 9. it seems here to signify the same. As if she should say, If
the Civil governors will yield their helping hand to build up and defend the
Egyptian Church, they shall not want our ready aid, that they may do that with
the more dignity. The Gates in the Wall are the Ministers themselves, which
make an entrance for others into the Church. As the new Jerusalem, all closed
with walls, has twelve Gates, inscribed with the names of the twelve Apostles,
Reve. 21. 12. This is then the meaning thereof. If she shall be naked, and
without authority of the Magistrate, so that she must be gathered and
preserved by the only trust and industry of the Ministers; Then will we every
where fence these gates with Cedar boards, so that they may be fitted against
force, not feeling any worme-eaten old age For then shall the Church flourish
with such Authority, that she shall not only help her self, but also her far
remote Citizens.

Verse. 10. I am a wall and my breasts like towers, then was I in his eyes as
one that found peace.
The consultation and decree of the sisters has discovered the beginning of
this Church. She shows the proceeding in her own words. For answering their
carfulness, she shows her self furnished with those ornaments which they
were afraid she wanted. Verily, not altogether destitute of the civil power,
but somewhat ^enced with the aid thereof as with a wall and Bulwark. Also her
Breasts from whom milk is drawn for the Children, though in the beginning
they were so small, that they seemed altogether none, yet now they were grown
to that largenes that they might be worthily compared with Towers. This peace
which she speaks of is that Marriage (as it s^emeth) which her sisters before
pointed at, and is elsewhere called Rest, Ruth 3. 1. As if she should say:
after that my breasts waxed ripe or imbossed, I found that pleasure in Christ,
which Maids are wont to enjoy in Marriage.

Verse. 11. Solomon had a vineyard at Baal-hamon, he let out the vineyard unto
keepers: every one for the fruit ther^of was to bring a thousand pieces of
silver.
Verse. 12. My vineyard which is mine is before me: thou (O Solomon) must have a
thousand, and those that keep the fruit thereof two hundred.
Hitherto of the new Christian Church, as it was distinguished into diverse
members, into the elder, and the three younger sisters, whereof the first is a
Princess among the rest* Now follows that which is common as well on the
behalf of the Bridegroom as of the Bride: that of the Bridegroom is twofold. A
care, and a Precept. The care of the Bridegroom toward the Universal Church
is excellently declared by a dissimilitude taken from Solomon: Solomon let out
his Vineyard to others, and received a large yeerly*revenue from his Farmers:
But I (says the Bridegroom) will take care of my vineyard my self. I will not
hire it forth. And the fruit which I shall receive, will be far larger then
Salomons. Much good do it him with his profits, I do not envi^him. Yet are they
not to be compared with mine. Neither is it a new thing for Kings to hire out
to others that which exceeds their household store. Morcerus interprets the
twelfth verse as spoken of the Bride herself, like as in the first Chapter and
sixth verse she says, She was made a keeper of the vines, and so she might be
now again, except perhaps for ill lucks sake then, the Bridegroom himself will
hereafter undertake ^his care (See Esaias 65. 22, 23* etc.) lest the peace of the
Church should afterward be disturbed by some such like negligence.

Verse. 13. O Thou that dwell in the Gardens, the Companions hearken to thy
voice: cause me to hear it.
This precept teaches to what imploiment the Bride would give her self for
ever: They being subdued which durst to mutter against her, and all things
settled in most calm peace. We have often told you that the precepts of this
Song are prophesies of common affairs. The bride is said to dwell in the
Gardens after the same manner as before, Chap. 4. 12. when by Constantines
Authority she was fenced by the safeguard of the Civil Law, but* in those last
times the Magistrates over all, especially in the new collected Congregations,
shall bend all their force to defend the Church; herein only this shall differ
from that, because the first garden was closed with one wall, their whole
aff^ires administered by one man's rule, this new Garden (as also that r^stored,
Cha. 6. 1.) shall be divided with many enclosures, for the variety of
Presidents which shall govern in several provinces. As concerning the
Precept. The companions that hearken, are all the Citizens of the Church, for
then the Church brings it to pass^ that the Bridegroom may hear Her
fellows, that is, her citizens and particular Congreg^tions, when she
sincerely delivers the right way to believe in Christ, and to worship God, ^o
that from her most wholesome instructions, sins may be acknowledged, mercy
implored, goodness preached, and God in the end may receive his due honor.
This is that voice of the Companions, wherewith the Bridegroom shall be
delighted, which from that time sh^l sound in the Church for ever, and which
voice the Citizens learn to pronounce, l^stning to the doctrine and instruction
of the Church their Mother.

Verse* 14. Make have* or fly hence my beloved* and be thou like to a Roe* or
to a young heart upon the mountains of Spices.
It is the common desire in the Brides behalf, which is delivered in this
verse, for the Universal Church b^eaketh forth into these words, that the
Bridegroom should fly away into the mountains of Spices* What? is she now
weary of his presence, whom with such labor, she before sought being absent,
that sh^e should so soon command him out of her sight? No, but when the Spou^e
earnestly desires that her beloved would fly out of the garden into the
mountains of Spices: it is as if she should desire* that leaving the earth he
would return again to the heavenly fort^^ss^ for that mean the Mountains of
Spices. No^ that she wish^^h (being alone and depri^^d of his imbracings) any
longer to stick in the filthy dregs of this world: but that she earnestly
desires to fly hence her self together with her beloved, and to come to the
inheritance laid up for the Elect in heaven. For she (one of the Sisters) which
even new desired that she might be ^ixed to his heart* as a Seal, could not
endure this divorce, to tarry ^ere behind him. This is all one with that of
Saint John, Rev. 22. 20* Come Lord ^e^us; differing a little in words. Io^n
requesteth that the Bridegroom would show himself to the world in the most
glorious m^nifestation of his Majesty* which is now covered from the eyes of
the world at the right hand of the Father, and so at length would put an end to
all things. The Spouse desires that this Beam, how brigh^ soever, which shall
then shine in the ear^h, would as it were collect his light, and withdraw it
self into heaven. Either of them wishe^h the e^d, but he defines it by coming
from Heaven: she by departing from the earth. Either of which we expect, the
coming first, the departure after. Hitherto goes this divine Poem, but
points not out the last moment of time. It is sufficient that it sets
forth the condition of the last Church more distinctly and exactly, I suppose,
then any other part of the holy Scripture. Many large and ple^sant Prophesies
do aim at the calling of the Jews, but here alm^st all set up their mark:
but of the other Sisters coming to the truth by her help, they make a more
obscure and general mention, yet out of this interpretation it may be
understood how false they are, who set down the end of the world at a certain
year out of some limited number in the Scriptures, especially if they compare
this Prophecy with the Revelation and Daniel. For that Resurrection, Dan. 12.
and Rev. 20. 12. Also that, It is done, of the seventh Vial, Reve. 16. 17.
appertains to the calling of the Jews* So that where we ex^ect the end of the
world, there we find the beginning of a new Church; which is not like to be
for a day or a week or a short time. The Angel expressly affirms to be far
and wide spread, Rev. 20. 5. 6. And gives it a thousand years after the first
Resurrection of the elder sister. Now seeing the Church of the Jews shall
begin to flourish about 400. years after that Resurrection, 600. years at least
shall be left wherein she shall reign here upon the earth* but how*long after,
he only knows, who knows all things. I can light upon no mark or token of
time that may give even the least conjecture; Daniel says, after the
destruction of the Turkish Empire, (which shall be d^stroyed by Conversion of
the Jews) a space shall be given for the rest of the Beasts to live, even for
a time, and a time appointed. But this space is neither expressed, neither
perhaps shall the end of the World be joined with the destruction of the
remnant. That therefore which has troubled many, as if that certain limiting
of time which offers it self in the Revelation and elsewhere, should bring us
to the end of all (repressing or mollifying the words of Christ, Mar. 13. 32.
by interpretation) may hence be delivered from this fear, for all those
accounts end, either in the Jews Conversion, or if they go a little farther
(whereof I find only two, which I have spoken of before) they rather show
within what time the end shall not be, then at what moment it is to be
expected. Wherefore that of Christ remains without doubt, in the same meaning
as the words do properly show: The Angels themselves know not the very last
day. We verily believe this day by faith, and have many tokens of its drawing
near, but I suppose we fail of any account that may bring us to any near
knowledge thereof. If any think I have opened a window to security by removing
the bounds of it so far off: let him know if the shortness of this life and
the end uncertain move him not, neither will the neerenesse of this day move
him any whit at all. What matter makes it whether Christ himself come to
judgment in the sight of all men, or thou be drawn to judgment at his
Tribunal Seat? or ought thou not be careful of thine own end, unless the
end of the whole world do accompany it? Let the wicked be filthy still, yet
this thought will easily shake off s^curity from the godly, though this
revealed truth may not a little bridle the tongues of the wicked, which draw
all things into doubt, whiles they read of fixed terms in some men's works,
and by use learn them to be deceived by conjecture. As if the error of blind
man (and such verily are the sharpest sighted in Divine Matters) should be a
sufficient Argument to subvert the truth of God. We may be deceived in obscure
things, and not plainly delivered to us of purpose, yet the Divine Truth does
neither deceive, nor is deceived, as they too late shall find, which have
despised it. But let this be an end of this plain exposition.

A Prayer.
EXceeding praise be to thee O merciful Father, together with the Son and
holy Ghost, which have so much respected our infirmity, that thou have
vouchsafed to inform us of things to come even to the last end. Whereby, and by
the use of times past we may be confirmed in thy truth, and not run headlong
into unforeseen mischiefs in the knowledge of things to come. Let not this
knowledge vani^^ without fruit I beseech thee, but bestow the comfort thereof
upon thy Church; that she looking into the glory of thy Children may despise
all the troubles and deceitful delights of this life, and may constantly
proceed to that mark for which the Crown is laid up in Christ Jesus. To whom
with thee O Father, and with the holy Spirit, ^e all honor, praise and glory
for ever and ever,

Amen.
The Popes SPECTACLES Or his CLJMACTERJCALL year calculated in August, Anno
1623.
Brief Notes out of several Expositors of the Revelation, touching the rising
and fall, progress and final destruction of the Enemies of the Church: with
some other observances out of diverse writers.

St. John wrote his Revelation and sent it to the seven Churches in Asia minor,
now called Natolia.

He wrote it Anno 97. as Eusebius says: in 99. as Irenaeus says. He dyed
under Trajan, 109. as most say; But Jerome and Nicephorus say in 100.

This Prophecy is of things to come, and not of things past, as is well
observed by Master Brightman.

It is to be observed, for the better understanding of this Prophecy, what
names and Titles the Revelation gives to the adversaries of the Church, which
are as follows.

The first and last adversaries are called a dragon; an open and perverse
enemy to Christianity, which were the heathen Emperors, and now the Turks, as
the best expositors understand it.

The second and third after the Dragon are two beasts, the first out of the
Sea, the second out of the earth.

The fourth is called a Whore and Babylon, chap. 17. 1. and 5. Also that Whore
is called the great City, etc. which in Saint John's time was only Rome.

The Dragon the first Adversary was destroyed by Constantine the great in
overthrowing Dioclesian, Maxentius and Maximinian Anno 311. he began his Reign
Anno 306. or 307.

After the overthrow of the Dragon, a Beast arises presently out of the Sea:
which Brightman expounds erroneous doctrine, so likewise has he
Ecclesiastical Government. And in Constantines time Rome was called the first
Sea, Constantinople the second, Alexandria the third, Antioch the fourth, and
Jerusalem the fifth. And so the Romanists at this day style the Popes
jurisdiction.

The other beast rises out of the Earth, which is the Popes spiritual and
Temporal power, or rather his dear friends, the Antichristian Emperors;
because it is said verse 11. that this beast ca^^^th all that dwell in the
earth to worship the first Beast, which is the Pope, for they were his first
builders and are his chief pillars, etc.

He is likewise called the Beast which was and is not, Chap. 17. 11. by which
is meant the Roman Empire, in the West, which lay void three hundred twenty
five years, from Augustulus, to Carolus Magnus.

Also, the Beast was taken, and with him that false Prophet which wrought
miracles, etc. Chap. 19. 20. which seem to make them to be two distinct
persons.

Thus also is Rome plainly described to be set on seven hills and ruling over
the Kings of the earth: which make Bellarmine and R^bira both Jesuits to
confess that Rome is the Whore there meant. Rome also maintains Idolatry and
Superstition in her Religion, Government, and Policy; which in Scripture is
called Whoredom: then the Pope is not the Whore, but one of the Beasts or
Bawds rather (if you will) to the Whore. For example; he maintains Stews in
Rome, yielding him yearly 40000. Ducats, and receives yearly of Curtizans
50000. Ducats, and grants dispensations to his Cardinals to use Sodometry in
the three hot months of the year. I would know of any Jesuit whether the
Pope can pardon a sin before it be committed etc. As he did H^nry the 8. to
marry his brothers wife: the King of Spain his Niece: the Arch-dutches,
Albertus, whom she might call, Brother, Uncle, and Cozen. And so I leave it to
the indifferent to judge, whether he be the Whore, the Beast, or a Bawd.

The Whore is said to sit upon a Beast, Revel. 17. the Pope is this whores only
stay and prop, (quis nescit?) And so Iunius Napier and Brightman take it: but
Downam thinks it meant of the Germane Emperors, whose punishment and
destruction is described, Chap. 17. and 18. verse. 3. and 4.

In the thirteenth chapter it is said that the first beast is wounded and
healed by a Dragon, before the arising of the second Beast; which Dragon some
say was Athaulphus that wounded Honorius the Emperor, Ann. 414. Others say
Odoacer, who overthrew Augustulus the last Roman Caesar. Another (viz. D.
Forbes, now a Bishop in Scotland) says, it was Theodoricus the Ostrogoth, Ann.
476. Others Alaricus a Goth that sacked Rome, Anno 541. These were all heathen
Kings, and therefore accounted among the Dragons, whereof one healed the first
Beast, viz. the Pope. Quere.

After this Rome was under the Exarches of Ravenna 197. years, which were
Christians; then under the Lumbards 56. years, which at first were heathen and
after Arrians, and had but a part of the Empire.

In this time the Visigothes ruled in Spain, the Aleins in Guines and
Gascoine, the French men in the residue of France, the Vandalls in Afric, the
S^xons in Britain, the Ostrogoths in Mise and Hungary, the Herules and
Turinges in ^talie and Rome. Only the name of the Empire remained with Zeno in
the East. Transamundus King of the Vandalls in Afric banished 220. Bishops
Ann. 459. About the time was great alteration of States and Kingdoms; Carolus
magnus overthrowing the Goths and Vandalls with Alaricus and the Lumbards, was
by Pope Honorius made Emperor of the West, Anno 802. (M^lancthon and Lanq^et)

So from Augustulus to Carolus Magnus the Empire was void, 325. years, wherein
says Eraesmus, Antichrist was to arise. Downam, Napier and Brightman, say he
rose when Constantine removed the Empire (out of the way) to Constantinople; It
is true, then the whore conceived the monster, but she bore him in her womb 35.
years, before she brought him forth to the fight of the world, 2 Thessalonians. 2.

He that withheld was taken away by Constantine, (311) when he overthrew
Dioclesian, Maxentius, and Maximinian the last of those Dragons: neither is he
there said presently to appear or be borne into the world, Chap. 13. 11. and 12.

The second Beast after his rising, causes the earth and them that dwell
therein to worship the first Beast, whose deadly wound was healed. These were
the Emperors: as Phocus, who gave the first title of universall-Bishop to
Boniface the third, Bale says, he was a Britain first named Wenefridus, Anno.
606. Pepin and Charles the great, who gave great revenews to Leo the third. But
these were of the Race of the second Beast* and not of the Dragon. About 100
years after the death of Charles the Roman Empire came to Otho the first German
Emperor, Ann. 9^6. After in 996. the Eel ctors of the Empire were ordained, by
Pope Gregory the seventeenth and Otho the third.

Neither were Boniface or Le^ the first Beast as some take it, for the two
Beasts were bred and born long before, as hereafter will plainly appear.

Thus much shall suffice to distinguish between the Dragon, the Beast, the
false prophet, and the whore, Rev. 20. 2.

The Dragon called also the devil and Satan is bound for 1000. years* his
first binding by Constantine continued until Zadok the first Emperor of the
Turks: which was 1310. This dragon began to breed, Anno 1051. but was not of
full growth until Ottaman the first Emperor, Anno 1300. Then the Dragon and
Satan compassed the tents of the Saints and the beloved city, Rev. 20. who were
the Christians. In this time the Christians recovered again Jerusalem, and held
it 92. years, Chap. 11. 3.

The two witnesses (...) and their corpse lying in the streets of the great
city unburied three days and a half, is expounded by Brightman to be the
decree of the Council of Trent, the Pope and Charles the fifth, dated the
eight of April 1546. Calling the scriptures a dead letter, as Pope Innocent had
before decreed. And so the scriptures were but as a dead corpse, for the space
of three years and a half, (Sleydan) until the coming of Mauritius, and the
men of Magdeburg, who made the said council to ^^ie the ninth of November
1549. This council continued by fits 17 or 18 years. The Emperor with the
consent of his brother Ferdinando and the Princes of Germany suffered the
Scriptures again to be read in their mother tongue by a decree at Ausburg the
seventh of October 1555. when the two witnesses were set again upon their feet,
Chap. 11. 13. And then the tenth part of the city is said to fall, which was
England, Denmark, Swetia and a great part of Germany fell then away from the
Romish Religion or sea.

Napier takes it to be meant of the council of Constance, which began Anno
1414.

These two witnesses are to prophecy 1260 days clothed in sackcloth, which
are so many years, and then they are to be slain. Wherefore they must not begin
at Constantines time, as Napier and Brightman suppose, but a little after his
death at the Council of Ariminum: where above 200. good Bishops opposed the
multit^de of the Arrians. Lanquet says it was held, Anno 361* Melan^thon 362,
from thence the 27 of September, it was removed to Sele^cium. From whence
(adding 1260 years) it will fall out to be about 1620 or 1621. About which time
was the loss and fall of those two famous Churches of Bohemia and the
Palatinate: or if you will, the great afflictions that fell on the two Churches
of France and Germany, which caused a great rejoicing among Papists in all
places. But if I might see them upon their feet again either in Anno 1624 or
25. I shall be confident it was meant of them.

Parker who wrote upon the cross, and died at Frankford, says (by learned
Brightmans leave) that by the Angel pouring out his vial on the sun* is meant
some great affliction to fall upon some Church. And the Angel showing John the
destruction of the whore out of the wilderness, means that he which shall
destroy Rome, his country must be first made a wilderness, which he says is
some Protestant or Lutheran State, Chap. 12. 14.

The time, times and half a time, must agree with the sixth verse of the
twelfth chapter, where the woman is fed in the desert 1260. days, which make
three years and a half.

Also they say it was the custom of the Prophets to account years by months,
weeks and days, as Number. 14 34. Eze^h. 4. 5* 6. The 70. weeks in Daniel must
of necessity be 490. years. 40. days and Nineve^ shall be destroyed, Jonah. 3.
4. which came to pass just 40. years after, by Cyaxares. And thirteen years
before the desolation of Jerusalem by Nebuchadnezzar. Eusebius, Of the times of
the alteration of States.

Nineveh the Imperial city of the Assyrians was distant from Jerusalem
north-east 648. miles. And Anno mundi 3238, and before Christ 730. Merodach a
Chaldean slew Senacharib and his son Asarhaddon, and made the A^syrians
subject to the Babylonians, Babylon is 680. miles from Jerusalem toward the
east. About 536. years before Christ Babylon was taken by Cyrus. And so the
Empire of the Babylonians came to the Persians. Persepolis their chief city was
from Jerusalem, 1240 miles toward the east: about 302. years before Christ
Alexander magnus overcame Darius and translated the Empire to the Grecians.
Their chief city Philippi was distant from Jerusalem) 954* miles north-east. A
little before Christ's time Iuli^^ gat the name of Emperor: but it was settled
in August^^ at the birth of Christ. So much of the second of Daniel.

1. In the eleventh chapter, the two witness^s prophecy clothe^ in sackcloth
1260. days.

In the twelfth chapter, the woman is nourished in the wilderness 1260. days.

2. In the eleventh, the holy city shall they tread under foo^ 42. months.

In the 13th. power is given to the Beast to domineer 42. months.

A time, times and half a time is expounded three years and a half. Three years
and a half contain 4^. months, which make 1260* d^ies; thirty days to a
month.

Now for the time of the fall and destruction of the enemies of the Church.

By the account of Napier it shall be, Anno 1639. Brightman faith before 1650.
These two begin at Constantines time.

But I crave leave of these two worthies to begin 35. years after theirs, my
reasons are; First, they take the man*childe to be Constantine, and so do I,
but it is plain in the text that he is first taken up to God before the woman's
flying into the wilderness, which came not to pass until 23. or 26. years
after the death of Constantine. Secondly, in his time the Church most
flourished and had no cause to hide; But Con^^anti^^^ b^unty and leaving Rome
to the Popes government was the cause that p^esently Rome grew proud and turned
to be the great whor^* ^or (committing ^ornication with errou^ and ambition)
^he conceived and brought forth two sons that were* Beasts: yi^* Constanti^^
Emperors and Liberi^s Pope both Arri^^s. These are the fathers and Grandsires
of the two Breasts* viz. of all the Antichristian Emperor and Popes following.
So that it was er^our and p^rsecution which caused the Church to hide her sel^.

The greatest difficulty is to know the time when the woman's flying began: to
free my sel^ from envy and ^avill of Papists and Prot^stants I will begi^ at
the Ar^ia^ counsels. And I will begin my computation at the horrible dec^ee
and council of Antioch, Anno 365. And add to it 1260 years, the time of the
woman's hiding i^ the wilderness (and the Beasts time of Domineering) it makes
1625. At the end whereof I hope the woman or Church shall come forth as a
virgin and Bride trim*d for her husband, and see all her enemies trod under
foot: which I pray God the father of all mercies and the God of all comfort to
grant, etc.

But I know many will say, my calculation is incredible, c^nsidering the Popes
and the Emperors late prevailings, together with their and the King of Spaines
power. I answer: The whores plagues are to come upon her at a day, Chap. 17.
which may well be unde^stood of a years warning, or upon a sudden.

Also if Babylon be and were an Antitype of Rome, as it is apparent; Babylon
was of an incredible strength and greatness. The walls were 50. cubits thick
and 200 high, and 380* furlongs in compass as Strab^ says, which makes 48.
miles. The river E^p^^ate^ ran through it. The first founder was Nimrod* like
Romulus, branded with the most perspicuous note of cruelty: compelling his
vassals (like the Pope) to worship him with divine wo^ship, and after his death
to be honored for one of the principal gods by the name of Saturn. (Chap.
18.) And ^f Romes destruction be described by the name of Babylon: and Babylon
was destroyed upon a sudden, when they were secure. Belshazzar was merry in
his cups. The same night the city was taken destroyed: and so may the Pope for
any thing I know.

And if any ask, by whom it shall come to pass. It is said, Rev. 17. that
there are ten horns, which are ten Kings, who shall hate the whore and make her
desolate. If any demand who these ten Kings are, let them read Maxwells Jury
of 24. Prophets, whereof twelve ^re canonized by Popes for Saints, Bale reckons
them seven in England, one in Sc^tland, one in Ireland and one in Wales. These
says he shall hate the whore and make her desolate.

But I will cite two or three of Maxw^lls Prophets which are most to the
purpose.

First Paulus Secundus and Grebnerus of Misma the Germane Astrologian.
He foretelling diverse strange things which have since come to pass. As the
destuction and dissipation of the Spanish fleet in 88. The murder of Henry
the third of France: the preferment of Henry the fourth to the crown. The
besieging and winning of Grooning in Friezland and the death of Philip the
second King of Spain in his Sericum mundi filum. He also does deliver that
the Lion having the rose and the lillies on his arms shall utterly destroy the
Pope: so that afterward there shall never be any more Pope.

Thus far Maxwell out of Grebnerus.

This that follows of Greb^er^s is taken out of the Original, in Trinity
Library, Banner. 173.

The Roman Scepter and Diadem being laid down or taken away from the house of
Austria by fatal necessity, being oppressed of the Germans, and Forraigners,
French, English, Danish, and Swevians, flocking and flowing together hence and
thence. Whence shall a horrible, bloody and most sharp battle arise, wherewith
all Europe (being grievously shaken) shall tremble: and being sundry ways rent
and wasted, it shall be obnoxious to notable mutations and changes. To this
battle, (and to the making of eruptions into the provinces of the Pomeranes,
Megapolensians, and Danes) the King of Swevia of that time shall be invited and
drawn by the writings of the Legate of the Roman Sea: to which, if he shall
obey, he becomes the nearest Companion or fellow of War: but evilly and
unluckily, by that propinquity or ^eerenesse. Wherefore I counsel him to leave
Suevia in that state he had received it. So hims^^^e, his stock and Posterity
shall quietly and peaceably enjoy it, being content with their own condition:
Wherewith they do Govern, they shall preserve*their Nation and Subjects, and
keep them bo^nd to them in duty. But if he shall determine* with his heart to
persuade his people, and to draw them from the way, the Lord shall take him
away by death. And so of or from a Charles, a Great Charles reigning, is made,
who with great success and fortune shall rule the Northern people, and as an
Enemy fight luckily with hi^ Navy against the Spanish power and Tyranny, and
their Navy or Armado. And together with other Christian forces conjoined shall
fight stoutly and fiercely. But God does call out of this life the Popish wife
of the King, from whence the Roman High Priest shall con^eive great ^errour,
which shall the more m^rease and press when Charles the King himself shall
oppose Antichrist, and be adverse unto him, and shall join his forces to the
Bands of the Germans and other neighbors, and oppugn or fight against the
Spanish Diadem* And then the Swevian shall use his Navy with most happy
success, and his people by Land, and by Sea, against the Enemy.

Bohemia does fe^le tumults and warlike noyses, with a great falling away of
her people. At that time, the last Caesar of the house of Austria, shall put on
the nose of the Elector of Saxony, Spanish, sra^dulent, deceiptfull,
flattering* and treacherous Spectacles. The nature of* which spectacles at laft
he knows and by experience is taught, that these spectacles of the house of
Austria, are colloguing or flattering and glorious words, wicked and
treacherous practices. And if he go on further to give credit unto them: he
shall cast headlong himself, wife, and children, and all the confederates of
Christendom into pernicious destruction, whence the Pope of Rome shall take up
a great laughter. But the Lord does raise up an Elector which shall throw down
and raze out the Roman Antichrist with all his members and ayders.

In this violent, headlong and Sea-tumult, and in the song of despair of the
Roman Caesar, the Exiles of all the Kings and Princes of Europe; the
Bavarians, the Bohemians, Burgundians, and Portingalls. shall be restored to
their former estate. And a noble and stout Bohemian Lord does possess and
recover his jurisdiction.

They that have not seen the destruction, the meeting together of Arms, and
the dissipation: these being expelled, shall plot or seek their recovery. And
the heirs of them shall contend and labor, that by the bounty of the last
Emperor of Germany they may be set again in the place of their Ancestors.

There arises now a fortunate Bohemian Zisca for the Bohemian War. And a
certain Germane Zisca, most powerful and famous: who shall bruise and break
the heads of the Jesuits in Germany. He shall drive and banish them out of
Bohemia and Austria, and shall subdue to himself the Bohemians and all that
through Austria and Pannonia even to Constantinople, and all those people. And
therefore it is meet and just, that a glittering and precious golden crown,
burning, be set on the head of this Teutonicall or Germane Zisca, or on the
head of the Storke, who being a great and stout Warrior does come forth out of
the stock of Mars.

And he shall be called a worthy noble man. He shall ruse victoriously, which
shall do these famous things and happily finish them with his other Captains
of Zisca. After these changes, a subtle exercised interpretor of the
Revelation of Saint John, may more easily understand, and more lively decipher
the same, the ninths being past by little and little between the 606. There
shall be a more lively explication of those things which Ezechiel and Daniel
have Prophesied of the last Act of the age of the world.

Paulus Grebnerus his silken thread of the world perfected at Magdeburgh. Anno.
1574.

This book was found in the Closet of Queen Elizabeth at her death by Doctor
Nevill, etc.

Also a Prophecy of Capistranus in the Records of Canterbury.

The Lion of the house of Burgundy having got the Empire, will seek to build a
sure nest for his young: but it shall not be* for there arises a certain
grave and constant man, near Aquisgrave of the Rheine, who being chosen, shall
restore the Apostolical discipline. And in the third incursion of time shall
prevail and do great things, and there shall be of his race to the day of
jadgement.

This Capistranus was a Franciscan Minorite Friar, and prayed for the Soldiers
under Huniades at the siege of Belgrade by the Turk Anno 1454. says Symonds,
fol. 224. He is also one of Maxwells Prophets.

Also Nostrodamus says* that Rome shall be ruled by her old Brit^nish head.

Those 10. Kings which were to rise with the beast and gave their power to her,
and which shall also hate the Whore and make her desolate. Bale reckons them as
before, seven in England, the other three in Wales, Ireland, and Scotland.
These, says he* rose with the Beast, and first gave their power to the Beast,
and did him homage, paying him Peter pence as a service. This was Anno 433.
This kingdom was afterward reduced into a Monarchy by Aluredus, Anno D^m. 687.

But I rather like Grebnerus judgment, who reckons them thu^* The French, the
English, the Danes, the Swetians and the Germans; for they begin to combine
prettily together at this time.

Savanorolla says that one should come over the Alps like to Cyrus, which
should subvert and destroy Jtaly and Rome. He lived about, Anno 1496. says
Lanquet.

FINIS.

