Brightmans PREDICTIONS AND PROPHESIES: Written 46. years since;. Concerning
the three Churches of Germany, England and Scotland. Foretelling the misery
of Germany, the fall of the pride of Bishops in England by the assistance of
the Scottish Kirk. All which should happen (as he foretold) between the years
of 36. and 41. etc.

Printed in the year 1641.

Predictions and Prophesies of these times: written forty six years since,
etc.
Diverse and sundry Predictions and Prophesies have bin made by our ancient
Prophets, Bards, and fatidicall Vaticinators, which in their due times have
futurely, both punctually and exactly come to pass, as of the Sybills (so
often and frequently alleged by the Fathers) who many years before predicted
of the Incarnation of our blessed Savior. The like did Merlin Ambrosins, that
famous Cambrian Prophet, who flourished in the time of Vortiger, King of
Britain, whose South-saies (for so they called them in old time) have proved
true even to these latter days, which is made plenally apparent in a Book not
long since published by the Title of Merlins life and Prophesies, which
whosoever shall read may be amply satisfied what prevalence his prenotions had,
all of them in the process of time, being seasonably and maturely accomplished.

But to leave others, and insist only upon Mr. Brightmans stupendous
Revelations, a zealous Divine, who in his learned Sermons preached in the later
end of Queen Elizabeth's days (of most blessed memory) about the three and
four and fortieth year of her reign; which was immediately before the
coming in of K. James, father to our Royal Sovereign K. Charles, (of like
sacred memory with the former) His Predictions were out of the 3. and 4.
Chapters of the Revelations: in which there is mention made of 7. Epistles sent
to the 7. Churches of Asia, which were Types of 7. other succeeding Churches to
come. The 7. Asian Churches as you shall find there mentioned, were Ephesus,
Smyrna, Pergamus, Thyatira, Sardis, Philadelphia, and Laodicea; in three of
which he figured the state at that time, and that should hereafter be of the
three Churches of Germany, of Scotland, and of England, making the Church of
Germany a counterpaine of Sardis, the Church of Scotland a type of
Philadelphia, the Church of England represented in Laodicea.

The Church of Germany had its initiation or beginning in Martin Luther of
Wittenburg a Town in Saxony; in the year of grace 1517. Now as Mr. Brightman
vatically observes, the Church of Thyatira was much blamed for suffering the
woman Iezabel, who calls her self a Prophetess, to teach and deceive Christ's
servants, and commit fornication, by which is meant Idolatry, etc. But this
the Church of Sardis reformed: notwithstanding which, she still retained many
errors, as Consubstantiation of the Lords Supper, and about free will,
justification, good works, etc. by which he foreseeing the misery since come
upon them, admonished the Germans to consider of it before hand, and to prevent
these impending judgments by reformation and timely repentance, grounding his
Conjectures upon the words of the Text, which are these: But if thou will not
watch, I will come upon thee as a thief: that is, suddenly and unexpected: now
these judgments are thus fatidically delivered. His prediction of the Church
of Germany.
Like to a whirlwind shall destruction come,
Sword, fire, and famine, wasting all and some,
Cities be turned to Towns, and Towns converted
To villages, forsaken, and deserted.
The people of all comfort quite bereft,
And scarce one hundred of a thousand left.
Fire with the sword shall strive for sovereign power,
And when they spare, the plague and pest devour:
And such as their stern fury shall evade,
A more sad prey be unto famine made.
Forced shall they be to eat of Snailes and Frogs,
The long dead Carcasses of Rats and Dogs.
Mothers their babes shall without mercy kill,
And cook their limbs, their starved guts to fill:
(The like have brothers to their sisters done)
Sights that at noonday have eclipst the Sun:
And that which all belief seems to exceed,
Dig Corses from their graves, and thereon feed.
Nor cease the judgments thus, (as if they had
Their period here: to death they tortures add;
Exquisite tortures, (fitting to deplore)
Being a Nation never slav'd before:
For what is it the foe will not devise,
To force them tell where all their treasure lies,
To pierce and cut with bodkins and with knives
Their skin and flesh, indangering so their lives.
Draw strings and wyers through all their brawnie parts,
Of thighs and arms, some stabbing to the hearts:
Others into hot Ovens they shall thrust,
And stop them up till they be dried to dust.
By lingering fires roast some on wooden spits,
Basted with Lard: what is it their savage wits
Cannot devise? here men new strangled lie,
There others stifled with wet stubble die:
Others being gagged, they down their throats will power,
All puddle trash, with Urine stale and sower,
Till their guts break, their miseries transcend;
Of which for many years shall be no end etc.
Of all which, and how punctually they have happened, whosoever would be fully
satisfied, I refer them (the better to confirm their truth) to diverse letters
sent out of Germany, bewayling their sad and lamentable estate, and are to be
read in print, one sent from Swebrugden, the 14. of November, 1636. by the
Ministers of Germany to the Dutch Church in London: another written by a
worthy Minister of Messenbeim, upon the edge of the lower Palatinate, the first
of February, 1637. And a third also sent from Worms, and written by a godly
Minister the tenth of Febr. in the same year: all which you may find in a book
called the Lamentations of Germany, To which may be added (namely to the
premises) what happened to a learned and a godly Preacher of especial note
and remark, at the taking in of Magdenburg, who was dragged from the Church
unto his own house, where having seen his wife and daughters ravished before
his face, and his young infants torn from their Mothers arms, and pitched upon
the tops of Pikes: when his eyes were blood-shot with these savage and brutish
objects, they led him bound to the Marketplace, and having tied him to a
stake, pill'd all his books about him, of which setting fire, they burnt them
with his body to ashes. God Almighty in great mercy, avert the like
judgments from us.

As concerning the Church of Scotland, in which he likewise includes the two
Churches of Geneva and Holland, which (he says) were truly figured in the
Asian Philadelphia: of them he says, that in no place of Christendom, The
Doctrine of Christ sounds more purely, the worship of God is exercised more
incorruptly: nor the diligence of Pastors and Teachers is performed more
faithfully etc. To which he also adds, that the Philadelphians (meaning the
Churches of Scotland, Geneva, and Holland) shall continue till the appearance
of the new Jerusalem, and that they shall be joined with it in covenant and
so^ietie, proceeding with this encouragement, Nourish and cherish thy hopes
with these things, O holy Philadelphia, and be not perplexed, whatsoever the
world vainly prates of thee, thou art little and lowly, God shall exalt thee,
go forward constantly, etc. Which words, with many more to that effect, were
delivered by him both in word and writing, more than 40. years ago. But now to
come to a view how nearely he reflected upon their estate, and what has
happened unto them of late in these times, fresh in our own notion and
knowledge.

His prediction of the Church of Scotland,
The victory the Philadelphians had
Over the Jews (in Christ) to make them glad,
Is but a figure in the days to come,
Of the great triumph you shall have over Rome,
And their Prelatick pomp: the time was when
You warred against it but with ink and pen,
(And then prevaild) but after shall do more,
Chase with the sword that Babylonish whore,
Like Iehu new anointed to the Crown,
With furious march you shall at length pull down
Idolatrous Ahabs issue, and then call
To one assembly all the Priests of Baal,
There slay them to one man: story shall tell
How you that painted Harlot Iezabel
Shall from the window, where she struts in state,
Down headlong to the earth precipitate;
Whose brains dashed out; and whilst her limbs yet bleed;
Upon her flesh the hungry dogs shall feed.
Geneva standing on a ticklish ground,
As by the foreign foe incompast round;
For many years attempted, but in vain,
By the three potent powers, Rome, France, and Spain,
Shall flourish still: the Hollander oppressed
By Spanish tyrants, shall still keep her crest
Level with theirs, by equal strength on land;
But on the Seas shall have that prime command,
That when their Fleets encounter, though' against odds,
As if descended from the Marine gods,
Manger the pride of their Hesperian braves,
The brinie billows shall be made their graves.
And the Scotch Church, that little seems and low,
Shall be in the end their Bishops overthrow:
By whose example others shall be drawn
To question Miters, Copes, and sleeves of Lawne.
Then these with others, shall combine in on^,
To put the Archpriest from his Papal throne,
Much more is spoken by Mr. Brightman to the like purpose, which into these few
words are contracted, speaking of those Churches before named, as had he lived
in these our days, and had seen and known all the contingents late happened:
of which, because they are so frequent, and familiar in every man's notion, I
purpose no longer to insist, but proceed to the last.

In Laodicea (says he) is figured the Church of England, (called Reformed) in
which he presageth the state of the Prelacie, and Clergy of England, and how it
now stands; and least he should be taxed of any spleen or malice conceived
against them in regard of sundry troubles and tribulations which he in those
times suffered by them: therefore he makes this apology in the Epistle to
his work. God is my witness, that I am not grieved through envy at the
wealth or honors of any of them, being sufficiently contented with that small
and competent estate which God has allotted me: neither thought I ever any
thing more foolish than for any man to please himself by distasting others.
But when I perceived that these seven Cities were propounded for a type of all
the Churches amongst the Gentiles: and when I did moreover see so clearly both
the order, the time, and the mavelous agreeing of all things together, I
durst not perfidiously bury the truth in silence; for God forbid that I should
willingly distaine that Church with the least aspersion or infamy, which by the
mercy of God has brought me forth, and has brought me up, and does now
sustain me; yet I thought it my duty rather to cast my self upon any trouble
whatsoever, than to betray the salvation of that Church, whose estate ought to
be of more account with every one of us than our own. For he that gathers
the tears of his children into his bottle does know right well that I have not
with dry eyes taken a survey of Laodicea.

Thus it appears by his own ingenious confession, that these Enthusiasmes and
raptures which proceeded from him, were mere inspirations, and no vain and
idle fancies and fantasmes, the fruit of a distracted brain: of which no
better testimony can be given, than the event, which in the subsequence will
be more apparent; for it thus follows.

His prediction of the Church of England,
The Counterpaine of Laodicea stands,
(As third in rank) In The Church of Englands hands;
And by the Angel of the Church is meant
The Pastor of the same, or President,
Of whom'tis said, (to her no little blot)
I know thy works, the art neither cold nor hot.
What art thou then? some medley stuff composed
Of hodge podge temper, (fit to be disclosed)
Thou art not cold, thy doctrine's sound and pure;
Such, as a fiery trial can endure.
Nor art thou hot: thy zeal is of no price,
Losing its heat, it falls as cold as Ice.
How else could a reformed Church admit
Of popish superstitions mixed with it?
They thy infatuated senses charm,
To be nor one, nor other, but lukewarm:
It Is equal with thee to be Romish all,
Or one of those which we reformed call:
If on this weak point thou thy judgment stay,
To know Gods truth, and serve him the wrong way,
If Baal be God, before his fires appear:
If God be God, then follow him in fear:
He Is justly taxed of spiritual sloth
Who is a Ne^ter, and shall halt' tween both.
We of thee Laodicea further find,
The Text says, then art naked, poor, and blind:
Not poor in spirit, that were a blessed thing;
For some have dared to write, I and my King:
Yet beggars too, but not of pence, but pounds,
And besides Clergy Tithes of temporal grounds.
Dark art thou in thy Canons long since past,
As in th^se future, which shall come on fast:
Which thoroughly sifted, and in every part,
It will appear to all, how blind thou act.
These with thy Innovations, cruel doomes,
And popish trinkats, all which once were Romes,
Uncover shall thy skirts, and as I guess,
Before the nations show thy nakedness,
Which shall a double Sanedrin invite,
To clip thy wings, or else to plume thee quite, etc.
Thus you have heard the whose sum of what was amply delivered by him,
briefly epitomized, and I hope so plainly, that there needs no further
comment upon it: which I entreat the Read^^ ^^y be perused considerately and
carefully: For all predictions of this na^^re ought to be three times read,
before once determinately censured.

FINIS.

