Achitophel Befooled: A SERMON PREACHED NOVEMBER V. 1678. AT St. SEPULCHERS.

By AARON BAKER, M. A. and late of Wadham College Oxon.

QVISEQVITUR ME NON AMBULAT IN TENEBRIS. printer's device of Richard Royston

LONDON, Prunted for Rich. Royston, Bookseller to His most Sacred MAJESTY, An.
Dom. MDCLXXVIII.

To the REVEREND Dr. J. TILLOTSON, Dean of Canterbury, and Chaplain in Ordinary
to his MAJESTY.
Reverend Sir,
THE Importunity of Friends could never have prevailed with me to let this
Discourse come abroad, had not your better Judgment complied with their
desires. This is enough to make it pass among those within; And as for those
without, I must expect to become their Enemy because I tell them the Truth; and
though I have endeavored to rebuke them with a spirit of Meekness, I do not
suppose they will receive it so. They have a way of answering us, by those
Instruments of Cruelty that are in their habitations; so that we shall never
reply more, unless by our blood, that cries for Vengeance. But the Will of God
be done: If we must be sent as Sheep in the midst of Wolves, and that too by
the great Shepherd and Bishop of our Souls, it behooves us all that are
under-Shepheards, by Patience and Innocence to become Examples to the Flock.
But I hope the Lord of David will snatch us out of the Jaws of these Lions and
Bears, and Experience works that Hope that he who has delivered, will deliver
us; and he has delivered us out of six troubles and out of seven. But
whatsoever becomes of such mean Lamps as my self, my hearty Prayer to God is,
that such burning and shining Lights as You are in the Church, may never be put
out by these Extinguishers, but continue to turn many unto Righteousness, till
in God's good time you shall be translated to shine as Stars in the Firmament
of Glory. Sir, I earnestly recommend you, and all your Pious and learned
Labors in the Vineyard, to the Blessings of him who is Lord of it, and am

From my Study this 16 November. 1678. Your most obliged and humbly Devoted
Servant, Aaron Baker.

A SERMON Preached at St. SEPVLCHRES, November V. 1678.
2 SAMUEL XV. 31. And one told David, saying, Achitophel is among the
Conspirators with Absalom; and David said, O Lord, I pray thee, turn the
Counsel of Achitophel into foolishness.
NO Danger can appear more Dreadful than that which is known to be plotted by
Wickedness armed with Subtilty and Power; Such is that Danger which is in this
place represented to David, being projected by Achitophel, that State Machiavel
in Israel at that time. And this Danger must be the Subject of our present
Discourse, now we are met upon occasion of Thanksgiving at this Anniversary
Commemoration

The words are a Part of that History which records Absaloms Treason against
the King his Father. I shall divide them into these two Generals:

First, A Discovery of Danger made to David.

Secondly, David's Defensative against this Danger.

Concerning the First, I shall enquire into three Things.

First, What the Danger was?

Secondly, Who it is that is noted as a chief Actor or Adviser in this
Conspiracy? Achitophel.

Thirdly, By whom this Discovery was made? And one told David.

The First General is an Advertisement given to David, or a Discovery of
Danger, and therefore our first Enquiry must be, What kind of Danger it was.

This is easily collected from the Text, Achitophel among the Conspirators. So
that the Danger was, a Conspiracy against David God's Anointed, such as we
Commemorate this day. For the better understanding whereof, we must reflect on
the former Passages of this History; where we shall find the Author of the
Conspiracy to be Absalom, 2 Samuel 3.2.
David's Son by Maacha the daughter of Tahmai King of Geshur, a man of that
goodly Personage and Endowments, that he was at once the Love and Beauty of
Israel: a man of that exquisite Frame and Composure of Body, 2 Samuel 14.2^.
that from the sole of his Foot to the Crown of his Head, there was no blemish
in him. This Absalom not long since returned from Banishment after the Murder
of his Brother Amnon; and after some restraint in Jerusalem, reconciled to his
Father by the means of Joab, who suborned the Woman of Tekoah to work on David
by a Parable, is again received into Grace and Favor of his Compassionate and
Royal Father. But Pride and Ambition not suffering his haughty Spirit to
content it self with a moderate Prosperity, are restless within him, till they
have wrought his aspiring Mind to aim and level at a Kingdom: Hence it is, that
he runs into a desperate Rebellion; and that he might the more easily pluck the
Crown from the Royal head of his Indulgent Father, he uses his utmost
diligence to become Popular, and by his seeming Affability to win the
Affections of the heedless Multitude. Ambition wants no Diligence. Whence he
rises up early and stands in the Gate, 2 Samuel 15.2.
where he complements all that pass by; And when any man that had a
Controversy came to the King for Judgment, he would cast Aspersions on his
Fathers Government, as, First, An Imputation of Remisseness and Negligence, Thy
matters are good and right, but the King deputes no man to hear Causes.
Secondly, An Imputation of Injustice, Absalom must be fain to do it, David
would not. And Thirdly, An Imputation of Pride, too much Reservedness and
Haughtiness. David belike kept too much State, while Absalom kissed those that
came to him; Judas's Treason was breathed forth in a Kiss, so this Popularity
of Absalom was but the Veyl to his Unnatural Treachery. For the End of all his
Kindness was, Stealing away the Hearts of Israel from the King, Quis me
constituet Judicem? O that I were made Judge in the Land!

And now having gained (as he thought) the Peoples hearts (whose simplicity is
easily abused with the desire of Novelty and fair speeches) he puts on a
Pretense of Religion (as the Papists did in this their matchless Conspiracy)
and tells David, Vow to be paid at Hebron; sent Emissaries (secret spies)
throughout all the Tribes of Israel, to feel the Inclinations of the People,
and to draw a Party to meet him at Hebron; where having gathered his
Counselors and Abettors, Hebron was his Devotion to the Crown, not the Altar.
Absalom is proclaimed King, Absalom reigns in Hebron.

News of this is soon brought to David, for, a Messenger comes and tells him,
the hearts of the men of Israel are after Absalom; to which David has nothing
to say, but speaks to his servants, and those that were with him, And now in
his flight in great Distraction for fear of the Traitor his Son, Olivet with
his head covered (a token of Subjection, Willet, p. 95.
as some think) his feet bare and eyes weeping (Symbols of his Humiliation)
behold another Messenger overtakes him, and tells him more particularly of the
Conspiracy and Conspirators. One told David, saying, Achitophel is among the
Conspirators with Absalom, etc.

Here then we may behold the horridness of this Sin of Conspiring against the
Lords anointed, 1 Samuel 26.9.
and how Infamous Conspirators have been in all Ages. Absalom's Treason in this
Story, written in the indelible Characters of the Scriptures by the Holy Spirit
of God, and there painted out in its proper colors to the life, with all his
Art of Plotting and Contriving, has made him odious to all Posterity. How are
his cunning Insinuations into the Peoples Affection, and his Affability and
Popularity displayed? how his pretense of Piety and Religion? And this, partly
to let us know, that the wicked and irreligious Hypocrites care not how they
mock God, so they may abuse and mislead the People; and partly to acquaint us,
that the Best, not only Kings, but Men, have not been able to secure themselves
from the Traitorous Plots and underminings of the Wicked, who make no
Conscience of paying Obedience to Gods Vicegerent. For was it not David's case,
a man after God's own heart, more than once? Here Absalom the Son of his own
bowels, and soon after Sheba the Son of Bichri blew the Trumpet; What Part have
we in David? and who, as David himself said, 2 Samuel 20.6.
was like to do him more harm than did Absalom. This was St. Paul's Case too,
Certain Jews, more than forty in the Conspiracy, Acts 23.12, 13.
bound themselves under a curse neither to eat nor drink 'till they had killed
Paul. And thus it was with our Savior himself, for he had but twelve
Disciples, and yet one of them a Traitor. No marvel then if Queen Elizabeth of
ever fragrant memory, King James a pious and Protestant Prince, and as a
seasonable and happy Discovery makes it even now appear, our present King
Charles the Second, have found the same Lot in their and our Times from the
hands of Bloody and murtherous Papists. Zeal of the Holy Cause, Extirpation of
Heretics, and the spreading of the Catholic Religion, were their Pretense in
this, as well as in other their Plots and Conspiracies. Whence they are the
worst sort of Politicians, never bogling at, nor making any Conscience of
driving on their Projects and wicked Self Ends under the Vizard and Petence of
Religion. Thus it was, we see, with Absalom in my Text; when he intends to
raise a Rebellious Army against David his Father, he pretends he must to Hebron
to sacrifice, he has a Vow to be performed to the Lord in Hebron. So Herod,
when his Purpose was to kill Christ, Mat. 2.8.
pretends that he would go and worship the Babe that was born. And how did
Julian cry up Piety and Reformation, when he had no other End, but
sacrilegiously to take away the Revenues of the Church, that Christian Religion
for want of maintenance for the Ministers of the Gospel, might insensibly decay
and fall to the Ground? But let such wretched Politicians know, that as there
is nothing more Odious to God, than to make Religion thus basely subservient to
Policy; so they are the worst and most dangerous sort of Hypocrites, and cannot
long escape the Wrath and fearful Vengeance of God, whose Religion they thus
make a Mockery of, to serve their own most wicked Ends and Purposes. And so
much may suffice to be spoken of the first Branch of our Enquiry into the
Discovery, namely, What the Danger was? A Conspiracy.

Come we now to the Second, Who a chief Actor, Ringleader or Adviser in this
Conspiracy? and the Text tells us, It was Achitophel. Achitophel with Absalom.

Now this Achitophel, if we enquire into his Birth, was born in the City of
Giloh, which Joshua numbers amongst the Cities of the Josh. 15.51.
Tribe of Judah. Whence in the 12th Verse of the same Chapter with my Text, we
find him called, Achitophel the Gilomite.

For his Place and Relation to David; beside that of a Subject, which had been
Obligation enough to have engaged his Loyalty and Obedience, he was David's
Counselor, one that did partake of his Secrets, and with whom he did
principally Advise about the Affairs of State. Achitophel David's Counselor.

And lastly, for his Parts and Abilities, and his Estimation in giving Counsel,
he was so Prudent and Wise, that it is said, that the Counsel of Achitophel was
as the Oracle of God; 2 Samuel 16. ult.
Non ratione Rectitudinis Consilii, sed Adhaesionis, Cajet. in loc.
says Cajetan; such Estimation found it both with David and with Absalom.
Hence it was, that Absalom had an Eye on him in the hatching of this Treason,
and sent for Achitophel for the benefit of his Advice and prudent Conduct: So
that well might David complain of the Greatness of his distress, in regard of
the Persons by whom it was effected; Absalom his Son, and Achitophel his
Counselor; the one out of his own Loins, the other from his own Board and
Council Table. Who could have suspected or feared any such thing from these?
and yet behold These are the Conspirators. David indeed resents it, and
complains heavily of it, as a hurden intolerable. If an Enemy had done this
unto me, Psalm. 55.
I could have born it; we can look for no less from an Enemy, who professes
Hostility; but alas, says David, it was thou my Companion, and my Guide, my
bosom Acquaintance, my Counselor, and my familiar Friend; we took sweet
counsel together, etc. This was it that sat near unto the Royal Psalmist's
heart, that the Treason was menag'd by so near an Instrument. There are no
Wounds to the Wounds of a Friend. Even our Savior Christ took it to his very
heart, Zech. 13.6.
that he was wounded in the house of his Friends.

And is the Treason of this day free from the like Guilt? May it not be justly
taxed with this very Circumstance? Was it not to have been Acted against the
King by his own Subjects, Persons that had received many singular Favors from
his happy Government and Royal Clemency toward them? Had they not a Propriety
in their Estates, the Benefit and Security of the Laws? Yes certainly, they ate
of the Fat of the Land, 1 King 4.25.
they sat under their own Vine, and under their own Fig Tree, without the
least disturbance of a Sequestration or an Inquisition as to their
Superstitious and Idolatrous Religion. Achitophel is among the Conspirators
with Absalom in the Text; and Subjects in the Conspiracy of the Day.

Achitophel was of David's Privy Council, a great Statesman, and a cunning
Politician, and therefore a very dangerous and remarkable Conspirator. The
greatest Wits prove most Pernicious, when they are misimployed. Who so wise as
Achitophel? When he was David's Counselor, the Oracle of God; what a Stay,
what a Prop, what a Pillar and Support to a Church or State? But now, who more
formidable to David? How is David startled to hear, that Achitophel is among
the Conspirators?

Wise Politicians if wicked, are of all others most Destructive. So was
Catiline among the Romans, a great Wit, but a most pernicious Rebel; And so the
Gracchi in the same State, wise and eloquent, but to the public detriment

It was the Case of these Popish Traitors, many of them of good Birth and great
Parts; but how did they cast away their Abilities? God bestowed them on them,
but they employed them in the Devil's Service. But O that we could learn, that
when God gives us Parts, as Learning and Wisdom, to employ them to his Glory,
and the Churches good. Take heed of being Achitophels, Jer. 4.22.
wise to do Evil, but not to do Good. Our good Parts, if abused, will one day
turn to our greater Condemnation; and Knowledge misemployed will but increase
our Stripes. Luke 12.47.
And let us beware likewise of sinning against the Laws of Gratitude and near
Relations; for we may be assured, that God's Justice looks upon and will
severely punish the unnaturalness of our sins, as when Sons Rebel against
their Father, or Subjects against their Prince, thereby subverting the Laws of
Nature it self. Mark those that cause Divisions amongst you, and avoid them,
Chapter 16. verse. 17.
was St. Paul's Advice to the Romans. As we must shun Faction and Rebellion, so
must we avoid all Occasions conducing thereunto, and especially mark those that
cause them, that are Chief Actors and Ringleaders in them. For as Achitophel is
here observed above others, so in all Seditions the Leaders and Counselors are
most Notorious, the People but Followers seduced and misled. In the 2d Sam.
20.1. Sheba blew the Trumpet, and in the 2d Verse it follows, Every man of
Israel went up from after David, and followed Sheba the Son of Bichri. And so
here in my Text, Achitophel plotted, Verse 11.
the rest went out in their simplicity, and knew not any thing of Absalom's or
Achitophel's Intent, though at last they were easily won upon and drawn into
the Conspiracy.

Which that we may Parallel in the Powder Treason: Were not some Papists
singled out to be the Actors, as Fawks and Catesby? While the rest had designed
their time to come in and do their Parts, if God's Mercy had not prevented
their Designs, and seasonably interposed it self in the Defeating of their
Counsels. What the Prophet Isaiah said once of the sinful Jews, may be fitly
applied to them, Chap. 59. v. 6, 7.
Their works are works of Iniquity, and the Act of Violence is in their hands;
their Feet ran to evil, and they made haste to shed Innocent blood; and
therefore their Webs shall not become Garments; their hopes ended in
disappointment, for their Plot was discovered, Psalm. 10.2.
and they taken in the crafty Wilyness that they had Imagined. Which brings me
to

The third particular Enquiry, By whom the Discovery is made. And one told
David.

The Vulgar renders it, Et nunciatum est David; In the Hebrew Elliptically, Et
David indicavit, i. e. indicavit quispiam, as Montanus, or quidam; No name, an
Individuum vagum. It does not appear, that he was any employed by David; but
rather one that came Casually or Providentially, by Gods own Dispensation and
peculiar Mission; one not thought on, or put upon any such Employment: to Teach
us, that God does many times bring to light Conspiracies against Kings and
States by strange and wonderful Means. As he has professed himself to be the
Protector of his Anointed, and his Church, that the Gates of Hell shall not
prevail against the One, Mat. 16.18.
nor the Sons of Violence approach to hurt the other; Psalm. 89.23.
so he has appeared Mavelous in the detection and manifestation of the
Practices of the Wicked, though never so secret and close. I cannot instance in
a plainer Case, nor indeed in any more pertinent to our purpose, than that
which is the Occasion of this days Thanksgiving. For certainly none can doubt,
but that the hand of God was in the Discovery, while the Treason was brought to
light by a Quidam, a Letter from an unknown Person, which the King by God's
direction construed aright, and so foreseeing the danger, prevented the fatal
stroke.

How then should this deter men from Conspiring against the Lords Anointed,
since God is so engaged in the defense of their Persons, that rather than they
should perish by the Plots and Conspiracies of the Wicked, he will bring to
pass strange Discoveries, though even by the expense of Extraordinary and
Miraculous means. In the Scripture we are forbidden to speak evil of Dignities:
Jude v. 8.
But how little this Prohibition is regarded by us of this Nation, I leave you
to judge, who cannot but be sensible surely of the frequency of Whisperings
against God's Vicegerent; of the Number of seditious Pamphlets and scandalous
Libels, that have of late years stolen out into Print, to rob our Governors
Ecclesiastical and Civil of their Reputation, some murmuring, others mutining
against their Rulers, detracting from the worth of their Good deeds, and
amplifying and aggravating their Bad, that so by traducing their Government,
they may the sooner ripen the People for a Rebellion against the first
Opportunity. But, this Practice is no less sinful than common, for it is a
notorious thwarting the Commands of Scripture; Thou shall not revile the Gods
(says Moses) nor curse the Ruler of my People. Exodus 22.28.
We may not Whisper or speak evil, much less Plot and Conspire the Death of our
Sovereign the Lords Anointed. I shall conclude this Particular with that of the
Royal Preacher: Curse not the King, Eccles. 10. ult.
no not in thy Bedchamber, nor in thy Thoughts, for (it shall not be
concealed) a Bird of the Air shall carry the voice, and that which has wings
shall tell the Matter. God will have it discovered by some Means or other. I
have done with the first General proposed, A Discovery of the Danger toward
David, in the first words of my Text. And one told David, saying, Achitophel is
among the Conspirators with Absalom.

I proceed now to the Second General, David's Defensative against the Danger
discovered in the next words: And David said, O Lord, I pray thee turn the
Counsel of Achitophel into Foolishness.

And herein three Things also present themselves to our Consideration.

First, The Person to whom David seeks and applies himself, which is God; and
David said, O Lord.

Secondly, The Means which David uses in his Search or Address to the Lord,
Prayer. O Lord, I pray thee.

Thirdly, The Sum and Tenor of David's Prayer, O Lord, I pray thee, turn the
Counsel of Achitophel into Foolishness.

I begin with the First of these: The Person to whom David does seek and apply
himself, The Lord; And David said, O Lord.

David who was called, A man after God's own heart, 1 Samuel 13.14.
had that Eulogy and Commendation (as some think) for his Mercifulness. He was
(...) (says Procopius) a Lover of the Poor, a compassionate man. Willet, p. 48.
But others are of opinion, that David was called so for his Faithful
Dependence upon God in all Dangers, which did either threaten or affright him.
He had a faithful heart, a heart that was Constant and True to his God. How
often does he profess it? as Psalm. 57. O Lord my heart is fixed, Verse 7. Verse
2.
my heart is fixed. And again, Psalm. 108. O God my heart is fixed. His heart
was such as would never start or recoyl from God, no not in the greatest Fears
and Concussions whatsoever. Even in this great Danger he keeps close to his
God. Cajet. in 1 Samuel p. 97.
The Reason that Cajetan gives, does indeed vary in words, but is to the self
same Effect and Purpose. When David (says he) is said to be a man after God's
own heart, God who calls him so, says, I have sought a man after mine own
heart; 1 Samuel 13.14.
Whence Cajetan, Quaesitus erat David, ideoque ad similitudinem quaerentis:
David was sought by God, and therefore was a man like God. As he was, quaesitus
a Deo; so was he, vir quaerens Deum. So that he that seeks God in his Distress,
is a man after God's own heart. This was this Pious King's Practice in all
Difficulties, in all approaches of Trouble and Affliction; I sought the Lord,
Psalm. 34.4.
and he delivered me. I sought him in the day of my Trouble, Psalm. 77.2,
yea I sought him in the Night, when my Sore ran; Plaga fluente, and non
quiescente; when my Wound bled, and my Pain was upon me: and that in the Night,
the most dismal and disconsolate Condition; even Then I sought him. It is the
same Lord, whom he seeks in this Place, and to whom he does apply himself in
the great danger that was Imminent at that Time. One tells David of a Treason
and Conspiracy against him. David runs immediately to God, and said, O Lord.

Too many among us swerve from this Example of David, as,

First, Those who in their Afflictions and Necessities look not up to God, but
cast their Eyes only on Inferior and Second Causes. 2 Pet. 1.9. (...).
Those are they of which the Apostle Peter speaks, short-sighted, purblind men,
men of thick eyes, that can see only such Objects as are at hand, such as are
the objects of their Senses. It was God's complaint of Ephraim and Judah, Hosea
5.
That they could see no further than their neighbor Nations, their Friends and
Allies for help. They saw their wound, but they went not to God; no, they went
to the Assyrian, and sent to King Jareb, who (as the Prophet tells us) could
not heal, nor cure their wound. Verse 13.
They could discern nothing but the Arm of Flesh, which was visible to their
fleshly Eyes; they had not the Eye of Faith which sees afar off, even the
things which are not seen. 2 Cor. 4. ult.
Or

Secondly, Such as see no help at all, but are cast down in damps of Dejection
and Despair, like the Philistines in 1 Samuel Chap. 4. v. 8.
who cried out, Woe unto us, who shall help us? they are even at their wits
end. Or, Psalm. 107.27.


Thirdly, If they do see afar off, they look the wrong way. Instead of looking
up to God with David, Psalm. 121.3.
whose eyes were lifted up unto the Hills, they look down to the smoaky Gates
of Hell, 1 Samuel 28.7.
as Saul did to the Witch of Endor. Desperate Sinners will look after any
Shifts, rather than they will turn to God. But David here knew well, that when
a Danger is threatened from a Malicious Enemy, such as Achitophel was, in whom
Policy and Power were both combined, none is able to defeat such an Adversary
but God himself, to whom he makes his Address.

And it would be happy for us, if we would follow his Example, and in all our
Extremities fly unto our good God for Relief and Succor. We are all even at
this time again, in a Panick Fear, because of the Treachery of the Papists; A
second Powder Plot was to have been acted amongst us, the very Consideration
whereof has put us into such a General Consternation and Astonishment, that we
are in Jehoshaphat and Judah's Condition, We know not what to do; 2 Chronicles. 20.
The Counsel that I shall advise you to, is the course that they took in the
words Immediately following, Our eyes are upon thee. Verse 13.
Lift up your Eyes and your Hearts unto the Lord, and trust in the Name of God,
and then no doubt, but he will some way or other rid you of your Enemies, and
bring you out of your Distress, or else (if a trial of your Constancy and
Christian Courage be most for his Glory) support you under it. For, Surely,
Prove. 18.10.
the Name of God is a strong Tower, the righteous runs into it and is safe.
Let us not stand Amazed, or in suspense what to do, in a Fluctuation and
doubtful dispute with our selves; No, let us first humble our selves for our
sins, and then run and betake our selves with speed to this Tower, leaving the
Issue to God and his Anointed, the King and Parliament, while we use the Means
which David did in the Conspiracy of the Text, and that is, Prayer, Our next
Particular, and now comes to be insisted on. And David said, O Lord, I pray
thee.

As Protection and Deliverance from Dangers are works of God's Providence, so
Prayer is a means subservient to this Providence. Prayer is a Condition without
which there is no one thing we have Promise to receive from God. Ask and ye
shall have, not otherwise. Mat. 7.7.
And for this cause David no sooner hears of A^^itophel in the Conspiracy, a
Combination of such strong and Malicious Politicians, but (...) falls
immediately to Prayer. Lord, I pray (...)

It was David's Practice here and elsewhere, Psalm. 109.4.
and it must be ours, if we would be delivered as David was. Psalm. 46.1.
God is a Present help in the day of Trouble, and it is our Duty to Pray to him
for his Assistance.

First, God's Command requires it, when we are engaged in the greatest
Difficulties. Call upon me in the day of Trouble. Psalm. 50.15.
Secondly, God's Promise is obliged, and annexed to our Prayers. Psalm. 91.15.
He shall call upon me, and I will answer him, I will be with him in Trouble,
and will deliver him.
Much here might be added concerning the Duty, Power and Efficacy of Prayer, as
that, it is as Incense to the Nostrils of the Almighty; Psalm. 141.2.
A Sacrifice wherewith he is well-pleased. Of that force, that it Jam. 5.17, 18.
opens and shuts Heaven; has Command over the Sun Josh. 10.12.
and Moon, to make them stand still at Noonday; allayes the fury of the Numb.
11.2.
Fire, and the raging of the Exodus 14.15.
Sea; Cures the Acts 28.8.
Body of Diseases, and the Job 42.8, 10.
Soul of Sin: In a word, that conquers 1 Kings 17.20, 21, 22.
Death, and the Mat. 17.21.
Devil, and in a manner (if I may speak it with Modesty) even Exodus 32.10.
God himself. Let me alone, says he to Moses; as if he could not do what he
was about, until Moses ceased Praying. But this is a trite Subject, we meet
with it often, and therefore I pursue it not at present, but proceed from the
Means, Prayer, to the Form or Tenor of this Prayer, or (if you will) to the
Object of it, the thing which David prays for, which is next in order, and
craves your Patience yet a little longer; O Lord, I pray thee, turn the Counsel
of Achitophel into foolishmess.

The same God who makes Wise the Godly, does infatuate the Wicked. Thou, O
Lord, Psalm. 119.98.
(says David) have made me wiser than mine Enemies. That David was wise, yea
wiser than his Enemies, he acknowledges to be God's doing, Thou through thy
Commandments, through the Light of thy Word have done it. On the other side, it
is Gods work too to infatuate and befool the Ungodly, such as conspire against
his Church and Anointed; As Absalom and Achitophel did in this Scripture, and
as the Popish Traitors, whose Wickedness we commemorate this day, with that
Mark of Shame, and brand of Infamy which is due unto them.

The sum of David's Prayer is here in the Hebrew (...), which word imports a
befooling, an infatuating, a bereaving of Understanding and Judgment, or as
it is in our English Translation, a turning into Foolishness. God is that God of
whom Job says, he makes the Judges Fools, Job 12.17.
and leads away the Counselors spoiled; so we render it. In the Latin it is,
adducit Consiliarios in stultum finem, makes Judges Fools, and brings
Counselors to a foolish end. The word (...) is spoiled not only of Goods, but
of Reason and Understanding. Thus it is translated Psalm. Verse 5.
76. The stout-hearted are spoiled or robbed, which must not be understood so
much of Goods, as of Reason and Judgment, of Courage and Animosity; So here the
Counselors spoiled, is as much as to say, they are befooled. He is that God
that, as Isaiah speaks, Isa. 19.3.
destroys the Counsels of Egypt, that challenges all the Policy of men, and
bids defiance to it. Verses 11, 12.
Where are thy wise men? says he to Pharaoh; Who makes the Counselors of
Pharaoh brutish, and the Princes of Zoan Fools. Isa. 44.25.
Lastly, he, that God, that makes Diviners mad, turns Wise men backward, and
makes their knowledge foolish; and to whom the Wisdom of the World is
Foolishness. 1 Cor. 3.19.
This was the sum of David's Prayer against that Wicked and Unnatural
Conspiracy which at that Time was on foot against him. Lord, turn the Counsel
of Achitophel into Foolishness. A short Ejaculation, the words few, but so
Powerful and Effectual with God, that by them was overthrown all the Policy of
Achitophel and his Complotters risen up in Rebellion against God's Anointed.

I shall shut up all in a brief Application, wherein (because I would not be
too forward in speaking to this present Plot 'till it be fully discovered,
which we should all wish and earnestly pray to God for) give me leave to draw
before you a Parallel between the Defeating of Achitophel's Treason of old, and
those Popish Traitors in King James's days, our Deliverance from whom we
Commemorate yearly this day.

And first, This may acquaint us with the variety of God's Methods, and the
many ways he has to defeat and disappoint the Wicked, who like Gebal and Ammon
and Amalek knot themselves together against his Church and Anointed, as those
Papists did about Seventy three years since, and do now again at this Time. Who
Wise than Achitophel, whose Counsel for Authority (you heard) was held as the
Oracle of God? Yet let all the Achitophels, Machiavels, Judasses and Julians of
the World, let them all, I say, combine, and join in weaving the most subtle
and Artificial Web of Treason, God is able to unravel it, and take it asunder
thread by thread, that every Eye may look through the Folly of their Ungodly
Designs.

I cannot tell you all the Means that God has to turn the Counsel of Traitors
into Foolishness, for who can set bounds to the Infinite and Incomprehensible
Wisdom of God? Let it suffice, that I point to some few notable ways,
observable by us, by which God has, and does still turn the Counsel of Wicked
Rebels (such as rose up against David at this Time) into Foolishness.

The Means especially are Five.

First, God turns their Counsel into Foolishness, by Countermining and opposing
their Counsels by weak and Improbable Means. So he countermin'd Achitophel by
Hushai, 2 Samuel 17.
a man not of that deep reach or Excellency that Achitophel was, a man that had
not that Estimation or Opinion; yet his Counsel must be inclined unto, and
Achitophel's rejected. How could Achitophel but think himself besotted and
befooled, scorned and neglected, when the Counsel of an Upstart and Novice is
preferred before his? In the like manner, God befooled Pharaoh and his Host by
Unlikely Means; Against all his Horses and Chariots he sent Armies of Frogs and
Flies. Exodus 8.2, 21.
So all the Policy of the Gentiles in upholding their Idol-Gods, all their
Learning and Wisdom he silenced and confounded by the Foolishness of Preaching,
1 Cor. 1.21.
as God is pleased to call it. And so in this Powder Plot, A small unlikely
Means, the sending of an obscure Letter, which was hard to be construed,
befooled all their Wisdom. Traitors in all Ages have been betrayed by their own
Folly. That Is the first way how God turns the Counsels of Achitophel into
Foolishness, by Weak and Unlikely Means.

Secondly, Job 5.13.
By taking them in their own Craftiness. God makes the Policy of all Wicked
Machiavels a Snare to entangle their own Nets. Chap. 20.4^.
In the First of Kings, we read of Benhadad King of Syria, that he came up
against Samaria and besieged it; but God; who called him, Vir retis mei, made
him fall a Prey into the hands of Israel. So was it with Achitophel; he that
would have taken his Sovereign, was himself taken in his own Halter; The common
End of all Traitors, their own Policies trip up their own heels.

A third way, How God turns the Counsel: of the Wicked into Foolishness, is by
Dividing them in their own Aims and Designs, by raising Jealousies among
themselves, and melting their hearts into Panick Fears and Terrors. This was
the Course God took to discomfit the host of the Syrians; 2 Kings 7 8.
The Lord made them to hear a Noise of Chariots, and a Noise of Horses, even
the Noise of a great Host, wherefore they arose and fled for their Life, when
there was no Danger near. And thus dealt he with the Builders of Babel; Genesis 11.
they agreed all to work Confusion, 'till at last they were so confounded, that
they could not understand any more one another Language. This was the Case of
those Popish Conspirators; what Disputes were there? What difference among
themselves how to dispose of the Kings Children, after the King himself was
blown up? and how to share such and such Lands? It is usual with Traitors as
with Thieves; their particular Interest sets them together by the Ears, and
turns their Counsel into Foolishness.

A fourth way is Cutting them off by Death in the works of their own Designs,
while their Plot is but on the Anvile, and hammering; The Lot of Antiochus,
Herod, Julian, and many others; and the same that befell those Popish Traitors,
who were opportunely cut off by the hands of Justice. Traitors walk always, as
though they trod the Scaffold; The Axe of God's Justice is evermore turned upon
them, and they are still menaced with Destruction.

A fifth and last way (for I will instance in no more) is surprising them in
their greatest Security; and disappointing them of their hopes, even Then, when
they are ready to grasp them. The rich Miser in the Gospel had Corn, Wine and
Oil, had all in his Barns and Storehouses for many years; but is deceived, he
cannot enjoy them one Night. Like 12.20.
How was he befooled? how were his Counsels and Expectations turned into
Foolishness? Even so was it with those Romish Traitors, they had a Hellish
Birth, but it proved Abortive for want of strength to bring forth? Isa. 37.3.
All the Plot suited to their Desires; The Vault was hired, the Gunpowder laid,
the Barrels and Engines of Death hid and disguised, the Train laid, Match
ready, and all this Undiscovered: How near were they now! how near the end of
their Hellish Designs! one spark of Fire had done all; and how soon is that
struck! Yet now behold, God, the Keeper of our Israel. (who all this while
overlooked all their Actions, and heard their guilty Whispers) disappoints and
befools them. Traitors seldom fare better; when they are, as they imagine,
nearest to their Ends, God wrests the Booty from them, and sets them further
off than ever from their Purposes. While they go on in their Plots and Counsels
and serious Projections, That God who is called by the Prophet Amos, Amos. 5.9.
Deus subridens vastitatem, (so in the Latin with much Allowance from the
Hebrew) sports and laughs at them, bringing Destruction upon their Counsels,
which Infatuates and turns them into Foolishness.

And now after all this on God's Part, there remains certainly something to be
done on Ours.

Secondly therefore, Let the Consideration hereof invite us to the Exercise of
a double Duty, Thankfulness and Prayer.

As to the First of these, David tells us, That it is a good thing to give
Thanks unto the Lord, Psalm. 92.1, 2.
and to praise his Holy Name, to show forth his Loving kindness in the Morning,
and his Faithfulness every Night. It Is a Duty wherein we resemble the blessed
Angels of Heaven, and which we must never forget on Earth; Gods Mercies are
Renewed to us every Morning, and every moment gives us some Evidence of his
Love to us. He clothes, he feeds us, and preserves us from Innumerable Dangers;
and therefore it is but Reason, as for him to expect, so for us to pay him the
Tribute of our Thanks, and that daily and hourly. But these are Private
Thanksgivings; there are Blessings that concern the Public, as the Peace,
Plenty and Safety of the Nation wherein we live, and these we must thank God
for in our Public Capacities; But especially we should take Notice of Gods
Signal Deliverances either from his greater Judgments, or the Enemies of our
Church and State; The latter of These concerns us more Peculiarly at present,
and which I am briefly to exhort you to, as it relates to the Discovery of the
Powder Plot. And here to raise your Gratitude, I shall desire you to reflect
and consider a little, Who were designed to Destruction in this Plot, and what
the sad Consequences of it would have been, had it taken effect; The latter of
these we can but guess at; the former is most certain, that it was designed
against King and Parliament, which (you know) is made up of the Honorable
Nobility and Reverend Bishops, of our faithful Counselors and grave Judges; in
a word, of the greatest part of the worthy Knights and Gentlemen of our Land.
All these must have been dispatched as in the twinkling of an eye, and at one
mighty Thunderclap been sent to Heaven together; where though they should have
been happy to Eternal Ages, we should for a while have been left behind to
bewail the wretched Condition of this our helpless Land, and mournfully to weep
forth the sad Elegies of Sion; for a while, I say, for though Poena Damni, our
Punishment in the Loss of our Pious King and Parliament might not presently
have broken our hearts, yet Poena Sensus, the Inquisition would, unless we
would submit to the Yoke of Popery, and to save our Bodies for a moment, have
damned our Souls for ever. All this I ground upon this easy Supposition, that
had this Plot of theirs met with its hoped Success, they would have Introduced
the Establishment of Popery, and probably backed the Observance of it with an
Inquisition. And then what good Christian could have expected, but to feel the
Tortures of the Rack or Gibbet? and to hear of many doleful Outcries, many
Shrieks and Groans, and other sad. Notes from the distressed Protestants? And
is not this, O ye men and Brethren, matter of a Thanksgiving to us, that God
delivered us from this Plot, and snatched us as Firebrands out of the Fire?
Amos 4.11.
Is it not worthy of our Everlasting Remembrance, that he suffered us not to
become their Prey, nor to be clothed with Shame and Dishonor? Certainly, if
this be not, it is not easy to name a Temporal Deliverance that is. For alas,
who are we? and what is there in us, that God should signalize this Nation with
such a Complicated Mercy? We are a very sinful and Rebellious People, and
therefore might justly fear, that God should rather give us up into the hands
of our Enemies, than deliver us from them. We have deserved his Anger, and must
therefore confess, Lam. 3.22.
that it is of the Lords Mercies that we are not Consumed, because his
Compassions fail not. God has hitherto preserved us, and would fain preserve
us still, if we would pay him Obedience, and answer his Mercies with fit
returns of Gratitude. Then might other Nations dash one against another, and
the World tumble upon heaps; whatever Confusion there is in other Kingdoms,
whatever Plots and Conspiracies against This; of us God would take a Peculiar
Care and Charge. Which that he may do, let us add to our Thankfulness for the
Time past, our Prayers for the time to come.

First, That he would be pleased to make us more Thankful for all his great and
undeserved Mercies, Private and Public, Temporal and Spiritual, especially for
this Signal Preservation from Popery, and for this great Deliverance of King
and Parliament.

Secondly, That he would continue still to turn the Counsels of Achitophel into
Foolishness, and discover more and more the Plots and Designs of the Enemies of
his Church, and our Peace; That he would lay open more and more their
fraudulent and wicked Purposes (especially the Papists and Jesuits at this
Time) to render them as Odious to men, as they are to God.

Thirdly and lastly, That he would continue and perpetuate his Mercy in
Preserving our Gracious Sovereign, that now is, with this Protestant Church and
Commonwealth, from all Treasons and Traitorous Conspiracies:

Which God grant to us of this Kingdom, for his Son Christ Jesus's sake, To
whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit be ascribed by us (as is most due) all
Honor, Glory, Power, Might, Majesty, Wisdom and Thanksgiving, henceforward,
and for evermore. Amen.
FINIS.

