To the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses in Parliament assembled.
May it please Your Honors,
THE last Sessions of Parliament I presented the Members of this Honorable
House with a Treatise, Entitled, A Discourse on the late Funds; wherein were
Proposals for a National Land-Bank to be under the Government of 4
Commissioners appointed by the King, 6 Commissioners by the Lords, and 10 by
the House of Commons, and 25 Directors to be chosen by the Subscribers to the
Bank: A third Edition of which being reprinted, I do purpose to present such of
the Members of this Honorable House therewith, who will be pleased to accept
of the same.

The main Objection I could hear that was made against my then Proposals, was
obliging Persons to take Bills of Credit in Payment, having double the Value in
good Land-Security, to indemnify the Person who should receive the same; which
Objection I notwithstanding answered in several places of the said Treatise.
But finding it difficult to persuade Gentlemen to close therewith, I have since
opened Books, and received Subscriptions of Land and Money to a considerable
Value, that there may not be Money wanting to circulate or pay such Bills that
shall be issued out upon the Security of such Land: and the Committee of this
Honorable House being of opinion that a National Land-Bank should be settled,
I do here humbly present this Honorable House with

A short Scheme or Proposals for a National Land-Bank.

THat Books be laid open to receive Subscriptions of the Owners or Proprietors
of Lands, etc. to the Value of 4 Millions, one 4th part of which Yearly
Estates, together with 2 Millions in Money, to be the Fund of the Bank.

That the bare Subscriptions of such Estates shall oblige such one quarter part
of the Value of every of those Estates to be subject to a proportionable part
of the Loss, and entitled to a like Proportion of the Profits of the said
Bank, viz. every 100 l. per annum shall divide against 500 in Money. But that
the said Subscriptions shall not prejudice any Persons Right who shall appear
to have a better Title than the Subscriber, but only subject such Estates to
the Bank; which will be for the Advantage of the rightful Owners or Proprietors.

That every such Subscriber of Lands, etc. after their Estates shall have been
subscribed 6 Months, and their Titles shall be examined and approved by the
Counsel of the Bank, and settled on the Bank, may have three fifth parts of the
Value of such Estate lent him, viz. upon 100 l. per annum, 1200 l. in Money, at
3 l. 00 s. 10 d. per cent. per annum Interest.

And, that none may settle or take up Money upon any Estate who has no Right
so to do, every Estate is to be entered in a General Office in London, and in a
particular Office to be kept in the County where such Estate lies, where any
Person may put in their Claim, or enter their Caveat (for the space of 6 Months
after such Entry) against the Settlement thereof, and public Notice shall be
given of every intended Settlement, before the said Estate shall be permitted
to be settled.

That if any Subscriber of Land shall desire to withdraw his Estate after it is
settled, he shall be permitted so to do, paying into the Stock of the Bank one
fourth Part of the Value of such his Estate, viz. 500 l. for 100 l. per Annum,
and from thenceforth he shall be esteemed to be a Money-Subscriber.

That every subscriber of Money shall have 4 l. per Cent. per Ann. for his
Money, paid out of the Treasury of the Bank, before any Dividend shall be made
of the Profits in lieu of the Rent the landed Man receives of his Tenants; and
after that, the Account of Profit and Loss shall be stated, and the landed and
monied Men shall divide accordingly.

That any other landed Man, whose Estate shall not be settled in the Fund of
the Bank, may have 1500 l. upon 100 l. per Annum Land, at 3 l. 10 s. per Cent.
per Annum.

By this Means, Estates in Land may be presently subjected to be a Fund of the
Bank.

The monied Men shall have a Rent from the Bank, as the landed Man has from his
Tenants.

The landed and monied Men will both alike be concerned in the management and
direction of the said Bank; and therefore it cannot be doubted but such landed
Men will take care of the Interest of the Freeholder.

No Person's Right can be prejudiced hereby; nor his Estate be kept in the Bank
longer than he pleases.

The Proposer has a much larger and perfecter Scheme ready, and is prepared to
answer all Objections that can be made, whenever commanded by your Honors so
to do.

I am, Your Honors most obedient Servant, JOHN BRISCOE.


