Vannus Divinus OR A FAN To separate the CHAFF from the WHEAT, AND
Distinguish Pure, and True, FROM Impure and False RELIGION.

Very useful to inform the Ignorant, Settle the wavering, Reduce the straying,
and Confirm the sincerely Orthodox Professors:

By C. B. M. A.

Brevitas matter est Memoriae, perspicuitas ^utrix Intelligentiae.

LONDON Printed by S. G. and B. G. for Francis Eglesfield at the Sign of the
Marygold in St. Paul's Church Yard 16^^

The Publisher to the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
THou art here presented with a Treatise more to be prized than Homers Iliads,
and yet, like that, comprised in a Nutshel, A small Enchiridion that
comprehends more than many large Tomes and Volumes in Folio: The Subject matter
is the most important in the world, the method and manner of handling it new
and accurate, never was Brevity better matched with plainness, that neither thy
memory might be overcharged, nor thy understanding put on the Rack; That thou
may Read heedful, Meditate seriously, Practice duly, and Increase as well in
Grace as knowledge continually, Is the earnest desire of

Thy Friend F. E.

EXERCITATIONS Concerning The Pure, and True; And the Impure, and False
Religion.
Of Religion in General. There is a Religion, And that necessarily.
1. ALl the Ancient men agree fully, That there ought to be a Religion among
all Men.

2. As indeed there is not a Thing that does more necessarily follow, 1. Than a
God, a Man, and a Religion. 2. A Father, a Son, and an Obedience. 3. A Master,
a Servant, and a Service. 4. A Giver, a Receiver and a Reward. 5. Or rather a
Lender, a Debtor, and a Bond.


3. And therefore full well does one say, The Philosophers ought to have been
the first Divines.

For in as much as we make toward God with two wings,

That is to say

With Wit,

And with Will.

Wit can no sooner conceive that God is our Father,

But by, and by, will infer thereupon, That therefore we ought to Obey him,
and to Serve him.

Yea and it proceeds yet further;

That since he is our Father, and we his Children,

It is for our most behoof to return unto him.

4. This thing, even the Navigations of our Time do show to be imprinted in
all the Climates of the World,

And in all the kinds of Men,

As which have discovered Nations that wander in Woods,

Without Law,

Without Magistrate,

Without King;

But none without some kind of Serving of God,

None without some shadow of Religion.

Of the Distinction of Religion.
REligion is distinguished in this Manner, 1. There is the True Religion, 2.
There are Heretical Religions, 3. There are Schismatical Assemblies, and
Religions, 4. There are False Religions.


Concerning the True Religion In General.
THat is the true Religion which has its Origin from God.

The true Religion can be but one,
That is to say sufficient to Salvation.
And there cannot be Diverse true Religions.
1. THat does appear, 1. By that which Religion requires of us, 2. And by that
which Religion is to get for us.


2. Concerning the First.

Religion, as the Men of old time themselves have taught us, requires of us in
effect,

That we should yield full obedience unto God.

Full obedience requires that we dedicate unto the Glory of God

Our Thoughts,

Our Words,

And our Deeds,

In such sort

That our selves

And All that ever is in us should be referred to his Honor.

If Religion requires this,

How can it be any other then one?

Or what Diversity can it admit?

And if any require less of us, contented peradventure with the outward Man,

Which is all one as if they would rob God of one half of a Man:

What is their doing but Hypocrisy,

Or High Treason against God?

3. Concerning the Second.

That which Religion is to get for us is Salvation;

For to speak properly, what is Religion?

An Art, or skill, if I may so term it, how to save Men,

And wherein consists this Art?

1. It consists in showing Men their Disease, 2. In showing them that it is
Deadly: 3. And finally in teaching the fit, and convenient Remedy.
4. Indeed the very Law of Nature leads us well to the first Point.

For who is he which even of Nature accuses not himself?

And whose Conscience nippeth him not when he has sinned?

5. Reason also leads us to the Second Point.

For who is he that concludes not with himself.

That the Creature which offends his Creator deserves to be rooted out?

That is to say that Sin ingendreth Death.

6. And thus far may all Religions come,

And all Ceremonies ordained by Man,

As Prayers,

Sacrifices,

Washings,

Cleansings,

And such others;

But what is all this but a bringing of us to Hell gate?

Or rather a showing of Paradise unto us a far off?

But there is an horrible, and infinite Gulf between us, and it,

Which Man,

And all the whole World can neither fill up.

Nor Pass over.

7. Yet must there needs be a Passage,

For the end of Man is to be united unto God,

And the end is not in vain.

8. The Mean to be united Above

Is to be reconciled here Beneath.

9. And the Mean to be reconciled here Beneath is but only one,

Which is that God himself acquit us of the Debt which we owe unto him.

10. That Religion then, and none other, which leads us straight to the said
Passage,

And by the Following whereof we find it

Is the true Religion,

As that which alone attaineth to the end of Religion,

Which is the Saving of Man.

Of Antiquity concerning Religion 1. The Distinction thereof. 2. The true
Ground of true Antiquity, or the true Rule thereof.

1. IT is to be observed, that there is a double Antiquity,

One is Primary

And the other is Secondary.

2. Primary Antiquity is that which was from the beginning, though
discontinued, and interrupted by the corruption of Times.

3. Secondary Antiquity is that, which indeed is aged, and gray headed, but yet
reaches not to the Springhead.

Thus our Savior Christ controlleth the Law of Divorce Matthew. 19.8. Though it
was aged, and of long continuance; Even two thousand years old: Yet non sic
fuit ab initio. It was not so in the beginning.

4. In regard of this it is truly said of Tertullian verum quod primum, falsum
quod posterius. That which is first is always true, and that which comes
later is false.

5. Concerning Antiquity it is to be observed, that no Antiquity, be it never
so ancient and hoare-headed, is to be reverenced or regarded, if it be not
grounded upon the truth of the Scriptures.

6. And that which seems Novelty, if it bring Scripture for its warrant is
truly Ancient: and has true, certain, and unresistable Authority.

The reason is given by Aquinas 2. part. q. 97. Art. 3. Because the Law of God
proceeds from the will of God; and therefore may not be altered by Custom
proceeding from the will of Man.

7. In that regard very well does S. Cyprian write lib. 2. Epist. 3. ad
Caecilium. If only Christ is to be heard, we ought not to regard what any
before us has thought fit to be done, but what Christ who is before all has
first done. For we must not follow the Custom of Man, but the truth of God.

And in another place: Custom without truth is nothing but Antiquity of Error.
Idem. ad Pomp. cont. Epist. Steph. Papae.

Nothing must be ordained concerning the Things which belong to Religion, God
alone is the Lawgiver of his Church.
without the Word of God.
1. THe Reason of that is because God alone is the Lawgiver of his Church,

And the only Author of the Doctrine

Concerning Faith or Belief,

And Religious Worship.

That God is the only Author of the Doctrine concerning Faith, or Belief; we
prove it by the following Arguments.
1. THe 1. is taken from the Nature of Faith.

For all the Doctrines of Faith, in regard of the matter which is to be
believed must have a certain, infallible, and undoubted Truth:

Now it is the property of God alone to be infallibly true of his own nature.
Let God be true, but every man a liar, says S. Paul, Romans 3.4.

And therefore God alone is the Author of the Doctrine of Faith.

2. The 2. Argument is taken from the Quality of the Articles of Faith;

For the proper documents and Doctrines of Faith do exceed the capacity, and
apprehension of the Creature. And therefore they could not be revealed but
only by the Creator.

Such is the Doctrine of the Trinity of the Persons in the unity of an Essence.
Such is the Doctrine of the Eternal Birth of the Son of God. Such that of the
Procession of the Holy Ghost. And such that of the hypostaticall union of the
two Natures of Christ, Divine and Humane.

And such are all other Articles concerning Faith properly, and strictly taken,
which in that they are above the natural knowledge of the Creature, cannot be
known by us, but by the supernatural Revelation of the Creator.

Of all them this of Christ may be said, Flesh and Blood has not revealed
these things unto mankind; but God the Father which is in Heaven. Matthew. 16.17.

3. The 3. Argument is taken from the reward of Faith, and the punishment
propunded to unbelief, and infidelity,

Which do manifestly argue that it belongs to God alone, to frame and
prescribe to Men, Articles, and dogmes, concerning belief and Faith. For the
reward propounded to Faith, is Eternal Life. John 3.36. And that is the gift
of God through Jesus Christ our Lord. Romans 6.23. And the punishment denounced
against infidelity is Eternal Death; Which punishment God alone is able to
inflict. Christ teaches it Matt. 10.28. in these words Fear not them which
kill the body, but are not able to kill the soul. But rather, fear him which is
able to destroy both soul and body in hell. He teaches it also, John 3.36.
when he says, that he that believes not the Son, shall not see life, but the
wrath of God abides on him.

2. That God is the only Author of the Doctrine concerning Religious Worship.
We prove it by the following Arguments.
1. THe 1. Argument is taken from the Relation which is between God, And the
Church.

God alone in the Spiritual Government of the Soul, is Sovereign Monarch.

Is the Householder,

Is the Husband.

In regard of his Church.

This Church in regard of her Relation to God

Is Called

The City of God,

The House of God,

The Spouse of God.

Now who should be so Impudent

As to prescribe Laws to a Foreign City?

Concerning her Duties to her King,

Or to Another Man's Family,

Or to Another Man's Wife,

Concerning the Manner

Of Obeying,

And Rendering Service

To her Master,

Or to her Husband.

2. The 2. Argument is taken From the Reward, And Punishment, Annexed to the
Works of Divine Worship.

For the Works of Divine Worship Piously observed, have from the Munificence of
God, a Promise of Eternal Reward:

But being Neglected, or Contemned, a Commination of Eternal Death.

From whence it may be Gathered,

That God Alone, who is the Lord of Life and

Death, Has the Power

To Ordain such Works,

And to Injoin Them

By the Empire of a Lawgiver.

3. The 3. Argument is drawn from the Prohibition of God.

For God himself by an Express Law has attributed to Himself Alone

The Authority to Ordain his Service, Deuteronomy. 12.32. What thing soever I command
you, observe to do it, Thou shall not add thereto, nor diminish from it.

From whence also is that of our Savior, Matthew. 15.9. But in vain they do
worship me, Teaching for Doctrines, the Commandments of men.

4. The 4. Argument is,

Because the Works of Worship depend from the Will of God, who is to be
Worshipped:

Therefore God is not Worshipped at all by those Works, By which he did not
declare whether he would be Worshipped, or Not.

But in This, None can know the Will of God, unless he does reveal it, and
Injoines it,

For who has known the Mind of the Lord, Or who has been his Counselor.

That is Confirmed by This;

That all whosoever did think to Worship God with their own Invented Works;

Did provoke him to Anger, rather than honor him:

Nay they are found, To have worshipped the Devil, Or the Idols of their own
heart, rather than God:

They went a whoring with their own Inventions, Therefore was the wrath of
God-kindled against his People, Psalm. 106.39, 40.

. The only Ground, and Rule of Faith,
And Divine Worship,
Is the Holy Scripture.

1. NO Mortal Creature can Teach Religion:

2. Nor Carnal Man can attain true knowledge, unless God Instructs Him,

And his Spirit lead Him to the Truth.

3. The Phrophets Agree to the Truth of this Doctrine,

Esa. 8.20. To the Law, and to the Testimony.

4. So does Christ, Joh. 5.39. Search the Scriptures, for in them ye think ye
have eternal Life, and they are they which testify of me.

5. And so do the Apostles, calling the Scriptures a Rule,

As S. Paul does, Gal. 6.16. And as many as walk according to this Rule.

And Philip. 3.16. Let us walk by the same Rule.

6. And so do the Ancient Fathers, and Doctors; Sequi Divinas Literas, De side
ad Reginas.
etc. To follow this Rule, says Cyrill, is the Path unto Heaven:

And to be led by this Canon is the way to Salvation.

And S. Irene, Non per alios Dispositionem Salutis cognovimus. By the
Scriptures we Learn to be saved.

. Also,
The Holy Scripture ought to be among us,
the Supreme Interpreter of Scriptures,
And the Judge of Controversies.

1. FOr Confirmation of That, this Language of the Reformed is to be noted, and
observed. How better, say They, would it stand with wisdom, That as Augustine
sometime wrote of Counsels, August. contra Maximian. lib. 3. cap. 14.
Neither the Papists should object Jerome against the Reformed;

Nor the Reformed Augustine against the Papists.

Thereby to Prejudice each Side;

But that Matter might be tried with Matter,

Cause with Cause,

And Reason with Reason;

By the Authority of Scriptures.

2. For indeed as the same Augustine has taught us, Epist. 111. Ad Fortunatum.

We must not have any Men's Disputations (Howsoever They be Men of sound
Judgment, and worthy Praise,) In like Estimation as the Canonical Scriptures.

3. Such an understander (says the same Augustine) Am. 7. In Reading other
Men's Writings, Such would I have other Men to be of Mine.

. Consequently This Power and Authority is not to be Attributed to any Creature.
1. NOt to the Ancient Fathers, And Their Writings.

2. Not to the Church.

3. Not to the Counsels.

4. Not to The Pope A Part, or Joined with a General Council.

3. Because They have not the Conditions of a Supreme Interpreter of the
Scriptures, And Judge of Controversies.

3. Which Conditions are the following,

1. It is required of a Supreme Interpreter, and Judge of Controversies,

That It says Infalliblie the Truth,

And Cannot Err.

2. It is Required that It be not Partial.

3. It is Required That no Appeal, or Provocation may be made from it.

4. It is Required That it might produce a certain knowledge, and Belief in the
Minds of Men.

And by a Certain Spiritual Power so bind in some manner the Dissenting Parties,

That They willingly obey unto the Truth,

And give Assent unto it.

. What Force have in Matters of Religion, Arguments taken from Reason.
1.
1. THe Argument that is Grounded only upon Reason, In Matters of Religion, And
Faith, we Reformed grant most unfeignedly to be no lawful weapon to fight the
Lords warfare.

2. And therefore, whatsoever any of the Christians have said against
Philosophy, and Reason, when Philosophy and Reason did disagree, and does from
the Faith,

Which in the Scripture we Learn,

All That we Reformed do Allow with all our Hearts.

3. And never used thus any Argument taken from Natural Reason, In Matters of
Religion against Any Adversary.

4. For Reason must submit it self to Faith, we know.

Faith must not be Restrained, or stitched according to Reason.

2.
But when Reason is not Controlled of Faith, Then we think, That no Adversary
in Points of Belief will Deny, but that an Argument Builded upon Reason

Makes a necessary Proof.

The Controversies Concerning Religion,
In Disputations,
Either Public,
Or Private;
Most be Divided only by the Holy Scriptures,
According to the Doctrine of the Reformed.
ANTITHESIS.
1. THe Popish Doctors do Reject this Doctrine, For They will not enter in
Combat with the Reformed only with the Scriptures;

They Account themselves Disarmed,

If they must fight with Them only with this weapon.

2. For this is their Language to the Reformed Doctors.

You Boast much of your valor,

But whether, think you, is he valorous, or Fearful who dare not otherwise
buckle with his Adversary, But upon Condition he may forbid Him what Weapons he
List,

And choose for Himself what he List.

Now say They to Them, Here is your valor,

You forbid us the Weapons

Of the Church,

Of the Counsels,

And of the Fathers;

And you only leave us the Weapons of the Scriptures.

Answer of the Reformed Doctors,
To this Language of the Popish.

1. HE that will overcome in the Case of Religion, must only use those Weapons
which are Allowed in this kind of Fight:

For it is not lawful here, As it is in War, to take any weapon by which you
can wound your Enemy;

But weapons must be fetched out of the Armory of the Scriptures,

And of the Spirit of God.

Or Else, There will be no foiling of an Adversary.

2. And, This is That which the Scriptures do warrant.

3. And the Emperor Constantine commanded the Fathers of the Nicene Council to
use against the Arrians.

And to end Controversies,

The Books of the Evangelists, And of the Apostles, And of the Oracles of the
old Prophets: Theodoret. Lib. 1. Cap. 6.

4. And the like teaches Hilarie, De Trinit. Lib. 7.

And Augustine, Epist. 3.

And Contra Liter. Petil. Donat. Lib. 3. Cap. 6.

And in Diverse others Places.

The Supreme Authority of Establishing, Conserving, and Reforming Religion
does belong to the Prince and Sovereign Magistrate.
1. Which we say, and maintain against the Doctors of the Church of Rome, who
leaves to the Prince only to defend that Religion, which has been established
and approved by the Clergy.

2. But more belongs to the Prince, and all that which is propunded in the
Head.

3. Which we prove 1. By the Right of Pagan Princes;

For among all the Pagans, and Gentiles, although the solemn administration did
belong to their Priests; yet the Supreme Authority of settling, reforming, and
defending Religion did ever belong to the Magistrate.

4. And that 2. we should not think that the Pagan Princes did err in that we
are to know That the Supreme Magistrate among the Israelites, and among the
Christians did assume to themselves the same Right.

God himself would have the Ceremonies concerning Religion to be settled and
established by Moses the Civil Magistrate. And not by Aaron the High Priest.

And after the Death of Moses, the Care concerning Religion was devoled to
Joshua the Governor and Magistrate, And not to the Priest.

During the Government of the said Joshua,

The Ark was removed,

The Idols were pulled down,

And by him was renewed the Religious Covevant between God, and the People.

It is manifest also that David and Solomon, and Josiah, And Hezekiah did
exercise their Royal Power, in establishing, and Reforming Religion, And in
overthrowing, and rooting out Superstition, and Idolatry.

If any one doubts of the exercise of the Power of Christian Emperors about
the matter of Religion, let him read the Code,

And the Novell Constitutions, And there he shall find Laws made by them,

Concerning the Catholic Faith,

Concerning Sacraments,

Concerning the Churches,

Concerning Synods,

Concerning the Pastors of the Church,

Concerning Heretics,

And in a word, concerning the whole matter of Religion.

5. And it is an Error to teach that the Care of things does not belong to the
Office of the Supreme Magistrate,

For, as says very well S. Augustine, Princes do serve God in this, August.
contra. Crescon. lib. ^. cap. 51.
as they are Princes, If they Injoin good things in their States, and
Dominions, And forbid that which is Evil; Not only in regard of that which
belongs to Divine Religion.

6. To the two former Arguments let us join a third one to prove that the
Supreme Authority concerning Religion, does belong to the Prince, and Sovereign
Magistrate.

This Argument is taken from the necessity, or at least from the convenience of
the Thing.

It is a thing very necessary that there be one to whom the Supreme authority
does belong to Injoin that which belongs to Religion, To forbid the Things
that are hurtful and contrary to Religion, And to punish those that are
Rebellious; For the outward worship of God shall vanish away, Heresies will
rise, and Increase, as also Blasphemies, unless there be one armed with the
Sword, who may by fear, and by a coactive power, restrain the perverse, and
wicked.

This cannot be done by Ecclesiastical Persons;

For their Office is to preach, to exhort, to rebuke, and by Spiritual Censures
to Correct.

But they bear not the Sword; And they are deprived of that Supreme Power,
which by the fear of punishment may contain the Impious, and wicked in their
Duty.

Therefore the very outward face of a Christian Commonwealth shall not be
retained, if we exclude the Civil Magistrate from the Supreme Authority
concerning Religion.

1. The Prince, And Sovereign Magistrate, must order, and settle nothing
Concerning Religion, without Consulting the Book of Holy Scriptures. 2. And
Assembling Learned, and Godly Divines whose Charge is to expound them.

1.
1. THe Grecians never undertook any matter of great consequence before they
received Answer from their Oracles.

2. Neither the Jews before they consulted with God by the Ephod.

3. Nor the Romans before they had the Approbation of their Soothsayers.

4. And therefore doubtless all Christian Princes, and Estates, are to expect
either a Command, Or at least a Warrant from Holy Scripture before they proceed
in matter so nearly concerning God, and his Service.

5. Otherwise they go about to set the Sun-Dial by their Watch, and not their
Watch by their Sun-Dial.

6. Whether all wise Governors, like good Pilates have Manum ad Clavum, oculos
ad Astra; The eye upon the Stars, And their hand upon the Helm, Steering
their Course below, by direction from above.

2.
1. THough Sovereigns are Supreme Commanders for the Truth, yet they are not
the Supreme, or sole directors unto Truth.

For in Scruples of Conscience, And perplexed Controversies of Religion, they
are to require the Law from the mouth of the Priest; That is, they are to ask
Counsel of the Prophets, And generally in all matters appertaining to God, to
hear the Ministers of God, declaring to them the will of God out of his Word.

2. Symmachus was bold to tell Anastasius the Emperor, that as Bishops owe
Subjection to Gods Sword in Princes hands; So Princes owe obedience to Gods
Word in Bishops mouths. Defer Deo in nobis, nos deferemus Deo in te; O
Emperor hear God speaking by us, and we will fear God ruling by thee.

The same God who has put a material Sword in thy hands to smite malefactors
in their body, has put a Spiritual Sword in our mouth to slay sin in the Soul.

3. The Magistrate is the hand of God, but the Preacher is his mouth.

And for this cause all wise and Religious Kings have given them their ears,
And taken some of them in their bosom, As David did Nathan, to receive
Instruction, and direction from them how to sway the Royal Scepter within the
walls of the Church.

In what regard a Sovereign Prince is said to be the Head of the Church, which
is within his States, and Dominions.
1. IT is not in the same sense that Christ is called the Head of the Church,
which is Mystically. For this honor is proper only unto him, And cannot,
without an horrible blasphemy, be attributed to any Creature.

2. Neither also is it in the same sen^^ that the Popes of Rome do call
themselves Ministerial Heads of the Universal Church, Pretending thereby to
have an Universal, and a Supreme Power in Spiritual things belonging to
Religion, and Conscience; As also an Universal Jurisdiction over all
Ecclesiastical Persons. For this Title belongs not unto them, neither by
Divine, nor Humane Right, But they assume it by a mere Antichristian Usurpation.

3. The Sovereign then is called Head of the Church of his States, and
Countries in the same sense that in Gods Word King Saul is called the Head of
the Nations; That is to say, not only as he is the first, and the Noblest
member of the Church of his States and Countries, but because he is her
Defendor, her Nursing Father, and Supreme Inspector; and who is bound by the
virtue of his Supreme Authority to establish therein, defend and maintain
Religion, and the Divine truth, As also a good, and a lawful Government.

Of the Marks of the True Religion, By which it is distinguished from the False
Religion of Pagans, etc.
1. THe First Mark of the True Religion is This; That it direct us, And all our
Religious Service unto the true God, Creator of Heaven and Earth, The only
Searcher of Men's Hearts, Of which chiefly he will be served.

By this first Mark true Religion is distinguished from all Idolatrous
Religions, which seek unto Wood, to Stone, to the Sun, to the Moon, to Men, to
Angels, and to all the Creatures that are in Heaven, and in Earth.

2. The second Mark of the true Religion is, That the Service of God which
Religion is to teach us, must be grounded upon his word, And Revealed unto us
by his own self.

This Second Mark will serve us to discern the True Religion from the
Inventions of Men.

And to reject as untruth whatsoever is not grounded upon Gods word.

3. The Third Mark of the True Religion is, That True Religion must put into
our Hands a Mean to satisfy Gods Justice.

Without the which not only all other Religions, but also even that which
concerns the true serving of the true God were utterly vain, and unprofitable.

By this third Mark True Religion is distinguished from all False Religions.

Man's Reason has well perceived that some such Mean was needful in Religion.

But to know what that Mean is, was too high a Thing for man's Reason to attain
unto.

4. The True Religion then, And which deserves the Name of Religion is only
that

Which has God for her Scope,

His Word for warrant of her worshipping,

And a Mean appointed by him to pacify him toward us.

And in that Religion only, and in none other, rests Salvation.

The Ancient Judaical Religion has been a True Religion.
The Jews having had the knowledge of the true God;
And having served, and worshipped him alone.

1. AMong the great Nations

Of the Assyrians,

Of the Persians,

Of the Greeks,

Of the Egyptians,

And of the Romans,

Whose Religions did not bear the Livery of one only true God,

But of Many.

There was discovered a little Nation called the People of Israel,

Which worshipped the Creator of the World,

Acknowledged him for their Father,

Did call upon him alone in their need;

And for all the small Account that others made of them,

Did abhor all the glistering gloriousness of the Great Monarchies, and
Kingdoms that were out of the way.

The first Christian Religion was Pure, and True.
1. FOr it was wholly According to the Will of God, Declared by the Prophets,
by Jesus Christ, And, By his Apostles.

2. It was a Pure and a True Religion, Because It Had All the Marks, and Parts
of the True Religion:

1. Teaching to know one only God,

Creator of Heaven and Earth,

And who Conserves, And Governs All Things By his Providence.

2. It Discovers to the sinful Man the true

Mean to be Reconciled with God,

Namely By the Mercy of Jesus Christ our Redeemer;

By whom Alone,

Having Satisfied the Justice of God his Father,

His wrath may be Appeased toward Sinners, who Repent, And Believe.

3. It Prescribes in what Manner the true God is to be Served, And Honored,

Namely in Spirit, and in Truth;

Refers All to the Glory of God,

And the Salvation of Men;

And Admits Nothing

Either Absurd,

Or unjust.

Of the Agreements,
And of the Differences,
Between the Religion of the Ancient Jews,
And the true Christian Religion, which we
Christians do embrace.

1. Of the Agreements between both the said Religions.
1. GOd is the Author, and the Efficient Cause of both.

2. Christ is the foundation of both, By whose only merit all the Faithful
since the first sin of our first Parents have been, and are reconciled unto
God: See Heb. 13.8. Rev. 13.8.

3. As Christian Religion, so the Religion of the Ancient Jews did aim to
stir up a desire of the blessed Immortality, and to confirm the hope of the
same.

4. Both the Religions did bring, and does bring Justification, and
Sanctification to the Faithful of the Old, and of the New Testament: See John
8.56.

5. Both the Religions have been sealed and confirmed to the Faithful of the
Old and of the New Testament by the self-same Holy Spirit.

2. Of the Differences between both the said Religions.
1. THe Religion of the Ancient Jews did belong only to one Nation and People;
The Christian Religion belongs to all People.

2. The Religion of the Ancient Jews by many Ceremonies did shadow and
represent Christ which was to come. The Christian Religion does teach and
clearly publish that he is come.

3. In the Religion of the Ancient Jews, the Lord under some earthly benefits
did represent the fruition of the heavenly Inheritance:

But in the Christian Religion directly he does direct our minds to the
Meditation of Eternal Life;

Omitting those earthly means, and helps which he did use toward the Ancient
Jews.

4. The Religion of the Ancient Jews was darker, But the Christian Religion is
Clearer.

5. In the Religion of the Ancient Jews the Rites of their Sacraments were
bloody, And difficult; Namely, the Rites of Circumcision, and of the Paschall
Lamb.

But in the Christian Religion they are without blood, and Easy.

3.
1. FRom the abovesaid Things it appears,

That since the first Sin of Adam there has been but one way to attain to the
fruition of Salvation. And this way has been the Faith in Jesus Christ the
Mediator. See thereof Genesis 3.17. and Chapt. 22.18. Act. 15.11. and 10.43.

2. Therefore the doctrine of those is to be rejected, who teach a threefold
way to attain unto Salvation; Namely,

1. One to those who did live before the written Law, by the observation of the
Law of Nature.

2. The second to those who did live under the written Law, by the fulfilling
of the same.

3. And the third to those who did, and do live under the grace of the Gospel
by the Faith in Jesus Christ.

3. The Reason why such Doctrine is to be rejected, and exploded, is because
the Faithful, and Believers, under the Old Testament, have had Redemption in
Christ, by his blood, which was to be shed, As we have by his Blood which is
shed. For the Expiatory Sacrifice of Christ has had a saving virtue, not only
since it was offered unto God upon the Cross, But even from the Eternal Decree
of God.

And the Efficacy thereof has been as well before, as after it was exhibited:

In which regard it is said of Christ, Heb. 13.8. That he is the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever.

And Rev. 13.8. Christ is called the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world.

4. Therefore all the Faithful, and Believers under the Law have had Redemption
by Faith in Christ the Redeemer as we have under the Gospel.

Abraham did see the day of Christ, and was glad; as it is said John 8.56.

He did see it by the eyes of Faith, and not of the flesh.

Of the Mutation which happened to the First Christian Religion.
In the Great Prosperity, and Pomp, which happened to the Church under the
Empire Constantine.
The First Christian Religion Suddenly Changed, By the Introduction in It.
Of the Ceremonies, and Superstitions of the Pagans Converted To the said
Christian Religion.
And in Borrowing the Words,
And the Ceremonies of the Jews.

1.
1. THe Church before this Empire had been bred In the Hills, and Wildernesses.

2. It came out of them clothed with Camels Hairs:

That is to say, Clothed with all Sobriety, with all Simplicity, And with all
Innocence.

3. The Bishops for the most Part, manifesting Her to the World,

Were ashamed to Present Her such to the Centiles:

That is to say, to Those who Newly came out,

Or would come out from Paganism.

4. The Good Emperors Likewise,

Who were Desirous, that the Christian Religion should be Received by Their
People,

More Curious of the Outward, then of the Inward

Of the Appearance then of the Truth,

Of the Ceremony then of the Substance.

5. They make then no Conscience to clothe the said Church after the Fashion of
the Pagans, And to Adorn Her with the Ornaments of the Gentiles,

To Fit the Christians Services, and Ceremonies to those of the Pagans:

As far as without wrong to the Faith, They did think They could do it.

6. And this Proceeding was called Among Them

Zeal, and Prudence;

Which Tertullian would have called Sacrilege,

Being a Severe Observation of the first Simplicity

And Purity as long as he Lived in the Church.

2.
1. IN which Besides, the said Bishops, were to keep this Temperament.

That in the same Time, being to give content to the Jews, who did Embrace the
Christianism, which for the most part did believe that their should be a
Greatness under the Kingdom of the Messiah.

They were very Glad to show unto Them the Fulfilling Thereof in the outward
Splendor of the Christian Church.

2. And where They did Conceive, that They should Adorn the Simplicity of the
Christian Religion,

They willingly borrowed as much as they could,

The Terms, or Words,

And the Ceremonies

Of the Jews.

Of the Terms, or Words;
And of the Ceremonies
Borrowed
From the Jews,
And the Pagans,
When the Christian Church
Under the Empire of Constantine,
Did Pass From Persecution to Peace,
And from Thraldom, To the Domination.

1. AS All the Outward Service of the Jews,

And of the Gentiles, did chiefly Consist in Sacrifices;

Those of the Gentiles without a certain Scope,

And those of the Jews aiming All at One only,

Jesus Christ;

It did seem hard and scandalous unto Them,

To Abolish all Sacrifices,

Because Those New Converts believed,

That Religion could not be without such Sacrifices.

Not Concerning that All Sacrifices are Nothing.

But in as much as they are Referred to the only Sacrifices of the Son of God
Accomplished in the Cross.

Therefore to the End, That Neither the one

Nor the others should be Frighted.

The Christians used Themselves to Speak

Of Altars,

And of Sacrifices;

And as much as the Apostles had taken Pains

To Teach That All Sacrifices had Ended in Christ,

They did Delight to call their Sacrifices, Immolations, Oblations, Sacrifices;

They call The Lords Table His Altar;

The Commemoration of his Death in the Sacrament,

The Sacrifice of the Altar.

A Holy Host,

They call the Bishops, and Ministers Priests;

The Deacons Levites, etc.

Manners of Speech among Them well understood

Which in those Ages were not Hurtful;

But in the Following, More Ignorant, And farther off from the Light, have
notwithstanding been the Cause of great Abuses,

Because they are Passed from the Figure, to the Thing,

And from an Improperty of Words in an Error of Doctrine.

2. The Gentiles Also had a Multitude of Gods To them All;

They Had Builded Temples,

Founded Altars, and Sacrifices,

Suddenly, and at a clap, To Restrain Them

To the Service of one God, which is all Spirit,

And his Service all Spiritual;

They who were Carnal,

Besotted after Pomps, and Ceremonies,

And after the Wood, And Stones,

Was found by Humane Prudence Both Scandalous and Impudent.

In Regard That these Gentiles were to be Edified, And not Destroyed,

Fed, said They, with milk, Before They were Fed with Solid Meat. For Thus this
Place of Scripture was Abused.

Whereas, Then the First Antiquity had bluntly contested, That to have Many
Gods, was to have None;

That to Serve Any Creature was to forsake the Creator:

It was found sweet by Succession of Times,

To Transform Their Gods into Saints,

Their Goddesses into She Saints,

To put our Apostles, and our Martyrs in

Their Place,

To Dedicate unto Them Their Temples, And

Their Altars,

To Give them some Priests,

And some High Priests,

To Appoint To Them Holy Days,

And Honors, And Services.

3. Now As Humane Wit is Blind in the Things of God,

It Happened, That under the Shadow

To Draw to Christ The Jews, and the Gentiles,

Those Good Folks by a Laps of some Ages, did

Introduce mildly in the Church

Both The Judaisme, And the Paganism

We understand Their Ceremonies,

And their Outward Pomps,

Their Superstitions, And Vanities,

And which is worse,

Many of their Presumptions, And Anticipated opinions in the Doctrine it self.

The Religion, And Church of Rome
Is not Now
What it was in the Beginning.

1. TO Judge aright of the Roman Church, we say that there is great difference
between that which is now, And that which was in the time of the Apostles, And
some Ages after their Death.

2. That which was in the Time of the Apostles, was Pure and Orthodox, So that
her Faith, was spoken of throughout the whole world, Romans 1.8.

3. After the Death of the Apostles, during some Ages, she has been also a
true Church; But not the only True Church. Not the Catholic, or Universal
Church, But a Part of the same; As was the Church of Greece, of Syria, of
Egypt, And of other Places; She has been a True Church, but not so Pure as in
the Apostles time; Errors betimes, having begun to creep in her.

4. But the Roman Church which is now, is an Impure and Heretical Church, And
more Heretical than any one that ever was before; Since the Plague of
Antichristianisme have sticked unto her, it is no more the Chaste Spouse of
Christ, but an Harlot, And an Adulteress. It is no more a sound and vigorous
body, but a body full of ulcers, and soars. In a word, she is no more Pure and
Orthodox, as she was before, but Impure, and Heterodox.

5. Which we prove by two strong, and Irrefragable Arguments;

The 1. is, because the greater part of her Faith, and belief is contary to
holy Scriptures;

And consequently is mere Heresy.

The 2. is, because a great part of the Ancient Heresies which have been
condemned by the Ancient, and Orthodox Church, are received in her, and
approved by her.

6. I have said, 1. That the now Church of Rome is Impure, and Heretical
because the greater part of her Faith, and belief is contrary to holy
Scriptures.

1. Scriptures forbids the use of Images in matter of Religion, and Divine
Worship. The Church of Rome receives, and maintains them.

2. The Scripture teaches us, that the blood of Christ does cleanse us from
all sin, The Church of Rome does establish another Purgatory.

3. The Scripture teaches us, that of our selves we are not able to think any
good Thing, but but that all our sufficiency is from God.

The Church of Rome will, that by the strength of our Free Will we may do good
works, And make the said strength to cooperate with the Grace of God.

4. The Scripture will, that we pray, and speak in the Church in a known
Tongue, All the Service of the Church of Rome is in an unknown Language.

5. The Scripture does ordain, that in the Sacrament of the Lords Supper all
drink of the Cup:

The Church of Rome has forbid it to the Laity.

6. The Scripture presents us Jesus Christ as the only Mediator between God and
Men:

The Church of Rome does forge a great number of Mediators, who are to help us
with their Merits, and with their Suffrages.

7. The Scripture does warn us concerning Christ, Acts 3.21. That the Heaven
must receive him until the time of restitution of all things:

The Church of Rome will in some sort make him to come down every day from
Heaven in a million of Places; And moreover, exposes him under the accidents of
bread to diverse ignominies.

8. In a word, there is no Proposition mentioned against us in the Church of
Rome, whereof we may not be able to find the Antithesis in the Word of God.

In that regard there are many to be found in the said Church of Rome, which
are ashamed of the abovesaid Errors:

And except the brainlesse Spirits, and resolved to maintain even the grosest
Abuses, few Persons will there be found who entirely keep their Religion, And
in some Points thereof do not find something wanting.

7. I have said, 2. that the now Church of Rome is Impure and Heretical,
because a great part of the Ancient Heresies, which have been condemned by the
Ancient and Orthodox Church, are received in her, and approved by her.

Those Heresies meet in her, and do compound a part of Popery, As all the
Waters of Rivers and Springs do meet in the Sea.

The Devil has made them to rise up again upon the stage in the Roman Church
with some small disguising.

Her so insolent contempt, and debasing of Holy Scriptures she has common with
all kinds of Heretics, to whom such a thing is usual.

She does borrow from the Pharisees the nonwritton Traditions, And the Merit of
Works.

She borrows from the Basilidians, and the Carpoeratians the worshipping of
Images.

She has from the Marcosians, of whom Epiphanius does speak, And from the
Eutichians, against whom Theodoret and Vigilius do so excellently dispute the
Error of Transubstantiation.

She has from the Messalians, and the Euchetes, her vain repetitions of
Prayers by number.

She has from the Manichees, the Montanists, the Marcionites, the Tatianites,
the Eucratites, the Priscilianists, and Eustachians her Fastings, her
Abstinences, her Vow of Poverty, Her Distinction of Meats, And her Law of
Celibat, or Single Life:

By all which is accomplished the Prophecy of S. Paul, which we have 1 Timothy
4.1. etc.

With the Marcionites, and Pepusians, she permits Women to Baptize.

With the Pelagians, and Semipelagians, she does establish Free Will, The Merit
of Works, The Perfection of Holiness, whereof the Monks do principally boast,
Adding thereunto of their own the Works of Supererogation as a mark of a
Supreme arrogancy.

With the Manichees, though under another consideration in the Eucharist, she
has cut off the use of the Cup.

It were a thing too tedious to particularise more upon this matter.

8. From the abovesaid, it manifestly appears that the Church of Rome is
Heretical, yea above all others who ever have been Heretical.

Because she is not infected only with two or three Heresies, but with a great
number and multitude of them.

And because her maladies are not small and slight, but the poison of Heresy
has thrust it self through her whole body, having almost corrupted all the
Articles of Faith;

Which causes us to say with the Prophet Isaiah c. 1.21, 22. How is the
faithful City become an harlot? it was full of judgment, righteousness lodged
in it, but now murderers; Thy silver is become dross, thy wine mixed with water.

8. The same also causes us to acknowledge that the Church of Rome has only
an outward show;

Her fairest is the frontispiece and fore front, all covered with magnificent
Titles, But within it is nothing else but falsehood, and Corruption.

She is like unto the Temples of the Egyptians of old, which outwardly were
fair and magnificent; But within nothing was to be found but Cats, and
Crocodiles, and Serpents, and such other Beasts; fitter for a Den, then for
such a Temple.

9. If so many fair Churches in the East, planted by the sacred hands of the
Apostles, and watered with their blood are now changed in Mosquies of
Mahumetans, or in lodgings of Heretics; why then shall we find strange that
such a change be happened in the West?

Since the thousand years ended of the binding in Chains of Satan by Jesus
Christ, in the preaching of the Gospel he has been loosed, according to the
Prophecy of S. John, Rev. 20.1, 2, 3. to work again a little season about the
seduction of the Inhabitants of the Earth.

. Antithesis of the Popish Doctors.
1. Objection.
Against the Above Exercitations, they object
1. That By Testimonies of Stories,
No Heresy was brought into the Roman Church,
Or any Change of Doctrine was ever made in the same.
Answer to that Objection.
1. WE Answer to that Objection,

That the Papists Histories, written in the Time of Antichrists Tyranny,

Ought not, And do not Deserve to be regarded by us Reformed;

Because the Authors of Them were Infected with the Errors of the Pope;

And did not Dare write for the most Part otherwise, then might well stand with
his Honor.

2. And to All Histories, That since the Defection have commended the Faith of
that Church,

We Oppose the Word of God,

Which plainly convinces it of manifold, And Damnable Heresies.

3. Besides, we could allege Sundry Writers in all Ages, That openly have
reproved the Same:

To Instance in one,

Does not Sigisbertus the Monk, An Historiographer, mentioned by the Papists,

Expressly Charge Gregory the Seventh

And his Successors,

For maintaining and practicing,

Not only an Error, But an Heresy Also,

In taking upon Them Authority to Excommunicate the Emperor,

And other Civil Princes:

This Heresy has ever since continued in that See,

And is at this Time, by the Pope, And his Popelings Avouched.

And therefore by the Confession of the Popish owns Historiographers,

Some Heresles has taken Place in the Church of Rome,

Which is contrary to the Objection before propounded.

2. Objection.
2. Against the Above Exercitation,
The Popish Writers demand
At what Time,
Under what Bishop,
By what way,
And By what Proceeding,
Was a New Religion Spread
Over the City of Rome
And over tho whole World?
Answer to that Objection.
1. IT is hard for us to Answer

At what Time;

Neither is it Necessary to set down the very Instant of Time:

All Things were not at once overturned in the Church of Rome;

Sin,

And Error,

Came to their Height by Degrees,

And by Leisure to Ripeness;

The Hairs of our Head are not all Gray of a Sudden,

Neither does any thing suddenly come to his Maturity,

And the Growth of every Thing appears long after.

This is manifest in such Things as having small beginning, go on forward unto
a greater Quantity,

Until they come to Perfection.

2. But does it follow, that the Church of Rome is not Corrupt,

Because we cannot tell the Moment of Time When it began to be Corrupt?

But being so manifest as it is,

What need we search the Histories to

Show the Beginning?

What we Pray?

If you see a Man sick of the Pestilence,

If you see a City corrupt with Riots, and wickedness,

If you see a House Ruinous, And Ready to Fall,

If you see a Ship Sinking,

Will you deny all These,

Unless one can tell you the Time

When that Man began to be Sick,

The Means how the City grew Corrupt,

Who was Owner, And in what Year

The House grew Ruinous,

And in what Day the Ship began first to Leak?

And what is the Force of the Papists Reason, and

Demand, other then This?

3. But do not their own Histories Tell When,

And By whom

Innovations and Corruptions Entered;

Let Them See a Few of Them;

1. He that first usurped Authority over other Churches, was Pope Victor,

After Him Zozimus,

And Boniface the Third,

And Celestine,

And their Successors.

2. Pope Syricius first forbad Priests

Marriages.

3. The Manichees first Denied the Cup to the People.

4. The 2. Council of Nice first ordained Worshipping of Images.

5. Pope Nicholas the Second, first taught, the Body of Christ must Carnally be
handled, broken, and Eaten.

6. Pope Innocent the Third, first established the Doctrine of
Transubstantiation.

7. Boniface the Third, first Declared

That the Pope was the Head of all Churches.

8. Gregory the Great, taught first Purgatory, for a certain Truth.

9. The Florentine Council, first taught, And Declared that the Pope was above
Councils.

10. Innocent the Third, brought in Auricular Confession.

If these were not Sufficient,

We could produce the Rest, of the Popish Errors.

3. Objection.
3. Against the above Exercitation,
The Popish Writers take an Objection
From the Perpetuity, and Continuance of Christ's Universal Church;
And demand of the Reformed Doctors
With what face they durst accuse of Corruption the Present Church of Rome,
If they Remember how Christ promised his Spouse Perpetual Preservation.
Hos. 2.19. I will even betroth thee unto me for ever.

Isa. 59.21. As for me, This is my Covenant with Them, says the Lord, My
Spirit that is upon thee, And my words which I have put in thy Mouth, shall not
Depart out of thy Mouth, Nor out of the Mouth of thy Seed, Nor out of the Mouth
of thy Seeds Seed, says the Lord, from henceforth, and for ever.

And Such Like.

Answer to this Third Objection.
1. TO what Purpose does this Objection serve the Popish Writers?

Or what Argument may the Perpetuity

Of Christ's Universal Church afford Them against our former Assertion?

2. We Believe, and Confess, to the Comfort of our Souls,

That Christ's Church has continued,

And shall never fail so long as the world endures.

3. And we account it a profane Heresy to teach that Christ's Universal Church
has Perished from the Earth at any Time;

For this Assertion shakes the Foundation of all Faith, and Religion.

4. But the Popish Writers who makes this Objection,

Should prove by invincible evidence of Scripture

That the Catholic Universal Church of Christ is nothing Else,

But the Outward Succession of the Roman See:

If They can Prove This,

They should Prove their Objection Soundly,

And should confute our Opinion Truly.

5. But it is a Thing which They cannot Do,

They cannot bring us

Either Texts of Scriptures, or Reasons,

To show that Christ's Church

Either is the Popes Succession,

Or Else depends upon the same See.

6. For as Touching External Show,

And Succession of Churches,

The Scriptures have foretold,

Apoc. 12. and 13.16.

That Antichrist shall Seduce

Great, and Small,

Rich, and Poor,

Free, and Bond;

And that the Church shall fly into the Wilderness,

And there Remain:

Of all which no word could be true,

If the Catholic Church were tied

To the Popes Chair,

And the Popes Chair were the Rock

That cannot be removed.

7. And yet notwithstanding this General Dispersion,

And the Flight of the Church under Antichrist,

The Catholic Church shall for all That

Continue.

8. Although not in that outward strength,

And Glory,

In which sometimes it has appeared,

And Flourished.

4. Objection.
Of the Popish Writers
Against the above Exercitations,
That the Now Church of Rome is Changed,
And is not Now what it was in the Beginning.
What Impudence is This, say the said Writers;
There was never Heresy that Assaulted the Church of Rome,
Of which it carried not the Victory, As
Over the Donatists,
Over Jovinian,
Over Pelagius the Britain,
And over Others.
Answer to this Fourth Objection.
1. THe Triumphs of which the Popish Writers do boast of,

Are no more proper to the Now, or Latter Church of Rome,

Then the Triumphs of old Rome

Over Pyrrhus,

Over Annibal,

Over Perses,

Over Antiochus, are to be esteemed the Triumphs of Rome, Now Being.

2. And for the pretended Victory over Pelagius the Britain, we say that he
Triumphed over the Popish Kingdom.

For did he not Teach, That Grace was imbred in Nature? And the Popish Crew of
Jesuits Defends the same.

Who sees not then Pelagius sitting in the Popish Triumphant Chariot?

Popery is not of the first, and Primary Antiquity; That is many of the present
Doctrines of the Church of Rome; And in what Time Errors were received in it.
1. PApists are not able to produce any Record, Express and direct testimony,
Canon of Council, or Ecclesiastical constitution, For their burning Lights in
the Church at noon day before the Decree of Pope Sabinianus, in the year of our
Lord 605.

2. Nor for Rome to be the Head of all Churches, before Pope Boniface the
Third, in the year 606.

3. Nor for the Invocation of Saints in their Public Lithurgy, before Boniface
the Fifth, in the year 618.

4. Nor for their Latin Service, thrust upon all Churches before Pope
Vitalian, in the year 666, which is the very number of the name of the Beast.

5. Nor for the Cutting of the Host into three parts, and offering one part for
the Souls in Purgatory, before Pope Sergius in the year, 688.

6. Nor for setting up Images in Churches Generally, and worshipping them
before Pope Adrian the First, and the Second Council of Nice, in the year, 787.

7. Nor for Canonization of Saints departed, before Leo the Third, about the
year 800.

8. Nor for the Orall Manducation of Christ's Body in the Sacrament, before Pope
Nicholas the Second, in the year, 1053.

9. Nor for the entire number of seven Sacraments, before Peter Lombard, in the
year 1140.

10. Nor for Indulgences, before Engenius the third, in the year 1145.

11. Nor for Transubstantiation of the Bread into Christ's body, before the
Fourth Council of Lateran, in the year 1215.

12. Nor for the Elevation of the Host, that the People might adore it, before
Honorius the Third, in the year 1216.

13. Nor for any Jubilee, before Pope Boniface the Eighth, in the year 1300.

14. Nor for the Carrying the Sacrament in Procession under a Canopy, before
Pope Urban the Fifth, In the year 1262.

15. Nor for the Day and half Communion, before the Council at Constance, in
the year 1416.

16. Nor for the suspending the Efficacy of Sacramental Consecration upon the
Priests Intention before the Council at Florence in the year 1439.

17. Nor for the Popes Superiority to General Councils, before the Sixth Council
at Lateran, under Leo the Tenth, in the year 1517.

18. Nor the vulgar Latin Translation to be held for Authentical, And upon no
pretended Cause whatsoever to be rejected, before the fourth Session of the
Council of Trent, in the year 1546.

19. Nor for the Second book of the Macchabees, and the Apocryphal Additions to
Hester and Daniel, with the History of Bell and the Dragon, which S. Jerome
terms a Fable, to bereceived for Canonical Scripture, before the said
Session, in the year above named.

1. Frande.
1. These be the Principles, and Grounds of Faith, and Worship, that the Church
of Rome does Produce.
1. Scriptures. 2. Traditions of the Apostles. 3. The Catholic Church. 4.
General Councils. 5. The Ancient Fathers. 6. The Pope, which she calls the
Supreme Pastor of the Church.
2. These be the Frauds of the Church of Rome, Concerning all the Principles,
and Rules above Produced. The 1. of those Frauds is, That the Church of Rome
cares indeed for none of Them, but for the last, which is, The Determination
of her Pope.

1. THe Scripture must not be Scripture in any other Sense, then as the Pope
will Expound.

So that the Scripture being the Meaning of the Scripture, And the Meaing of
the Scripture being the Popes Exposition;

Hereof it follows, That the Scripture is nothing else but the Popes
Interpretation.

2. So Likewise,

In Traditions,

In Doctors,

In Councils,

In Churches,

If any Thing Dissent from the Popes understanding, and Determination;

It is Rejected, Abolished, Condemned.

3. And Finally, all Faith, all Religion, all Divinity of the Church of Rome,
is only the Popes Sacred will, and pleasure.

Papists give the Churches Authority to the Pope, And take all Authority quoad
nos from the Scripture. So that by the Church, they understand the Pope.

1. THe Papists 1. take all Authority from the Scripture. 2. They give it to
the Church. And 3. They give the Churches Authority to the Pope.

2. I say 1. That the Papists take all Authority (quoad nos) from the
Scripture, which appears in that they teach, that it is not the ground or
pillar of truth; Nor properly, and of it self any Cause, or Means of Belief, or
of Charity; And that God does not immediately speak by it; Neither is the Holy
Ghost joined with the writing of the Scripture; And that the Church is not
subject to the Scripture. And that put case any person living out of the
Communion of the Roman Church do read, or study the Scripture, it is not the
word of God to them, or of greater Authority then Aesops Fables.

3. I have said 2. That the Papists give all Authority to the present Roman
Church.

This appears in that they make it the only External ground and pillar of
Truth, The sole Judge of Controversies, The principle, or first ground, and
foundation from whence the Scripture, in regard of men, receives all Authority.

4. I have said, 3. That the Papists give the Churches Authority to the Pope;
And no Papist in these days, can, or will deny This.

For 1. the Positive Speeches of their greatest Doctors thereupon manifestly
confirms it. Ecelesiae nomine, says Gregorius de Valentia intelligimur ejus
Caput, Romanum Pontisicem, Tom. 3. Did. 1. q. 1. part. 1. page, 30.

And Bannes 9.2. q. 1. Ar. 10. Animadvertendum est cum Cajetano, etc. quod apud
Thomam pro eodem omnino reputatur Authoritas Ecclesiae universalis, and
Authoritas Concilii, Et Authoritas Summi Pontisicis.

2. The same Assertion follows upon the main principles of their Doctrine;
which are,

That the Pope is the prime subject of Ecclesiastical Authority.

And that the whole Authority of all the Body, and of all the Members thereof
is derived by, and from him.

And that the promise of the perpetual Assistance of the Holy Ghost, And the
Infallible judgment, and the Supreme Authority, And other Privileges are
intailed upon his Tribunal.

The 2. of those Frauds, is That, The Pope also is Taught by the Papists, To
be the true and Lawful Interpreter of the Sense of the Scriptures, And the
Supreme Judge of Controversies Concerning Faith, and Divine Worship.
1. IT is most clear, that the Jesuits make both the Scripture it self, and
the Interpretation of it, to Depend upon the Authority of the Church.

2. And the Church they call not the whole Multitude of Christians, and
Faithful Men:

3. But they Restrain both the Name, and the Nature of the Church, 1. unto
their Bishops; 2. If Thereupon we Reformed object, That their Bishops may
Differ touching the Sense of the Scriptures: so shall we be uncertain, and
shall not resolve which of them to Believe, but they help this, and Answer,
That General Councils must Decide, and Determine all Questions, and
Controversies.

3. Shall we then Rest in them?

No more then in then the other.

For the Pope must be Judge over the Councils.

4. So in the Conclusion, The whole Interpretation of Holy Scriptures is
transferred to the Pope, and must be fetched out of his Breast, yea, and as a
proper Right, he so challenges the Power of Interpreting of the Scripture;

That whatsoever he thinks, That must be accounted the Sense and Meaning of
them.

Refutation of this Doctrine of the Jesuits, by the Reformed Doctors.
1. THat which has been said above, is the Jesuits constant, and perpetual
property, and disposition in interpreting the Scriptures.

2. Which is full of Dotage, Error, and Falsehood void of Advise, Knowledge,
and Wisdom.

3. For what an Absurd, and horrible Thing is it, that the Sense, and Meaning
of the Holy Scripture should depend upon one man's Judgment, and Voice.

4. Specially being such a one, as commonly the Bishops of Rome have been
Unlearned, Wicked, Heretical.

5. And hence have proceeded all the following goodly Interpretations,

1. Take, Eat,

That is, you Priests say Private Masses.

2. Drink ye all of This,

That is only the Priests must Drink.

3. Be ye Holy, for I am Holy,

Therefore it is unlawful for the Ministers of the Word to marry a Wife.

Exception of the Jesuits.
Which of the Popes, or what Catholic Writer ever concluded this out of that
place.

Answer to this Exception.
Pope Syricius did first of all so Collect;

And after him Pope Innocent;

As it may be read in Gratian, Did. 31. cap. Tenere and Did. 82. cap.
Proposuisti cap. Plurimos.

4. This is another like Interpretation:

Give not holy things unto Dogs,

Therefore the people must be forbidden to read the Scriptures.

5. What should we number up Innumerable more of the Popes, and Papists
Interpretations, By which they do nothing but pervert, and wrest the Scriptures.

In Particular, These be the Frauds of the Church of Rome Concerning Her first
Principle, Which is the Scripture.
1. Fraud. The Papists making Show to Receive the Scriptures for Ground, and
Rule of Faith, Do Disgrace Them in Joining Traditions with Them.
1. FOr as the Scriptures are Grounds And Rule of true Doctrine. So are They
only Grounds, And Rule.

2. And as in Matters of Faith, Arguments ought principally to be drawn from
Them, so such Arguments only conclude necessarily, As even the Schoolman
Thomas Aquinas does Directly confess, 1. Part. 1. Quaest. Artic. 8. Ad. 2.

2. Fraud. The Church of Rome which Produces Scriptures for one of Her
Principles, And Rules, has indeed no sufficient Scriptures.
FOr in making an old rotten Translation (which we may boldly call so, being
compared with the Original Word of Scripture) to be the Authentical Word of
God: and denying the Original Faithful Texts which Moses, the Prophets, the
Apostles, the Evangelists did write, to be the Word of God.

What does she else, but plainly, as it were with one dash of a Pen Cancel
the whole Scriptures?

2. This Homely Latin Translation, is the Papists Scripture.

3. Coined and Canonized of late in the Council of Trent, And never before.

4. And other Scripture have They none.

. Of the Corruption of the vulgar Latin Translation more Fully.
1. THe Reader of the vulgar Latin Translation, may manifestly perceive, That
in it are manifold, and almost infinite Faults of all sorts;

1. By Adding,

2. By O^^^^ing,

3. By Mis^^^ing,

Of Letters.

Of Points,

Of (...).

And (...).

4. By wrong interpreting the Original Text.

2. Wh^^^ ^^^lts, The Popish Doctors shall never (...) ^^prove, or Justify;
Though They (...) th^^selves never so much with Traveling and ^^^ing, and
seeking some Defense.

3. When They have said what They can say, for Maintenance of These
Corruptions, it shall for all that Appear, By all Learning, and Evidence of
Reason, that They have, Neither the Old, nor the New Testament, in the Entire,
and Original Truth thereof.

Refutation of the Excessive Praises, that the Semiminarie Priests of Rhemes
gives to the English Rhemish Translation.
1.
1. LEt the Seminary Priests of Rhemes give what Commendation they will to
their English Translation.

2. We Reformed say against it, That that Translation is the worst of all the
Translations that has been set forth of the New Testament.

3. And we prove our Assertion, because that translation has such examples of
unaccustomed and monstrous novelties of words, as the like in no other can be
found.

4. So as a man may justly call it a new fangled and ridiculous Translation:
Devised rather to amaze the Readers, and make the word of God a laughing stock;
then to Edisie the Church of Christ.

5. For who has ever heard or read such words, and Phrases as they have used,
and affected in their Translation?

6. Whereas They might have retained, as well the common, and known manner of
speaking.

That their Translation set forth in English, might have been understood of
English men.

7. But they of purpose have so framed the same, that the English is in many
places as obscure in words, as the Latin.

8. Which thing is in all Translations a foul fault: But in Translating of Holy
Scripture Intolerable.

9. And what Reason should be hereof, but that Men either should contemn or not
understand the Scripture, which yet they will seem to Translate, for the
benefit of the Church?

2.
10. If the Reader require Examples, let him take but the Book, and read a
little, and soon shall he see strange Affectation of Novelties in words, and
speeches throughout their whole Translation.

11. There shall he sind The Transmigration of Babylon, Matthew. 1. v. 17. The
Enemy Man, Matt. 13. v. 28. Unless you have Penance, Luke 13. v. 3. Give us
to day our supersubstantial Bread, Matt. 6. v. 11. Whatsoever thou shall
supererogate, Luke 10. v. 36. Not in Chamberings, and Impudicites, Romans 13.13.
An Emulator of the Traditions of my Fathers, Gal. 1.14.24. I Expugned the
Faith. They Emulate you not well, Gal. 4.17. That you might Emulate Them, 1
Pet. 2.5. Be ye also your selves superedified, Ephe. 4. v. 10. Once at length
you have reflorished to care for me, denying the only Dominator, and our Lord,
Jud. 4. To the Redemption of Acquisition, Ephesians. 1. v. 14. Against the
Spirituals of wickedness in the Celestials, Ephesians. 6. v. 12. The
Archisynagogue, Mark 6. v. 22. Ebrieties, Commessations, Gal. 5. v. 21. The
Dominical day, Apoc. 1. v. 10. But they are written to our Correption, 1 Cor.
10. v. 11. That in the Name of Jesus every knee bow of the Celestials,
Terrestrials, and Infernals, Philip. 2. v. 10. But he Exinanited himself,
Philip. 2.7. For with such hosts God is promerited. Hebr. 13. v. 16. Let the
Charity of the Fraternity abide in you, Heb. 13. v. 1. O Timothy keep the
Depositum, 1 Timothy 6.20. That he might repropriate the sins of the people, Heb.
2.17. Wrapped it in Sindon, and laid it in a Monument, Matt. 27.59. All shall be
docible of God, John 6. v. 45. Upon probatica a Pond, John 5. v. 2. Which of
you shall argue me of Sin, John 8. v. 46. They hated me gratis, John 15. v. 26.
Beyond the Torrent Cedron, John 18. v. 1. It was the Parasceve of Pasche, John
19.14.

3.
1. These, and such like, are the goodly flowers of the Rhemists English
Translation.

4.
2. Besides the obscurity and ambiguity of Sentences, by Reason of leaving out
the Verbs, and other words in the English Translation, which may in Latin more
easily be understood.

5.
Hereby the Reader may judge, but better by Reading the Translation it self;
whether we have not Truly said of it, That it is a strange Translation indeed;
And such an one, as hard it were to find the Like.

6.
1. But one of the Rhemist Priests does Answer That we Reformed rather Delight
in such Novelty, then They, seeing they Retain the Ancient words, Mass,
Priests, etc. And we Reformed refuse them.

2. Of these words, shall be spoken in our particular handling of Controversies
between the Reformed Churches, and the Roman.

3. And as for certain Names of persons, and of places, which some of our
Interpreters do reduce to the Hebrew Sound.

They cannot much trouble the Reader, And they are rather used in Books, then
in Speech.

EXERCITATION. Condemnation of the Annotations joined with the Rhemist
Translation of the New Testament, By the Seminary Priests of Rhemes.
1. WHosoever shall consider with himself advisedly the Rhemists Manner of
Collection,

Their Argument,

Their Application of Scripture;

And shall Examine a little how their Conclusion follows upon their Proofs,
without all Coherence or consequence of Reason, must needs greatly mislike
their whole Religion, that is founded upon so weak, so tickle, and so ruinous a
Foundation.

2. For unless it be granted, That of every Thing, may be concluded any Thing;
and that the Word of God may be made applicable to all purposes, opinions, and
Doctrines; it is impossible that these, and such like arguments of Theirs, as
they have in their Annotations gathered upon the words of Scripture, should
have in them such strength, and Truth, as Divinity and Religion requires.

These be the Frauds of the Church of Rome, Concerning another of their
Principles, Which is the Ancient Fathers.
1. Fraud. The Church of Rome does Discover an abominable Fraud in this, That
putting the Ancient Fathers to be one of the Principles of their Doctrine of
Faith and Religious Worship, by an Expurgatory Index they cause to be blotted
out of the Books of the Ancient Fathers, all that is displeasing unto them. Or
else they falsify them, and alter their Sense and Meaning.
1. THis is true in Regard of the most Ancient Fathers, and particularly of the
Books of S. Cyprian, S. Chrysostom, S. Augustine, S. Cyril of Alexandria, and
of others.

They make them say the contrary to that which they will, and take out from
them, not only some Clauses, but also whole Leafes.

2. We know well, that to cover this Sacrilege Sixtus of Sienna does add,
That those Writings of the Fathers had been soiled, and infected by the Malice,
and Venom of the Heretics of our Age; But it is a False Cover.

For if by Heretics he does understand those of the Reformed Religion, we
maintain that which they cause to be blotted out of the Writings of the Fathers
was in Them before the Reformation. And That it cannot be Justified that any of
the Reformed have Corrupted or Altered any Writings of the Fathers.

2. Fraud. The Church of Rome acknowledges, That there are many Faults, and
Errors in the Books of the Ancient Fathers, which are not to be Approved. And
notwithstanding That, The Popish Religion, is as it were, a Body consisting for
the most part of Rottenness, and Corruption, Namely of Ancient, and New Errors.
1.
1. THe Popish Writers can as soon prove out of the Scriptures, the following
Points of their false Doctrine, As they can draw a Fountain of water out of a
flint.

2. These Points of the Popish false Doctrines are 1. Their Doctrine of Free
will. 2. Their Doctrine of the Merit of Works. 3. Their Doctrine of Purgatory.
4. Their Doctrine of the Sacrifice of the Mass, for the sins of Quick and
Dead. 5. Their Transubstantiation. 6. Their Popes Supremacy. 7. Their
Superstitious Fasts. 8. Their Worshipping of Images. 9. Their praying unto
Saints. 10. Their praying for the Dead. 11. Their Satisfaction. 12. Their
Forgiveness by Works of Penance. 13. And for many more the like Points of
their false Doctrine.


2.
1. And therefore they will be rather Tried, and Judged by the Writings of the
Fathers, then by Scriptures.

2. Although for a Fashion in Defense of some of the Points above propounded,
they pretend Scriptures.

Yet being easily beaten from them, they fall at last to Rail on Them as not
containing sufficient Doctrine; and rather will be Tried, and Judged, as we
have said, By the Writings of Fathers.

3. At whose Hands albeit they find not such Relief, as they would make Men to
Believe in no one Point of Controversy between us, and them; As has been
oftentimes plainly proved by many Doctors of the Reformed Church, And by Bishop
Jewel notably.

4. 1, Notwithstanding by Reason of the Fathers manifold oversights, and slips.

2. And the Corruption that daily increased in the Church; They may bring
somewhat, such as it is for their Maintenance.

5. Wherefore in That we Reformed will not admit the Fathers for Judges in
Matters of Religion, but hold them hard to the Trial of the Scriptures.

6. Which the Papists cannot abide; This puts them out of patience, and drives
them into vehement passions.

7. But let them mend themselves where they can, They shall never get more at
our Hands Then that which we have said before concerning the Scriptures, and
the Fathers.

8. This is then a very true saying, that our Adversaries Doctrine cannot
stand, unless we Reformed will allow for Good those Things, That in the
writings of the Fathers are most Faulty.

. Again of this Matter more briefly.
1. IT is a peculiar Thing to the Popish Doctors that they, even greedily hunt
after, and pursue whatsoever is Faulty in any Ancient Author. As if all the
Fathers Errors served to make up the Body, and Faith of their Religion.

2. They rake up even out of the Fathers oversights watsoever seems to favor
their Errors.

Papists suck Errors from the Fathers unsound Speeches, And of a small Error of
the Fathers do occasionally procreate a great one.
1. AS Horseleaches suck the naughty blood out of the veins, So Papists
excerpt that which is most imperfect, and unsound from the Fathers.

2. And thus Popery according to D. Whitaker, is a patcht Coverlet, framed of
the Fathers Errors, and sewed together.

3. Moreover, the Papists of a small error of the Fathers, may occasionally
procreate a great one.

As from praying for the dead used in one respect by the Fathers, The gross
praying for the dead, with a reference to purgatory.

4. And so we have great cause to tax the slipperie dealing of Popish Hucksters
in abusing the Fathers.

Frauds concerning Councils, Another Principle of the Church of Rome.
1. Fraud. Of many Frauds, and Slights committed in the last Councils of the
Church of Rome.
1. THat before they were Assembled, their Decisions were Debated, And
concluded at Rome.

2. That notwithstanding all Disputations, And Proof done on the contrary,
they passed by absolute Authority.

3. That the Holy Ghost, or rather the Spirit of Satan was brought there from
Rome weekly by the Post.

4. That the Presidents in them, and those who did Dispute in them, and those
who Concluded in them, did Respire nothing but the good will of the Popes. And
did Aim only at this, to obey, and please Them.

5. By that it evidently appears, That it is not much needful to produce
Proofs, that such Assemblies might have erred.

6. On the contrary it should be found strange if they could have concluded
any thing without Error.

2. Fraud. This is a great slight of the Popes in these last Times, to oppose
themselves to the holding of Councels; believing that they would Decree against
them; Against the Roman Clergy, And against the Court of Rome.
CLement the 7th. Pope of Rome, very much versed in Affairs of State, even
during the Life of his Predecessor Adrian the 6th, had still maintained, That
in the Occurrences of that Time, the Council, to make use of the Mean of
Councels, was most pernicious.

2. And commonly did say, That Councels were profitable whenever any other
thing should be Handled then the Popes Authority.

But when it came to be Debated, That then there was nothing more pernicious.

3. For as in former times, the Popes weapons were to have Recourse unto the
Councels. So in those Times the Safety of the Papacy did consist to shun, and
avoid them.

4. And so much the more that Leo the 10. his predecessors, having already
condemned Luthers Doctrine; This same matter could no more be referred to a
Council to Examine it, And Deliberate upon it without wronging the Authority of
the Holy See.

3. Fraud. Observation. This was a great Fraud and Slight in the Court of
Rome, to endeavor as much as could be done to suppress the Relation of what
was passed in the Council of Trent.
1. MAny clear sighted persons have done what they were able to do, to
suppress the History and Relation of that which did pass in the Council of
Trent.

2. Whereupon we say, That it is true, That the Great Things deserves to be
held in some Mysterious Secret: But it is when the public Good requires that
it should be so.

3. But when the Ignorance of the whole is notably wrongful to one of the
parties, and Advantageous to the other, It is no marvel, if in Contrary
Intentions and Ends, it is proceeded also by opposite, and contrary ways.

4. And here it is true, and received, the Common and Famous Sentence, That
with more Reason it is endeavored to avoid Loss, then to get profit.

Addition. Of the History of the Council of Trent, written by Patre Paulo.
1. AS the Council of Trent holds the first Rank among the Affairs happened in
Christendom in the former Age, and which also may happen in the following
Times.

2. So may it be said in very Truth, That the History which we have of the said
Council by Patre Paulo, is the most Excellent of the Histories that have been
written in that time, and perhaps surpassing the others which had been written
before.

3. For if we have a Regard to the Matter which it contains, we shall find
there, those of the Religion, and of the State, and if exactly we consider the
Form of it, we shall find that nothing is wanting in it.

4. He that shall Read it carefully, shall not be ashamed to confess that he
has received much profit by the Reading of it; For in the Discourses which by
Digression are made in it, by its Author concerning Religion, and the Church:

There is a Depth of Learning,

A Clearness of Wit,

And a Solidity of Judgment most Admirable.

As also a true, free, and bold Decision of many Points of Importance which are
in Controversies between the Reformed Churches, and the Roman.

Fraud. The Acts of the Councels have been falsified for the most part, And
things have been supposed, which never were.
1. FOr they have been during a long time shut in the Convents. And for the
most part did pass by the Hands of the Monks, who have cut off them, and added
unto them, whatsoever they would.

2. And in that Regard, the Greeks do complain, That the Latins have corrupted,
and falsified the Councels. And the Latins frame the same accusation against
the Greeks. To whom shall we Hold?

3. The Frauds in this Matter are so Ancient, That from the sixth Council of
Carthage, the Bishops of Romes Legates did produce the Acts of the first
Council of Nice, falsisied in an horrible Manner. And although that
Falsification was even then solemnly Discovered: yet Rome, which has Drunk all
Shame, is often relapsed in the same Crime, that was Repreached in full Council
of Florence to the Popes Legates, But they were not much astonished thereby.

4. The whole Code of the Ecclesiastical Canons has been not long since set
out by one Denis Petit;

But we find that this Author has Ecclipsed from the Laodicean Council the
Enumeration of the Canonical Books which was to be in the last Canon: And it
cannot be said that he has done that for brevity sake.

For the same Author in the same Code has inserted the Enumeration made by one
Synod of Carthage, because, without doubt, he did like it better then the other.

5. And so every one give us that which his passion, or affection does approve,
And an Indiscreet Zeal does hide, and suppress from us That which is Best, and
of greatest Edification.

It is with Just Causes that the Council of Trent is Rejected and Condemned by
the Reformed, because it may be rightly called the Iliade of our Age.
1. FOr this Council greatly desired, and procured by Good Persons to Reunite
the Church which did begin to Devise it self, did so bend and harden the
Parties, that it has Rendered the Differences Irreconcilable.

2. And the said Council negotiated by the Princes to Reform the Ecclesiastical
Order has caused the greatest Deformity which ever was since the Christian
Name is in Being.

3. Besides, the said Council hoped by the Bishops to Recover the Episcopal
Authority, which in a great part was fallen to the alone Pope of Rome, has been
the cause that they wholly have lost it, Reducing them to a greater Bondage.

4. On the contrary, the said Council having been feared, and shun by the Court
of Rome as a powerful Mean to temper the excessive Power, which from small
beginnings was mounted by degrees to an extremity without bound, and limit,
has so confirmed and propped to Her over the Party which is remained subject
unto Her, That is, was never so Great, nor so well settled.

Concerning the Council of Trent.
1. The Rhetorical, Commendations of it by the Jesuits.
1. THe Council of Trent, says a Jesuit, The Elder it waxes, By so much more
it shall flourish daily, And continually.

2. O with what Diversity of People out of all Countries!

With what Choice of Bishops throughout all Christendom.

With what Excellence of Kings, and Commonweales.

With what Profound Divines.

With what Devotion,

With what Lamentations,

With what Abstinence, and Fasting,

With what Flowers of Universities,

With what knowledge of Strange Tongues,

With what Sharp Wits,

With what Study,

With what Endless Reading,

With what Stores of Virtues, And Exercises,

Was that Sacred Place Replenished!

2. The Reformed say, That it is without Cause, that such Commendations are
given to this Council.
1. FOr they know very well, The Notable Carriage, and Behavior of that Synod,
so much Extolled by the Jesuit.

2. And besides they say, That every one knows thus much, That it was not to
be Esteemed a Council of the whole Christian State, But rather a Conventicle of
few Men, Running together into the same Place.

3. There was there present a sort of silly Friars, which did sustain the
greatest part of the Burden, By Disputings, Writing, And playing the Orators.

4. For as for the Bishops, and the Chief Cardinals, They busied their Heads
about other Matters, for which They were specially Assembled.

5. No more will we say of this Council.

6. Others have spoken of it those things, that are most True.

Both how it was Called,

How Handled,

And how it was Dismissed.

7. Among Them chiefly is considerable Patre Paulo, in his Admirable History of
the Council of Trent.

3. Of the Decrees of the Council of Trent.
THe Tridentine Decrees, which the Jesuits, and other Popish Doctors Commend
being set forth, as They write, by so many Excellent, godly, and Learned men,
and say, That it were Impiety to compare with them: All the scattered
Synagogues of Lutherans, have been Tried, and Examined by more Godly, and
Learned Men, then ever were in that Synagogue Assembled, wherein prevailed
neither Godliness, nor Learning, but Antichristian Tyranny.

4. Of the Examen of the Council of Trent, by Kemnitius. Jesuits. Kemnitius,
says a Jesuit, gained but Infamy by his Examen of the Council of Trent.

Answer to That by the Reformed.
1. IF Kemnitius have not the Jesuits good word, it is no great wonder:

For he has Achieved that by his Learning, Virtue, and Industry, that he may
seem worthy of Envy, and Hatred from such as the Jesuits are.

2. But if true, and deserved Praise be due to good Deeds, he has obtained an
honorable Reward, even the everlasting glory of a good Name.

5. For what Reasons the Protestants made no great haste to go to the Council
of Trent.
Jesuits.
Why, say the Jesuits, did not the Protestants. 1. Called to the Synod of
Trent, And secured by the Caution of public Promise, make all haste to come
unto it?

Answer of the Reformed.
What should they have done there? Or to what end should they have undertaken
so long a Journey?

1. Either that having been mocked, and abused, they might have returned home
again,

2. Or having been burned in the Council, the Protestants should have been paid
for their Rashness.

1. For in Regard of the First, What place of Disputation was left among those
who had every man plighted their faith to the Pope, and had Religiously bound
themselves by Oath, That they would never, either do, or say, any thing against
his dignity, and pleasure.

What therefore might have been hoped for from those, which might have drawn
any to Disputation?

2. And in Regard of the second; Did not the Calamity of John Husse of
Bohemia, and of Hierome of Prague, who were burned in the Council of Constance,
give just cause of fear?

And yet Husse came to the Council, trusting in the protection of a public
promise.

Of the History of the Council of Trent, Written by Patre Paulo. See the
Addition. Concerning this Question, Whether the Pope be above the Councils, Or
otherwise.

Jesuits.
THe Jesuits puts the Pope above the Councils,

And they allege this Reason,

Because no Council is of any Authority, which was not Confirmed by the Pope.

Answer of the Reformed to that Reason.
That is false:

1. For the Sixth African Council, and the Chalcedon Council had their
Authority without the Pope.

2. And Emperors, Patriarchs, and Bishops have Confirmed Councils.

3. And the Council of Constantinople, by Letters, desired the Confirmation of
the Decrees from Theodosius the Emperor.

Fraud.
This is a Fraud of the Church of Rome in Regard of another of her Principles,
That is the Catholic Church. That because the Scripture makes Honorable
Mention of the Church, The Roman Church is that true Church of Christ, of which
the Scripture speaks so often.

1.
WE Reformed acknowledge, That both in the Old, and New Testament, there is
every where honorable mention made of the Church: And that it is called

A Holy City,

A Fruitful Vineyard,

An High Hill,

A Direct Path,

The only Dove,

The Kingdom of Heaven,

The Spouse, and Body of Christ,

The Pillar of Truth,

The Multitude unto which the Holy Ghost being promised, pours all things
needful to Salvation.

The Congregation against which the Gates of Hell shall never so prevail, That
they shall utterly extinguish the same.

The Congregation, which who so Repugneth, though he confess Christ with his
mouth, yet has he no more to do with Christ, then has a Publican, and a
heathen man.

2. The abovesaid Titles do not belong to the now Church of Rome.
1. FOr on the contrary,

It is the Babylonish Whore,

A Branch cut off from the true Vine,

A Den of Thieves,

A broad way leading to Destruction,

The Kingdom of Hell,

The body of Antichrist,

A Sink of Errors,

A great Mother of Fornication,

The Church of the wicked, out of which every Christian ought to depart, which
Christ shall one day fearfully destroy, and give her the just Recompense of all
her sins.

2. In vain then do the Popish Writers reckon up the praises of the Church,
unless they can demonstrate that they are proper to the Church of Rome.

3. Which they shall never be able to do so long as Rome stands.

As the Church of Rome is Fraudulous in regard of the Principles of Faith and
Worship, that she does produce.
So is her Doctrine false concerning these Principles.

1. Concerning the Traditions that she calls Apostolical.

2. Concerning the Church.

3. Concerning General Councils.

4. Concerning the Ancient Fathers.

5. Concerning the Pope.

And therefore such Principles are justly excluded by the Reformed, from the
Rule of Faith.

1. The Reformed justly exclude from the Rule of Faith, the Traditions, called
Apostolical, by the Papists.
1. FOr the Popish Apostolical Traditions are but forged, and devised Things,
and therefore no stay for a man to settle his Conscience upon.

2. That they are not such as the Papists says. Let them tell us if they can,
which be the Apostles Traditions; how many, and where they may be found?

If they cannot satisfy this Demand, as they cannot indeed, How may they then
make any Reckoning of that whereof they have no certain knoledge?

How can They, without falling, Build their Faith upon Fantasies, such as they
are.

3. The Apostles Doctrine we have in Writing. The Apostles Doctrine we have in
writing.

4. Other Traditions of the Apostles we receive none for our belief.

The Scripture is the only Rule of Faith, and not Traditions a part of the
Rule of Faith; that is, That Scripture is a perfect Rule.
1. THat I prove in this manner, 2 Timoth. 3.15. Apoc. 22.18. 1 Cor. 4.6. John
20.31.

2. That is the only Rule whereunto the chiefest properties of a rule do
solely belong. But the properties of a true, and certain rule do only belong
to the holy Scriptures in matters of Faith. The rule of Catholic Faith, says
Bellarmine, must be certain, and known, De verb. Dei libr. 1. cap. 2. Now there
is nothing better known, or more certain then the Scripture; which appears,
Because Traditions are far more uncertain than the written word, and because
many of them are false, and uncertain.

3. The written word is a Rule of Traditions. From whence it follows, that it
is the only rule. That the written word is a rule of Tradition, appears by
the Doctrine of our Adversaries, who acknowledge that no Traditions must be
admitted, but such as agree with the Scripture, Bellarm. de verb. Dei libr. 4.
cap. 3. And which are derived from the Scripture, and the writings of the
Primitive Fathers, Bellarm. de Script. libr. 4. cap. 3.

But those Traditions which are derived from the Scriptures, have the same to
be their rule. And there is nothing more common in the Primitive Fathers, then
to subject all their writings to be Regulate by the holy Scriptures. Therefore
such Traditions as are found in the works of the holy Fathers have the holy
Scripture to be their rule: from whence it follows, that the Scripture is the
only primitive rule of Faith.

4. It is that which is acknowledged by some of our Adversaries, Gabr. Biel,
Can. Miss. Lect. 71. whereof Ferus says expressly, The holy Scripture is the
sole rule of verity; and whatsoever differs, or contradicts the same, it is
error, and cokle, with whatsoever show it come forth, Ferus in Matthew. lib. 2.
in cap. 13. page 248. col. 1.

And another says, The Doctrine of the books of the Prophets and Apostles is
alone the foundation of truth, and the rule, etc. Villavincen. de formand.
Concion. lib. 2. cap. 2.

2. The Reformed justly exclude from the Rule of Faith, the Catholic Church.
1. WE Reformed do Reverence, and Love The Catholic Church as the Spouse of
Christ.

2. But we know that her duty is to hearken only to the voice of Christ her
Husband; And that she has no Authority to add so much as one iota in his
Word, or any ways to dissent from it.

3. And further we know, That the Romish Synagogue is not that Catholic Church
of Christ, whereof we speak.

3. The Reformed justly exclude from the Rule of Faith, General Councils.
1. WE Reformed do esteem, and regard General Councils in their place.

We thank God for them; We Read, Allow, and Commend them, so far forth as they
agree with Gods Word.

2. Let therefore their Decrees be examined by Gods Word.

3. And if they agree, let them be received for that Agreement.

4. If not, let them be rejected for the contrary.

5. But the Argument holds not in this Form, such a Council decreed so, and
therefore so must we believe.

6. If this Principle were set down for certain, and perpetual in Divinity, we
should have strange Beliefs enough, yea surely, scarcely should we retain any one
true Belief.

7. Two famous General Councils have been held in Nice;

The First,

And the Second.

In the First is condemned the Popes Supremacy, Can. 6.

In the Second is established the Idolatrous Worship of Images.

The First Belief the Papists will not allow.

The Second is detested by us Reformed.

8. Let Councils therefore be esteemed as they deserve.

9. And let them be tried as has been said.

Objection of the Popish Writers against our Rejection from the rule of Faith,
the Catholic Church, and General Councils.
IF the Church, say they, and general Councils, be not Grounds, and Rules of
Faith? Why then did the Ancient Fathers draw an Argument from them, to Refute
the Errors of the Ancient Heretics.

Answer of the Reformed to that Objection.
1. WE know, say the Reformed, That the Ancient Godly Fathers, in Confuting
all Heretics, used only Arguments drawn out of the Scriptures: and plainly
taught, That by no other Weapons an Heretic can be put to flight.

2. The same Reformed do know, That the Ancient Fathers did charge the
Heretics sometimes

With the Judgment of Churches,

With Determination of Councils,

With Succession of Bishops,

With the Name of Catholics.

Not as though this were a necessary Conviction of it self, but thereby the
rather to induce them to believe the Doctrine to be true, which they did see
from the first planting thereof in the Church to have remained.

3. The case of the Papists drawing Arguments of Conviction from the Doctrine
of their Popish Church, is nothing like, seeing they have only the bare Title
of the Church without the Thing; and, as it were, the empty Casket without the
Treasure.

4. The Reformed justly exclude from the Rule of Faith, The Ancient Fathers.
1. WE Reformed, as has been said of General Councils, do esteem, and regard
them in their place;

We thank God God for them,

We Read, Allow, and Commend them,

So far forth as they agree with Gods word.

2. For it cannot be truly said, that they never disagree from it.

3. We grant, that they were Learned, and Godly Men, but yet were they Men,
having their Infirmities, and Imperfections.

4. Their Learning,

Their Zeal,

Their Ages,

Were not Privilege unto them, but that notwithstanding, they might be
deceived in their Writings, and in their Expositions of Scripture.

5. And let the Popish Doctors take this for a sure Conclusion, That in the
Sayings of Those who are all of them subject to Error, there is no stable, and
stedy Ground to build our Faith upon, least perhaps we build upon Error in
stead of Truth.

6. So that without Trial, and Examination no Sentence of a Father, nor of all
Fathers, may safely be Received.

Objection of the Popish Writers against our Rejection from the Rule of Faith,
the Ancient Fathers.
SInce the Reformed Exclude the Ancient Fathers from the Rule of Faith.

Why, say the Popish Writers, do they make use of them, and allege them?

Answer to this Objection.
1. THe Reformed do read the Ancient Fathers, And oftentimes they rehearse
their Sentences, and their Expositions of the Scripture.

2. But not as Proofs in Doctrines of themselves, For they do not acknowledge
them as Rule, and Ground of the Faith,

3. It is to stop the Papists Mouths, that cry so loud in the ears of the
simple, that all the Fathers are against them.

4. It being most true, That they are notably, and generally for them.

How the Reformed carry themselves, in regard of the Scriptures, and in regard
of the Ancient Fathers.
1. This is their Carriage in regard of the Scriptures.
1. THey receive that which the Scripture delivers.

2. They reject that which the Scripture reproves.

2. This is Their Carriage in regard of the Ancient Fathers.
1. THey read the Fathers with Indifferent and Free Judgment.

2. Weighing all their Doctrine in the Balance of Gods Word, and thereby either
allowing, or refusing the same.

3. This they must do, or else of Fathers they make Gods of Men's Writings; They
make Canonical Scriptures. Of Doctors Opinions, they make Articles of Faith.

4. And herein they do no otherwise, then they are taught, both by Scriptures,
and by Fathers, to do.

5. They declare to the Popish Writers, That concerning these two Heads, they
shall never get at their hands more than this.

Of Bishop Jewels Challenge to the Fathers that flourished 600 years after
Christ.
The Popish Writers.
John Jewel, say they, challenged the Catholics, calling upon, and desiring
the help of the Fathers, as many as flourished 600 years after Christ.

Answer of the Reformed to that Relation.
1. They Answer this.
THat Bishop Jewel proved, all the Ancient Fathers to be against the Church of
Rome in Disputing with Doctor Harding, as he had affirmed at Paul's Cross.

2. They Answer this.
1. THat the present Popish Writers may be ashamed to make mention of that
Challenge, which they have so long ago given over as a Desperate Cause.

2. Wherein Doctor Harding, the chiefest Adversary could not make show of
Proof without using the Testimonies of forged, and Counterfeit Writers, As

Amphilochius,

Clemens,

Abdias,

Hippolytus,

And such Others, of which no more Account is to be made, then of Fables, and
shameless Forgeries; Such were the Chiefest Proofs which Dr. Harding was able
to bring.

2. And whatsoever he brought has been fully Answered in the Reply, by the
Bishop himself; Which Book as yet, though it has been in some parts nipped at
by Diverse, yet thoroughly confuted was it never: what the present Popish Writers
can do in this Case may easily be guessed.

3. They Answer This.
1. THat what, which Bishop Jewel promised to give over, and to subscribe, If
any of the 27. Articles of Controversies propounded by him could be proved by
Scriptures, Councils, or Doctors, within 660. years after Christ, was not
because he meant ever to subscribe to the Popish Doctrine, or was unstayed in
his Religion; but it was of a most assured knowledge, and resolute persuasion,
That the Popish Doctors were utterly destitute in this behalf of all Truth and
Antiquity, as indeed they are.

2. Otherwise the Popish Doctors may remember, That our Religion is grounded
only upon the Holy Scriptures of God.

3. And therefore, though the said Doctors brought against us Reformed,
Writers, and Fathers never so many for these Matters, as they can bring not one
of Credit, and Age. Yet will we never subscribe unto them, having once
subscribed to the certain Truth of God, revealed unto us in his holy, perfect,
and written word.

4. By which all Sentences, Opinions and Writings of Men whatsoever, must be
examined.

Notwithstanding some Errors of the Ancient Fathers, we Reformed esteem them as
Gods Saints, and holy Men, and holy Fathers.
1.
THe Ancient Fathers holding the Ground, and Foundation of Doctrine, did
oftentimes build thereon Stubble and Straw; partly by some Superstitious
Opinions which themselves conceived of such Inventions, and partly by the sway,
and violence of Custom, whereby they were carried to a liking of those Things
which they saw commended, and practiced by others.

2.
And yet, God forbid, that because of some Errors which they held, we Reformed
should raze their Names out of the Calender of Gods Saints, or think otherwise
then Reverently of them.

Objection of the Popish Writers against this Declaration of the Reformed.
HOw, say they, can we esteem them to be Holy, teaching that they did Err?

Answer to that Objection.
1. WE Reformed do Answer, That the Ancient Fathers are not in such Assertions
contrary to themselves.

2. Were not the Apostles Holy Men when they dreamed of an Earthly Kingdom in
this World? Yet this Opinion is contrary to a principal Article of our Faith.

Were They void of Holiness, when they believed that the Gospel was to be
preached to the Jews only? Which is greatly Derogatory to the Grace of God,
and Salvation of his people. Then every Error does not overthrow all holiness
in the servants of God.

3. In the Primitive Church many Holy Fathers were infected with the Error of
Christ's Reigning a thousand years on earth; who notwithstanding are worthily
accounted Saints of God.

4. Cyprian, and many Godly Bishops with him, erred about the Baptism Ministered
by Heretics. Yet lost they not, for all that, the Opinion and Name of Holy
Bishops and Fathers.

5. All such errors mentioned, were such as in the before named Fathers, did
not raze the Foundation of the Gospel.

There is great difference between the Errors of the Ancient Fathers, And those
of the present Church of Rome, And Popish Doctors.
1. THe Fathers slipped a little, The Popish Doctors, and Papists, are fallen
headlong into the pit.

2. The Fathers were overseen through infirmitle.

The Popish Doctors and Papists are blind of Malice.

5. The Fathers scattered some Darnel in the Lords Field.

The Popish Doctors, and Papists have plucked up by the Roots the good Corn.

4. The Fathers have suffered loss of this building, being not agreeable to
the foundation, yet are saved.

The Popish Doctors, and Papists overthrow indirectly, and by good consequence,
the foundation it self; And therefore, continuing in these opinions, what hope
can they have to be saved?

Examination of these words of Luther, reproved by the Popish Writers, That he
was not moved, though a thousand Austins, Cyprians, Churches, be against him.
The Popish Writers.
BY these words, say the Popish Writers, Luther did show that he was
unmeasurable Arrogant, and wilful.

Answer to that Accusation, and Presumption.
1. LVther's Spirit was far from this Insolent, and Immoderate Presumption, as
may by his own words appear Contra Regem Angliae.
: For he says not that he more sets by his own private judgment, then he
does by all the Fathers and Doctors.

But he says, That he sets against the sayings of the Fathers, of Men, of
Angels, of Devils, the Word of the only Eternal Majesty, the Gospel. And
again immediately he says, The Word of God is above all, The Majesty of God
makes with me, That I care not, though a thousand Augustines, and Cyprians
stood against we.

2. Is this to set his private judgment against

All the Fathers?

Is this Pride?

Is this Presumption?

Must Gods word, and Majesty, and Gospel, yield to the judgment of Fathers, be
they never so many.

3. Luther did not think so, but meant this, by the words alleged against him.

If Augustine, or Gyprian, or any other Father maintain any thing against Gods
Word, Luther, or any other Minister of Christ, may in such Case prefer his
Judgment warranted by the word of God before theirs.

4. If the Popish Doctors deny this, they are not worthy to be called
Christians.

5. And yet closely They do deny it, in that they reprove Luther, and condemn
him for saying the same.

. Objections against this Answer of the Reformed, by the Popish Writers.
1. Objection.
YOu Reformed, say the said Writers can bring no Instance that ever the Ancient
Fathers did so.

Answer of the Reformed to that Objection.
1. HAve the Popish Writers forgotten what fell out in the first Council of
Nice, when the Fathers agreeing to dissolve the Marriage of Ministers, were
withstood by Paphnutius, and yielded in the end.

Here one Paphnutius Judgment was preferred before all the other three
hundreds of Fathers.

2. And so oftentimes the Judgment of many has been corrected by one. S.
Angustine says, whether of Christ, Contra Petil. lib. 3. cap. 6.
or of his Church, or of any other thing that appertains to our Faith, and
Life.

I will not say We, not to be compared to him, that said Though we; But as he
added, If an Angel from Heaven shall Preach any thing besides that ye have
received in the Legal, and Evangelical Scriptures, let him be accursed. If we
may accurse them, how many and whosoever they be, that Teach contrary to the
Prophetical, and Apostolical Scriptures, then may we prefer our Judgment in
such Cases before them.

3. In another place S. Augustine says, August. Epist. 19.
For all these, (namely Fathers) yea above all these, the Apostle Paul offers
himself, I fly to Him, I appeal to Him from all Writers that think otherwise.

Thus was S. Augustine bold to write, even to S. Jerome, and feared not any
suspicion, either of Arrogance, or of Heresy, for the same.

4. Such Account then must we make of the Truth, that we must stand with it
against all the world, and not for the Reverence of men's Persons give it over,
or betray it, or be afraid to defend it.

2. Objection.
THough the Fathers in the Councils of Nice, of Ephesus, of Chalcedon, had
alleged no direct, and evident Place against Arius, and Nestorius and
Eutiches; yet the Christian People was bound to believe them, grounding
themselves only upon the Catholic and Universal Faith of the Churches before
them.

Answer of the Reformed to that Objection.
1. THis is boldly, and bluntly spoken.

2. These Godly and Catholic Fathers Assembled in Council against these
Heretics, Confuted them by the Authority of Gods Word, and as it were did cut
the throat of their Heresies, with the Sword of the Spirit.

This is only the Weapon then used, And with this they prevailed.

3. As likewise have all other godly Councils ever done against the Heretics,
and enemies of the Church.

The Fathers have Errors, and the Doctors of the Roman Church do acknowledge it.
1. IT is confessed by our Adversaries that the Fathers had their Errors.

2. And themselves in diverse cases challenge and censure them.

3. There is none of the Fathers, says Stapleton, in which something erroneous
may not be observed.

And Anselm says, in the books of those holy Doctors, which the Church reads
as Authentical, some things are found wicked and heretical. And Mulhusinus the
Jesuit, We know the Fathers were men, and erred sometimes.

4. Before the Pelagian Heresy arose, Augustine was deceived in the matter of
divine grace, and freewill. And although the same Father is many times Orthodox
in the Question of Purgatory, yet at other times he varieth, (at least
doubtfully) from his own sounder judgment.

The Reformed justly exclude from the rule of Faith, the Determinations of the
Pope.
1. WE have said before, That the Determinations of the Pope is the only Rule
of Faith in the Roman Church.

2. Now then this being the Papists own certain Rule, and Ground, and
Resolution, We Reformed would gladly be Informed, How by the same a man may be
assured of any Faith.

It being further also agreed, and confessed among themselves, That the Pope
may fall into Heresy.

3. Then who sees not, That their Ground being shaken, and their Stay
failing; All that is Builded, and upohlden thereon, is clean overthrown.

The Popes may fall into Heresy, and have erred in great Articles of the Faith.
1. MArtinus sacrifice to Idols.

Liberius subscribe to Arianism.

John the 24. an hererick, oppressor, persecutor, fornicator, Simmonist, did
deny the immortality of the Soul, and the resurrection of the body.

Leo the seventh was not much behind for the Life to come.

And Clement the 7th doubted of the immortality.

Answer to an Objection of the Jesuits.
4. IF the Jesuits say, That the Pope falling into Heresy, forthwith cease
to be a Pope: We demand who they are that must judge the Popes Cause, and give
Sentence against Him?

4. And if the Pope be obstinate, and teaching Heresy, and therewith infecting
the World, will notwithstanding stoutly stand in defense of his Doctrine, and
will keep his Chair.

What shift have the Papists then, And what can they do against him, seeing he
is their Pope, their Head, their Author, and Founder of all their Faith?

6. Thus a man going with the Papists along, and coming to the end of all,
finds no stay, but must wander still, as in an endless Labyrinth, wherein he
shall at last languish, and perish everlastingly.

Besides, The Reformed say of the Pope, That he is not the Rule of Faith, and
Judge of Controversies, because he is the great Antichrist, foretold in the
Scriptures.
1. IN the Bishops of Rome after Boniface the third, and Hildebrand, we find,
The Name, the Seat, the Apparel, the Time, the Pride, the Cruelty, the
Idolatry, the Coveteousnesse, the Imposture, the Power, and the fortune of
Antichrist, which are the Marks whereby S. Paul, and S. John describes that man
of sin, and son of perdition.

2. The Name of Antichrist contains in it the number 666, which Irenaeus
finds in the word Latinus, (...).

3. The Seat of Antichrist is a City built upon seven Hills, that rules over
the whole world. This City Propertius tells us to be Rome, Septem urbs clara
jugis, toti quae praesidet orbi.

4. The Apparel and Ornaments of Antichrist are Scarlet, and Purple, Gold,
Jewels, and precious stones, which the Popes wear, especially on high days.

5. The Time of Antichrist his rising is foretold to be after the Division of
the Roman Empire; after whch it appears by all stories, that the Pope grew to
his greatness.

6. The vices of Antichrist are these especially,

Pride,

Idolatry, or Spiritual Fornication,

Cruelty,

Imposture,

Covetousness, who are to be found in the Popes, as has been represented
above, under the Title of the Popes vices.

7. The Beast is said to have horns like a Lamb, and to speak like a Dragon,
and to exercise all the power of the first Beast, Apoc. 18.11.

This agrees to the Papacy and Pope, who resembles Christ, whose Vicar he
calls himself, and arrogateth to himself Christ's double power, both Kingly
and Priestly. He exercises also the power of the first Beast, to wit, the
Roman Empire, described by seven Heads and ten Horns; because as the first
Beast the Roman Empire by power, and temporal Authority: So the Pope, by
policy, and Spiritual Jurisdiction, rules over a great part of the world.

8. It is written of the Whore of Babylon, that the Kings of the earth should
give their power to her for a time, but that in the end they should hate her,
and make her desolate, Apoc. 17.13.16. which we find daily more and more
fulfilled in the Papacy.

9. From all which we do justly argue in this manner, He in whom all, or the
principal Marks of Antichrist are found, he is the Antichrist. But in the Pope
all or the principal marks of Antichrist are to be found, Ergo the Pope is the
Antichrist.

Of the diverse Ages of Antichrist.
1. THe First Age of Antichrist was when Bonifacius the third, Bishop of Rome,
was declared Head of the Church, and the Bishop of Bishops, by Phocas, who
killed the Emperor Mauritius his Master, and did usurp the Empire: which
Phocas, to get the good will of the Romans, drew to himself, That Bonifacius
the third giving him the abovesaid Title.

2. The Second Age of Antichrist was when he was put in possession of the City
of Rome, and of the Exarchat.

3, The Third Age of Antichrist was when he raised himself above the Emperors,
their Sovereigns, and Lords.

The Pope being the foretold Antichrist, and demonstrating it, What Horror is
it to submit to him.
1. ALthough the Pope be the foretold Antichrist, yet people do Adore this
Monster. and Princes do Applaude him; and very often ruin their Kingdoms at
his desire and appetite: and daily yet do offer their poor Subjects in a
Sacrifice of good Odor to this Antichrists feet.

2. Who would believe it, if Gods Spirit had not foretold it?

3. And who shall believe it after us, when he is consumed by this same Spirit?

An Appendix concerning Cardinals, the Popes Counselors.
1. WHen Cardinals have been raised up, this is the Language of the Archbishop
of Bragantia, among many Prelates of the Council of Trent.

That, in the Church had been established an Order Superior to the Bishops, in
times past unknown of the Church, namely that of Cardinals.

2. Who in the first times were reputed to be of the number of other Priests,
and Deacons.

3. And only after the tenth Age had raised themselves above their Degree.

4. Yet not so much that they durst make themselves equals unto Bishops, unto
whom they were held to be inferiors, until the year of Grace, a thousand and
two hundred.

5. But from that time; Not only have they esteemed themselves to be Equals
unto Bishops, but moreover have raised themselves above them. So that now they
hold them for servants in their Houses.

6. He concluded, That the Church should never be reformed, until Bishops, and
Cardinals were brought again to the Rank due unto each of them.

Of Cardinals more particularly.
1. NOt one word can be found in the Ancient Church concerning Cardinals, save
in this signification, That Cardinal Priest did signify the Parson, or Rector
of one of the Parishes of the Bishopric.

Then Cardinal Priest was as much as principal Priest, even as some virtues are
called Cardinal virtues. And some winds Cardinal winds, that is to say, First,
and Principal.

2. And this Title was used, not only in Rome, but also in other great
Archiepiscopal Cities, principally at Milan, where Sigonius reports, that
there were 22. Cardinals, about the end of the seventh book.

3. And there being many Priests in one Parish, he that was the first in Order,
and the Rector of the Parish, as has been said, was called the principal, or
Cardinal Priest. For that comes to one, as Pandulphus Pisanus does teach, and
after him Onuphrius.

4. And at this time all Cardinals are Priests or Deacons of some of the
parishes of Rome.

5. In that regard they sat at the last in Councils; As namely in the sixth
Council of Carthage, And in the Council of Gregory the first, And the Gallicane
Church in her Remonstrances to the Council of Canstance says these words:
Cardinals are the Rectors, or Parsons of the Parochial Churches at Rome.

They have their Dignities in their parishes; and their First, and principal
Office is, To hear Confessions, To preach, and to Baptize, etc.

6. But Onuphrius says in Libro de Cardinalibus, That when Pope Clement the 2.
about the year 1046. had strengthened the Papal Majesty. Leo the 9. about the
year 1049. did begin to raise up the State of Cardinals at Rome.

7. Unto whom afterward Innocent the 4. about the year 1244. gave the
privilege of the Red Hat, Of the Scarlet Gown, And to go on Horseback through
the City.

8. And in the year 1470. Paul the 2. did confirm it.

9. And since Clement the 5. went so far in his Clementines, as to make them
march before all the Princes of the earth.

10. But that the beginning of Cardinals had been such, as has been
represented: Besides the consent of the whole History, it does appear by the
following things.

1. It does appear by this; That Anciently there were only 28 of them, That is
to say, as many as of Titles, and of the parishes at Rome.

2. That does appear by this, That as the Popes were willing to make a great
number of Cardinals, they did also increase the number of the Parishes of Rome.

3. That does appear by this, That above a thousand years lasting, the least
Bishop had the precedence of a Cardinal; how Ancient soever he might be: And
even the Dean likewise.

4. That does appear by this, That the Cardinalat was a Degree to become
Bishop; And that he who of a Cardinal was made Bishop, did cease to be
Cardinal, which was not altered but about the year 1190, by Pope Clement the
third.

5. That does appear by this, That among the Cardinal Bishops, the Precedence
was taken from the Promotion to the Bishopric, and not to the Cardinalship.
The Cardinals being esteemed inferiors to Bishops, and only more then simple
Priests. Alexander the 3. did change that, after he had trodden under feet the
Emperor Frederick, about the year 1180. making thenceforth the Cardinals
Bishops, and the Cardinals not Bishops, to have the precedence of Bishops,
Archbishops, Primates, Patriarchs, etc.

6. That does appear by this, That the Church of Ravenna in Italy had her
Cardinals, and kept them a long time; which also in the time of Charles the
Great did maintain, That she held nothing of Rome.

11. Concerning Cardinal Deacons, the books of the Church of Rome do teach us,
That there was but one there in the beginning; which was called so, because he
was the Principal Deacon, (called by us Archdeacon) of the seven Deacons that
were in that City: that is to say, one for two Regions, which were called
Regionarie Deacons, having the care of the Alms.

Since they were 14, one for a Region, and afterward 18. To give 4 of them to
Latran. and at last they were all Cardinals, and that without Number.

12. It must not be wondered at, Then if the Canonists do Dispute, that the
Cardinals have no Rank in the Church, and that they are neither Instituted by
Christ, nor by his Apostles, etc.

13 Neither also must we wonder, if even the Cardinal of Alliaco, among the
Articles which he presented to the Council of Constance, Libr. de Reform.
at the Request of the Emperor Sigismond, did give counsel to extinguish them,
as superfluous, and added without cause.

This is an Observation greatly to be considered, namely, That the Arguments
used in the Church of Rome, for Defense of their Erroneous Doctrines, before
the coming in of the Jesuits, are declared by the Jesuits themselves, to have
been but slight and weak Arguments.
Jesuits.
OUr Ancestors, says one of the Jesuits, otherwise most wise men, having not
always to Debate with wilful Spirits, did not strictly stand upon exact Form
of Teaching.

Answer to that by the Reformed.
1. THe cause is the more desperate, when such wise men could find no better
Arguments to maintain it, but such as even the Jesuits themselves confess to
be but weak.

2. And both their Heresies were then too credulous to believe. And the
Jesuits are now ridiculous to defend such loose Arguments as they do.

By the above observation it does manifestly appear, That the Jesuits, that
now have taken upon them to defend the Doctrine Erroneous of the Church of
Rome, of all the Sophisters of that Church, are the greatest.
1. THe Jesuits puts now down all the Ancient Sophisters of the Church of
Rome, for deceit, and fraud; themselves being yet but upstarts.

2. For if there were ever any kingdom of poor blind men over the stark blind,
questionless it is now wholly descended unto the Jesuits.

3. To whom the former Popish Doctors, as also the Ancienter Orders of Monks
and Friars, do willingly yield the Garland, because they think that they see
something.

Of all the Sophisters, Jesuits, Bellarmine, a Jesuit, is the greatest, and
most Universal; as appears by the Representation and Observation of his Faults.
1. REading the Controversies of Cardinal Bellarmine, concerning Religion, we
find two kinds of Faults in them, Some are General, And the others are
Particular.

2. These be some of his General Faults.

1. To make show and parade of his Learning, he propounds, and moves Questions
too curious, as also unprofitable.

2. He refutes the Ancient Errors with too great prolixitie, and labor, which
were not to be drawn out of Hell; wherein, in times past, truth had made them
fall.

3. He unjustly reproves the Reformed Doctors, and slanders them, being
beholding unto them for many matters that he has taken from them; though he
does not vouchsafe to acknowledge it.

4. When he loses all hope to be helped by holy Scriptures, he does strengthen
himself by the Authority of the Fathers, and of the Councils, and of Miracles.

5. Against all right, and reason, to maintain, and uphold his Capitolin god,
which is the Pope, he alleadges unto us the Popes in their own Cause as Judges,
or witnesses.

6. Also to prove his Assertions, he alleadges and produce that which has been
done by the Pope: Whereas it was to be known, in regard of Right, whether they
ought to do such things.

7. To procure glory and fame unto himself, and being stirred by Ambition, he
blames, and rebukes every kind of persons, even his own Doctors; and moreover
the holy Scriptures.

8. Having undertaken to uphold an Error, he hoth sink in the mud the more when
he goes on.

4. Concerning the particular Faults of the said Cardinal, they appear in every
point of controversy, which he handles against the Reformed Churches. Which
particular Faults are clearly discovered, and solidly refuted by the Doctors of
the said Churches, who did undertake the Answer to the said Controversy.

. An Observation very considerable, concerning the Society of Jesus, and the
Name of Jesuit.
1. THe Society of the Jesuits have separated Christ; Else why have they
separated Jesus from Christ?

2. And leaving the Ancient ordinary Name of Christians, which they scorn, as
too common, they desiring rather to be called Jesuits, (a new Name of their
own framing) then to be called Christians.

3. As though there were some society of Jesus priated to one kind of men,
separated from other Christians.

4. If there be, then is Christ divided.

5. If not, then you Jesuits are too Impudent to devise a new Society.

. Exception of the Jesuits.
YOu Reformed set upon our Society, and say we have divided Christ; because
certain men have chosen unto them this Name above all others, to be accounted
of the Society of Jesus; because they have consecrated themselves wholly to
advance this Name: Must they therefore of necessity divide Christ? Have not the
English Christ College in Oxford?

Answer of the Reformed to this Exception.
1. WE will not strive much with you Jesuits about your Society: of which we
reformed make very small account.

2. If you have for some special consideration Dedicated your selves unto
Christ, What is that consideration? Why do not you tell us what Jesus requires
of you, which all other Christians are not bound to do?

3. If the Order of your profession require, that you propagate the honor, and
magnify the Name Jesus. If for this all Christians ought not to labor, at
least Bishops, and specially the Pope of Rome. And if they be Jesuits who do
this, Why are not your Divines, Bishops, Cardinals, and Popes Jesuits?

4. It may be this care is far from them.

5. Whereas then Names are for distinguishing of things: they be needless, and
vain, when there is no difference of the thing.

6. Either show us what is the proper, and peculiar duties of Jesuits: Or
confess that without any cause you have appropriated such a Name unto them.

7. In Cambridge, as well as in Oxford, there are both Christ, and Jesus
Colleges: but they that live in those Colleges, are called only Christians.

8. Think you, That because there are many Colleges different in Names, there
are many different Orders, and Professions of men?

9. In places, distinctions of Names are necessary, and without danger; unless
some Schism may happen betwixt the walls.

10. Have you Jesuits no other thing to say for your Sect, and Society?

Concerning the Conversion of Countries made by Papists. What judgment is to be
made of such Conversions.
1. IT may happen that a corrupt Church which holds not the faith entirely
throughout, but erreth in some parcels thereof, may convert Heathens.

2. Such a conversion shall be mixed: In some things it shall be to the true
Faith: In others it shall be to erroneous believing.

3. Like as diseased Parents when they procreate Children, do, together with
their nature and kind, propagate hereditarie sickness.

4. And that the Ecclesiastical story reports, That the Arrians converted the
Goths to Christianity.

5. And such is the conversion of Heathens made by Papists.

Again, Of the Conversion of the Americans by the Jesuits.
1. The Jesuits which have assayed to make new kingdoms among the Indians, did
not serve Christ, but the Pope.

2. Nor did they enlarge the Kingdom of Christ; but they did prepare for the
Pope a Kingdom, far from the Reformed, where he may reign, after he shall be
banished from these countries.

3. Which newly could easily have been effected by Lewis the 14, King of
France, if he had been willing to chastise, or rather so far to punish
Alexander now Pope, as to take from him the Temporal Dominions, of which the
Popes are become Princes, by the liberality of the Kings of France his
predecessors.

Of the different Sects that are in the Church of Rome, namely, Thomists,
Scotists, Dominicans, Franciscans.
Jesuits.
COncerning these different Sects, the Jesuits, for Defense of them, produce
this Reason.

That all these did ever consent in Faith, and differed only in such things
which might be disputed without any hazard of Faith.

Answer to that by the Reformed.
1. BE it granted they did agree in matters of Faith, Why then do they not
follow all one Rule?

3. For S. Paul reproved the Corinthians agreeing in Faith, because they
attributed to their Ministers more then was meet, whilst one had Devoted
himself to S. Paul, another to S. Peter, and another to Apollo. What then shall
be done to the Scotists, to the Thomists, and to others?

Are the Names of Scotus, of Thomas, of Francis, more holy, and lawful Names,
in their Disciples, then the names of S. Peter, S. Paul, and of Apollo?

3. Besides the difference is very great, not in the name only, but in things
also.

4. As thus, Let the Question be whether the Cross of Christ, and the Image of
Christ, be to be worshipped with the same kind of worship, that Christ is
Adored withal; Does not this appertain to Faith?

But Error in this will be plain Idolatry. And yet the Jesuits know some of
the Schoolmen stand for it, Some against it.

5. What of that Question which has exercised all Churches, and all Schools so
long, Whether the Virgin Mary had Original sin, Or was ever pure, and without
spot?

6. And infinite such Differences the Reformed do omit, being matter of Faith.

From hence I infer, That the Unity pretended by the Popish Doctors to be in
the Church of Rome, is not so Entire, and General, as they would have it
thought.
1. BUt although it be not so, yet if it proceeded of knowledge of the Truth,
and of faithful submission, with the hearty obedience to the same truth, it
should deserve great Commendation.

2. But springing from this Fountain, That all men must obey the Pope,
whatsoever he teach, and command without Examination, or Resistance, upon pain
of Eternal Damnation: It is altogether unworthie of commendation, and praise:
because it is an easy matter upon this Foundation, to raise up, and maintain
any unity whatsoever.

3. In that regard such unity is Tyrannical, and Devilish.

4. And in other Regards it is Carnal: For in the chiefest Members of the
Church of Rome, it does proceed from vain Ambition, from worldly Pleasures, and
from filthy Covetousness.

5. In another regard besides, It is Brutish, and also carnal; proceeding in
the most Members of Brutish Ignorance, and of Fear.

Of the Seduction of People by the Popes, and the Roman Church, by their False
Doctrine in General.
1. IT is one of the Sins of the Popes, and of the Church of Rome, to seduce
People by their False, and Corrupted Doctrine.

2. Which is a crying, and an abominable Sin, for it is thereby to poison
People, and to put them in the way which leads unto Death.

3. Of this Seduction is spoken, 2 Thessalonians. 9, 10. in these words, Even him,
(namely the wicked mentioned before) whose coming is after the working of
Satan, with all Power, and Signs, and lying Wonders, and with all
deceivablenesse of unrighteousness in them that perish, because they received
not the love of the Truth, that they might be saved: Of the same also is
spoken, Apoc. 13.12. where it is said of the Second Beast, That he causes the
Earth, and Them which dwell therein to worship the first Beast, whose deadly
wound was healed, And a little after, namely verse. 14. That this Second Beast
deceives them that dwell on the Earth, by the means of those Miracles which he
had Power to do in the sight of the Beast: And that he causes all both small
and great, rich and poor, free and bond, to receive a mark in their right hand,
or in their foreheads; And that no man might buy, or sell, save he that had the
mark, or the name of the Beast, or the number of his Name: And Chap. 13.7, 8.
It is said, That it was given unto him to make war with the Saints, and to
overcome them: And power was given him over all kindreds, and tongues, and
nations: And all that dwell upon the Earth shall worship him, whose names are
not written in the Book of Life of the Lamb slain from the foundation of the
world. And Chapt. 17.2. It is said, That with the great Whore the Kings of the
Earth have committed Fornication; and the Inhabiters of the Earth have been
made drunk with the Wine of her Fornication.

4. All That has been seen before the last Reformation of the Church.

2.
NOw as Satan (to the end he may tempt the better) does often transform himself
in an Angel of Light: So Antichrist and his Followers to seduce better the
world, and to spread with greater fruit, and success, the venom of his False
Doctrine, in corrupting that of Christ, and of his Apostles, has made use of
four Means the fittest for the fulfilling of his design.

1. The first of these Means consists in Mysteries, and Secrets.

2. The second of these Means consists in Frauds, and Impostures.

3. The third of these Means consists in Signs, and Miracles.

4. And the Fourth of these Signs consists in Persecution, and Cruelty.

1. I have said, That the First of the Means used by the Popes, and the Church
of Rome, to seduce People, consists in Mysteries, and Secrets.
1. FOr Popery having not found convenient, openly to propound her false
Doctrines, has clothed them with Mysteries, that so they may be more easily
received. In this regard it is said of the great Whore, Apoc. 17.5. That upon
her forehead was a Name written Mystery, Babylon the Great, the Mother of
Harlots, and Abominations of the Earth.

2. Let the Rationals be read, and the book of Ceremonies of the Church of
Rome, and no piece, or part of the Divine Service, thereof shall be found,
which contains not some Mysteries, even to the Priests Garments, and to the
Lamps always burning.

3. The Doctrine of an Ecumenical and Universal Bishop and Head, was softly
introduced under this Mystery, That thereby the Unity of the Church was
represented.

4. Marriage has been prohibited to the Roman Clergy, permitting unto them,
under this color to keep Concubines. And under this Mystery, That Virginity is
far more excellent then Marriage.

5. The Life, and the Monastical Vows have been introduced under this Mystery.
That the Contemplative Life, is by much to be preferred to the Active. And that
thereby Grace, and Glory are merited. And moreover, that thereby more is done,
then God commands in his Law.

6. The use of Holy Scripture in an unknown Tongue, has been introduced under
this Mystery, To avoid and hinder the contempt of Her Mysteries; And to
entertain an Union in all the Churches.

7. How many Mysteries are found out in the Mass, to the end that it may be
received?

2. I have said, That the Second of the Means used by the Popes, and the Church
of Rome, to seduce People, consists in Impostures.
1. IN that they are like to False Coyners, and to Jugglers. Like again to the
Serpent, who by Imposture, and Fraud, did deceive our Mother Eve, and by the
same Means did endeavor to seduce Jesus Christ our Savior, but was not able
to do it.

2. Which Impostures and Frauds, have been showed, and continue to be showed,
by the Popes, and by the Roman Clergy, in diverse manners.

3. We will produce in particular, those diverse Manners, after we have set down
the other Means used by the Popes, and the Church of Rome to seduce People.

2. I have said, That the Third of the Means used by the Popes, and the Church
of Rome, to seduce People, consists in Signs, and Miracles.
1. OF them does Christ our Savior speak, Matthew. 24.24. in these words, For
there shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great
signs, and wonders, insomuch, that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the
very Elect. Of them also does S. Paul speak, 2 Thessalonians. 2.9. in these words, Even
him, (namely Antichrist) whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all
power, and signs, and lying wonders. Of them likewise does S. John speak, Apoc.
13.14. in these words, And them that dwell on the earth, (meaning Antichrist)
by the means of those Miracles which he had power to do in the sight of the
Beast.

2. The Popes, which are that Antichrist, boasting of this Gift of Miracles,
has noised more of them then any other Religion; Either the True, Or the False
Religion.

More then Simon the Magician did.

More then Mahomet has done.

More then Moses, and the other Prophets have done.

Nay more then Christ has done, and his Apostles, although they have made of
them in great Number.

3. Is it not the most ordinary Subject of the Legends of the Saints: by
which, in time past, the Preachers of the Church of Rome, did so beat the ears
of their Auditors.

It is true, That since the Reformation of the Christians, those Legends are
not so much esteemed, but still Citations are made out of them, although not so
commonly.

4. But these Miracles, boasted by those of the Church of Rome, were not true,
but lying Miracles. And that in regard of all manners and kinds of Causes.

1. False in regard of the efficient Cause, Because they were wrought by Satan,
who is the father of Lies.

2. False in regard of the final Cause, Because they were done to introduce a
false Doctrine, and full of Lies.

3. False in regard of the Material Cause, Because most of them are but
Illusions, and Impostures. Not true Resurrections of some Dead, as they are
pretended to be. Neither also curing of some Diseases.

4. False in regard of the Formal Cause, For if some of these Miracles are
true, in respect of the Matter, they shall not be so in regard of the Form,
because they shall not be above the strength of Nature, as are all the true
Miracles, but shall be wrought by Natural Causes, Either Manifest, or Hidden.

Satan applying Active Things to Passives, They may be wondrous things, but not
Miracles, which are wrought only by the Omnipotency of God.

5. And notwithstanding that, God having so permitted it, those false Miracles
did serve to Introduce, and settle many Errors.

1. By this Means the Popes, and their Clergy did endeavor to establish the
Doctrine of Transubstantiation; Sometimes saying, that Beasts did leave their
Food to worship the Host. Sometimes, That the Host being pricked, some blood
came out of it. That a part thereof being fallen in the water, when the Priest
washed his hands, all the water had been changed into blood.

2. By this Means also the Pope, and his Clergy did establish, The
Intercession, Adoration, and Invocation of the departed Saints. And upon that,
How many Miracles have been boasted of. Namely That many blind do recover their
sight, Many lame do go, That many sick do recover health.

If any Mineral Waters be found in a Country that have some virtue, there a
Chapel of some Saint is builded, unto whom the virtue of these waters is
attributed, which is called by the Name of Miracle.

3. By this Means likewise has been established the Adoration of Images; being
said, that in certain places the Crucifix being ill used by the Jews, did
render Blood. Also, that in another place, a Child without Feet having vowed
himself to the Virgin Mary, whose Image was worshipped in the place where he
was Born, did see in sleeping his two Feet be given unto him. That in some
other Places some Images did render Oil like unto Sweat, which did serve for
the Cure of many Diseases.

4. By this Means besides has been established the veneration of Relics.

5. And for the Admiration of the Dignity of Popes, this Means has been also
used.

4. I have said, That the Fourth of the Means used by the Popes, and the Church
of Rome, to seduce People, Consists in Persecution, and Cruelty.
1. IT is that which is represented in the Apocalypse chap. 17.6. In these
words, And I saw the woman drunken with the blood of the Saints, and with the
Blood of the Martyrs of Jesus. And in the 12. Chapter all along Particularly,
and Expressly in the verses, 13, 15, and 17. of that Chapter.

2. In that the Church of Rome is gone far above the Cruelty of the Pagan
Emperors, and that of the most wild and Barbarous of them.

3. This Cruelty, and Persecution has been exercised, and tried by the Popes,
and the Church of Rome in all the places where the Reformed Religion was
Embraced.

4. And if at this Time it does not appear so violent, as in time past; It is
because the strength of Antichrist weakenth, and not his will.

The Popes do hold, That no other ways are to be used toward the Reformed,
then that of Punishments, and of war.
1. BEcause, say they, there is but small hope of their Conversion; Heretics
being very obstinate, and whatsoever is done to exhort them to Repentance,
being by them attributed to the want of strength to force them.

2. That there was not any Remembrance that ever Moderation had done any good.

3. But that Experience had showed, that the sooner it is proceeded against
them by the Justice and the Executions thereof, it fares the better.

4. And where this way does not suffice, to proceed against them by war.

Again, Of the Cruelty of the Popes, and of the Church of Rome, and of the
Popish Inquisition.
1. THe Reformed call to witness, all the people of the Christian World, who
have yet any sense of Humanity, and Equity remaining in them, Whether the
Cruelty of the Church of Rome, has not been of all Cruelties the greatest.

2. Thereupon let Italy speak, also Germany, Spain, France, the Low Countries,
besides our Kingdom of England.

3. It were tedious to recite the Horrible Murders, The Fearful Burnings, and
the Exquisite Punishments that the Papists have exercised in those States.

4. The Sword, The Rack, The Gallows, and the Fire, have been the Instruments
of their Cruelty.

5. And had it not been for these, the Church of Rome had been overthrown long
ago. For by these Weapons it was first Founded, after increased, and now
maintained.

6. If once these fail, the Roman Church questionless cannot long continue.

Of the Popish Inquisition.
1. THe Horrors of this Popish Inquisition, are above all that the Devil did
ever invent.

2. The Tortures thereof are so cruel, and barbarous, that that justifies all
the Torments of Phalaris.

3. It is to speak of it too softly to call it the Image of Hell.

4. A man is laid in prison, not knowing for what cause.

5. After the Darkness, and Solitariness of a year, he is questioned upon
some certain deeds.

6. If he declares himself to be a good Catholic, and Abjures Heresy, then he
is put to death more mildly. For there to be guilty of death, it suffices to
have been accused.

7. If he persevere in the defense of the Truth which he did profess, and
resolves himself to martyrdom; after infinite Torments, he is produced in
public, his head covered with a horrible cover, which they call S. Benedict,
with a mouth and a tail of the Devil.

8. And so he is burned with a slow fire, at sundry times, that so he may feel
himself dying.

9. Which is an horror to the Turks and Mahometans, although they be mortal
Enemies to the Christian Name: For they never did any thing to Christians,
which came near to this Cruelty.

Of the Perfidiousnesse, and Cruelty Exercised by the Council of Constance upon
John Husse, and Hierome of Prague,
1.
1. John Husse of Bohemia, and Hierome of Prague, came to the Council of
Constance, trusting in the protection of a public promise, namely of Sigismund
the Emperor, who gave his public warrant.

2. And yet they were burned in that Council.

3. Was it not fit that the Council should have given credit to the public
warrant of the Emperor.

Exception of the Jesuits.
BUt say the Jesuits, John Husse was not called by the Council of Constance,
neither did he receive from it any public promise.

Answer of the Reformed to that Exception.
1. THe Emperor Sigismund gave him his public Warrant; which the Council most
dishonorablie infringed.

2. And after they had put Husse to Death, contrary to public promise, they
Enacted a Law, That a promise made unto Heretics, by the Emperor, or by any
King, or Secular Prince, should not hinder any Ecclesiastical Judges from
proceeding against them According to Law; Council. Constant. Sess. 19.

2.
HIerom of Prague likewise came to the Council of his own accord, and making
public profession of his Faith, was burned.

3.
SO that the Case of these Two, than the which all Christendom at that time,
had not any more Holy, or Learned.

1. Shall remain as a perpetual Monument of the Papists Treachery, and most
horrible Cruelty.

2. And also as a notable Caveat unto all the Godly, to beware of them for the
Time to come.

. The Doctrine of the Church of Rome is false, Concerning the Faith given to
Heretics.
1. AFter that the Council of Constance had most Dishonourably infringed the
safe Conduct in Writing given to John Husse, 1. By the Emperor Sigismund, and
had put the said Husse to death, contrary to public Promise, They Enacted a
Law, as we have said before, That a Promise made unto Heretics, by the
Emperor, or by any King, or Secular Prince, should not hinder any
Ecclesiastical Judges from proceeding against them according to the Law;
Council. Constant. Sess. 19.

2.
IN the Regard of this Expression, a Jesuit says this, That whereas the
Reformed Doctors commonly say, that it was decreed in this Council of
Constance, That Faith is not to be kept with Heretics; That such a thing is
false.

3.
BUt let this Decree be understood in the Expression propounded, We Reformed
ask of the Jesuits, How can we be safe going to Councils Assembled by the
Popes, who are mortal Enemies to Protestants; If the Emperors, more reasonable
to them bear no sway in such Councils?

Other Frauds. The pretended Donation of Constantine the Emperor to the Roman
Church, in person of the Pope Sylvester of the City of Rome, and of a great
part of Italy, is not only a Fable, but moreover a notorious Fraud.
1. BEcause all History is contrary to it.

2. Because the fourth Consulate of Constantine the Son, and of Gallicanus,
which is in the Date of it, is not found.

3. Because Damasus, Pope of Rome, in the very Life of Sylvester, which is to
particular, makes no mention thereof, Neither also Anastatius.

4. Because this pretended Donation was afterward divided among the sons of
the Emperor Constantine, even Rome it self; as it is related by Eusebius
Zosimus, and Zonara.

5. Because Isidorus, Burchardus, and Yvo, judging it to be Apocriphal, did not
insert it in their Decrees.

6. Because even the Pope Agathon, writing many Ages after to Constantine
Pogonat, calls Rome, Vrbem Imperatoris Servilem, The Servile Town of the
Emperor.

7. Because this pretended Donation has been confuted by some of the most
famous men of the Church of Rome. As

By Antonine Archbishop of Florence.

By Raphael Volateranus.

By Hierom Catalan Chamberlain to Pope Alexander the 6.

By Otho, Bishop of Frisinghen.

By Cardinal Cusan.

By Laurence Valla, a Roman Patrician.

By Francis Guicciardin: every one of these men famous in their times.

By Aeneas Sylvius himself, who afterward was Pope Pius the second.

By an express book cited by Catalan.

8. Because Platine, the Popes Historiographer has been ashamed to speak of it.

9. Because finally, That in the pretended Original, which is kept of it in the
Vatican in Golden. Letters, the Writer himself has added to the end thereof in
this Latin, Quam Fabulam longi Temporis Mendacia finxit; It is a Fable which
the Ancient Lie did forge.

10. And notwithstanding, Let us here admire the Impudency of Baronius, who
passes upon this Donation, as upon Fire; And will give it us as a thing
already judged; We speak not of it, says he, because we could not say other
thing thereof, Then that which has been said by so many others, and which
should be burdensome, and needless to repeat: Volum. 3. Ann. 324. Art. 117.

11. And wretched man that he is, how many other things does he repeat of
lesser Importance? handled by many others, and what else are all his Annals?

Fraud. Of the pretended Donation of Constantine, in General.
1. THat Constantines Donation is a base and witless forgery, is of old by
Laurentius Valla, and since that by diverse of our Learned Writers so fully
demonstrated, that scarce ought can be added unto their Labors.

2. Nor would we so much as once endeavor to treat thereof, but that many of
the Popes late flatterers do most pertinaciously, and shame^essely continue
still the claim thereof.

3. And it must not seem strange to any, nor be thought unfit, that we should
reiterate our just defense of the Truth. So long as they reiterate their
Cavils, and vain Objections against the Truth.

Three Reasons by which we prove that Constanstine never made any such Donation
as the Doctors of the Church of Rome do pretend, either by Word, or by Writing.
1. THe first Reason is the Testament of Constantine, wherein he disposed the
whole Empire, and divided it among his three Sons; To Constantine, and
Constans, was attributed, (says Zonaras,) Italy, and Rome it self, Africa,
Sicily, the Cottian Alps, Cum Galliis with the Countries of the Galls: To
Constantius was Attributed that which was in the East.

2. It is credible, that if Constantine had formerly made, either by Word, or
Writing, an Absolute Donation of Rome, Italy, and the Western Provinces to the
Pope, and that so solemnly, That as Leo the 9. says, He Decreed that Donation
to abide firm, and inviolable, in finem mundi, unto the end of the world. It is
credible we say, that so pious, and prudent an Emperor would within twelve
years after, do contrary to his own Act, especially in his last Will and
Testament, wherein he would rather have testified his Religious affection, and
love to the Church, by an Addition of some other gift, then leave so eternal a
blemish upon his Name.

Of Inconstancy,

Of Injustice.

Of Impiety.

Of Sacrilege.

And of making his own children inheritors of that which he knew was neither
his to give: Nor which they, without open Injustice, Impiety, and Sacrilege,
might accept, hold, or possess.

2. The second reason is, the perpetual possession and dominion, which the
Emperors had of Rome and of Italy, with the Government thereof; which
Continued still in them. Nor only after Constantines time, but even while he
lived, until it was unjusty taken from them.

First by Popes, and then confirmed by Pipin, by Charles the Great, and by
others.

3. The third proof, that Constantine made no such Donation, is the Testimony
of their own Writers.

Whereof, though it were easy to produce a long Catalogue, yet we here cite
but a few.

4. The first is Bishop Canus, who thus writes. Eusebius, Ruffinus, Theodoret,
Socrates, Sozomen, Eutropius, Victor, and other Authors of good credit, who
have most diligently written all the Acts of Constantine, not only do make
mention of this Donation; But further they declare, That he so divided the
Roman Empire among his three Sons. Vt Italia uni little tota contigerit, That
all Italy was allotted to one of them. So Canus.

5. And to him accords, one of their latter, and most earnest Defenders of the
Popes Regalities, Alex. Carerius, who thus says, of this Donation of
Constantine, Compertum est. It is certain, That nothing is read in any approved
Historian; specially in those who writ in that, or in the next age. Eusebius
does not mention it,

Nor Hierom,

Nor Augustine,

Nor Ambrose,

Nor Basil,

Nor Chrysostom,

Nor Ammianus,

Nor the Tripartite History,

Nor Damasus,

Nor Bid,

Nor Orosius. So Carerius.

The Charter, or Edict of Constantines Donation, is a base, and improbable
Fiction.
1. ALL that which is proved by Reformed Writers, of the supposed Leprosy,
Persecution, and Baptism of Constantine, by Pope Sylvester, are undoubted
Demonstrations of the Forgerie of this Edict of Donation.

2. For in the Charter are all these, Not only related as certain truths, but
they are made the very ground and occasion why Constantine made this Charter.

3. Seeing then there is neither truth nor reality in the foundation; Certainly
there is no truth at all in the Charter it self.

4. But leaving these we will propose a few other Considerations in this Cause.

1. In this Edict is mentioned the Sea of Constantinople, as one of the
Patriarchal Sees. Whereas, neither it had Patriarchal Dignity, before the
Second General Council, (that is more then fifty years after the Donation is
supposed to be made) Nor was there at that time so much as the name of
Constantinople: For this City was then called Byzantium. And diverse years
after, when Constantine had much enlarged it, and made it, as Socrates says,
Parem, and aequalem Romae, equal to Rome, choosing it for the Imperial Seat.

It was then first called by his Name Constantinople. And this was done, as
Baronius himself acknowledges, a little after the Nicene Council was ended.

But as Sigonius more truly teaches, five years after that Nicene Council,
when Gallicanus and Symachus were Consuls.

So very stupid was the forgerer, that to gain to the Pope, and to the Sea of
Rome principality over Constantinople, he makes Constantine write of that City
which was not; no nor the name of it so much as extant in the World at that
time.

2. Had Constantine given principality to the Roman See, above all Churches in
the World, as the Charter says he did, What folly was it in John, Bishop of
Constantinople, in Cyriacus, and in others, to strive for that Pre-eminence?
What meant Boniface the third, that he would never show this Charter, and grant
of principality made by Constantine.

Why did he use so much entreaty and means to Phocas a murderer, that the
Church of Rome might be called the first of all Churches; when the same was
long, almost 300. years before given by a fair Charter to the Roman See, by
Constantine so Worthy, and Renowned an Emperor.

3. In this Edict Constantine is made solemnly to give unto Pope Sylvester the
Lateran Palace; whereas, not only Sigonius witnesses that this was given long
before to Pope Meltiades: Augustale Palatium in Laterano impertiit; Constantine
gave to Meltiades the Lateran Palace: but Baronius and Binnius avouch the same
for a certainty, and say, that no wise body will doubt thereof.

Those Augustissimae Lateranenses Aedes, say they, That most princely Palace of
the Lateran was given by the same Constantine to Pope Miltiades, the
Predecessor of Sylvester, and to his Successors; and that in the Seventh year
of Constantine, which was twelve years before he was either Baptized, or made
this Charter of Donation.

Is not this now a piece of great munificence in the Emperor, to give that,
which it is not his own to give; or to give that to Sylvester, which many years
before that gift was Sylvesters own, and his Successors for ever.

4. To the above said considerations, let us add the Testimony of their great
Cardinal Baronius, to whom accords Gretser, who has written an Apology for
him in this very point. He by many Reasons, and at large, proves the Edict to
be Commentitium, prorsusque falsum, A mere Figment, and Forgerie. And as
Gretser says, Commentis accensendum docuit. He has taught, that it is a
Counterfeit. One Reason is, That this Edict was not in the Ancient Acts of
Sylvester, but was by forgerie inserted into them.

The time when this was done, he defines to have been after the 1000 year of
Christ. The Parties by whom this forged Edict was made, and published, he also
declares. It was fained by some Grecian, under the name of Eusebius, and set
forth by Theodorus Balsamon: whereas a nullo Graecorum hactenus in lucem
editum, until then no Grecian had published it. And from the Grecians it came
to the Latins and Western Church. Leo the 9. being the first Pope, who makes
mention thereof. Thus the Cardinal.

By whose acknowledgment it may be seen, what truth there is in the Popes;
specially in Pope Leo, who in his Decretal Epistle, most solemnly commends this
Edict, for an Ancient, and undoubted Evidence. Such as he knew by sight, and
sense to be the true deed of Constantine. Which yet their great Cardinal after
long sifting of Monuments, and Records, testifies to be a Forgerie; and that
of the Grecians. First of all devised, as he says about 700. years, and
published 800. years after the Death of Constantine.

Fraud. Of the Fraud, and Imposture of the Popes, and of the Church of Rome, in
regard of pretended Revelations, both by Dreams, and by Extraordinary Visions,
and Apparitions of the Dead.
1. THe Pope, and the Church of Rome make use of these pretended Revelations,
to lead the poor People by the Nose, and to make him believe some Doctrines
which the word of God does condemn.

2. So was it said, that some were Appeared, who had said, That to come out of
Purgatory, such and such things were to be done: so Sing Masses, and by some
certain kind of persons, that by such forged Impostures, the Fable of Purgatory
should be established.

3. Likewise was it said, that some were Appeared, who said, That they had seen
some Tormented in Hell Fire, who told them, That they were there for sundry
Sins, but particularly, for having Stolen a Chalice from the Convent of the
Benedictine Monks.

4. Others who being Tormented, did say, That it was because they had Taken and
Appropriated to themselves some Possessions belonging to the Church.

5. Besides others said, That some certain Priests godly persons, singing
Mass, did see an Angel which did accompany them.

6. In the Times of the deepest ignorance, there was nothing more common then
the speech of such Visions, and Apparitions, either Imaginaries, and
Fantastical, or proceeding from the Devil, to abuse the poor people, and to
establish his False Doctrine.

Fraud. It is a Fraud, and a mere Cavillation, for the Refutation of the
Falsehood of a Religion, and also for the Proof of the Truth of a Religion, to
demand only Formal Places of Holy Scripture contained word by word in it. Which
Fraud and Cavillation is used by many Doctors of the Church of Rome disputing
with the Reformed, but wrongfully.
BEcause, if all that which is not opposed by Formal Texts, cannot be said to
be grounded in the Word of God. Then there are none so abominable Heresies, nor
any so monstrous opinion, which may not boast, although wrongfully, to have the
word of God for its Ground. So for Example.

1. The Heretic Arrians could say, That they were grounded upon the Word of
God, because there is no passage, which formally says, That the Son is
consubstantial to the Father; and that it is not a Created God.

2. The Nestoreans also could say, That they were grounded upon the Word of
God, because there is no formal place which says, That in Jesus Christ there
are not two Persons.

3. So much could say the Eutichians, For there are no places which formally
says, That the two Natures of Christ be not confused: and that the Human
Nature has not swallowed up by the Divine Nature.

4. Likewise the Jews, who reject Jesus Christ, with a prodigious obstinacy,
could say, That they were grounded upon the Word of God, because that in Moses,
and in all the Prophets, there is not any place which says formally, That
Jesus, the Son of Mary, born in Bethlehem, under the Empire of Caesar Augustus,
is the Messiah.

5. In a word, the Religion of the Mahometans could be said to be grounded upon
the Word of God; For there is no Text in the Bible, which says that Mahomet is
a false Prophet, and that his Religion is impious, and abominable; and that the
Paradise which God promises to his children, is not a carnal Paradise.

The necessary consequences that are drawn out of the Scriptures, are as
valuable to prove the falsehood of a Belief, as the formal Texts are: as also to
prove the Truth of a Belief.
ANd so whenever we are to confirm the Truth, and to confute Errors, and
Untruths, it is lawful to make use of two kind of Arguments drawn out of the
Canonical Books of Scripture; Namely, 1. of those who expressly, and as in as
many words are drawn out of the Holy Scriptures. Secondly, of those which are
drawn out of them by good, and lawful Consequence.

1. Certainly those that would reject Consequences drawn out of the Reason of
Holy Scriptures, should condemn Jesus Christ, who made use of Consequences, to
prove the Resurrection against the Sadducees.

For after he had produced the place of Moses, Exodus 3.6. where God calls
himself the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. He inferres
by a good Consequence for proof of the Resurrection, God is not the God of the
Dead, but of the Living.

2. Truly, whosoever is against the drawing out of any Consequence, does
abolish all the common sense, and all use of Reason, which consists only in
that.

3. We acknowledge, That Faith proceeds another way, then Humane Sciences do,
for Faith draws all her Proofs from the Divine Authority: but as the most
famous Schoolmen do observe the Sacred Divinity is Argumentative, that is to
say, That it does not abolish, but on the contrary makes more Noble the use of
Argumentation, and Discourse.

We allow besides, That the Rules of Legick are not Articles of Faith: But
notwithstanding, we say, that they are Tools, and Instruments; to handle all
knowledge with order, and certainty. And Consequently the Theological Matters.

Fraud. This is a Fraud of some Jesuits, that in Disputations concerning
Religion, they will ever Question, and never Answer.
1. FOr it belongs to him that Affirms a Thing to prove it; otherwise one
might Affirm all things impudently.

2. According to this Rule, It belongs then unto those who maintain, That
every day Christ is to be offered in a Propitiatory Sacrifice, who maintain The
Prayers unto the Dead, to Justify their Belief by the Word of God; And to make
us see, That it has been written, and set down in clear and formal words, or
that it is drawn from it by a Necessary Consequence.

This is another of the Frauds of the Church of Rome.
1. That the taking away of the Cup from the Sacrament of the Lords Supper. 2.
Forbidding Marriage to Priests. 3. And Divine Service being in an unknown
Tongue to the People, are only grounded upon worldly Interest.
1. This is true in Regard of the taking away the Cup from the Communion.
COncerning the taking away the Cup from the Sacrament, This is the language of
the Doctors of the Church of Rome, That if it were possible to grant to the
people the use of the Cup, without doing any wrong to the Faith, it should be a
thing of small importance: but that could not be, because by the grant of the
said use of the Cup, a gate should be opened to require, that all the
Ordinances which are of positive right, should be broken. And yet, say they,
They are they by which alone the Prerogative, given by Christ to the Curch of
Rome is conserved.

2. This is true in regard of the Prohibition of Marriage to Clergy Men.
FOr, say the said Doctors, from the Marriage of Clergy men, if it were
granted, it should happen, that they having a Family, Wives and Children,
should no more depend from the Pope, but from their natural Prince; and their
assecrions toward their issue, would make them agree to all things wrongful
unto the Church, that they should endeavor to render Livings Hereditarie: And
in a short time the Holy Sea^ should (...) in the only City of Rome. That
before the Coeliba, or Single Life had been decreed.

The Roman See drew no thing at all from other Towns, and Countries: but by it
was become Master of such a great number of Benefits: Of whom by the Marriage
of Clergy men, it should be deprived in a short time.

3. This is true in regard of Divine Service in a Tongue unknown to the people.
FOr, say the said Doctors, from the use of the vulgar Tongue in the
Celebration of Divine Service, it should follow, that every one should esteem
themselves Divines. That the Prelates Authority should be vilified, and that
Heresy should creep in All.

Of a most considerable Contradiction of the Principal Doctors of the Church of
Rome, in regard of their Doctrine, That the Kingdom of Heaven, And Eternal
Life, is due as a Debt to our good works.
1.
WE Reformed do Teach, That he that sins has deserved death worthily, in
respect of the sin committed, which is a Transgression of Gods will, and
Commandment. And for which, without Remission, there is no hope to Escape
eternal Condemnation.

2.
But can he that works well, for one, or two, or for more good Works, claim
unto himself, as a due Debt, the Kingdom of Heaven for the same.

3.
The Reformed Doctors do deny it, for many strong Reasons.

4.
The Popish Doctors in the Schools, and in handling Controversies of Religion,
that are between the Reformed, and the Church of Rome do openly affirm it,
maintaining, that the Kingdom of Heaven and Eternal Life is due as a due Debt,
to our good works.

5.
1. But howsoever it is now for a Fashion with great Countenance, and vehement
Disputation, avouched by some Doctors of the Roman Church that we merit Heaven
by our good works.

2. Yet we are persuaded that no Adversary of Conscience can otherwise think or
dare in peril of Death otherwise say, but that he has deserved for his sins
punishment, and death everlasting; and cannot avoid the same if God will render
to his works the reward that of due belongs unto them.

3. And therefore casting away all trust in his works, will ask pardon, and
mercy, not claim any debt, or due reward of the Lord.

4. So though in their life time many of such Doctors be obstinately bent, and
have in their mouth nothing so much as good works, Merits, Reward, Due, Debt,
Recompense for their well doing. Yet the time drawing near, when they must hold
up their Hands at the Bar of the Lords Judgment Seat, and there must make
answer for themselves, and their works must be tried by the Law of God. They
give over their former confidence, They have no joy in themselves, yea they
distrust their own works, They tremble and quake inwardly, They are in fearful
heaviness, and perplexity of mind, They know not whither to turn themselves.

5. And if God give such grace unto them, that they see, and forsake their
Error of deserving Heaven, then they confess they are sinners, and therefore
guilty of Death.

6. And then learn that Lesson in their end, which before in their life time
they would not understand.

The Burden of Ceremonies which are now laid upon the Members of the Roman
Church, Is an Intolerable Burden.
1.
1. SOme of the Fathers, after the 300 years, that they might more easily draw
the Gentiles to Christianism, did Tolerate, and Admit, with an alteration of
the end, and manner, some Ceremonies of the Gentiles in Chiristian Religion.

2. Wherein no doubt their intention was godly, to wit. 1. To use their
Christian liberty in matters Adiaphorous, and not Morallie evil, according to
the Apostles rule, Tit. 1. v. 15. Unto the pure, all things are pure, Romans 14.
v. 14. There is nothing unclean of it self, but to him that esteems any thing
to be unclean, to him it is so.

2. And to amove a present offense and occasion which hindered Gentiles from
receiving the Christian faith; to wit, the difference of outward Ceremonies and
Customs.

2.
But in succeeding Ages when the Gentiles were converted, and when the Church
needed not further to accommodate it self to the weakness of the Heathen; And
that things at first admitted by way of toleration, should rather have now been
removed and worn out.

Superstitious persons contrary to this, make daily addition and increase,
borrowing more and more from the superstition of Jews and of Gentiles, until at
length they overwhelmed Christianity with an intolerable burden of ceremonies.

3.
1. Making the easy yoke of Christ's Gospel heavier then the state of Jews and
of Gentiles.

2. And by this means they obscured Gods truth, and only made people
ceremonious, whereas they should have been made pious.

Of the false Worship of the Church of Rome.
1. IN the Church of Rome there is a Religious worship, and the devotion of
many members of the same does eat up their time and their estates too.

2. But the Divine worship of the Church of Rome is not a true, but a false
worship.

3. For the Papists devotion is not employed and exercised in the true worship
of God according to his word, but according to man's will and invention.

4. That is to say, in praying to Saints,

In worshipping Images,

In suffrages for the dead,

In seeing Masses,

And adoring the Host,

And telling out a set number of Pater Nosters and of Ave Mary's upon hallowed
Beads,

In making superstitious Vows,

And going to Pilgrimage,

And abstaining from certain Meats,

And wearing Hair-cloth,

And whipping themselves,

And creeping on all four to a Crucifix, and the like.

5. Of all which, we demand as God does of the Jews by the Prophet Fsay, chap.
1. v. 12. Who required these things?

The Church of Rome is guilty of abominable Idolatry: And in what it does
consist.
1. Whatsoever Church attributes Divine honor to a creature is guilty of
abominable Idolatry. But the Church of Rome attributes Divine honor to diverse
creatures, as appears in the instances following.

1. Do they not devote themselves, dedicate Temples, consecrate Altars, appoint
Offices, make daily Prayers, vow Pilgrimages, and present Offerings to the
blessed Virgin, and do all such outward Acts as properly appertain to Latria?
Is not this to equalize her with her Son? The same is also true in regard of
the other Saints.

2. Do they not make an Idol of the Cross of Christ, when they profess that
they worship it Cultu Latriae?

Gretser the Jesuit in his Book of the Cross says, we affirm according to the
more common and received opinion in the Schools, That the Cross of Christ is to
be worshipped with Latry, that is Divine worship.

3. Do they not make an Idol of the Sacramental bread, or the Host, as they
call it? to which they pray and confess; before which they fall down when it is
carried in solemn Procession on Corpus Christi day.

4. Lastly, do they not make Idols of their Images, and of the Relics of
Saints, before which they burn Incense, and bow down when they pray, directing
their prayers toward them, and fastening their eyes on them?

2. This Conclusion then justly, and Rightly follows, That the Church of Rome
is guilty of Abominable Idolatry.

The Church of Rome is guilty of Idolatry.
IN six things the Church of Rome does commit Idolatry.

1. In worshipping the Host which the Priest holds, and calling God that which
is not God.

2. In attributing to Saints the honor which belongs only to God.

1. Praying to them. 2. Calling them Mediators. 3. Asking salvation of God by
their merits. 4. Believing that they know the hearts and thoughts of men.
3. Particularly in calling the Virgin Mary Inventrix of Grace.

The Queen of Heaven,

The Lady of the World.

For Kingdom, and Empire over all creatures, belongs only to God.

4. In the adoration and worship of Images.

5. In the adoration of the Cross.

6. In the adoration and worship of Bones, of Rags, and other relics of the
dead.

1. The Papists do commit many things which the Heathen Idolaters did do, and
so are like unto them in those regards. 2. In particular, they put the Saints
in the place of the Gods and Goddesses of the Pagans.

THough we forbear to fasten the name of Heathenish Idolaters upon Papists, yet
surely they do the same things as they did.

1. The Heathen carried their Gods of Gold and Silver upon their shoulders,
Baruch 6.4. So do the Papists bear out their images and relics, enclosed in
chasses of gold and silver in their solemn Processions on high days.

2. The Heathen decked their images as if they were men and women, with
apparel; and who knows not that Papists put costly apparel on their images?
Almost every Saint among them has his Holy Day and his Working-day suit.

3. The Heathen lighted Candles before their images, though the image sees not
one of them: And do not the Papists set Tapers before theirs?

4. The faces of the Heathen Idols were blacked with smoke, Baruch v. 11. So
are the Papists Images with the fume of the incense they burn to them.

5. The Heathen spoke to their Idols as if they were able to understand them,
Baruch v. 41. So do the Papists to the wood of the Cross, saying, Ave lignum
spes unica.

6. The Heathenish Priests beards and heads were shaven, Baruch v. 31. And so
are our Popish Priests Crowns.

7. The Heathens about the Calends of February visited all their Temples with
Lights. A like Ceremony the Papists use at Candlemasse.

8. The Heathen commended every City and Village, to the protection of some
god, or goddess. Juno was Lady Guardian of Carthage, Venus of Cyprus, Diana of
Ephesus, Pallas of Athens, etc.

And have not our Papists likewise multiplied their Saints according to the
number of their Cities. And do they not share the Patronages of them between
them?

Does not Venice fall to S. Marks Lot?

Paris to S. Genouiefs?

Spain to S. James?

France to S. Dennis?

Scotland to Andrews?

Ireland to S. Patricks?

England to S. Georges?

9. The Heathen assigned several offices to several Gods;

Calling upon Ceres for Corn,

Upon Bacchus for Wine,

Upon Aesculapius for Health,

Upon Mercury for Wealth,

Upon Apollo for Wisdom, etc.

In like manner the Papists address themselves to particular Saints upon
particular and special occasions.

To St. Genovief for Rain,

To St. Marceau for fair weather,

To St. Michael in Battle,

To St. Nicholas in a Sea Tempest,

To St. Eustace in Hunting,

To St. Roch and Sebastian for remedies against the Plague,

To St. Raphael against Catarrhs,

To St. Apollonia against the Toothache,

To St. Anthony against Inflammations,

To St. Margaret for safe Delivery in Childbirth.

And to other Saints upon other occasions, as if God had granted a kind of
monopoly to the several Commodities of this Life to several Saints.

10. Will you have yet more?

Hercules has left his Club to St. Christopher.

Janus has resigned up his Keys to St. Peter.

Lucina has resigned her Office of Midwife to St. Margaret.

The Muses have resigned their instruments of Music to Cecilia.

And Jupiter Hamun has resigned his Horns to Moses.

Concerning worshipping of Saints departed: thereupon the Church of Rome does
commit a great Idolatry.
1. VEneration and honor of Saints departed the Protestant Churches do
maintain and practice.

1. We worthily esteem of their persons, and recognize their excellency and
glory.

2. We give them honor by commemoration, and by imitation of their faith and
virtues.

3. When they depart this life, we afford their bodies a decent Burial, Psalm
112. v. 6. Jos. 1. v. 2. Prove. 10. v. 7. John 8. v. 39. James 5. v. 10. Acts 8.
v. 2.

4. And some of our learned Adversaries seem to require no other Veneration of
Saints but this, Peers. de Tradit. p. 3.

2. But the Jesuits maintain the adoration of Saints departed with sacred and
Religious worship.

1. Erecting Altars, 2. Building Temples, 3. Placing their Images in Churches
to be adored. 4. Enclosing their relics in Caskets, and proposing them to be
worshipped. 5. Offering up Masses in the honor of them, 6. And worshipping
them by Church service, and by Canonical hours.
3. And they teach that the adoration belonging to them is after a sort divine,
approaching so near to divine worship, as that it is exercised by the same
materials and sacred rites.

4. We acknowledge then on both parts that Saints are to be honored. We differ
in the manner. To wit, whether they be to be honored with adoration, or such a
kind of worship as is in a manner divine, or with sacred rites appertaining to
Gods religion, and above rehearsed.

5. St. Hierom is so far from the practice hereof, that he affirms, we do not
worship and adore the relics of Saints, nor the Sun, Moon, Archangels, or any
other name spoken of in this World, or in the next; but we honor the relics
of Martyrs, and adore him whose Martyrs they be. And against Vigilantius, who
at any time adored Martyrs.

6. And with him consent the faithful Christians of the Primitive Church, who
being traduced of superstition for adoring Martyrs deceased, affirm, that they
adored Christ Jesus only, and exhibited no more to martyrs, but the honor of
love, Eusebius. Histor. Eccles. lib. 4. cap. 15.

7. Some of our Adversaries would patronise the Popish superstition of
worshipping of Saints departed, with the sentence of Hierom, saying, That he
honors Paula deceased, Cultoris tui, that is to say, that worshippeth thee.
But to them we answer, That every honor and worship is not such as Papists
require; and therefore to reason from honor in general to a certain kind
thereof, is to mock the Readers.

Fraud. This is a great Fraud and Imposture of the Church of Rome, that the
members of it do not only worship Saints against the word of God; but besides,
worship Imaginary Saints, which never were in the World.
AS one St. Longis, who pierced, as it is said, our Saviors side. As one St.
Martial, St. Peter's Cozen, who as it is said did serve at the Table when Jesus
Christ did administer the holy Sacrament. And also that he had in the time of
the Gotes, driven Paganism out of the Gauls, when there were no Gotes in the
Gauls. As likewise one Saint Vrsula, which is said to have been daughter of a
King of England, Captain of an Army of twelve thousand Virgins, when there was
no King in England. Item, one St. Katherine, which is said to have been the
daughter of Castor King of Alexandria. And in the time of the Emperor
Maxentius to have converted the Queen Faustina, and fifty Philosophers.

All the abovesaid Saints were here indeed in the World, as easy it may be
proved; and whose life by Baronius confession in his Martyrologie is full of
Fables. Not one good ancient Author that has lived five hundred years after
the time in which these imaginary Saints are set up, does speak of these
Saints, and yet prayers are made unto them: It is the same of St. Margarite, of
which it is said that the Devil did swallow her, who also bursted by that,
which is a kind of Childbirth; from whence is the custom to read her Legend
to the women that are delivered.

The adoration of the Virgin Mary is unlawful: Thereupon the Church of Rome
does commit a great Idolatry.
1. WE say with Epiphanius, Let Mary have honor, and let the Lord our God be
adored.

2. But the Papists instead of honor, exhibit error to the blessed Virgin,
as the same Father speaks, and their manner of worshipping her according to
the said Father, is Heresy and dotage.

3. For some part of that worship which Papists give to the Virgin Mary, are
the actions of Divine adoration.

Namely Invocation, Romans 10. v. 14.

Vows, Psalm 50. v. 14.

Oaths, Deuteronomy. 6. v. 13.

And yet Tursellin the Jesuit commends Paul an Hermit, and says, He adored
God and his mother.

4. Epiphanius had another Belief; for by many of his Speeches he condemns in
general all Religious Adorations of the Virgin Mary: Although, says he,
Epiphan. Haeref. 72. in fine v. 79.
she is glorious, holy, and honorable, yet she is not appointed to be Adored.
Again, the Lord in the Gospel speaks to the Virgin his Mother, What have I to
do with thee woman? In which Speech, to the end that none should think her over
excellent, he calls her woman; Prophesying as it were aforehand of the
Heresies which should arise; And premonishing that none in admiration of her
Sanctity, should fall into this Heresy of Adoration.

5. Of which doting Heresy of Adoration of the Virgin, the Papists are guilty
in a high degree. For in the Countries subject to the Sea of Rome, all men and
women, wheresoever they are, in the City, or in the Field, thrice a day, when
the Ave Mary Bell rings, send up their united devotions to her; and where one
professes himself a devote to our Savior, whole Towns devote themselves to
her; where one prays at a Crucifix, ten pray at her Image; where one fasteth
on Friday, which they account our Lords day, Many fast on Saturday, which they
count our Ladaies day.

To conclude, they conclude all their prayers with an Ave Maria, As we do with
our Lords Prayer; and most of their Treatises with Laus Deiparae Virgini,
Praise be to the Virgin Mother of God: And in the Psalter called Bonaventures,
they have Entitled all the 150. Psalms of David to her, and where he says
Lord, they put Lady.

Touching Adoration of Relics: It is Idolatry the Church of Rome is very much
guilty thereof: What office is to be rendered to the Bodies of those that are
deceased, by those that are alive: It is not to worship them, but to bury them.
1. THis the Protestants reproves concerning Relics of Saints.

1. Such Adoration of Relics as S. Hierome himself, and S. Augustine condemned.

2. The attributing of Supernatural Effects to Monuments and Relics, which
they have not by any ordinance of God.

3. To place confidence and merit in these things without any divine authority,
and to cause people to gad, and wander to this or that place, that they may
receive benefit by them.

4. We most of all condemn the Impostures, and covetousness of the Romanists,
who in stead of true Reliks brought in counterfeits; The Lance is found
wherewith Christ's side was pierced; A Brazen Serpent made of the same Brass
which Moses his Serpent was, at Milan in S. Ambrose his Church, Tunica
Inconsutilis Domini nostri, etc.

5. And consequently for filthy lucre bartered and made Portsale of these
Relics, abusing herein the Ignorance and Superstition of fond people.

2. And on the side, the said Protestants declare, That the office which is to
be rendered to the Bodies of Saints Deceased by those that are alive, is not to
Worship them, but to bury them. In that regard Eusebius writes thus concerning
Polycarp; After we had gathered his Bones, being more precious than Pearls, and
Gold, we buried them where it was fit.

Of Miracles wrought by Dead Bones and Carcasses of Saints.
1. When it pleases the Lord to show his Power and to work Miracles in any
place, or by any means, as seems Good unto himself, we admire his power, and
praise his goodness.

2. And we are not Ignorant how God has used dead bones as an Instrument of
Life, 2 King. 13. v. 21.

3. And concerning these things Bishop Jewel has written in this manner, Reply
Art. 1. p. 39. Almighty God, for the Testimony of his Doctrine, and Truth, has
oftentimes wrought great Miracles, even by the dead carcasses of his Saints, In
witness that they had been his Messengers, and the Instruments of his Will. But
as they were godly Inducements at the first to lead people unto the Truth, So
afterward they became snares to lead the same People into Errors.

We Protestants must not frequent Exercises of Popish Worship, nor assist to
the Mass.
1. WE cannot be present there, but either we must give great offense, or
commit a Greater.

2. Give great offense if we do not as the Papists do, and join not with them,
in Censing Images, bowing before them, offering unto them, and kissing: In
calling upon Saints; and praying for the releasing of Souls out of Purgatory.

3. Or commit a greater if we join with them in their superstitious Rites, and
Idolatries. In so doing we give greater offense to the Church of God. And not
only receive a mark from the Beast, but a grievous Wound.

4. Constantine the Emperor thought himself defiled if he had but seen an
Heathenish Altar; Ambros. Epist. 31. David, if he had but made mention of an
Idol, Psalm. 16. v. 4. Their Offerings of Blood I will not offer, nor take their
names into my mouth.

5. The Corinthians might not be partakers of such meats as were offered to
Idols; May we be partakers of such Prayers as are offered unto them? It was
unlawful for them to fit at the same Table with Idolaters when they kept their
Solemn Feasts; Can it be lawful for us to stand at the same Altar with them?

6. Let us think again and again upon those fearful menaces Apoc. 14. v. 9. If
any man worship the Beast, and his Image, and receive the mark in his forehead,
or in his hand, the same shall drink of the Wine of the Wrath of God; and he
shall be tormented in fire and brimstone before the holy Angels, and before the
Lamb: And the smoke of their torments shall ascend for ever: And they shall
have no rest, day nor night, which worship the Beast, and his Image, and
whosoever receives the Print of his Name.

7. We have not received any print of the Beast, we are free from the least
suspicion of Familiarity with the Whore of Babylon; we have kept our selves
unspotted of Popery: Therefore as we tender not only our Honor and
Reputation, but chiefly the salvation of our Bodies and Souls, let us keep our
selves still from Idols: Let us be zealous for Gods honor, and he will be
zealous for our safety; Let us abstain from all appearance of that evil which
the Spirit of God ranketh with Sorcery and Witchcraft.

As the Church of Rome became corrupted by Degrees, in Regard of the Doctrine
of Faith, since the Apostles Times, So did she in regard of Manners.
1. This is True in regard of the Pope her Head.
1. THe Common Opinion which Men did conceive of the Time in which Gregory the
Great lived, was, that Gregory the Great was the last good and the first ill
Bishop of Rome.

2. He was no better then should be.

3. And all the other Bishops that suceeded him were stark naught. Every one
striving to go beyond his Predecessor in all lewdness.

4. So that now a Sink of all wickedness has has violently burst into the
Church.

2. This is true in respect of the Popish Clergy, and in respect of other
Members of the said Roman Church.
1. A Sink of all wickedness does now possess all the Parts of the Roman
Church.

2. The Adversaries do force us Reformed to open the Sores of their Church
which we had rather not touch; But they are so unreasonable that they neither
spared us, nor themselves.

1. Bernard who was the only Religious Man the Church of Rome had for many
years.

How often, and how grievously does he bewail the most desperate Estate of the
Roman Church. In Cant. Sermon. 33. De Conversione Pauli; Thus he writes. A
shameful Contagion spreads spreads over the Body of the wicked Church: The
Servants of Christ serve Antichrist; from the Sole of the Foot to the Crown of
the Head nothing is sound. With these and the like Speeches used Bernard to
bewail, and complain of the Intolerable wickedness of the Church of Rome,
which he would never have done without sufficient Reason moving thereunto.

2. Aeneas Sylvius, afterward Pope, writes that Charity was waxed cold, and
Faith utterly gone. And what manner of Church shall we judge this to have been
when she had lost both Faith, and Charity.

3. What shall we further Recite? Petrarch, Mantuan, and other Poets, both
Learned, and Famous, which feared not with Satirical Verses to Inveigh against
the Pope, and against the Cardinals, and against the whole Clergy.

4. All things were then so out of order, that all sins might without
controlement, both be practiced, and openly blamed.

3. This is true in regard of the Popes Court.
ST. Bernard does not fear to describe it, Ad Eugenium Papam, Lib. 4. In these
words, amongst these, You Eugenius being their Pastor, walk decked with much
Precious Apparel: If I durst speak it, These are rather Pastors for Devils,
then for Christ's sheep. Your Court usually receives good Men, but makes few
good; there the wicked are not made better, but the good far worse: A number of
such places could we allege out of him.

Of the great and scandalous Incontinency of the Roman Clergy, by reason of
their Single Life.
1. THere was never generally, or in regard of the greater number, any true
Chastity in the Popish Clergy. And ever since the Law of Single Life was
obtruded, Whoredom and Baudery so shamefully distained them, that they became
a by word to the Christian world.

2. Bernard complains in this sort, If according to Ezekiel his Prophecy, we
dig through the wall, we shall find in the house of God an horrible
abomination. For after, and besides fornication, Adultery, and Incest, the very
passions of Ignominy, and works of filthiness, Romans 1.27. are not wanting, for
which the Cities of Sodom, and Gomorrha, the very nurses of filthiness were
predamned: Some of the Priests of the Church are besprinkled with the lothesome
and mattery filth of this uncleanness, and abstaining from the remedy of
Wedlock, they brake out into all flagitious wickedness.

3. Aventine in the Story of Pope Gregory the 7. the Author of this compelled
Eunuchisme, speaks in this manner, And thou O vigilant Gregory, what would
thou have done, if fortune had reserved thee until our days; In which to dally
with women, to whore, to drink, to ravish and deflowre Virgins, to adulterate
Wives, is become the principal study of Priests. In so much that Cauda salax
Sacrificulorum in proverbium abiit.

4. Whereas the Papists in specious words rejected Wedlock in their Clergy,
yet indeed they did practice and admit it.

For although their Bishops and Priests kept no Women under the Title of Wives,
yet they generally maintained Lemans, and Concubines, which were an inferior
kind of Wives.

5. The Gloss upon the Legate Otho contains these words, If a Priest keep his
Concubine privately within his own or his friends house, he incurreth not the
penalty of this Constitution. Peter Ravennas, and Michael Lochmaine living
about the Year 1490. report, That many Clerks in their days kept Concubines as
their Wives, and brought up Children. And Clemanger, The Priests being at a Fee
with the Prelates, do commonly and openly keep their Concubines.

6. That which we have said of Bishops and Priests, is also true in regard of
the Popes.

For, Onuphrius says in the Life of Pope Alexander the VI. That if this Pope
at any time were not oppressed with business, he devoted himself to all sorts
of pleasure without respect; Being especially addicted to Women; of which he
begat four Sons and Daughters. The chief of his Lemmans was Vannocia a Roman,
which by reason of her Beauty, and amorous Dalliance, and mavelous
fruitfulness in his meaner Fortunes, he detained in a manner as a lawful Wife.

Pope Hildebrand the Father of the General Decree of single Life in the
Clergy, was reported to have lulled night and day, without any shame in the
Arms and Embracings of the great Countess Maud. And that she being surprised
with the stolen Dalliance of this Pope, regarded not second Marriage after the
death of her first Husband. Read Antonine reporting the like of Pope Clement
the fifth.

Nay Pope Leo the tenth was defamed for Sodomitical filthiness with his Pages
and Chamberlains, says Joacus a Romish Bishop.

In what Regard the Names of Catholics is given to the Members of the Church
of Rome by some of the Reformed.
1. THe Papists ought not to Triumph much for the Name of Catholics which is
given them by some of the Reformed.

2. For their Meaning is to give it them no otherwise then usually the Name of
Man is given to one Deadly sick, or in whose Body there is nothing but skin and
bone.

3. He is a Catholic, not who follows the Popish Apostasy, but that
professes the Doctrine of Christ.

God from Time to Time has raised Godly Men, that have cried against the
Errors of the Roman Religion, and Church, and have Discovered them.
1. COncerning the Errors and Idolatries of the Roman Church, when they
Established themselves, and chiefly when Endeavor was made to make them pass
in Form of Law, and to oblige to the reception of them as of Articles of Faith,
God did raise many godly Men who courageously did oppose themselves to that.

2. Thereupon let the Catalogue of the witness of Truth composed by Flaccus
Illyricus be read, and the Mystery of Iniquity, or the History of Papacy,
written by the most Famous and Learned Philip de Mornay.

3, And not only from among those who openly have shaken off the Popes Yoke;
but moreover even among those that are remaining in his Outward Communion; God
has given the Grace to Acknowledge, and to some of them even to Deplore, and
Detest publicly great Number of Abuses, and Corruptions that are in the
Church of Rome.

Concerning the Greek Churches.
1.
1. THe Greek Church could never yet be brought to join it self to the Church
of Rome, and it is as opposite to Her, as ever the Reformed Church was.

Exception of the Jesuits.
1. THis is very false, say the Jesuits, for in the Florentine Council the
Emperor Paleolus, together with the Grecians and Armenians, freely
acknowledged the Pope to be the Vicar of Christ, and embraced the Roman Faith.

2. Yea, and at this day they dissent from us in few things, as Jeremy the
Patriarch of Constantinople has plainly written.

Answer of the Reformed to that Exception.
THe Reformed do answer to this Exception.

1. That if that be true, why are they then of the Papists accounted
Schismatics? Or why do they not Obey the Pope? Why came they not to the
Council of Trent? The Pope by all means has sought to have them subject to
Him, but they still contemn him, to his no small grief.

2. It is true, the Emperor, the Patriarch, and a multitude of Bishops came to
the Florentine Council, they agreed with them in many Things, in others they
dissented, the Popish Transubstantiation they utterly renounced.

3. At that time Josephus their Patriarch suddenly died; Eugenius the Pope
instantly urged a new Election, they denied to make any, till they came to
Constantinople.

4. Do not the Papists see how well they agree? We have a Book of Cyril
Patriarch of Constantinople, in which is set down the Confession of their
present Faith, whereby it appears manifestly, that they are far nearer to
the Reformed Churches in Belief, then they are to the Roman.

1. The Turks are beholding to none more then to the Pope, for their Possession
of Greece, and the Eastern Empire, which has caused the Miserable Slavery of
the Greek Churches.
1. IF, As our Savior Christ says, A Kingdom divided against it self cannot
stand, then the breaking of the strength of the Empire, and weakening the power
of the Christians, and consequently strengthening the Turks, must all be inputed
to him, which did rent and divide the Roman Christian Empires, and of one
Empire made two.

2. As long as the Province, and Dominions of the Empire were united, We were
strong enough against the Turks.

3. But After Pope Leo the 10. divided the Empire, the Empire of
Constantinople, which before had much ado to resist the Turk, was now no
longer able to sustain the Burden, wanting the greatest part of the Empire.

2.
O Christian Princes, and States, unite your selves, and consequently join your
Forces together, to pluck off from that Infidel the Turk the Empire of Greece,
and to join it with that of the West, that so both, as in Times past, make but
one Empire.

THESIS. Of the Reformation of the Church in general.
1. When the Church is infected with Errors in the Doctrine, or loaded with
unlawful Ceremonies, or Governed by an evil Ecclesiastical Policy, the
Reformation thereof is not permitted to the People without the consent of the
Prince, and Sovereign Magistrate.

2. But such a Reformation is to be made by the Prince and Sovereign, as being
a Right which belongs unto him, and which belongs unto him by Divine and
Humane Right.

3. Neither also is it lawful to a Minister of a particular Church to change at
his will the Ceremonies of his Church, but if they are not to be tolerated, he
must with his Church make his Addresses to the Supreme Magistrate to obtain
from him the necessary Reformation of the same.

4. The Prince being to employ himself about the Reformation of the Church when
she has need of a Reformation, ought to that effect to consult the Divines of
his Country, the most Learned, the most Prudent, and the most Godly, and to
convoke a National Synod composed of such Men.

5. It will be well done also by him to join unto his own Divines the Divines
of other Reformed Churches, that by that Means greater weight may be given to
the Reformation which he will effect.

6. The Divines assembled must carefully seek out the Truth, and when they have
found it, the Prince ought to ordain and injoin the observation thereof.

7. The said National Synod, or Assembly of Divines, ought to extend the
Reformation of the Church to four Heads, namely,

1. To the Doctrine concerning Faith.

2. To the Divine Worship, and Service.

3. To Ceremonies, and outward things.

4. To the Ecclesiastical Policy, and Government of the Church.

8. And in regard of the abovesaid four Heads, the said Synod or Assembly of
Divines ought to Reform the Church according to the best Form of all.

9. Now a better Form of the Church cannot be conceived, nor found than that
according to which Jesus Christ by himself, and by his Apostles did in the
beginning establish, and confirm the Church.

10. Which has been the Form of the Church in the Times of Christ, and of his
Apostles, we learn it clearly out of the Books of the Evangelists, and of the
Acts of the Apostles, and probably out of the Writings of the Doctors of the
Church who lived immediately after the death of the Apostles.

11. According to this Form the Church ought to be Reformed in regard of the
above named four Heads, bringing them back to the first beginning, and to the
first Springs; Thas is to say, to the first Antiquity.

12, If it happens that between some National Reformed Churches there be a
difference in regard of Ceremonies, and outward things, agreeing well together
in regard of the Doctrine; for such a difference in Ceremonies the said
Churches must not be enemies one to the others. But they ought to bear one
another Charitably, and profitably.

Of the 1. Reformators, Luther, Calvin, etc.
What Esteem the Protestants make of the last Reformers, Luther, Calvin, and
their Associates;
And how far it does extend.

1. THe Protestants, especially we of the Church of England, acknowledge not
any factious names of Lutherans, Zwinglians, or Calvinists, with which we are
injuriously nicknamed by our Adversaries.

As of old, good Orthodox Christians were called Cornelians and Cyrillians by
the seditious followers of Novatus, and Nestorius; Phot. Cod. 280. in Excerptis
Eulogii, ad finem Libri. Act. Conciliab. Ephesians. in Epist. Legate. Schism. ad
suos in Epheso. page 281. Edit. Bin. 1618.

2. With Pacianus we profess, Christian is our Name, and Catholic our
Sur-name.

3. We esteem of Luther, Zwinglius, and Calvin, as worthy men, but we esteem
them not worthy to be Lords, or Authors of our Faith, or to lead our
understanding captive; both themselves were far from affecting such Divine
Honor, and we far from bestowing it. We remember who said of Christ, Hear him,
not hear them.

4. And therefore, though these men's reasons may gain our Assent, their
Testimony is at the best but probable; we believe not what they say, but what
the prove.

5. Much less can we endure, being once baptized in the name of Christ to be
marked with the name of any man, as with a note of our servitude. We disclaim
the name of Calvinists, we owe no service, we have no dependence upon Calvin,
nor upon any other man, as Doctor, or Master of our Faith.

6. We owe him and the rest of the first Reformers many thanks for their
painful labors, which shall remain of honorable account in all posterity: We
cannot bless God sufficiently for such Instruments of his glory. Yet we do not
Idolize their persons, or adore their Dictates and Opinions, as if they were
Divine Oracles.

That Doctor who has the command of our Conscience has his Chair in Heaven;
we love, and honor such persons as our Friends, yet so that we honor Truth,
and love it above all Friendship.

Which Churches and Assemblies we comprehend Properly under the Appellation of
Reformed Churches.
1. THey are the Churches which are entirely Reformed; of which by Gods Grace
we are Members.

2. That is to say, those Churches who having the true Marks of the Church,
have them also with all the Purity which is required, in regard of the Doctrine
of Faith, and in regard of the Worship of God.

1. 1. The Socinians. 2. The Anabaptists. Are not comprehended by the
Protestants under the Appellation of Reformed and True Churches; Because in
their Assemblies the very Notes of the True Church do not appear.

1. FOr we do not comprehend under that Appellation those Assemblies, who
having forsaken Idolatry, Superstitions, and some Errors of the Roman Church,
are fallen into others very great and most pernicious: Such are the Assemblies
of the Socinians, or the New Samosatenians: And such also are the Assemblies of
the Anabaptists: In which Assemblies the very Notes and Marks of the true
Church do not appear.

The Reformed Religion is True and Orthodox.
1.
1. THe Reformed Churches Faith is sound. That appears in their Belief of God
the Father, Of his only Son Jesus Christ, Of the Holy Ghost, Of the Church, Of
the Sacraments. Of the Ministry, Of the Scriptures, Of Ceremonies. And of
every part of Christian Belief.

2. They abandon and detest as plagues and poisons all those old Heresies which
either the Sacred Scriptures or the Ancient Councils have utterly condemned.

3. They call home again, as much as in them lies, the right Discipline of the
Church, which our Adversaries have quite brought into a poor and weak case.

4. They punish all licentiousness of Life, and unruliness of Manners, by the
Old and long continued Laws. And with as much sharpness, as is convenient, and
lies in their power.

They maintain still the state of Kingdoms in the same Condition and State of
Honor wherein they have found them, without any diminution or alteration:
Reserving unto their Princes their Majesty and Worldly Pre-eminence safe, and
without impairing, to their possible power.

6. They have so gotten themselves away from that Popish Church, which the
Popes had made a Den of Thieves, and wherein nothing was in good frame, or like
to the Church of God, as Lot in times past gat him out of Sodom, or Abraham
out of Chalde: Not upon a desire of Contention, but by the warning of God
himself.

7. They have searched out of the holy Bible, which they are sure cannot
deceive them, their sure Form of Religion; and have returned again unto the
Primitive Church of the Apostles, and of the Ancient Fathers: that is to say,
to the ground and beginning of things, unto the very foundations and
head-springs of Christ's Church.

The Reformed Churches are the same in kind with all the good Churches which
were before them.
1. THe Reformed Churches are the same with all Good Churches that had been in
the World before them; and do succeed the sound and firm Members of the General
Visible Church, in whom was the Life of true Religion in the substantial matter
of Faith and Godliness.

2. But they having shaken off their former Errors, they differ from them in
manner and quality. As a man who was deceived in sundry things, when he becomes
wiser, differs from himself as he was Ignorant.

3. And as a sick body when it is healed, and a Commonwealth after it has
reformed disorders, are in substance the same, but differ in in Quality and in
Goodness, so the Protestant Churches have purged sundry corruptions, and
perfected that which was defective; But are the same in kind with all the good
Churches and Christians that were before them: And succeeds them of the General
Visible Church, in whom was the Life of Faith, and of Religion.

Concerning the Antiquity of the Reformed Religion.
Jesuits.
THe Jesuits say, That the Reformed for fifteen hundred Years could not spy
out one Town, one Village, one House seasoned with the Doctrine that they
follow Now.

Answer of the Reformed.
1. THe Reformed do answer, That such an Accusation is very false; for in the
Apostles time, all Churches, all Cities, and Towns, every Family embraced the
same Faith and Religion which now they profess.

2. Antichrist that Man of Sin, could never prevail so much, nor so far in
corrupting the Christian Religion and Church, but a great multitude of the
Saints remained; and those whose Names were written in the Book of Life, did
utterly abhor all those filthy and wicked Superstitions of Antichrist: For in
the Church of Rome it self, even in the worst times of it, many were ever found
who worshipped the God of their Fathers, and kept themselves unpolluted with
that horrible Idolatry.

And this can Histories of all Times witness, which we could now Recite, Vide
Catalog. Testium veritatis.
if it were needful; and reckon up to the Jesuits, many Houses, Villages,
Towns, Cities, and Countries, where Christ had many, and populous Churches.

3. We add, That the Greek Church could never yet be brought to join it self to
the Roman Church, and it is now as opposite to Her, as ever the Reformed was
and is.

4. Furthermore we answer to this Question of the Jesuits, Where was your
Church for so many years before Luther? That it did never lie so hid, but it
was discerned by their Pope, unless for so many years he persecuted shaddows.

Another Answer of the Reformed to the Question of the Jesuits, Where was the
Reformed Religion before the Reformation made by Luther, and other Divines?
1. THey answer, That the Apostles, and the Primitive Church, for almost six
hundred years after Christ taught as they do.

2. They answer, That ever since that time, there have been some that have
contended for the maintenance of the Faith which they profess.

For Example;

1. In matter of Supremacy, they taught as the Reformed do, till after
Gregory's time, which was six hundred years after Christ: yea Gregory himself
writing against them of Constantinople, held this Language, If any shall call
himself Universal Bishop, I say it confidently that he is Antichrist.

3. In matter of the Sacrament, for a thousand years together, that the People
received the Wine as well as the Bread, Aquinas cannot deny.

3. In the point of Images, at first the Church admitted no Images at all; as
Erasmus and Gregory shows; yea Polydore Virgil confesses, That the Fathers
condemned Images for fear of Idolatry; and this continued till the second
Nicene Council: But now of late the Trent Council and Bellarmine have given
unto them Divine honor.

4. Bristow, a Popish Doctor confesses this, The Truth is, says he, that some
have been in all Ages of the Protestants Opinion.

5. And Illiricus Flaccus does remember one Reynerius, who discoursing of the
Waldenses, a People for substance of the Protestants Religion, says in these
terms, They are in all the Cities of Lombardy, and of Provence. No Sect has
continued so long. Some say it has been since Pope Sylvesters time; Some since
the Apostles. These Waldenses believe all Articles concerning God, but they
hate the Church of Rome.

3. So that the Reformed have had a Church, and their Religion before Luther.

A Refutation of this shift of the Jesuits, That because Luther was in Error
in Regard of his doctrine of Consubstantiation, Therefore his Refutations of
their Opinions and Doctrines is not to be considerable.
1. THis is a strange shift indeed; for is it not a miserable perverseness in
the Jesuits, and others Popish Doctors and Writers, that being not able to
maintain their own Heresies against Luther, they will think to escape in the
Judgment of Men from being condemned; because Luther himself in one point of
Doctrine erred?

2. May no man convince Error, but such an one as is free from Error at all
Himself?

3. The Scriptures are left unto us to be our Rule of Truth, by them must all
Doctrine be squared and directed; they sit in the highest Seat of Judgment, to
give Sentence in every Cause.

4. With Them did Luther cut down the Popish Errors.

5. But one Error of Luther cannot serve to excuse infinite Errors in the
Popish Church.

The Reformed of England, France, Holland, etc. do not Believe whatsoever the
late Writers have said.
1. WE are not so addicted in these Reformed Churches, as to Believe whatsoever
the late Writers have said.

2. We are no more partial unto them in this behalf, then we are unto the
Ancient Fathers.

3. Our Religion and Faith hangs not upon the sayings of Men, be they old or
young, but only upon the Canonical Scriptures of God.

4. And if they be against us, so long as Scripture is for us, our Cause is
good, and we will not be ashamed thereof.

5. From hence it follows, That therefore most false is it that the Papists
say, That our Divity rests upon these late Writers, and young Fathers, whom
the Jesuits and other Popish Doctors do so scornfully compare with the Old
Fathers.

6. We use not to allege for proofs authentical of any Doctrine, and as the
Rule of our Faith, Calvin, Bucer, or others.

7. But our Traditive and Use is this,

Thus says the Lord,

Thus say the Prophets,

Thus say the Apostles,

Thus the Evangelists,

Thus it is written in the Scriptures,

Thus we read in some Book of the Old, or of the New Testament.

Again,
If Luther, or any other Learned Man among the Protestants, or of the Reformed
in the Churches above mentioned have either Interpreted the Scripture in
something amiss, or have doubted of some one Book of Scripture, whereof doubt
also has been made of old in the Church of Christ, we are not to defend their
Expositions, or to approve their Judgment.

Again, The particular Opinions of Luther and Lutherans, are not to be objected
by the Papists against the Reformation of England, France, the United
Provinces, etc.
1. FOr these Reformed Churches are not bound to justify all Luthers sayings,
and the Lutherans, and their private Opinions, no more then the Papists will be
content to avouch whatsoever has been spoken or published by any one, or other
famous man of their Sect.

2. Which thing if they will take upon them to perform, then let them profess
it, or else they offer us the more injury, that object still against us a
saying which was never either uttered or allowed by us.

3. This might suffice men of indifferent Reason.

Of Luthers Error concerning the Bodily Presence in the Sacrament.
LVther retained this Error of his old leaven, wherewith in time of Papistry
his Judgment was corrupted.

Another Answer of the Reformed to the Objection made by the Jesuits against
Luther in regard of his Error of Consubstantiation, That therefore his
Refutation of their Doctrine is not to be considerable.
THe Reformed again return this answer to that Objection.

1. That although Luther therein something swarved from the Truth, yet that he
might bring in other Causes, assured thereof out of the Word of God, reject the
Opinions of such as dissent from the same word.

2. Otherwise no Man in Defense of Gods Truth may challenge, or bid Defiance to
the Adversaries thereof, seeing they have no Privilege or Charter granted to
them, but that themselves also may be deceived.

Again, Concerning Luther.
1. LVther say the Reformed was an excellent Man, and a worthy servant of
Christ.

2. Whose Ministry especially it pleased God to use, in revealing to these
Times the Son of Perdition, who fitteth in the Temple of God, and advances
himself above God.

3. Yet Luther was a Man.

4. And therefore no marvel if he were not exempted altogether, as from
Ignorance, so also from Infirmities.

Concerning the Contention between Luther and Zuinglius about the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper.
1.
1. THis Contention and Dissension was a very hard one, hotly debated in many
Books.

2. And the same has continued since, to the great hinderance of the Gospel,
and offense of many.

3. In which contrary Writings and Discourses are found oftentimes harder
speeches of either against other then were to be wished.

4. Now do come in the Popish Writers like crafty enemies, and gathering a heap
of such speeches out of sundry of their Books, do insert the same in their
Books, to make their Readers acquainted therewith; that seeing such earnest
contention among the chiefest Professors of the Gospel, they may be further
withdrawn in alienation of mind from the love and liking thereof.

2. Examination of that matter.
1. THose speeches of either against other, which are harder oftentimes then
were to be wished, are yet such as the godly Servants of the Lord in contention
about the Truth sometimes are moved to utter against their Brethren.

1. S. Paul openly and sharply reprehended S. Peter to his face; whereat wicked
Porphyrie catched a like occasion to rail at Christian Religion long since; as
our Adversaries do at these days.

2. What a violent and troublesome contention was there between Theophilus of
Alexandria, and good Chrysostom of Constantinople?

3. Who knows not how sharply Cyrillus, a learned and wise Bishop of
Alexandria has written against Theodoretus, a good and Catholic Bishop, in a
Controversy touching the Catholic Faith; both Bishops, both Catholics,
both Learned, both Godly, both Excellent Pillars of the Church.

And yet he that reads both their Writings, would think that both were
dangerous Enemies of the Church, and of the Faith of Christ, and to be avoided
of all Christians.

2. So in the Books of Luther, and of Zuinglius and of those that maintain
either part, appears (we grant) great sharpness and bitterness of Dissension,
who all notwithstanding, if we set the heat of Dissension aside, were as godly,
as learned, as zealous Christians as the World had any.

The Reformed Religion and Church are not Heretical.
1. WHat if the Romish Church condemned Luther, Shall we say therefore that
Luther is an Heretic?

2. The Church of Jerusalem condemned Christ, and Him, and his they would have
denied to be the true Church, but for all their Denial, it was not less the
true Church.

3. The Accusation of being Heretical, nothing touches our Reformed Religion
and Church. For, by Gods Grace we are far from all kind of Heresy, and hold
no other Doctrine then that which the Prophets, and the Apostles, and Jesus
Christ himself have taught us, and which is plainly contained in the Books of
Canonical Scripture.

The Jesuits maintain the contrary, but by a Falfe Ground, which is one of
their great slights.
Jesuits.
1. THe Doctrine of the Jesuits is, That for not to be an Heretic, one must
have Communion with the Church of Rome, and acknowledge the Pope to be Vicar of
Christ, and Successor of S. Peter in the Quality of Head, and Monarch of the
Church; which Church of Rome they presuppose to be the Catholic Church.

Answer of the Reformed.
1. THe Reformed do answer to that Doctrine of the Jesuits, That it must first
appear that the Now Church of Rome is the Catholic Church, before he that is
separated from his Communion can be justly convicted of Heresy, which is also
to be said concerning the Pope; It must appear that he is S. Peter's Successor,
and the Head and Monarch of the Church.

2. Which the Jesuits shall never be able to do, and yet never have done; for
since the time that the Ancient Fathers of the Church did call the Church of
Rome Catholic Church, the course of that Church is turned, and the Sea of Rome
has declined and degenerated from her sincere Faith to detestable falsehood.

3. Let the Jesuits restore unto us the old Church of Rome, and we will never
separate our selves from her Communion.

4. But of that Church they have nothing left but the Walls, and old Rubbish.

5. And yet still they brag of the Name of the Catholic Church.

Exception of the Jesuits.
SO indeed Calvin answers, say the Jesuits, But it shall not serve the
Reformeds turn, for Optatus say they, proves himself to be in the Catholic
Church, because he joined himself to S. Peter's Chair.

Answer of the Reformed to that Exception.
ANd what do the Jesuits call S. Peter's Chair?

1. Is it the external Seat, or the Succession of the Bishops? They shall never
prove it.

2. And the contrary, say the Reformed, we can easily object out of Optatus
himself, Optatus calls Syricus Bishop of Rome his Fellow, and the companion
of other Bishops who held a sound and Catholic Judgment, with all those
Syricus agreed in one Society and Fellowship; By their Letters sent one to
another, as Witnesses of their consenting in Doctrine, and lawful Ordination.

Optatus then proves that he was a Catholic, because he kept the Catholic
confession and conjunction with Syricius, and with others Bishops.

2. Secondly the Reformed do answer, that Optatus Argument was good against the
Donatists, who did separate themselves from the Communion of the Catholic
Church, while they consented not with these Churches where the Doctrine of the
Apostles, and a lawful Ordination of Bishops did ever flourish.

3. But that is nothing to us Reformed, and specially to the Reformed of the
Church of England.

It is not a sound Argument to convince the Reformed of Schism, because they
have separated themselves from the Church of Rome.
The Jesuits do maintain the contrary.
1. ANd in that regard, thinking to touch the Reformed, who have separated
themselves from the Church of Rome, they produce the Authority of Optatus, who
did reprove the Separation of the Donatists, and did argue them to be
Schismatical, because they had separated from the communion of the Catholic
Church.

Answer to the Jesuits, and Refutation of their Argument.
1. A Very good Argument indeed, and Augustine observed the same course; and it
was a good Argument, That the communion of the Church should be objected to the
Schismatical Donatists, which seditiously without cause separated themselves
from the Church.

2. But this Argument employed by Optatus against the Donatists, makes nothing
against the Reformed, who have separated Themselves from the Church of Rome.
For the said Reformed deny the Church of Rome to be the Catholic Church.

3. And therefore the Jesuits cannot by this Argument of Optatus convince us
of Schism, although Optatus might thereby confute the Donatists.

4. It must first appear that the Church of Rome be the Catholic Church,
otherwise the Reformed cannot be convicted of Schism.

5. In the time of Optatus the Church of Rome was the Preserver of Religion,
the Maintainer of the True Faith, and she shined like a Star in the sight of
all other Churches.

6. No marvel then if the most holy Fathers esteemed much, and reverenced this
Church, and urged the Schismatics with the example of it, and also the
Heretics of their time, as a great prejudice unto them.

7. But since that time the course of that Church is turned, and the Sea of
Rome has declined and degenerated from her sincere Faith, to detestable
Falsehood.

8. Let the Papists, as we have said before, restore us the old Church of Rome,
and we will never separate our selves from Her.

9. But of that old Church of Rome they have nothing left but the Walls and old
Rubbish.

10. And yet they still brag of the Name of the Catholic Church.

Of the Differences in Religion between the Calvinists and the Lutherans.
1. THe Jars and Dissentions between the Lutherans and Calvinists are neither
many, nor so material, as to shake or touch the Foundation; easily
reconcilable, if men of any moderation had them in handling.

2. The bitter speeches of Luther none can excuse, and much less the virulent
Pamphlets, and Proscriptions of some of his Disciples, who in a preposterous
imitation of his Zeal, are little less then furious; But the consequence of
Opinions must not be measured by the Passions or Outrages of opiniate men. Two
Brothers in their choler may renounce each other, and disclaim their amity, yet
that heat cannot dissolve their inward and essential Relation.

3. The Divisions of the Lutherans and Calvinists, namely of the moderate of
either side, are rather in forms, and phrases of Speech, then in substance of
Doctrine.

4. The first, and main Controversy between them, is that about
Consubstantiation, which after occasioned that other of Ubiquity.

5. In both these Controversies the main Truth on both sides is out of
Controversy, That Christ is really and truly exhibited to each faithful
Communicant, and that in his whole person he is every where. The doubt is only
in the manner how he is in the Symboles, and how in Heaven and Earth; which
being no part of Faith, but a curious nicity, inscrutable to the Wit of Man, we
should all here believe where we cannot understand; and not fall a quarrelling
about that which we cannot conceive. How, or why are saucy Questions in Divine
Mysteries, Just. Mart. in Expos. Fid.

6. I omit the Questions of Predestination, being no less debated in the Roman
Schools, then in the Reformed.

7. Their other Differences in Ceremony or Discipline, are diversities without
Discord.

8. All wise men in the World have ever thought that in such things each
several Church is left to her own Judgment and Liberty, so as she keep her
self to the general Apostolic Rule of Order and Edification, and to the
general Judgment and Practice of the Church Universal, See Tertull. de virg.
vetand. cap. 1. Fermit. apud Cyprian. Epist. 75. August. Epist. so Socrat.
Hist. lib. 5. cap. 21. etc.

9. Though the Body of Religion in diverse Reformed Churches and Countries be
clothed in diverse Suits, and Fashions, yet for substance it may be one in all.

In all these contestations, as it commonly falls out, blessed be God, they
that are for Truth, have ever been for Charity, and mutual Toleration, as
appears by their published Writings, all tending to Pacification. Vide Junii
and Parae. scripta Irenica.

10. Luther himself, though of a rough and vehement Spirit, yet before his
death, being tempered by mild Melanchton, that honor of Germany, did much
relent, and remit of his rigor against Zuinglius, and began to approve the
good Counsels of Peace. Admonit. Neustad. de Libro Concord. cap. 6. p. 236.

And

11. Among the Lutherans all are not of the same intractable Disposition: As
they in Polonia for instance, where the followers of Luther and Calvin have
long lived together in a fair and brotherly concord and communion,
notwithstanding their several Opinions, which they still retain, vide Corpu.
Confess. Et ibi Poloniae consensum.

12. Since then our Discords are of no higher Degree, we say as Prudentius, a
Christian Poet, of the Unity of his Times; It has been a little violated, but
is defended by Faith her Sister, in whose company being safely come off, she
laugheth at her wounds, as being easily curable.

Fraud. A Discovery, and Refutation of a New Way, and Subtle Cunnings of a
Seminary Priest of Rhemes against the Reformed Religion.
1.
THis Way and Cunning is to bring continual Allegations of Testimonies out of
the Reformed own Writers craftily brought in their Books to show a dissension
of Judgment among the said Reformed Writers, that so the Readers of the Books
of those Popish Writers, may be Induced to think the worse of the Reformed
Religion.

2. A Refutation of this New Slight, and Device.
THis Device is full of Fraud, Dishonesty, and Malice, taking Advantage of Men's
Infirmities and Imperfections against the Eternal Truth of God, which the said
Popish Doctors cannot by ordinary and lawful kind of Reasoning Refute.

Concerning the Acknowledgement of a Seminary Priest of Rhemes, That three
Articles of the Controversies which were propounded by Bishop Jewel in this
Sermon at Paul 's Cross, in which he made his Callange were, and are of weight;
1. The Supremacy of the Pope, 2. The Corporal Presence, 3. And the Sacrifice of
the Mass.

Examination of this Acknowledgement of the Seminary Priest by the Reformed
Doctors.
1.
1. IN that acknowledgement the Seminary Priest has uttered his Judgment of
the rest of the Articles that are in Controversy, that they are not of such
weight as his Church would have them to be esteemed.

2. And of these three Articles he might with as good Reason have excepted the
two latter, and so make the first only a matter of weight.

3. For that Article indeed is the substantial Point; in maintenance whereof
all the Popish Writers Labors are bestowed, otherwise were it not for defense
of their Popes wicked, unreasonable, Antichristian Monarchy, they could easily
agree with us for these two, and for all the rest, we doubt not.

2.
But what did the Priest in his Acknowledgement think then,

1. Of Private Mass;

Is it a thing of no weight, as there he would have it accounted? There is not
we suppose any thing in the Rome Church more used, or better liked

2. What he did think of the half Communion?

3. What he did think of the Latin Service?

4. What he did think of Images?

5. What did he think of the keeping of the Scriptures in a Tongue unknown to
the People?

6. And what did he think of other such Heads of the Romish Religion?

3.
1. Are they of no weight?

Are they Trifles?

Are they not worth the striving for?

2. Then let the Popish Writers give over all defense of them.

1. Let Private Masses be abolished.

2. Let the Communion be administered in both kinds, according to Christ's
institution.

3. Let the public prayers be said in the Tongue that every Country uses.

4. Let Images be burned.

5. And all Idolatry forbidden.

6. Let it be lawful for the People of all Countries to read the Scripture in
their own Language.

7. Let there be no controversy about the other Articles.

3. For while they stand so stiffly in maintenance of all these, and others,
They cannot truly say, and bear us in hand; That they are not of weight in
their Account.

The Reformed Churches truly, and properly so called, are Pure, and Orthodox
Churches; And their Faith is sound and not Heretical, as falsely they are
termed by the Church of Rome.
1. IT is that which must be acknowledged by some certain Notes and Marks.

For as we judge of Coin by the pair of Gold Weights, and of Metals by the
Touchstone, and of Glassen and Earthen Pots by the sound, so ought we to judge
of the Church by her Marks.

2. The true Touchstone of the Church is the Truth. It is the Scripture. It is
the Word of God.

For the true Sheep of Christ are those who hear the voice, who know him, and
follow him, John 10.27. It is the Lords Camp, who marches after this Pillar.
And the Apostles Church is builded upon the Foundation of the Apostles, and
Prophets, Jesus Christ himself being the chief Cornerstone, Ephesians. 2.20.

We hear says St. Augustine, found Christ in the Scriptures, let us also seek
there the Church. And if they have the Church on their side, let them show it
only by the Canonical Books of the Divine Scriptures.

As to know whether a Line be strait, a strait Rule is applied unto it. Even
also to discern a pure Church from an impure, there is no other means than to
see and observe whether it does agree with the Rule of Practice, which is the
Word of God.

3. Under which Word of God the pure Administration of the Sacraments of the
Church is also to be comprehended; Because the right use of them is prescribed
in the Word of God.

4. Now by this true and certain mark of the Church, we prove that the truly
Reformed Churches are pure, and Orthodox Churches, because from point to point
they follow it.

The Articles of their Doctrine as the generous young Eagle do fixly behold the
Sun, and without at all feeling the Eyelids.

5. If it were true, as it is pretended by our Adversaries of the Church of
Rome, that the Religion of the said Churches should be false, and that they
were deceived, then it should follow, that Christ, the Prophets, and the
Apostles should have deceived them; Because they defend their Institutions, and
embrace their Doctrine, which to think only were blasphemy, and yet more to
say it.

The Reformed Churches are not Schismatical.
For having separated from the Romish Church. As falsely they are accused
thereof, by the said Roman Church.
1. HAving sufficiently showed that the truly Reformed Churches are not
Heretical, we must pass further. And show also that they are not Schismatical,
because they have separated themselves from the Roman Church.

2. For that cause they are not Schismatic, because they have had just causes
of their Separation; Which we demonstrate in this manner.

3. For not to be Schismatic, in making separation from the Communion of a
Church, that Church must be corrupted and impure.

And this corruption and Impurity must be in the Doctrine, and not simply in
the manners. And the said Separation must be for a Doctrine contrary to the
Word of God, which over throws the grounds of Salvation, and annihilate the
Faith.

And besides which Erroneous Doctrine be publicly authorized, and maintained
by arms, and the fire.

4. When that does meet and happen in a Church, and that there are other
Churches that God has delivered, and freed from Error, then there is a
necessity to withdraw, and separate from such a corrupted and defiled Church
for not to be partakers of her sins, and not to receive the plagues of which
she is threatened of God, Rev. 18.4.

5. And yet before that all endeavors must be done to procure Remedies to the
evil, after the example of the Children of Israel who before they did retire
themselves from Babylon did carry their hands to her wounds to cure them, but
seeing that it was in vain they resolved to forsake her to go in Jerusalem,
there to serve God according to his word, Jerem. 51.9, 10. These be their
words, We would have healed Babylon, but she is not healed, forsake her, and
let us go every one into his own Country: So the Apostles did not separate
themselves from the Jews to turn toward the Gentiles but after that they had
rejected their word, and made themselves unworthy thereof.

6. It has been for that, and after the same proceeding, that our Fathers by
thousands did separate themselves from the Roman Church.

7. For which Retreat and Separation we are wrongfully accused of Schism, for
it is the Church of Rome which is Schismatic, and not our Churches, because
she has given the Cause, and the necessity to our Separation.

Now it is the Cause and not the Separation which makes the Schism, as the
Canonists do teach.

8. So the Apostles were not Schismatics in separating themselves from the
Pharisees. But it were the Pharisees that were such.

9. The Roman Church has given cause to our separation.

1. By her false and Erroneous Doctrines.

2. By the Domination of Antichrist.

And, 3. By the strange cruelties which she did exercise against us, when we
did endeavor to repurge the Temple from the corruptions which the Devil had
sowed therein, during the darkness of Ignorance. As anciently the Samaritans
did pollute the Temple of Jerusalem in shedding therein Dead-mens Bones during
the darkness of the night.

10. Having been so dealt with; who can lawfully revoke in doubt, that our
separation has not only been most necessary, but also most just.

11. The Reformed Churches for the abovesaid Reasons separating themselves from
the Roman Church, did not thereby separate themselves from the Communion of the
Catholic Church, Rather they are entered in it. Such a separation has not
been a forsaking of the Church of Christ, but a going forth from Babylon. An
escape from Sodom. A quitting of a Pestiferous House, and which threatens of
ruin.

12. In a word, by such a Separation the Reformed Churches did separate
themselves only from a particular corrupted Church.

1. For when the Roman Church was in her greatest purity, she was not the
Catholic Church but only a member, or a part thereof, besides which part,
there were many others even more ancient than the Roman Church, the Church of
Antioch, and the Church of Alexandria, and the Church of Greece were also; as
the Roman Church, parts of the Catholic, or Universal Church.

2. And the said Roman Church such as it is now, and has been in these last
Ages, ought not to bear the Name of a Church without adding unto it, that it is
an Impure, Idolatrous, Heretical, and Antichristian Church.

1. Rejection of the Injurious Names Given unto the Reformed by the Jesuits
and other Popish Writers. 2. Representation of the Laudable Names which the
said Reformed do approve and make use.

1.
SOme of the Popish Writers do talk much, and Dispute to, and fro, by what Name
they may call the Reformed,

Either Christians,

Or Catholics,

Or Heretics,

Or Protestants,

Or Zuinglians, Lutherans, and Calvinists,

Or Sacramentaries.

Answer in General to the giving of those Names.
THe Papists do call indeed the Reformed at their pleasure by such Names as
their malicious and railing Spirits can invent, sometime by one, and sometime
by another.

Of the Names, Christians and Catholics.
1. CHristians, and Catholics, the Papists will not have the Reformed to be
called.

2. They reserve that Denomination to themselves.

3. And yet notwithstanding to them of all Professors of Christian Religion;
the same does least appertain.

The Reformed do not deserve the Injurious Name of Heretics, and do slight
such a Name.
1. THe Reformed for their part so long as they are sure that the Doctrine
which they follow is the eternal word of God, and the Gospel of his Son Christ:
as they are by Gods Grace most sure, seeing it is plainly set down in the Holy
Scripture of the Old, and New Testament, they care not what the Papists do
think of them, or what they spoke of them, or by what Name they reproach them.

7. If they blaspheme the Doctrine of Christ, and call it Heresy; not fearing
or sparing the Lord himself; it is no wonder if they revile them with all
opprobrious names that can possible be devised.

The Reformed reject the names of Lutherans, Zuinglians, and Calvinists.
1. THey do Declare, that they are not Lutherans, nor Zuinglians, nor
Calvinists, because they maintain not any private or proper Doctrine of Luther,
or of Zuinglius, or of Calvin.

2. No more then the Faithful in the Primitive Church to have been called
Paulines, or Petrines, or Athanasians, or by the name of any other such
Minister of Christ.

What the Reformed say of the Name of Protestants
1. IF the Papists think it belongs not to us Reformed of England and France,
etc. let them give it to those whose it is.

2. Being not a Name of Schism, or of Sect; it may as well be used as the Name
of Catholics, and for Distinction sake only.

3. Having begun first at the Diet of Ausbourg. we are enforced to use it.

The Reformed are truly Christians and Catholics.
1. WE Reformed tell the Papists, notwithstanding their Opprobrious Names,
that if a Christian be he that believes in Christ, according to his word; and
if Catholics be they that profess the universal Faith of Christ, we are
truly Christians, and Catholics, believing so, and professing so.

2. And are content with these Names, and desire no other.

. Let the Papists be called as they will, the Reformed who Reprove and Confute
the multitude of their Namss will not be grieved at them.
1. LEt the Papists be called Diversely,

Franciscanes,

Benedictines,

Dominicanes,

And whatsoever other Title they can take up; the Reformed are not grieved at
the multitude and variety of their Names.

2, Who being in Truth almost any thing rather then Christians, delight in any
Name, rather then in the Name of Christians.

Against the Reconcilement, and Reunion of the two Religions, the Reformed, and
the Roman.
1. BEing true that the Roman Church is Heretikcal, and Impure. And on the
contrary the Reformed Churches, Orthodox, and Pure.

It follows manifestly that there can be none well grounded hope to agree, and
reunite Popery with the Reformed Churches. And therefore that the labor of
those who would think upon such a thing were not a seasonable labor.

1. Because that in the differences which are amongst us, we are so contrary
one to the other, that the one do clearly maintain the Negative, and the others
the Affirmative.

Now it must necessarily be that one of the Propositions be true, and the other
false; Because two contradictories cannot be together true.

And it is not possible to soulder them by the mastick of some distinctions,
having no ground in the Word of God.

2. The Errors of the Church of Rome have been solemnly ratified and confirmed
by the Council of Trent, upon pain of Anathema; And therefore since that
Ratification, and confirmation, there is no way nor mean left of reconcilement,
and Agreement.

For if there were, the said Church should be bound to acknowledge her Errors
to the end that they may be reformed. And to disanul, and abrogate concerning
them the Canons of the said Council of Trent, which is not to be expected from
her as long as she shall maintain this poin, as she does vehemently, that she
cannot Err.

And that she lays down, and propounds no other Principle of Faith than her
belief.

Against Toleration of false Religions, with the pure, and Reformed, when they
differ in Fundamental grounds.
1. IT is not only evil to do, but also to suffer evil, when it is in our
power to hinder it. Therefore Religion differing in Fundamental Grounds, are
not to be Tolerated together.

2. This is proved by many Arguments; Drawn, 1. From the Law, forbidding to
plow with an Ox, and an Ass. And punishing Idolaters with Death, Deuteronomy. 22.10,
11. and Deuteronomy. 19.6.8, 9.

2. From the Gospel denying the service of two Masters, Mat. 6.24. And
interdicting all fellowship, and communion of light with darkness, or Christ
with Belial, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16.

3. From the Spirits Bill of enditement framed against the Angels of Pergamos,
and Thyatira, for tollerating the Nicolaitans, Rev. 2.15. and 20.

4. From Gods threatening to cut off all such as swear by him, and by Malcham,
Zeph. 1.5.

5. From the Imputation which is laid by the Spirit upon many Kings of Israel,
and Judah, for not taking away the High places, 1 King. 15.14.

6. From the Examples of Asa, Josiah, Ezekiah, Constantine, Jovian, Theodosius,
and other Religious Princes, who by severe Laws restrained Heresy, and
Idolatry, and constrained the true worship of God.

7. From the great danger of Heresy, which like a Canker soon spreads over the
whole body of the Church; and if it be not looked into, kills and that
eternally thousands of souls breaks the bands of Nature, and cutteth in
sunder all sinews of human Society. Puts enmity, variance and implacable
discords in families; Sows seeds of Sedition in the State, and Rebellion
against the Prince.

Refutation of this Slander of the Popish Doctors. That the Reformed are
Enemies to Scriptures.
1. THe Reformed say that this is indeed a very impudent Slander.

2. For who ever thought, and spoke more Honorably, Reverently, and with more
due Regard of the Scriptures, then they. Who have received, and embraced all
Scripture given by Inspiration as the very voice of God himself; Holding it for
the only Ground, and Rule of their Faith, and Religion. And so resting in it,
as that they desire no other help as necessary to Salvation. Which if they had
not with more diligence, and devotion defended, then the Romanists ever did,
long ere this the glory of it had perished; and it had been counted as a dead
Letter.

3. For what have the Reformed done for these many years with more endeavor
and diligence, then to maintain the Majesty and Excellency of the Scriptures.

4. Which the Romanists have so unworthily violated.

5. And yet they blush not to match the Reformed with the Manichees, and
Ebionites, who have violently laid villainous hands upon those Sacred Books.

Of the Apocryphal Books excluded from the Canon by the Reformed Churches.
Jesuits.
THe Jesuits and other Papists do demand of the Reformed, by what Authority
they Maime, and Rob the Corpse of the Bible.

Answer of the Reformed to that Demand.
1. WE offer no violence to this Body, neither do we cut off any which do
appertain to the substance and perfection of it, we pull away no Member.

2. For we do not cut out any true Canonical Scriptures, but cull out such as
are not Canonical, but foisted in and Counterfeit.

3. Herein we do the Canonical Scriptures no injury, dividing them from such
Books as are not of that absolute Authority. That they which are in truth
Canonical may remain entire, and whole together; no more then the Shepherd
does injury to the Sheep, in sorting the Goats, and other Cattle from them.

The Doctrine of the Reformed Churches, and particularly of the Church of
England, that the Ministers of God has power to Forgive Sins, if the Sinner
repent and believe the Gospel; makes not the English Reformed Ministers to be
Priests as they are called in the Church of Rome.
1. WE Reformed say, that the Ministers of God has power to forgive sins, not
in some Cases only, but in all whatsoever, if the sinner repent and believe the
Gospel.

2. This Authority is given unto him by Christ.

3. This in the State and Church of England, the Parliament, and the Communion
Book confess.

2.
1. NEvertheless a Popish Writer is far from his purpose, to prove thereby the
Popish Order of Priesthood.

2. For this makes not the English Reformed Ministers to be Priests, as they
are called in the Church of Rome; but Preachers of Repentance, which bring the
glad Tidings of the Gospel to all those that be heavy laden, and desire to be
refreshed.

3.
1. NEither have they power themselves to forgive sins; but God alone forgiveth
sins, Mark 1.7.

2. But having the word of Reconciliation, committed unto them from God, they
offer pardon, and in his Name pronounce pardon to the sinner that believes,
and that turns from his wickedness and sins unto the Lord.

Refutation of this Accusation of the Jesuits, and other Popish Writers, that
in the Religion, and Doctrine of the Reformed, their is no Stay or Certainty.
1. WHat greater steadfastness in Religion can be required, then to hold Gods
Word, which we Reformed profess to be the Ground we build our Faith?

2. If the Popish Doctors can show wherein we swarve from it, we will not
refuse their Instruction.

3. But that they cannot do, for we plant not our Religion in man's Judgment,
and in the uncertainty of Traditions in vain Ceremonies and Devices, as the
Papists do.

4. But in matters of Faith, and Religion, we depend upon God; who in the
Scriptures of the Old and New Testament, has delivered to his Church one
certain, Uniform, and perfect Doctrine; to which we add nothing, from which we
take nothing away, in which we settle, and ground our selves.

. In matter of Points of Religion, the private Judgment of some few, is not to
be objected by the Popish Doctors against the consent of a whole Reformed
Church; And therefore conclude, that in our Reformed Religion, we have no
certain stay.
1. FOr then may we Reformed, in like manner, and by as good reason argue
against the Papists for a thousand such matters, wherein has been no small
dissension among the Popish Divines; That the Papists have no certain ground of
their Faith.

2. That appears by the following Examples. 1, A Cardinal of Rome has openly
defended and taught, that the Apostle S. Paul permits one Wife to Priests,
and to others more; And that plurality of Wives is not forbidden, either by the
Law of God, or by the Law of Nature; This Cardinal was Caietan, the Popes
Legate in Germany, and the great Adversary of Luther, Katherine, has noted
this among his manifold Errors.

2. And another Popes Legate writ, and published in print a Treatise in
commendation of a foul sin, for which he was greatly and grievously punished by
the Pope, being preferred to a great Archbishopric.

3. Pighus says, that Justice in us is a Relation, wherein he has exceedingly
offended the other Popish Doctors, and Writers.

3. May we Reformed Now by the Papists Example hereof conclude, that this is
the Doctrine of the Roman Church; That thus the Papists do believe generally;
or else that there is no stay in their Religion.

Refutation of this Accusation of the Jesuits, and others Popish Doctors, that
in the Reformed Churches; There is no Unity, but great Differences.
1. WE Reformed say, that greater Difference shall not the Popish Doctors find
among the true Professors of the Gospel, and Reformed Churches, then may be
amongst the children of God.

2. When such bitter Dissension was between the East and the West Churches,
about the day of Passover, and the same continued so many years with great
offense, and Alienation among the Faithful; yet they ceased not for all that to
be the Churches of Christ.

3. Neither is it ever to be hoped for, that such perfect concord shall be
among the Professors of Christ's Religion, that they shall agree most joynly
together in the Truth, or in every particular point thereof.

4. Yet let us add; That although the Tyrannical, and the worldly, and the
carnal provisions for keeping of Unity above Represented, be not amongst the
Reformed Churches, notwithstanding through Gods grace and blessing, all
Churches Reformed agree soundly in all Articles of Faith that are substantial,
and necessary to Salvation, and shall so do unto the end.

Refutation of this Accusation of the Jesuits, and other Popish Doctors; that
in the Doctrine and Religion of the Reformed Churches, many Paradoxes are to be
found, and that in General.
1. HIerome said, that he would not have any man to be patient, if he were
suspected of Heresy.

2. And therefore in so much the worser part do we Reformed take it, that so
many Paradoxes, false and horrible, be by the Jesuits and other Popish Doctors
objected against us.

3. And indeed those Jesuits, and others of the Popish Clergy that do object
them to us, do in this place manifest an horrible Impudence and audaciousnesse;
for unless they had quite and clean put off both all Religion of God, and
Reverence toward Men, they would never have admitted so much Impudency into
themselves, as to upbraid us with these monstrous Opinions.

4, But we perceive what they intend, for they hope that by slandering boldly,
somewhat would always cleave fast, which one of them was wont to say.

5. For since they lack true Imputations whereby they might oppugn our Churches,
it remained, that either they should leave off writing, which were their
honestest way; or at least, devise some slanders, which they would cast like
venomed darts upon us.

6. Which thing is both in it self, very filthy, and also a sure Argument of
their desperateness.

7. When we handle in particular the Controversies that are between us, by Gods
grace we shall so wipe away these their Paradoxes and Impossibilities, that all
men shall perceive that they are ascribed to us by them most falsely and most
impudently.

8. In the mean time we entreat the Reader to observe this, That those
pretended Paradoxes are either such things as that nothing can be truer then
they, or else, that they are craftily and treacherously wrested by them in a
perverse meaning.

. It is the Doctrines, and Religion of the Church of Rome, that many Paradoxes
are to be found.
1.
THe Jesuits publish, that there are Paradoxes in great number in the Reformed
Religion and Doctrine, and do endeavor to manifest it by many Instances, which
they propose.

But although they have stirred this Puddle to the bottom with all their
diligence, yet they have found so much as one Paradox, or a piece of a Paradox
of the Reformed.

2.
1. BUt now if the said Reformed should but a little make search into the most
filthy Puddles of the Popish Writers, as to reckon up what they have affirmed,

Of God,

Of the actual Providence of God,

Of Predestination,

Of the Person, and of the Offices of Christ,

Of Original Sin,

Of the Law,

Of Righteousness, and Justification,

Of Purgatory,

Of the Pope of Rome,

Of the Sacraments,

And of the rest of the greatest Matters in Reliligion; how many Carts should
they fill with Paradoxes, horrible to be spoken or thought.

2. We forbear at this present, handling but general Observations, to stir
this common Sewer: but we will do it hereafter, by Gods grace, when we take in
hand the particular Controversies about the said common places that have been
mentioned.

The Renowned Doctors of the Reformed Churches are impudently accused of
Ignorance, by the Jesuits, and others of the Roman Clergy.
1. FOr we Reformed do ask of these Jesuits, and their fellows, and demand to
know of them what Learning is, wherein it consists, and how it may be gotten.

2. Unless they have some special means, and as it were some secret way to
attain unto it which others have not.

The said Reformed see not why the Jesuits and others such like Popish
Doctors, should think that they have gotten a greater Measure of Learning and
Wisdom, then others who have used as great endeavor as themselves.

3. And therefore the said Reformed Doctors may think that it is some spice of
Pride in the Jesuits and their fellows, to object Ignorance unto them.

4. Who for any thing that appears, have no cause to brag of such
knowledge, or to challenge more to themselves then they may safely grant to
another.

5. Besides, there are none of the Reformed Doctors, how unlearned soever the
Jesuits, and others their fellows think they are, but by the grace of God, and
the Light of his Word, can easily discover the Falsehood and Corruption of the
Religion of the Church of Rome.

There is an unity in the Protestants Faith, and Concord among the Protestants:
And how Considerable against the Slanders of Papists.
1. WE acknowledge that there be differences and jarres among the Protestants.

2. But we deny that there is any such discord or difference among them as
dissolveth the unity of Faith Essential to the true Church.

3. The difference among the Protestants is no other then such as has formerly
been in the true Church of Christ, since the Apostles age, which is represented
in the end of this Thesis.

4. It is not in point of Faith, or Primitive Articles of Faith, or about
things Essential in the object of Faith.

1. But the difference is either in accidental, probable and secondary points.

2. Or touching things difficult in Religion, for the searching out of the
verity whereof it is profitable, that Learned men proceeding modestly, do
dispute pro, and contra.

3. Or else the disagreement is personal, either among private men, or raised
by private men, Schismatically, and Factiously against the Church.

5. Now if our Adversaries, who object Division unto the Protestant Churches,
dispute the question of Unity in it self, the Scripture, and the Fathers, and
the History of the Church will convince them; That Unity in the substance of
Faith, and of Religion, observed by the firmest Members of the Church, is
simply necessary, and an essential property of the Church.

And other Unity is of the perfection and well being of the Church, and yet
contingent and variable, sometimes greater, sometimes less, and at no time
absolute in all the parts; And the same many times is greatly wanting, by
reason of the Malice of wicked Imps.

6. In the days of Constantine, wherein it is acknowledged by all men, that
the visible society of Christians was a true Church. There happened so grievous
and unseemly contentions among the Bishops, and Pastors, that the discord of
Christians was brought upon the Stage. And Religion was derided, and traduced
by Infidels.

7. Saint Augustine acknowledges, that the concord of Godly men in this Life,
wherein they are not perfect but proficient, is sometimes interrupted with
discord, and dissension arises even among Brethren and Saints. And there be
diverse things says he, wherein the best learned, and most worthy defender of
the Catholic rule, without prejudice to the Body of Faith do not accord; And
one of them speaks more truly then another of the same thing.

8. If it be objected that Luther says, that the differences between him and
Zuinglius, and Calvin, are not in small points of Government and Ceremony,
etc. The Answer to that is, that Luthers personal and fretful speech proceeding
from passion, against such as were contrary minded to him, prove that godly men
have insirmities, and are sometimes over-bitter one against another. Like as
Cyprian was against Pope Stephen, calling him proud, ignorant, and of a blind
and wicked mind; and as Epiphanius was against Chrysostom.

But they are not sufficient to demonstrate that Protestant Churches want the
Note of Unity, neither does condemning, and Anathematising one another, imply
dissension in profound points of Religion, but may proceed from affection, and
from want of charity. This appears by Pope Victor, proclaiming Anathema
against the East Churches, about an Adiapherous Ceremony. It appears also by
Pope Stephen, and by Sergius, condemning their predecessor Formosus, and raking
him, being defunct, out of his Grave, etc.

2.
1. IF our Adversaries of the Church of Rome will proceed substantially, and
prove that there is discord of Faith, and of Doctrine among the Protestants,
they must perform these two things.

1. They must produce the principal part of Doctrine belonging to the main
object of Faith, and demonstate that the Protestant Churches, which are reputed
Orthodox, are divided in these; For we have nothing to do with Anabaptists,
Arians, etc.

2. They must also give instance in such persons as are reputed sound Members,
and what parts of the several Churches wherein they live. Not of Novellists,
Incendiaries, and Extravagants, which are condemned, and resisted by the sound
and best parts of the Church, Romans 16.17.

A Representation of good Magistrates, and truly Christians toward the
Reformed Religion.
1. SUch Magistrates are those who have been always zealous lovers of Christ's
Gospel, and who by their godly Wisdom, have done their endeavor to advance
greatly the Lords cause from time to time; And to hinder the practices of the
Adversaries.

2. True Religious men ought to beseech the Lord to increase in those Godly
Magistrates all those Christian virtues, to the benefit of Christ's Church, and
of the Commonwealth of all the Estates where the Reformed Churches are
gathered and tolerated.

Concerning the Church and Religion of England, touching the Conversion of
England by Augustine the Monk.
1. GAlfridus Monumetensis writes, that before Augustine the Monk came in
England, in the time of Gregory the Great, Truth was preached there, and
sincere Doctrine delivered. Vide Godofri. Mon. de Orig. and gest. Britan. Libr.
8. cap. 4.

2. Augustines pretended conversion of England, was only the planting of some
trifling Ceremonies.

Of the shaking off of the Popes yoke by Henry the Eight King of England.
1. IT is a thing much to be admired that Henry the Eight King of England,
having written against Luther, in the Popes behalf, and for a reward of his
affection and pains, having received the glorious Title of Defendor of the
Faith, yet shortly after withdrew himself from the Popes Jurisdiction, and
became his open and professed Enemy.

2. Which Act did seem to many to have proceeded from a cause very little
commendable; as if it had been only in revenge, that the Pope crossed him in
the fruition of his pleasures.

3. But it is most certain that the exquisite consideration, both of the Kings,
and of the Popes proceedings thereupon, does cause us to lift up our minds to
an higher cause, and obliges us to confess that Gods providence has been
manifested therein, in a particular, and extraordinary manner.

4. And that for the fulfilling in part of S. John's prophecy, Rev. 17.13, 16.
In these words, that those Kings which had one mind, and who had given their
power, and strength, unto the Beast, shall be them that shall hate the Whore,
and shall make her desolate, and naked, and shall eat her flesh, and burn her
with fire.

5. O that other Kings for the fulfilling of this Prophecy, would follow the
example of this King, and dispose themselves to serve God in a work so
important and high.

Of the Demolishing of Monasteries in England, by King Henry the Eight.
1. KIng Henry the Eight separating himself from Rome, consequently did very
wisely to demolish the Monasteries that were in England, and to cause the
Friars of them to change Habit and Vest of their Order.

2. For besides that such men by their Errors, Superstitions, Idolatries, and
most of them by their foul and corrupt manners, are utterly hurtful to the
Church, which they wast and corrupt more and more. They are also greatly
prejudicial to the State.

3. Because 1. enclosing themselves in their Monasteries; by that means they
withdraw themselves from the Civil Jurisdiction, both in regard of their goods,
and of their Persons.

4. From whence often does follow the Ruin of States; that which remains to
bear Arms, being not in sufficient number to conserve and maintain them against
their Enemies.

5. 2. Because also, that such persons are as many Creatures, ready for the
Popes Service; to rise and rebel against their Prince, if the said Pope gives
them command so to do, by the Superior of their Orders; the reason whereof is,
because they do not acknowledge themselves to be Subjects of the Sovereign of
the State, in which they live, and are settled, but only of the Pope.

6. Which thing well known and considered of the Popes, they have not been
contented of the Orders formerly established, but moreover have erected new
ones, which they have spread every where to Preach their obedience. The number
of them in certain States is come to that greatness, In France.
that they may compose ten good Armies.

7. Among these last Orders of Friars, that of the Jesuits holds the first and
principal Rank, which leaves to the others the honor of the vows of Poverty
and Chastity, and sticks altogether to that of Obedience, being particularly
sworn to the Romish See, to which they swear to obey in all things by a blind
obedience, so called, by the which they execute the commands of their
Superiors without any Inquisition of the Cause.

8. Which having been well observed by some States, they did judge to be able
to remain in quietness and peace, unless they did cast out of their Dominious
such dangerous persons, and by Authentical Edicts have declared Anathema's all
such that should dare to propound the reestablishment of them in the same.

Of the Reformation of the Church of England, begun by King Henry the Eight.
1. ALthough King Henry the Eight had shaken off the Popes yoke, demolished the
Monasteries, and beaten down the Images, yet notwithstanding all that he
retained to the end of his life, the other Errors of the Romish Church, and did
greatly persecute those who did not embrace them.

2. From whence we may perceive that oftentimes great and mavelous works are
not begun and ended altogether. And by those who have been the beginners of
them.

3. Asa did not fully Reform the Church, neither also Jehosaphat; But that
which was begun by them, was perfected afterward by the good Kings, Ezekiah,
and Josias.

4. The same thing is apparent in the last Reformation of the Church. It was
first begun by Martin Luther in Germany, and perfected afterward by John
Calvin, and other famous Divines raised by Gods Grace to that end.

5. The Reformation of the Church of England having been begun by K. Henry the
Eight, was consummated by his most Worthy Children, King Edward the Sixth, and
Queen Elizabeth of blessed Memory.

6. The Father begun the said Reformation at the Root, and his Children did cut
the Branches. Yea we must say that King Henry did cut off the very Head of the
Romish Beast, and his Children the Fingers, and the Nails.

For what Cause we may separate one from another, in regard of public
Assemblys and Exercises of Religion, only for corrupt Doctrines, and not alone
for corrupt Manners.
Against Independants.
1. WHich is to be noted against Anabaptists, and Separatists; They will not
communicate with the wicked, for they pollute all, say they.

2. Yet did not the Prophets fly the Congregation, Hagg. 2.4. Nor did Christ
abhor the Publicans, Luke 5.30.

3. Then there is a double communicating; one with the exercises of Religion,
and another with the works of Darkness. The first is lawful, but the second
forbidden.

4. Again, there is a twofold departure; one with our Bodies, another with our
Minds. One from the Evil, and another from the Person.

The first must be followed, 1 Cor. 5.10. The other cannot be avoided without
departing the world. For only God is Just, and giver of Righteousness.

The Militant Church prays for forgiveness of sins, Mat. 6.12. And is assured
when she shall Triumph, to be blameless without spot, when Death shall lose his
sting, and Hell forgo the Victory, 1 Cor. 15.55.

5. Therefore I know not what to say of such Anabaptists, and Separatists, but
as Constantine said to Acesius a Novation Bishop; Set up a Ladder for thy self,
O Acesius, that thou alone may ascend up to Heaven.

If they leave us because we have faults, by the same reason they must needs
fly into Heaven, for there is no place on Earth for them.

6. Attendis zizania, triticum non attendis; Thou look to the Cockle, and
the Wheat thouregardest not.

7. When thou dividest thy self from Hypocrites which are in the Church, thou
dividest thy self from the Church, Et membrum in Heterogeneis perit abscissum:
In Heterogeneal bodies a member cut off, perishes.

8. O then forsake not the green pastures because of the Goats. Nor forsake
Gods House because of the Vessels of dishonor. Nor Gods Wheat because of the
Tares. Nor Gods Net because of the bad fishes that are in it.

9. Rather follow the Rule of S. Augustine against the Letters of Petilianus;
bear with the mixture of evil because of the good, lest thou violate the
charity of the good because of the evil; neither let us forsake the good
because of the evil, but suffer the evil because of the good.

The Separatists of England have no just cause to separate themselves from the
Communion of their Parish Churches, for the evil Life and corrupt Manners of
some Members of the same.
1. FOr was not the Church of Corinth more corrupted in Doctrine, and Manners,
than they pretend ours to be? Yet S. Paul calls it a Church.

2. Does not Christ call it his Field, where there grew many Tares?

3. Did not Christ suffer Judas, whom he knew to be a Thief and a Traitor, to
partake of the Sacrament with his Disciples?

4. Yet these pure Sectaries will none of our communion, for that some unclean
persons presume to come thither.

5. To whom we answer as S. Augustine does to Cresconius; Lib. 3. c. 50. Et
Epist. 48.
These evils are displeasing to the good, we forbid, and restrain them what we
can, what we cannot we suffer.

6. But we do not for the Tares sake forsake the Field; For the Chafe leave
the Floor of Christ.

For the evil Fish break the Net.

For the Goats sake refuse the Fold of Christ.

7. When Religion was partly corrupted, partly contemned in Israel, and the
Prophets cried go out from them, and touch no unclean thing; Did they then
sever themselves from them? In Evang. Sermon. 8.
I find no such thing, says Augustine, yet doubtless they did themselves what
their Prophets willed others to do.

8. Hoc ergo est exire ore, non Parcere, hoc Immundum non tangere voluntate non
consentire.

9. Liber in conspectu Dei est, cui nec Deus sua peccata imputat quae non fecit.

Neque aliena quae non approbavit.

Neque negligentiam, quia non tacuit.

Neque Superbiam quia ab unitate Ecclesiae non necessit.

There is a necessity to have a certain Form of Liturgy, for the public
Administration of all the Parts of Divine Worship in the Christian Church.
1. THis certain and set Form of Public Liturgy, is necessary to entertain
Uniformity in a National Church.

2. There was such an one in the Eastern and Western Churches, as it appears by
their Liturgies which are in our hands.

3. There is such an one in all the Reformed National Churches. As in the
National Reformed Church of France. And in that of the Low Countries. And in
the Church of Geneva. And in the Reformed Churches of Germany, etc.

4. By such a certain and set Form of public Liturgy, no wrong or injury is
done to the Holy Ghost, as if one would undertake to enclose him within the
Bars of certain Words. For if that were true, Christ should have committed such
a fault, because he has given to his Apostles, and with them to the whole
Church an express and set Form of Prayer.

David also should have committed the like fault, having given us in his
Psalms, so many Forms of Prayer, of Thanksgiving, and of confession of Sins.
Rather let us say that the set Form of Prayer of our Lord Jesus Christ, and the
Forms mentioned of the Prophet David, being proceeded from the Holy Ghost, the
Will of God is, that we make use of them, to call upon him by prayer, and to
render thanks unto him by the very words of his Holy Spirit.

5. And concerning the Ecclesiastical set Form which we require and commend, by
it we do not pretend to prescribe any thing to the Holy Ghost; But besides the
benefit of a National Uniformity, our scope is to succor our common
Infirmity, which is done when the Minister in the Administration of the parts
of public Divine Worship, does make use of the help of the Church thereupon,
and esteems it better to perform it in certain and set words, then to let out
from his mouth impertinent, and ill digested conceptions, and words.

6. It is left to the liberty of every National Church, to frame such a set
Form of Liturgy.

. The Reformed State and Church of England, do condemn utterly and publicly
Anabaptists, Atheists, the Family of Love, and also the Separatists.
1. ANd if notwithstanding that condemnation, there be such in the State of
England, and secretly in the Church thereof; so have there been always
Hereticles, and wicked persons in the Church.

2. And in respect of them, the Reformed Religion of the Church of England, is
no more to be accused, then the good Corn may justly be condemned, because
together with it many Tares and Weeds spring up, and cannot be avoided.

. From the time of the Reformation of the State, and Church of England, the
Jesuits and Priests did never cease to trouble them, and assault them.
1.
1. IT is not unknown to the Sovereign Prince, and also to the subordinate
Magistrates of England, how since the Reformation of the Religion, and Church
of that Kingdom, the Adversaries, Popes, Jesuits, and Priests, have never
ceased to trouble the State thereof; and that, by their Books in great number
written and published; and by all other means that possibly they were able to
devise; and also to defame that holy Religion of Christ, which through Gods
great mercy, and the godly Laws of the Sovereigns, is according to Gods word
established in this State.

2. What they have wrought with many of all Estates, and how mightily they have
prevailed with that strong, and effectual (...) of Satan, which has advanced
Antichrist un^^ that Supremacy of Power, Authority, and Credit in the World,
whereof the Holy Ghost, by S. Paul, and by S. John has foretold, lamentable
experience can witness; And that in the backfliding, and continual Apostating
of many a way from us, to the final perdition of such Apostates, to the grief
of the Godly, and to the great encouragement, and comfort of the Enemy.

2.
ANd we have no doubt, that all the English Jesuits, and Seminary Priests of
Rome, or of the College of Rhemes, are all most wilfully bent, and earnestly
disposed, to do what harm any of them possibly can, to the Church of England.

. All the English Jesuits, and Seminary Priests, by their writings, have
gained nothing against the Reformed Religion of England.
1. THese English old Soldiers of the Popish party, Sanders, Harding, Allen,
Stapleton, Bristol, have employed in the assailing of the Reformed Religion of
England whatsoever. Either Reading,

Or Leisure,

Or Cunning.

Or Wit,

Or Diligence,

Or Malice,

Could supply unto them, and for all this have gained nothing.

2. Should New-discovered others of that kind that are not worthy to be
compared with these, hope to Reform that wherein they have failed.

. Refutation of the Censure of the Manners of the State and Church of England,
made by the Jesuits.
1. HE that reproves the Manners of others, it were meet that he should be
without fault.

2. Now is there so great a change made of Rome upon the sudden? Is their Life
now such? Are there Manners begun to be so godly, that the Jesuits being
thence returned here Friars, dare strive with us about Virtue, Shamefastness,
and Honesty.

3. Howsoever there be in England many things done, which ought not to be done;
Yet if the Jesuits shall say that there is as great Impunity, and
Licentiousness of sins in England, as they themselves have seen at Rome, which
is the very Tower of their Religion, and Kingdom; all men will judge them to be
too too impudent.

4. Surely as long as those public Stews, and Dens of Whores stand still in
Rome, the Jesuits could scarce honestly make mention of Manners.

Of the English Service Book, and of the Change in it since the beginning of
the Reformation, in the Reign of Edward the Sixth.
1. THe first Service Book of King Edward, was not altogether approved by
Bucer, and Peter Martyr, but in some things reproved. As the censure of Bucer
upon the same does declare. Vide Bucer Script. Anglican. page 428.

2. That first Service Book was rather accepted of the Protestants by
toleration, because at first they could obtain no more, then by an absolute
approbation.

3. The same Service Book was changed and reformed, and many things were left
out of the said Liturgy, by another Edition thereof established in the Fifth
Year of Edward the Sixth.

4. And that latter Service Book of King Edward is in substance all one with
the Servicebook of Queen Elizabeth.

5. And that since King Edwards Reign, there has been no material Alteration
of the English Service book.

6. The Papists have no cause to inveigh against this alteration of the
Service Book of the Church of England, if they remember that themselves have
changed their Breviaries, Portesses, and Missals, more then once, even of late
years. See Possevin Appar. v. Missal. Etver. Breviarum.

Of the mention of Saints made in the Liturgy of the Church of England, and of
their Feasts keeping yearly.
1. When in the Church of England, according to the Liturgy thereof, the said
Church does adorn the Calendar with the Names of some Eminent Saints, and do
make honorable mention of them in her Religious public worship, as the
Ancient Church did of her Martyrs, yet she does not call upon them; She does
not lift up the hands, nor bow the knees, nor present offerings, nor direct her
prayers, nor intend any part of Religious worship to them; But to their God,
and ours, as S. Augustine answers for the practice of the Church in his time.

2. She does remember the Saints of God, but in no wise made Gods of Saints;
She does bless God for them, and not worship them for God.

3. Although her Devotion does glance by their Names, yet it does pitch, and is
fixed upon the Angel of the Covenant, the Holy of all Holy ones, our Lord and
Savior Jesus Christ.

On the blessed Virgins Anniversary, she does honor Christ in his Mother.

On S. John Baptists, she does honor him in his forerunner.

On S. Michaels, she does honor him in his Archangel.

On the Apostles, she does honor him in his Ambassadors.

On the Evangelists, she does honor him in his Chroniclers.

On S. Stephen, she does honor him in his Martyr.

On S. John the Divine, his day, she does honor him in his beloved Disciple,
who also leaned on his breast at Supper.

It is a great Error in the Worship of God, to be altogether for Prayer, and to
make no esteem of the Preaching of the Word of God, both must not be severed
one from the other.
1. FOr if it be said of Christ that his House is an House of Prayer, and not
of Sermons; We must observe where he spoke this: it was in the Temple where he
spoke it: And were not these very words part of a Sermon, which he Preached to
the Buyers and Sellers there.

2. He has but little skill in the Language of Canaan, who knows not that
Prayer, and Invocation of Gods Name, is in the Scripture by a Synecdoche, taken
for the whole Worship of God, Acts 2.21. Rom 10.13.

3. Yet admit that our Savior should in that place take Prayers strictly for
that part of Gods Worship, which consists in lifting up our hands to prefer
our Petitions, and Supplications unto him; S. Paul furnishes us with a direct
answer to this Objection, even by those Questions he propounds, Romans 10.14.
How then shall they call on him on whom they have not believed? How shall they
believe on him of whom they have not heard? And how shall they hear without a
Preacher?

4. As there is no powerful Preaching without Prayer to God for a blessing upon
it, so no good Prayer without Preaching, to direct both in the matter, and
form, and to inflame our hearts with zeal.

How the Magistrate is to carry himself toward Seducing and Seditious
Heretics, that are not Tolerated in a State.
1. LEt it be accounted Mercy, not to execute the Rigor of Penal Statutes upon
silly seduced Sheep; But certainly it is cruelty to spare the Wolves which
worry them.

2. I mean those Wolves who plot Treason against their Natural Prince, who
scandalize the State; and who stain with impure breath the Gold and Silver
Vessels of the Sanctuary, who turn Religion into Statism, or rather into
Atheism.

3. Such Wolves are in England, the Popish Priests, and the Jesuits.

4. Who not only show their Rage in not sparing our Sons, and our Daughters,
and daily enticing them, and by their Agents conveying them over beyond the
Sea, to sacrifice, not their bodies, but their souls, their Faith, their
Religion to the Moloch of Rome.

5. But besides who plot the ruin and overthrow of the State, who say as the
Children of Edom, in the day of Jerusalem, down with it, down with it, even to
the ground; or rather up with it, up with it to the trembling Air; blow up
King, Queen, Prince, Parliament, Clergy, Laity, Nobility, Gentry, Commons,
Laws, Statutes, Charters, Records all in a Cloud of fire, that there remain
not so much as any Cindars of them upon the Eearth; lest parhaps the Phoenix
might revive out of her own Ashes.

We must not in England frequent Heretics, Seducers, nor keep familiar society
with them; rather we must fly from them, and detect them to the Magistrate,
when they be banished from the Country.
1. WE must beware in England of the Agents of Rome, Priests, and Jesuits, who
go about to withdraw us from the love of our Country, from our Allegiance to
our Prince, and which is worst of all, from the true and pure Worship of God.

2. If stealing away the bodies of our Sons and Daughters, be so heinous a
crime, that many conceive it better to deserve the Gallows, then the stealing
of a Horse, or of a Sheep: what punishment do we suppose they do deserve, who
steal away their souls from God, and their hearts from their Parents?

3. If we account them as capital Enemies who seek the ruin of our Estate, can
we esteem otherwise of them who seek the utter ruin, and overthrow of our
Souls.

4. And let us not be deceived in regard of them, because their outward
behavior is fair, and their company delightful; For as they are Panther like,
which hides her ugly visage, which she knows will terrify the Beasts from
coming near her, and allures them with the sweet smell of her body, but as soon
as they come within her reach, she makes a prey of them.

5. Therefore as we tender the Salvation of our Body and Soul, our Estate in
this Life, and in the Life to come, let us take heed how we play at the hole of
the Cockatrice; And do familiarly converse with the great Whore, or with any of
her Minions, lest they draw us to naughtiness, and spiritual lewdness.

6. Let us have no part with them, that have no part in God, or who have part
with abominable Idols.

7. Nay furthermore, let us detect such Persons to public Authority, that they
may learn not to blaspheme the truth of our Religion, nor seduce his Majesty's
Subjects from their Allegiance unto him, and conformity to his Laws.

Of the Contentions, and Differences, which happens in the Church about
Religion.
1. IT is the craft and practice of Satan, sworn enemy to Christ, and to his
Church, to rise and excite Contentions and Differences in the same. He sowes
his Tares in the Field of the Lord, and at the coming up of the Heavenly
Doctrine, he raises great Fogs, as some do rise, at the rising of the Sun.

2. Which he does to hinder to his utmost power, the virtue and efficacy of the
said Divine Doctrine, and to maintain his Kingdom, which is not destroyed by
any thing so much as by preaching of the Word of God.

3. From the beginning of the Christian Church, we have some examples of such
differences among the Faithful; Then there was a great controversy concerning
the Ceremonies of the Law, Act. 15.5.
some thought it needful to keep them, and others were against them.

4 Since Divisions and Differences are also crept in the Churches, which were
founded by the Apostles, in the time of Irencus, what contention was it between
the Eastern and Western Churches, concerning the time of the Celebration of
Easter, or Pasch, and how long did it last.

The Eastern Churches maintaining that it was to be kept, as the Jews did the
fourteenth day of the Month, after the Equinox of the Spring; And the Western
only the Sunday following. In the time of S. Cyprian, the Council of Afric,
had a belief quite contrary to that of the other Churches. Having decreed that
those should be rebaptized, who before had been baptized by Heretics. Is it
not also that which by the craft of the same Enemy is happened immediately
after the last Reformation of the Church, when then the first Reformers did
employ themselves about the Discovery and Refutation of the Errors of the Roman
Church; on one side the Anabaptists did arise in great number, and with a
wonderful fury opposing the Power, and Authority of the Civil Magistrate.

And on the other side the Sacramentary War did become hot. That is to say, the
difference concerning the presence of Jesus Christ in the Eucharist. Is it not
besides, that which since some years, we have seen in this Church and State,
where the Arminians did trouble the peace of both? And now it is troubled by
Anabaptists, Separatists, Antinomians, and by sundry other dangerous Sects.

5. Now when we say that Satan is the cause of the contentions, and differences
which happens in the Church; We do not mean that he be the only cause of them.
For it is certain that there are some other.

As, 1. Pride, and Self-love.

And, 2. Ignorance.

1. Pride, and Self-love is a firebrand of contention and discord, whereas on
the contrary, Humility entertains peace and concord; For Humility seeks the
last places, for which there is no debate, and so peace is conserved.

2. Ignorance also is a great cause of contentions and differences; For the
Faithful may be ignorant of many things, and yet be too-confident in their
knowledge.

Of the Troubles and Contentions, which happens in the Church about Religion.
1. IT is a thing which is to be noted, that the contentions and differences
which happens in the Church, commonly begins by the most weak and ignorant; but
who with their ignorance, are stubborn and obstinate.

2. The reason thereof is rendered by S. Cyril, who says that there is nothing
more audacious, than ignorance, and that there is none so enormous crime, but
that it has the boldness to reach unto it.

3. So do we read, John the third, 25, 26. that the contention which was moved
between the Disciples of John the Baptist, and the Jews which followed Christ,
did first arise from the Disciples of John who were rude and impertinent men;
As it is to be seen in the History of the Gospel, and particularly in the
Answer of John their Master which he gave unto them.

4. And this is too much confirmed by the Examples of the dangerous contentions
moved in these times, by the dangerous sects of Anabaptists; Of all Sectaries
none are so ignorant as they, and yet none so quarrelsome, and who are the
first to debate.

5. They are like unto Sarah, Abraham's Wife, who in the difference concerning
Hagar, although she was the weakest, and had the wrong on her side, Yet she did
rise against Abraham her Husband, and said unto him, the Lord judge between me
and thee, Genesis 16.5.

Of the Remedy to the Contentions and Differences, which happen in the Church
about Religion.
1. WE read, Acts 15.5, and 6. that the way which the Apostles and the Elders
did take to compose the great dissension which was arised touching
Circumcision, was to meet in Council, for to consider of this Matter.

2. Which is a commendable way, and most fit to compose differences and
contentions, when some are happened in the Church.

3. And therefore which ought to be the way, that the Prince, and Supreme
Magistrate most use, when some happens in the Churches of his States and
Dominions; Then he must assemble a Synod, or Council, as he calls a Parliament
to compose the civil differences, and to order the things belonging to the
State.

4. So did the Apostles, as has been said; so did afterward the Primitive
Church; And so did the Ancient Emperors, who did desire the Union of the
Church which did succeed very well unto them; For as by the Council of the
Apostles was decided and composed the difference concerning Circumcision, and
the Ceremonies of the Law, Acts 15. So the first Council of Nice did condemn
the Heretic Arius, who denied the Divinity of Christ.

The council of Constantinople did condemn the Heretic Macedonius, who denied
the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.

The council of Ephesus, did condemn Nestorius, who denied the Unity of the
Person of Christ.

And the council of Chalcedon did condemn the Heretic Eutiches, who confounded
the two Natures of Christ.

5. An Universal council is most useful when it can be called, and assembled;
But it is not absolutely necessary for the conservation and maintenance of the
Church.

6. And therefore National Churches may commodiously enough be Ruled and
Governed, by National Synods.

7. For that cause, and in that regard, the care of the Prince, and Sovereign
Magistrate ought to be, that such a National Synod be settled, and established
in the National Churches of his Dominions, and States.

Let us be careful to entertain Peace and Concord in the Church of England, and
to avoid all Divisions among us.
1. FOr it is the Axiom of our Savior, That A Kingdom divided against it self
cannot stand.

2. It is the Maxim of Philosophy, Omne divisibile est corruptibile, which
holds in all States and Societies.

3. Lib. 2. Nature. Hist. cap. 105.
The Church and the Commonwealth like the Lapis Tirrhenus, of whom Pliny
speaks, while they are whole, swim in all waters, but if they be broken into
Factions, or crumbled into Sects and Schisms, they will soon sink, if not drown.

4. After the Donatists had made a Faction in Africa, as they brake the unity
of the Church, so they were broken themselves into diverse fractions. And so in
a short space came to nothing.

5. The Division among the Britains of this Nation brought in first the Saxons,
next the Danes, and last of all the Normans.

6. This is a cunning sleight of Satan to divide us one from another, that so
he may prevail against us all.

7. The barbarous Soldiers divided not Christ's Coat; shall we rend and tear
asunder his Body by Schism and Faction.

8. Religion is the bond of all Society, the strongest Sinew of Church or
Commonwealth; O let us take heed that there be no rupture in this bond, nor any
sprain in this Sinew.

9. The Husbandman has sowed good Seed, clean, and picked, in this Kingdom
for more than threescore years, and it had fructified exceedingly since the
happy Reformation of Religion in these parts; lately the Envious man did sow
upon it his Tares: O let Christian Charity pluck them up; or in the defect of
it, Public Authority.

10. We are all one Body, let us have all the same mind toward God; and let us
endeavor to the utmost of our power to preserve the unity of the Spirit in the
bond of Peace, Ephesians. 4.3.

11. That our Spiritual Jerusalem may resemble the old Bizantium, the stones
whereof were so matched, and the wall built so uniformly that the whole City
seemed to be but one stone continued throughout.

12. It was the Honor of the Old Jerusalem; Let it be also of the New, that it
is a City at unity in it self, Psalm. 122.3.

13. The lines, the nearer they come to the Center, the nearer they are one to
another, we cannot be one with God, so long as we are thus divided one against
another.

Refutation of this Accusatin of the Jesuits, and other Popish Doctors, that
in the Church, and Religion of England, since the last Reformation, have been
many Changes and Alterations, and particularly in the Common Prayer Book.
The Popish Doctor.
1. HE first calls to remembrance the Act of 6. Articles established in the
later days of King Henry the 8.

2. Which in the beginning of his Son Edward the 6. Reign was straightwaies
disanulled, and the Church Reformed.

3. Which Reformation was overthrown in Queen Mary's Reign.

4. And after renewed by Queen Elizabeth.

5. And continued by her Successors unto this day.

Answer of the Reformed.
THis is the Answer that we make to that Accusation.

1. That at the first, when the Lord began to work some Reformation in the
Church of Fugland, perfection in every Point was not forthwith attained, and
established.

2. Which is no marvel, considering both the greatness of the work, and the
malice of (...) fold enemies that withstood the same.

3. Yea, if in the Common Prayer Book of that Church, alteration has been,
according as to that Church seemed most convenient, that was not in substance
of Doctrine, but in matters of Ceremony.

4. Neither can the Popish Doctors charge the Church of England more for
changing her Common Prayer Book, then the said can charge the Roman Church for
changing and reforming

Her Missales,

Her Portasses,

Her Breviaries,

And a number of such Books, even of late years, in daily and public use of
Service in Her.

Defense of the English Translation of the Bible, against the Contumelies of
Jesuits, and other Popish Writers.
Accusation of the Popish Writers.
THe diverse English Translations of the Bible, say the Popish Writers, are
nothing else but corrupt Gutters flowing from corrupt and stinking Lakes, the
best containing wicked, horrible, and Ethnical Errors.

Answer to that Accusation.
1.
THis is a slander most wicked, horrible, Ethnical, of all men to be detested,
and the Accusers shall never prove any word of their Accusation true; Gregory
Martin has labored herein, and has performed nothing.

2.
If the said Popish Writers find fault with us for Correcting our Bibles, let
them show us if they can, that either it is unlawful to Translate the Bible
into our own Tongue, or else after it has been Translated, to reform the
Translation in such places wherein some Errors have escaped, or to Translate it
again.

3.
No Translation of the Scripture can at the first be so perfect and sincere,
but it may be afterward amended, as God shall reveal to his Church the faults
thereof.

4.
Otherwise, if it were any Fault to amend a Fault, why has the Council of
Trent taken order for the Correction of the Church of Romes Latin Translation?
and for a better Edition thereof to be published, then heretofore has been.

5.
Yea, why has Pope Pius Reformed

The Psalters,

The Breviaries,

The Offices,

And such other Books as are in the Church of Rome in greatest use, and
estimation.

6.
If this seemed requisite, why may not we look to our Translations likewise,
amend the Imperfections, and set forth better?

7.
We add, that we depend not upon any Translation, English, or Latin, or of
other Language, no otherwise then the same agrees with the Word of God.

EXERCITATION. Refutation of this Accusation of the Jesuits, that in the State
of England, great cruelty is exercised against them, and the Seminary Priests,
in regard of their Religion.
1. TO that Accusation, the Reformed Doctors do answer; That it is true indeed
that some few of the Jesuits, and other Popish Priests have been punished in
the State of England, but they died not for Religion, but were by open Judgment
of Law convicted of Treason.

2. In the Reign of Queen Elizabeth, of happy Memory, was executed one Everard
a Priest sent from the College at Rhemes, into England, who though he was in
danger of the Laws many ways, yet might have had his life; But that impudently
at the Bar he uttered things shameful, vile, and intolerable, for he boasted
himself, both to be the Subject and Vassal of the Pope, even in England, and
affirmed that the Pope was no less the Head of the Church of England, then of
the Church of Rome; Avouching further, that he was verily persuaded, that the
Pope did not err, when he termed Queen Elizabeth an Heretic, and the Patron
of Heretics, and denounced Her no lawful Queen.

Everard was for this confession convicted and condemned, who afterward as if
this had not been enough, in prison professed plainly, and directly, in the
presence and hearing of sixteen men of credit, that it was no sin against God
to commit Treason against his Prince. Yet for all this he suffered no new and
unusual punishment, but the same that all Traitors suffer in England, in the
like cause.

3. We leave other Examples.

4. And say generally of all the Jesuits, and Priests, that did suffer in
England, that they did not suffer for their popish Religion, but only for
their Treason, and for their perturbation of that State.

. Great is the Evil and Harm, that the Jesuits and Roman Priests, hidden in
England, did cause, and do cause, to that State.
1. THey trouble the peace of it.

2. They corrupt its Children with an impious, and strange Religion.

3. They make more precious account of a foreign Enemy, than of its Dignity.

4. They divert the minds of people from true Religion, to trouble the peace of
the State.

5. They estrange the minds of Loyal Subjects from their Lawful Prince.

6. And turn all things topsie turvie.

. In the State of England, as in other States, since the last Reformation of
the Church, extreme has been the cruelty of the Papists, toward the Reformed.
1.
Who are the Papists, and what is their Religion? That the Jesuits and Roman
Priests, so boldly object cruelty unto the Reformed State of England.

2.
1. In Queen Mary's time, more of them were condemned in that State at one
Sessions, more executed in one day, more consumed in one fire, then they can
recount to us to have been put to death for the Popes cause, at any time, or by
any kind of death, in the whole happy Reign of Queen Elizabeth.

2, Let the Jesuits and other Papists, then but call to mind the extreme
cruelty, the exquisite Tortures, the frequent Martyrdom of the times before
the Keign of Queen Elizabeth. And if there be in them any mark of Humanity,
they cannot choose but confess, that their side has been extreme cruel; And
that the Englishes Reformed have been sufficiently provoked to severity against
them, and to have repayed them with the like.

3. For what Times can afford such, and so many Butcheries of men, as was to be
seen when the Papists were Lords over the Protestants in England, let them tell
what Sex, or what Age they spared, and did not bloodily execute all, without
difference and distinction.

Of Learned, or Unlearned,

Of Male, or Female,

Of Old, or Young.

Children, Virgins, Married, Clergy, and Layetie, Bishops, Archbishops,
escaped not their hands. The Martyrs they did beat with Rods, their Tongues
they pulled out of their Mouths, their hands they burned off with Torches: They
Tormented, Crucified, Hanged, and Beheaded them, they burned them alive, and
toasted them at a soft fire; Yea, the Infant leaping out of the Mothers belly,
they received upon the Spears point, and cast it into the flaming fire: To
conclude, whatsoever barbarous cruelty could invent, that they were not wanting
to in execution against them.

4. And if their cruelty had ended with the Living, and had terminated in their
deaths, it had been less; but so raging was their Tyranny, that they took up
the bodies of Saints interred in the Earth, they arreigned them upon a day,

They accused them at a Bar,

They condemned them to Death,

And burned them at a Stake, even exdeeding those old Tyrants in Fury and
Cruelty.

5. Can they name any one such Savage Fact amongst the said Reformed of England.

6. Or what was he that was put to Death amongst them Reformed, whom every good
Man that heard of him, judged not worthy of Death threefold more then of Life.

7. Therefore let the Papists acknowledge their own cruelty in the State of
England, and accuse not the English Reformed.

. What the Jesuits did allege for their Justification of coming in England,
against the Laws of that State.
THey did allege, That they came thither upon commandment of their Superiors,
according to the Order of that Religion which they profess.

Confutation of such an Allegation.
1. BUt the English Reformed did demand of the said Jesuits, what necessity
did lie upon them to obey his Commandment, who had no Authority to enjoin them
a Journey, whether they were willing or unwilling to go.

2. And if that Spanish Soldier Loyola, the first Author of their Jesuitical
Society, were now alive, and should enjoin them to set their Country on fire,
would they obey him? we Reformed of England are sure they would never command
such a foul fact.

3. And yet he might better command, and the English Jesuits execute that,
then this Thing for which they did profess that they were then come in England.

4. For whether might it be deemed less to set houses on fire, then to cause
the Evils and Harms represented before?

5. Which yet were the Ends of the Jesuits coming, and the Order of their
Profession required no less at their hands.

. The Sovereign Magistrate in the Reformed State of England has great Reason
to Prohibit the Books of English Jesuits, and Seminary Priests.
1. THe Books of those man are such as it behooveth the Sovereign Magistrate to
stop their passage.

2. He must of necessity restrain their Books unless he would suffer the State
to be stirred to Sedition, the Church in danger of Heresy, and Men's minds
filled with cursed Opinions.

3. For if Magistrates ought carefully to prevent, lest the infection of the
Plague be from other places brought into their Cities, much more care is to be
had, that pestilent and pernicious Books be not openly spread abroad, out of
which simple and unlearned men do suck Poison of deadly Error.

4. Neither is the Reformed State of England the first that have taken this
Course.

5. It may be remembered in Queen Mary's Time, that they proceeded by Martial
Law against all those with whom any of the Reformed Books were found. If this
was in the Reformed of that Time, a matter worthy of Death, so that they were
by and by drawn to punishment, as men guilty of High Treason, and that without
any Judicial Proceedings; what reason have the English Jesuits and Seminary
Priests that are in Rome, Rhemes, and other places abroad, to look that their
Books should now have such free liberty to be every where publicly sold?

Of Heretical Churches, and Religions, Of Heresies, and Heretics.
1. Heresy is some opinion in matter of Faith repugnant and contrary to the
Word of God, being of some chosen out to themselves, and wilfully maintained.

2. And an Heretic is a person wilfully and stiffly maintaining false Opinions
against the Scriptures after due admonition.

3. There be three things required to an Heretic; first, that it be an Error
about some Article of Christian Faith. Secondly, that it be contrary to the
evidence, and clear truth of holy Scripture soundly, and generally held by the
holy Catholic Church of God in the earth. Thirdly, that it be stoutly, and
obstinately maintained, after conviction and lawful admonition.

4. The Doctors of the Roman Church do err, which account such Opinions for
Heresies as are not condemned, but rather taught in the Word of God, which is
the only Rule of saving Truth.

5. It is to be noted, that Heresies are compared in Scriptures to whores;
because they are stored with cunning pranks, and a thousand entisements to make
men ill advised to swerve from the right way. See Revel. 14.4.

6. As on the contrary in the said Scriptures simplicity of Faith is called
Virginity. See 2 Cor. 11. v. 2.

7. The Difference which is between Heresy and Schism, is as the Difference
which is between Faith and Charity. Heresy is the Poison of Faith, and
infecteth the Doctrine thereof: Schism is the wound of Charity; and by which
the Church is divided; which Division is not for points of Faith, but for the
Ceremonies and Discipline of the Church received and established in her since a
long time, and well grounded upon the Word of God: and that by a Spirit of
contention and trouble to purchase the glory of some particular, and
extraordinary wisdom and sufficiency.

8. Heretics are called Antichrists, 1 John 2. v. 18. because they are
forerunners of the great Antichrist, the man of sin, and the Son of Perdition.

Heresy is a most dangerous thing, and spreads soon over the whole body of the
Church, and produces woeful Effects.
1. Heresy like a Canker soon spreads over the whole body of the Church.

2. And if it be not looked into kills, and that eternally, thousands of
Souls; breaks the bonds of nature, and cutteth asunder all sinews of humane
society; puts enmity, variance; and implacable discords in Families; sows
Seeds of Sedition in the State; reaches Daggers, and Daggers to Subjects to
assacinate the Sacred Persons of the Lords Anointed; lays Trains in the deep
Vaults of disloyal hearts, to blow up Parliaments; and to offer whole Kingdoms
for an Holocaust.

Of the Impudency of Error and Heretics in these Times.
IN this wretched Time, Error and Heretics, which were wont but to whisper men
in the Ear, and to mumble between the Teeth, have been so bold as to step into
the Pulpit, and to belch out blasphemies against God, and the true Christian
Religion.

Concerning the Books of Heretics; whether they are to be tolerated, or
absolutely abolished by the Prince.
1. Concerning the Books of Heretics, this is our Judgment, that of them,

1. Some are Magical.

2. Some are Defamatorie Books.

3. Some are Blasphemous Books.

4. And some are Books full of diverse Errors.

2. The Magical Books are to be burned Acts 19.19.

3. The Defamatory Books are to be forbidden; The Emperors Constitutions do
ordain a Capital Punishment for the Authors of them.

4. The Notoriously Blasphemous Books of Heretics are also to be abolished.

5. Concerning the Books of Heretics, which contain diverse Errors, the
reading of them is not to be permitted to every one; and chiefly not to those
who did not yet sufficiently know the grounds of true Faith, and Religion.

6. But for that they are not absolutely to be abolished; but the reading of
them is to be permitted to the Learned.

7. Which we prove by the following Arguments:

The first is taken from the Apostles Injunctions; Prove all things, says S.
Paul, 1 These. 5.21. And S. John 1. Epist. 4. v. 1. Brethren helieve not every
Spirit, but try the Spirits whether they be of God.

The 2. Argument is taken from the Commodities and Utilities which proceeds
from the reading of such Books. In the Books of Heretics such things are
written, by which the Heresies themselves are confuted. Besides, it is
profitable to know what is happened in every Age.

The 3. Argument is this, Which of the Fathers has been free from all kind of
Errors: And in the Books of the Gentiles, and of the Jews many things are
contained contrary to the true Christian Faith, and yet we do not abolish them.

Heretics, and Deceivers, and Impostors grace themselves with high and strange
Titles, and glorious Names to blear the eyes of the simple.
1. THeudas said he was some great one; Simon Magus styled himself the great
Power of God; Montanus arrogated to himself the Title of Paracletus the
Comforter; and to his three Minions, Priscilla, Maximilla, and Quintilla, the
names of Prophetesses: Manes bare himself as if he were an Apostle, immediately
sent from Christ.

2. Therefore it is a silly shift of a bankrupt Disputant in the Schools to
argue a vocibus ad res, from the bare name of things to their nature; and yet
Bellarmine fights against us with this Festraw, De Not. Eccles.
We are Sir-named Catholics, therefore we are so.

The Devil often makes of women strong Instruments to dispread the Poison of
Heresy.
1. SImon Magus had his Helena;

Marcion his female Forerunner;

Apelles his Philumena;

Montanus his Maximilla;

Donatus his Lucilla;

Elpidus his Agape;

Priscillian his Galla;

Arius the Prince his Sister;

Nicholaus Antiochenus his Feminine Troops, and Quires; and all Arch-hereticks
some Strumpets or other to serve them for Midwives, when they were in Travel
with Monstrous and misshapen Heresies. Thou suffer the woman Jazabel.

We must avoid the familiar company of Gods Enemies, and of true Religion, for
fear of Infection.
1. FOr such enemies are like Jacobs Poplar rods, they are like the two Rivers
in Mercator, Axius and Aliacmon; like the two Fountains in Spain, whereof
Maginus;

1. Omnia Injecta respuit, refuses all that is cast into it.

2. Omnia injecta sibi assimilat, makes all things cast into it like to it self.

2. The danger is noted by Solomon, Prove. 6.27. And by the sharp speech of Jehu
the Prophet to Jehosaphat, 2 Chronicles. 18.3. 2 Chronicles. 19.2.

3. Therefore is the Exhortation of the Apostle, Wherefore come out from
amongst them, and touch no unclean thing, 2 Cor. 6.17.

4. If Saint John the Evangelist would not stay in the Bath with Cerinthus the
Heretic, shall we dare freely to communicate with worser Heretics?

Of the Chief Errors of the Socinians.
1. Their Errors concerning the Unity of the Divine Essence, and the Trinity of
Persons.
THey deny the Trinity of Persons.

They deny the Divinity of the Son.

They say that the Birth of the Son is altogether impossible.

They deny the Divinity of the Holy Ghost.

They deny that the Holy Ghost is a Person.

They maintain that the Holy Ghost is only the Power of God.

They teach that the Holy Ghost dwelling in the hearts of the Faithful is
nothing else but a firm and certain hope of Eternal Life.

They deny that a particular operation of the Holy Ghost be required for the
production of Faith.

They deny also that in God there be a certain natural Justice and Mercy.

2. Their Errors concerning Christ the Mediator.
THey deny that there be two Natures in Christ, the Divine, and the Humane.

They deny that Christ is risen from the Dead, by his own power, and virtue.

They deny that Christ by his Death, did satisfy for our sins, or that he be
dead, to merit Salvation unto us.

They deny that Christ has reconciled us unto God.

They deny that Christ be come to fulfill the Law for us; on the contrary, they
say, that Christ has added new Commandments to the Law.

They deny that Christ upon the Altar of the Cross, did offer himself to God
for us.

They deny also that Christ was a Priest, before his Ascension in Heaven.

They deny that by the Sacrifice of Christ, any other thing is to be
understood, than a deliverance from our Necessities.

They deny that Christ does properly interceed for us; And they say, that by
the Intercession of Christ, nothing else is to be understood, but that Christ
has from God, the Power by which he does work.

3. The Errors concerning the Image of God, concerning the first Sin of our
first Parents, and concerning the Strength of Free Will, which yet is remaining
in Man.
THey deny that Adam was made in Immortality, they say, that the Image of God
after the Fall, is yet remained in Man, and that this Image was nothing else
than the Dominion of man over the other Creatures.

They deny Original sin.

They deny that by sin, the Natural gifts of Adam could be corrupted; And much
less, those of his Posterity.

They say, that it is now as much in our power to render obedience to God as it
was before the Fall.

They say that naturally there is in all a free will to obey God: By the help
of God necessary unto us to do good, they say that nothing else is to be
understood, than Gods threatenings, and promises outwardly propounded unto man.

4. Their Errors concerning the Law.
THey teach that Christ has added some peculiar Commandments to the Moral Law,
and them of two kinds; So that some are in regard of Manners. And some in
respect of Ceremonies.

They deny that the promise of Eternal Life was added to the Law of Moses.

They say that in the Old Testament, it was also lawful to pursue that which
regarded Volupties, and Pleasures, which now is forbidden in the New.

5. Their Errors concerning the Gospel, and concerning Justification.
THey say, that in the Old Testament, there was another means to be saved, than
there is in the New.

They deny that the Faith of the Faithful, in the Old Testament, had a regard
to Christ. They oppose the free Mercy of God, by which we are Justified to the
merit of Christ.

6. Their Errors concerning the Sacraments.
THey deny that Infants are to be Baptized. They deny that Baptism, be a
perpetual Sacrament of the New Testament.

They acknowledge none other end of Baptism, than this, that in the beginning
of Christianism, those that were converted, did profess by this outward
Ceremony, that they did acknowledge Christ to be the Lord.

They deny that in the Lords Supper, the Body of Christ be received, yea, not
Spiritually.

They deny that Faith is confirmed by the use of the Lords Supper, or that at
all any Spiritual good be there received.

They say that the Words of the Lords Supper, are to be understood Typically;
Namely in this Sense, the breaking, and eating of Bread, is the signification
of that which is to happen to my body. The pouring and drinking of Wine, is a
signification by which is set, as before the eyes, what is to be done with my
blood.

7. Their Errors concerning the Church.
THey deny that Purity of Doctrine, to be a Mark of the Church.

They say that it avails but little, to be solicitous concerning the Signs
of the true Church.

They deny that a peculiar Vocation, be required in the Ministers of the
Church.

The abovesaid Errors, or rather Furors, are short ways to Mahumetism, and to
Hell; and do show manifestly that Satan has discharged in those Vessels of
wrath, a sink of diverse Heresies: Satan I say, the enemy of Christ, and of the
Godly, which is cursed for ever with all his Organs.

Of the Errors of the Anabaptists, who in the beginning of the last Reformation
of the Church, did trouble the Empire of Germany.
1. THe Anabaptists then were divided in many Sects, of whom some maintained
more Errors, and some less, but all of them did profess such Doctrines, that
they could not be suffered and tolerated,

Neither in the Church,

Nor in the State,

Nor in the Families.

1. These be the Errors of the Anabaptists which could not be tolerated in the
Church.
1. THat Christ did not take his flesh and blood from the Virgin Mary, but
brought them down from Heaven.

2. That Christ is not a true God, but only that he is above the Saints that
are in Heaven; because he did receive more gifts of the Holy Ghost than any one
of the Saints.

3. That our Justice before God does not consist in the only merit of Christ,
but in Renovation, and also in our own righteousness, in which we are to walk.

4. That Infants not Baptized are not sinners before God, but righteous, and
innocent. And that in such an innocence, having not the use of reason, they are
saved without Baptism; of which Baptism, according to their opinion, they
have no need: And by this means the Anabaptists do reject the whole Doctrine
concerning Original Sin; and all the rest also which depends from the same.

5. That Infants are not to be Baptized until they have got the use of reason.

6. That the Children of Christians, because they are born of Christian and
Faithful Parents, even before they have received Baptism, are truly Saints, and
to be ranked in the number of Gods Children; for which cause also, neither do
they much esteem the Baptism of Infants; neither do they take care that
Infants be Baptized, which is against the express words of the Divine Promise,
For it belongs only to those who keep the Covenant of God, and do not
despise the same.

7. That that Church is not a true Christian Church in which some sinners are
yet to be found.

8. That no Sermons are to be heard in these Temples, or Churches, in which
sometimes the Popish Mass was celebrated.

9. That a godly man ought to have no commerce or communication at all, with
those Ministers of the Church, who teach the Gospel according to the sense of
the Confessions of the Reformed Churches, and who reprove the Errors of the
Anabaptists.

That it is not lawful to serve, nor to be bound to such Ministers of the
Church, but rather that they are to be shunned and avoided.

2. These be the Errors of the Anabaptists which were Intolerable in the State.
1. THat the Office of Civil Magistrate under the New Testament, is not a kind
of life pleasing, and acceptable unto God.

2. That a Christian man cannot in good Conscience perform the Calling and
Office of Magistrate.

3. And that the Subjects also ought not to implore the help of the Magistrate
to the end that he should exercise the Power which he has received from God
for the Defense of the said Subjects.

4. That a Christian man cannot with a good Conscience take an Oath; neither by
any Oath, promise, fidelity and obedience to his Prince and Sovereign
Magistrate.

5. That under the New Testament a Magistrate cannot with good Conscience
condemn to Death the Criminal Persons, nor cause them to be put to death.

3. These be the Errors of the Anabaptists which could not be suffered in the
Families.
1. THat a godly man cannot with an entire Conscience, retain and enjoy that
which belongs unto him, but that he is to make common whatsoever means he
has.

2. That a Christian man, without wronging his conscience, cannot exercise
Merchandise, nor Cookerie, neither make Arms.

3. That it is lawful for Wives to divorce themselves for different Religion,
and to marry with another Person, which shall not differ in Religion.

The Spirit is not without the Word, and must be examined by the Word of God,
against Anabaptistical Enthusiasts.
TRy the Spirits, whether they be of God, or no, by the Word of God, 1 John
4.1. To the Law and to the Testimony, says the Prophet Esaiah, if they speak
not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them Esa. 8.20.
And if we, says the Apostle, or an Angel from Heaven preach unto you any other
Gospel, than what ye have received, let him be accursed. Gal. 1.8. That is,
says S. Augustine, than what is contained in the Prophetical, and Apostolical
writings. August. contr. tit. Petil. lib. 3. c. 6.

Of Schism, and Schismatics.
1. Schism, is a Dissension, or Separation, when one or more separate, and
rent themselves from the outward fellowship of the Faithful, cutting asunder
the Peace, and Unity of the Church, upon some dislike of some Rites and Orders
therein lawfully received and observed, or else upon different Opinions about
their Teachers.

2. As Heresy is a departing from the Communion of the Church in respect of
Doctrine, so Schism, is a cutting off ones self, for External things. An
example hereof we have, 1 Cor. 1.10. etc. In these words, every one of you
says, I am Paul's, I am Appollos, I am Cephas, and I am Christ's.

3. There are two kinds of Schism, one is Simple and without any conjunction of
Error in Doctrine; The other is Mixed, that is to say, that it is conjoined with
some Error in Doctrine.

4. It is not the Separation that makes the Schism, but the Cause of the said
Separation, as the Doctors of the Cannon Law do teach.

5. This cause of Separation, must not be the corrupt Life and Manners of some
Members of a particular Church, but only Errors, Heresies, and Idolatry.

6. In this regard the Reformed Churches, are not Schismatical; Because, for
such a cause they have separated themselves from the Roman Church.

6. It is rather the Roman Church which is Heretical, and the Pope Head of the
same, because they have given the cause of the Separation by their Heresies,
their Idolatry, their Persecutions, and their Tyranny.

8. Before this Separation of the Reformed from the Roman Church, there has
been great Schisms in her by the plurality of Popes which she had at the same
times.

9. There has been also many Schisms in the said Roman Church by the Division
of her Doctors.

10. The Reformed Church do wish the Convocation of a lawful Council to reform
the Errors and Abuses of the Roman Church.

11. Besides the Roman Church, other Churches have been Schismatical; as that
of the Donatists, and of the Novatians, who for some Faults of some Members of
the Church, did separate themselves from the Communion of the Church.

13. There is a great danger in Schism, although it be not as great an evil as
Heresy, and therefore the remedy must be applied unto it as soon as it does
appear.

Of the False Religions in general, and conjointly. 1. Of Pagans and Gentiles;
2. Of the Modern Jews; 3. Of Turks and Mahumetans; which are all Enemies of
the Church of God.

1. Of Pagans and Gentiles.
1. THe Pagans and Gentiles are ignorant of the true God, and of the truth of
his Word.

2. And among them some are found, who not by consequence, and as if they did
not mind and mean it, but by express profession do worship the Devil, builds
Temples unto him, and render unto him Religious Worship.

2. Of the Modern Jews.
THe Modern Jews, which are now scattered among the Nations of the Earth, are
virulent enemies of Christ, and of his Church; for having persecuted the
Savior during his Life, they injure him, and blaspheme against him after his
Death.

3. Of the Turks and Mahumetans.
THe Turks and Mahumetans do prefer their Mahumet to Christ, and do follow
the pernicious Doctrine which the Alcoran does propound unto them.

Of the False Religion of the Ancient Pagans, in particular.
1. THe Principle, and the Rule of the true Religion, is the Word of God.

2. The Marks of the true Religion are, 1. The true knowledge of the true God.
2. The true Worship of the true God. 3. The true Mean of Man's Reconciliation
with God.


3. Let now every one consider well whether all that is to be found elsewhere
than in the Ancient Judaical Religion, and in the true Christian.

4. Truly not among the ancient Pagans:

1. For instead of a Word of God which enlightneth us to Salvation, there were
but Ambiguous, Vain, Frivolous Oracles, which did not speak, neither of the
Glory of God, nor of Man's Salvation.

2. Instead of the true God among them only were found Devils, Men, and Idols.

3. Instead of a sufficient Mediator, they only had Washings which pass not
further then the skin; Slaughters of Men; Sacrifices of poor wretched condemned
for their Crimes.

5. How could there have been a true Religion among the said Pagans, since they
did not know, nor had the true God? how could there have been among them an
assured and certain Religion, since the true God did not speak unto them? and
how could there have been a saving Religion among them, since the true God did
not intervene in it?

What differences there are between the true God, and the false Gods of ancient
Pagans and Gentiles.
THe true God is styled the Living God, in opposition to the Heathen Idols,
which were without Life, Sense, or Motion.

1. They had eyes, and saw not; ears, and heard not; hands, and handled not:
whereas the true God has no eyes, yet sees; no ears, yet hears; no hands,
yet works all things.

2. The Heathen Idols were carried upon men's shoulders, or Camels backs, as the
Prophet Esaias excellently describes the manner of their Procession, Esa. 46.1,
2, 3. But contrariwise the true God bears his Children, and supporteth them
from the womb, even to their old age, and gray hairs.

3. The Heathen Gods, as S. Augustine observes in the Siege of Troy saved not
them that worshipped them, but were saved by them from Fire and Spoil;
whereupon he infers, what folly was it to worship such Gods, for the
preservation of the City and Country, which were not able to keep their own
keepers; but the true God preserves them that serve him, and hides them under
the shadow of his wings.

Of the great multitude and diversity of the Gods, acknowledged and worshipped
by the Pagans.
1. THe Assyrians worshipped as many Gods as they had Towns.

2. The Persians had as many Gods as there be Stars in the Heaven, and Fires on
Earth.

3. The Greeks had as many Gods as they had Fancies.

4. The Egyptians had as many Gods as they Sowed, or planted Fruits, or as
the Earth brought forth Fruits of it self.

5. To be short, the Romans in conquering the World, did conquer all those
Vanities, and they wanted not wit, to devise others of their own brain.

Let us learn by this what the Gods of the Pagans and Gentiles were.
1.
1. IT is written of Ewhemere of Tegea, That, the cause why he was called an
Atheist, was for that he wrote the true History, and Genealogy of the heathen
Gods.

2. Showing that they were Kings, Princes, and great Personages.

3. Whose Images being kept for a Remembrance of them, were turned into Idols.

4. Their High and worthy Doings into yearly Gamings.

5. And their Honourings into Worshippings.

2.
1. ANd Seneca writes in his Book of Superstition, that the Gods, as he says,
which were called inviolable and immortal, were dumb and senceless Images,
disguised in the shapes of Men, of Beasts, and of Fishes, and some in ugly and
ill favored Monsters.

2. That the Daemones, which were the Devils, which possessed those Images, did
require worse things for their service, then the horriblest Tyrants that ever
were.

3. As that men should Gash themselves, Maime, and Lame themselves, Geld
themselves, and offer to them in Sacrifice, Men, Women, and Children.

Seeing the Romans brought into Rome, the Gods of all the Nations, whom they
had conquered; It is demanded how it happened, that the God of the Ancient
Jews, which was the true, and the only God, and none other did find no place
there.
1. CIcero, in his Oration for Flaccus, answers; That that beseemed not the
Majesty of the Empire.

2. But in his conscience, did Bacchus, Anubis, Pryapus, and their shameful
Nightwakes, and Mysteries, celebrated in the Dark, yield Renown to the State of
the Empire?

3. Nay, if he will say the Truth, they knew that the God of Israel, and none
other, was the true God.

4. And that for the harboring of him, it behoved them to drive away all the
rest.

5. And they had for so long a time, fed the people in Idolatry, that they
were afraid, as many Princes also, to be cast and driven away by their
Subjects, in receiving their rightful Lord.

They were Devils who were worshipped by the Pagans, under the Name of their
false Gods.
1. THe Gods of the Pagans were men.

2. Under the Names of those men, the Devils made themselves to be worshipped.

3. The Devils to get credit, and to authorize themselves, did borrow the Name
of men, and very often the Names of most wicked men.

4. And in their Oracles, when they were asked what they were, they said that
they were those men.

5. As for Example, he that was worshipped at Delphos, said he was the Son of
Latona, Esculapius said, he was the Son of Apollo, and Mercury said, he was the
Son of Jupiter, and of Maja, as we read in their Oracles rehearsed by
Porphyrius.

6. Now what honest man does not make difficulty, for never so great gain, to
make use of the Name of a wicked man; Nay, who does not abhor the Name, and the
very remembrance of such an one.

7. And who then will not conclude that those Devils were worse then those
wicked men, who would win credit, clothed of the skins of such wicked men.

1. The Sybils speak but of one only God. 2. And do cry also against the false
Gods.

1. IT is disputed among the Learned, by what Spirit the Sybils did speak,
because it is not unconvenient that God should compel the very Devils to set
forth his Praises.

2. Howsoever it be, they speak but of one only God, saying, There is but
only one true God, right, great, and everlasting, Almighty, and Invincible,
which sees every thing, but cannot be seen himself of any fleshly man;
Lactantius lib. 1. cap. 6.

3. Also they cry out against the false Gods, and exhort men to beat down their
Altars, accounting them happy who shall dedicate themselves to the glorifying
of only one God.

Among the diverse Religions of Pagans, there were some manifestly impious and
wicked.
1. SOme worshipping the Creatures in Heaven, yea, and on Earth, as the
Egyptians did in old time, and as the Tartarians do at this day.

2. Some offering up Men in Sacrifices, as the Carthaginians did in old time;
and as the Western Isles do yet at this day.

3. And other-some permitting things, not only contrary to all Laws, but also
even horrible, and loathsome to nature.

4. If all this was good, I pray you what good does remain, or what evil is
there in the World?

Of the False Worship of the Idolatrous Heathen.
1. THe Idolatrous Heathen did render a Religious Worship.

2. And were not content only to offer Beasts to their Gods, as the Jews did
to the true God, but also they did offer men.

3. For in some places they Sacrifice their Children, as among the Moabites: In
others their Fathers, as among the Triballi: Elsewhere their Princes, or
Priests, as among the Indians: And in some Countries Themselves, as among the
Americans.

4. Yet for all this their throwing themselves into, or causing others to pass
through the fire to their Moloch, or Saturn, or Abaddon, they are not to be
accounted true worshippers; and such worship is not true, but false.

5. Because what they do in this kind is not done by Gods Commandment, nor
intended to the honor of the true God, but it is in obedience and to the
honor of an Idol, or Devil, whom they worship instead of the true God.

Of the Falsehood of the Modern Jews Religion, in particular.
1.
THey serve, and honor only one God, but they soil with many Fables the
Doctrine of the nature of God, and of the Providence which they acknowledge, as
it clearly appears by the Fables which are related by Buxtorfius.

2.
The Modern Jews seek the means of their reconciliation in some outward
Ceremonies, in Washings, and Purifications, and such other like things, whose
Conscience being awaked, they are forced to acknowledge, that by such things
the Remorse of the Conscience, and the Sting of Sin, cannot be plucked out from
the sinful Man.

3.
1. The Modorn Jews, although it seems that they keep the Bark of the Law, yet
they deny the Truth thereof.

3. Besides, they give false Interpretations to the said Law, as it is to be
seen in diverse places of the New Testament.

4. Moreover, they forge and invent many absurd things, concerning the Messiah,
and the Kingdom thereof; As also concerning Eternal Life, all contrary to the
Doctrine of the Old Testament.

Of the Religion of the Modern Jews.
In what respects now the Judaical Religion is opposite to Christ.
1. THe Jews Religion is opposite to Christ, in two respects principally.

First, In retaining the old Ceremonies of Moses Law, which were shadows of
things to come, Romans 10.4. Heb. 10.1. and had their accomplishment in Christ;
For that which S. Paul says concerning Circumcision, is to be understood of
all other Ceremonies, Gal. 4.9. and 5.2. They which entangle themselves with
that Yoke of Bondage under those impotent, and beggarly rudiments, are
abolished from Christ, and Christ does profit them nothing.

Secondly, In devising a multitude of strange and new Superstitions, coined in
the Mint of their Rabinish conceits, contrary not only to the Gospel of Jesus
Christ, but even to their own Law; Which Deutorologies of theirs, our Savior
condemns, Mat. 15.3.6. When he says, That they transgressed the Commandment
of God, and made it of none effect, by their own Tradition.

4, Both these ways do the Jews show their enmity to Christ, and Christian
Religion, and are thereby retained, and encouraged in their Errors.

Jesus Christ is the true Messiah.
1. MAugre all, Christ is the true Messiah.

2. Whatsoever was prophesied of the Messiah, is performed in Christ.

1. Christ came of the Stock of David, and of the Root of Jesse, so should the
Messiah.

2. Christ was born of a Virgin, so should the Messiah. Christ's Star appeared,
and the Princes did worship him. Christ was born in Bethlehem. He fled out of
Judea into Egypt. The Children were slain for his sake. He was called out of
Egypt, and was called a Nazareth; All which things were prophesied of the
Messiah.

3. He had John Baptist his forerunner, and crier, and that was foretold of the
Messiah.

4. He vanquished the Devils, and had the Angels to minister unto him, which
was foretold of the Messiah.

5. He called his Disciples, and his Conversation was in Galilee, foretold of
the Messiah.

6. His Miracles were altogether Divine, and from the power of God, prophesied
of the Messiah.

7. His Preaching and Conversation were in humility and gentleness, foretold of
the Messiah.

8. He was reproached, reviled, whipped, and Crucified; foretold of the Messiah.

9. He Rose, and Triumphed; forespoken of the Messiah.

10. He called the Gentiles unto the unity of Faith; fore prophesied of the
Messiah.

2.
1. The Messiah must be true God, and true Man; so was Christ.

2. The true time when the Messiah should be born, was when Judea should be
subject unto the Romans; Christ was born in that time.

3. The Messiah should be born of a Virgin; so was Christ, as S. Matthew does
witness.

4. The Place where the Messiah should be born was Bethlem; the same is where
Christ was born, according to the Evangelists.

5. Things forespoken by Esaias, and foretold by David, concerning the M^ssiah,
were fulfilled in Christ, as the Preaching of the Apostles, the banding of
Pilate, and of Herod; the Kingdom of Christ after the death of the Cross; his
sitting at the right hand of God; and the destruction of the Jews for killing
the Anointed.

6. Also the Prophesies concerning the Miracles of the Messiah, concerning the
slaughtering of good Men; concerning the Calling of the Gentiles; are
accomplished in Christ.

7. Also are the Prophesies of the death of the Messiah, of his Resurrection,
and of his Ascension into Heaven.

8. All these things Prophesied of the Messiah, being accomplished in Christ,
it follows against the Jews that he is to be believed, and worshipped as the
only Son of God, and Savior of the world.

The Jews shall be converted to Christ before the End of the World.
1. THe Scripture has determined, that this Conversion of the Jews shall be;
that appears Romans 11.26. And so all Israel shall be saved,

2. But of the day and year of this Conversion the said Scripture has said
nothing.

3. All that we dare say of it, is by way of probability.

4. And it may be comprised in the following Propositions.

1. The Conversion of the Jews is not as yet past; for though some be here and
there converted, yet the promise being more general, is not yet fulfilled.

2. It will not be long before the second coming of our Savior Jesus Christ,
but toward the latter end of the world.

3. Nor when that day shall be; that is to say, when God will convert this
Nation, or come in the Clouds of Heaven to Judge the Earth, no man can tell: It
is not for us to know the times and seasons, which the Father has put in his
own power, Acts 1.6.

4. If we say so little of so great a Point, our Apology is, that of what we
know not, we speak not.

5. If any man out of a proud spirit, for ostentation, shall take upon him to
determine the time, we profess that we believe him not.

6. We dispute not whether they shall have a Policy, and shall recover the holy
Land, and dwell there; for it is likely they shall never recover it, because we
find no such promise.

We must have pity and compassion of the blindness of the Jews, and pray God
earnestly, that they may be enlightened with the saving knowledge of God, his
Christ, and holy Gospel.
1. FOr if their Case be to be pitied and lamented, who through bodily
blindness run into innumerable mischiefs, and fall at last into a deep gulf
without hope of recovery; how much more should we pity and bewail their
miserable condition, who through spiritual blindness plunge themselves for the
present into far greater evils, and at last fall irrecoverably into the Pit of
everlasting destruction.

2. Neither let their fury and faultiness in opposing Christ in his truth and
members, lessen our pity, but rather increase it.

3. For what can they do otherwise, so long as they are under this heavy
Judgment of Spiritual blindness; who is angry with a blind man because he
goes out of his way, or stumbleth at every block, or falls into every pit
and ditch? yea, who does not pity him in all, or any of these miseries, and
labors not that he may either prevent, or be delivered out of them.

4. And how much more then should we stand thus affected toward those who lie
under the punishments of spiritual blindness and frenzy, which without all
comparison are greater than the other, and much more desperate and durable.

What things from Christians do alienate and detain the Jews from Christianity.
1. IT is on one side the Idolatry of the Papists, they see in Babylon some
Sacrifice to Idols, some prostrate themselves before Creatures; and other such
Idolatries.

2. And on the other side the Libertinage of the Protestants, and their profane
Life, and bad Conversation.

3. For when the Jews do see that the Papists believes not well, and that the
Protestants live not well, it is a Rock of offense to them, that they can
approve neither the one, nor the other.

Let us help and set forward the Conversion of the Jews, and how.
1. LEt us to that end endeavor by our pure, and sincere service of God, by
our Zeal, by our Godly Life, by our just Dealing, and by our good Conversation,
to give light unto the Jews, to provoke them to Emulation, and to win them to
Christ.

2. That there may be one Fold, and one Shepherd, as our Savior speaks, John
10.12.

3. Let us so behave our selves toward the Jews, as S. Peter taught once the
Jews, to behave themselves toward us, 1 Pet. 2.12.

Have your Conversation honest among the Gentiles, that they by your good
works, which they shall see, may glorify God in the day of their Visitation.

4. Example is very powerful, there is nothing more available to the winning of
one that believes not, than the good conversation, and life of him that does
believe; S. Peter teaches that, 1 Epist. 3.1.

Of the Falsehood of the Religion of Turks, and Mahumetans in particular.
1.
THe Mahumetans have learned of the Christians, to serve and honor only one
God; But they soil with many fables, the Doctrine of the Nature of God, and of
the Providence which they acknowledge, which appears by their Alcoran.

2.
The Mahumetans seek the means of their Reconciliation, in some outward and
foolish Ceremonies, in Washings, and Purifications, and such other like things,
whose conscience being awaked, they are forced to acknowledge (as we have said
also of the Jews) that by such things, the Remorse of the Conscience, and the
Sting of Sin, cannot be plucked out from the sinful Man.

3.
Among the Turks.

1. Plurality of Women,

2. Private Vengeance,

3. The Murder of Brethren by their Emperor, are things in recommendation,
and praised.

4. That which they hold concerning the Life to come, relishes nothing but the
Fable.

5. They make their happiness, to consist in the satisfying of their Carnal
lusts.

FINIS.

