(...).

THE Spiritual Vertigo: OR TURNING SICKNESS OF Soul-Unsettlednesse IN Matters
of Religious Concernment.

The Nature of it opened, the Causes assigned, the Danger discovered, and
Remedy prescribed.

As it was lately delivered to the Church of God at Great YARMOUTH, By JOHN
BRINSLEY, Minister of the Gospel there.

And now presented unto a Public View, as a needful Antidote against the
Infection of those diverse and strange Doctrines, wherewith in these unsettled
Times many (possibly well-meaning, but) unwary and unstable souls are carried
about, to the great disquietment of the Church, the dishonor and prejudice of
Gods true Religion, the hazarding of others, and eminent indangering of their
own Souls

Jam. 1. 8. (...). Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed
to and fro, etc. Romans 16. 17. Now I beseech you, Brethren, mark them which
cause Divisions and Offenses, etc. London, Printed for Tho. Newberry, and are
to be sold at his Shop in Cornhill near the Royal Exchange, 1655.

TO All the Fixed STARS in Englands Horizon, Whether Ministers or others, who
in these loose and unsettled times, do yet (through Grace) remain stable as to
matters of Religious concerncernment. Specially those in the Town of Great
YARMOUTH.
(Highly and deservedly honored in the Lord,)
YOu see what Matters they are I have here to deal with; Not Civil, but
Religious: The former of these I leave to the wise Providence of that Most
High, who rules in the Kingdom of men, and gives it to whomsoever he will,
Dan. 4. 17. The latter I look upon as properly within the Sphere of my sacred
function. And being so, I have taken occasion to deal therewith according to
the exigence of the present Times: which being themselves unstable, are apt to
render those that live in them like unto themselves, as the Ship does the
Passengers that are embarked in it. Hence is it that vertiginous distempers (as
to a secondary cause of them,) are grown so Epidemical in this our Climate at
this day; that in this our Heaven (so the Church is frequently styled in the
Book of Revelations) there should be so many Planets, wandering Stars (it is St.
Jude's word, Jude 13.) to be seen in every quarter of it; so many every where
carried about with diverse and strange doctrines, to the no small disquietment
of the Church, the high dishonor, and great prejudice of Gods true Religion,
with the eminent indangering of their own souls. That you are not in this
number, this you owe to that Grace, by which the Heart of man is established.
And that you may not be so, is my design in this Treatise: wherein I have,
according to my weak skill, done (or at least endeavored to do) what becomes
a spiritual Physician, Opened the Nature, assigned the Causes, discovered the
Danger of, and prescribed a Remedy proper and Sovereign for, this Malady. And
these my good Intentions I do here present to a public view; desiring (what I
do not wholly despair of) that they may be in some degree useful and
successful, if not for the reclaiming of those who are already turned aside
from the way of truth, yet for the preventing of the like deviations in others.
Which that they may be, let them not want the additional Ingredient of your
Prayers: For which I shall rest

Yours obliged to serve you in the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Ioh. Brinsley.
Yarmouth, March 19. 1654.
(...) THE Spiritual VERTIGO; OR TURNING SICKNESS OF SOUL-UNSETTLEDNESSE IN
Matters of Religious concernment.
Heb. 13. 9. Be not carried about with diverse and strange doctrines; For it is
a good thing that the heart be established with grace, etc.]
IT is not for nothing that the Ministers, Watchmen.
Prophets, the Ministers of God in the Language of the Old Testament are
sometimes called by the name of Watchmen. Son of Man, I have made thee a
Watchman, (says the Lord to his Prophet Ezekiel) Ezekiel. 3. 17. What the
Watchmans Office is, it is not unknown; viz. to stand upon the Watchtower, to
look out for, and give warning of approaching dangers, or Enemies. And such is
the office of the Ministers of God; Thus to watch for the souls of men, (which
is their proper work, as the 17. verse of this Chapter sets it forth, Obey them
that have the oversight over you, etc. for they watch for your souls), to look
out and descry what spiritual dangers do threaten them, and to give timely
warning of them. Son of man, (says the Lord to that Prophet in the place
forecited, Ezekiel. 3. 17.) I have made thee a Watchman unto the house of Israel,
therefore hear the Word at my mouth, and give them warning. This did that
Apostle who is commonly reputed the Penman of this Epistle, the Apostle St.
Paul. He made this his work to warn others. So he tells the Elders of Ephesus
at Miletum, propounding himself unto them (as to all other Ministers of the
Gospel), as a pattern for their imitation, Act. 20. 31. Remember (says he)
that by the space of three years I ceased not to warn every one night and day
with tears. And writing to his Colossians, he inculcates the same, telling
them how this was one thing which he ever had an eye at in his preaching of
Christ; Whom we preach, (says he) warning every man, Col. 1. 28. And this is
the design which my self have upon you at the present.

God having by his Providence and Occasion of taking up this Text.
Ordinance set me as a Watchman in this place, my desire is to approve my self
faithful in discharging that trust committed unto me, by giving a seasonable
warning unto you of that which may endanger your souls. I presume there are
few, or none of you, but take notice of a flood of dangerous and
soul-destroying errors, which in these unsettled times have broke in upon the
Church of God in this Nation. Some of which have already entered in at these
gates; and others in all likelihood are treading upon their heels, ready every
day to follow them. Now upon this account it is, that I have singled forth this
portion of Scripture, wherein the Apostle gives the like Caveat to his
Hebrews, that I intend to you; forewarning them of the like danger, willing
them to beware of it. [ Be not carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines;] Then seconding and backing Parts Caution. Reason.
that Caution, that Admonition with a Reason of it, wherein also he comprehends
an Antidote, or Remedy against it. [ For it is a good thing that the heart be
established with Grace.] These are the Parts of the Text, which by Gods
assistance I shall handle distinctly; beginning with the first; the Precaution,
or Admonition,

Be not carried about with diverse and Part 1. Admonition, or Caution.
strange Doctrines.] Wherein (for the better handling of the words) we may take
notice of two things; The Affect, or Malady, and the Ground or Cause of it. The
Affect or Malady, a spiritual wherein the Malady, Cause of it.
Vertigo, or Giddiness, [ Be not carried about]. The Ground or Cause of it, [
Diverse and strange Doctrines]. Touch we upon these severally by way of
Explication; beginning with the Affect or Malady it self.

Be not carried about]. (...), 1. The Malady. Sic etiam Chrysistomus. Hom. 13.
ad loc.
(says the Original); which some Manuscripts (as both Beza and Grotius take
notice of it) read, (...), Be not carried away. So the vulgar Latin (therein
following the Syriack) renders it, Nolite abduci, Be not led, or carried away:
Or be not transported beyond the truth, and your selves. Or Ne insanite (as
Grotius expounds it), Do not dote, be not frantic and mad. So he observes the
word to be used by the Seventy, 1 Samuel 21. 13. where it (...).
is said of David, that he feigned himself mad; distracted, frantic. A sense
which will very fitly suit with the Apostles meaning in the Text. (...), Be not
distracted. made frantic and mad with diverse and strange doctrines.

So it is with some Errors, some A madness to embrace some Opinions.
Heresies; It is even a Madness to embrace them. As it was in the doting
Prophet Balaam, who would still go on in his way, in attempting to curse the
people of God, though expressly contrary to the mind of God, until such time as
the brute and dumb creature reproved and convinced him, this was in him no
other but Madness. So the Apostle St. Peter expressly terms it, 2 Pet. 2. 16.
The dumb Ass (says he) speaking with man's voice, forbade the madness of the
Prophet. Even so fares it with many Heretics, as of former ages, so in the
present times, who have broached and maintained diverse Opinions and Doctrines
so clearly and expressly contrary to the revealed will of God in the Scriptures,
as that it can be accounted no other then Madness in them: A plain evidence
that they have been, and are besides themselves. This was that which Festus
thought and said of Paul, when he heard him preaching of such strange doctrine,
such as he had never heard of before. He cried out, (...), Paul thou art
besides thy self, Act. 26. 24. And truly, what he spoke ignorantly and falsely,
we may say it knowingly and justly of some Heretics in this and former Ages:
when we hear of their strange, monstrous, and unheard of Doctrines, so
expressly contrary to the word of truth, we may without any breach of Charity
conclude they are besides themselves, they are Mad. So was that old Heretic
accounted Manicheus insaniam sundens. Vide August. de Haeres. and contra
Faustum.
in the ancient Church, whom the Greeks alluding to his Persian name Manes (as
if he had Omen in Nomine) called Manicheus, which signifies (as Augustine
interprets it) a Madman, or one pouring out of madness: which they did in
reference to his many strange and mad Opinions, he being a very sink of
Heresy, in whom most of the Errors of former Ages from Christ's time to his
were concentred and met together. And truly such there have been in the Ages
after him, almost in every age some, whose opinions have been so wild, so
monstrous, that men cannot conceive, that had they not been given up at least
to a spiritual distraction and madness, they would ever have embraced them,
or hearkened to them. And I wish I might not so truly speak it, that some, yea
many, such there are to be found at this day in this poor distracted Nation,
concerning whom I think it were the greatest piece of Charity that we can
exercise toward them, to pass this Censure upon them, that they are besides
themselves, under a Spiritual, if not Corporal distraction: which if they were
not, they would never do as they do, nor say as they say.

And indeed it is the nature of diverse Diverse and strange Doctrines apt to
distract those that hearken to them.
and strange doctrines, if men will hearken to them, to make them so; to
distract them, to put them besides themselves; even to make them mad. A truth I
think never more sadly verified then in and by the experience of this Age and
Nation wherein we live: wherein many of the Ancient Heresies which have been
dead and buried, and lain rotting in the grave of oblivion for many hundreds of
years, are now revived and raised up again; insomuch that many by reason of
those ghostly and ghastly apparitions coming out of the bottomlesse-pit of
hell, and walking so freely abroad without check or control even at noonday,
are (as I say) even scared out of their wits, plainly, according to that sense
of this word, (...), being distracted, put besides themselves.

But I shall not fasten upon that reading The Ordinary reading accepted.
of the word, though (as I said) proper enough to the Apostles meaning in the
Text. The generality of Copies read it as our Translation renders it, (...), Ne
circumferimini, Be not carried about. Verbum Paulinum (says Pareus ad Text.
Pareus upon it): A word used sometimes by the Apostle St. Paul. So we find it
in that Text, which running Parallel with this, will let some light into it,
viz. Ephesians. 4. 14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro,
and carried about with every wind of doctrine. (...), Ne circumferamur, Not
carried about. And so the word Beza Gr. Annot. in loc.
here is most properly read, as Beza rightly collects from the opposition
betwixt this Verb and that other in the following clause. Be not carried about,
but be established. Where (...), is opposed to (...), Establishment to
Unsettlement.

So reading the word, come we in the Sense of the word expounded.
next place to enquire concerning the sense and meaning of it.

Be not carried about]. A Metaphorical A Metaphor fetched from diverse heads.
expression, very fitly setting forth the nature of this Malady, the
unsetlednesse of some Christians, who harkening to diverse and strange
doctrines, are carried to and fro, and carried about. The Metaphor I find
derived and fetched from diverse heads. Pareus writing upon the Text, gives me
the choice of two.

1. It may be taken from a Wheel, 1. From a Wheel. Verbum (...) Metaphoram
habet a Rota^, quae continuo motu circumacta, parts summas and imas semper
commutat, et nunquam consistit: vel a stipulis quas ventus hinc inde in gyrum
versat. Paereus in Text. A Wheel a lively Emblem of Inconstancy.
which is turned round, and carried about; which it is either by its own
motion, or by the hand that moves it. A lively Emblem of Inconstancy, and
Unsettlednesse. David imprecating the implacable Enemies of God and his Church,
makes use of this expression; O my God, make them like a wheel, Psalm. 83. 13.
A Wheel being set upon a declivity, the side of a hill, it is restless, never
leaving rolling and turning till it come to the Bottom. And such a condition
David there wishes to those his, and Gods enemies; that they might have no
rest or peace; but as they were instruments of disquiet to others, so they
might have no quiet themselves; but that being set in slippery places, they
might be cast down to destruction (as elsewhere he speaks, Psalm. 73. 18.),
still rolling downwards, till they came to their own place, the bottom of Hell.
And truly such is the condition of some poor unstable souls; who are ready to
follow every new doctrine, and way; they are like a wheel, which turns (...).
Heinsius ad Text. ex Hesichi^.
round (which is the proper signification of the word in the Text): So do they
with the times and places wherein they live. Being now of this mind, then of
that. Up and down. Even as the wheel, which turning round has now this spoke
uppermost, then another, and then another, until at length that which was
uppermost comes to be lowest, Even so is it with them in matter of Opinion and
practice. Up and down. Now crying up this doctrine, or this way, as the truth
and way of God: And soon after decrying, renouncing, disclaiming, trampling
upon it. Now joining in fellowship and Communion with this Society; soon after,
without any just cause, falling off from that to another, and from that to a
third; and so going on till it may be not knowing whither further to go, either
they come round again, re-imbracing their first love, or else (as the sad
experience of the present times tells us) they come to trample all Religion
under their feet.

And such wheels how many in this The worst kind of wheels, temporizing
Apostates.
Nation at this day? unstable Christians. Amongst whom some there are, (whom I
look upon as the worst kind of them) who instead of serving the Lord, serve the
times (and that in a far other sense then ever the Apostle meant it, if we
should read that Text, as some Copies do, Romans 12. 11. which for (...), read
(...), for serving the Lord, serving the time), turning about with them:
embracing and following those opinions and ways which the times smile upon;
and which may be any ways advantageous to themselves in point of Credit or
Profit.

Such a Wheel was that notorious Ecebolus infamous for turning with the Times.
Ecebolus Sophista ad mores Imperatorum mutabat Religionem. Ar t* ad Text.
Apostate and Changeling, Ecebolus, or Ecebolius (taken notice of by Aretius
writing upon the Text), the Constantinopolitane Orator, of whom
Ecclesiastical-Histories make frequent mention, telling us how he still turned
round (as we have seen some fanes do) under the Crown, conforming his Religion
to the Religion of the Prince, the Emperor for the time being, being one while
a Christian, then a Heathen, then a Christiah again; for which at length he
grew not more infamous to others then to himself; insomuch that being
Prostratus ante Templum dicebat, Calcate me sa em insipidum. Aret. ibid. vide
Socratis Histor. Eccl.
convinced of the evil of his way, he came and cast down himself at the
Church-door, at the feet of those Christians who had continued constant in
their Profession, bidding them to tread and trample upon him, Calcate me
insipidum salem, Tread upon me unsavory salt, worthless creature, good for
nothing. Such was he in his own apprehension. And (truly) this is that which
such Weather-cocks, such Time-servers. such Turn-coats must look for. However
for the present they may by this politic practice of theirs in changing their
coat save their skin, escape some sufferings, and gain some temporal
advantages, yet in the end they will come to be justly accounted and looked
upon as unsavory salt, neither owned by God, nor his people. Which let it make
all you that hear it afraid of it. Take heed that ye be not thus carried about,
turned about as wheels. This is a first head from whence this Metaphor in the
Text may be derived.

A second is from Chafe, which being 2. Chafe*
a light empty husk is carried to and fro, and whirled about with the wind.
That is another of the Psalmists Imprecations, Psalm, 35. 5. Let them (says he,
speaking of the Enemies of God) be as Chafe before the wind; which our new
Annotation explains, Let them be smitten with the spirit of Giddiness. And the
Prophet Isaiah, setting forth the doom of Isreal's Enemies, makes use of the
like expressions, Isai. 17. 13. God shall rebuke them, and they shall flee afar
off, and shall be chased as the chafe of the Mountains before the wind, and
like a rolling thing before the whirlwind]. Lively expressions of a total rout,
of an utter dissipation. Chafe being (as I said) only an empty husk, it
flies before the wind. So does the Chafe upon the floor, in the valley; much
more chaff upon the Mountain; where the wind has more force, there being
nothing to restrain the violence of it, or to stop or stay the thing which is
driven before it. And like a rolling thing] Like Thistledown, (so the Margin
in our new Translation reads it) then which nothing is lighter. Or (as some
others render it) Sicut pulvis rotatus, as dust whirled about with the
whirlwind. Such a condition is there threatened to Isreal's enemies in a
Temporal way.

And (truly) even such is the Condition Empty-soules like Chafe.
of some poor unstable souls in a spiritual way. Thus are they carried about,
and carried away. Being but Chafe, having in them only an empty husk of a
formal profession, wanting the kernel, the truth of grace, not having in them
the Root of the matter (as Job phraseth it, Job 19. 28.), they are carried
about with the wind of every Tentation. Being as light as the Thistledown,
having no substance or solidity in them, they are tossed to and fro with every
breath of wind that blows upon them. Both these are very apt and elegant
Similitudes, fitly explaining and illustrating the force and meaning of the
Phrase in the Text.

But besides these, there are two other (which our new Annotation puts into
my hand) no less apt and proper then either of those. The one is of the Waters
of the Sea; the other of the Clouds of the Air: Both which are carried about by
the wind, now this way, now that way. Such are the waters of the Sea; never
standing still, especially if there be any wind stirring: whence it is that
water is made an Emblem of Instability; Unstable as water (says Jacob of his
son Reuben, Genesis 49. 4.) And for the Clouds of the air, especially if they be
light and empty, wanting those libramenta, those Ballancings which the Lord
speaks of to Job, Job 37. 16. how are they carried about from one quarter of
the heavens to another? And even such is the condition of some unstable souls.

They are, in the third place, like the 3. Waves of the Sea.
Waters or waves of the Sea. That is St. James's comparison, Iam. 1. 6. He that
wavereth (says he) is like a wave of the Sea, driven with the wind and tossed.
So are the waves of the Sea; by the force of the winds they are driven to and
fro, carried sometimes this way, sometimes that; one while lifted up to Heaven,
and by and by depressed again as low as the Deep. And even so fares it with
unsettled spirits; they are still fluctuating to and fro, up and down; now of
this mind, this opinion, this Judgment, this Resolution, then of that.

Or (in the fourth place) like the 4. Clouds of the Air.
Clouds of the Air. That is St. Iudes comparison, ver. 12. of his Epistle,
where speaking of some Heretics sprung up in his time, among other Characters
which he gives of them, he calls them (...), Empty Clouds; Clouds without
water carried about of winds. (...), the word is the same with that in the
Text. Carried about.

Here is then a fourfold head from whence this Metaphor may be derived. And to
some one or more of these I conceive our Apostle here to allude in the Text,
whilst he gives this Caveat to his Hebrews, that they should not be thus
carried about. Be not carried about, as Wheels, as Chafe, as Waves, as
Clouds. And thus I have shown you the Affect, or Malady it self. Spiritual
Unsettlednesse.

Come we (in the next place) to take notice of the Ground, or Cause of it;
which we have in the words following.

With diverse and strange Doctrines]. The Ground or Cause of this Malady, A wind
of Doctrine.
Here is the wind which carries about these Waves, these clouds. A wind of
Doctrine. So the Apostle calls it in that place, to which I have had, and
shall have frequent recourse, Ephesians. 4. 14. Be not carried about with every wind
of Doctrine. (...), Every wind. An elegant Metaphor (says Calvin upon Pulchra
metaphora, dum omnes hominum doctrinas, quibus ab Evangelii simplicitate
distrahimur, appellat ventos. Calvin. ad loc.
it) fitly expressing the nature of all those doctrines of men (as the Apostle
calls all false doctrines, Col. 2. 22.) which draw men aside from the
simplicity of the Gospel; whatever they may seem to be, what noise soever they
may make in the ears of those that hearken to them, and how prevalent soever
they may be with them, yet they are but wind, vain and empty speculations.

And concerning this wind it is, that our Apostle here (as elsewhere) warns
Christians, that they should take heed of being carried about with it. Hence is
that natural disease in the Head, which we call a Vertigo, the Turning
Sickness or Giddiness; it is caused by wind, by flatulent vapors affecting
the Brain. And from a like cause many times is this spiritual Vertigo, the
unsetlednesse of Christians in the matters of God; They are turned and carried
about with this wind of Doctrine.

But what Doctrine? That we have False and Heretical, called diverse and strange
Doctrines.
here set forth by a twofold Epithet: Diverse and strange Doctrines. Two words
(as Lapidee notes upon them) fitly agreeing to False and Heretical doctrines:
Which are,

1. (...), Various, diverse. So they 1. Diverse. Nec sibi nec veritati
consentaneae, Pareus in Text.
may be said to be, in as much as they differ always from the truth, and often
from themselves.

1. Always from the Truth. Being 1. Always differing from the Truth.
no other but Lies. So Paul calls Heretical doctrine, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. a Lie.
And speaking of Heretical Teachers, he calls them (...), teachers of lies, 2 Timothy 4. 2. And so, Diverse. Truth (as Aquinas notes upon the Text) Cum veritas
consistit in medio, cujus est unitas, etc. Doctrina ergo fidei una est, etc.
Aquin. Com. ad loc.
is but one, being like the Center; Errors are many, like the several points of
the Circumference; which as they all differ from the Center, so one from
another. And so do Errors; all differing from the truth, which is but one; they
differ betwixt themselves.

2. Yea, and often differ from themselves. 2. And often from themselves.
Such is the guize of Heretics, having no sure ground to stand upon, they are
often flitting, running from one Error to another; they do not sibi constare;
but are often inconsistent with themselves, self-contradicting, saying and
unsaying with the same breath; denying and destroying that by Consequence,
which positively they assert and maintain: Thus false doctrines are said to be
Diverse. And,

2. Strange, (...). So termed again 2. Strange.
in a like double respect. Being strange to the Scriptures, and strange to the
Church.

1. To the Scriptures, not to be found 1. To the Scriptures.
in the Canon of the Old or New Testament; Not known to Christ or his Apostles.
Were they alive again they (...). Chrysostom. ad loc.
would be strange to them. They preached no such doctrine. They are no other
but humane Inventions, Commandments and Doctrines of men (as the Apostle
calls them in the place forecited, Col. 2. 22.); not delivered by God in his
Word, but invented by men. And being so, they may upon that account well be
called strange, having no acquaintance with the Scriptures.

And, secondly, strange to the Church. 2. To the Church
Such Doctrines as the true Church either never heard of, or at least never
owned, never acknowledged. New Doctrines. Such was Paul's doctrine to those
Athenian Philosophers, (...), (as they call it) A new doctrine, Act. 17. 19.
whereupon they charge him to be a setter up of strange gods, verse. 18. (...).
Strange deities; and a bringer of strange things to their ears, verse. 20.
Strange, because new. And such are Heresies unto the true Catholic Church of
God; either not known to it, or not known by it. And upon that account may well
be called strange.

Now concerning such doctrine it is The Apostles Caveat to his Hebrews: Not to
be carried about with such doctrines.
that the Apostle here gives this Caveat to his Hebrews, that they should
take heed of being seduced, of being carried about with them. Be not carried
about with diverse and strange doctrines.]

A useful, a needful Admonition. So A useful Admonition at that time upon a
double account.
it was to the Church at that time when the Apostle gave it. And that in a
twofold regard: 1. In regard that some such doctrines were then abroad. 2. Some
Christians were then carried about with those doctrines. Both which are
insinuated in the Text. And so it was.

1. Some such Doctrines were then 1. Such doctrines were then abroad.
abroad in the world, Diverse and strange doctrines. Such was that doctrine
which was then preached by the false Apostles, whose design was to make a
mixture of the Law and Gospel, to join them both together; pressing the
Observation of the Mosaical Law, not only the Moral, but Ceremonial Law, as
necessary to Justification and salvation. This did some and many in Paul's
time; who placed a great part of Religion in Ceremonial Observances. Such were
those Ordinances which he speaks of, Col. 2. 21. where he blames his
Colossians for dogmatizing, for complying with the false Apostles in subjecting
themselves to them; (...), Why are ye subject? How is it that ye suffer your
selves to be so inthralled unto such doctrinal Errors, and superstitious Rites
and Observances, viz. Touch not, taste not, handle not?] These were the
prescriptions and injunctions of those false Teachers; who by crying up these
Ceremonial Rites, corrupted the minds of those that would hearken to them, from
the simplicity that was in Christ (as he speaks, (2 Cor. 11. 3.), drawing off
the hearts of Christians from looking only unto Christ, and the free grace of
God in him for Justification and Salvation.

And this was one of those doctrines, those diverse and strange Doctrines, The
Ceremonial Law cried up by false Teachers.
which our Apostle here in the Text has an eye at. So much we may collect from
the latter Clause of the verse; where he says, It is good that the heart be
established with grace, not with meats.] i. e. Not with the choice of meats,
and drinks; using of some as clean, abstaining from others as unclean, under
which (by a Synecdoche) he comprehends all other Ceremonial observances (as I
shall show you hereafter). This did some of the Teachers of those Times press
upon Christians; therein teaching them a Doctrine diverse from, and contrary to
that which Paul had before taught; which was, that the Kingdom of God is not
meat and drink, Romans 14. 17. The Kingdom of Christ under the Gospel did not
consist in such outward observations.

And besides this there were at that time sundry other Doctrines abroad of like
nature; Diverse and strange Doctrines. Such were those which Saint Jude speaks
of, verse 4. of his Epistle, ( Jude 4.) There are certain men (says he,
speaking of false Teachers) crept in unawares]: (...), subrepserunt,
subintroierunt; they came in closely and covertly, coming underground, as
Pioners do, who sometimes enter a City by a Mine, while the guard is standing
upon the Walls. So did they insinuate themselves into the Church, coming both
unlooked for, and unsent. Not expected, or suspected by the Church; nor yet
sent by God; but taking the Ministry upon them of their own heads (as our New
Annotation paraphraseth upon that word). And so entering Gospel-Liberty turned
into Carnal Licentiousness.
what did they? why (among other things) they turned the grace of God into
Lasciviousness, and denied the only Lord God and Savior Jesus Christ. Both
these they did; and that as by their practice, so by their Preaching. Under a
pretense of crying up Gospel-liberty, and advancing the free grace of God in
the pardoning of sin, and justifying of sinners, they set open a wide door to
all kind of sensuality. So turning Evangelical Liberty into Carnal
Licentiousness. And they denied the only Lord God, and their Savior Jesus
Christ]. Such St. Peter had foretold of, 2 Pet. 2. 1. But there were false
Prophets among the people (says he, meaning the people of Israel under the Old
Testament), even as there shall be false Teachers among you (you Christians
under the New) who privily shall Christ denied.
bring in damnable Heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them. And what
he foretells, St. Jude (having an eye to that Prophecy, as he has almost
throughout his whole Epistle unto that second Epistle of St. Peter; the one
being looked upon but as a kind of abstract and summary of the other) shows
how even in his time it was come to pass. Such false and Heretical Teachers
then there were, who denied the Lord that bought them; denied the only Lord
God, and their Savior Jesus Christ: denied Christ to be God, who having paid a
price in it self sufficient for them, and being their Master and Savior by an
outward profession, they ought to have owned him. But they denied him: And that
as by their deeds, so by their doctrines.

This among others did thnt Simon, Simon Magus the Father of Heretics.
of whom we read, Act. 8. who was in his time, and still is, famous, (or rather
Infamous) for three things; his Sorcery, his Simonie, his Heresy. His Sorcery,
for which he was admired by the people, who cried him up for little less then
a God ( This man (say they) is the great power of God, verse. 10.); and was
afterward called for distinctions sake by the name of Simon Magus, Simon the
Magician. His Simonie, in offering money to purchase the Holy Ghost, the
extraordinary and miraculous gifts of it, from the Apostles, verse. 18. from
whence it is that that Sin (for such a sin still there is, what ever the
present Times think of it) bears his name, being called Simonie. And lastly,
his Heresy, for which he is no less famous in Ecclesiastical, then for those
two other in Sacred story. He being the Father of Heretics (as he is called),
the first Apostate under the Gospel, who broached and maintained diverse
Blasphemies, and damnable Opinions; Among other, Vide Augustine. de Haeresib.
denying the Trinity, and denying any other Christ but himself; affirming
himself to be the true God, (as afterward he was accounted at Rome, where
(through the just Judgment of God giving them up to that strong delusion, that
they should believe a lie), they who who in the days of Tiberius would not
acknowledge the Divinity of Christ, yet soon after in the days of Claudius*
erected a Statue to this Impostor with this blasphemous Inscription, Simoni Deo
Sancto, To Simon the Holy God. Thus did he bewitch the people, as by his
Sorcery, so by his Heresy. Wherein he being the Ringleader, wanted no
followers. Diverse there were who within a few years after, when he was gone off
from the Stage, stepped up in his room; owning most of his opinions, and adding
to them many other no less monstrous and absurd. Such was Menander, and Ebion,
and Cerinthus; The last of which was that Heretic, with whom St. John is said
to have refused to enter into the same Bath; and who is the reputed Father, the
first Author of the Millenary opinion concerning the temporal Kingdom of
Christ upon earth after the Resurrection, wherein his Subjects should live in
the full enjoyment of all kind of carnal and sensual pleasures and contentments.

These and some other Heretics and Heresies in the first age, in the Apostles
times* Hymeneus and Philetus.
Heresies did the first age bring forth. Among whom St. Paul takes notice of
two, Hymeneus and Philetus by name, who (among other Errors, as Error seldom
goes alone) denied the Resurrection of the Body, (as Simon Magus Augustine. de
Haeresib.
is said to have done before them) saying, That the Resurrection was past
already, 2 Timothy 2. 17. acknowledging (as is probable) no other Resurrection,
but that of the Soul, or of the Church in the Renovation, the new state of it
under the Gospel.

Besides these, St. John makes mention The Sect of the Nicolaitans
of another Sect, notorious in his time, the Sect of the Nicolaitans (so called
from Nicolas, one of the seven Deacons, mentioned, Act. 7. the reputed Father
of them, whether justly or no, is a question). This he does once and again in
that one Chapter, Revel. 2. First telling the Church of Ephesus to her deserved
commendation, that she hated the deeds of the Nicolaitans, ver. 6. then
charging it upon the Church of Pergamus as no small blemish to her, that she
had them (some of her Members) which held the doctrine of the Nicolaitans, ver.
15* what that doctrine was, Scripture is silent; but Ecclesiastical Histories
with one consent tell us, it was the renouncing of a Conjugall propriety
betwixt man and wife, and so allowing a promiscuous community; at which door
brake in many other horrid enormities not fit to be named amongst Christians.

To them soon after succeeded that The Gnostics too like some in the present
Times.
impure and infamous brood of the Gnostics, who were indeed the same Sect
under a diverse name, calling themselves by that name, Gnostics, from (...),
which signifies knowledge; which they of that Sect pretended to above all
others, who had either gone before them, or were contemporaries with them: Such
high thoughts had they of themselves, (as for the most part Heretics are not
wanting in that way); and thereupon gave themselves that proud title. Whereas
in truth those other styles were far more proper, which (as Augustine tells us)
were given them by others, who called them Borboritae, or Coenosi, Men given
over to wallow in the mire and filth of all kind of abominable uncleanness.
Such was their practice, and such was their Doctrine.

I might here yet go on, and (following the track of Ecclesiastical History)
show you what a flood of like monstrous errors after these broke in upon the
Church. The Golden Age of the Apostles and Evangelists being spent, then how
did false Teachers crowd in amain, infesting the Church, and assailing the
truth almost in every part of it? broaching and venting diverse and strange
doctrines; some, and many of which were so strange, as it cannot but amaze and
astonish any Christian head or heart to hear of them. A Catalogue whereof is
left to posterity by Epiphanius and Augustine, and some other of the Ancients.
But I shall not trouble you with any more of them. This being enough, as to our
present purpose, that such doctrines were then abroad; some of them come upon
the stage already, and others pressing after them.

Which latter also our Apostle Saint False Teachers foretold of.
Paul (if so be that he were the Penman of this Epistle, which for the present
I shall yield) took notice of. So much he tells the Ephesian Elders at
Miletum, Acts 20. 29. I know (says he) that after my departure from you shall
grievous Wolves enter in among you. What Wolves were these? Why, two sorts of
them. First, bloody Persecutors, whom he calls Wolves, and grievous Wolves,
(...), being like those Lupi vespertini, the evening Wolves, which the Prophet
Jeremy speaks of, Ier. 5. 6. which should not spare the flock, but make a
prey of the poor Lambs of Christ, sucking their blood. Such Wolves there were
many after Paul's departure (his dissolution) in that Neronian persecution, and
others following it. But besides these, there was another kind of Wolves, whom
Paul looked upon as no less dangerous, if not more. And those were white
Wolves, Wolves in sheeps clothing. So our Savior describes false Prophets,
Matthew. 7. 15. Men who had fair and promising outsides, specious apparances of a
harmless innocence; yea, and pretenders (it may be) to a more then ordinary
piety; but inwardly (says he) they are ravening wolves; such whose design is
to make a prey of the souls of men, to destroy them by their false doctrines.
Now such also the Apostle took notice of, that they should come after his
departure. So he tells them there more plainly in the verse following, verse.
30. Also of your own selves shall men arise, speaking perverse things, ((...),
preaching false and heretical doctrines* cross to the truth, and wrested
contrary to the mind of God in the Scriptures) that they may draw disciples
after them. (...), draw and pluck them as members from the mystical Body, so
making a separation therein, that they may gain a party to themselves, and so
be reputed singular and popular. Such Paul foresaw would arise to the great
indangering of the Church: which (as Grotius and others look upon it) was made
good in the forenamed Nicolaitans and Gnostics. Thus then in those first times
there were such doctrines as the Apostle here speaks of in the Text, Diverse
and strange doctrines.

And (in the second place) these doctrines 2. These false Doctrines were then
taking with some.
were then taking with some, with diverse. So (it seems) was that doctrine of
the false Apostles concerning the observation of the Ceremonial Law with the
Hebrews, the Jews, who had been educated and brought up in it, having sucked
it in (as it were) with their mothers milk, it was taking with them; insomuch
that they were already (some of them) carried away with it, and others in
danger of being so, (as the Caveat in the Text is conceived to import). And not
only they, but others also. This was that which Paul took notice of in his
Galatians, charging it upon them not without a wonderment to himself, Gal. 1.
6. I marvel (says he) that ye are so soon removed from him that has called
you into the grace of Christ, unto another Gospel. So it was; By the means of
the false Apostles, they were either already turned, or turning. Both which are
looked upon as employed in that word, (...), which being of the Passive voice,
lays the fault primarily upon those false teachers, by whose means they were
perverted: [ Ye are turned] And being of the present tense, it imports what was
in fieri, doing if not done. They were turning, well nigh turned. And from
what, and to what were they thus turned? Why, [ from him who has called you
into the grace of Jesus Christ] from Paul and his Doctrine, who by the
preaching of the Gospel to them, had called them to seek for Justification and
salvation only by faith in Christ. From this doctrine they were turned to
another Gospel; taught and brought to seek Justification in another way, (at
least in part) by the observation of Mosaicall rites and Ceremonies: Which Paul
there calls another Gospel: Not that it was so in truth. Well did he know
that there was no other Gospel but one; No other Name under heaven given among
men whereby they must be saved (as Peter elsewhere tells the Jews, Act. 4.
12.); no way or means of salvation appointed by God for lost mankind; save
only through the merit and mediation of Jesus Christ. But in as much as it was
a doctrine diverse from, and a depravation of the true Gospel, therefore he so
calls it; as he explaineth himself in the verse following, [ Which is not
another Gospel; but there be some that trouble you, and would pervert the
Gospel of Christ, v. 7.]. Thus were they carried about.

And what he saw in them as done, or doing, he feared the like in his
Corinthians. So much he tells them, 2 Cor. 11. 3. I fear (sairh he) lest by any
means, as the Serpent beguiled Eve through his subtlety, so your minds should
be corrupted, from the simplicity that is in Christ. This he also speaks in
reference to the doctrines of the false Apostles; who made a medly of the
Gospel, mixing their own Philosophical speculations, or Jewish Traditions, or
Ceremonial observances with it. By which means they corrupted and adulterated
that pure doctrine, even as pure and precious liquors are imbased and corrupted
by other mixtures. And concerning this Corruption Paul's jealousy was, that
they were ready to swallow it down; and so to be carried about with those
diverse and strange doctrines.

A thing that was no news in those Many seduced in the first and purest times.
first and purest times. This was that which our Savior himself foretold a
little before his death, Matthew. 24. 24. Where showing what should come to pass
before the destruction of Jerusalem, among other things, he says, There shall
arise false Christ's and false Prophets, etc. Insomuch that (if it were
possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. Intimating that many should be
seduced, and deceived by them. And the like Prophecy we meet withal in that
forecited place of St. Peter, 2 Pet. 2. where having in the first verse (as you
have heard) foretold of false Teachers that should come, in the next verse he
shows what success they should have; And many shall follow their pernicious
ways, ver. 2. And what he there forerelleth, St. Jude shows us how in his
time it came to pass. Having in the fourth verse of his Epistle in like manner
described the false Teachers of his time, in the sequel of the Epistle he sets
forth their followers; whom he calls Clouds without water, carried about of
winds, ver. 11. and in the next verse, Waves of the Sea, and wandering stars;
thereby denoting Christians who were inconstant in their profession; not like
fixed stars which are regular in their Motion, but like Planets, or Comets,
wandering from one opinion or way to another, being constant only in
inconstancy. Thus were there some, and not a few in those times, those
protoprimitive times, who were thus carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines. This is that which our Apostle says of Hymeneus and Philetus in the
place forecited, 2 Timothy 2. 17, 18. that by their pestilent doctrine in denying
of the Resurrection, they overthrew the faith of some. So as there was then a
just cause why he should here give out such an Admonition as this, Be not
carried about, etc.

A useful and a needful Caveat then; A useful Caveat at all times.
And no less in all the ages of the Church since; In every of which still
there have been some such doctrines held forth. So it has been; so it is at
this day (that I shall not need to tell you), and so it will be. This Calvin
Significat praeterea Apostolus, Ecclesiae Dei semper fore certamen cum
peregrinis doctrinis. Calvin. Com. in loc.
looks upon as a truth not obscurely hinted by the Apostle here in the Text;
that The Church in all ages must account to conflict and combat with diverse
and strange doctrines. And if there be teachers of them, it is not to be
imagined but that there will be some Disciples, some followers.

Q. But how comes it so to be? Qu. 1. How comes it to pass that there should
be such Doctrines held forth?
How comes this to pass? first, that there should be such doctrines held
forth? and then, that so many should be carried about with them? To these two
queries I shall return Answer severally.

A. 1. For the former; Know we (in Ans. 1. By Gods providential and effectual
Permission.
the first place) that this comes to pass not without a providence, and a
special providence. Herein (as in all other things) God has a hand; concurring
therewith not barely by his Permission, but (as Melancton calls it) by his
Effectual Efficax Permissio. Melanct.
Permission; most justly decreeing that they should be; whence it is that the
Apostle says, There must be Heresies, 1 Cor. 11. 19. Must, as by reason of
Satan's malice, and Man's corruption, so of Gods decree, who having determined
that they should be, most wisely orders and disposes of them So disposing
hereof for diverse ends.
when they are. Which he does for diverse ends. As,

1. For the manifestation of his own 1. The manifestation of his own power.
power in maintaining his Truth, and that against all opposition.

2. For the honor of truth it self, 2. For the honor of Truth.
which by these conflicts with Error is rendered more illustrious. That house
which stands out all storms and tempests of wind and weather, shewoth it self
to have a good foundation.

3. For the Probation and trial of 3. For the manifesting of such as are
approved.
such as are sound in the faith. There must also be Heresies, (says the
Apostle in the Text last named, 1 Cor. 11. 19.) (...): There must be also; Not
only Schisms, (of which he had spoken in the verse foregoing) divisions about
matters of Order and Discipline; but also Heresies, Errors in doctrine, and
that fundamental Errors. And wherefore must these be? why, that they which are
approved may be made manifest. Thus is Wheat differenced and Triticum non rapit
ventus, nec arborem solida radice fundatam procella subvertit. Inanes paleae
tempestate jactantur; invalidae arbores turbinis incursione evertuntur.
Cyprian. do Unitate Ecclesiae.
distinguished from the Chasse. Inanes paleae tempestate jactantur, (says
Cyprian) Light empty Chafe is whirled to and fro with the wind; while the
Wheat lies still in the floor. Thus whilst empty and formal Professors, who
have taken up the profession of the truth either pro forma, for fashion sake,
or else for some by, and sinister ends, wanting the kernel and truth of grace,
are carried away: those which are (...), approved unto God, sincere and
sound-hearted Christians, they are hereby made manifest, as to themselves, so
to others. Thus does God by this means (as Cyprian in the same place notes)
Sic probantur fideles, sic perfidi deteguntur: sic et ante judicii diem hic
quoque jam justorum et injustorum animae dividuntur, et a frumento paleae
separantur. Cyprian. ibid.
make a kind of a previous separation, separating the Chafe from the Wheat
before the day of Judgment.

4. This God permits for the just condemnation 4. The Just Condemnation of
others.
of others; and that both of Masters and Scholars; of such as broach and preach
such doctrines; and such as believe them.

For the former of these, express is Of false Teachers themselves.
that of St. Jude in the Text forecited, Jude v. 4. There are certain men crept
in unawares, (says he) who were before of old ordained to this condemnation.
This he speaks of seducers, false teachers, whom God in his most just and
righteous decree did from eternity preordain so far to leave them to their own
natural corruption and malice, as that they should dare to corrupt and falsify
his truth, and thereby justly incur the sentence of condemnation, and bring
upon themselves swift destruction (as the Apostle St. Peter says of them, 2
Pet. 2. 1.)

And for the latter, that of St. Paul Of those that hearken to them.
is no less express, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 1. where speaking of Antichristian errors,
that should come into the Church, and should be prevalent with many, he
assigns this as one end of Gods dispensation in permitting and sending them.
God shall send them strong delusion, (says he) (...), Efficaciam deceptionis,
the Efficacy of Error, or deceit, that is, such errors as should be
effectual for the deceiving of them, so as they should believe a lie, receive
and embrace those forged and false doctrines. And wherefore this? Why, That
they all might be damned who believed not the truth, but had pleasure in
unrighteousness, ver. 12. Thus has God not only an eye to, but also a hand
in these diverse and strange doctrines; which come abroad not only with his
prescience and permission, but also by his most wife and just Ordination.

2. This is Satan's doing. He it is that A. 2. This is Satan's doing.
is the father of lies. When he speaks a lie he speaks of his own; (says
our Savior) pro ingenio suo, according to his natural disposition, (so it is,
if ever Satan speak truth, (as sometimes he does) he borrows it, to make some
advantage of it, that he may the more easily deceive by it); Lies are his
proper and natural offspring; For (as that Text goes on) He is a liar, and
the father of it. So he is of all Lies: Among which false doctrines are none of
the least. And therefore deservedly called by that name, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. 1 Timothy
4. 2. He it is that was the first Preacher of diverse and strange doctrines.
This he did in Paradise. Where when God had preached to our first Parents this.
Doctrine, that The day that they ate of the forbidden fruit, they should
certainly dye the death, (Genesis 2. 17.) he soon after preaches to them the
clean contrary. The Serpent said unto the woman, Ye shall not surely dye, Genesis
3. 3, 4. And still this is his work. He that was a lying spirit in the mouths
of Ahabs Prophets, (2 King. 22. 22.) he is still the same in the hearts and
mouths of all false Prophets. He is the seedsman that sows these tares. So
the Parable in the Gospel sets it forth, Mat. 13. 24. The Kingdom of heaven is
like unto a man, which sowed good seed in his field; but while men slept, his
Enemy came and sowed tares among the wheat. The Moral of the Parable is
obvious. The field is the true Church of God. The seed is the Word, the
doctrine of truth. The Seeds-man sowing this seed, is God himself, who has
caused this doctrine to be preached and published, as by his Son, so by his
Ministers. The Tares are Heresies, false Doctrines, which are fitly represented
by tares, which as they are of a different kind from the wheat, so they are
hurtful to it, pulling it down; and withal have a peculiar quality of
intoxicating the brain; All fitly appliable to false doctrines. Now these were
of the Enemies sowing, the Devils work, who is rightly called Satan, an
Adversary, an Enemy; being so both to God, ((...), says the Original there,
his Enemy); and to his People, (your Adversary the Devil, (says Peter) 1 Pet.
5. 8.) This is properly his work. The Enemy has done this (says the Master
there to his servant, enquiring of him how those tares came, v. 28. (...), The
envious man, (as the former Translation has it) Satan, who does this out of
Malice and Envy. Envy, First, to the Owner of the field, to God himself, whose
professed enemy he is, and so seeks by all means to cross him in his work,
and to frustrate his designs. Secondly, Envy to the field, the Church, which he
cannot endure to see flourishing and prospering; and therefore stirs up
against it, as Persecution on the one hand, so false doctrines on the other;
both to disquiet; and hinder the growth of it. And, thirdly, Envy to the Wheat:
Both to the doctrine of truth, which he being a liar hates, and so by this
means seeks to pull it down, to hinder the propagation of it: And also to the
Professors of it, true believers, whose salvation he envies, and so seeks to
turn them aside from the way of Truth. Thus this is Satan's work.

3. This is man's own work; the proper A. 3. This is man's own work. Natural
Corruption the Mother of false doctrines, conceiving and breeding them.
fruit of his Natural Corruption. Even as the ground by reason of that first
Curse, not being tilled and cultured, it brings forth briars and thorns; and
being tilled it brings forth C^ckle and darnel, and such other heterogenous
plants, which are never sown. Even so does the heart of man by reason of that
Corruption which is in it, it is apt of it self to conceive and breed such
errors in doctrine, diverse and strange doctrines.

Which being thus conceived and bred, there are some particular lusts which
have a special Midwifery in the bringing of them forth unto an open view: Of
these I shall instance only False doctrines brought forth by
in three.

1. Hypocrisy. This was that which 1. Hypocrisy.
set those false Teachers, those seducing spirits on work, to broach and vent
those doctrines of Devils, as the Apostle calls them and their Heresies, 1 Timothy 4. 1. they spoke those lies in Hypocrisy, (as the next verse has it)
pretending to a more then ordinary holiness and strictness; And thereupon
they forbade to marry (as it follows, ver. 3.); even as the Religious Orders
in the Church of Rome upon the same account at this day do. And truly (without
any breach of Charity) this may be conceived to be either the Mother, or Nurse
of some of those strange doctrines which are abroad in this Nation at this day.

2. Ambition, vainglory. This was 2. Ambition.
that which moved that notorious Impostor Theudas (mentioned, Acts 5. 36.) to
that factious undertaking, who under pretense of being a Prophet, moved
sedition among the Jews; this he did (says the Text there) Boasting himself
to be some body; (...), i. e. Vide Grotium* and Bezam ad loc.
(...), (as some Copies there have it) some great one. So it is noted of Simon
Magus, that he bewitched the people of Samaria with his Sorcery, giving out
that himself was some great one. And this it is that sets some false
Teachers a work to invent and publish some new and strange doctrines, that so
they may be thought to be some body, some more then ordinary persons. This is
that which Paul says of those Heretics which he foresaw should arise after
his departure, Act. 20. 30. They shall speak perverse things (says he, preach
strange and Heretical doctrines) to draw away disciples after them, affecting
popularity. And surely in all times this has had no small influence upon such
kind of persons.

3. To these add (in the third place) 3. Covetousness.
Covetousness. This Paul washes his own hands of; appealing to God as a
witness of his innocence therein, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 5. For neither at any time used
we flattering words (as ye know), nor a cloak of Covetousness, God is
witness. As he was free from vainglory (of which he speaks in the next
verse,) so also of Covetousness. He had no Covetous design in his preaching.
So he tells his Corinthians; I seek not yours, but you, 2 Cor. 12. 14. not
their goods, but their good; not their estate, but their salvation. But so did
not the false Apostles, and other false Teachers of that time. What ever they
pretended, they sought their own things more then the things of Jesus Christ
(as Paul speaks of the greater part of Teachers in his time, Phil* 2. 21.);
their own things, as their own honor, so their own profit. And such for the
most part are false teachers, they are self-seekers; seeking rather to make a
gain of others, (which thing Paul disclaimes both for himself, and Titus, 2
Cor. 12. 17, 18.) then to gain them to Christ. This is that which St. Peter
foretells of the false teachers that should come in aftertimes, among other
things, they should make merchandise of their followers. So you have it, 2 Pet.
2. 3. And through Covetousness shall they make merchandise of them]. Thus do
false teachers too often (witness those in the Church of Rome); they endeavor
to lay hold of the goods of others, though it be with the ruin of their
souls. Thus do they follow the way of Balaam, (as the Apostle there speaks
of them. v. 15. And after him St. Jude, ver. 11.) who loved the wages of
unrighteousness; so as he cared not what he said or did, so he might but gain
that reward which Balack proffered him; though it were to the cursing of that
people which he knew to be Gods people, the people of Israel, had not God
withheld him, by causing the dumb Ass to reprove him; as you have it recorded,
Numb. 22. 7, 13, 37. 2 Pet. 2. 16. Even so is it with some false teachers,
having an heart exercised with covetous practices (as St. Peter speaks, verse
14. of that Chapter), they care not what they say, or do for gain. And thus do
they make merchandise of the souls of men. This is said to be part of Babylons
Merchandise, Rev. 18. 12, 13. As Gold, and silver, and precious stones, and
diverse other commodities there reckoned up, so among other, the souls of men.
Which may very well be taken literally, in as much as Babylons, Romes
Merchants, her Idolatrous Priests and false Teachers, do make a spiritual
Merchandise of them. Now put these together, and here you may see, how many of
these diverse and strange doctrines come to be conceived, bred and brought forth.

And being thus brought forth, now False doctrines propagated and multiplied
through the negligence of Ministers and Magistrates.
they come to propagate and increase, to spread themselves; which they do, (as
by other ways and means, so) through the sinful connivance, or careless
negligence of those to whom God has committed the care of his Church. So says
the Parable in the Text forecited, Mat. 13. 25. While men slept, the Enemy came
and sowed tares.] Whilst those to whom God has committed the Care of his
field, his Church, (which he has done to Magistrates and Ministers, to whom he
has given the like charge concerning Heresies, that the King of Egypt did to
the Hebrew Midwives concerning the Male children, Exodus 1. 16. viz. that they
should stifle them in the birth) whilst they sleep; whilst they are remiss
and negligent in discharging of their duties, for the suppressing of false and
Heretical Teachers, with their doctrines, by such ways and means as are
agreeable to Scripture, and Gospelrules; in the mean time Satan, (that vigilant
Adversary, who watches all such opportunities), he takes advantage to sow
and scatter these seeds, to propagate and spread abroad these diverse and
strange doctrines. And thus you have the former Question resolved, How it
comes to pass that there are such diverse and strange doctrines abroad in the
world, and in the Church?

Come we now to the latter, How it Qu. 2. How Christians come to be carried
about with false doctrines?
comes to pass that Christians professing the faith of Christ, should be
carried about with such Doctrines? So they are sometimes, often* times; and yet
easily, quickly. So were the Galatians, in so much, that Paul could not but
wonder at it, Gal.* 1. 6. I marvel (says he) that you are so soon ((...), so
quickly, so suddenly) removed to another Gospel. And truly, so i^ is; It is a
wonder to see, how easily, how quickly some Professors are turned about, and
carried away, and that with strange Doctrines. Now how comes this to pass?

In Answer to this I might again reflect A. The general Resolution.
upon some of those generals, which I made use of before.

1. This comes to pass not without 1. Through Gods righteous Judgment.
a special Providence of God; who in his most righteous Judgment, both sends,
and gives men over to strong delusion, that they should believe a Lie: (as the
Apostle has it in that forecited Text, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 11.) And wherefore so, and
so? The verse foregoing renders the reason of it; Because they received not the
love of the truth that they might be saved. Thus it is; where the truths of
God, (Gospeltruths) are not sincerely and cordially embraced, believed and
loved, lodged in the heart, and the power of them expressed in the life, God in
his just Judgment gives men over to the power of strong delusions, that they
should be deceived by them, and carried away with them.

2. This comes to pass through the 2. Satan's subtlety.
working of Satan, through his subtlety. In this way was our first parent, our
great Grandmother Eve, deceived. Satan coming to her in the form (or rather
Body) of the Serpent, (making use of that subtle and insinuating Creature to
speak through, and convey his temptations by), he beguiled her through his
subtlety (as the Apostle has it, 2 Cor. 11. 3.) And in a like way does that
old Serpent, called the Devil and Satan, (the accuser of the brethren, and
adversary to the Church) deceive the world, (as you have it, Rev. 12. 9.) the
wicked and ungodly world, which is the greatest part of it. This he does
through his subtlety, winding himself into the heads and hearts of men,
seducing them by his Temptations, thereby drawing them, as into moral Vices, so
into doctrinal Errors.

3. For this men are beholding to 3. Men's own Corruption.
their own Corruption; Which is as tinder, ready to take fire by every spark
that falls into it. Insomuch that if man be left to the inclination and sway
thereof, it can be no wonder if he be turned aside from the way of truth, to
the embracing of the most pernicious and damnable Errors.

But I shall let pass these Generals; A more particular Resolution; fetched
from 3. Heads.
For a more full and particular Resolution of this Enquiry, directing you to
these three Heads, to take notice, First, of somewhat in the Teachers of these
Doctrines. Secondly, somewhat in those that hearken to them, and are carried
away with them. Thirdly, somewhat in the Doctrines themselves; whereby this
seduction may be either caused, or occasioned.

Begin with the first, the Teachers of 1. From the Teachers of these doctrines.
In whom consider,
these Doctrines. And in them take we notice of two things; Their Activity, and
their Subtilty.

Their Activity: As Satan, so his 1. Their Activity.
Instruments are very active in this work. St. Peter speaking of him, (of
Satan) says, He walks about as a Lion, seeking whom he may devour, 1 Pet. 5.
8. and we may as truly say, that he creeps about as a Serpent, seeking whom
he may poison; in both kinds Compassing the earth (as himself speaks, Job 1.
7.). And our Savior speaking of some of them, (his Instruments) the Scribes
and Pharisees in his time, he says, that they compassed Sea and Land to make
one Proselyte, Matthew. 23. 15. They were indefatigable in their endeavors of
bringing the Gentiles over to their own Religion, of turning them from
Heathenisme to Iudaisme; which when they had done (as our Savior there further
charge it upon them), they made them twofold more the children of the Devil
then themselves; i. e. more superstitious then themselves; (as ofttimes
Disciples do in the way of Error, exceed and go beyond their Masters)* And
thus for the most part it is with false and Heretical teachers. They are very
active and unwearied in spreading their Errors, not caring what pains they
take that way: In so much that they are willing to Compass Sea and Land, to go
far and near (as the Jesuits are notoriously known to do, who ttavel into all
parts of the habitable world; and as some Sectaries among our selves are said
at this day to do, into all parts of this Nation), that they may by spreading
their doctrine, make Proselytes, gain disciples. To this end some of them
thrust themselves into public Congregations: more of them creep into private
houses, (as the Apostle speaks of them) 2 Timothy 3. 6. Such is their Activity.

And no less (in the second place) is 2. Their Subtlety.
their Subtilty. Wherein oft-times (and for the most part) they show themselves
to be the children of their father, a Serpentine brood, a subtle Generation.
Such a one was Elymas the Sorcerer, (who sought to turn away the Deputy from
the faith, and to pervert the right ways of the Lord (as it is charged upon
him, Acts 13. 8, 10.) laying false imputations upon the doctrine of the Gospel,
that so he might hinder the work of Gods grace, and obstruct the Apostle in the
work of his Ministry), he was a man (as* Paul there sets him forth) full of
subtilty and mischief. And such (in their measure) ordinarily are seducers,
false teachers; They are (as Solomon describes the Harlot, Prove. 7. 10.)
Subtle of heart, Cunning, and Whereby they deceive those that hearken to them.
crafty, and wily. And by this means they come to seduce and deceive those that
will hearken to them; viz. by their Subtilty. This is that which the Apostle
takes notice of as a principal Engine, whereby these wheels come to be turned
about; as we may collect from that intimation of his to his Ephesians, in that
Text to which I have had so frequent recourse, Ephesians. 4. 14. where he gives them
this Caveat, that they should not be carried about with every wind of Doctrine,
by the sleight of men, and cunning craftiness, whereby they lie in wait to
deceive. Two words expressing (for substance) one and the same thing: (...):
The former of which is a Metaphor, taken from Cheaters, who by Cogging of dice,
and by sleight of hand cheat and cousin those whom they play with. Even so do
false Teachers, by their slight and cunning craftiness deceive those which
have to deal with them. Which they do diverse Which they do diverse ways.
ways: Instance in some few of them.

First, By their Sophismes, fallacious 1. By Fallacious Arguments taken from
Arguments. These are the false Dice which these Cheaters play with: Subtle
and intrapping Arguments; which they take out of diverse boxes; fetch from
several Heads: As,

1. From Scripture; which they make 1. Scripture.
use of this way, by wresting it. Even as David's Enemies made use of his words,
as he complains, Psalm. 56. 5. Every day (says he) they wrest my words;
perverting them, and turning them to another sense then ever he meant when he
uttered them: so do false teachers, being Gods Enemies, make use of his Word.
This is that which St. Peter says of some unlearned, and unstable souls in
his time, they wrested some things in Paul's Epistles, as they did also diverse
other Scriptures to their own destruction, 2 Pet. 3. 16. This did they by
mis-interpreting of them, and drawing them violently from their true and
genuine sense, to a false one; which they did to that end that they might
thereby uphold their errors. And truly such is the ordinary practice of
Heretics and false teachers; they wrest the Scriptures; (...), detorquent,
depravant, writhe and wring them about, turning them this way or that way, as
may best serve for their purpose. Dealing by them as Chimists sometimes do with
natural bodies, which they (as it were) torture, to extract that out of them
which God and nature never put into them: Or as cruel Tyrants sometimes deal by
innocent persons, whom they set and stretch upon the Rack, and so make them
speak that which they never thought. After the like manner do false teachers
use to deal by the Scriptures, wresting them to draw a sense out of them, which
the Spirit of God never intended. A practice common to all Heretics, save
only those Antiscripturians, who will not acknowledge the Divine Authority of
Sacred Writ.

2. And as herein they make use of 2. Reason.
Scripture, so also of Reason; which it may be sometimes they oppose against
Scripture, or else make use of to vouch that sense which they put upon it. So
dealt those false teachers in the Primitive times: Such use they made of their
Philosophy. Thereupon it was that Paul gave that Caveat to his Colossians,
Chap. 2. v. 8. Beware (faith he) lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and
vain deceit; that is, by such subtle and plausible Arguments as are drawn from
the principles of Natural Reason: which however in it self it is useful, yet
when it is made the measure of spiritual mysteries, this is a dangerous abuse
of it. Now, it comes to be no other but (as he there calls it) (...), a vain
deceit. And this deceit did those false teachers in those first times make
great use of; by such Arguments both opposing the doctrine of the Gospel, and
supporting their own errors. And the like use do not a few make of it at this
day. In special the Socinians, who make this the measure of their faith, and
the Touchstone to try all Evangelical truths by, viz. humane Reason; not
allowing any thing to be believed, (how clearly soever in Scripture held forth)
but what that may apprehend and comprehend. Upon which account it is that they
desperately disclaim diverse Articles of the Christian faith, for which
Scripture is express, and which the Church of God in all ages of it has
looked upon as truths, the belief whereof was necessary to salvation. And by
this means it is that they pervert the faith of some, who have not learned to
submit their carnal Reason to divine Revelation.

And (in the third place) sometimes 3. Custom.
they plead Custom, Tradition. So did the Scribes and Pharisees in maintenance
of their superstitions. That is the Argument which they use to our Savior,
blaming his Disciples (and him in them) for not complying with them in some of
their Ceremonial observances, Mat. 15. 2. Why do thy disciples transgress the
traditions of the Elders? Not observing such Customs and usages as they had
received from their Ancestors, and so had been of long continuance. And this
Argument the false Apostles in Paul's time made great use of. Thereupon it is
that he gives the like Caveat to his Colossians concerning that, as he does
concerning Philosophy, putting them together in that forecited Caveat, Col. 2.
8. Beware lest any man spoil you through Philosophy, and vain deceit, after the
Traditions of men. This was one thing which they pleaded for their doctrines
against the doctrine of the Apostles; Tradition, Custom. Wherein they are
followed by the Doctors of the Church of Rome, who take up the like plea for
many of their Errors; pretending (though most falsely, as it Bishop Iewel's
Apolog.
has been made out by diverse Champions of the truth, who have undertaken that
cause against them) Antiquity for them: casting the odious imputation of
Novelty upon all contrary Opinions and Practices.

Which is a taking Argument with Pretended Custom a taking Argument with many.
many. So was it with the Jews, who brought it in as an Article against
Stephen, that he should say, that Jesus should change the Customs, which Moses
had delivered them, Act. 6. 14. And the Disciples, when Paul came to Jerusalem,
give him to take notice what a stumbling-blockit was in the way of the
believing Jews, that he should teach those of that Nation to forsake Moses,
saying, that they ought not to circumcise their children, neither to walk after
the Customs, Act. 21. 21. So tenacious are many at this day of some Customs,
that they will prefer them even before either Scripture, or Reason. And these
are some of those Arrows wherewith false Teachers do oft-times pierce the
hearts of men; Sophistical Arguments, fetched from Scripture, Reason, Custom.

To which for the further Confirmation of their Doctrines, and gaining belief
from the credulous multitude, they sometimes add two other Artifices;
pretending to Revelations and Miracles; to the receiving of the one, and
working of the other.

1. For the former; Revelations. This 2. Pretended Revelations.
was a thing which the false Prophets under the Old Testament frequently
pretended unto; and thereby deceived those that trusted to them. So did that
old Prophet of Bethel the Man of God, who had prophesied against the Altar
there, 1 King. 13. 18. And so did Ahabs Prophets him. And the like Artifice
have many false Teachers under the Gospel used, which has proved very
effectual for the seducing of many. So did many of those Ancient Heretics,
the Montanists, Messalians, Donatists, and others who pretended to an
extraordinary familiarity with God this way; affirming that they had received
their doctrines by immediate Revelation from God himself; whence it was that
some of them (as the Messalians) were called Enthusiastae, Enthusiasts, from
their pretended Inspirations. And it is well known what use that grand Impostor
Mahomet made hereof, who held forth his new and impious doctrine, as delivered
to him by the Angel Gabriel; with whom he would be thought to have had frequent
intercourse in his Epileptical fits, which he pretended to be no other but
Divine raptures. And I shall not need to tell you of what use this has been to
the Doctors of the Church of Rome, whose Legends are stuffed with such stories
of Visions and Revelations made to themselves, or others. Nor yet what use has
been made of it by the Anabaptists, and some other Sects of late times. Some of
which are said to be among our selves in this Nation at this day, who are great
pretenders to Enthusiasmes; as if they neither spoke nor did ought, but what
the Spirit in an immediate and extraordinary way moved them to.

3. And to these some join Miracles; 3. Feigned Miracles.
being in like manner pretenders unto them. Such were some under the Old
Testament, as, viz. Iannes and Iambres, of whom St. Paul makes mention, 2 Timothy
3. 8. Two of those Egyptian Magicians (spoken of, Exodus 7.) who are there said
to withstand Moses. This they did, as by other ways and means, so by vying
Miracles with him, as the story sets it forth, Exodus 7. 11. And the like (it
seems) did many false Prophets in those times. Thereupon it was that the Lord
gave that Caveat to the people of Israel, Deuteronomy. 13. 1. If there arise among you
a Prophet, a dreamer of dreams, and gives thee a sign or a wonder, etc. Such
it seems then there were, some who pretended to Revelations by dreams, and
confirmed their Prophecies by signs and wonders. And the like have diverse
false Teachers done under the Gospel. So our Savior foretold it that it should
be, Matthew. 24. 24. There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, and
shall show great signs and wonders. And accordingly soon after his departure
it came to pass. Many such false Teachers arose. Among other, and in the first
place, the forementioned Simon Magus, who for the Simon Magus deceiving the
people thereby, till he was arrested by Divine vengeance.
confirming of his impious opinions, made use of his Sorcery, which he had
practiced before his seeming Conversion, by the power of Satan working many
wonders, counterfeit miracles, in so much that the people of Rome generally
thought of him, as the people of Samaria had done before, Act. 8. 10. that he
was the great power of God, and so both admired, and adored him. Such use did
he make of those his Impostures to gain credit to his person and doctrine. In
which way he went on, until he was stopped by the hand of Divine Justice,
which as the hand of Providence says to the Sea, Hitherto shall thou come, but
no further, and here shall thy proud waves be stayed, Job. 38. 11. so said that
to him; not only staying and bounding him, (as it did Iannes and Iambres, who
were permitted to go on in their Enchantments, till it came to the turning of
dust into lice, but then were stayed, Exodus 8. 18.) but also arresting him,
taking him (...), in the very Act of his Sorcery. So Ecclesiastical Histories
tell us, how that attempting on a time to fly in the air in the sight of many
people, his divellish Art failing him, he fell to the ground, and brake his
leg, which proved to him mortal, in a little time bringing his wretched life to
a miserable end. Thus was he most deservedly made a spectacle of Divine
vengeance, and a laughingstock to the people, who before taking him for a God,
now saw him to be what he was, no other but a notorious Impostor. God therein
dealing by him, as the Apostle there says he had done by Iannes and Iambres,
and would do by other false Teachers, 2 Timothy 3. 9. Not suffering him to proceed
any further, but causing his folly to be made manifest to all men.

And what that father of Heretics Antichristian Lying Wonders.
did, the like have diverse of his followers after him done. It is the Character
which the Apostle gives of the great Antichrist, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 9. He is one,
whose coming is after the working of Satan, with all powers and signs, and
lying wonders. A description fitly agreeing to the Antichrist of Rome, who
makes use of this as a special means for the confirming and upholding of his
erroneous doctrines, and false worships. Among all the Engines which he
employeth in this way, there is none more usual, or effectual then this, this
of Lying wonders; (...), Wonders of deceit, deceitful wonders. So may Popish
Miracles fitly be called; being either downright Lies, things merely feigned,
never acted or done; or else impostures and illusions, cheats, acted only in
show and appearance, deluding the senses of the beholders; or at the best,
Diabolical wonders, Miranda non miracula, not true Miracles exceeding the power
of any created nature (which all true miracles do), but wonders, varying from
the ordinary course of nature, which by Gods permission Satan may alter and
change. Such, I say, are Romish Miracles; either prodigious lies, or lying
prodigies. And these does that Man of sin make use of for the confirming of his
doctrines. Therein showing himself to be the Antichrist, Aemulum Christi, (as
the word Antichrist may be expounded) Christ's Ape (as it were) emulating and
imitating of him in things not imitable. This was Christ's way of confirming his
doctrine, by Miracles, and wonders, and signs, which God did by him (as the
Apostle Peter tells the Jews, Act. 2. 22.) And by the like means Antichrist
attempteth the confirming of his doctrine, his coming being after the working
of Satan, with all power and signs, and lying wonders.

And the like has been the practice of diverse other Heretics, and false
teachers. Some of which are said to be abroad among our selves in this Nation
at this day, who pretend as to Revelations, so to Miracles. Of all which we are
to judge as of the former. And these are some of those false dice, those false
Arguments, which these spiritual Cheaters, false teachers make use of in the
seducing of simple and unstable souls.

Besides which there are some other Other Artifices made use of by false
Teachers.
Artifices which are very useful to them in this way; As, viz. The Gloss
which they set upon their Doctrines, and the Vizour which they put upon their
own faces.

They use to set a Gloss upon their A Gloss set upon their Doctrines.
doctrines. Even as Tradesmen do upon their Stuffs and other Commodities,
which they set a gloss upon, to make them more pleasing to the eye, and so the
more vendible. So deal false Teachers by their doctrines, putting a specious
gloss upon them, to make them more taking; setting them forth with such a
dress of words, as may commend them to those that will hearken after them.
This is that which St. Peter foretells and forewarneth the Primitive
Christians of, 2 Pet. 2. where speaking of false Teachers, who should come
among them, privily bringing in of damnable Heresies, verse 1. he adds, ver.
3. And through Covetousness shall they with feigned words make merchandise of
you. (...), smooth language, a feigned kind of speech, framed (it may be) to a
show of more then ordinary piety, zeal, Charity. By this means do subtle
seducers oft-times wind and insinuate themselves into the bosoms of their
Auditors; withal, crying up the doctrines which they hold forth; decrying all
other doctrines and ways but their own, (at the best sleighting them, as not
worthy to be looked after) but crying up their own, as the only ways and
truths of God; making use (it may be) of high and lofty and confident
expressions to that end: As St. Peter describes those seducers which he
speaks of, to be such as should speak great swelling words of vanity, 2 Pet.
2. 18. (...), praetumida, words swelling with pride, and arrogance, and
self-conceitednesse, as bubbles do with wind. And hereby they ofttimes
exceedingly take the ears of the ignorant multitude, carrying them about like
pitchers: So putting off their Doctrines, as cunning Chapmen do their Wares,
which by their smooth Language, and high commendations they obtrude upon the
simple and unskilful buyers.

And thus setting a Gloss upon their 2. A Vizour put upon their own faces.
Doctrines, they also oft-times put a vizour upon their own faces; pretending
to a more then ordinary Piety, and Sanctity. Thus does Satan sometimes
transform himself into an Angel of light, (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Cor. 11.
14.) either assuming unto himself the like shape that some of the heavenly
Angels have sometimes; done or doing the office of a good Angel, by suggesting
such things as have in them a show of piety, as if it were the motion of one of
the holy and blessed Angels. And if Satan do this, no wonder if seducers, false
Teachers, being his Instruments, and acted by him, do the like. So the Apostle
there infers in the verse following, (ver. 15.) Therefore it is no great thing
if his Ministers also be transformed as Ministers of righteousness. This did
the false Apostles, (as the verse foregoing there has it) verse 13. They
transformed themselves into the Apostles of Christ]; pretending not only to
the like Commission that they had to preach the Gospel; but also to equalize,
yea, to exceed and excel them in their Gifts and Graces. Thus were they (as
they are there called) (...), crafty, and deceitful workers; making use of
those shows to gain a high esteem of their persons, and so to promote their
doctrines.

Such were the Scribes and Pharisees Scribes and Pharisees pretenders to
special Sanctity.
in their time, whom our Savior calls whited, or painted Sepulchers, Mat.
23. 27. they were outwardly, seemingly very Religious, pretending to a high
degree of Sanctity; to be more devout then others, For a pretense making long
prayers, v. 14. and very zealous they were in their way, Compassing Sea and
Land to make one Proselyte (as the next verse has it): And elsewhere we read
how strict and precise they were in their outward deportment; in their habits,
gestures, diet, washings, and such like ceremonial observances. By all which
their design was to ingratiate themselves, and so their doctrines, with the
people.

And such deceitful workers oft-times Therein imitated by many false Tea chers.
are false Teachers; having (as the Apostle says of them, 2 Timothy 3. 5.) (...),
a form, a show of Godliness, pretending to extraordinary strictness. So did
many of those ancient Heretics in the first ages: who therein have been, and
at this day are followed by those Religious Orders (as they call them) in the
Church of Rome, both the Iesuitical As in the Church of Rome.
and other, who tie themselves so strictly to their Rules, being many of them
very exact and precise in the observation of them; and very demure in their
carriage; outside Saints, seemingly more devout, more just, more temperate,
and abstemious then others; Thus these Locusts (as it is said of those in the
Revelation, Chap. 9. 7.) they have as it were crowns of gold on their heads,
and their faces are as the faces of men; and they have hair as the hair of
women; being outwardly very demure; by which means they and their doctrines
gain no small esteem with the vulgar, who look no further then to the outward
appearance.

And it cannot but be thought that So among our selves.
there are some false teachers at this day in this Nation, who do therein tread
in their steps, making use of the same stratagem. Such as pretending to an
extraordinary piety, zeal, devotion, make use of that vizour to commend, first
their persons, and then their doctrines to the credulous multitude; who having
the persons of men in admiration, do readily yield up themselves to them, to be
carried about by those diverse and strange doctrines which they hold forth to
them.

And thus have I done with the first of these Heads, from which this dangerous
seduction may be conceived to arise, viz. Somewhat in the Teachers of these
Doctrines, Their Activity, their Subtilty showed in their deceitful Arguments,
fetched from Scripture wrested; from Reason abused; from Custom alleged;
backed with pretended Revelations and Miracles; and set off by false Glosses
put upon their doctrines, and vizours put upon their own faces.

To all which I might yet add two Two other Qualifications promoting this
Seduction.
other Qualifications, which being sometimes found in the Teachers of these
Doctrines, do not a little promote this Seduction in the Hearers of them; as,
viz.

1. It may be they are Learned men, 1. Learning.
who either broach, or maintain some of these Opinions; Possibly, eminently
learned; at least reputed so to be. And this is a weight which swayeth not a
little in the vulgar balance. This it was that had a prevalent influence upon
many of the Jews; the reputed learning of the Scribes and Pharisees, who were
their Teachers. Them they looked upon as great Doctors, as Scribes fully
instructed unto the Kingdom of heaven; as knowing men; specially in their own
science, in all matters of Religious concernment: And thereupon they yielded up
themselves to be led and carried about by them, as the shadow is by the Body.
And truly so has it been, and yet at this day is. If men of eminent learning
(really or reputedly so) shall be turned aside from the truth, to the embracing
and holding forth of any error, (as sometimes, and not seldom, they are,
whereof many Causes and Reasons might be assigned) it is not to be wondered, if
those who being unlearned themselves, have them in admiration that way, and
look upon them in Spirituals, (as Achitophel in his time was accounted for
Politics, 2 Samuel 16. 23.) as the Oracles of God, be carried about with them,
after them.

Or, (secondly) They may be Godly; 2. Piety.
really, yea, and eminently such. Now being so, and being themselves seduced
(which the most holy men are subject to) they become eminently instrumental in
seducing of others, upon whom their example has a prevalent influence. That
was Peter's case, recorded by St. Paul, Gal. 2. He being through fear of scandal
fallen into a scandalous dissimulation, Iudaizing with the Jews, for fear of
displeasing them, in the observation of some Legal Ceremonies, which before
being among the Gentiles, he had seemed to renounce and disclaim, by this
means he drew many after him. So the 13. verse there sets it forth; And the
other Jews dissembled likewise with him; insomuch that Barnabas likewise was
carried away with their dissimulation. Of such prevalency oft-times are the
examples of men eminent for piety and holiness (as Peter was) that if they
miscarry whether in Practice or Doctrine, they draw many other well-meaning,
but unstable souls after them. But I shall hold you no longer in this first
Head.

Come we now to the second Head, From the Hearers and Receivers of these
Doctrines; who,
to take notice of somewhat in the Hearers and Receivers of these Doctrines.
And here again we shall meet with diverse things which help forward this
Seduction. I shall only instance in some of the most obvious.

1. It may be they are Chafe. And 1. It may be are Chafe.
so they may be upon a double account. Either in regard of their Natural
Levity, or Spiritual Vanity.

1. Chafe, in regard of Natural Levity: 1. In regard of their natural Levity.
Being by natural disposition weak of apprehension, and so fickle and
inconstant, like Quicksilver, which cannot be fixed, (...), like a man standing
upon one leg, wavering and unsteady, unstable in all their ways (as Saint
James has it, Iam. 1. 8.). So they are even in matters of Civil concernment;
they are in and out, to day of one mind, to morrow of another, easily turned
this way or that way. And being so in the matters of the world, it is the less
to be wondered at if they be so in the matters of God.

2. Others who have no such defect 2. Or spiritual Vanity.
in nature, yet are Chafe still, and that in regard of spiritual vanity.
Having at the best but the empty husk of an outward Profession, wanting the
inward grain, the truth and kernel of Grace. This it is, and only this, which
establishes men in the matters of God; as the latter part of the Text will
show us, [ It is good that the heart be established with Grace] This is the
ballast of the soul. Now what wonder is it to see unballasted vessels, light
Skiffs and Cockboats, to be tossed to and fro upon the waves? (a Metaphor to
which the Apostle alludes, Ephesians. 4. 14. Be not tossed to and fro; (...),); or to
see light and empty clouds, Clouds without water (which is St. Iude's
Comparison, verse 12. of his Epistle, borrowed from St. Peter, 2 Epist. 2. 17.)
carried about this way or that way, which way soever the wind blows. No more
is it to see empty souls, being wholly void and empty of true saving Grace, to
be carried about by diverse and strange doctrines. Here is a first supposal,
they may be Chafe.

2. If not so, yet (in the second place) 2. They may be Children.
they may be Childron. That we henceforth be no more Children, tossed to and
fro, and carried about with every wind of Doctrine, Ephesians. 4. 14. Children,
(...), Such are many Christians. Though they may have more then a bare empty
profession, they have some truth of Grace in them, yet they are but Children.
So Paul looked upon some of his Corinthians, when he wrote that Epistle to
them, 1 Cor. 3. 1. And I, brethren, (says he) could not speak unto you, as
unto spiritual, but as unto Carnal, even as unto Babes in Christ. Such was
their estate then. They were such as had received the first fruits of the
Spirit, and so were in measure Spiritual, yet he calls them Carnal, which he
does Comparatively, in as much as there was a great deal of Carnality yet in
them, much flesh, and little Spirit. And they were Babes in Christ; (...). They
were in Christ, being engraffed into him by faith; but they were Children,
Babes in Christ. So they were, though not in respect of time; (they had been
long enough in him, to have grown up to some degree of Maturity), yet in
respect of Proficiency. They were Babes in Christ, that is, in the knowledge,
faith and Mystery of Christ. And such at this day is the condition of many
Christians; Though it may be they are in Christ, and have had a long standing
in him, being Ancient Professors, yet they are but Babes, Children. Children
in understanding, (as the Apostle explains it, 1 Cor. 14. 20.) Unskilful in the
Word of Righteousness (as those Babes are described, Heb. 5. 13.) Such there
are some (and too many) among us at this day, who (it may be) have been old
standers in the Churches Grove; they have been long in Christ before many
others, (as Paul says of Andronicus and Iunia, that they were in Christ before
him, Romans 16. 7.) and yet they are but Dwarfe-trees, (like the Adam Apple Tree)
Babes. Children in understanding. So the Apostle complains of some of his
Hebrews, Heb. 5. 12. When for the time ye ought to be Teachers, ye have need
that one teach you again, which be the first Principles of the Oracles of God,
and are become such as have need of milk, and not of strong meat. Upon which
account he calls them Babes in the verse following (verse 13.): And truly
thus fares it with some at all times, with many at this day. They have been a
long time Scholars in Christ's School, and have not wanted means of
Instruction, such as, had not they been wanting to themselves and them in the
improvement thereof, they might have been in a degree, (...), (as the Apostle
there calls them; Heb. 5. 14.) adulti, of full age, grown men in Christ. But
through that neglect they still continue Babes, Children, such as have need to
be Catechized, and instructed in some of the principles of Christian Religion.
Thus (it may be) they have good Affections, but weak Judgments; having but
little knowledge, less Experience. And by this means they come to be unstable
souls, (as St. Peter calls them, 2 Pet. 2. 14.) (...), not well grounded.
And being so, they are apt to be seduced by false Teachers. So he there shows
it; where speaking of those impious and blasphemous seducers which were to
come, he says, They should beguile unstable souls. (...), Inescantes, a
Metaphor taken either from Fowlers, who by their Calls, and Stales, and other
devices, draw the simple birds in to their Nets or Snares; or rather from
Anglers, who by covering their hooks with deceitful baits, take the silly
fishes. Even thus are simple and unstable souls taken oft-times by subtle
seducers. Wanting judgment, and so not being able to discern the hook that
lies hid under the bait that is presented to them, to see the danger of those
erroneous doctrines, which are held forth unto them under fair and specious
pretenses, they are by that means taken and carried away by them.

And surely this is the case of many The case of many in the present Times.
at this day in this Nation; Of whom Charity requires us to hope the best,
that they are such as whose hearts are upright with God; they have good
desires, good Affections, and such as both have had, and have ( real Saints
being through Grace exempted from a Total and final Apostasle) the truth of
Grace in them; yet being but Children, not well grounded in the truths of God,
and so wanting judgment to discern betwixt truth and falsehood, they are drawn
aside out of the way of truth, to the embracing of dangerous, and (it may be)
in themselves, damnable Opinions. Here is a second supposal; They may be
Children.

Or (in the third place) they may be 3. They may be Blinded.
for a time Blinded, or Blindfolded. Even as men sometimes deal by their
horses, which they first blindfold, by putting some covering over their eyes,
and then make them go round in their Mills; So deals Satan sometimes by some
Christians, the eyes of whose understanding God has opened, inlightning them
with the saving knowledge of his truth, revealing Christ unto them, and in
them, (as the Apostle speaks of himself, Gal. 1. 16.) though he cannot put
out their eyes (as the Philistines did Sampsons, Judge. 16. 21.) quite
extinguish and put out that spark of Divine light which God has kindled in
their heart, yet (possibly) for the time he may blindfold them through his
Temptations; and so by that means carry them about to the embracing of diverse
and strange doctrines. And this he does diverse ways, according to the diverse
kinds of Temptations which he makes use of; as, viz.

1. Through Blind zeal. Such a Zeal Paul took notice of in many of the 1.
Through Blind Zeal.
Jews. I bear them record (says he) that they have a zeal of God, but not
according to knowledge, Romans 10. 2. Even as it was with himself before his
Conversion (as he tells them, Act. 22. 3) so was it with them, they were
zealous toward God, many of them bearing an earnest affection to his glory,
and to his worship and service; But wanting the light of knowledge for the
guiding and ordering of that Affection, by that means they miscarried, and so
were carried out in an unwarrantable way after legal observances. And truly so
fares it with many well-meaning Christians, they have (...), a zeal of God,
for God; they have good intentions, and strong Affections, but wanting a due
proportion of knowledge for the regulating of that zeal, it becomes to them as
a mist before their eyes, hindering their sight; so as through the vehemence of
that boiling Passion foming up from the heart to the head, they do not so
judiciously discern betwixt things that differ, as they ought to do, and
otherwise might do; and so are carried, as into some unadvised actions, so also
to the embracing of some erroneous Opinions, which have some show and semblance
of piety in them.

2. As inordinate zeal may occasion this, so also sometimes may inordinate 2.
Fear.
fear, fear of suffering. This was that which wrought that strange change upon
Peter, turning him about contrary to his confident resolutions, to the denying
and abjuring of his Lord and Master, Matthew. 26. 70, 71. Fear having possessed
his heart, it for the present bred a sudden vertigo in his head, so as he was
turned about like a wheel by the hand of every damsel. And like operation it
has sometimes upon holy and precious Saints, causing them either to dissemble
the truths of God, as Nicodemus did, who came to Christ only by night, Ioh. 3.
2. This he did for fear of the Jews. Which so far in those times prevailed
with many true believers, whose hearts were toward Christ, that they durst not
own him. So it is noted* Ioh. 7. 13. No man spoke openly of him for fear of the
Jews. And this it was which made the parents of that blind child dissemble
their knowledge of Christ, Ioh. 9. 22.) or (it may be) to deny them. Thus do
timorous Christians too often, (like the Weathercocks upon this and many of our
Church-sleeples) turn round under the Cross: being through fear brought not
only to dissemble their Profession, but to deny it. That was the case of those
Primitive Christians among the Jews, whom Paul says that he by his
persecuting of them, caused to blaspheme, Act. 26. 11. to deny Christ, yea, and
(it may be) to speak evil of those truths, that way, which before they had
owned. Thus is this Vertigo sometimes caused by fear.

3. And sometimes again through 3. Covetousness.
desire of gain, and outward advantage. So is it with gross Hypocrites. With
them (...) and (...), are all one, Gain is Godliness (as the Apostle says of
some seducers in his time, 1 Timothy 6. 5.) they make it their design to turn that
way which may bring in the best income of profit to them; and so are carried
about with the hope of gain. This is that which St. Jude says of some in his
time, in that Text forecited, Jude 11. They ran greedily after the error of
Balaam for reward; which (as Diodate notes upon it) the Italian version
understands of some who were seduced by those false Teachers spoken of before,
verse 4. rendering it, They suffered themselves to be carried away; that is, (as
he expounds it) they were carried away by the bait of gain, which they ran
greedily after. (...), (says the Original) a word very Emphatical, properly
signifying Effusi sunt, or erant, They were poured out; a Metaphor taken from
water in a Bottle, which being poured forth makes haste to get out (as our New
Annotation explains it). Even so did they; So earnest were they in seeking of
gain, that they cared not what Errors they closed with for the compassing of
their base ends; which they followed with such eagerness, that they cared not
though they poured their souls in the pursuit thereof; though they poured them
forrh as water that is spilt upon the ground, lost them. Even so fares it
oft-times with Hypocrites.

And I wish there were no cause to By-respects promoting the embracing of
Errors.
suspect that there should be any such by and base respects in the hearts of
any whom the judgment of Charity looks upon as truly godly. Possibly thus it
may be; Some whose hearts are right and sound in the main, yet they may be
drawn aside to the embracing of some opinions and ways, which were it not for
some temporal advantage they expect to meet with in them, and from them, they
would not look after. Such a filme is this sometimes upon the eyes of those who
are otherwise seeing, and knowing enough, that for the time it blinds them.
Even as it is said of a Gift, a Bribe, Exodus 23. 8. A gift blinds the wise,
(the seeing, as the Original has it) dimming the eyes of Judgment and
Conscience in those who are otherwise understanding and Judicious, [ And
perverteth the words of the righteous], causing them neither to speak nor judge
aright, according to the evidence of truth given into them. And truly it is to
be feared, such effect sometimes the hope of Gain may have upon some who are
otherwise godly, that it is like a Pearl in their eye, dimming their sight for
the present, so as they do not see the Error of those Opinions and ways which
are so promising to them. And thus I have done also with the second of these
Heads.

Pass we to the third; To take notice 3. The third Head; Taken from the
Doctrines themselves.
of somewhat in the doctrines themselves, which may cause, or rather Occasion
this seduction. And here again I shall single forth three or four particulars.

1. It may be they are such doctrines 1. It may be they are New and strange.
as do please and tickle the fancy through the Novelty and strangeness of
them. They are such Doctrines as the Text speaks of, Diverse and strange
doctrines. And strange it is to think, how such doctrines do sometimes affect
the Hearers of them; having nothing else to commend them but only their
Novelty and strangeness. They are New and strange. And Oh! how taking is this
with many? And that not only with Children, who are apt to be taken with
novelties; such things as they have not seen before, be they never such toys,
yet they are apt to part with things of far greater value for them; But also
with others, persons who in respect of their years might, and should be wiser.
What is it that induces many, (I wish I might not say some Professors) to
follow every vain fashion in their apparel, and hair, etc. though in themselves
never so undecent and unbecoming, (as diverse of the fashions at this day are)
but only this, they are diverse and strange? And what is it that induces the
impure Adulterer sometimes to forsake the wife of his youth, being both for her
person and Condition every ways amiable, to embrace the bosom of another no
ways to be compared with her? why, only this, she is a stranger, the strange
woman (as Solomon calls the Harlot, Prove. 5. 20. and often elsewhere). And so
for the abominable Sodomite to commit that horrid sin against nature, but only
because it is (as St. Jude calls it, v. 7.) Strange flesh, of another sex.
Thus is Corruption oft-times taken with diverse and strange things upon no other
account but this, because they are so.

And truly so is it sometimes in matters Novelty and strangeness taking
Arguments.
of Religious concernment, both Doctrines and Practices, they are taking with
some; How so? Because they are new; New lights, and new ways; such as the
Church of God in former Ages has not been acquainted with. This it was that
bred that itch in the Athenians ears; that made them so earnestly desirous to
hear what Paul's doctrine was; because it was New and Strange. May we know (say
they) what this new doctrine whereof thou speak is? For thou bring
certain strange things to our ears; We would know therefore what these things
mean, Act. 17. 19, 20. This it was that moved them to become his Auditors,
because they would satisfy their own curiosities. And in likelihood, this it
is which moves some, and not a few, at this day, to run after some Teachers,
and to listen after some doctrines: Only because they are new and strange. So
the Apostle foretold that it should be, 2 Timothy 4. 3. The time will come (says
he) when they (speaking of some Christians) will not endure sound doctrine; but
after their own lusts shall heap unto themselves teachers, having itching
ears. And what he foretold we may now see it verified. The time is now come,
when some, nay many, will not endure sound doctrine; Old truths, with the
Ministers that preach them, these they cry down; crying up new Teachers, and
New doctrines; thereby showing that they are infected with this Leprosy, this
Itch.

2. It may be they are such Doctrines 2. It may be they gratify the flesh.
as gratify the flesh. Such was that first diverse and strange doctrine that
was ever held forth in the world; I mean that doctrine which was preached by
Satan to our first Parents in Paradise; it was a doctrine that gratified them
by an indulgence of a greater liberty then God had allowed them. And such were
some of those doctrines which were held forth by some false Teachers in the
Primitive times, which were so taking with diverse, whereof St. Peter speaks,
2 Pet. 2. 18. For when they speak great swelling words of vanity (says he)
they allure through the lusts of the flesh, through much wantonness, those
that were clean escaped from them who live in error. This did some false
Teachers in those early times; they held forth such doctrines as did gratify
the flesh; under the name and notion of Christian liberty giving a License for
some loose and licentious Practices, as the verse following explains it [ While
they promise them liberty, etc.], so turning the grace of God into
lasciviousness, (as St. Jude, having an eye to that of Peter, expresses it,
Jude 4.) And by this means they allured some, who (as St. Peter there
describes them) were clean escaped from them who live in error; that is,
either true Converts, (...) (as most Copies have it) qui vere effugerant (as
Beza translates it) such as were really, and truly converted. Even such (as it
seems), some of them were wrought upon by those doctrines; being for a time
dangerously shaken, though not utterly overcome by those Temptations. Or
however, such as had only renounced Idolatry, and made an outward profession
of the Christian Religion, withal, walking answerably to that Profession,
without any just scandal. Yet they were taken by these Anglers; as the word
there imports, (being the same with that which we met with before in the 14.
verse of that Chapter). (...), Inescant, i. e. quas^ pisces hamo captant (as
Beza interprets it), they take them as Fishes with a Hook and a Bait. And
(questionless) in this very way have not a few of late times in this Nation
been taken by diverse of those false doctrines which have been spread abroad.
They being such doctrines as gratify the flesh, indulge men in a great deal of
loosnesse and licentiousness under the pretense of Christian and
Gospel-liberty; giving allowance unto them in some unwarrantable practices,
which true Religion will not admit. And by this bait it is that they are taken,
and so carried away with those doctrines.

3. It may be they are such doctrines 3. It may be they are consonant to Reason.
as are consonant and agreeable to humane Reason. Such were the doctrines of
the false Apostles in Paul's time, who made use of their Philosophy (as I
showed you) their Natural Reason; which they did both Pro and Con, for their
own doctrines, against the doctrines of the Gospel; pretending the one to be
agreeable to Reason, and the other contrary to it. Which (no question) cannot
but be a very prevaient Argument with such as the Apostle calls (...) or
(...), 1 Cor. 2. 14. mere natural men, who have no other guide but the light
of Reason to follow. And hereupon it is that Satan, that subtle and experienced
Engineer has made, and at this day does make so much use of this Engine, for
the battering and overthrowing of diverse Articles of the Christian faith; as,
viz. the doctrine of the Trinity; the Incarnation of Christ, the Creation of
the World, and the Resurrection of the Body* all which being contrary to
Philosophical principles, and so not to be comprehended by Reason, upon that
ground he disswadeth men from the belief of them. And by the same means he
seduceth and draws them into dangerous, yea, into pernicious and damnable
errors; presenting them unto them as doctrines most consonant and agreeable to
their Carnal Reason. Such are the doctrines, as of some other Sects amongst us,
so in special of that, of all other (in my eyes) the most dangerous, the
Socinian: which by this Engine seeks to undermine diverse of the Principles of
Christian Religion, because they are not consonant and agreeable to their
Reason, though never so clearly held forth to the eye of faith in Scripture.
And upon this foundation it is that they erect and build their own diverse and
strange doctrines: which (presuming themselves to be great Masters of Reason)
with much confidence they hold forth, to the seducing of some, who are willing
to hearken to them, and to be deceived by them.

4. To these add one more, which is as taking as any of the former, if not 4.
It may be they have a show of Piety.
more. And that is; It may be they are such doctrines as have in them a show of
piety. Such were the doctrines which the false Apostles preached, and pressed.
They were such things (as the Apostle describes them, Col. 2. last) as had
indeed a show of wisdom in will worship, and Humility, and neglecting of the
Body. Such were diverse of those Ceremonial observances, which were so eagerly
pressed by them upon Christians in those times. They had a great show of Piety
and Humility in them; being exercises of Mortification and Self-denial, which
(being rightly performed) are services very acceptable to God. Thus did they
varnish over that superstitious Will Worship of theirs; whereby it became very
taking with such as were not aware of the hook hid under that bait.

And the like may be said of many of the doctrines of the Church of Rome at
this day, which pretend to extraordinary strictness, and so carry a show of
singular piety and devotion with them; whereby many well-meaning, but unwary
souls are bewitched; and so carried away with them.

And surely that is the case of some and diverse of those doctrines which walk
abroad in this Nations at this day: they have a show of special and singular
piety in them. Some of them pretending to an high advancement of free Grace,
which in it self is a glorious doctrine. Such is that Arminian doctrine, (which
it seems is of late crept into this place, being brought in by some who creep
into houses, and so beguile unstable souls), I mean the Doctrine of Universal
Redemption, with its Attendants, (as Error seldom goes alone), which is
cried up as a doctrine highly advancing and magnifying the grace of God, by
this extending it to the Universality of Mankind, far above that which confines
it to a select number: which yet is but a mere pretense. For if all be alike
Elected in Christ, alike given to Christ, and alike redeemed by Christ, so as
nothing is done, or intended more for one then another, where is then that
special differencing and distinguishing Grace of God, which is so admired by
the Apostle in diverse of his Epistles? So as in truth this doctrine, being
rightly scanned, is not an exaltation of Grace, but a great derogation from it.
And diverse other doctrines there are of like nature, which have the like
varnish set upon them: As, viz. the Antinomian tenants, and some other, which I
shall not trouble you with the enumeration of. Only desiring you to take
notice of this in the general, as one special means of thus carrying about
some, and many wellmeaning, but unstable souls; even the specious show of
pretended piety that is in some Doctrines.

And thus I have now (through the good hand of my God leading me along)
dispatched the former of my tasks, that which I intended by way of doctrinal
Explication and Illustration. Wherein I have showed you what is meant by Diverse
and strange Doctrines, and what by being carried about with those Doctrines.
Then that there have been, and are such doctrines; and that Christians are
subject to be carried about with them; Giving you the Grounds and Reasons of
both. That which now remains of this part of the Text, is Application.

Where (in the first place) I might Applic. A just Lamentation over the present
state of the Church in this Nation.
here make a stand, and take a just and sad Lamentation, pouring forth my soul
in bemoaning the present state and condition of the Church of God in this
Nation. Wherein, (Lord!) what variety of strange doctrines are there to be
found? And how many every where carried about with them? For Doctrines, how
diverse? and many of them how strange? Surely Africa was never more fruitful in
variety of Monsters, then England is at this day in variety of Opinions: diverse
of which are so monstrous, so hideous, as surely Hell it self affords none
more. Such as give us to hope, that the Devil is now pouring out the very dregs
of his poisonous Cup. But withal, how many are there found to be intoxicated
therewith? Yea, some, who some years since were looked upon as stayed and
sober Christians, yet now we may see them reeling and staggering like drunken
men to and fro; carried this way and that way, as not knowing how, or where to
stand. Such is the Condition of this poor Nation at this day: Insomuch that
this disease of the Spiritual Vertigo is grown Epidemicall, common in all
places. Look where we will, almost, how may we see wheels turning about,
Chafe whirled about, Waves and Clouds driven about, unstable souls carried
about with the wind of diverse and strange doctrines. A matter of just and deep
Lamentation.

And so let it be to every of us. Should any of you, while your selves stand
safe upon the shore, see others, though Strangers, much more if friends,
tossed upon the waves among Rocks or Quicksands, ready to perish every moment,
I presume it could not but affect the flintiest heart among you. And surely
such is the condition of many of your Brethren and Sisters at this day in this
Nation, who are thus tossed to and fro with diverse and strange doctrines, some
of which are no better then Rocks and Quicksands, desperate, and damnable
doctrines, such as who ever imbraceth, living and dying in the belief of them,
must needs split and perish upon them. Now how should the consideration hereof
affect the hearts of all those who truly loving God, cannot but bear an hearty
affection to their brethren, so as to desire their everlasting welfare and
happiness! But I shall not insist upon this, either the further discovering of
this Malady, or the bewailing of it. I shall rather come to that which more
nearly concerns your selves; to prosecute that which I told you was my design
in taking up of this Text; Which is,

To Warn you, you of this place, of Use 2. A double Caveat to Christians.
this Congregation; To whom let me in the Name of God here hold forth a double
Caveat: First, Be not you offended at these: Secondly, Be not you seduced by
them. Of these two severally. Begin with the former.

1. Be not you offended by these; by Caveat 1. Be not offended.
what either you see or hear of in this kind; so offended, as to like Christ
and his Religion ever the worse for them. A blessed thing not to be thus
offended. Blessed is he whosoever shall not be offended in me (says our
Savior) Matthew. 11. 6. This unstable souls are subject unto upon diverse
occasions; like queasie stomachs which are ready to take distaste at every
thing that displeases them. But upon none sooner then this, the instability,
and unsettlednesse of those that profess the faith of Christ; when they shall
see them carried about with diverse and strange doctrines. So much we may learn
from St. Peter, 2* Ep. 2. where speaking in the first verse of false Teachers,
such as should broach damnable Heresies; and in the second verse, of their
followers, which should not be few, but many, [ Many shall follow their
pernicious wayes], He subjoynes this to both, [ By reason of whom the way of
truth shall be evil spoken of]. The way of truth], The true Christian
Religion, which shows the true and only way to true happiness; It should by
this means be exposed to the Reproaches and Obloquies of the Adversaries of
it. And surely so is it with the Protestant Religion at this day, which is
professed and held forth as the true Religion of God in this Nation; by reason
of those diverse and strange doctrines which are to be found in it (some of them
confessedly far worse then any that the Church of Rome is charged with), and
the strange unsettlednesse of the Professors of it, who as if they had no sure
bottom to stand upon, are thus carried about with every wind. By this means
this way of truth is evil spoken of by the adversaries of it. And that
especially by our Adversaries of Rome, who as they have ever been ready to cast
this in the Protestants face, their divisions, so now questionless, they
rejoice in them, and triumph over them; from hence concluding, that surely this
cannot be the way of Truth, which has so many windings, and turnings, and
Cross ways in it: This cannot be the true Religion of God, the Professors
whereof are so far from that which God has promised to his Church under the
Gospel, viz. Cor unum and via una, One Heart and one way. Thus are others
offended hereat. But let not any of you be so offended. No Reason why you
should be so. This being no No Reason why Christians should be offended at this.
other then what,

1. Has been. It is no new thing. No other then what has been in all Ages 1.
This is no other then what has been.
of the Church; even in the first and purest times of it. Then were there such
diverse and strange doctrines set on foot, and diverse carried about with them.
And what wonder then to see the like acted over again in these dregs of time.
It is no other then what has been.

2. And (secondly) it is no other then 2. No other then what is foretold shall
and must be.
what has been foretold should be, must be; There must be Heresies (says the
Apostle,) 1 Cor. 11. 19. And that as in all, so specially in the latter times.

For which most clear and express is that of St. Paul, who writing to Timothy,
informs him hereof, 1 Timothy 4. 1. Now the Spirit speaks expressly, that in the
latter times some shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits,
and Doctrines of Devils, etc. And again, 2 Timothy 3. 1. This know also, (says
he) that in the last days perilous times shall come, For men shall be lovers
of themselves, Covetous, boasters, and so he goes on, showing what a flood of
evils should in the last times (being, as it were, the lees and dregs, the
worst of times) break in upon the Church, spreading over the face of it; and
among other he reckons up this for one, that there should be some who should
creep into houses, and lead captive silly women, etc. there should be many
Seducers, and many seduced by them.

Now wherefore is this so clearly foretold, but to prevent that offense, which
any might be ready to take, when they see these things come to pass. This was
our Saviors end in foretelling to his Disciples what harsh usage they should
find in and from the world, after his departure from them, These things (says
he) have I spoken unto you, that ye should not be offended, Joh. 16. 1. And
again, These things have I told you, that when the time shall come, ye may
remember that I told you of them, v. 4. And to the very same end he elsewhere
foretells in like manner of false Teachers that should come, and the
prevalencie of their seductions, Matthew. 24. 24. There shall arise false
Christ's, and false Prophets, and shall show great signs and wonders, insomuch
that (if it were possible) they shall deceive the very Elect. So prevalent
should they be in their seducements. And wherefore does he foretell this? why,
to prevent that offense which any might be ready to take hereat, when they
should see it; So it follows, Behold, I have told you before, v. 25. given
you this warning, that you might not be offended or troubled at it, when you
shall see so many errors held forth, and so many giving heed to them.

And of such use let these and the like predictions be unto us. Now that we see
what was foretold to be come to pass, being thus forewarned of it, be not
offended at it, so as to like the true Religion of God ever the worse for it.
Here is the former of these Caveats. Pass we to the second, which my eye is
principally upon.

Not being offended, take heed (in the Caveat 2. Take heed of being seduced.
second place) of being seduced. Be not ye carried away with diverse and strange
doctrines. That was the Apostles admonition to his Hebrews, and let it now be
mine to you. Such doctrines there are abroad; and many there are who are
carried about with them. Now taking notice hereof, take you heed that none of
you be found in this number, that you be not also led away. So St. Peter
presses it in the close of his latter Epistle, 2 Pet. 3. 17. Having foretold
them of (what we at this day see) false Teachers, and many that should be
seduced by them, Ye therefore (beloved) (says he) seeing ye know these things
before, beware lest ye also being led away with the error of the wicked, fall
from your own steadfastnesse. And the like let me, with like tender respects to
your souls, press upon you; Seeing so many seducers are abroad, and so many
every where seduced by them, take heed that you be not in like manner carried
about as they are. Which let me beg from you: And that,

1. For our sakes, whom God has set Arg. 1. For your Ministers sakes.
over you. (I begin here; Not that we seek our selves in the first place, (as
some are ready enough to charge it) but intending a Gradation, I begin at the
lowest stayr first). If you should be thus carried away, this will be our
Loss, our Grief; which look you to. So Saint John presses it, making use of
this very Argument to this very end, 2 Ep. v. 8. where speaking to the Elect
Lady, and her Children, and exhorting them to constancy in the faith, which he
does the rather because of those false Teachers which were then abroad, of whom
he speaks, v. 7. For many deceivers have entered into the world] Then he
subjoynes, Look to your selves, that we lose not the things which we have
wrought, but that we receive a full reward]. We. Peoples Apostasy the
Ministers loss.
So it is, where Christians come to Apostatize, to fall from the Truth which
they have received and embraced, there their Ministers, who have been their
Teachers and Instructers, they lose the things which they have wrought; their
former labors by this means are frustrated; they are lost and spilt; and so
it comes to pass that they do not receive their full reward. True indeed, as
for their Eternal reward, that they shall not lose. That was the Confidence and
Comfort of their Lord and Master, the Lord Christ, who complaining of the
fruitlesnesse of his labors among the Jews, (as he is brought in, and
personated by the Prophet Isaiah, being therein a Type of him) Isai. 49. he
bears up his spirit with this comfortable assurance, v. 4. Then I said, I
have labored in vain, I have spent my strength for naught, etc. yet surely my
judgment is with the Lord, and my work with my God. This was his comfort, that
though his Labors had been in vain as to the greatest part of that people, and
of the world, yet God his Father, who knew with what uprightness and sincerity
he had done the work which he had given him to do, would, for all that, crown
his endeavors with an answerable reward. And the like may all his servants
comfort themselves with. Being faithful in their Ministration, approving
themselves unto God, in seeking his glory, and the good of his people, what
ever the success of their labors be, yet they shall not lose their eternal
reward hereafter. But in the mean time, they may lose a part of their reward
here: which consists partly in the fruit of their labors; when they see them
successeful in the hearts of their people. This they may by this means lose.
Yea, and in some sense they may be said to lose part of their Reward hereafter.
For if those whom they gain unto Christ are their Crown, and their, Glory, as
the Apostle calls them, Phil. 4. 1. Therefore, my brethren, dearly beloved,
and longed for, my Joy and my Crown, so stand fast in the Lord. And so writing
to his Thessalonians, 1 Thessalonians. 2. 19, 20. For what is our hope, or joy, or
Crown of rejoicing (says he)? Are not even ye in the presence of our Lord
Jesus Christ at his coming? For ye are our glory and Joy. Now if so, then the
Apostatizing of those whom God has (as to an outward Profession) given unto
them, their falling off from the Truth received, is as the falling off of so
many Pearls from their Crowns. And so by this means it comes to pass, that
they do not (as he there speaks) receive their full reward.

And this being thus their Loss, it is Their Grief.
also their Grief. So it must needs be. If this be their Joy to see those whom
they have gained by their Ministry, to continue constant in the profession and
practice of the Truth, (as it is) I rejoiced greatly (says St. John, writing
to the Elect Lady in that his second Epistle) that I found of thy children
walking in the truth, verse 4. And so writing to Gaius in the Epistle
following, he tells him first, as concerning his own person in particular, 3
Ioh. verse 3. I rejoiced greatly when the Brethren came, and testified of the
truth that is in thee, even as thou walk in the truth: Then concerning all
others who were converted by his Ministry, verse 4. I have no greater joy then
to hear that my children walk in the truth]. Now (I say) if this be so great a
joy to them, (as it is to all the faithful Ministers of Christ, who do
seriously intend, desire and endeavor the salvation of those committed to
them) it cannot, on the other hand, but be a great sadding to their spirits, to
see hopeful branches broke off from the stock, fair blossoms falling off from
the Tree; to see those upon whom their Ministry has been in measure
effectual, (at least to the enlightening of them), deserting the truth, and
embracing of error, seduced by false Teachers, and so carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines.

Even as it is with Natural Parents, Ministers spiritual Parents.
(if they be not such as the Apostle speaks of, Romans 1. 31. (...), without
natural affection) it cannot but be a heartgrief to them, to see any of their
Children whom they have bred and brought forth, and brought up to some
maturity, with so much carfulness and tenderness to be taken captive by the
Enemy, or to be carried away by Gypsies, or the like. Truly in like manner, it
cannot but deeply affect the faithful Ministers of Christ (who are as
spiritual parents, as Paul calls himself, 1. Cor. 4. 15) to see any of those
whom God has given them as Children, who have been (as it were) the labor and
travel of their souls, to see them captived by Satan, to see them carried away
by those Gypsies in Religion (of which there are many walking abroad in this
Nation at this day), I mean Seducers, false Teachers, who by their Canting
Language, and other like artifices, deceive simple souls, and so carry them
about with them into the ways of Error. This (I say) cannot but deeply affect
the hearts of the faithful Ministers of Christ; be a sadding to their spirits.

Now then have you a regard to this, The Ministers Loss and grief reflecting
upon the People.
that you be not in this way the causers of it. This is that which the Apostle
presses upon his Hebrews, v. 17. of this Chapter whereof the Text is part, (
Heb. 13. 17.) And let me press the same upon you. Obey them that have the rule
over you (meaning thereby not Civil Magistrates, as the Erastian Gloss would
corrupt and darken that clear Text, but Ecclesiastical Ministers), and submit
your selves, for they watch for your souls, as they that must give account,
that they may do it with joy (that they may (first) do their work with joy,
going on cheerful in their Ministerial service; and (secondly) that they may
give up their account with joy,) and not with grief. Which if they do, it will
in the end prove a loss and grief to you, as well as them: So it there
follows. For that is unprofitable for you; It will be prejudicial to you
here, and it will turn to a sad account to you an other day. Which leads me
to a second Argument.

Whilst you do this for our sake, do Arg. 2. Christians to beware of this for
their own sakes. Beza Gr. Annot.
it also for your own sake, that you may not lose your work and your Reward. So
some Greek Copies (who are therein followed by the Vulgar Latin, and some other
Translations, our own also taking notice of it in the Margin) read that
forecited Text of St. John, 2 Ep. v. 8. Look to your selves, that ye lose not
those things which you have wrought, (or gained) but that ye may receive a full
reward.] Ye] This Apostates do; Falling from the truth believed and
acknowledged, they lose the things which they have wrought, lose the reward of
them; so as all their profession shall not turn to any account to them. For
this express is that of the Lord by the Prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 18. 24.
repeated and inculcated, Chap. 33. 12, 13, 18. When the righteous turns away
from his righteousness, etc. All his righteousness that he has done shall
not be mentioned, etc. So it is in doctrinall truths, as well as Practical
performances. A professor turning aside from the way of truth, to the
embracing of Error, thereby he blasteth all his former Profession, loses the
fruit and benefit of his former Faith, or seeming Holiness. And unless he
look to it betimes, may also lose that full Reward, (as the Apostle there
calls the reward of Eternal Life) (...), in as much as it is an abundant
recompense for what ever any shall either do or suffer). This Reward all
Apostates are in danger to lose.

Not that all errors in doctrine (no Errors not all alike dangerous in
themselves.
more then in practice) are alike dangerous. We know what the Apostle says of
those Teachers, which build wood, and hay, and stubble upon the foundation, 1
Cor. 3. 12. Holding fast Christ, and his saving Truths, the Mystical and
doctrinal foundations, yet raise and build some unwarrantable superstructures
upon them, holding forth some doctrines that will not endure the Trial; of such
he says, verse 15. that though their work be burnt, (as it shall be at that
great day of trial, when all things shall be tried (as it were) by fire), and
themselves suffer loss, (lose the praise of their labor, which shall not be
accepted or rewarded with God) yet they themselves shall be saved, though it be
as by fire. Though they escape narrowly, as a man that escapes out of the fire
naked, where he has lost both his goods, and his Garments; yet, as to their
persons, they shall be saved. God accepting the sincerity of their intentions
as to the main, will graciously overlook and pardon those infirmities, and so
receive them to mercy. Now what he there says of the Teachers of such
doctrines, we may apply to the followers of them. So long as they hold fast the
Foundation, though they be (through infirmity) drawn aside into some Errors
not fundamental, they may as to their persons, through the indulgent grace and
mercy of God, be saved. Which we hope concerning many poor seduced fowls in
this Nation at this day. Thus it is true, all Errors are not alike dangerous
in themselves.

But withal, who knows what the Yet all dangerous in the Consequence.
Consequence of those more venial Errors may be? when the wheel begins to turn,
going down the Hill, who knows where it will stay? Not, unless it be
accidentally stopped, until it come to the bottom. And even so is it with
poor seduced souls; if once they begin to be carried about with diverse and
strange doctrines, though of an inferior concernment, if they once begin to
fall from their steadfastnesse, who knows where they will rest? whether
before they come to the bottom of the Hill, to the bottom of Hell, or no? I
presume your own experience can furnish some of you with some instances of this
kind: Of some, who beginning at the first with some smaller Errors, (as, viz.
withdrawing themselves from the public Assemblies), in process of time, by
turning and turning from one Error to another, they have never left till they
came to the very browe and brink of Hell; even to the deriding and scorning of
that Religion which before they professed; to the defying of Ordinances,
public and private; to jear at heaven and Hell, at the immortality of the
soul, and Resurrection of the Body, as if they were no other but melancholy
dreams; and so brought even to the height (or rather depth) of downright
Atheism and profaneness. O let these examples be as booyes, or Sea-marks unto
you, to warn you to take heed of coming near those shelves, those quicksands,
which they have thus made shipwreck upon. As you love your selves, your own
precious souls, take heed of being thus carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines. Which if you shall suffer your selves to be, unless Gods mercy be
the greater in checking and stopping of you, you are like to be undone by it.

So much the Apostle intimates to his Soul-unsettlednesse in Religion an
undoing thing.
Colossians in that Text forecited, Col. 2. 8. Beware (says he) lest any man
spoil you through Philosophy and vain deceit]. This he speaks in reference to
those false Teachers, who by their false doctrines sought to make a prey of
them. So the word there used signifies, (...). Ne sit qui vos depraedetur;
That no man make a prey of you. Verbum militare, (says Beza upon it) A word
taken Beza Gr. Annot.
from the Wars, where Soldiers drive away as a prey the Cattle which they have
taken; or (as our New Annotation has it) from such thieves or Pirates, as do
not only take and carry away the goods of those they rob, but their persons
also, to make them their own, or other men's slaves. Thus do false Teachers deal
by those that hearken to them. By their false doctrines they carry them away
for a prey, making a spoil of them; spoiling them, not only of their goods, the
things which they have wrought, and gained (as the Apostle there speaks) but
even of their souls, (unless God in mercy step in to their rescue); as much
as in them lies, giving them up as Captives unto Satan. As our Savior says
of the Scribes and Pharisees, who were so zealous to instill their doctrines
into others, to make proselytes, they thereby made them twofold more the
children of Hell then themselves, Matthew. 23. 15. Thus do false and Heretical
Teachers, by their false and damnable doctrines, they beget Children of Hell;
bringing men under the power of Satan to be taken and led Captive by him. As
therefore you love your selves, beware of such seducers, such seductions, that
you be not thus carried about with such diverse and strange doctrines.

And (in the third place) whilst Arg. 3. For the Churches sake.
herein you have respect to your Ministers and your selves, have the like also
to the Church of God. This is a thing which all Christians, who profess
themselves members of that mystical Body, ought to have a special regard
unto, so as not to despise it, nor yet to shame it.

1. Not to despise it. This is one 1. Not despising it.
thing which Paul charge upon some of his Corinthians, that by their
disorderly manner of administering and receiving of the Sacrament of the Lords
Supper, and Celebrating their Lovefeasts before, or after it, (uncertain
whether) they in so doing despised the Church of God, 1 Cor. 11. 22. Or despise
you the Church of God? Which, though some, and not a few, learned Expositors,
Chrysostom. Augustine. Grotius ad loc. Fuller, in miscellan.
and that not without some good show of Reason for it, interpret of the place
of the Churches meeting, which by a usual Metonymie, vulgarly is (and
inoffensively may be) so called, Ecclesia, The Church: which place they might
be said to have despised, in that they put no difference betwixt their own
private houses and that; which, supposing it to be set apart for Religious
services, ought not, without necessary cause, to have been employed to other
Civil, (much less Uncivil) uses, (as it seems Calvin. ad loc. Beza Gr.
Annot. in 1 Cor. 11. 18. Pareus ibid. and in verse. 22. Camero in Praelect. de
Ecclesiam adversus. Bellaminum et Fulle^^^* fuse.
their meetings were). Yet others, not inferior to them, (to whom I profess
my self rather to subscribe) understand it rather of the Mystical Church, the
coetus fidelium, the Company of believers, either in that particular
Congregation, or elsewhere. This Church they by this disorderly carriage of
theirs, seemed to slight, not regarding the Custom of other Churches, nor yet
hearkening to the Admonition of their own, possibly seconded by some others,
(as Pareus conceives of it): And this the Apostle there calls a despising of
the Church of God. Which he charge upon them as a thing most blameworthy in
them. [ Shall I praise you for this? I praise you not.]

And so is it in whomsoever shall do To despise the Church no small contempt.
the like in any kind; Despise the Church of God! that Church whereof they are
members, and others of the true Churches of Christ. Which they do, without
regarding the lawful and laudable usages and Customs of those Churches, do
without any just ground and reason differ from them in matters of concernment.
Paul (in the Chapter last named) taxing another undecency in that Church of
Corinth, viz. their women (some of them) having their heads and faces unveiled,
uncovered in the public Assemblies, he presumes this to be Argument sufficient
to silence those, who ever they were, that should appear whether in defense of
it, or contest about it; If any man list to be contentious, (says he) we have
no such Custom, nor the Churches of God, 1 Cor. 11. 16. And if this be an
interpretative despising of the Church, not to regard the Customs thereof,
much more may it be so construed, to recede from the doctrine thereof; and to
run after diverse and strange doctrines, such as the true Church of God has not
owned, but renounceth, and disclaimeth. Surely this is no other but a despising
of the Church of God; which who so stands guilty of, let him not look for
praise from God, or thanks from men.

2. Not to shame it. This do they 2. Not shaming it.
who professing themselves to be children of this mother, yet desert her
doctrine, suffering themselves to be thus carried about with such diverse and
strange doctrines. This is no small blemish in the Churches face. Even as it is
in a field Diverse and strange Doctrines tolerated a shame to the Church.
of Corn, to see such a (...), such a medly in it, as sometimes we do in barren
soiles, such an intermixture of diverse and strange weeds, and flowers, as
Cockle and Darnel, Poppies, and Mayeweed, etc. all growing among the Wheat;
this variety of heterogeneous plants, (what ever their color be, and how
pleasing soever they may be in the eyes of Children, yet) it is no small
eyesore to the husbandman, or blemish to the field it self, whose best beauty
is to be all of one color. And (truly) so is it in the Church of God; where
there ought to be but one Faith, (as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 4. 5.), to have
diverse and strange doctrines put up, and take rooting there (much more if they
come to flourish and spread), this is no small eyesore unto God, nor blemish
to it. Which have you a regard unto, that you may not in this way either
despise, or shame the Church of God.

In the fourth place, having an eye to Arg. 4. For Religions sake.
the Church of God, have a regard also to the Religion of God therein
professed. To the Truth of God, which is but one. Veritas unica, error
multiplex. Error is various, and may be infinite: Truth is but one, and that
semper eadem, ever the same, being constant and immutable; like unto him who is
the Author of it, the God of truth, who says of himself, I am the Lord, I
change not, Mat. 3. 6. Now what a dishonor then is this? to have the
Professors of it so unlike unto it self; the children so unlike the mother,
such Changelings? so mutable, so changeable; As if they were of Pilates race,
who when Christ spoke to him concerning the Truth, he replyeth, not without
some Passion, And what is Truth? Joh. 13. 38. Truly such Scepticks in Religion
are some, and many at this day, as if they were (as some call themselves)
Seekers; not knowing what Truth, no not Gospel Truth, is: which if they did,
surely they would be more constant in adhering to it, and owning of it.

Fifthly, and lastly, let me beg this Arg. 5. For Christ his sake.
for the sake of your Lord and ours, even for Christ his sake. His Disciples
and followers you profess your selves to be. And are you so? then hear his
voice, and no others. This will his sheep do. My sheep hear my voice, Joh. 10.
27. Those that are truly given unto Christ by the Election of God the Father,
to be made partakers of the merit and benefit of his Redemption, to be
justified and saved by and through him, they will hearken unto him speaking in
the Gospel. And thus hearing him, they will follow him, and only him; not so
any other. A stranger will they not follow (says the fifth verse of that
Chapter, speaking of the same sheep of Christ), but will flee from him; For
they know not the voice of strangers. False Teachers, such as teach diverse and
strange doctrines (and in that respect fitly called strangers); Christ's sheep
know not their voice, viz. with a knowledge of Approbation, so as to hearken to
them, to follow them. And O that all of you might in this way approve your
selves to be in the number of these sheep! such as have Christ's ear-mark upon
you, by giving this honor unto Jesus Christ, to hear him. This is my beloved
Son, in whom I am well pleased, hear ye him, (says the voice from heaven)
Matthew. 17. 5. A Prophet shall the Lord your God raise up unto you of your
Brethren, like unto me; him shall ye hear, (says Moses, speaking of the
Messia) Deuteronomy. 18. 15. cited by Stephen, Act. 7. 37. Hear him; and in matters of
Faith, only him; Not hearkening to any other, who ever they are, that shall
bring any diverse and strange doctrines, contrary to, or diverse from, that
which is revealed in the Word. This is that which Paul (with no little
earnestness) presses upon his Galatians, Gal. 1. 8. Though we, or an Angel
from Heaven preach any other Gospel unto you, then that which we have preached
to you, let him be acoursed. And let me with like affection press the same
upon you. If any (be they who, or what they will) shall preach another Gospel
(as some such there are in this Nation at this day) then that which has been
preached to you by the faithful Ministers of Jesus Christ, what ever they are
(I say) let them be accursed. So look upon them, as being therein Instruments
of the devil, no other but the spawn of that old Serpent, who having deceived
your first Parent, now attempteth the like upon you.

To proceed no further. Put these Arguments together; and I hope (being by the
good Spirit of God set on upon your hearts), they may prove effectually
prevalent, for the letting in of this useful and needful Admonition, that you
would take heed, that you be not carried about with diverse and strange
doctrines.

But you will now say unto me; How Q. 1. Preservatives against this spiritual
Vertigo.
shall we be preserved from this so dangerous a Vertigo? this turning
sickness? How shall we be kept from being thus carried about, and carried away?

A Question that will be very useful A.
in the Resolution of it. Wherein I shall prescribe unto you some plain, but
proper directions, which may serve as an Antidote against this Infection.

1. In the first place, my advice shall Direct. 1. Christians not to be
Overconfident of themselves.
be; Be not over-confident, over-confident of your selves. Whether of your own
Strength or Judgment.

1. Not of your own Strength. This 1. Not of their own strength.
it was that gave Peter that Turn in the High Priests Hall; even his standing
upon his own legs, self-Confidence. Though all men shall be offended because of
thee, yet will I never be offended, (says he to his Master) Matthew. 26. 33.
This he spoke in confidence of his own strength; and therefore he was left by
his Master to that sad experience of his own weakness. Let his miscarriage be
a warning to all that hear of it, to teach them while they stand, to take heed
lest they fall. That is the Apostles counsel, 1 Cor. 10. 12. Let him that
thinks he stands, take heed lest he fall. (...). He that thinks he
stands firm and sure, and is confident that he shall ever stand (as Grotius
well expounds it); Let him take heed. Let him not be over-confident. That is
the same Apostles advice to his Romans, and other Gentile Christians, Romans 11.
20. where speaking of the just Rejection of the Jew, and the gracious Reception
of the Gentile in their stead, he makes this use of it. Because of unbelief
they were broken off, and thou stand by faith; Be not high-minded, but fear.
(...), Have not high thoughts of your selves, but fear; not with a fear of
diffidence and distrust, but of Circumspection, and watchfulness. A useful
direction, very proper in the present Case. Would you not be thus carried
about? Take heed of Topsailes. You well know (many of you) how unsteady they
make the vessel that bears them, carrying it about, and tossing it to and fro
with every blast of wind. And the like will high thoughts do the soul that is
possessed with them. And therefore be not High-minded. Let no man think of
himself more highly then he ought to think, (as our last Translation renders
that, Romans 12. 3.) But fear. Happy is the man that fears always (says the
Wiseman, Christians always to fear themselves.
Prove. 28. 14.): Fears God, and himself. Fears God with a fear of Piety,
and himself with a fear of Jealousy. Fears to offend his God, and is no
ways confident of himself (as Diodate well expounds it). And thus let us fear;
And that Always. Which well we may, when we see, or hear (which we may do) of
others, some of them, sometimes Champions for the Truth, to be thus deceived,
thus seduced, thus Captived. Well may we, who in comparison of them are but
poor weak striplings, fear. Be we diffident of our selves.

Which whilst we are, commit we our Committing their souls to a Divine
Custody.
selves to the Custody of another. That is St. Peter's advice to Christians in
all their sufferings for God, that they should commit their souls to God, 1
Pet. 4. last. Let them that suffer according to the will of God commit the
keeping of their souls to him in well doing, as unto a faithful Creator. And
this do we: Knowing that we cannot keep our own souls, (If Adam in state of
Integrity could not do it, how much less we in this lapsed condition,
laboring under so great Imperfection), commit them to the custody of another,
even of that God who is a faithful Creator, who, as he is able to keep that
which is committed unto him (as Paul speaks, 2 Timothy 1. 12); so also he will
do it for all that trust him. A God that will not forsake the work of his own
hands. Thus commit we our selves unto him.

Taking hold of him by faith. Even Taking hold of their Fathers hand.
as Children, walking abroad in the winds way, specially if they be to pass
over some narrow bridge, they will take hold of their fathers hand. Even so do
we of our heavenly Fathers. Now that the wind of diverse and strange doctrines
is up, and is so high that every day it carries away some or other, we being
to pass over a narrow bridge, (for such is the way to heaven, Narrow is the
way which leads unto life (says our Savior, Matthew. 7. 14.) so as if our
foot slip, or we be turned aside, we may perish for ever, take we hold of our
Fathers hand, begging it from him that he would hold us, so keep us that we may
not turn aside from the way of Truth: not leaving us to our selves; which if he
do, we shall be found no better then Wheels, then Chafe, then Clouds, then
Waves, easily carried about. Thus be not over-confident of our own strength.

2. Nor yet (secondly) of our own 2. Nor of their own Judgment.
Judgment, by leaning too much upon it. So the Wiseman subjoynes this Direction
to the former, Prove. 3. 5. Trust in the Lord with all thine heart, and lean not
to thine own understanding. A useful Caveat, which let Christians make use of
in this case. Would they stand sure, so as not to be carried away with Errors,
let them not lean too much upon their own Arms, trust too much to their own
Judgments. By this means many have been deceived in matters of the world, more
in the matters of God. And therefore beware of this Self-confidence also.

And that, as in other things, so in Particularly, in expounding of Scriptures.
interpreting, and expounding of Scriptures. We know what the Apostle St. Peter
tells us, 2 Pet. 1. 20. where he lays down this as a Praecognitum, a thing
which he would have all those who meddle with Prophetical Scriptures, to take
notice of. Know this first (says he) that no Prophecy of the Scripture is of
any private interpretation. (...), propriae Explicationis, of a man's own
expounding, for a man to interpret of his own head, according to his mind,
without consulting with others, with God, with Scriptures, with other men: with
God, having recourse to him by Prayer; with Scriptures, comparing one place
with another; with other men, consulting with their Wrttings, conferring with
their Persons. This is the ordinary way for expounding of Prophetical
Scriptures. And the like we may say of all other Texts; specially such as have
any degree of obscurity in them. And therefore let all Christians take heed how
they go about to expound them, that therein they do not go upon their own
heads, lean too much to their own Understandings.

Which as it concerns all, so more Specially being ignorant and unlearned;
who are apt to pervert it.
specially those that are ignorant and unlearned; who leaning to their own (too
often prejudiced) understanding, in interpreting of Scripture, may and do,
sometimes make strange work of it; wresting it. Thus in Peter's time dealt some
by Paul's Epistles, as also by other Scriptures, as himself observes, 2 Pet. 3.
16. In which (says he, speaking of those Epistles) there are somethings hard
to be understood, (viz. by reason of the sublimity, the height of the matter,
and some particular expressions in the phrase) which they that are unlearned
and unstable wrest; as they do also the other Scriptures to their own
destruction. This did those kind of men then. And the like they are still apt
to do. Being (...), men void and destitute, not only of Humane Learning,
(which is, what ever any, who have either little acquaintance with it, or
affection to it, may think and speak of it, no small help to the right
interpreting and understanding of Scripture), but also of Divine; having little
acquaintance with the mind of God revealed in his Word; not having their senses
(the faculties of their souls, Understandings and Judgments) exercised to
discern good and evil (as the Apostle describes the grown Christian, Heb. 5.
last), to discern betwixt truth and falsehood, they by this means, meddling with
the Interpretation of Scripture, and trusting to their own Judgments, wrest it,
torment it, set it upon the rack (as I showed you before the word there used
signifies).

A truth (I think) never more verified Strange perverting of Scripture in the
present Times.
in any age or part of the world, then it is at this day in this Nation.
Wherein how do these Sacred Records in this time suffer, being thus wrested,
thus tortured by many different sects, (like so many wild horses drawing at the
several quarters of man), every one endeavoring to force them, and bring them
over to their own party, to vote with them, and speak for them. To which end
some of them put such senses upon them as the world before never heard of, nor
any sober and unprejudiced spirit would ever have dreamed of. It were an easy
matter here to give you some instances in this kind. Take only a taste of them
from that poor illiterate act, (the noise whereof has of late alarummed A
Taste of it in the Sect of Quakers* Gypsies in Religion.
these Quarters, which gave me the first occasion to fall upon this subject),
those Gypsies in Religion (so I called them, with some others before, and know
not how more fitly to term them (vulgarly known by the name of Quakers. Being
(as it seems) every way such as Saint Peter there describes, unlearned and
unstable; what a nose of wax do they make of the Scriptures? which having a low
and contemptible esteem of, they handle accordingly. Bear with me a little if I
take up a few of those fragments which have fallen from some of them.

Having (all of them) an evil eye upon See the perfect Pharisee set forth by
the Ministers of New Castle.
those two standing Ordinances of God Magistracy and Ministry, (which diverse
look upon as the two witnesses spoken of, Rev. 11. 3. and some suppose to be
now about to be slain, v. 7. and having a design (as much as in them is) to
slay them, to take them out of the way, or at least to render them contemptible
in the eyes of the people, how do they hale in Scriptures to their ^id? not
sparing to offer violence to them, to enforce them to speak that which neither
the Spirit of God, nor yet any man besides themselves ever thought of. As for
instance.

Whereas the Prophet Jeremy speaking Texts perverted against Ministers.
of the false Prophets that were in Israel, says, that the Priests did bear
rule by their means, Jer. 5. last, meaning that they strengthened themselves
by the league which they had with the Prophets, and so were confirmed in their
ambitious courses and corrupt carriages, they envying the Ministers of God that
double honor, which the Apostle, (1 Timothy 5. 17.) says, those which rule well,
and specially they which labor in the Word and Doctrine are worthy of, viz.
Countenance and Maintenance, and not willing to allow them either the one or
the other, but being desirous to muzzle the mouth of the ox that treads out
the corn, and willing that they which serve at the Altar should live upon the
Air, some of them (and I suppose none of the meanest) would have thereby
understood their temporal subsistence; The Priests bear rule by their means; i.
e. Ministers of the Gospel domineer by their Maintenance; which upon that
ground they would have taken away.

And so finding our Savior blaming the Pharisees for their ambition, and among
other things charging them with this, that they loved the chief seats ni the
Synagogues, Matthew. 23. 6. they, not understanding what the word (...).
signifies, nor yet what the manner of the Jewish Synagogues was, wherein (as
in our Churches) there were many chief seats for more eminent persons, they
apply it to the Pulpits, which Ministers in preaching of the Word make use of
for conveniences sake, not without an express Scripture- president for it,
viz. that of Ezra, of whom we read, Neh. 8. 4, 5. That Ezra the Scribe stood
upon a Pulpit of wood, which they had made for the purpose. And so (it is said)
he opened the book in the sight of all the people; For he was above all the
people.

And so again, while they find the Pharisees taxed by our Savior for loving to
stand praying in the Synagogues, so making their private prayers in those
public places, which they did for ostentation sake, that they might be seen
and heard of men, (as our Sadiour himself there expounds it, Matthew. 6. 5.) they
take it up, and cast it as a stone at the faces of Gods Ministers, for using
the same posture in their public devotions.

And so also, where our Savior bids his Disciples to beware of the Scribes,
which desired to walk in long Robes, Luke 20. 46. wherein he had no intent to
condemn garments of that fashion, (which as the Prophets were ever wont to
wear, so himself and his Apostles did the like, it being the custom of those
Eastern Countries then (as to this day it is) to wear vestes talares,
side-garments), but their vain affectation in wearing them, most probably
having them longer then usual, trayling upon the ground, that so they might be
taken notice of to be no ordinary persons; these men apply it to the decent
garments of Ministers, whether Gowns or Cloakes, which they wear, and
warrantably may (as Magistrates do) for distinction sake, and that there may
appear (as there ought to do) even in their habit a gravity becoming their
calling. I might soon weary you with more of this kind; Texts thus perverted
against the Ministers of God.

And as they deal with Ministers, so Texts perverted against Magistrates.
also with the Civil Magistrate. To whom they refuse to give any civil
respects suitable to their places and offices. Which they do (as it seems)
chiefly upon the account of those two abused Texts. The one, Matthew. 23. where
our Savior taxing the ambition of the Scribes and Pharisees in affecting to be
called Rabbi, Rabbi, verse 7. he prohibits his Disciples to do the like, Be not
ye called Rabbi, verse 8. And again, verse 10. Be not ye called Masters, so
forbidding them to affect high styles, and swelling titles; from thence these
men refuse to give any respective language to Magistrates, more then to any
others.

The other place is that, Luke 10. 4. where our Savior sending forth his
seventy Disciples upon that great and earnest employment to preach and plant
the Gospel, he orders them that they should carry neither Purse, nor Scrip, nor
shoes, nor salute any man by the way; This kind of men overlooking the former
part of the verse, which equally concerns themselves, forbidding that which
they usually practice in their journeys, the carrying of purse, or scrip, or
shoes, they take hold of the latter, and from thence refuse to salute any man,
and so to afford any respect unto Magistrates, as well as others. Whereas our
Savior therein intended no such prohibition to his Apostles, as to for^i^ them
Comitie and Civilitie, the verse following there, he expressly enjoynes them,
(verse 5.) Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say, Peace be to this house;
which was a form of salutation then in use); but only that they should not
give way to any unnecessary diversions, so as to be taken off from, or hindered
in the executing of that Commission which he had given to them.

Thus do they make good what St. Peter there speaks, Being unlearned and
unstable, they wrest the Scriptures. And that not only such places as he there
speaks of, which are dark and obscure, whether for matter, or expression, but
plain Texts, the sense whereof is obvious to every eye, that has not the like
filme of prejudice upon it that theirs has. And by this means (among other)
are they (poor souls) carried about with such diverse and strange doctrines as
they are, to the shaming of that Religion which formerly they have made
profession of, and indangering their souls, and the souls of others.

Now let this present experience be useful to you, to warn you to beware of
that which exposes you to such eminent danger in this way; of being
overconfident of your selves, as not of your own Strength, so not of your own
Judgment. I pass to a second Direction.

While you are not over-confident, Direct. 2. Christians not to be
overCredulous, so as to take Doctrines upon Trust.
be not over-Credulous. While you are not over-Confident of your selves, be not
over-credulous of others, so as to take doctrines from them upon trust. Whether
from any one singular Person, or from any Community and Society of men.

1. Not from any one singular person. 1. Not from any one singular person.
This is an honor due only unto Christ; who being the Word of his Father,
ought to be heard, and that with an absolute credence. Not so any other;
whether Man, or Angel. Though we, or an Angel says St. Paul, Gal. 1. 8. It
matters not how qualified, how dignified. How qualified, whether for Learning
or Piety. How dignified, whether Pastors, or Teachers, to whom (being sent by
Christ) he has promised a more special assistance, Lo, I am with you always
to the end of the world, Matthew. 28. 20. yet give not this honor to any of
these, so as to pin your faith upon their sleeves; to take doctrines upon trust
from their tongues or Pens. It is the Bereans commendation, that they would not
trust Paul upon his word, but that they would search the Scriptures, to see
whether the things which they heard from him were so, or no, Act. 17. 11. Even
as wary Princes and States will not trust Ambassadors upon their bare word,
but they will see their Credentials under hand and seal: So wary should
Christians be in hearing the Ambassadors of Christ, his Ministers, whether
Ordinary or Extraordinary (of which latter sort yet I know none since the
Apostles times), so as not to receive any thing (in matters of faith) from the
mouths of any, be they what they will, unless they see their Credentials,
good warrant, and clear evidence from Scripture for it.

In which case it matters not what Pretended infallibility not to be regarded.
pretensions may be made by, or for any. Be it the highest that can be, an
unerring Infallibility. That is the pretension of him who gives out himself to
be Peter's Successor, and Head of the Church, that Man of Sin, that Antichrist
of Rome; who upon that account challenges to himself an absolute credence,
requiring all to acqutesce and rest in his determinations, without any further
discussion. Which is more then ever Paul or Peter did. And a thing directly
contrary to that which St. Paul enjoynes, 1 Cor. 7. 23. Ye are bought with a
price, be ye not servants of men; i. e. so as to inslave your selves, specially
your consciences unto them, by giving an absolute credence unto them.

No, though they may pretend Credentials Nor yet pretended Credentials: Spirit,
Word, or Letter.
also; Credentials whether from Earth, or Heaven. From earth, the Reports or
Writings of men; from Heaven, Divine and Immediate Revelations. All these three
(it seems) some of the false Apostles made use of. And thereupon it was that
St. Paul gave that Caveat to his Thessalonians, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2. Now we beseech
you, Brethren, that ye be not soon shaken in mind, or be troubled* neither by
Spirit, nor by Word, nor by letter as from us]. That ye be not shaken in mind,
(...), A metaphor taken from Ships, which are tossed to and fro at Sea in a
stresse of wind. Thus are poor unstable souls sometimes tossed and troubled,
by hearkening to false Teachers. But so would not Paul have his Thessalonians
to be by those false Apostles, who to insinuate into them, and to gain credit
and credence unto their doctrines, made use of that threefold Artifice, viz.
Spirit, Word, and Letter; Spirit, pretending Prophetical Revelations: Word,
Reports concerning the Apostle, as if he had changed his mind, recanting what
before he had preached, and so were of the same mind with them, (as Grotius, I
think, sitly expounds the word there); Letter, any counterfeit writing, going
under the Apostles name. And the very like Artifices do false Teachers
frequently make use of. Pretending sometimes to Spirit, Revelations,
Inspirations: Sometimes to Word, Reports, Traditions: Sometimes to Letter,
forged Records; All frequently made use of in the Church of Rome. And some of
them made use of by some false Teachers among our selves at this day. Now let
not Christians be shaken in mind, or troubled by any of these.

No, not by that which bids most Spirits to be tried.
for belief in this kind. Spirit, Pretended Revelation. This was the great
Argument which the false Prophets under the Old Testament made use of to gain
credit to their doctrines by. And the like have false Teachers done in the New:
As in the Primitive times, so in most ages since; being therein imitated by
some in this Nation at this day. But let not this pretense gain any Credence
from us. That is St. John's advice, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. Beloved (says he), Believe
not every spirit. But try the spirits, whether they be of God; because many
false Prophets are gone out into the world. So it was in his time; there were
many false Teachers. who boasted of the Spirit, pretended Revelation, and
Inspiration, by which means their doctrines gained belief with over-credulous
souls. But St. John forbids to believe them ever the more for that; but to Try
them. So did the Church of Ephesus, for which she is commended, Rev. 2. 2. Thou
have tried them which say they are Apostles, but are not, and have found them
liars. And the like it stands all Christians in hand to do. Not lightly to
believe every spirit. By this means (if reports be true) many children have
Merchandising Spirits.
been stolen and carried away by those whom the vulgar call by the name of
spirits. Being over-credulous, and committing themselves to them, they have
made Merchandise of them. Take you heed of doing the like by your souls; of
committing them to every one that pretend to the Spirit, lest they also do the
like by you, make merchandise of you (as St. Peter foretells false Teachers
would do, 2 Pet. 2. 3.): But try such spirits, whether they be of God: Bringing
their Doctrines to the Touchstone of the Word. That was the Touchstone to which
God requires his people to bring the Prophets under the Old Testament, Isai.
8. 20. To the Law, and to the Testimony (to the Word, to the Scriptures) If
they speak not according to this Word, it is because there is no light in them;
No Morning (says the Original), The daystar has not appeared unto them, the
Sun is not risen upon them, as they pretend; they have no light of divine
illumination, or yet can afford any light of true Consolation. And in like
manner, by the same means, try we the like Pretenders under the New Testament.
Not taking doctrines (in matters of faith) upon trust from any. Not from any
one singular person.

2. No nor yet (in the second place) 2. Not from any Community or Society of
men.
from any Community, any Society of men. Be it a Church, or be it a Synod, a
Council, Provincial or National, yea, suppose Ecumenical, General, Universal.
True it is, great respect both may and ought to be given to these; specially to
the last. But yet none of them having a promise of infallibility, it is too
great an honor to yield an absolute credence unto them, so as to receive their
determinations for Articles of faith, without any further discussion. Such an
implicit faith did that ancient Heretic Apelles plead for. Being (as Eusebius
(...). Eusebius. Histor. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 13.
reports it of him) taken in some errors, and dealt with for his Conviction, he
alleged that it was not for him, or any other to enquire into the truth of
Doctrines professed, but every one to abide in that faith which he had
received. And the very like do they of the Church of Rome. Fearing the truth of
their doctrines, they forbid the people to try them; specially if once they
have the Churches stamp upon them, now it is piacular so much as to question
them. No wonder that poor souls being overcredulous are in this way carried
about, whither it pleases their blind guides to lead them. Would not you
miscarry in the like way? make use of this second Advice; Be not over-credulous
in receiving of Doctrines upon trust from others. I pass to a third.

Would you not be thus carried about, Direct. 3. Take heed of coming in the
winds way.
Take heed how you come in the winds way, how you expose your selves to
Temptations in this way. Under which Head let me give you a twofold Caveat.

1. Take heed of high things That Caveat 1. Take heed of High things.
is the Apostles Caveat to his Romans, Romans 12. 16. Mind not high things. And
let it be mine to you. If you would not be thus carried about, take heed of
high things. You may remember what I told you of Chafe upon the Mountains;
Being there, it is presently whirled about with every gust of wind, whereas had
it been in the valley, or upon the floor, possibly it might have lain still and
quiet. Would not you in like manner be carried about with this wind of strange
doctrines, keep off from the top of the Mountain; take heed of high things. In
particular of high thoughts, and high speculations. I shall instance only in
these two.

1. Of high thoughts concerning your 1. High thoughts.
selves; of your own wit, your own wisdom, your own Judgment; as if you were
more perspicacious, more quicksighted then others. This Caveat the Apostle
subjoynes to the former, Romans 12. 16. Be not wise in your own conceits. Such
for the most part Heretics are; they have high thoughts of themselves, as if
they could seek further then others. And with this leaven (for the most part)
their Disciples likewise are sowred. And thence is it that having once given
entertainment to an opinion, they are so hardly induced to part with it again.
Sees thou a man wise in his own conceit? there is more hope of a fool, then of
such a one, Prove. 26. 12. would not you fall into the like condition? Be not in
this sense High-minded, Have not over weening thoughts of your selves.

And (secondly) whilst you take heed 2. High Speculations.
of high thoughts, take heed also of high Speculations. Whilst you take heed
of setting the one into your souls, take heed how you let out your souls
after the other; that they do not reach at things above their reach. So our
former Translation (not unfitly) renders that of the Apostle, Romans 12. 8. That
no man prefume to understand above that which is meet to understand, (...)
Either, above that which is meet for any man to understand, as some Divine
secrets are, which yet some will be prying into, or above that which is not
meet for such or such persons to attempt to understand. Such are some high and
deep Points in Divinity to low, and shallow capacities. They are too high for
them. And thereupon it is, that when they will be meddling with them, and
looking too far into them, they are like weak brains upon an high Tower, which
presently turn round, they are easily carried about. Even as it is with small
Skifs and Cockboals; so long as they are in the narrow and shallow waters, they
are steady, but lanching forth into the main, the broad and deep Ocean, then
how are they tossed? Even so fares it sometimes with some well-meaning
Christians. So long as they keep themselves within the banks of more plain and
necessary truths, as the doctrines of Faith and Repentance, etc. now they are
steady and stable, but adventuring to lanch forth into the deeps, how are they
carried about? Such deeps the Apostle speaks of, Romans 11. 33. where having
treated of Gods just and gracious dispensation, in rejecting of the Jew, and
receiving the Gentile into Covenant in their room, he breaks forth into this
passionate Exclamation, as a man astonished with the thought of that which he
could not comprehend the reason of, (...)! O the depth of the riches both of
the wisdom and the knowledge of God! How unsearchable are his Judgments, and
his ways past finding out? So they are in many of his common providence, in
disposing of humane affairs here below, much more in disposing of men for their
eternal estates. Those Decrees of Election and Reprobation, or Preterition;
Gods choosing of some to be vessels of honor, ordaining them to life and
salvation by Jesus Christ; his over-looking and passing by of others, leaving
them to be vessels of wrath, ordaining them to just condemnation for sin; and
both these before they have done either good or evil, (as the Apostle lays it
down, Romans 9. 11.) merely out of the good pleasure of his own will, without any
respect (as to the Decree) to any thing in the persons so disposed of, this is
a depth which neither man nor Angel can sound the bottom of. No wonder then
when such Skifs and Cockboats, unlearned and unstable souls shall boldly
adventure into these deeps, that they are tossed to and fro, that they are
carried about into Pelagian, Vorstian, Arminian, and Socinian Errors, which
too many vessels of greater burden, men of eminent learning and parts have
been, and at this day are. That you may be secure from the like danger, take
heed of these high things; as of high thoughts, so of high speculations; as how
you entertain the one, so how you meddle with the other. Remembering what the
Kingly Prophet says of himself, Psalm. 131. 1. I do not exercise my self in
things too high for me; (things passing the measure of his apprehension, or
limits of his vocation) As also what the Apostle says unto you, Be wise (
understand) unto sobriety, Romans 12. 3.

Secondly, That you may be kept Cavat 2. Take heed of Eddie winds.
out of the winds way, take heed of Eddy winds, (I speak to you in a Language
you are well acquainted with). Take heed ( I say) of Eddie winds. Such are the
winds that we meet with in byLanes, or in the Corners of streets, where the
wind being but straightened, blows more violently then in the open fields,
turning light things about like a whirlewind.

And even like danger there is in Conventicles truly so called.
those (truly so called) Conventicles. Let no man here mistake me, as if under
that name I had any intent to strike at those private meetings of Christians,
which are intended for mutual edification in Gods way, by praying together,
conferring together, repeating of Sermons, or the like warrantable exercises. I
am so far from discouraging such meetings, that I wish where there is one,
there were many. But those unwarrantable Conventions which are intended only
or chiefly for seduction. When false Teachers (as the Apostle foretells they
should do) creep into private houses, there to sow their tares, to vent their
erroneous doctrines. Specially where these meetings are upon the Lords day,
during the time of public worship, (of which kind (it seems) there are more
then one, taken notice of in this place). These I call, and that deservedly, by
the name of Conventicles; and compare them to those Eddie winds in by-Lanes, or
Corners, wishing you, if you would avoid the danger of being carried about, to
take heed of them; how you come at such places where seducers keep their haunts.

Q. But (will some say) may we not Q. May we not try all things?
try all things? Is not this a Christians liberty? nay, is it not his duty?
what else means that of the Apostle, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 21. Prove all things; Hold
fast that which is good?

A. True, this Christians may do, A. The Apostles sense expounded.
ought to do, but in the Apostles sense. Where Doctrines and Opinions are
presented and offered to them, they are to bring them to the Touchstone of the
Word, so to prove them, to try whether they be current or no, before they
receive them, lay them up in the Cabinet of their hearts. But in the mean time,
know we it to be far from the The itching ear a dangerous disease.
Apostles meaning, to approve of that vain and fond Curiosity, of affecting of
Novelties, which some, and too many in this (as in all other places) are guilty
of. If a new Teacher, that brings some new and strange doctrine, come to
Town, and creep into a private house, they must (like those Athenians
forementioned) go hear what he says. A dangerous Affectation.

Specially in those who are most subject Specially in those that are unlearned
and unstable.
to be infected with this Itch, unlearned and unstable souls, for the most
part silly women (as the Apostle calls them), who wanting Judgment, know not
how to try any thing. For them to adventure upon this trial in this way, what
is it but as if a Child should adventure to taste of every Box, every Glass in
an Apothecaries shop? in which way he may sooner meet with poison then with
nutriment. And truly such is the danger, when simple souls, children in
understanding, will be thus trying of every doctrine, and thus following of
every Teacher. Not unlike to those men or women, who being overaffected unto
Physic, will have recourse to every Emperick, every Mountebank that they hear
of, putting themselves into their hands, suffering them to practice upon them,
who in so doing can never expect to have sound bodies. No more let them look
for sound souls, who will be thus running after every Mountebank in Religion,
at least to hear what their new and strange doctrines are. A fond, and (as I
said) dangerous Curiosity: So it was to the first woman, who by holding Parley
with the Serpent, was seduced by him, The woman being deceived was in the
transgression, 1 Timothy 2. 14. And so has it been to many of her sons and
daughters after her; who lending an ear to subtle seducers, God in his just
Judgment has given them over to be deceived and seduced by them. And thus I
have also done with this third Direction, which bids you take heed of coming in
the winds way. Take a fourth.

Would you not be thus carried about? Direct. 4. Take heed of beginning to turn.
take heed of beginning to turn. You know how it is with a wheel, (I have
hinted it once and again), Being set upon a declivity, if once it begin to
turn, going down the hill, now it turns alone being carried about of it self,
by its own force.

Object. True, (will some say) so long Object. We are going up the Hill.
as it is going down the Hill. But that is not our case. We are going up the
Hill, and therefore though we do begin to turn, yet there is no such fear, no
such danger.

A. This is the common plea of all Answ. The common Plea of all Sects and
Secturies.
Sects and Secturies in the world. They all think they are going up the Hill,
tending to an higher degree of perfection then those have attained to, whom
they leave behind them. But we know how it fared with the Syrian Army which was
sent to surprise the Prophet Elisha, being smitten with blindness, whilst
they thought they were going to Dothan, they march into the midst of Samaria, 2
Kings 6. 19, 20. And even so fares it with those Armies of Sectaries that are
in this Nation, and elsewhere. Being all of them, Blinded, blindfolded in some
of the ways aforesaid, they all think they are going up the Hill, climbing
toward perfection, whilst in truth they are going downwards, declining in
their spiritual conditions. That none of you may be taken with this (not more
common then dangerous) fallacy, let me subjoyn to 4. Particular Caveats under
this general direction.
this General direction 3. or 4. particular Caveats* every of which will
inform you, when you are going down the Hill.

1. Take heed of turning from Jesus Caveat 1. Take heed of turning from Jesus
Christ to any thing else.
Christ, of not holding fast the head (as Paul cautions his Colossians Col. 2.
19.) Such is Jesus Christ the Head of the Body, (the mystical Body, the
Church, Col. 1. 18. The Head of the Corner (as Saint Peter has it) 1. 2. 7.
borrowing it from the Psalmist. Ps. 118. 22.) The Headstone, as the
Foundation-stone, so the Topstone. And being so, it necessarily follows, that
whosoever turn from him, which way soever they turn, they are gowing downwards.
And this take you heed of, as being at all turns most dangerous, of turning
from Jesus Christ to any thing else.

In particular, of turning from Christ From Christ to Moses.
to Moses. This was the case of many in the Apostles time, who turned from the
Gospel to the Law, from the doctrine of free Grace in Christ, to seek
Justification in whole, or in part by the works of the Law. So did the
Galatians (some of them) whom Paul tells, that they were fallen from Grace,
Gal. 5. 4. from the doctrine of Gods free Grace in Christ. And so do they, who
ever shall seek Justification and Salvation by the works of the Low, by any
moral performances, much more by Ceremonial observances (which was the case
of those Galatians), or any thing besides Christ, in so doing they fall from
Grace, and they fall from Christ, who by this means is made of none effect to
them. So unsound is that seemingly An unsound and dangerous Maxim.
politic Maxim, which is made use of by many in the Church of Rome, viz. That
a man stands surer upon two boughs then upon one. Not so (say we), if so be
that by standing upon a bough that is rotten, he fall from that which was
sound. Which is the very case of all those who trust to Christ and Moses, to
Gospel and Law for their Justification and Salvation. By resting upon the one
in part, they fall wholly from the other. Christ will either be a whole
Savior, or no Savior. So as this is a declining, a going down the Hill with a
witness.

So Paul looked upon it in his Galatians To fall from Christ a desperate
declension.
and would have them so to judge of it, Gala. 3. 3. where he parlies with them
about it, Are ye so foolish, (says he) having begun in the Spirit, are ye now
made perfect in the flesh? Where by flesh we are to understand the Ceremonies
of the Law, which were no other but external and Carnal observances,
especially after that the figurative and Sacramental use (which whilst it
continued, was as the soul and spirit, putting life into them) was now ceased,
being taken away by the death of Christ; Now they were no other but flesh;
flesh without spirit. And being so, the Apostle censureth it as no small degree
of folly in them, that they should fall off to them; that having begun in the
Spirit, having embraced the doctrine of the Gospel, the commands whereof are
Spiritual, and having withal found the effectual work of the Spirit in their
heart, working faith and Regeneration in them, that they should once think of
being made perfect in that way. This indeed was that which the false Apostles
promised them, that they should by this means receive some addition of
perfection (Even as the Doctors of the Church of Rome at this day do to their
disciples). But this the Apostle justly censures as folly, and that no small
degree of it, as in the Teachers, so in the receivers of this Doctrine. (...)
Are ye so foolish? And be you ware of falling under the like Censure.

A Caveat not unneedful; this being A needful Caveat in regard of the present
Times.
a folly which some in this Nation at this day, who pretend to the highest
degree of perfection, to be perfect as Adam, nay, for holiness (such is their
See the perfect Pharisee, Pos. 7, 8, 9, 10.
Blasphemy) perfect as God himself, do openly proclaim whilst they profess to
look for Justification and Salvation, not by the Righteousness of Christ
imputed to them, but by the Righteousness of Christ inherent in them; which is
no other then inherent holiness. Now if this be not a falling from Christ, and
a falling from Grace, surely we must conclude the Apostle in that Text
forenamed ( Gal. 5. 4.) to have been much mistaken. Let this be a first Caveat
under this Head.

Secondly, whilst you thus hold fast Caveat 2. Take heed of turning from the
Church.
the Head, take heed of parting with the Body; of falling off from the Church,
by severing and separating from it. And that, as from any part of it, any
particular Church, which being sound in the faith; wherein the Word is rightly
preached, and Sacraments duly administered, though possibly laboring under some
other imperfections, and not so accomplished in respect of Order as it ought to
be, and some others are, yet deserves to be called and owned as a true Church;
so, much more from the whole Body, the whole Catholic visible Church. This
also is a Hill, a Mountain; Yea, a Mountain paramount, a Mountain The Church a
Mountain Paramount.
established in the top of the Mountains. So the Prophet Esaias describes the
Church under the Gospel, ( Isai. 2. 2.) which in respect of spiritual glory is
exalted far above all secular state and power: And being so, well may they who
fall from it be said to go down the Hill* And such a Declension, such a
Separation take heed of.

Such Separatists there were in Saint An unwarrantable and dangerous Separation.
Iude's time, These are they that separate themselves, Jude v. 19. (...), the
word properly signifies Separatists, such as separated themselves, and others
from the true Church of God, renouncing Communion with it, so making of Sects.
Such were the Donatists some ages after, against whom Augustine so strenuously
and earnestly Donatists and Anabaptists parallelled.
contended. The founder of which Sect, Donatus a Bishop, taking an unjust and
groundless distaste at Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage (not unlike that which
some among our selves at this day have taken up against the Ministers of the
Church of England, (as also of other Churches, being in this respect Maxim
quod a Traditoribus Divinarum Scripturarum fuerit Ordinatus, August. de
Haeresibus.
in the same Predicament with them), viz. because he had received his
Ordination from the hands of some of the Traditores, or Proditores, such
persons as had in time of Persecution delivered the Book of holy Scriptures to
be burnt, (even as our Ministers are said to have received theirs by or through
the hands of Antichristian Romish Bishops) thereupon he fell off from the unity
of the Tanquam Ecclesia Christi de toto orb perierit, ubi futura promissa est,
atque in Africa et Donati part remanserit: in aliis terrarum partibus quasi
contagione communionis extincta, August. ibid.
Church, separating himself, with his party, from all others, as if the
Catholic Church had been no where else to be found but only in that Corner of
Africa where himself dwelt, and that among his Society, himself and his
followers. Thus did that Sect then.

And the very like have the Anabaptists of the last age done, who are not
unjustly looked upon by some, Diu perstitit haec Haeresis, etc. Postea tamen
jugulata est, atque acquieverat, nisi miseri et insani Anabaptistae eam ab
inferis hoc nostro seculo revocas^ent, Danaeus in Augustine. de Haeresib. Cap.
69.
as revivers of the Sect of the Donatists; being therein followed by their
Successors among our selves in this Nation, at this day, who by that one Act
of Rebaptization (which also they learned from those Donatists, of whom
Augustine tells us that Audent rebaptizare Cathol cos, August. de Haeresib.
they did the very like, Rebaptize those that were baptized before) do at once
unchurch all the Churches in the world, in as much as they do thereby make a
nullity of that Sacrament, which the members of those Churches have received in
their Infancy, which being the Initial Seal of the Covenant, and the
distinguishing mark betwixt Christians and Heathens, none can be looked upon as
visible members of the Church without it. An Error, which be you ware of.

It being a Mother-Errour, and that a Separation a Mother-Error.
teeming, a fruitful one, in whose womb ordinarily many erroneous Opinions are
conceived. So it was to those Donatists the first founders of it; who being
fallen off from the Church stayed not there, but were then carried about with
diverse and strange doctrines, ran into Vide Augustine. de Haeresib. and Danaeum,
cap. 69.
many pestilent Opinions, (as inveterate Schism for the most part turns to
Heresy) besides some desperate practices. One of which amongst the rest is A
practice observable in the Donatists.
very observable; viz. that whilst they at the first plead for Liberty of
Conscience, and an Universal Toleration, that no man should be compelled to any
Religion, nor yet hindered from holding forth any opinion; denying the Civil
Haereticos negant ullo modo Magistratus quanquam pii* et fidelis autoritate
coercendos, castigandos, vel comprimendos, ne eorum Venenum latius setpat, vel
ut ipsi Haeretici resipiscant. Error. 3. Danaeus ubi supra.
Magistrate, though Christian, (as Constantine the Emperor then was, under
whom this Schism had its beginning) any power for the punishing or repressing
of any Heretics or Heresies, or to take any Course whereby either the
broachers or maintainers of them might be brought to Repentance, or else the
poisonous breath of their Opinions might be stopped from infecting of others
(which is, and not without cause, reckoned up as none of the least Errors they
were guilty of), yet in process of time they came to that Obvios sibi quosque
in plateis et agris homines a suis erroribus alien^s caedunt et jugulant
furiose, Danaeus ibid. Error. 7.
height of rage, that if they met any in the field or streets, who were not of
their judgment, they made nothing furiously to fall upon them, to assassinate,
to murder them.

The like spirit whereunto modern Histories tell us was to be found among their
successors in Germany in the last age. And God grant England may never have
experience of the one. Well, (to draw to a conclusion of this Head) take you
heed of this so dangerous a defection, of this turning from the Church.

Which being the Pillar and Ground The Church the Pillar and ground of truth,
how.
(or the Stay) of Truth, (as the Apostle calls it, 1 Timothy 3. 15.) (...),
Columna et Firmamentum, or Stabilimentum (as Beza has it), holding forth, and
in some sense bearing up, the truth of God, even as Pillars and Posts are wont
to do the Proclamations and Orders of Magistrates, which are affixed to them,
that so all may take notice of them; No wonder that they who recede from it,
turning their backs upon it, recede also from the truth, and so become subject
to this Peripherie, to be thus carried about with diverse and strange doctrines.

Even as it is with Deer (I do not The Church Gods Park.
know a fitter comparison), when once they have left the Herd, and got out of
the Park, then though they get into Pikles, yet there they are restless,
driven to and fro by every Passenger, so as then they leap hedge and ditch.
Even such is the condition of those who have once given a farewell to the
Church (which is as Gods Park in the world), being once got out of the Pale of
it, now though they fall into Pikles and severals, several Companies, yet it
cannot be expected that they should rest there, but that they will be subject
to be driven to and fro by Error after Error, till at the length they come to
leap hedge and ditch, to make Shipwreck of faith and a good Conscience (as the
Apostle says that brace of Heretics, Hymeneus and Alexander, with some others
in his time, had done, 1 Timothy 1. 19, 20.): But I pass to a third.

Whilst you thus hold fast the Head Caveat 3. Take heed of turning from the
Scriptures.
and the Body, Christ and his Church, take heed of turning from the Scriptures.
The Scriptures, they are a Christians light, whereby he is to walk in this
world* Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet, and a light unto my path, (says David)
Psalm. 119. 105. And St. Peter speaking of Scripture-Prophecie, 2 Pet. 1. 19.
calls it a more sure Word, (that is, most sure, the Comparative put for the
Superlative, as sometimes in Scripture it is) whereunto (says he) ye do well
to take heed, as unto a light that shines in a dark place, etc. Such is the
Understanding, the mind of man in regard of spiritual and heavenly mysteries it
is like a dungeon, a dark place, until it be enlightened by that light which
the Lanthorn of the Scripture holds forth. Which therefore all Christians are
to attend unto.

Object. True (say some) they are so How long Christians are to give heed to
the light of the Word.
to do; but how long? until the day dawn, and the day star arise in their
hearts, (as it there follows), that is, until their hearts be fully
enlightened by the Spirit of Christ, who is as the morningstar (so called, Rev.
2. 28.) and the Sun of righteousness, Mal. 4. 2. But when the Sun is up, what
need of Canales? when Christ is once come into the heart of a Christian,
dwelling there by his Spirit, what need then any more of this Candlelight of
the Scriptures? This is but to burn daylight.

A. To this it is answered; that true Saints upon earth enlightened but in part.
it is, the Saints upon earth are thus enlightened. They who were sometimes
darkness, are noon-light in the Lord, (as the Apostle says of his believing
Ephesians, Ephesians. 5. 8.) having an inward light of the Spirit within them. But
this illumination is imperfect. This light is but a Twilight; like that of the
morning, when the day star appears before the Sun arises. Now during that
time a Candle will not be unusefull in a dark room. And of such use are the
Scriptures unto enlightened souls, illuminated Saints here; who though they
have some light, yet still they have much darkness within them, and so stand
in need of a light without them, which is Scripture Light. To this Paul directs
his Timothy. Though he was then illuminated by the Spirit, and that in a more
then ordinary measure and manner, being an Evangelist, yet he bids him, Give
attendance to reading, 1 Timothy 4. 13. viz. of the Scriptures, the Law and the
Prophets. And again in his second Epistle, Chap. 3. 5. he tells him, that the
Scriptures which he had known from a child were able to make him wise unto
salvation. And in the verses following, (verse 16, 17.) enlarging himself in
setting forth the diverse and excellent uses of Scripture, he says, It is
profitable for doctrine, etc. that the man of God may be made perfect, thoroughly
furnished to all good works. Now if Scriptures contribute so much to
Ministerial perfection, surely they cannot be useless to the most illuminated
Saints upon earth. This is their Light to see by.

As also their Rule to walk by. Even The Scriptures a Christians Light to see
by* and Rule to walk by.
as the Card and Compass is to the Seaman, so are the Scriptures unto the
Christian, serving him to stear his Course by. And therefore take heed of
laying them aside. Should the Mariner do so by his Card and Compass? lay them
aside, and stear by guess, no wonder if his Vessel were carried about to this
Coast, or that, striking upon this Rock, that shelf, this or that Quicksand.
And truly so is it with Christians, if once they shall come to lay aside the
Scriptures, and pretending to Revelations and Inspirations, (as it seems too
many in this Nation at this day do) stear their Course by guess, following
their own fancies, no wonder they be carried about this way or that, to the
embracing of all kind of Errors. And therefore, as you would be freed from
this deception, take heed of this delusion, of thus turning from the
Scriptures: Turning from them, whether in whole, or in part.

1. In whole, as Anti-Scripturists do, Turning from the Scriptures in whole.
(of which sort it seems there are not a few abroad in this Nation) who will
allow the Scriptures no such Divine Authority, as that they should be called
the Word of God above any other Writings; but only look upon them as the
writings of holy men setting forth their own and others Conditions. Whence it
is that they are usually styled by some, The Saints Conditions; Moses's, See
the perfect Pharisee, Pos. 13.
David's, Isaiahs, Ieremies, Paul's Conditions. In the mean time they do not look
upon them, either as a Light, or a Rule which they are bound to follow.

2. Or yet (in the second place) of In part.
turning from them in part. This do they, who whilst they receive the New
Testament, reject and disclaim the Old, as being now like an old Almanac
calculated for the year past, out of date, of no more use for Christians under
the Gospel. And so do they who renounce Letter of Scripture not to be renounced.
the Letter of the Scripture, as a useless Shell or Bark, a dead Letter (as
they ordinarily call it). They are all for the pith, the inward Mystery. To
which end they turn every thing into an Allegory, as if the Literal sense were
not at all to be regarded. By which means they make no other then (as Papists
Regulam Lesbiam, Nasum cereum.
style it) a Nose of Wax, or Leaden Rule of the Scripture, turning it which way
they will to please their own foolish fancies. Being so far in love with the
pretended Pith, as that for it they cast away both Bark and Timber too. This be
you aware of; of offering such force to Sacred Writ. Which Ita Origenes, poenam
dans merito tot Allegoriarum, Eunuchatum plane Allegoricum ad literam paulo
servilius interpretatus, sibi vim tulit qui non minus vim intulerat Scripturae,
virque esse desiit, qui non desiit esse malus interpres. D. Josephus. Hall in
Communione ad Synodum Dordracenam.
whilst Origin did, God is said justly to have met with him, leaving him to
offer violence to himself through mis-expounding of one Text in a literal
sense, who before had done the like to many by turning of them into an
Allegorical; And which whosoever shall do, no wonder if they be carried about
with diverse and strange doctrines. Here is a third of these Caveats.

To which add a fourth. Whilst Caveat 4. Take heed of turning from public
Ordinances.
you thus hold fast the Head and Body, Christ and his Church, with the
Scriptures the Rule of faith, take heed of sorsaking the House of God; I mean
his Public Worship and Service. This also is set upon the Hill. So was the
Tabernacle which David erected; And so was the Temple which Solomon built, the
places of Gods public worship and service, the House of God. Wherein we find
these four precious and sacred Relics, all mentioned by the Apostle in one
verse, Heb. 9. 4. The Golden Censer, the Pot of Manna, Aarons Rod, and the
Tables of the Covenant, not unfitly (whether intentionally or no I will not
say) representing those four great Gospel Ordinances, Prayer, Word, Sacraments,
Discipline; these were seated upon the Hill; upon Mount Sion the one, the other
upon Mount Moriah: So as whoever in Jerusalem went aside from this place, they
went down the Hill: And so do they who ever they are that forsake the House of
God, that forsake Public Ordinances. What ever they may fancy to themselves,
as too many at this day do, whose design it is to get and live above Ordinances
(as they call it), looking upon them as low things, fit for Children; and so
they think that they are flown above the ordinary pitch; yet certainly they are
gone down the Hill, and (unless mercy step in to them) are not far from the
bottom. O be you ware of this so dangerous a Declension, of this forsaking the
House of God.

This did some in our Apostle's time, Church Assemblies not to be forsaken.
as he gives us to take notice, Heb. 10. 25. where he gives this Caveat to
his Hebrews, that they should not do as some among them had done, Not
forsaklng the Assembling of your selves together, as the manner of some is;
that is, not forsaking the public Congregations and Assemblies of the Church,
where public Ordinances are dispensed, where the Word of God is rightly
preached, Sacraments duly administered, Prayers and praises in a public way
presented unto God. These Assemblies some Christians in those early times
forsook; upon what ground (it being not expressed) is uncertain, whether for
fear, or through negligence, or out of Pride, Self-conceitednesse, and
affectation of singularity. But what ever it was, this practice of theirs the
Apostle censures and condemns. And well does it deservea Censure in
whomsoever, upon what ground soever. True it is, where God separates men, as by
sickness, or any just and necessary impediment, this pleads their excuse; but
where men shall separate themselves, this is a practice both unwarrantable and
dangerous. In the fear of God be you ware of it.

It is Grotius his Note upon the Text, Forsaking public Assemblies, the
beginning of Apostasy.
( Heb. 10. 25.) and it is a true one; Deserere Conventus est initium quoddam
defectionis, To forsake the public Assemblies is the beginning of Apostasy
and defection, opening a wide door to all kind of Errors and Miscarriages in
Doctrine and Practice. A truth sufficiently evidenced by many and sad Examples
in this Nation at this day. Whence is it that so many have been carried about
with diverse and strange doctrines? follow it to the Head, enquire into the
Original of it, and you shall find it for the most part to have begun here, in
their for saking of the public Assemblies of the Church, falling off from
public Ordinances. Let this be a warning to you. Take heed how you fall off
from attending upon, or submitting unto any Ordinance of God, which is
dispensed and held forth in the Congregations where you live, and whereof you
are, or ought to be members, according to the Rule of Gods holy Word.

And in particular, take heed of renouncing Take heed of renouncing a
Gospel-Ministery.
a true Gospel-Ministery. Which whilst some have done in this Nation, being
carried forth, not only with groundless distastes against the persons of Gods
Ministers, but also against their office and calling, crying that down, as
Antichristian, and I know not what, (as that poor ignorant Sect forenamed, and
some others do) how have they been whirled, and carried about? And no wonder it
should be so. This being the Ordinance which God has appointed for this very
end (among others) for the establishing of the hearts of Christians, to keep
them from being thus carried about. So the Apostle sets it forth expressly in
that Text forecited, Ephesians. 4. where having reckoned up diverse ends wherefore
Christ instituted those Ministerial offices in his Church, Extraordinary and
Ordinary, why he gave some to be Apostles, some Prophets, and some Evangelists,
and some Pastors and Teachers, among other he points out this for one, ver.
14. That we henceforth be no more children, tossed to and fro with every wind
of doctrine. Mark Note.
it, it being worth your marking. To this very end Christ instituted, not only
Apostles, and Prophets, and Evangelists, extraordinary Officers, but also
Pastors and Teachers, Ordinary Ministers, who are to continue to the end of the
world, (as that promise made to them implies, Matthew. 28. last), that by and
through their Ministry his people might not only be begotten unto God, but
also confirmed and strengthened, edified and built up in their holy faith, and
so established in it, as that they might be kept therein, not being carried
about, as light and empty vessels, without a Pilote are upon the waves. And if
so, what wonder if those who throw away the Antidote, which is prepared for
them, and given to them, be infected with that disease, which it was proper and
sovereign against? If they who cry down this Ordinance which God has given
them to be a preservative against this Turning Sickness, be thus carried
about, as generally they are, with such diverse and strange doctrines. Thus I
have done with this fourth Caveat, as also with this fourth Direction; which
advises you to beware of beginning to turn, of beginning to go down the Hill;
in particular, of falling off from Christ, from his Church, from Scriptures,
from Ordinances.

To which let me yet add one more, Direct. 5. Take heed of false Lights.
which is still upon the Negative, showing you what you should not do, what you
are further to take heed of, and that is, of following of false Lights. By this
means men are sometimes, ofttimes carried, and led wild, by following of Ignes
fatui, false Lights, insomuch that sometimes they are led into ditches, and
bogs, and rivers. And by the very like means are unwary and unstable souls
often seduced and carried about, by following of false lights. Which are of two
sorts, Lights without them, and lights within them.

1. There are false lights without the 1. False Lights without a man, False
Teachers.
man; Such are false Teachers, of whom I have spoken. Teachers are Lights. Ye
are the Light of the world (says our Savior to his Apostles) Matthew. 5. 14.
And being true Teachers, they are true Lights. Such was Christ the Master, of
whom it is is said, He was that true light, Joh. 1. 9. So he was Originally, as
the Sun is, which is the fountain of Light. And such are his servants, his
Ministers, who hold forth the Word of Truth, they are Lights also, though by
participation only, as the Stars are; by which name they are called, The seven
Stars are the seven Angels (the Ministers) of the seven Churches, Rev. 1. 20.
But so are not fale Teachers: They are Lights indeed, but false lights. Not
true Stars, but Comets, blazing Stars; So called by St. Jude, (as some
understand his expression) Jude v. 13. wandering stars: Such as Comets are, or
Planets, (that is his word; (...)) which have no regular motion. Now would you
not be carried about, take heed how you follow any of these lights, how you
follow false Teachers. That is our Saviors advice concerning them, Luke 17.
23. Go not after them, nor follow them: Yea and, knowing them so to be, how you
come nigh them, how you resort unto them, have any unnecessary society, much
more familiarity with them. That is St. John's advice to the Elect Lady and her
Children, Joh. 2. Ep. v. 10. If there come any among you that bring not this
doctrine, (viz. the doctrine of Christ spoken of in the verse foregoing, but a
doctrine contrary to it) Receive him not into your house, neither bid him God
speed. And thus let Christians deal by false and Heretical Teachers; keep a
distance from them, as they would do from those creatures which poison with
their breath; not showing them any countenance, not affording them any
encouragement, not having any unnecessary society with them. These are false
lights without a man.

2. Besides which there are other 2. False Lights within a man.
false lights within him. These are of two sorts, Supernatural, Natural.

1. Supernatural, (I mean going under Supernatural; Enthusiasmes.
that notion, so apprehended and taken to be by those that are deceived by
them). Such are Enthusiasmes, supposed Inspirations. This is the Light which
some, and not a few (it seems) in this Nation at this day, (as the
Anabaptists in the last age also did) pretend to be led by. Not by any light
without them, the Scriptures, or any outward teaching. No, this they renounce
as a dim and uncertain light. But a light within them: The light of the
Spirit. This is that which those poor deluded souls forementioned so much
boast of, as being that which they profess to follow as their only guide;
sending all Christians to it for direction. All people, Perfect Pharisee, Pos.
12.
cease from your outside lights, (says one of them), and return to the light
of Christ within you. Which light is not a Chapter without you in a book. So do
they take men off from Scriptures, directing them only to a light within them.
This is the light (says the same Author) which Peter bids Christians to
Take Ibid.
heed unto, 2 Pet. 1. 10. So blind was he (or worse in expounding that clear
Text, which plainly speaks of a light without, the Word of Prophecy,
Scripture Light.

But be you ware of this Light. It Enthusiasmes for the most part an Ignis
fatuus.
being for the most part no other but a mere ignis fatuus, a false light,
nothing but the fancy of a distempered brain, or else a diabolical Illusion,
which whoever, laying the light of the Word aside, shall make their sole, or
chief guide, no wonder if they fall into bogs and ditches, and rivers, into all
kind of erroneous doctrines, and enormious practices, as we see it by sad
experience verified at this day. Which that you may be kept from, take heed how
you follow this Light. Knowing that you have a more sure Word of Prophecy (as
St. Peter there calls it) (...), More sure then any pretended private
Inspiration or Revelation: which where it is not consonant and agreeable to
this Word, we may safely and confidently conclude, that whatever glaring there
may be, as there is in Glowworms, and in rotten wood, and some other things
which shine in the dark, yet there is no true light in it (as the Prophet
asserts it in the place forenamed, Isai. 8. 20.)

2. There is a Light within a man 2. Natural Reason.
which is natural. This is the Light of Reason; that Light wherewith every man
is said to be enlightened, that comes into the world, Joh. 1. 9. And this
Light is much cried up by some, and not a few, (and some of them no mean ones)
in these times, as being sufficient to guide any man to salvation, without the
help of any outward light or discovery. So it is averred by those of that Sect
aforesaid; who upon that account bid every man to mind the light Perfect
Pharisee, Pos. 11.
of God within him; meaning the Light of Natural Reason, as being sufficient
without any other. But this also may be and often is a false Light; which take
you heed how you follow in matters of Religious concernment. Take heed how
therein you consult with Reason.

Not but that Reason herein How Reason may be consulted with in matters of
Religion. (...). Chrysostom. Hom. ad Text.
may be consulted with. For my part I dare not vouch what Chrysostom writing
upon the Text affirms, that Faith is contrary to Reason. No, I conceive Aquinas
Rationi naturali verae nunquam contrariatur Theologia, sed eam excedit saepe,
et sic videtur repugnare, Thom. Disp. de fide Artic. 10.
his Determination to be more Orthodox and sound, that Divinity is never
contrary to true and right natural Reason, however oft-times it is above it,
and so may seem repugnant to it. Neither am I of their mind who would have
Reason always to be shut out from Counsel in matters of Religion. No, it may
be consulted with, and that ofttimes very usefully.

But yet whilst this is allowed, take Take heed of making Reason our guide.
heed how you make use of it, so as to make it your guide, to be led by it;
whether it be Gross, or yet Refined Reason.

1. For the former, It is a Light (if Not Gross Reason.
I may so call it) which too many are guided by, Gross Reason, which differs
little from sense, being imbased by it. Such were those whom St. Jude calls
Sensual men, Jude, verse. 19. (...), Mere Natural, Animal men, who have nothing
to difference and distinguish them from Brute beasts, but a Reasonable soul;
which yet they make little use of, but are rather led, like brute beasts, by
their senses. If such miscarry in the matters of God, it is not to be wondered
at: when as the Apostle tells us plainly, that they are above their reach,
their Capacity. The Natural man ((...) (...), the same word with that of Jude)
receives not the things of God, (Gospel-Mysteries, receives them not into his
mind, so as rightly to apprehend them). Neither can be know them, for they are
spiritually discerned. (...). There must be some suitableness betwixt the
faculty and the Object. The brute Creature, having nothing but sense, cannot
apprehend what belongs to humane affairs. No more can the mere natural sensual
man, who has nothing but Reason, and that gross Reason, to guide him,
understand what belongs to the matters of God. Take heed of following this
light, or of judging of Doctrines by it, the Light of gross Reason.

2. Yea, or yet of Reason refined. Nor yet Reason Refined, Philosophy.
Such is Philosophy; which the Apostle bids his Colossians to take heed of,
being deceived by ( Col. 2. 8.) Philosophy, which is nothing but Reason refined
by Art. Now however this may be made use of, and consulted with, as being a
useful handmaid to Divinity, yet take heed of making it a Guide, a Mistress,
so as to set Reason above faith. What were this but to set Hagar above Sarah:
to give the handmaid the upper hand of her Mistress? which let Christians
beware of. Philosophia Theologiae se submittat (says Clemens well). Let
Philosophy Philosophia Theologiae se submittat, ut Agar Sarae; patiatur se
admoneri et corrigi, sin minus pareat, ejice ancillam. Clem. Str. 1.
submit her self to Divinity, as Hagar is bid to do to her Mistress, (Genesis 16.
19.), suffering her self to be admonished and corrected by it. Otherwise if she
will not thus stoop, Ejice Ancillam, Cast out the Handmaid. Thus make Reason
stoop to faith, Philosophy unto Divinity. Otherwise you will follow a false
Light, which will deceive and seduce you, carrying (...). Chrysostom. Hom. ad
Text.
you about into diverse and strange doctrines; as it has done, and does, the
Socinians, and some others at this day.

Thus have I given you some Negative directions, showing you what you are not
to do, what you are to take heed of, if you would not be thus carried about.
There is yet one Direction more behind, which is Positive, showing you what you
are to do. And that is,

That you may not be thus carried Direct. 6. Get the soul well ballasted.
about, get your souls well ballasted. That is the way, and only way to make
your vessels steady at Sea, to lay in good ballast in the bottom of them. Like
course take you with your souls, that they may be steady, and not carried
about, get them well ballasted.

Q. But how shall that be done? what ballast shall we get?

A. To this the Text it self in the Viz. with Grace.
latter part of it will give you a short, but full Answer in one word; Grace.
This it is that is the best ballast for the soul, which being well laid in with
it, it will so establish it, that it shall not be thus tossed to and fro, thus
carried about. So it follows, It is a good thing that the heart be
established with Grace. To which I should now come; were it not that there is
another useful Admonition or Exhortation that steps in; which I shall dispatch
in a few words.

Whilst you have thus a care of Use 2. Christians to be careful of their
Brethren, for the prevention, or cure of this Turning Sickness in them.
your selves, that you be not thus carried about, as much as in you lies have
also a regard to others. That is our Saviors lesson to Peter, Luke 22. 33.
When thou art converted, strengthen thy brethren. And let it be mine to you.
When you are in measure through Grace established, and so secured from this
Turning Sickness your selves, labor what you may to establish others of your
Brethren. Taking heed that you be neither Causes, nor yet Occasions of their
turning. Not Causes of it, whether Principal or Instrumental, by broaching, or
spreading of false Doctrines: Not Occasions, by your Examples; do what in you
lies for the preventing, or curing of this Soul-sicknesse in others.

Which let all do in their places. Private All in their places.
Christians in their places, by suggesting seasonable Counsel unto their
brethren, for the staying of those that are wavering and beginning to turn, or
for the reducing of those that are turned. Public persons in their places.
Heads of Families, Ministers, Magistrates. Heads of Families, Parents and
Masters, Catechizing those committed to their charge, Children and servants,
instructing them in the Principles of Gods true Religion, seasoning them
betimes with divine Truths, which will be of special use to keep them from the
putrefaction of unsound, and erroneous doctrines. Ministers, watching over
their flocks with all possible circumspection, warning them, as Paul says he
did, Act. 20. 31. instructing of them, praying for them, that so the Sheep and
Lambs committed to them may not become a prey Siquis pudor, si qua pictas,
reprimite hanc petulantissima^ insaniendi libidinem, modum imperate hominum et
linguis, et calamis: Et facite ut qui vera sentire nolunt falsa divulgare non
ausint, etc. Vide D. Joseph. Hall, ubi supra.
to Wolves or Foxes. Magistrates, improving that Power, which God has put into
their hands for the restraining of Seducers; so as if they will not be brought
to believe the truth, yet they may not dare to divulge and publish Errors.
This is the Magistrates work. Whence it is that in Scripture Language they are
called, Heirs of restraint; so you find it, Judge. 18. 7. There was no
Magistrate in the Land:] No possessour, or Heir of restraint (says the
Original, as the Margin in our new (...) Possidens Retentionem, Montanus.
Translation will inform you) so called because this was, and is their office,
to bridle and restrain men from all kind of wickedness, doctrinal and Moral,
in Magistrates to restrain Fall Teachers.
matters as well of Religious, as Civil concernment. It is noted as the Reason
how it came to pass that Micah played the Idolater in that manner, Judge. 17.
5, 6. (the Chapter foregoing) that he had an house of gods, (of Idols) and made
an Ephod (a Priestly vestment, such as the High Priest wore) and Teraphim,
(Images) and consecrated one of his sons, who became his Priest, (being neither
of Aarons Lineage, now Tribe), so moulding the Religion of God according to his
own fancy; In those days (says the verse following) there was no King in
Israel, (no Judge, no supreme Magistrate) but every man did that which was
right in his own eyes; (as in matters of Civil, so of Religious concernment.)
Intimating that so they should not, nor durst not have done, had there been a
Magistrate set over them; Into whose hands God committing the care and custody
of both Tables, he ought to have an eye to Gods Religion, as well as to any
other Civil interest whatsoever; so as not to suffer it to be injuried or
prejudiced, as not by false Worshippers, so not by false Teachers.

Concerning whom the Law under The Law against false Teachers.
the Law was express, Deuteronomy. 13. 5. If there arise among you (says the first
verse) a Prophet or dreamer of dreams, etc. saying, Let us go serve other
gods, (so endeavoring to seduce the people from the true worship and service
of God) that Prophet, or dreamer of dreams shall be put to death, (says the
fifth verse) being a convicted seducer in so high a kind, he was not to be
suffered to live. And was this crime then adjudged to be so Capital? surely it
cannot be so venial as some at this day would make it; who would have a
licentious liberty given, not only to all men in a private way, keeping their
Conscience to themselves, but to all kind of Teachers, to come upon the public
Stage, and there by Tongue or Pen, preaching or writing, to vent what doctrines
they please. To this let Magistrates see. Being accountable for it, as to God,
so to his people, who cannot have the Evil put away from the midst of them (as
the close of that verse there has it), unless some course, and some severe
course also, be taken for the restraining and repressing of such dangerous
deceivers. But I shall prosecute this no further: But rather come to that which
is behind in the Text, the second Branch of it; Wherein we shall meet with a
proper and sovereign Remedy for the aforesaid Malady.

For it is a good thing that the heart be 2d. Part of the Text. The Reason of
the Prohibition.
established with Grace.
IN which words, for the better handling Parts two.
of them, we may take notice of two things. The thing here commended, and the
means of attaining it. The thing commended, is Heart-Establishment: [ It is a
good thing that the Heart be established]. The means of attaining this
Establishment, Grace, [ It is a good thing that the heart be established with
Grace]. Upon these two I shall insist severally, and that with all convenient
brevity. Begin with the former.

It is a good thing that the heart be established]. Part 1. The thing
commended; Heart-Establishment.
Where, by way of Explication, let two things be enquired into. What is here
meant by the Heart, what by the Establishing of the heart. Explic.


For the former, I will not trouble Q. 1. Heart, what it here signifies.
you with the several acceptations of the word ( Heart) in Scripture, which
are many. Literally and properly what it signifies, I shall not need to tell
you; that fleshy partt in the Body of Man, or other Creature, which is the seat
of the soul, the fountain of life; Primum vivens, and ultimum moriens, the
first that lives, and the last that dies. But this is not the heart that our
Apostle here speaks of. As for this heart, the proper means of strengthening
and establishing it, is by Meats and Drinks. Thus Abraham speaking to the three
Angels, and taking them to be Men, he bids them sit down and rest themselves,
and I (says he) will fetch a morsel of bread, and comfort ye: your hearts,
Genesis 18. 5. Fulcite corda, Stay, or stablish your hearts (says the Original),
meaning their vital spirits, whereof the heart is the receptacle. But to let
that go.

The Heart here spoken of, is (as the The Soul of man.
Apostle tells us) such a thing as whose establishment is not by Meats, but
by Grace. Understand hereby then the Soul of man. The Reasonable soul, with the
faculties of it. So the word ( Heart) in Scripture is most frequently used; it
being (as I said) the proper seat of the Soul. And so look we upon it here. It
is good that the Heart]; the Soul.

Q. But the Soul of man, in regard Q. What part of the Soul?
of the faculties of it, is divided into two parts. The Intellective, and
Affective. The former properly called the mind, comprehending the
Understanding, Judgment, Conscience. The latter the Will, with the Affections,
(which are nothing but the several turnings of the will, to or from an Object).
Now of whether of these shall we understand the Apostle here to speak?

A. To this I shall answer, that however A. The whole soul, specially the Mind.
(...) pro mente, et ratione intelligente ponit. Homo is est interior, et
spiritualis, Aret. Com. ad Loc.
(with Aretius) I look upon the former of these as primarily and principally
here intended, the Mind of man, his Understanding, Judgment, Conscience, which
are the faculties with which Doctrines, as to the verity or falsity of them,
properly have to deal; yet so, (in as much as they have also an influence upon
the Affective part, the Will and the Affections) as that I shall not wholly
exclude any of them: But rather take the word ( Heart) here in the
Comprehensive sense of it, (as commonly it is to be taken, where it goes
alone) as pointing at the whole inward man; both the Intellective, and
Affective part of the Soul, Understanding, Judgment, Conscience, Will,
Affections. Q. 2. Heart Establishment, what.


Q. Now so taking it, What is it for the heart to be Established?

A. (...): To be firmly and surely A.
settled, as an house that is built upon a sure foundation, or a Pillar that
stands upon a firm and solid Pedestal., so as it can neither be removed, nor
moved. And thus is the Heart of man said to be established, when it is fixed,
(as David says his was, My heart is fixed, O God, my heart is fixed, Psalm. 57.
7.) settled upon a sure basis, a sure foundation; or well ballasted, so as it
is free from such fluctuations, such vertiginous distempers as the former part
of the Text speaks of. When it is neither Actually carried about, nor yet
Subject so to be. When Christians are not soon shaken in mind, nor troubled,
whether by Spirit, Word, or Letter (as the Apostle speaks, 2 Thessalonians. 2. 2.)
But are stablished, strengthened, settled (as St. Peter has it, 2 Pet. 5.
10.): This it is to have the Heart established.

Which the Heart of man naturally is Oserv. The heart of man natural unstable.
not. So much is not obscurely insinuated by the Apostle here in the Text,
where he says, It is a good thing that the heart should be established, and
that with grace: Intimating that of it self it is not so: This is a flower that
grows not in natures Garden: A truth. The heart of man by nature is nothing
less then stable. Even as it is with a Ship, when it first comes out of the
Dock, or off from the Stocks (as here you phrase it), before any ballast be put
into it, being light and empty, it is also waltery, and unsteady, apt to turn
this way and that way. And truly such is Man, as he comes out of the womb
(Natures Dock,) a light and empty thing. So David who had well weighed him,
found him to be. Surely men of low degree are vanity, and men of high degree
are a lie; To be laid in the balance, they are altogether lighter then
vanity]: that is his verdict, Psalm. 62. 9. Altogether, ( Iacad) Suppose it that
all Pa^iter, (...)
the men upon earth were put together in one balance, and vanity it self, (any
light thing as a Bubble, or a feather) put in the other, to be weighed against
them, they would Ascend, mount up (...) Ascendendo: Montanus.
(as the Original has it), as the lighter scale uses to do, they will be
found the lighter of the two. Such was David's apprehension of all the sons of
men; Be they what they will, whether Beni Adam, or Beni Ish, filii Hominis, or
filii viri, whether men of low degree, or men of high degree, all was one to
him. He sets his Tekel upon them all; Even the very same that the handwriting
upon the wall did upon Belshazzer the Persian Monarch, the greatest man of his
time, Dan. 5. 27. Thou art weighed in the balances, and found wanting; wanting
weight, many grains too light. And such are all the sons of men naturally: And
that, as in regard of their outward state and condition, being not to be
confided, trusted in, so also in respect of their inward disposition, the frame
and temper of their hearts and spirits: Before the grace of God meet with them,
they are all light as vanity. Being by nature empty things. This it is that
makes the Bubble so light, because it is empty. And such is the heart of man
naturally. The Evil spirit returning into the heart of a man from whence he
seemed to have been ejected, finds it empty, Matthew. 12. 44. Empty of Grace:
which being the best and only ballast for the soul (as I shall show you anon),
without it it must needs be light, and consequently unsettled, subject to
fluctuations, and turnings; specially in matters of Religious concernment. Thus
it is.

But, It is not good that it should be so. Obser. 2. Heart-unsettlednesse a
great evil.
That is a second thing we have here hinted unto us. It is good that the heart
should be established.] So then the contrary is not good. That the heart should
be unsettled, specially in the matters of God, this is an Evil, a great Evil.

So it is (first) when a man is actually 1. Such is Actual turning from the way
of Truth.
turned. When he is under this sad distemper, carried about (as the Apostle
says) with diverse and strange doctrines. This is an Evil, and that both a
Sinful, and a Penal one.

1. Sinful. So it was in our first Parents, 1. A sinful Evil.
when they hearkened to the voice of the Serpent, bringing to them a doctrine
diverse from, and contrary to that which God himself had preached to them. And
so is it in their posterity; when they shall in like manner hearken to the
Instruments of Satan, subtle seducers, suffering themselves to be turned aside
from the way of Truth to the embracing of Errors. This is a sinful Evil.

And so it may be called, and looked Upon a double Account.
upon, upon a double account; As it is a forsaking of Truth, and as it is a
cleaving to Error. Thus the Lord complains of his people, Ier. 2. 13. My
people have committed two Evils (two grand and notorious Evils), they have
forsaken me the fountain of living waters, and hewed them out Cisternes, broken
Cisternes, that can hold no water. They forsook the true God, and turned to
false gods, Idols. This he charge upon them as a double Evil. And so is it,
when any one shall forsake and relinquish the truth once received, and
acknowledged, and shall follow after Errors, this is a double Evil. Even as it
was in the Israelites, when being weary of their Manna, they lusted for flesh,
(of which you have the story, Numb. 11. 4, 6.) this was in them a double Evil.
Their loathing one, their lusting another; their loathing of that heavenly
Manna, and their lusting after Egyptian fleshpots. Even so is it with
Christians; when they shall come to loathe divine and heavenly truths, which
their souls have formerly fed upon, and found relish in, satisfaction and
contentment, and shall lust after diverse and strange doctrines, this is a
double Evil. So St. Peter looked upon it in those Seducers, of whom he
complains, 2 Pet. 2. 15. that they had forsaken the right way, and were gone
astray, following the way of Balaam. And so may we look upon it in the Seducers
of these times, as also in many of those that are seduced by them. Their
turning from the Truth received, and embracing of Error, is in them a double
Evil. A sinful evil.

2. And as sinful so Penal. As a sin, 2. A penal Evil.
so a punishment of sin, and that a dreadful one. So the Apostle looked upon
it, who writing to his Thessalonians concerning the Apostasy of the latter
times, he says, that For this cause (viz. because men received not the love of
the truth) God shall send them strong delusions that they should believe a lie,
2 Thessalonians. 2. 11. Thus does God justly punish those disrespects which men show
unto his truth, when it is held forth unto them, their not receiving and
embracing it with entire and cordial Affection, and living up to it, by giving
them over to Satanical delusions, to be captived and blinded by them, that they
should believe a Lie, be carried about with di^vers and strange, forged and
false Doctrines. Thus is this Actual turning an Evil thing.

And such (in the second place) is 2. Habitual instability a great Evil, in two
respects.
Habitual Instability. When men have unsettled heads and hearts, and so are
subject to be turned, and to be carried about in this manner. This also is an
evil, a great Evil. So it will appear, if we do but consider these two things:
First, how it indisposeth a man to service; and, secondly, how it exposes him
to danger. Both which may fitly be illustrated from a Ship (a Similitude which
I have the more frequent recourse unto, in regard that, as it suiteth very well
with the Subject in hand, so it is familiar, and well known to you.) A Ship,
being tender-sided, and waltery, is neither serviceable, nor safe. Not
serviceable to the Owner, not safe to the Passenger. And truly such is the
condition of an unstable soul.

1. It is unserviceable. Unserviceable 1. Rendering the soul unserviceable.
to God the Owner of it: Being hereby indisposed unto his service; whether to
do, or to suffer for him. Both which require a stable head, and a stable heart.
Where these are wanting, it cannot be expected, or hoped, that a man should
walk uprightly with God in a constant course of Obedience. We see how it is
with a man in drink (so we speak sometimes, and yet not improperly, when the
Body being surcharged with any inebriating liquor, the soul (which is the man,
the most noble part of him) is drowned in it), his head turning round, what
Indentures does he make with his feet: He cannot now walk right on, but reeleth
to and fro, this way and that way (as the Psalmist speaks, Psalm. 107. 27.):
And truly so is it with an unsettled Christian, having an unstable head and
heart, he has also an unstable foot, so as he cannot walk steadily with God.
He cannot do (what our Apostle requires all Christians to do, Heb. 12. 13.)
Make straight paths (or steps) unto his feet. This is that which St. James
tells us in that Text forecited, Iam. 1. 8. (...), A double-minded man is
unstable in all his ways. A man unsettled in his Principles, Opinions,
Resolutions, Purposes, having (as it were) his soul divided in him, (which the
word (...) properly signifies, Bianimis; when the mind is divided betwixt two
Objects, that it knows not which to choose, but is like a man standing in
bivio, that has two ways before him, and knows not which to take) he is
unstable in all his ways, all his practices, courses, undertakings, whether of
Civil, or Religious concernment. And being so, it cannot be expected than
either God or Man should ever have any great service from such a one. It was
Jacobs prophetical prediction concerning his firstborn son, Reuben, Genesis 49.
4. Unstable as water, thou shall not excel, etc. viz. in valor, or any
excellent achievements. And the like may be said of unstable Christians. Being
unstable as water, (which too many are) subject to be moved and carried about
with every wind of doctrine, as the water is with every gale that blows upon
it; Let it never be expected that they should excel, in doing any special
service whether for God, or for his Church. Thus does this Habitual
instability indispose a man for service.

2. It exposes him to danger. Even 2. Exposing it to Danger.
as it is with a Ship (still I have recourse to the same similitude), being
tendersided and waltery, as it will not bear much sail, so it is subject to be
overset by every gust. Even so is it with an unsettled Christian. As he is not
capable of doing much service, so he is in danger of being over-set by every
Tentation; to be carried about by fear, or hope of gain and outward advantage,
or by the slight and cunning craftiness of subtle seducers; which is a thing
of very dangerous consequence, making the condition of a man most hazardous and
unsafe, continually exposing him to the danger of no less then the sinking of
his soul in eternal perdition. But I promised brevity. Thus is it (as you see)
an evil thing to have the heart, the soul of man, unsettled, especially as to
matters of Religious concernment.

But on the other hand, To have the Obser. 3. Heart-Establishment a good thing.
heart established is a good thing. That we have here expressed. [ It is a good
thing that the heart be established]. (...), a good thing, a singular good,
eminently good. So it is, being both Honestum, Utile, and Iucundum, (which are
the three kinds of good) an Honest good, a Profitable good, a Pleasurable good.
1. An Honest good.


1. An Honest good. This is the good of the heart, when it is like the good
ground spoken of, Luke 8. which our Savior, verse 15. expounds to be the
honest and good heart; (...) Now this it is which makes it so to be, when it
is established, and that with grace. This is as good manure to a light soil,
which being laid on it and mingled with it, makes it good ground. And so does
this a good Heart, an honest Heart.

2. It is a profitable good. So is good 2. A profitable good.
ground to the Owner. And so is a good heart, that is thus established. Now it
brings forth fruits unto God; fruits of New Obedience; fruits of Holiness
and Righteousness; and that both Plentifully and Constantly. Which a heart not
so established will not do. Possibly by fits and starts an unsettled, unstable
Christian may do some good services, in themselves acceptable unto God, and
profitable to others. But he is not constant herein. This is the fruit of this
heart-establishment, to make the Christian like David's tree, planted by the
rivers of water, that brings forth his fruit in his season, and whose leaf
also does not wither, Psalm. 1. 3. Constant both in profession and practice of
Gods true Religion.

3. It is a pleasurable, a delightful 3. A delightful good.
good. So it is to the Christian himself. The heart being in a good and
constant temper, it makes both an equable pulse, and a cheerful countenance.
And so is it with the Christian, when his heart, his soul is settled and
established in the matters of God, this makes him as Constant in his way, so
cheerful. David having his heart fixed, then he will sing and give praise,
Psalm. 57. 7. An unsettled heart must needs be an uncomfortable heart. Even as
it is with a Traveller, falling with diverse ways, and being anxious and
uncertain which to take, now he goes on heavily, though possibly he may be in
the right; whereas being confident of his way, he goes on cheerfully. So is it
with a Christian in his journey to heaven, falling with diverse ways, diverse
doctrines, and being in himself unsettled, and unresolved which to cleave unto,
this Amity is to him no small perplexity. Whereas going on resolvedly, now he
walks comfortably. Thus is Heart-establishment a good thing.

And is it so? What then remains Applic.
(to make a short Application of this threefold Observation) but that,

1. We be all of us convinced of the Use 1. Be convinced of soul-unfetlednesse.
want of this Establishment; which who so is not, surely he is not acquainted
with his own heart as he ought to be. True it is, amongst Christians some are
more stable then others, having through Grace attained some good measure of
this heart-establishment. This is that which David says of the good and Godly
man, Psalm. 112. 8, 9. His heart is fixed, trusting in the Lord. His heart is
established, etc.] So it may be in measure, in good measure; yet so as still
there will be some fluctuations, some doubtings, some waverings, specially in
times of Temptation, being the remainders of natural Instability. And this let
every of us be convinced of.

2. And being convinced of the Use 2. Be convinced of the evil of it, and be
humbled under it.
thing, be withal convinced of the Evil of it, that so we may be humbled for
it, and under it. And that, as for any actual deviation, turning aside from any
way or truth of God, and being carried away with any diverse and strange
doctrine, which many, many, (I hope well-meaning souls, many of them) in this
Nation (that I say not in this place) at this day have just and great cause
for; so for that degree of habitual unsettlednesse which is yet left remaining
in us; that we should be so obnoxious, so subject to be thus carried about, as
the best of us are if left unto our selves.

3. Then (in the third place) be we Use 3. Seek after Heart-Establishment.
exhorted to seek after this blessed frame and temper of spirit, never resting
until we have in measure attained it. Not resting our selves contented either
with that fides implicita, or Conjecturalis fiducia, that Implicit faith, or
Conjectural belief, which the Doctors of the Church of Rome would have their
Disciples to rest contented in. As for any certain knowledge, or assurance,
(looking upon them as things in an ordinary way not attainable, specially for
private Christians), they would not have them sought after by them. And thus do
they keep poor souls in a fluctuating, doubting condition; by which means
their Consciences can never be quiet; not having any sure basis to rest upon;
but they are continually subject to be carried about. A sad and dangerous
condition, what ever they may think or speak of it. An Evil, a great Evil. So
much Pareus writing upon the Text Damnat hic Apostolus fidem Conjecturalem, h.
e. fluctuationem Jesuitarum, qua necesse est conscientias circumferri dubias.
Contra asserit (...) fidei, etc. Pareus ad Text.
rightly concludes from it against the Jesuits, and their Conjectural faith.
If it be a good thing to have the heart established with grace, then it must be
an evil thing, not to have it thus established. And so looking upon it, rest
we not contented under it, but strive after such a Plerophorie, such a full
persuasion and assurance as the Apostle sometimes speaks of. Thus did the
Thessalonians receive the Apostles doctrine, (as he says) It came unto them in
much assurance, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. (...). And the like does he wish and earnestly
desire, as for his Colossians, so for other of the Saints, Col. 2. 2. That
their hearts might be comforted, being knit together in love, and unto all
riches of the full assurance of understanding, to the acknowledgment of the
mystery of God, etc. that is, of the doctrine of the Gospel. And the like does
St. Peter beg for the Saints to whom he writes, 1 Pet. 5. 10. The God of all
grace, etc. make you perfect, stablish, strengthen you. And this let all of us
seek for our selves; that our hearts may be established in the Truth of God.
This is the Commendation which that Apostle St. Peter gives to the Saints, to
whom he writes, that they were established in the present truth, 2 Pet. 1. 12.
i. e. the truth of the Gospel which was then preached unto them. And O! that
the like could be said of every of us, and of all the Lords people in this
Nation! that we and they were thus established!

A blessing never more to be desired Heart-Establishment needful in respect of
the present Times.
then at this day. Wherein, the times, the general state of all things, both in
Church and State, being so unsettled, Christians have need of stable hearts.
When the winds are loud, and the Sea is up, then have Ships need to be well
ballasted. And truly so is it with Christians, as at all times, so specially in
unsettled and troublesome times, when the wind of diverse and strange doctrines
is up, (as is at this day among us) blowing upon the Church, as that wind of
the Devils raising did upon the house where Jobs children were, which is said
to have smote the four Corners of it, Job 1. 19. (a strange wind to blow so
many several ways at once, and such is the wind of false doctrines, which the
Devil has raised against the Church in this Nation at this day) now they have
need to have their hearts established.

1. And this let all of us now seek Directions for the obtaining of it.
for. Seeking it from God, who is the God of all grace. From him it is that 1.
Seek it from God by Prayer.
Peter beggeth this blessing in that Text even now cited, 1 Pet. 5. 10. Now the
God of all grace stablish you. This is his work. He which establishes us with
you in Christ, is God, (says the Apostle to his Corinthians) 2 Cor. 1. 21.
This he can do. To him that is of power to establish you, (says the same
Apostle, describing of God, Romans 16. 25. And that he would do it, that he would
put forth that power upon every of us, beg it from him by Prayer. That is
David's request for himself, Psalm. 51. 12. Stablish me with thy free Spirit, (so
the former Translation reads it) And this let all of us beg, as a mercy
seasonable at all times, never more then at this day, Lord establish our
hearts, stablish us in thy truth, confirm us, uphold us, keep us from being
thus carried about.

2. Which that he may do; be directed with care and conscience to attend 2. By
a conscionable attendance upon Establishing Ordinances.
upon the means of establishment; Confirming, strengthening, establishing
Ordinances, whereby God is wont to convey this grace into the hearts of his
people. Such is the Word in the public Ministry of it, and such is the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. And therefore that your hearts may be
established, whilst you attend upon the one of these, do not neglect the
other. That which David and Ezekiel say of ordinary The Sacrament of the Lords
Supper an establishing Ordinance.
Bread in reference to the Body, Psalm. 105. 16. Ezekiel. 4. 16. we may in
reference to the Soul apply it to Sacramental bread, It is (...) (as the
Seventy there render it), the stay and staff of bread; being of sovereign use
for the comforting and strengthening of the heart, the establishing of the
soul, by sealing up unto it the Covenant of grace, and all the blessed promises
belonging thereunto, and engaging it to a close and conscientious walking with
God. To these I might add, Forget not the Communion of Saints. Trees stand
surer in the Wood or Grove, where they have company, then in the field where
they stand alone. But I shall not give way to enlargements. I have done with
the first of these Particulars, the thing here commended, which is
Heart-Establishment. Briefly of the latter, the means of attaining this great
good, and that is

Grace] It is a good thing that the Part 2d. The means of Hearr-Establishment,
Grace.
heart be established with Grace]. See here (what I have told you before, once
and again) what is the best ballast for the Soul, the best way and means of
establishing Oserv. The best Ballast for the Soul, Grace.
the Heart, Grace. It is a good thing, Optimum est, (says the Vulgar Latin)
it is the best thing (turning the Positive into the Superlative, which
frequently it does, as Estius notes upon it). And what ever there be in the
Translation, sure it is there is a truth in the thing. Other things there are
which may be useful in this way, for the settling and establishing of the heart,
as, viz. Reason, and Experience. The former of these was the Ballast which the
Heathen Philosophers made use of, Natural Reason. Thereby they quieted, and
composed their spirits, so as they were not transported with inordinate
passions, but were kept in a sedate, calm, eeven temper in the midst of
whatever changes passed over them. And of like use is the latter to the
Seaman, and to the Soldier. Having been in many Storms, many Battles, having
had experience of many dangers, wherein yet they have come off safe, escaping
with their lives, their spirits are hereby steeled, hardened, composed,
settled, so as whilst others being in their conditions would quake and tremble
like leaves, they are no more moved then the Tree that bears them. Thus other
things may be useful in this way. But none like this: None to Grace. This is
the best ballast for the soul, the best way and means of establishing the
Heart, Grace.

Q. But what shall we understand Q. Grace, what here it signifies.
hereby? what Grace is it that has this Property?

A. The word (...), Grace, is (...), A. The Doctrine; and Habit of Grace.
of very various signification in Scripture. I shall not trouble you with that
variety. Here in the Text I find a double sense put upon it: Some understanding
it of the Doctrine of Grace; others of the Habit of Grace. But this differencr
may be both easily and fairly taken up, by putting them both together, which
accordingly I shall do: Both these we shall find of sovereign use in this way.

1. The Doctrine of Grace. The Gospel, 1. The Doctrine of Grace, the Gospel.
holding forth the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ, for the Justifying and
saving of poor sinners, through the Application of his Merit, and the
imputation of his Obedience unto them. This in Phrase of Scripture is called
sometimes by the name of Grace. This is that which the Apostle means, 2 Cor.
6. 1. where he beseeches his Corinthians, that they would not receive the
Grace of God in vain; meaning the Doctrine of the Gospel, holding forth to them
the free grace of God in Christ. So again, Titus 2. 11. he calls it (...),
The Grace of God that brings salvation has appeared; meaning the Grace of
God held forth in the Doctrine of the Gospel, which (says he) has now
appeared, and that unto all men; being held forth more clearly then under the
Law, and tendered not to Jews only (as then in an ordinary way it was), but to
Gentiles also. And in a like sense our Apostle is conceived to make use of the
word sometimes in this Epistle to the Hebrews; as, viz. twice in the Chapter
before the Text. Once, ver. 15. Looking diligently lest any man fail of (or
fall from, as the Margin has it (...)) the Grace of God. And again, ver. 28.
Let us have grace; or, Let us hold fast grace (as the Margin again reads it,
and that, (as is conceived) more properly; (...) being put for (...), as
Grotius there notes upon it, and as sometimes elsewhere it is). In both places
by Grace (as it is by many expounded) understanding the Doctrine of Grace, the
doctrine of the Gospel, which holds forth salvation through the free Grace of
God in Christ. And so, besides Aretius (...) pro gratuita Dei erga nos
benevolentia acceptante nos and justos pro nunciante propter meritum Christi,
Aretius ad loc.
and some other Protestant Expositors, I find Estius the Jesuit very heartily
interpreting it here in the Text with a Magis placet. Though he do not wholly
reject the Habit of Grace, yet he rather hereby understands the Doctrine of
Grace. Doctrina Christiana fide suscepta: True Christian doctrine (the doctrine
of the Gospel) apprehended and embraced by faith, which is Gratia
Christianismi, the Grace of Christianity (as he there calls it). The Doctrine
of Gods free grace in Christ; that saving Grace which Jesus Christ as Mediator
has purchased, procured, and made known to poor sinners. Of him it is that our
Apostle speaks in the verse before the Text, verse 8. Jesus Christ the same
yesterday, and to day, and for ever. And to him, (questionless) he has also
an eye here in the Text; where forbidding his Hebrews to be carried about with
diverse and strange Doctrines, (any doctrines which held forth Justification in
any other then a Gospel way), he gives this as a Reason for that his
Prohibition, For it is a good thing that the heart be established with Grace,
with the grace of God in Christ, the Doctrine of free grace held forth in the
Gospel. And of all ways and means for the establishing of the Heart, there is
none like unto this, the Doctrine of Gods free Grace in Christ.

That it is so, may soon be demonstrated. Heart-Establishment not to be
expected from the Law.
There being but two things that can be supposed to have any efficacy this way,
for the establishing of the heart as to Godward, viz. Law or Gospel. Now, as
for the former of these, the Law, that will say to the soul that comes unto
it, This is not in me. Not in the Ceremonial Law. For Not from the Ceremonial
Law.
that the Apostle is express in the Text; It is good (says he) that the heart
be established with Grace, not with meats; that is, not with any Ceremonial
observances, among which, choice of meats was one, and so by a Synecdoche is
put for all the rest. As for this Ceremony, the choice of meats, using one as
clean, abstaining from another as unclean, and that for Conscience sake, the
Apostle here affirms it to be an unprofitable thing, Not to have profited
those that had been occupied (or walked) therein. Such as were most
superstitiously addicted thereunto, as the Jewish Doctors were, who placed a
chief part of their Religion in those Legal Ceremonies, yet they merited
nothing at Gods hands thereby; (...): In this way they did not profit them
under the Law. Much less can they, or any of the like nature, now profit
Christians under the Gospel. Feathers and Thistledown may as soon ballast a
Ship, as Ceremonial observances establish the heart. This cannot the
Ceremonial Law do.

No nor yet the Moral. For that Nor yet from the Moral Law.
the Apostle is no less express, Romans 8. 3. where speaking of the Christians
liberty which he has by Grace, his being made free from the Law of sin and
death, he shows this to be a thing which the Law cannot do for him; giving
this as a Reason of it; In that it was weak through the flesh. Time was indeed
when the Law was able to Justify and save, viz. when it was given to Adam in
his state of Integrity, because then he was able to have fulfilled it. But so
it is not now. Man being fallen from that state is grown impotent, unable to
fulfill the Law: Nay, through the Corruption of his Nature, averse to it. So as
by this means the Law is, as it were, enervated, it has no such power as
sometime it had, no possibility of Justifying and saving of a man. And
consequently it cannot be of use in this way, as a foundation for a Christian
to ground and build his confidence upon, and so to establish his heart. No,
this is but a tottering foundation. So much that great Cardinal, Bellarmine,
however he was no great friend to free Grace, yet was enforced to acknowledge,
Propter incertitudinem propriae justitiae, etc. A man's own Righteousness
(says he) is an uncertain thing; a man may easily be deceived in it: And
therefore it cannot be safe to put any confidence in it. So far he. Which we
accept, (especially coming from an Adversary) owning it for a Truth; though not
the whole truth. Advance we a step further. A man's own righteousness is
uncertain: Nay, it is certain, being certainly defective and imperfect. Such
are the best duties and services of the most sanctified persons upon earth,
being clogged with many weaknesses and imperfections: which though they do not
render and denominate them peceata, Sins, yet peccaminosa, sinful. This is the
Churches Confession, Isai. 64. 6. All our Righteousnesses are as filthy rags.
Not only their Ceremonial services, but even their moral performances; they
were all mixed with Hypocrisy, Vainglory, or some such like tincture of
Corruption, as rendered them loathsome in the sight and presence of God. And
truly, the like may we say of the best actions and services of the best of men,
and in the best manner performed, yet still they are contaminated and defiled
with some imperfections, which might deservedly make them as filthy rags,
odious and abominable in the sight of God, should he look narrowly into them
with an eye of Justice, and judge of them according to the exact tenor and
Rigor of his Law, Such an influence has Corruption upon the best of men, and
the best of duties.

This is that which regenerate Paul complains of in himself, that when he
would do good, evil was present with him, Romans 7. 21. Evil, (...), sinful
Corruption, either hindering him from doing it at all, or else in the manner of
performance, from doing it in such a manner as he both ought, and desired to
have done. And if so, here can be no establishment for the heart in this way.
In thy sight (says the Psalmist, speaking unto God, Psalm. 143. 2.) shall no
man living be Justified; that is, by the deeds of the Law. So the Apostle
expounds it, Romans 3. 20. Therefore by the deeds of the Law shall no flesh be
justified in his sight]: For which he gives a Reason in the words following [
For by the Law is the knowledge of sin]. This is the proper work of the Law, to
discover sin and wrath, sealing up condemnation unto the sinner; but Justify,
it cannot. And if not justify the sinner, then not satisfy the soul, not
quiet the Conscience. Disquiet and unsettle, nay, torment and excruciate it
with the terrors of it, it may: But in this way to settle and establish the
heart, it can never do. No, this is a Gospell-work, the fruit of Grace, issuing
from the Doctrine of Gods free Grace in Christ, rightly apprehended, and firmly
believed. This it is, and only this, that establishes the heart. And this can
do it.

And how so? Because this is like Reason. Grace, like the Authou of it,
All-sufficient.
unto the Author of it, the God of all Grace; He is (...), All-sufficient: And
such is his Grace. This is that which the Lord from heaven tells Paul, when he
was conflicting with that thorn in the flesh, some violent Temptation or other,
(as is most probably conjectured), My grace (says he) is sufficient for thee,
2 Cor. 12. 9. (...), Sufficit, or Sufficiat, It is sufficient in it self for
thee, and so let it be unto thee, for the quieting, settling, establishing of
thy heart and spirit. And so may it well be to every true believer. It is that
which the Preacher says of Money, Eccl. 10. 19. Money answers all things.
What ever it is that a man desires, if it be to be got, Money will procure it
for him. And we may truly say the like of Grace; Grace answers all things.
What winds are there that can arise in the heart of a Christian, which this one
word (Grace) is not able to lay? What doubts which it cannot resolve? Are his
sins many and great? this is sufficient to pardon them: are his Infirmities
many? this is sufficient to heal them: are his wants many? this is sufficient
to supply them. Thus is Grace, this Grace of God in Christ, sufficient,
All-sufficient. And being so, well may this be attributed to it, as the proper
effect of it, to satisfy, settle, and establish the heart of Man.

What then remains (to make Application Applic.
of this Branch) but that all of us who desire to be made partakers of this
choice blessing, declining all other ways, put our souls upon this way of
obtaining it.

1. Decline all other ways. Not Use 1. Seek not Heart establishment in any
other way.
hearkening to any other Doctrines, which hold forth to us Justification and
Salvation by any other way and means. This is that which the Apostle here
drives at in the Text; to take off his Hebrews from being carried about with
any of those diverse and strange doctrines, which were held forth to them by the
false Apostles and seducers of those Times, whose design was to remove them
from their Gospel-foundation; directing them to the Law, and Not from
Ceremonial observances.
that to the Ceremonial part of it; promising to them great matters from those
external observances. But the Apostle would have them to turn away their eyes
from them, as being things which were not able to profit them in that way. And
truly, so is it with all things besides Jesus Christ, and the free Grace of God
in him. They can do nothing to the true establishing of the soul. Disquiet it
they may (as I said) and trouble it. Nay, so they will in the end, if ever God
come to open the eyes of those that trust in them, and rest upon them. They
will fail them as brooks in the Summer. Nay, be unto them as the staff of a
broken reed, (as he said of Egypt, Isa. 36. 6.) not only failing the trust
reposed in them, but running into their hands, their hearts, piercing, and
wounding, and goaring them. And therefore cease from them. Not hearkening to
any of those Romish doctrines, which tell us of merit; and that not only of
Congruity, but of Condignity; and hold forth many external, Ceremonial
Observances, as fastings, whippings, washings, Crossings, Pilgrimages and the
like: All which they make use of as women do of rattles to still their children
with. So do they think hereby to still and quiet the Consciences of their
disciples. But alas, all these, and the like, they are but shells, busks, empty
things; No fit ballast for the soul. Let we them go: And not only them, but
even all our Moral performances; Nor yet from Moral performances.
what ever services, or duties we have done, or can do; duties of piety, or
duties of Charity; duties of holiness or righteousness, make loss of all (as
Paul says he did, Phil. 3. 8, 9.) casting them overboard, renouncing them as
to any opinion of Merit: Not placing any trust, any confidence in them. However
we may take up confidence from them (of which I shall speak anon), yet place no
confidence in them. Far be it from any of us to think of establishing our
hearts in this way.

And if not in this way, then much Much less from Temporal enjoyments.
less by any temporal possessions or enjoyments; all which not being able to
fill any corner of the Heart, can never satisfy, never establish it. The truth
whereof we see sufficiently evidenced by daily experience. Who are so far off
from this Heart-Establishment, from having their spirits quieted and composed,
as they that have the greatest share of these outward things? How are their
hearts hereby filled with disquieting cares, and tormenting fears? so as their
bodily rest and sleep is often broken thereby, which the poor man quietly
enjoyes. And therefore renouncing all these (I mean in respect of any
soul-confidence in them) looking upon them as empty pits and broken cisternes,
which will not afford one drop of true solid comfort to the heart.

2. In the second place, go we to the Use 2. Seek it in a Gospel-way, making
free Grate our foundation.
fountain of living water, the free Grace of God in Jesus Christ, making that
our foundation. Such it is, a foundation, and the only foundation. Other
foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid, Jesus Christ (says the
Apostle, 1 Cor. 3. 11.) This is the Gospelfoundation, that foundation of the
Apostles and Prophets, spoken of, Ephesians. 2. 20. And it is the only sure
foundation. That our souls may be established, set them upon this foundation.
First, laying the foundation; then setting our souls upon it. These are two
Concerning which, two Directions.
principal requisites in the building of a house, that it may stand sure;
First, that the foundation be well laid: And then, that the building be fixed
to it, and settled upon it. And this course take we for the establishing our
hearts.

1. Lay this foundation. As it is already Direct. 1. See that this foundation
be well laid.
laid in the Word, by those Master Builders the Apostles and Prophets, [ Other
foundation can no man lay, then that which is laid], So let it be laid in our
hearts. And that both Rightly and Deeply. These are the two principal
requisites in laying of a foundation: that it be right set, and deep laid. And
so let this foundation of the free Grace of God in Christ be laid in our hearts.

1. Let it be right set. Get a right 1. Right set.
understanding of this Doctrine; that you may know what this Grace of God in
Christ is; and that this is the only way and means whereby poor sinners may
come to be justified and saved.

2. And being thus right set, let it 2. Deep laid.
also be deep laid; in a deep apprehension of the truth and excellency of this
glorious doctrine. Not suffering it to swim aloft in the brain, contenting
your selves with a superficial notion, an overly knowledge of this truth. No,
that which ballasteth the Ship must not lie aloft upon the Deck, but it must be
put into the hold, into the inward, yea lowest part of it. And so deal you by
this Doctrine. That your hearts may be stablished with it, think it not enough
that you have it in your Heads, some general apprehensions of it; but let it
sink down into the bottom of your hearts. Labor for a serious and deep
apprehension hereof; That being convinced of your own lost state and condition
by nature, and utter inability to do any thing for your selves, you may come to
admire and adore this rich Grace of God in Jesus Christ, so as it may make a
deep impression upon your hearts and spirits.

And the foundation being thus Direct. 2. Settle the soul upon this foundation.
laid, now set your souls upon it, fixing them to it. Be the foundation never
so well laid, yet if the house be not settled upon it, and fastened to it, it
will never stand sure. And so is it with the Soul. Gods Grace is a sure
foundation, where it is rightly laid. But withal, that the soul may be
established by it, it must be fixed upon it. And this see you to. As many as
would have your hearts truly established, fix them, settle them upon this
foundation. Which is done by a serious purpose Which is done by Faith, resting
upon free Grace.
and firm resolution of cleaving hereunto, resting and relying hereupon for
Justification and Salvation. And this (I say) do you, as many as would be made
partakers of this great Benefit, to have your hearts established. Renouncing
all other things in the world, as being no other but mockstayes, false
foundations, pitch your selves wholly and alonely upon this, the free Grace of
God in Jesus Christ, believing, resting thereon. So being strong in the Grace
that is in Jesus Christ: (as Paul exhorts his Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 1.) No way
of establishment but this. If ye will not believe, surely ye shall not be
established; so the Lord tells his people concerning their Temporal
salvation, Isai. 7. 9. If they would not believe his gracious promise, whereby
he had engaged himself to them, and rest upon it, but would be looking out
after other helps and succors, other means of security, they should not be
established, they should never be firmly settled, whether in their estates, or
in their minds. And what he there says of Temporal, let it be applied to
Eternal salvation. If you will not believe, believe the great Gospel-Promise,
that gracious promise made unto all poor penitent sinners upon their believing
on Christ, and so rest upon the free Grace of God in him, but will be looking
after other ways and means of Justification and Salvation, you shall never be
established, your hearts shall never be settled. But I shall reserve a word or
two for the latter sense here put upon this word, Grace: which we shall find
not inconsistent with the former.

Grace, as it is put for the doctrine, 2. The Habit of Grace, Regeneration.
so also for the Habit of Grace. So we find it frequently in Scripture. And so
both Calvin and Beza here look upon it in the Text; By Quum Cibis opponit
Gratiam, non dubito quin spiritualem Dei cultum, et Regenerationem intelligat
hoc nomine, Calvin. ad loc. Iisdem etiam verbis, Beza. Gr. Annot. ad loc.
Grace here understanding the spiritual Worship and Service of God, with the
inward work of Regeneration, for which they both give this Reason, in as much
as it is here opposed to Meats. And truly, to this Grace may we in a wary
sense fitly apply this property of Establishing the heart. This is a thing
which is not done by Meats, by any bodily external exercises, such as were
prescribed under the Law; not by a Ceremonial, but by a true Gospel Worship,
which is (as our Savior describes it, Ioh. 4. 23.) In Spirit and in Truth:
And by the work of Regeneration, true Sanctification, the inward work of the
Spirit in, and upon the Heart. That which ballasteth the Ship must not be any
thing on the outside of it, but it must be within, in the hold. And thus, that
which establishes the Heart must not be any external observance performed by
the Outward man, but that Grace that is within the Inward man, the Soul; the
Grace of Regeneration, with the fruits of it, as Faith, Hope, and Love, with
Humility, Meekness of spirit, and other the like gracious Habits, which are
freely bestowed, gratiae gratis datae, as fruits of Grace, and wrought in the
Heart by the preaching of the Doctrine of Grace; And thence called by that
name, Grace. In which sense Estius also yields that the word Nomine Gratiae
Graeci fidem, etc. Atqui nihil verat generatim significari interna ac
spiritualia. Dei dons, quibus homines sanctificantur, ut fidem, Spem,
Charitatem, caeterasque virtutes, Estius Com. ad loc.
may be here taken.

Q. But (taking it thus) how does Q. How the Habit of Grace establishes the
Heart.
this Grace establish the Heart?

A. This it does diverse ways. All which may be reduced to two Generals. Per
modum Evidentiae, and Efficientiae. By way of Evidence, and by way of
Efficiency.

1. By way of Evidence. This is 1. By way of Evidence.
that which the Apostle says of Faith, (Chap. 11. of this Epistle, verse 1.)
It is the Evidence of things not seen. And the like may we say of other Graces
of the Spirit in the Soul; they are Evidences of that which to the Eye of sense
is invisible; viz. of that Grace of God in Christ; assuring unto a Christian
his interest in that Grace. Thus is Grace within an Evidence of Grace without;
Sanctification an evidence, a sure evidence of Justification. Which being
evidenced and ascertained unto the soul, now it comes to have peace toward
God (as the Apostle has it, Romans 5. 1.), and so to be established. But this is
not all.

2. In the second place, Grace does 2. By way of Efficiency.
this also by way of Efficiency. And that it does two ways. Indirectly,
Directly.

1. Indirectly, and by Consequence; 1. Indirectly, by freeing it from what
might disquiet it; As from fear.
by freeing the heart from those things which would disquiet and unsettle it.
Such is fear, servile, slavish fear. Of which St. John tells us that it has
torment, 1 John 4. 18. (...). Such is fear of Gods wrath, and Judgment, it is
as a Hell in the Soul, a Rack, a continual Torment to it, disquieting,
unsettling it. But now Grace ejecteth this troublesome Inmate. So the former
part of that verse there has it. There is no fear in Love, but perfect Love
casts out fear]: Perfect Love, sincere, cordial Affection toward God, and
toward man, it casts out fear; freeth the heart from that slavish,
tormenting fear. Which it does by assuring the soul of the Love of God to it.
So the same pen there sets it forth, ver. 16. And we have known, and believed
the Love which God has to us. God is Love, and he that dwells in Love,
dwells in God, and God in him. Man's Love to God, being a fruit, it is also an
evidence of Gods love to him. We love him, because he loved us first. (so it
there follows, verse 19.) And by this means true Grace freeth the heart from
fear.

And so it does from other inordinate So from other inordinate Affections and
Passions.
Lusts, Affections, Passions, whereby it is subject to be distempered, to be
carried about. As from Self-love, Pride, Ambition, Vainglory, Covetousness,
Envy, Malice, etc. All which being like so many Eddie winds in the Corners of
the Heart, do disquiet and unsettle it. Now Grace lays all these, subdueth
them, and by that means procures the settlement and establishment of the
Heart. Even as a Kingdom is settled, and established by the subduing of
Rebels, which before disturbed the peace of it. Thus does Grace promote this
work Indirectly, and by Consequence.

2. And this it does (in the second 2.
place) directly and properly. And Directly, by fixing the Soul upon a sure
foundation, the Grace of God in Christ.
that by setting the soul upon a sure foundation. This is (as in part you have
already heard) the proper work of the Grace of Faith; which taking the soul off
from all false and rotten foundations, sets it upon the true foundation, upon
Jesus Christ, and the free Grace of God in him: Into which Grace by this means
a Christian comes to have access. So the Apostle lays it down, Romans 5. 2.
By whom also we have access through faith into this grace, wherein we stand.
Here is a Christians standing, viz. in the Grace of God; And into this Grace he
comes to have access, to have the actual enjoyment, and comfort of it by
Christ, through faith. By Christ, as the meritorious cause procuring it;
through faith, as the Instrumental cause, applying that merit, and so
apprehending that Grace. And by this means does this grace of faith come to
establish the heart; by thus setting and settling it upon this sure foundation,
fixing it upon Christ.

Even as it is with the Stock, and the Graft, though fle^^er and weak in it
self, yet being put into the Stock, ingraffed into it, and incorporated with
it, now it stands firm; So is it with a Christian, how weak, how infirm, how
unstable soever in himself, yet being by faith ingraffed into Christ, now he
comes to receive establishment from him; viz. by his adhesion unto him, and
union with him. Or as the vine, though in it self infirm, not able to stand
alone, yet by clasping about the elm, or such other supporter, now it stands
sure; so does the Christian by clasping of Jesus Christ, embracing him in the
Arms of his faith, by this means he comes to be established. And thus may
this blessed work not amiss be attributed and ascribed to this Habit of Grace
in the Soul, specially (...). Chrysostom. ad Text.
to faith, which has (as you see) a peculiar efficiency this way.

Whence it is that Faith is compared Faith compared to an Anchor.
by our Apostle to an Anchor, Heb. 6. 19. Which Hope (or Faith) we have as an
Anchor of the soul both sure and steadfast. An Anchor, you well know what the
use of it is; To stay the Ship from being carried about. And of like use is
Faith unto the soul; a means to stay, settle, establish it. Which it does not
by any worth which it has in it self above other Graces, but only as an
Instrument apprehending, and uniting the soul unto that whereby it is
established. Thus does the Anchor stay the Ship, not by its own weight; No,
were it in the hold, or hanging upon the bow, it would have no such property;
but being cast forth, and taking hold upon good ground, being firmly fixed upon
a sound bottom, now it becomes useful in this way to this end. And so is it
with faith. It is not faith it self, either as it is an Habit, or as it is an
Act, by any worth of its own that can establish the heart of man, but only as
it is an Instrument laying hold upon Christ, and so upon Gods free Grace
through him. In this way it is that it comes to establish the heart. So the
Psalmist sets it forth in that Text forecited, Psalm. 112. 7, 8. His heart is
fixed, says he speaking of the righteous man) Trusting in the Lord; His heart
is established, viz. by his faith and Confidence, resting upon Gods free grace
and mercy in Christ, as for the performance of that great promise of life and
salvation by and through him, so of all subordinate and inferior promises. But
I shall not give any further way to enlargements. You see that the Habit of
Grace does this, and in what way it does.

And what then remains (to draw Applic. Seek after the Habit of Grace.
to a Conclusion) but that all of us seek after this Grace? not resting our
selves contented with the bare outward performance of any Duties; or yet in a
constant attendance upon Ordinances (which some conceive here hinted by
Chrysostom. ad loc.
the Apostle in this word, Meats, understanding it of the Meats of the
Sacrifices). Alas, these being outside things, without the man, they will not
ballast the soul, establish the Heart. See we that our hearts be laid in with
this Ballast of Grace.

Concerning which have an eye to Having an eye to two things.
two things; first to the Quality, then to the Quantity of it. These are the
two requisites in the ballasting of a Ship: That which is used for that
purpose, must be some solid material, some weighty substance; And there must be
a proportionable Quantity of it. If either be wanting the work will not be
done. And thus for the establishing of the Heart.

1. See that your Grace be true Grace, To the Quality, that it be true.
solid and substantial Grace; that your Faith and Love be unfeigned, (...),
without Hypocrisy (which is Paul's Epithet, 2 Cor. 6. 6. 1 Timothy 1. 5. and 2.
1, 5.); that you believe with all your heart (which is that which Philip
requires in the Eunuch before he would baptize him, being both a man of
years, and an alien, Act. 8. 37.), sincerely and firmly; that you love God and
Jesus Christ in sincerity, (which who so does not, but out of Malice opposes
him, Paul pronounces an Anathema Maranatha upon him, Let him be had in
execration unto the death, 1 Cor. 16. 22.); That your souls be purified
through the Spirit, to the unfeigned love of the Brethren (as St. Peter says
of the believers to whom he writes, 1 Pet. 1. 22.) And the like I may say of
other Graces; See that there be truth, sincerity in them; that the Root of the
matter may be found in you (as Job pleads that it was in him, Job 19. 28.)
True Piety, true Grace.

2. And being true for Quality, 2. To the Quantity, that there be a good
proportion of it.
then see to the Quantity of it. It is not a small Quantity, though it be of
Lead, that will ballast a Ship, No more will every degree of Grace stablish the
heart. True it is, it must not be denied; the least measure of Grace (if true)
it is saving, but not establishing. This will require some proportionable
Quantity. And therefore rest not in the beginnings of Grace, but still strive
after a further measure; Grow in Grace (as the Apostle exhorts, 2 Pet. 3. 18.):
As in knowledge, the knowledge of God and Jesus Christ, so in Faith and Love,
and all other Graces; adding one Grace to another (as the same Apostle exhorts,
2 Pet. 1. 5.), and one degree to another; that so the Habit of Grace may be
more confirmed in your hearts, and show it self by a vigorous acting in your
lives, and so may be more and more conspicuous and visible to your selves and
others. In this way, and by this means, (this being an evidence of a
Christians standing in the Grace of God) the heart shall come to be quieted,
settled, established. Which blessing the God of all Grace, out of his abundant
Grace and Mercy in Christ Jesus, vouchsafe to every soul of us. Amen.

FINIS.

