THE HOLY PRACTICES OF A DEVINE LOVER OR THE SAINCTLY Idiots Devotions.

The ^^^tents of the book are contained in the ensuinge page.

Gustate, and videte quam suauis est Dominus. Psalm. 34. Taste, and see how
sweet our Lord is. Psalm. 35. 8. Printed at Paris by LEWIS DE LA FOSSE at the
sign of the lookinge Glass in the Carmes street 1657.

With Approbation.

1. The Summarie of Perfection. 2. The Directions: for these Holy Exercises,
and Idiots Devotions. 3. A Catalogue of such Books as are fit for
Contemplative Spirits. 4. The Holy Exercises and Idiots Devotions. 5. The Top
of the Heavenly ladder, or the Highest step of Prayer (...) Perfection, by
the Example of a Pilgrim goinge to Jerusalem.
THE PREFACE. TO MY MOST Dearly beloved Friends in Christ Jesus.
I HAVE according to your holy iniunction, and desire (willinge to communicate
all Good to others) published those directions, and exercises through which by
true practice (the only means, for simple readinge only avails nothing at
all) you have reapt such great Comfort, and Benefitt: that you seem to cry
out with the Royal Prophet. Ps. 66. v. 15.
Come and hear all ye that fear^ God, and I will declare to you what He has
done for my soul. That He may do the like for yours by the same means you
practising^ these directions, and Exercises. This I know you say dear
Friends, and from your heart wish the same Spiritual profitt to all as to your
selves. Mat. 16 12.
Capiat qui capere potest. Let the capable and well disposed make use of them.
It is not needful to name you to whom I speak this: for upon these very
words I know your hearts are burninge within you. Lu. 24. 32.
My sheep hear my voice, and those who are mine know me. Io. 10. 1^.
I am the poor unprofitable servant not so much as a voice soundinge of the
great and chief Shepherd; and you are his people, Ps. 94. 7.
and the sheep of his pasture, yea I hope the choice of His flock feedinge,
and graisinge in the pleasant deserts of interne Recollection guided by the
sweet grace of His Holy Spirit the sole secure Director. I need say noe more
but that I am sure you rejoice for the voice of Him that speaks and declares
these things to you, Io 3. 29.
and all other good people: and that I have done so, is my joy also being
hereby discharged of my Obligation to you and all. And our joy I hope none
shall take from us being the best part, Lu. 15.
and for ever permanent. Dear friends I am yours the more intime by how much
less outwardly expressed, living with you (I trust in God) a life hidden with
Christ in God. Coloss. 3. 3.


IHS


A SVMMARIE of Perfection.
Mat^h. 5. ^.
B EATI mundo cord quoniam ipsi Deum videbunt, Happy are the clean of Heart,
for they shall see God. Such a Vision of God signifies withal a fruition of
him thereupon, in this life only enigmaticallie, or according to the light of
faith and feelings of Love, in the future facially, and really. And it is
cleanness of heart (with is Purity in soul) that by the said sentence of our
Savior alone deserves such Vision and fruition, whereof the degree will be
according to the measure of purity toward it that is in the soul in this
life. And such purity consists in having the soul exempt, or cleansed from
inordinate loves toward her own self and all other creatures, and from all
inherent images of creatures which those loves so far as they be do
necessarilye cause. Hinderinge (according to their measure) the souls
Vision, and fruition wherein alone were to consist her happiness, imperfect in
this life, perfect in the future.

And now here follows the summarie itself of Perfection consistinge of ten
Articles.
1. FIRST we are to aim at as our final end (answerable to which shall be
our happiness in the future) the state of absolute Perfection that man was in,
in the state of innocence (siz: before the first man's fall) so far as
through Gods Grace, and our own industry aided by the said Grace we may
attain thereto.

2. The said Perfection of the first Man consisted in two things, whereof if
either had been wantinge, it had not been that Perfection that indeed it was
and which we his posterity are to seek after as our chief, and only
happiness.

3. The one of those two things so necessary was a perfection in all virtues
that were requisite (as a mean) toward the exercise of the other as chief,
and its end. And that Other chief thing was a continual perfect actuation of
love by the Man's soul toward God that caused an Union with him. In which
Actuation and Union causinge the fruition heretofore mentioned by me,
consisted the Man's felicity for this life, and the degree and measure whereof
was to be the measure of his more real felicity in the future.

4. The former of those two being the perfection of all virtues (that is the
same as the perfect habits of the^) implies in it an exemption and freedom
from their contrary being vicious inclinatio^s or habits, or (which is all
one) inordinate Affections with their evil effects or fruits being actual
sins offensive to God and deserving punishment at his hands for the same.
Those evil Habits for so much as they are in Man do ansuerably hinder his
souls true and perfect Actuation toward God and vnio^ with him (which should
cause his Happiness) God being purity it self and therefore incompatible
with all impuritie which reigns in vicious Habits, and their effects.

5. Now we are to know that through corruption of our nature by our said first
Man's sin and our own actual sins we are become replenished with vicious
Habits (contrary to those of virtue) that accordingly disables us as to the
foresaid perfect Actuation, and Union with God.

6. Nevertheless in what condition soever we be, as to such viciousness or
vertuousnesse in us, We ought in soul with Love to actuate toward God the
intensest and continuallest with discretion we can and there with and thereby
and by all Other proper means ever tend toward the foresaid absolute
perfection. And even by so doing though as yet in an imperfect manner we
attain to God, unite our selves unto him and get an answerable felicity in
Him being as yet not a perfect but an imperfect one. Perfect and imperfect. I
here mean as in regard of such perfection as even this life is capable of.

7. Moreover we are to live as well and purely as we can both as to our
thoughts, words and deeds, eschewinge all sins and their occasions and doing
all the good that pertains to us to do, the which doing by us answerably
does abate and destroy the vicious habits that are in us, and introduces the
contrary, being the habits of virtue, our progress and profit therein
proceedinge from this, that by those our doings we relinquish and mortify in
some measure or other our own natural perverse Will, and cause our will (as it
is good) about those matters to accommodate and conform itself to the divine
will for the matters themselves and intentions about them. And our doings
therein are the more profitable to us for our foresaid end of Perfection (as
breedinge the greater Mortification in us) by how much they are in things
contrary to the proprietatious or vnresigned will of our corrupt nature. And
in that reguard (speakinge generally) we profitt more by matters of
abstaininge or restraininge of our selves, then by matters of mere doing or
actinge, and by matters of sufferinge more then by those either of mere doing
or actinge, or of abstayninge or restrayninge our selves. And this by reason
that the matter of suffering is less voluntary to us as more proceedinge from
the will of another, be it God, or Creature, then from our own will; the which
will of ours I mean is less abnegated or mortified in or by matter of
abstaynings or restreignings then in or by those of sufferinge: and is yet
farther less abnegated or mortifyed in or by those of mere doing or actinge,
which are more wholly of our own wills, then in or by either of those two
others siz: abstayninge, or sufferringe. Albeit indeed nevertheless all and
every of those doings or actings, abstaynings or restreignings be also good
and profitable to us in their diverse measures or degrees though therein inferior
to those of sufferinge for the reason aforesaid.

8. By Actuation in soul (being the same as mental Prayer, or Prayerin
Spirit) being duly pursued (which is with all diligence, assiduitie, and
seriousness) though as yet performed in state of imperfection, we get fowre^
Benefits or helps as toward our foresaid end, being Perfection itself
complete. 1. The first is a betteringe or increase in or toward the habit of
Prayer itself. The exercise of such Prayer being (as I have said) duly
pursued. And Perfection in Prayer being the most essential virtue or quality
in the entier composite or fabric of Perfection itself. 2. The second good
of Prayer for the foresaid end, is an increase of vertuousnesse, that is to say
in other good habits (besides that of Prayer) by mean merely of the virtuous
Acts we produce and exercise in such our Prayer; and naturally habits are
gotten by acts of their matter. 3. The third good or benefitt is some measure
of mitigatio^ or expulsion of Vicious Habits and inclinations, and an
answerable introducinge of vertuousnesse, and this merely by way of a secret
divine infusion or workinge in the soul in and by the mean of such Prayer,
that had disposed and made her capable of such infusion. 4. The fourth good of
su^^ Prayer, is light of understanding ^^^ace or strength of will for doing
(...) forminge afterward, being forth of actual Prayer in the manner and for
the end as we ought, the good things pertaininge to us to do, and eschewinge
the evil things or sins which pertain to us to eschew. And if we desist, or
be negligent as to such due exercise, and pursuit of Prayer, we shall
accordingly most certainly fail of the foresaid four proper and most happy
good effects of it; and thereby shall remain unable as not tendant toward our
foresaid end, wherein alone was to consist our souls satisfaction, and supreme
felicity.

9. Duringe the times we are forth of our actual Prayer (as always we
cannot be in it in this our state of mortality) we are to eschew as before I
have signified both as to thoughts, and as to words, and deeds, all sins and
theirs occasions, so far as we may avoid the same, and do all the good
pertayninge to us to do the best we can, and this chiefelie according to
such light, inspiration, and grace as we have for it in or by our past and
present actual Prayer; that the next to Gods Grace itself must be the root
or source of all our well doings. And without such care of ourselves and good
demeauour out of the time of Prayer, our Prayer will not avail us to the
foresaid' end; by reason that through neglect of God and our selves we thereby
destroy the good otherwise gotten by our former prayer, and withal make
further increase in evil habits. And moreover we having ever in our
intention and desire the foresaid Perfection consistinge of Purity and vnio^
and vsinge all things so far as they are of use, or appertain to us, as
means for attayninge to the said end, we must take heed and the greatest heed
not to content please or delight our selves (as making our rest or
satisfaction in them) with those other things, which at the best can be but a
mean conducinge to the said end, how worthy and noble soever otherwise those
things in themselves seem to be; as namely, and for example sake, the
performance of our obedience, externe Pouertye, Chastity, (as did the foolish
Virgins in esteem of their Virginity to their Loss of Heaven, as says S.
Gregory) frequent use of the Sacraments, Vocal Prayers, singings, though never
so much, or so well exteriorlie performed, Quality of Religious Habit,
Dignities, Offices, the Favors, o^ Loves of Superiors toward us, our exacter
observance of our Regular Discipline, and other good externe comportment of our
selves, natural Talents of Body, and mind, acquisit sciences, or skills,
esteem of our Order for the numerositie of Saints of it, or for the
Antiquity, or amplitude of it, in Countries, Howses and Persons; our
Magnificence, Beauty or Lardgenesse in Buildings, our Riches in Temporalities,
all commodiousnesse for living, with supply of all needs; The greatenesse or
singularnesse of our Privileges or Exemptions of our Order, Confraternities or
participations of the meritts of others, or Hope in their Prayers, our
fastings, Abstinences, or other corporal Austerities, our corporal Health, our
Fame and estimation with others, as for our vertuousnesse, or other cause
whatsoever; Gentry or Nobility in Birth and descent, Kindred or Alliance of
Worth, or Friendshipps or Favors with greater Personages, in sum whatsoever
we do or can do, or suffer, or whatsoever other gift or thing we have or
can have from God naturalie or supernaturallie save simply our foresaid end,
in which alone (I say) we are to sist, make and our final delight, repose,
and rest, ever aspiringe toward the same, taking and vsinge all other things
as means only (as far as they may be such indeed, and noe further or
otherwise) toward attayninge to the foresaid end wherein alone we are to rest
as the proper natural and sole satisfaction of the soul, and her consummate
happiness. And in the mean time (I say again) not adheringe in affection to
those other things, but transcendinge as well as we can and as far as
justly we may even all thoughts of them and holdinge on forwards toward the
foresaid end as the proper and sole center of our affections.

10. And so we duly pursuinge such Prayer, and living the best we can,
which is according to the Grace we have, or may have toward itt from God, we
tend toward the foresaid end of absolute Perfection, and thereby satisfy God,
and secure our own souls salvation, which otherwise we cannot do. And in
and by such tendance we pass by degrees (though perhapps but slow and low)
from that which is less perfect, to that which is more perfect, and
perseueringe in such our tendance and progress, (live we or live we not time
enough for to be able to reach to the foresaid end itself) we shall finallye
become perfectlye happy, God reguardinge and requitinge (as out of his most
free and immense Goodness He will) such our good wills and endeauours in the
said Holy affair, graciouslye acceptinge the same as fact and deed from us.
And indeed noe man in this life and state of corruption, does fullye attain to
the foresaid Perfection of the first Man, who in that state of his Loved God
with his whole Heart, mind and powers of his soul and Body. But it will suffice
us that we aim at such Perfection and faithfullye labor to attain
thereunto, in the mean time and toward it exercisinge and performinge Love to
God the best and most we can; albeit we never attain fullye and in deed to
the aforesaid perfection; but to some degree of perfection inferior to it,
which we shall attain to aiminge at and labouringe for the said more absolute
(...)

COMMENDATIO Quotidiana.
PIE Jesus ego commendo tibi animam meam and corpus meum, progressum, finemque
huius miserae vitae meae. Presta vt recessus meus ab hoc exilio sit placitus
coram te, and cum venerit ipsa Hora mortis meae concede (si est Honor Nominis
tui) vt absque impedimento mox perueniam ad Te. Fiat voluntas tua Domine Deus
meus. Commendo tibi hunc locum and Congregationem, praesente: atque absentes
Fratres nostros. Commendo tibi omnia negotia spiritualia, and temporalia, and
omnes necessitates nostras. Da vt sit sancta disciplina verae Religionis, sit
hic Humilitas Charitas and Puritas ad Gloriam Nominis tui. Commendo Ecclesiam
Catholicam. Da Reformationem morum tibi placentem In ^mnium hominum ordine.
Commendo Vicarium tuum Summu^^ Pontificem and famulum tuum Imperatorem and
Regem nostrum and Principes Christianos commendo Patrem meum, Matrem, Fratres
Sorores, Propinquos, Familiares and Benefactores Nostros, omnesque fideles tam
vivos quam defunctos, ac praecipue eos qui meis orationibus specialiter
commendati sunt. Convert quaeso and salua excaecatos miserosque peccatores.
Convert and reuoca Hareticos atque Schismaticos. Convert and illumina
infideles te adhuc ignorantes; periclitantibus subueni, maerentes consolare;
Tentationibus, doloribus, calamitatibus pressos and afflictos releua. Miserere
Domine, Miserere Omnium propter Sanctum nomen Tuum, Amen.

Amor meus Pondus meum illo feror quocumque feror. S. Aug.

DIRECTIONS.
HOW to make right use of the Devotions or forms of Prayer followinge commonly
called the Idiots Devotions, because they are for such as fervently and simply
with all their affections, Light of faith the only ^ui, and safe ground.
desire to aspire after God in the Clo^d of faith and feelings of Love without
troubleinge themselves with busye and impertinent operations of the
understanding, commonly called Meditatio^s or discourses of the
understanding, to move and excite the will, which in the case of these divine
and Seraphicke Idiots, are superfluous, they being already sufficiently, yea
abundantly excited and bent to love God, and practice virtue, through their
light of Faith, which tells and assures them, that all is vanitye of
Vanities, but. Only to Love and serve God, Ec. 1.2^
and their own innate Propension inclininge them to this end, and not
sufferinge them to rest contentedly any way else, or in any thing else; and
this natural propension, strenthned and promoted by the habit of supernatural
divine Charity, makes them run the ways of the Commandments of God he
dilating their Hearts, Ps. 119.
1. First you are to know that though these Devotions imply great perfection,
yet noe greater then every Christian of what state and condition soever is
bound unto. To wit. To the perfect Love of God above all things. That is with
all Ones heart, with all ones soul, with all ones mind. Which is the very first
Commandment. 2. Though in these Devotions there be many Act^ peculiar and
proper to Religious Persons (as principally made for them) yet single and
married lay people may make very good, profitable and proper use of the rest,
and of those acts also so far as they may make them agree with their state
and condition by some small alteration. As where it is spoken of obedience to
Superiors; it may be applied of wives to their Husbands, Children to their
Parents, single people to their Ghostly Fathers, yea of all People to their
Ghostly Fathers in a good sense. So also where it is spoken of Pouertye, it
may be understood in Spirit and affection, which all, even lay people ought to
Have. And in like manner where it is spoken of Religious offices both for
acceptinge mean and base ones, and refusinge honorable ones, may be as well
applied to lay Offices both in private familyes, and common Wealths. And thus
appropriatinge every thing to each ones particular state and condition, very
good and profitable use may be made of them all. 3. Though these Devotions be
ample and large enough, yet they cannot reach to every ones particular
occasions and necessities, wherefore they are to observe that what Devotions
may be specially inspired them, or upon some just Occasion suggested unto them
as proper and necessary for them, they ought to make use of them freely and
cheerfully though they be^ not contained in these exercises. And this
especially in the Acts of Resignation. 4. Now as concerning the manner of
exercisinge these Devotions, it ought chiefly to be done in Spirit and mind and
without any vocalitie at all, especially in beginners who would be more
distracted through such vocalitie as more sensible, and so more subject to
distraction, yet in some who have such a Grace to exercise them both vocallie
and mentallye that is spiritually; they may do well, and best it is so to
do. 5. And as concerning the quantity though they be divided into several
Exercises and those into several Acts. Yet is it not to be understood that all
the Acts of every exercise are to be used at one time; nor that one Exercise
and all its Acts only are to be used at one time, but in this discretion is to
be used, and liberty of Spirit; sometimes to use fewer, sometimes more as may
be expedient for our souls good. For it may so happen that one or two Acts of
an exercise may serve with great profitt for one whole time of Prayer, and
sometimes again 20. or 40. may not serve, and in this, as I have said, and now
I say it again (as a principal point to be observed) discreet liberty is to
be used. Yea it may so happen that not one single Act at all of the whole
book is to be used, if God so enable and replenish a soul, and this is the
Best of all. Romans 8. 26.

An Holy Idleness.


For then the Spirit asks for us with unspeakable groanings. And in this
case we must not conceive ourselves idle, or doing nothing, this is Otium
Sanctum an Holy Vacation. 6. We must be wary not to oppress our souls too
much with Vocal Prayers, as Offices of our Lady, the Dead, Litani^s etc.
which though they are very good Prayers allowed and commended by the Church,
yet are they not commanded, but left to our choice. And we need not fear, if
we discharge these mental exercises duly, we shall discharge our obligation
as to all other voluntary Prayers and Customs of devotion, be they to the
Saints, or for our Friends. For in these Exercises there is nothing neglected
so they be performed with Humility and indifferencye purely for the Love and
Honor of God and our souls Good. Yet hereby we are not to conceive our
selves Freed from such Offices, or duties as are of Obligation, but only as I
said from such as are merely Voluntary and rather a clogge and Burden to the
soul, then any advantage, or furtherance in the way of virtue. 7. It will
suffice to exercise and use daily two mental exercises, to wit, the one in
the morninge, the other at the most convenient time in the eueninge. And by
thus doing and practisinge virtue and Mortif^cation (without which Prayer
avails nothing) we shall in time come to Exercise Prayer more continually,
and by degrees draw nearer and nearer to the Perfection of continual Prayer,
to which we are exhorted and commanded by our Sauuiours saying. Luke 18.
We must pray always without ceasinge. And in this Continual prayinge
consists our Happiness present and future. We still cryinge. Holy, Holy,
Holy Lord God of Sabbath. 8. And though none can receive hurt by this
Summarie, Directions, and Devotions, yet those only will reap the greatest
profitt and make the rightest use of them, who are of an interior Propension
toward God and of Exterior and Interior sound senses, yet want perchance some
means to nourish, feed, and increase such their Propension and desire toward
God, which (I hope) they will find by these Directions and Devotions. And a
great light to know their end, and what to aim at by the Summarie. And for
such persons, of what state and condition soever, Religious, single, or married
people, it was chiefelye written, which they shall perceive more clearly by
readinge and pervsinge them, and thereby be more assured they are for their
purpose. And thereupon let them resolve to make use of them to the Honor of
God, and their Souls Good. Yea I have known some Persons who (unless these
helps had fallen into their Hand) would never have been satisfied, and quieted
in Mind, whereas once put in this way, they have experienced such Benefitt by
itt, that for ever they have been settled, and indeed Happy. For they have
found that all Other things necessary have come with itt. According to that
saying of the wise Man. All good has come with it. Venerunt mihi omnia bona
pariter cumilla. Wis. 11.
And without itt nothing. 9. And here it is to be observed that we must not
be dejected or give over our Mental Prayer though we do not find so soon
an alteration, and amendment in our life, as we hoped for. The reason is
because God many times petmitts us to fall into our wonted imperfectio^s and
Frailties for our Humility and Mortification. Again we ought to consider
that if we are so frail with this kind of Souueraigne Prayer what should we
be without itt. And this is to be remembered specially in the Acts of
Resignation where we shall perceive our Frailty more frequent and ordinary.
10. To conclud, above all it will help much to confer with such as understand
and practice these Exercises, and to have a Confessarius, or at least a
Director for some time in the Beginning; especially, til we have got some
feelinge of them, and then we may better wrestle with difficulties Alone. And
we shall easily perceive whom we are to make use of in this kind, and who
are for our purpose, and who are not. And the like may be said of Books. What
Books, or Parts or Parcells of Books relish with our Spirits, breed discreet
fervor and Devotion in us, those we are to make use of and be conversant in;
such as breed Fear, Scruples, Troubles, Confusion, and disquiet of Mind etc.
they are not for our purpose, neither do they concern us. And thus doing,
we shall make right use of all Books, and Confessors, and reap profitt and
noe harm by them; which God send we may. Jesus.


A Catalogue of such Books as may much help, comfort, and increase the
Devotion of Contemplative spirits, such as are well grounded, and instructed
already in the Catholic Faith and have passed through the necessary
rudiments of active Preparations.
For such and in very deed only such This Summarie, Instructions, Catalogue,
and Exercises are by me set Forth, and for None Other intended.
A
All the Venerable Father Augustine Bakers Manuscripts of the Holy Order of S.
Benedict of the English Cong^, which are kept as Precious treasures (as indeed
they are) in the English Monastery of Comfort of she same Order, and Cong^. at
Cambraye. And all that is in this Summarie, Directions, Exercises, and what
else in this treatise is taken out of these Manuscripts, and if any thing to
be reproved; it is to be attributed to him who set them forth.

B.
All S. Bernards works.

S. Bonauentures little works, or opuscula.

Fath. Bennet Canfields Books of the three wills.

C.
The Works of Climachus.

Cassianus Works corrected.

The Colloquies of S. Catherine of Siena.

D.
Dionysius Areopagita his Misticke Divinity.

The little work of Dionysius the Carthusian of Contemplation.

The Works of S. Dorotheus.

G.
The Works of S. Gregory the great.

H.
Hugo of S. Victor.

Harphins his Misticke Dininitie according to the Roman impression.

I.
The golden Book of John Gersen of the Imitation of Christ.

John of the Cross.

L.
Lincolniensis: or Hugo Bishop of Lincoln.

R.
Regnum Dei intra nos. Or the Kingdom of God within us.

Rusbrochius his Works.

Richard of S. Victors Works.

The Revelations of Saint Gertrude, and Saint Brigitt.

S.
The Scale of Perfection.

Suso his life and Works.

The Secret Paths, of divine Love.

T.
Thaulerus his life, and Works.

S. Teresa Her works, and Her life written by Herself.

V.
Vitae Patrum, or the Lives of the Fathers.

Many other Books there are more th^n I can number up, very proper for thee,
which obuiously may happen into thy hands; but these I only reckon up, that
thou may easilye find out devout Reader what may serve thy turn; and to save
thee a labor never look to find any Book for thy turn in this way written
by any of the Society of Jesus, whose genius is the active way, and in that
they are excellent, and very commendable, but in this contemplative way few or
none has appeared ever since their first institute above these hundred years.

Vanity of Vanity, and all is Vanity. Eccles. 1.
But only to love, to love and serve God.
Though thou a fair house have, and splendid fare What then?
A spowse, or concubine without compare. What then?
And Blist with numerous issue, large extents. What then?
Yea fair, strong, rich in all accomplishment. What then?
If Prior, Abbot, Prince, or Pope thou be. What then?
Courted by the world, and all prosperity. What then?
Let fortunes wheel advance thee above the skies. What then?
Live here ten thousand years in Paradise, What then?
Then virtue only does remain by which true Glory thou shall gain. The world
passes away, and the concupiscence thereof. 1. Io. 2.17.
JESUS son of david have mercy on me. GOD be mercieful to me a sinner.
Luc^ 1^. ^^ 1^.


HOLY EXERCISES OR SAINCTLY IDIOTS DEVOTIONS. THE POENITENT.
THE FIRST EXERCISE.
1. WHO shall give to my head water, and to mine eyes a fountain of Tears
that I may bewail both day and night my sins and ingratitude toward God my
Creator.

2. Consider (o my soul) the multitude of the Benefits of God bestowed upon
thee, and be thou confoun (...)

16. Amongst so many infidels as are in the world, thou have brought me to
thy Faith and Baptism.

17. There that covenant was made that thou should be mine, and I thine; thou
my Lord and I thy servant; thou my Father, and I thy child. That thou should
behave thy self as a Father toward me, and I as a child toward thee.

18. What shall I say of the other Sacraments which thou have instituted for
remedies of my evils, making a plaster for my sins of thy own most
precious Blood.

19. Haueinge these helps yet have I not remained in goodness, but my
wickedness has been so great, that I have lost my first Innocence.

20. And thy Mercy on the other side so great that thou have patiently
hitherto expected me.

21. O my Hope and Sauuiour how can I without tears call to my remembrance how
oftentimes thou might iustlye have bereaved me of my life?

22. How many thousand souls now peradventure burn in hell who have less
sinned then I, and yet I burn not there.

23. What had become of me, if thou had taken me away, when thou tookst
them.

This is continued in the ensuinge Exercise.

THE II. EXERCISE.
WHO then o Lord bound the hands of thy Justice?

2. Who held the rod of thy judgments when as I by sinninge provoked thee?

3. What pleased thee in me that thou did deal more dearly with me then
with others?

4. My sins cried unto thee, and thou stoppedst thine ears.

5. My malice every day increased against thee; and thy merit every day
increased toward me.

6. I sinned, and thou expectedst.

7. I Fled away, and thou Followedst me.

8. I was wearied in sinninge, and thou were not wearied in expectinge.

9. In the midst of my sins I received from thee diverse good inspirations.

10. What shall I now render o Lord unto thee for all these benefitts which I
have received of thee?

11. Because thou have created me I owe thee all that I am.

12. Because thou have preserved me, I owe thee all that I am and my life.

13. Because thou have given me thy self what shall I render to thee?

14. If all the Lives of Angels and men were mine and that I should offer them
all unto thee as a Sacrifice, what were this Oblation if it were compared with
one drop of thy Blood, which thou have shed for me so abundantly?

16. Who therefore will give Tears to mine eyes that I may bewail my
ingratitude, and wicked retribution, or requital of these thy so many
benefits?

16. Help me o Lord, and give me Grace that I may worthylye bewail mine
iniquities?

17. For I am that unhappy wretch who has sinned against heaven and before
thee.

18. I am thy Creature made accordi^ge to thy Image, take away from me that
which I have made and know that which thou have made.

19. I have bent all my forces to do thee injury, and have offended thee by
the works of my hands.

20. The things which thou have given and created for me to be employed and
used for thy service and Honor, I have wrougfullie and most unthankfully
converted and employed the same to thy offense and dishonor.

This is continued in the ensuinge Exercise.

THE III. EXERCISE.
1. MY feet have been swift to evil, and mine eyes have been dissolute to
Vanity, and mine ears have been always open to trifles, and toys.

2. My understanding which should have contemplated thy Beauty, and have
meditated both day and night on thy Commandments has considered transitory
toys, and meditated day and night how to transgress thy said Commandments.

3. My will was by thee invited to the Love of celestial delights and
delicacies, but I preferred the earth before heaven.

4. I have spread my Arms which thou have consecrated to thy love to embrace,
and hug the filthy Love of Creatures.

5. This is o Lord the reward, this is the Fruit which I, thy Creature have
yielded.

6. Alas. What can I a wretch answer if thou entrest with me into Judgment,
and wilt say; I have planted thee a chosen vineiard all true seed, how then o
strange vineiard art thou turned in my sight into that which is depraved?

7. And if I cannot answer to this first question concerning my Creation, how
shall I answer the second concerning my conversation?

8. Thou o merciful God have preserved him by thy providence who has thought
of noe other thing, but how to violate thy Commandments, and to set up the
Kingdom of sin against thee.

9. Thou have moved that tongue which dishonored thee, thou have governed those
members which offended thee.

10. In so much as I have not only been ungrateful for thy benefits, but
used thy benefits also themselves as weapons against thee.

11. Thou have made all creatures for my use to allure me to love thee, I have
abused them, and of them have diverse times taken occasion of sin.

12. I have made choice rather of the gift, then the giver.

13. I have been blinded by them, and have not lifted up mine ey^s at the
sight of them.

14. I have not considered how much more beautiful the Creator is, then the
creature.

15. Thou have given me all things that I should give thee my self; and all
things have served me, but I never have given thee Glory, or paid thy
tributedue.

16. Thou have given me health, and the devil has gathered the fruits
thereof.

17. Thou have given me strenth and I have spent it in the service of Thin^
enemy.

18. What shall I say? wherefore have not all the calamities and miseries which
I have known to have fallen upon other men and touched not me, been a
sufficient argument to me that my delivery from every one of them was a
peculiar benefit from thee?

19. O most gracious Lord shall I be ungrateful for these Benefits?

20. If the fierceness and cruelty of Lions and serpents be assuaged with
benefits, why shall not thy benefits be sufficient to tame and assuage my
sinful Heart?

This is continued in the Followinge Exercise.

THE IV. EXERCISE.
1. BUT if so strict an account shall be demanded for these things which cost
thee so little what account will thou ask of those which thou have bought to
thy self with thy most precious Blood.

2. How have I perverted thy Counsels?

3. How have I violated the Mystery of thine Incarnation?

4. Thou were made man to make me a God, I have made my self a beast, and the
slave of the Devil.

5. Thou have come down to the earth to bring me to heaven, and I have not
harkened to or acknowledged this high Vocation.

6. But have perseuered in wickedness, and in the dirt and mire of my
baseness.

7. Thou had delivered me, I have cast my self again headlonge into my old
bondage.

8. Thou had raised me, I have again embraced death.

9. Thou had made me one Body with thee, and I have joined my self again
with the di^ell.

10. So many, and so great Benefits could not do so much, as make me know
thee.

11. Nor so many tokens of Love, make me requite thee with Love.

12. Nor so many deserts, and gifts make me hope in thee.

13. Nor such a strict kind of justice, as appeared in thy Passion make me
fear thee.

14. Thou have humbled thy self even to the dust of the earth, I puff my
self up with pride.

15. Thou did hang naked on the Cross, I seek the world and worldly
delights.

16. Thou being God were buffeted; if any man touch my garment who am only a
most vile worm, I presentlye become colericke.

17. What shall I say my sweet Sauuiour? behold how great thy mercy and
charity is toward me.

18. Thou would dye to kill my sins; and ^ persuminge in thy said Mercy,
Goodness, and Love have ^ot feared to sin against thee, what greater
impiety can be imagined?

19. I have taken occasion of thy Goodness to work malice; and by that mean
which thou have used to kill sin, I have taken occasion to raise again sin
in my self.

20. Because thou were so good, I thought I might without prejudice be evil.

21. And because thy Benefits were so many I thought I might without
punishment render unto thee, as many injuries.

This is further continued in the ensuinge Exercise.

THE V. EXERCISE.
1. THVS have I made thy medecines occasions of sinne^ and I have turned that
sword which I received of thee to defend my self from mine enemies against my
own bowels, and with the same murdered mine own soul.

2. Finally thou diedst (as we are taught by the Apostle) that they that now
live may not live to themselves but unto thee.

3. And I as the child of Iezable have made thy Death as a mean to deprive my
self of thy blessings by Flyinge from thy service, and making my self the
Bondslaue of thine enemies.

4. Alas what does he deserve who commits such enormities?

5. If dogs have eaten the flesh of Iezable, what will become of me?

6. If the Apostle make it so heinous a matter, of the Law itself to take an
occasion to break the Law how great is my malice who of Grace and Mercy have
taken an occasion to offend Grace and Mercy itself?

7. O most Patient Lord who for sinners have suffered buffetts; but far more
patient in sufferinge sinners. Will this thy patience ^ndure for ever?

8. I remember what thou have said by the Prophet, I have held my peace I have
kept silence, I have been Patiint as one that has been labouringe with
child. I will speak.

9. I see that the earth that yeldeth not fruict after rain is rejected and
cursed.

10. I see that the vineyard which being well tilled producinge noe grapes but
wild vines by thee is commanded to be destroyed.

11. Wherefore o unprofitable and fruitless branch do thou not fear the
voice of that potent husbandman, that dresser of the vineyard, who (as truth
itself reports) takes away all branches not bearinge fruicte, and casts
them into the fire?

12. What shall I do my Lord, what shall I do? I confess I am not worthy to
appear in thy sight, nor to behold thee.

13. Whither shall I fly from thy Face?

14. Art not thou my Father and in very truth a Father of Mercies which have
noe end, or measure?

15. For though I have (as much as lay in me) for a long time desisted to be
thy child; yet thou even to this present, do not desist to be my Father.

16. Although I have done many things worthy of damnation, yet thou have not
desisted to save me.

17. What then shall I do but cast my self down at thy Feet, and humbly
crave Mercy?

18. Art not thou?

My Creator, My Preserver, My Redeemer, My Deliverer, My King, My Pastor, My
Priest, and My Sacrifyce.
19. Whither then shall I go? whither then shall ^ fly but unto thee?

20. If thou repel me, who will receive me?

21. If thou reject me, of whom shall I seek succor?

22. Acknowledge o Lord and receive this sheep that has run a stray.

23. Behold I come full of wounds, thou can heal me.

24. I come all blind thou can give me sight.

25. I come all dead thou can raise me.

26. I come all full of leprosy, thou can make me clean.

27. Thou shall sprinkle me (o Lord) with I soap (with thy precious blood shed
for me) and I shall be made clean.

28. Thou shall wash me, and I shall be made whiter then snow.

29. Thy mercy is greater then my iniquity, thy clemency, exceeds my
malice; and thou can forgive more, then I can sin.

30. Do not therefore o Lord, do not repel and reject me.

31. Do not consider the multitude of my sins, but thine infinite mercy.

32. I resign my self wholye into thy hands.

33. Thou o God who art able to do all things, convert me unto thee, renew my
Spirit.

34. Enlighten my understanding, sanctyfie my will, increase my strenth of
Body and soul.

35. That I may depend only on thee, Fear and love thee above all things, and
serve thee feruentlye.

36. And in all my actions hereafter to conform my self to thy blissed will
and pleasure.

37 I beseech thee finallye to impart unto me thine abundant effectual Grace
by which I may be able to begin to lead a perfect and holy life, and to
serve thee perfectlye and throughlye even to the end.

Here end the 5. Exercises of Contrition.

THE VI. EXERCISE.
1. TAKE pity o Lord, take pity o merciful Sauuiour of me most miserable
sinner, doing things worthy of blame, and worthylye sufferinge for the same.

2. Being by thee daily afflicted, for that I am continuallye found to have
offended.

3. If I ponder the evil which I daily committ, that which I endure is
nothing in comparison of it.

4. That which I have done being much more greiuous then my Affliction. Thou
art just o Lord, and right is thy judgment. All thy judgments most just, and
true.

5. Thou o Lord our God art just and full of goodness neither is there in thee
any wickedness.

6. Because when we offend thou do not unjustly and cruellye afflict us,
who when we were not have powrefullye made us, and when for our sins we were
guilty of damnation thou have by thy wonderful Mercy, and goodness set us
in the state of Salvation.

7. I know o Lord God and am assured that our life is not governed by
uncertain chances but wholye disposed and ordered by thy Awful power and
providence.

8. Thou therefore take care of all things, but especially of such as serve
the, who put their confidence in thy only mercy.

9. Wherefore I humblye beseech thee that thou will not deal with me
according to mine iniquities by which I have deserved thine anger, but
according to thy manifold mercyes which surmount the sins of the whole world.

10. Thou o Lord who do punish me outwardlye give always an invincible
Patience inwardlye to the end may never cease to praise thee.

11. Take pittye of me o Lord and help me both in soul and Body.

12. Thou I say who know all things and art able to do all things
whatsoever, who live and rieguest for ever and ever.

13. O Lord Jesus Christ the Son of the living God who with thy hands
stretched forth on the Cross have drunk the bitter cupp of thy Passion for
the Redemption of all mankind, succor me this Day I beseech thee.

14. Behold o Lord, that I that am needy do come to thee who art wealthy; I
that am full of misery do approach to thee replenished with mercy, suffer
me not therefore to depart void or as one worthy to be despised.

15. I begin hungry, let me not end empty.

16. I approach as one hunger starned, let me not depart vnfedd.

17. And if I sigh before I eat grant that I may at least eat after I have
sighed.

18. First therefore most sneete Jesus before the magnificence of thy
sweetness, I confess against me my injustice.

19. Behold o Lord whereas I was conceived and borne in sin, thou have wa^hed
and sanctified me from the same; and I after this have I defiled my self with
greater offenses.

20. Those wherein I was borne were of necessity, but those in which I
afterward lay wallowinge were voluntary.

This is continued in the followinge Exercise.

THE VII. EXERCISE.
1. THIS notwithstanding, thou o Lord being not unmindful of thy Mercy and
goodness have drawn me from my Fathers house and from the tabernacles of
sinners.

2. And thou inspiredst me with thy Grace to follow the company of those who
seek thy Face, who walk the direct way that leads to felicity, living
amongst the Lillies of Chastity, and sittinge at the table with thee in the
parlour of most profound poverty.

14. As I have sinned, so do thou correct, and amend me.

15. And being by the stripes of thy Fatherly Pity ^orrected and amended,
committ me to the care and custody of thy only begotten Son Jesus Christ
our Lord.

16. Is it possible for a women to forgett the child of her own womb?

17. And though she should forgett, o most louinge Father thou have promised
not to be unmindful.

18. Behold I cry and thou do not hear me?

19. I am afflicted with with grief, and thou do not comfort me?

20^ O what shall I say or do in this extreme misery? Alas I am altogether
comfortless and which is worse am chased out of thy presence.

21. Wretch that I am from how great good into how great evil am I fallen?

22. Whither did I attempt to go, and whither am I come?

23. Where am I, and where am I not?

24. How is it that I, that did sigh after heaven; do now sigh through so
great Tribulation?

25. I have sought comfort, and have Found affliction.

26. And truly it is better for me not to be, then to be without thee sweet
Jesus.

27. It is better not to live then to live without thee the only true life.

This Exercise is continued in the Followinge.

THE VIII. EXERCISE.
WHERE are now o Lord Jesus thy accustomed Mercies?

2. Will thou be displeased with me for ever?

3. Be appeased I beseech thee and take pity on me, and turn not thy
louinge Face away from me, who to redeem me have not turned away thy Face
from those who did mock and spitt at thee.

4. I confess that I have sinned and my conscience does adiudge me worthy of
damnation, neither is my penance sufficient to make satisfaction.

5. Nenerthelesse it is most certain that thy mercy does surmount all
offenses whatsoever be they never so abominable.

6. Wherefore o most merciful Lord I beseech thee do not write down my
malicious bitterness, neither enter into Judgment with thy servant.

7. But according to the multitude of thy mercies blott out mine iniquities.

8. Woe be to me at the day of Judgment when the books of our consciences
shall be opened (wherein our Actions are registered) when of me it shall be
openly proclaimed. See here a man and his works.

9. What shall I do O my Lord a^ that dreadful day when the Heavens shall
reveal mine iniquity. And the earth shall bear witness against me.

10. Verilye I shall be mute and able to say nothing, but holdinge down my
head through shame and confusion, I shall stand before thee shakinge, and
blushinge.

11. Alas, what shall I say? I will call and cry unto thee, o Lord my God, why
am I consumed being silent?

12. Nevertheless, if I speak my grief will not cease.

13. And if I hold my peace I shall interiorlie be tormented with insupportable
bitterness.

14. Weep o my soul and make lamentation, as a young married weoman for the
death of her Husband.

15. Weep and be wayle thy misery, for that thy bridegroom, who is Christ,
has forsaken thee.

16. O Anger of the Almighty rush not upon me, for I cannot subsist against
t^^e.

17. Ver^^^e there is nothing in me that is able to sustain thee.

18. Take pity on me, least I despair of thy Mercy; that by dispairinge of
my self I may find comfort in confidinge in thee.

19. And albeit I have done that for which thou may iustlye condemn me, yet
thou have not lost thy accustomed property of shewinge mercy, and pity.

20. Thou o Lord do not desire the death of sinners, neither do thou take
pleasure in the perdition of those that dye.

21. Nay rather that those who were dead might live, thou thy self ha^^ died,
and thy death has been the death of that death that was due to sinners, and
they by thy Death are come to life.

22. Grant me I beseech thee O Lord that thou living I may not die; since
that thy death has given life, much more let thy life give life.

23. Let thy heavenly ^^^d help me and deliver me from the hands of those
that hate me least they insult and rejoice over me saying we have devoured
Him.

THE IX. EXERCISE.
1. HOW is it possible o good Jesus that ever any one can despair of thy
mercy who when we were thine enemies thou have redeemed us with thy precious
Blood, and have reconciled us to God?

2. Behold o Lord protected by thy mercy I run crauinge pardon to the Throne
of thy Glory, calling and knockinge until thou take pity on me.

3. For if thou have called us to pardon even when we did not seek it, how
much more shall we obtain pardon, if we ask it.

4. Remember not thy justice o most sweet Jesus toward me a sinner.

5. But be mindful of thy mercy toward me thy creature.

6. Remembeh not thy Anger toward me guilty, but be mindful of thy Mercy
toward me in misery.

7. Forgett my pride prouokinge thee to displeasure and weigh my
wretcheu^nesse^ imploringe thy Favor.

8. For what do thy sacred name Jesus signify but only a Savior.

9. Wherefore o Sauuiour Jesus be thou my succor and protection, and say unto
my soul, I am thy Salvation.

10. I do presume very much on thy divine Bounty because thou thy self do
teach us to ask, seek and knock at the door of thy mercy.

11. Wherefore I do ask seek and knock at thy door, as thou have
admonished me to do.

12. Thou therefore o Lord who willest me to ask grant that I may receive.

13. Thou do counsel me to seek, grant me likewise to find.

14. Thou do teach me to knock, open unto me knockinge at the door of thy
Mercy.

15. Recover me being diseased, repair me being craised, raise me^ being
dead.

16. Vouchsafe likewise so to direct and govern all my senses, thoughts and
Actions in that which is pleasinge unto thee.

17. That from henceforth I may faithfullye serve thee, live to thee, and give
my self wholye unto thee.

18. I know my Lord that by reason thou have made me, I owe my self unto thee.

19. And by reason thou have redeemed me and have been made Man for me, I
do owe (if I had it to give thee) much more then my self unto thee, by how
much thou art greater then I who have given thy self for me.

20. Behold I have nothing else to give thee neither can I give thee this
without thee.

21. Take me therefore and draw me unto thee that so I may be thine by
imitation, and affection, like as I am by Condition, and Creation, who live
and reignest world without end. Amen.

THE X. EXERCISE.
1. O Lord God Almighty who art Trinity in Vnitie^ who art always in all
things, and were before all things and wilt be in all things everlastingly,
one blissed God for all Eternity.

2. To thee this and all the days of my life I commend my soul, my body, my
seeinge, my hearing, taste, smell, and touching.

3. All my cogitations, Affections, Words, and Actions.

4. All things that I have without and within me, my sense and understanding,
my Memory, Faith, and Belief, and my constancy in well doing. All these I
commend into the hands of thy powerful protection.

5. To the end that all the nights and days, hours, and moments of my life,
thou preserve and direct me.

6. Hear me o sacred Trinity and preserve me from all evil, from all
Mortal sin.

7. And from all the deceites and Vexations of the Devil, and of all mine
enemies visible, and invisible.

8. By the Prayers of the Patriarchs, by the suffrages of the Apostles, by the
Constancy of the Martirs.

9. By the Faith of the Confessors, by the Chastity of the Virgins, and by the
intercession of all the Saints who have pleased and Faithfullye served thee
since the world begun.

10. Root out of my heart all vainglorious ostentation, and increase in me
the Spirit of compunction.

11. Abate my Pride, and increase my Humility.

12. Stir me up to tears and contrition, and mollify my Heart being hard
as a stone.

13. Deliver me, and my soul o Lord from all the sna^es of my Ghostlye
enemies, and preserve me in the performance of that which is most pleasinge
unto thee.

14. Teach me to do thy will o Lord because thou art my God.

15. Grant me o Lord perfect sense, and intelligence whereby I may be able to
know, and acknowledge thy meruaylous great kindness.

16. Grant that my petitions may be such as that they may be pleasinge to
thee, and profitable to my self.

17. Grant me tears flowinge from my whole Affection, which may be able to
dissolve the bands of my sins.

18. Hear me o My Lord, and My God, Hear me o light of mine eyes.

19. Hear what I demand, and grant that thou may hear what I demand.

20. If thou despise me I shall perish, and be consumed, if thou respect me,
I shall live.

This is continued in the ensuinge exercise.

THE XI. EXERCISE.
1. IF thou o Lord examine my righteousness I shall be found as a dead Man
stinkinge through rottenness.

2. But if thou behold me with the eye of thy mercy, thou will thereby raise
me (being through sin but a carcass) from the sepulcher of mine iniquity.

3. Whatsoever thou hate o Lord ^n me, expel, and root out of me.

4. And plant in me the Spirit of Chastity, and continency to the end that
whatsoever I shall demand of ^hee, in my demand I may not offend ^hee.

^. Take from me that which is hurt^ull, and give me that is profitable.

6. Give me a medicine o Lord by which the soars of my soul may be healed.

7. Bestow upon me o Lord thy Fear, compunction of Heart, Humility, and a
conscience Free from all sin.

8. Grant me Grace o Lord that I may be always able to live in charity with
my Brethren, not forgettinge my own sins, or pryinge into the sins, or
doings of other men.

9. Pardon my soul, Pardon my sins. Pardon mine offenses; Pardon mine
abominations.

10. Visit me Weakened; Cure me diseased; Refresh me wearied. Raise me dead.

11. Take pity o God, take pity of me, and behold me from the sacred
seat of thy sacred Majesty.

12. Grant me o Lord a heart tha^ may fear thee, a mind that may lou^ thee, a
sense that may conceive thee, eyes that may see thee.

13. And illuminate the darkness of my heart with the bright beams of thy
light.

14. Give me o Lord discretion to be able to discern betwixt good and evil,
and enduemee with an understanding that is always watchful.

15. I humblye crave pardon of all my sins, I humbly crave it (o Lord) of
thee from, whom and by whom I hope to find Favor in the time of necessity.

16. O Marie Mother of God; Mother of Jesus Christ our Lord, thou sacred and
unspotted Virgin vouchsafe to make intercession for me unto him who made thee
a worthy temple for himself to dwell in.

17. O S. Michael, O S. Gabriel, O S. Raphael.

18. O holy Quires of Angels and Archangells, of Patriarchs and Prophets, of
Apostles, and Evangelists, O S. Peter and S. John, of Martyrs, o blissed S.
Thomas of Canterbury. of Doctors o Blissed S. Gregory our Apostle; of Priests
and Levites, o Venerable Bede; of Monks, and Ermites o Holy Father S. Bennet,
of Virgins o Blissed S. Scholastica, and of all such as have lived holylye and
Religiouslye.

19. I presume to beseech you even for his sake by whom you have been elected,
and by whose contemplation you are extreamelye delighted, and fullye satiated.

20. That you will be pleased to pray for me a poor sinner unto him our God,
that I may be delivered from the furious laws of the infernal fiend, and
from that death which never shall have end.

This is continued in the followinge Exercise.

THE XII. EXERCISE.
1. VOuchsafe o Lord according to thy meekness, and unspeakable Mercy to
make me pertaker of eternal felicity.

2. Grant, o Lord that Priests may live in concord, and that Kings and
Princes rulinge as they ought to do may be united in peace and tranquillity.

3. I humbly crave Grace (o Lord) for the whole Catholic Church, for Men, and
women, for Religious Persons, and for secular people, for all Christian
Magistrates, and for all that believe in thee, and labor for thy holy Love,
that they may persevere in doing well all the days of their life.

4. Grant o Lord, and king eternall^ to Virgins Purity, to Religious Persons
who have dedicated themselves unto thee, the gift of Chastity; to married
folks Holiness of life.

5. To such as are truly sorrowful for their sins forgiveness; to Widows,
and Orphans succor.

6. Protection to those that are poor, to Travelers a safe return to their
Home, comfort to such as mourn.

7. To the faithful departed the present repose of Heaven, to mariners, and
such as sail on the sea their desired Port, or Haven.

8. To those who have attained to Perfection Grace, increase, and perseverance;
to beginners, and proficients in virtue Grace to do better, and better.

9. To sinners and to such as offend (as to me poor wretch) that they may
speedilye Amend.

10. O most mild and merciful Lord and Savior, son of the living God the
worlds Redeemer amongst all men and in all things I confess my self to be a
miserable sinner.

11. Nevertheless I beseech thee most sweet and souueraigne father, that as
an Abject I may not be cast out of thy Favor.

12. Yea rather o Lord thou who art King of Kings and have determined and
decreed the lenth of each Man's life, grant me a devout desire to amend mine.

13. Stire up my sluggish soul to the end that at all times, and in all
things, it may seek, desire, love, and fear thee who in all places art three
and one; and may put in practice that which is pleasinge to thee.

14. Especially I beseech thee o Holy Father who art blissed and glorious for
ever, that thou will mercifully preserve all those who in their Prayers are
mindful of me, or have commended themselves to mine.

15. Those likewise who have showed toward me any deed of Charity, or pity.

16. And those also that are joined to me in Blood, and affinity as well
those who are dead, as those who yet live in this mortal Body to the end that
thou guidinge and assistinge them they may not perish euerlastinglye.

17. In general, I beseech thee o Lord to aid, and succor all Christians that
are yet living, and on those that are dead to bestow pardon, and life
everlasting.

18. Finallye o Lord: I most humblye, and hartylie beseech thee (who art the
Alpha, and Omega: the beginning, and endinge) that when the time is come I
must dye thou will be a mild and merciful Judge, and a perpetual Protector to
me against the Accusations, and snares of the Devil mine old adversary.

19. Admit me for ever into the society of the Holy Angels.

20. And of all thy Saints in thy Heavenly cittye where thou art blissed and
praised for all Eternity. Amen.

THE XIII. EXERCISE.
1. O Lord Jesus Christ, My Redemption, My Mercy, and my Salvation.

2. I praise thee, and give thee thanks albeit far short of thy benefits,
wholly void of Devotion and Fervor; lean, and without the desired fattnesse of
that most sueete Affection which thou do require, and deserve.

3. Nevertheless my soul does render thee thanks, such as they are, not such
as I know to be owinge, and due unto thee.

4. But such as I am able to endeavor such does my Soul render unto thee.

5. O Hope of my heart, o strenth of my soul may it please thy omnipotent
Worthynesse to accomplish what my wonderful great weakness does attempt to
perform being thou art my life, and the scope of my intention.

(...) sire, sigh, and covet to come to thee.

17. And as a poor distressed child deprived of the presence of his tender
hearted Father does with sighs, and robbs incessantlye embrace in his heart the
Image, and semblance of his father. So fares it with me as often as I call
to mind thy bitter Passion: when I call to mind also the buffetts, and whipps
by thee sustained, the greiuous wounds by thee endured. When I remember in what
cruel manner thou have been crucified, and murdered; in what manner thou
have (by thy dear friends) been enbalmed, and buried; a^ often likewise as
thy Glorious Resurrection, and admirable Ascension do occur to my Memory.
All these things I believe most firmelye lamentinge with Tears the Calamities
of my exile in this veil of misery. My only hope is the comfort of thy
comeinge, my chief desire is to behold thee face to face in thy heavenly
habitation.

18. I cannot but greiue for that I have not seen thee o Lord of Angels
debasinge thy self to converse, and live amongst men, that by that means thou
might exalt men to Angelical conversation; when God did dye who was
offended, that man might live who had offended.

19. I cannot but greiue that I have not deserved to be present, and to be
astonished through admi^ation of a work so wonderful and unspeakable
compassion.

20. How is it o my soul that the sword of most sharp sorrow does not pierce
thee to the heart, seeinge thou could not be present to behold the side of thy
Sauuiour wounded with a spear?

21. Seeinge thou could not be present to behold the feet and hands of thy
Maker to be fastened with nails, nor the blood of thy Redeemer to be spilt on
the ground in that dreadful manner?

This is continued in the followinge Exercise.

THE XIV. EXERCISE.
1. WHY art thou not drunk with the Bitterness of tears, seeinge he was
made to drink of the bitterness of Gall?

2. Why do thou not take compassion of the most chaste Virgin Marie, his most
worthy Mother, and thy most worthy Lady?

3. O my most merciful lady what fountains of Tears may I affirm to have
flowed from thy most chaste eyes when thou beheldst thy only son (though free
from all offense) to be bound, whipped, and slain in thy presence?

4. In what mournful manner may I imagine thy doleful countenance at that
time to be blubbered all over with weepinge, when thou beheldst this thy
innocent son thy God and thy Lord to be stretched out upon the Cross and
that sacred flesh framed of thy flesh to be by those bloody butchers so
cruellye rent in Pieces?

5. With what unspeakable grief may I well think thy poor heart at that time
to be tormented when thou did hear those words pronounced. Weoman behold thy
son. And to the Disciple. Behold thy Mother? when thou did accept of the
Disciple instead of his Master, and the servant in Ieiu of his Lord?

6. O that I had been worthy with Joseph to have taken my Lord down from the
Cross, to have enbaulmed, and buried him, to have followed, or accompanied him
to his sepulcher that so I might have done some little service at so great a
funeral!

7. I am as a poor fatherless child, and my soul is as a weoman bereaved of
her husband in the Absence of my buried Lord.

8. Vouchsafe graciouslye to behold the tears of my distressed Orphancie and
widdowhood, which I offer unto thee, until thou return o my God.

9. May it please thee therefore, may it please thee o Lord to manifest thy
self to me, and I shall be comforted.

10. Grant that I may see thee, and I shall obtain what I desire.

11. Make manifest thy Glory, and my joy will be accomplished.

12. My soul has thristed after thee, and so has likewise my flesh
exceedingly.

13. My soul has thirsted after my God the living fountain; when shall I
come, and be presented before the face of my Lord?

14. When will thou come o my comforter: for whom I will wish, and earnestlye
wait?

15. O that I might once behold my delight which I do so much desire?

17. O how truly shall I be satisfied when thy Glory shall appear which I
greatelye hunger to behold?

17. When shall I, become drunk through the plenty of thy heavenly
habitation, for which I sigh often?

18. When will thou make me to drink of the river of thy pleasure, which I
so much thirst after?

19. In the mean while let my Tears be my continual food until it be said
unto me behold thy God; until it be said unto my soul behold thy Bridegroom.

20. In the mean while feed me with my sobbs and tears, nourish me with my
sorrows and lamentations.

21 Peradventure my Redeemer will come and visit me, because he is full of
Mercy, he will not be long in coming because He is full of Pittye to him
be Glory for all Eternity. Amen.

THE XV. EXERCISE.
1. O Lord my God grant unto my heart to desire thee, by desiringe thee to,
seek thee, by seekinge, to find thee, by findinge, to love thee, by louinge
thee, to ga^ne pardon of my sins heretofore committed, and being pardoned,
to committ them noe more?

2. Grant o Lord God repentance to my heart, and sorrow to my spirit.

3. O my King extinguish in me the heat of unlawful lust, and kindle in me
the fire of thy love!

4. O my Redeemer expel from me the Spirit of Pride, and Arrogancy, and
mercifullye grant me the treasure of thy humility.

5. O my Sauuiour remove from me all anger, and testiness, and gratiouslye
give me the shield of patience, and meekness.

6. O my Creator root out of me all bitterness of Affection and bestow on
me the sweetness of a mild disposition.

7. Give unto me most merciful father a firm faith, true hope, and
everlasting Charity.

8. O my God, my Mercy, I beseech thee for thy beloved sonns sake, grant unto
me to take pity on the afflicted, to pardon such as have offended me, to
love those, who hate me, and to render good for evil.

9. To despise noe-man, but rather reverence all Men.

10. To embrace Patience in adversities, and Temperance in prosperities.

11. To tread underfoot by contempt all temporal things, and greatelye to
desire those that are eternal.

12. Behold o my Maker I have now requested of thee many things, and those not
small, albeit I deserve nothing at all.

13. I confess alas, I confess that I do not only not deserve these gifts,
and Graces which I have demanded; but great, and greiuous torments to be
inflicted upon me.

14. Publicans notwithstanding, harlots, and theefes do enbolden me, who on
a sudden being delivered out of the Jaws of the ghostlye adversaries, are
received into the boosome of their true shepherd.

15. For thou o God the Maker of all things, though in all thy works thou art
full of Admiration, yet art thou most to be admired in thy works, of Mercy,
and compassion.

16. Whereupon by a certain servant of thine thou have said of thy self. His
Mercies are above all his Works.

17. And as speakinge of one, we hope thou have said of all thy people. I will
not take away my Mercyes from Him.

18. For thou disdainest noe Man, dispisest noe Man, unless peradventure such
an One, as, being as it were besides himself, shall hate thee.

19. Thou therefore not only forbearest to strike when thou art angry, but
likewise give gifts, and graces to those that have provoked thee, if they
shall cease from living wickedlye.

20. O my God the horn of my health and my Refuge, I vn^appie creature, I have
provoked thee, I have sinned against thee, I have incensed thine Anger, and
deserved thy displeasure!

This is continued in the ensuinge Exercise.

THE XVI. EXERCISE.
1. I Have sinned thou suffer me, I have done amiss, and yet thou look
not angrylie upon me.

2. If I repent thou do pardon me, if I return, thou receiuest me, yea
moreover whilst I delay to do it thou expectest me.

3. Thou recallest me wandringe, thou inuitest me resistinge, thou waitest
for me lingringe, thou embracest me returninge.

4. Thou instructest me simple, thou comfortest me sorrowful.

5. Thou raisest me from sin, thou ^^pairest me after I am fallen.

6. Thou give when I ask, thou vonchsafest to be found when I seek thee,
and when I knock, thou openest unto me.

7. Behold o Lord God of my Salvation, what to object I know not, what answer
to make I am ignorant?

8. There is noe place of Refuge to which I can fly from thee; there is noe
place so secret in which I may remain secret from thee.

9. Thou have showed me the way of liueinge well, thou have given me the
knowledge of walkinge as I ought.

10. Thou have threatened to punish me with the pains of Hell; thou have
promised to reward me with the joys of Heaven.

11. Now therefore o Father of mercy; and God of all comfort pierce my flesh
with thy fear, to the end that those things which thou do threaten, I may
eschape by fearinge thee.

12. And give me again the joy of thy salvation that those things which thou
do promise; I may receive by louinge thee.

13. O Lord my strenth, my force, my God, my Refuge, and my deliverer, instruct
me what I ought to think; and conceive of thee.

14. Teach me with what words, I am to call upon thee.

15. Make known unto me, which way I may please thee.

16. One thing (doubtless) I know with which thou art appeased, and another
which thou do not despise. Verily a penitent spirit is to thee, A sacrifice
acceptable; so likewise a heart that is contrite, and humble.

17. With these gifts o my God, and my Aid do thou enrichmee?

18. Barricade me with these Bulwarks against mine enemies.

19. Grant me this refreshinge, against the flames of my vicious inclinations.

20. Set open this pious place of Refuge, to which I may fly from the
Tumults of mine inordinate Affections. Amen.

THE XVII. EXERCISE.
1. GRAVNT o Lord that I be not of the number of those, who for a time believe,
and in time of Temptation do depart, and leave thee.

2. Cover my head in the day of Battle, thou o Lord who art my hope in the
day of Affliction, and my safeguard in the time of Tribulation.

3. Behold o Lord my light and my life, I have asked those things which I wan^,
I have made known those things which I fear; my conscience nevertheless
tormenteth me; the secrets of my heart do reprehend me!

4. And what love affords, fear disperseth, zeal encourages me, dread
daunteth me?

5. Mine Actions cause me to fear, but thy pity gives me cause of Hope.

6. Thy Mercy emboldneth me, my naughtiness with holds me.

7. And to speak the truth, their occur to my memory many sinful
imaginations, which reprehend the boldness of my presuminge Affections.

8. He therefore who deserves anger; with what face can he demand favor?

9. He who meriteth to be punished, how can he be so fool hardy, as to
ask to be rewarded?

10. He incenseth the judge, who neglects to make satisfaction for his
offense, and yet makes means to obtain a Recompense.

11. That malefactor mocketh and derideth His King, and Lord, who earnestly
requires the Prise, and honor, which he never deserved.

12. That foolish son likewise provoke to anger the sweet Affection of his
Father, who upon reproaches offered without repentance, dare usurp, and lay
title to his inheritance.

13. What is this (o father) that I recompt of my self? I have deserved death,
yet beg for life.

14. I have moved my King to anger whose aid notwithstanding I impudentlye
implore.

15. I have despised my Judge, whom boldlye I beg to be my helper.

16. I have insolentlye refused to hear him, as a father, whom now I presume
to choose as my defender.

17. Woe is me, for not cominge so soon as I ought. Alas! alas how little
have do I make?

18. I neglected to beware of the weapons which wounded me behore hand, and
now I am troubled through the apprehension of Death at hand.

This is continued in the followinge Exercise.

THE XVIII. EXERCISE.
1. I Have made my former ^carrs to fester with new soars, since I have
renewed my former faults by new iniquities

2. And those which the divine salve had made sound; my phreneticall itchinge
has again unbound.

3. The skin which being grown over my wounds had hidden my malady (by
reason of corruption breakinge forth) has grown to purify; because mine
iniquity being reiterated, has bereaved me of mercy, which before was
granted.

4. For that I know it is written in what hour soever a just Man shall sin
all his good deeds shall be forgotten.

5. If the righteousness of a good man is abolished when he falls into
sin?

6. By how much more is the penance of a sinner defaced if he return to the
same?

7. How often like a dog have I returned to that which I had vomited up
before?

8. And as a sow have wallowed again, in the mire?

9. I confess that it is impossible for me to remember how many simple, and
ignorant persons through my means have sinned?

10. How many that were desirous to cease from sin, have I persuaded to sin?

11. How many that have withstood me, have I constrained?

12. To how many that were willinge have I consented?

13. To how many walkinge in the right way have I prepared a ginne, or snare?

14. To how many that have sought the right way have I uncovered the pit that
they might fall in?

15. And that I might not be frightened with committinge still the like, I
easily put those past out of my mind.

16. But thou in the mean while (being a just Judge) have observed, and
recorded; and does observe, and record all mine offenses, and have numbered all
my footesteps.

17. Thou have all this while held thy peace, thou have been silent, thou have
been patient.

10. Woo is me: for that thou will speak at lenth, as a weoman in her
Travail.

This Exercise is continued.

THE XIX. EXERCISE.
1. I D^^re not (o my Lord God) presume on my own meritts; yea I am affraide,
and tremble to present my self before thee.

2. For my Soul, and Body are spotted, and blemished with many sins, and
defects, and I have been negligent ^^ thought, and word.

3. To thee, therefore o merciful God, and dear Sauuiour I wretched sinner
being in these streights recurre as unto the fountain of Mercy and pity, ^
fly unto thee for Salvation.

4. And to thee o Lord I lay open my wounds, and soars, to thee I discover my
infirmities of which I am ashamed.

5. I know my sins to be many, and great for which I stand in fear.

6. I hope in thy Mercies which are without end.

7. Lord Jesus Christ eternal King God and Man, look upon me with the eyes
of thy Mercy.

8. Harken unto me puttinge my trust in thee, have pity on me that am full
of miseries, and sins, thou o Lord who never restreignest the flowinge of the
fountain of thy Mercy.

9. I am hartilye sorry that ever I have offended thee, I desire to amend for
the time to come.

10. Do away therefore from me, o most merciful father all my sins, and
iniquities: that so being purifyed and cleansed in soul and Body I may be
able worthilye to serve thee, and blissedly to be united unto thee.

11. Let my soul thirst always after thee, the source of wisdom and
knowledge, the fountain of eternal life, and sun of eternal light, the
River of Pleasure, the Plentifulnesse of the House of God.

12. Let it always earnestly aspire after thee, seek thee, and find thee,
(...) deserving such ingratitude at my hands.

6. I much desire that I were more sorry, and that my heart might break for
any one of the offenses which I have committed against thy divine Majesty.

7. How great reason is there that I should melt into tears for the least of
them?

8. For I have little corresponded with my duty, and been very ungrateful
for thy Benefits.

9. For thou have spent thy whole life for my Advantage, and I have spent mine
in offendinge thee.

10. I acknowledge I deserve for my sins, and in punishment of them all the
pains of hell.

11. Yea they are all too little for my demeritt.

12. I have sinned, I have sinned, I am sorry, I am sorry, and repent from
the bottom of my heart.

This Exercise is continued in the followinge.

THE XXI. EXERCISE.
1. I Offer thee a sorrowful, and repentant heart: because such an one is
acceptable unto thee, and beseeminge me.

2. I assure thee I had rather have suffered all the torments, and trauayles of
the world, rather then to have offended thee in the least of my sins.

3. I purpose, if please thee to give me life, to take chastisement, and
revenge of my self, for offending^ thee, doing for my sins all the penance
I am able.

4. And though they be many and great; yet have I great hope and confidence
thou will pardon them.

5. For thou art the sea of Mercy, and that which thou most gloriest in, is to
be merciful, and forgive sins.

6. Thou have promised that in what hour soever a sinner should repent him of
his sins; thou would pardon him.

7. Be merciful therefore to me, o Lord, be merciful.

8. Pardon, and forgive me my sins, and offenses, pardon me sweet Jesus.

9. Be merciful unto me, for thy bitter death, and Passions sake, and for ihy
glorious meritts have mercy upon me, for in them I trust, and confide.

10. If thou look on me Alone, and naked: then may thou presently cast
me into hell.

11. But I humblye beg of thee that thou would place thy Death and Passion,
thy Blood, and Cross between thy judgment, and my soul.

12. That by the merits of thy death, I may be delivered from everlasting
death, and admitted to life in thy Glory.

13. And in the blessed society of thy Saints, I may praise thee world
without end. Amen.

Here Ends the Poenitent. FINIS.
CERTAIN AMOROVS speeches of the so^le to her self in Prayer. The Which are
a good form, or matter of Prayer when the soul is not able, or apt to speak
immediatelye to God.
THE FIRST EXERCISE.
1. O My soul when will thou be ready to follow the humility of thy Lord
Jesus Christ?

2. When will thou imitate his mildness?

3. When shall the example of his Patience shine in thee?

4. When will thou be better?

5. When will thou be, wholye free from Passions, and vicious Affections?

6. When shall evil be quite destroyed in thee?

7. When shall disordinatenesse be blotted out of thee?

8. When will thou peaceablye, and gentlye endure all tribulation, and
temptation?

9. When will thou perfectlye love thy God?

10. When will thou most inwardlye embrace Him?

11. When will thou be wholye swallowed up in his Love?

12. When will thou be pure, simple, and resigned before him?

13. How long will it be ere thou be hindered noe more, from his most chaste
embracings?

14. O that thou were immaculate?

15. O that thou did feruentlye love God?

16. O that thou did inseparablye cleave unto thy chiefest good?

17. O my soul where is thy God?

18. Where is thy Love?

19. Where is thy Treasure?

20. Where is thy Desire?

2^. Where is all thy Good?

22. Where is thy God?

23. When shall thou be with him?

24. When shall thou most happilye enjoy him?

It is continued.

THE II. EXERCISE.
1. WHEN shall thou freelye praise him, with all the Glorious Citizens of
Heaven?

2. Despair not o my soul?

3. Take comfort daughter, and be confident most dear?

4. If thou have sinned, and art wounded: behold thy God; behold thy Physician
is ready to cure thee?

5. He is most gracious, and most merciful, and therefore willinge; (...)tent
and therefore (...)

6. Peradventure thou art afraid because he is thy Judge; but take ha^^ for
he who is thy Judge, is also thy Advocate.

7. He is thy Advocate to defend, and excuse thee doing penance, and so thy
judge to save, not to condemn thee being humbled.

8. His mercy is infinitlye greater then is, or can be thine iniquity.

9. Thy God is most gentle, most sweet, he is wholye amiable; wholye
desirable; and loves all things which he has created.

10. Let not thine imperfections discourage thee too much, for thy God does not
despise thee, because thou art frail, and infirm. But loves thee
exceedinglye because thou desire, and labourest to be more perfect.

11. Arise my soul, arise out of the dust, slipp thy head out of the collar,
thou captive daughter of Sion.

12. Arise forsake the puddle of thy negligent lise.

13. How long must thou take pleasure in perils? how long will thou esteemee
anxitie, and torments to be rest? how long will thou securelye sleep in
destruction?

14. How long will thou willinglye leave the right way, and wander abroad
far, and near in uncouth, and unknown Paths?

15. Return unto our Lord thy God, for he expects thee.

16. Make have, be not slack, for he is ready to receive thee.

17. He will meet thee with open arms, defer not to return.

18. Have access unto Jesus he will heal, and purifye thee.

19. Join thy self to Jesus he will illuminate thee.

20. Adhere to Jesus, he will bless, and save thee.

21. Alas my soul how ungrateful have thou been to thy God.

It is continued.

THE III. EXERCISE.
1. HE has bestowed innumerable, and most admirable b^nefits on thee; and
thou still repaist evil for good.

2. He has adopted thee to be heir of the Kingdom of Heaven.

3. He has promised those things unto thee which neither eye has seen, nor
ear has heard, nor the Heart of man can comprehend.

4. But thou have left, and contemned Him, who has been so many ways
beneficial unto thee.

5. Thou have cast away the holy fear of Him that loved thee.

6. Thou have shaken of his sweet yoke that has elected thee.

7. Thou art become as One of the daughters of Belial; as an impudent harlot,
void of all shame thou have worshipped iniquity.

8. Thou have made a compact with death, thou have given thy hand to the devil.

9. Thou have been most prompt to all wickedness thou have heaped evil upon
evil, and have rejoiced to add sin to sin.

10. By thy wickedness thou have Crucified Christ again, who had chosen thee
for his spouse.

11. Thou have renewed his wounds by thy crimes.

12. Who will give groans and sighs?

13. Who will give thee a spring of tears that thou may night, and day be
wayle thy ingratitude?

14. O unhappy wretch what will thou do?

15. O that thou had kept thy self in the state of Innocence?

16. O that thou had remained immaculate?

17. O that thou had, not miserablye defiled thy self with dishonestie!

18. O that thou had not gone a stray from thy God!

19. Thou have lost thine innocence, thou art defiled, thou art become
dishonest, thou have forsaken thy God.

20. Alas poor wretch, and what will thou do? to whom will thou fly? from
whom will thou expect help?

21. From whom? but from Him whom thou have offended? He is most pitiful,
most courteous, and most merciful.

It is continued.

THE IV. EXERCISE.
1. HVMBLE thy self, prostrate thy self, power out thy self like water in
his sight, and He will take pity on thee.

2. O my soul if it were necessary daily to suffer torments, yea to endure
hell itself for a long time together that we might see Christ in his glory,
and be joined in fellowship with the saints in His Heavenly City: were it
not meet think thou to sustain all manner of misery, that we might be
made pertaker of so great a good, and so great a felicity?

3. O my soul who art most famous by being framed according to the likeness
of God being bought with the price of Christ's own blood, espoused unto Him by
Faith, endowed with the holy Ghost, adorned with virtues, esteemed equal with
the Angels?

4. Love Him then, Love Him of whom thou art beloved?

5. Attend to Him that attends to thee, and seek Him, that seeks thee?

6. Love this Lover, of whom thou art beloved, with whose love thou art
prevented, and who is the fountain from whence thy love flows?

7. Be careful to please Him who is careful to please thee, think on Him who
thinks on thee: be pure with Him, who is Purity itself, be holy with Him,
who is Holiness itself.

8. Accoordinge to thy carriage toward God in thy conversation, will he
carry himself toward thee again.

9. God is courteous, mild, full of mercy, and compassion, and does require
therefore of thee that thou likewise be courteous, mild, sweet, humble, and
merciful toward All.

10. Love Him (o my soul) who has delivered thee from the lake of misery;
and from the Mire of sin, and iniquity?

11. Choose Him for thy special Friend who alone will Faithfullye adhere, and
stick unto thee, when all other things, and Friends will fail, and shrink
from thee.

12. One the day of thy burial when thou shall be Abandoned and forsaken by all
thy Friends, He will not leave thee, but will defend thee from those roaringe
infernal Fiends ready to devour thee, and will conduct thee unto the Land of
the living.

13. O my soul sigh vehementlye, and aspire feruentlye to that glorious City,
so highlye spoken of.

14. Heaven, and Earth, and all therein contained do continuallye exhort thee,
to love thy Lord God.

15. My soul bliss thou our Lord, my soul praise thou our Lord?

16. Why art thou o my soul sad? and why art thou troubled? Hope in our Lord
for he will be thy comfort, and sollace?

17. Sweet, and amiable Jesus is present with thee, thou must with Reverence,
and love attend unto Him?

18. O would to God he would wash me with his most precious blood, and
perfectlye cleanse, and heal me, and lighten me with the brightenesse of his
Grace?

19. O that he would wound my heart interiorlye, and mollifye itt perfectlye,
and make it as it were drunk with his mellifluous Charity?

20. O would to God I might wholye burn, and be consumed and melted with the
fire of his Love!

21. I ask, I wish, I desire that the heavenly King who vouchsafes to be my
souls Bridegroom, would vouchsafe also to make me pleasinge to him. Amen.

FINIS.

An example of Acts, which a Soul may Exercisee toward God as absent from
Her.
1. I will bless our Lord at all times, his praises shall ever be in my Mouth.

2. Our Lord have Mercy on vs^ enlighten his countenance upon us, and take
pity on us.

3. It is good for me to seek after our Lord and get near unto him, for he
is our Hope, and our All.

The Pfalmes of David are full of these Acts.

FINIS.
An example of speakinges supposed to be made by God to the soul.
1. SON it behooves thee to give all for all, and reserve nothing to thy
self.

2. Son, where is true peace to be found? is it not in Me?

3. Son thou can not attain to perfect liberty; if thou do not wholye
forsake thy self.

4. Son abide constant, and hope in me. This is All in All.

FINIS.
ACTS OF LOVE, AND vvellvvishinge toward God.
THE FIRST EXERCISE.
1. I Do rejoice in all the Perfections that are in thee o my God, as in thy
wisdom, Goodness, Power, and all other thy divine prerogatives, and
perfections.

2. Let it please, and suffice me; that thou art infinitlye happy, and Rich,
my most benign, and louinge Father.

3. I do rejoice at the presence of thee my God in heaven (where thou reignest
as in thy Kingdom) and that thou art there worshipped, adored, and loved by
all thy Angels, and Saints.

4. So that if it were in my Power, I would Love, and honor thee with all
that love and worshipp wherewith all the Angels, and Saints do there Love
thee.

5. I do joy in all the Loves, and services that the just Men in the Church,
especially the Perfect in all former ages, in the present Age, or in the
future Ages; have borne, and performed, do bear, and perform, or shall
bear, and perform toward thee.

6. And I desire to love thee with the Love of them All; and would for thy Love
do, and perform, if it lay in my power, all their works as well internal, as
external, and would undergo all their labors, and endure all their
Afflictions.

7. I do hartilye rejoice in all the good things that are in the elect
servants of God, but especially for the wonderful gifts of the perfect, and
that they are by thee, o my God, illuminated, inflamed, and sanctified.

8. My Love, and desire toward thee, o my God is such, and so great: that if
it were possible to me, and acceptable to thee, I would of each soul
especially of mine own make a Kingdom of Heaven, that thou might be
beloved, and praised in foe many Heavens by the dwellers in them.

9. Which if it lay in my power should be more in number then the Grass piles
on the Earth, the sands in the sea, or dropps of water therein.

10. I do here in thy presence, o my God, hold and repute my self as
nothing, and whatsoever I have above nothing natural or supernatural; I
acknowledge it to be thine, and none of mine.

11. And because of my self I am nothing, and that my God is all Good; and
that all good things come only from him: I do greatly rejoice, and with all
my heart confess that I am nothing, can do nothing, and have nothing; for
both my being, and ability to do, and all I have, is thine, and from thee.

THE II. EXERCISE.
1. I Do here in the presence of God, repute, and judge my self the most
vile of all creatures; and because I cannot feel, or perceive this in my
self, but rather the contrary having a good, and great opinion of my self;
I do acknowledge therefore that I am most proud, and ungrateful of all
others, and I do bewail my self as such an One.

2. O my God I love, and desire to love thee with a love pure, and free from
all respect of proper commodity, and self interest.

3. I love thee my Lord with a perseuerant love, purposinge by the help of thy
holy Grace, and assistance never to be separated from thee by sin.

4. And if I were to live for millions of years yet would I ever remain thy
faithful servant, and lover.

5. I wish all Creatures would Adore and serve thee; and that infidels may be
converted to thy faith, and all sinners to good life; and All this only for
thy supreme Honor, and Glory.

6. I wish that neither my self, nor any other, had ever offended thee my God,
and that in particular I my self had ever served thee faithfullye from the
instant of my Nativity.

7. I wish, and desire that both I my self, and all others may hereafter
serve and love thee most faithfully, and this for the love, and good will I
bear thee.

8. I rejoice, and congratulate that thou my Lord God art so rich and happy,
that all creatures can add noe more to thy happiness then already thou have.

9. Nevertheless because thou may have external honor, and worshipp from
thy creatures: I do wish, I do wish that All of them may accordinglye
perform their service, and the worshipp dew unto thee the best they can.

10. I am sorry for all the sins and indignities that are, have, or shall be
done unto thee, by my self, or by All, or any others.

11. And this principally, and only I am sorry for; because these sins are
injuries done to thy divine Majesty, who only is worthy to be honored, and
served by all thy creatures.

12. I do ioyfullye accept, and am glad of all that is pleasinge to God, be it
Prosperity, or Adversity, sweet, or bitter; and this meerelye for the love I
bear him.

13. I am sorry for all that does displease God, or is contrary to his divine
will, or Commandments; and all this only for the love of him, and his Glory.

THE III. EXERCISE.
1. I Congratule thee, o my God, and am glad that thou art God; and for the
Blissednesse, and all the Perfections that are in thee; and which for all
Eternity thou have ever had as thy omnipotency, wisdom, goodnesses, and the
like.

2. I congratulate thee also, and am glad that thou have need of noe
extrinsecall thing, but art in thy self most rich and fullye sufficient both
for thy self, and all Other Creatures.

3. I likewise with thee, o my Lord, rejoice in the sweet ordinance, and
disposition of heaven, and earth; and for all the things which are in the
maruaylous Creation of this world, and for all the works which thou have made,
or shall yet make unto the end of the world.

4. I congratulate, approve, and rejoice in all the judgments of my Lord God,
as well manifest, as secret: concerning the Devils, the souls of the damned,
the unbaptized children in Lymbo, the souls that be in Purgatory, and the
wicked men that live in this world.

5. I congratulate, end rejoice with thee, o my God in all the Laud, and
praises which the Angels, and Saints in heaven, and thy servants of the earth
do give thee, and for all the worshipp they yield unto thee.

6. Because I find my self altogether insufficient to praise my God I do for
my help and assistance therein inuit, and call upon the holy Angels, and
all creatures.

7. And withal my own soul with all the powers of it, that all of them
together may glorifye my God for his infinitt excellency.

8. I am sorry I am not perfect, and wish that (so far as it may please my
God to grant itt) I may be perfect the more worthylie to praise thee;

9. And not out of any commodity by it to my self, but purelye for the Love I
bear thy Divine Majesty who is infinitely worthy of more love, and honor:
then all Creatures that are, or can be, are able to perform toward thee.

10. Exult, and rejoice: and be thou delighted o my soul for all the
excellencies, and good things that are in thy God.

11. If it lay in my power, and were lawful for me to choose what God I
would have; I would not choose any other God but thee Alone, saying with
David. Dixi Domino, Deus meus es Tu. I said unto my Lord, thou art my God.

12. I rejoice in the Dignity that our Sauuiour Christ now has in Heaven, and
congratulate him in it.

It is continued.

THE IV. EXERCISE.
1. BLISSED be thy eternal Father who so abundantly bestowed these
felicities on thee. Do thou blissedly, and gloriouslye enjoy them for all
Eternity.

2. I congratulate the most Blissed Virgin Marie; and all the Angels, and
Saints in Heaven for the glory and happiness which they now enjoy.

3. And I praise, and exalt my God for his great goodness, and liberality
therein showed toward those thy most faithful, and elect friends.

4. I do exceedinglye rejoice; that since all Creatures together are in noe
sort able to praise thee my God according to the very least worth that is in
thee; yet thou thy self, and thou only art able sufficientlye, and perfectlye
to praise, and glorifye thy self.

5. I do rejoice indeed at this, and do hartilye desire thee to do it ever
more.

6. Yea I do hartyly crave of thee that thou may incessantlye, and most
intensiuely praise thy self since thou only art Able to do itt, and
deserves to have it done.

7. I do congratulate, and rejoice with thee, o my Lord God in all the works
which thou have done; and this only because they are thy works.

8. As for the Creation of the world, thy Providence about itt, thy Redemption
of it. Wonderfully esteeminge all these works; because they are thine.

9. An I rejoice as well in that thou have made a hell for the punishment of the
wicked; as a heaven for the Reward of the good.

10. I wish, and desire out of my love to God that he may be praised and
known of all Men, and I do inuit all Creatures to do the same with my self.

11. I offer my self (for the love of my God) to bear, and suffer all things
which may be to his honor, and Glory: though noe manner of commodity accurre
to me thereby; but purely to do it out of the free love I bear, and desire
to bear, toward my God.

12. Lastly I profess that if I could devise any thing wherein I might show,
or Exercise my love toward my God; I hope (with the help of his Grace) I
should, and would do it most cheerefullye, and readily out of the pure, and
sinceare love that I bear, and wish to bear toward my God without respect of
any commodity by it to my self, which God grant me to do for his Glory,
and my happynes^e. Amen.

FINIS.
CERTAIN AMOROVS Aspirations, to be used according to the Direstions, and the
Disposition of the soul.
O Et Praesidium, and dulce Decus meum!

1. O thou art both my safeguard, and my sweet Ornament!

Da quod iubes, and Iube quod vis!

2. Grant me to do what thou command, and command what thou will!

O vita Animae meae!

3. O life of my soul!

O lumen oculorum meorum!

4. O light of mine eyes!

In manus tuas Domine commend^ Spiritum meum.

5. Into thy hands o Lord, I do commend my Spirit.

Ecce Ancilla Domini, fiat mihi secundum verbum tuum.

6. Lo the hand maid of our Lord, be it done unto me according to thy word.

Paratum cor meum Deus, paratum cor meum.

7. My heart is ready, o God, my heart is ready.

Ecce ego, mitte me?

8. Lo here I am, send me?

Toll quod tuum est, and vade.

9. Take what is, thine, and be gone.

Dominus meus, and Deus meus.

10. My Lord, and my God.

Domine quid mihi est in caelo, and a te quid volui super terram?

11. O Lord what is there in Heaven, or what upon earth that I would have
besides thee?

Domine quid me vis facere?

12. Lord what will thou have me to do?

Hei mihi quia incolatus meus prolongatus est!

13. O woo is me that my seiorninge is prolonged!

In ditione tua Domine cuncta sunt posita.

14. All things o Lord are in thy power, and Dominion.

Domine tu scis quia amo Te, and animam meam ponam pro Te.

15. Thou know, o Lord, that I love thee, and will bestow my life for thee.

Quemadmodum desiderat ceruus ad fontes aquaaum, ita desiderat Anima mea ad Te
Deus.

16. Even as the heart does thirst after the Fountain of Water; so does my
soul thirst after thee o God.

Infaelix Homo quis me liberabit de corpore mortis huius!

17. O unhappy Man that I am; who shall deliver me from the Body of this
Death?

Cupio dissolui, and esse cum Christo.

18. I desire to be dissolved, and to be with Christ.

Quando veniam, and apparebo ante faciem Domini!

19. When shall I come, and appear^ before the face of our Lord?

Argentum, and Aurum non est mihi, quod autem habeo hoc tibi Do.

20. I have neither gold nor silver; but what I have, that I give unto thee.

Praecor celestem Regem, vt me dolentem nimium faciat eum cernere.

21. I beseech the heavenly King to cause me (who am very much greiued for
want of it) to come to the sight of Him whom I so much love.

Domine si inueni gratiam in oculi^ tuis, ostende mihi faciem tuam?

22. Lord if I have found favor in thy sight; show unto me thy face?

Nouerim Te, nouerim me?

23. Let me know thee, let me know my self?

Te Deum landamus, Te Dominum confitemur.

24. We praise thee o God, we acknowledge thee o Lord.

Benedic Anima mea Domino, and omnia quae intra me sunt nomini sancto eius.

25. O my soul, and all that is within me, bliss ye our Lord, and praise
his holy name.

Benedicam Dominum in omni tempore, semper laus eius in ori meo.

26. I will bliss our Lord at all times, his praise shall ever be in my mouth.

Benedicite omnia opera Domini Domino.

27. Bliss ye our Lord, All the works of our Lord.

O vos omnes qui transitis per viam attendite, and videte, si sit Dolor sicu^
Dolor meus!

28. O All ye that pass by the way look, and see, if ever there were
grief, like my grief!

Sanctus, Sanctus, Sanctus Dominus Deus Sabbath, pleni sunt caeli, and terra
Maiestatis gloriae tuae.

29. Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God of Sabbath, heaven, and earth are full of the
Majesty of thy Glory.

Deus, Deus meus ad te de luce vigilo!

30. O God, ^ my God to thee I wake in the morninge!

Deus, Deus meus respice in me, quare me dereliquisti?

31. O my God, my God look upon me, why have thou ^orsaken me?

Deus meus, Adiutor meus sperabo in Te!

32. O my God my helper I will hope in thee!

Domine in caelo misericordia tua; and veritas tua vsque ad nubes.

33. O Lord thy mercy is in heaven, and thy truth reaches to the clouds.

Ad te leuaui oculos meos qui habitas in caelis.

34. To thee have I lifted up mine eyes who dwell in Heaven.

Fili Dei, miserere mei.

35. O Son of God, have mercy upon me.

Dilectus meus mihi, and ego illi.

36. My beloved to me, and to I him.

Regnum tuum regnum omnium saeculorum, and domenatio tua in omni generatione,
and generatione.

37. Thy Kingdom is a Kingedome for ever; and thy reign is for all
Generations, and generations.

O quam pulchra es Amica mea, quam puchra es?

38. O how fair art thou my beloved, how fair art thou?

Tota pulchra es amica mea, and macula non est in te.

39. Thou art all fair o my Love, and there is not a spott in thee.

Vulnerasti cor meum, sponsa mea, vulnerasti cor m^um?

40. Thou have wounded my heart my Spowse, thou have wounded my heart?

Adiuro vos filiae Jerusalem, si inueneritis dilectum meum, vt nuntietis ei,
quia amore langueo.

41. I adjure you o daughters of Jerusalem, if you shall find my beloved, you
tell him that I languish with Love.

Pulchra es Amica mea, suauis, and decora.

4^. Thou art fair o my love, sweet, and comely.

Veni Dilecte mi, Veni?

43. Come thou my beloved, come?

Dilectus meus candidatus, and rubicundus, electus ex milibus.

44. My beloved is white, and ruddie; chosen out of thowsands.

Quo abijt Dilectus tuus? Quo declinauit Dilectus tuus? and qu^remus eum tecum.

45. Whither is thy beloved gone? whither is thy beloved turned aside? And we
will seek Him with thee.

Reuertere, reuerter^ Sunamitis, v^ intue amur te?

46. Return, return o Sunamitenesse, that we may behold thee?

Quam pulcra es, and qnam decora charissima in delicijs?

47. How beautiful, and how comelye art thou my dearest in delights?

Quis mihi det vt inueniam Te, and deosouler Te?

48.. Who shall procure unto me that I may find thee, and kiss thee.

Osculetur me osculo oris sui?

48. Let him kiss me, with a kis^e of his month?

Fac me audire vocem tuam?

49. Cause me to hear thy voice?

Ecce tu pulchra es, amica mea, ecce tu pulchra es?

50. Behold thou art fair my beloved; behold thou art fair?

Trahe me post te, curremus in odorem vnguentorum tuorum?

51. Draw me after thee, we shall ru^ne in the odor of thine ointme^ts?

Exultabimus, and laetabimur in te^

52. We shall exult, and rejoice in thee.

Indica mihi quem diligit Anim^ mea, vbi pascas, vbi c^bes?

53. Thou whom my soul loves, show unto me, where thou do eat, where thou
do lodge?

Surge, propera Amica mea, columba mea, formosa mea, and veni?

54. Arise, hasten my beloved, my dove, my fair One, and come unto me?

Ostende mihi faciem tuam, sone^ vox tua in auribus meis?

55. Show me thy face, let thy voice sound in mine ears?

Vox enim tua dulcis, and facies tua decora.

56. For thy voice is sweet, and thy face comelye.

Quaesiui quem diligit anima mea, quaesiui illum, and non inueni.

57. I have sought for him whom my soul loves; I have sought for him, and
have not found him.

Surgam, and circuibo ciuitatem per^vicos, and plate as, and quaeram quem
diligit anima mea.

58. I will rise, and go about the city in all the streets, and lanes; I will
seek after Him whom my soul loves.

Number vidisti quem diligit Anima mea?

59. Have you seen whom my soul loves?

Paululum cum pertransissem, inueni quem diligit Anima mea.

60. When I had gone a little farther, I found him whom my soul loves.

Tenui ^um nec dimittam.

61. I laid hold of him, and will not let him go.

Vox Dilecti mei pulsantis, aperi mihi soror mea, Amica mea, columba mea
immaculata mea?

62. The voice of my beloved knockinge, open to me my sister, my love, my
dove, mine immaculate?

Pessulam Ostij mei aperui dilecto meo.

63. I opened the bar of my door to my beloved.

Anima mea liquefacta est, vt locuta est mihi.

64. My soul melted, as he spoke to me.

Diligam te Domine fortitudo mea, firmamentum meum, and Refugium, meum, and
liberator meus.

65. I will love thee o Lord, my strenth, my firm foundation, my Refuge, and
my Deliverer.

Illumina oculo^ meos ne vnquam obdormiam in morte, ne quando dic^t inimicus
meus praeualui aduersus eum.

66. Enlighten mine eyes that I may never sleep in Death, least mine enemy
may come at lenth to say I have prevailed against him.

Dignus es tu Domine Deus accipere Gloriam, and Honorem, and virtutem, and
Benedictionem.

67. Thou art worthy o Lord God to have Glory, and Honor, and power, and
praysinge.

Confite antur tibi Domine omnia operatua, and sancti tui benedicant tibi.

68. Let thy works o Lord confess unto thee, and let thy Saints praise thee.

Si oportuerit me mori, non te negabo.

69. Though I were to dye for it, yet I would not deny thee.

70. Jesus, Jesus, Jesus, etc.

Non aemittam Te, nisi Benedixeris mihi.

71. I will not let thee go, till thou have Blissed me.

72. Lord when shall I be wholye thine, and thou mine?

73. O my secure Refuge!

74. O life of my Soul, my Maker, my Redeemer, and my conseruer!

75. O joy of my soul! when shall I love thee with all my Heart, with all my
soul, and with all my might?

76. When shall I enjoy thee?

77. When shall I possess thee?

78. O that I were buried in thee?

79. When shall I fullye please thee?

80. My Consolation.

81. My Life.

82. My Love.

83. My Desire.

84. My Delight.

86. My Riches.

87. My Treasure, and all my good.

88. O when shall my soul be according to thy hearts desire!

89. O that my soul were as clean, and pure, as it was when it first
proceeded from thee!

90. O that I could perfectly obey thee!

91. O that I could always serve thee!

92. O Treasure of my soul!

93. O that I had never offended thee

94. O that I could see my self free from this, or that imperfection.

95. O that I could obtain this, or that necessary virtue!

96. When shall I perfectly love thee?

97. When shall this earthly Tabernacle be dissolved, and my soul be made one
with thee?

98. Replenish me o Lord with thy love.

99. Give unto me sweet Jesus purity of Heart, and poverty of Spirit?

100. O sweet Jesus that I knew thee, and knew my self?

101. Grant me o sweet Jesus that I may entirely love thee?

102. Grant me o my only love that I may continually reverence, and adore
thee?

103. O Bottomless sea of Mercy pardon me all my sins, and offenses?

104. Permit me not o my Lord Jesus ever to be separated from thee?

105. Possess me o sweet Jesus; and unite me wholly unto thee?

106. I am nothing, I can nothing, I desire nothing, but thee o Jesus,
Jesus, Jesus!

107. Grant me o Lord the holy hatred of my self; and the perfect love of
thee.

108. O my God quench thou the thirst of my soul!

108. Thou only please me, and thee only I desire.

109. For thy love, I utterly renounce all other Loves.

111. For thy love I wholly yield up my self into thy hands.

112. O All my Glory!

113. O All my Delight!

114. O All my Comfort!

115. With thy self comfort me, whom nothing else can comfort, or satisfy.

1^6. O what do I love, o what do I intend, or seek for, save only thee!

117. Feed, and satisfy me o Lord with thy Grace, and presence in my soul?

118. Thee only does my soul relish Jesus, Jesus, Jesus?

119. My Heart longs after thee, and with none but thee Alone can it be
satisfied?

120. Quench my thirst o Jesus, Jesus, Jesus!

121. When shall my soul be plunged, swallowed up, and buried in the infinite
depth of thy Eternity?

122. O my Happiness!

123. O my only delight!

124. O joy of my heart!

125. O my Hope, my sollace, my beginning, and end!

126. O Lord Jesus!

127. O Emanuel!

128. O Messiah!

129. O Christ the anointed of our Lord!

130. O most sweet, and most louinge Lord God!

131. When shall I be united unto thee?

132. When shall I be drowned in thee?

133. When shall I be fullye mortified?

134. When shall I embrace thee?

135. When shall I be inflamed with thy love?

136. When shall I be one with thee according to thy hearts desire?

Confitebor tibi Domine in toto cord^ meo, and glorificabo nomen tuum in
aeternum.

137. I will confess unto thee o Lord with my whole heart, and will glorify
thy name for ever.

Miserere mei Deus, miserere mei, quoniam in te confidit Anima mea.

138. Have Mercy on me o Lord have on me, because my soul does confide in
thee.

Beati qui habitant in domo tua Domine in saecula saeculorum laudabunt te

139. Blissed are they who dwell in thy House o Lord, they praise thee for ever
and ever.

Quia est melior est dies vna in atrijs tuis super millia.

140. Because one day within thy Gates is b^^^^r then a thousand without.

141. O All my Hope?

142. O All my Glory?

143. O All my Refuge; And All my joy?

144. O the most Beloved of Beleiuers?

145. O Flourishinge spowse!

146. O sweet spowse?

147. O Comfort of my Heart?

148. O life of my soul, and the pleasant repose of my Spirit?

149. Mortify in me whatsoever displeases thy sight, and make me a Man
according to thy heart.

150. Wound me o Lord, wound the most inward part of my soul with the darts
of thy Love?

151. And make me drunk with the wine of thy perfect Charity.

152. O when shall this be!

153. When shall I please thee in all things?

154. When shall all dye in me, which is contrary to thee?

155. When shall I be altogether thine?

156. When shall I live to be noe more mine own?

157. When shall nothing else live in me, but thou o Jesus?

158. When shall I love thee most fervently?

159. When shall the flames of thy love wholly consume me?

160. When shall I be altogether melted and pearsed through with the wonderful
efficacy of thy sweetness?

161. When will thou take me hence by force, drown me, transport me, and
hide me in thy self, where I may never more be seen?

162. When will thou free me from all these impediments, and distractions, and
make me one Spirit with thee, that I may not any more depart from thee?

163. O Dearly, Beloved! O Dearly Beloved of my soul?

164. O sweetness of my Heart?

165. Hear me o Lord not for my merits, but for thy infinitt Goodness, and
Mercy?

166. Teach me, enlighten me direct me, and assist me in all things, that I
may do, or say nothing but what is agreeable to thy blissed will, and pleasure?

167. O my God, my well beloved, my dearest Heart, and the very God of my soul!

168. O my sweet love!

169. O my great Delight!

170. O my strenth Help me!

171. O my light guide me toward thee!

172. O God of my soul, why give not thou thy self to thy poor Creature?

17^. Thou fillest Heaven, and earth; and will thou leave my heart empty.

17^. Thou bathest the Lillies of the field, give meat to the little birds,
and feedest the worms of the earth: why then do thou forgett me who
endeauours to forgett all others for thy sake.

175. Too late have I have I known^ thee o infinitt Goodness?

176. Too late have I loved, thee o Beauty so ancient, and so new!

177. Woo to the time I loved thee not!

178. Blind I was, that I saw thee not.

179. Thou were within me, and I went seekinge thee abroad?

180. But now that I have found thee though late, suffer not Good Lord that I
ever leave thee. Amen, Amen, Amen.

FINIS.
ACTS OF RESIGNATION To be used according TO THE DIRECTIONS. ACTS OF
RESIGNATION in things concerning the Body.
THE FIRST EXERCISE.
1. I Resign my self for the Love of my God my dear Lord, to undergo these
ensuinge Pains, or Difficulties in my Body; so far as God has already
laid them, or any of them upon me; or shall be pleased hereafter to lay, or
permit them, or any of them to fall upon me. To wit: Agues, Feauers,
falling sickness, crampe, collicke, Consumption, or other bodily sickness
whatsoever. Especially such sickness, or infirmity, as troubles me at this
present, or to which through my nature or Bodily complexion, and constitution
I am most disposed, and inclined.

2. As weakness, feebleness, lamenesse, Toothache, or any other ache, or
pain in my head, or any other part of my Body.

3. Deformity, or ugliness in the sight of others, as it was in the case of
holy Job, Lazarus, and others that were full of Biles, botches, and other more
odious external defects in Body.

4. Extremity of Heat such as we feel, or may feel in some time of the
summer: extremity of cold such as we feel, or may feel in some time of the
winter. And in time of summer to be driven to wear, and bear perhaps out of
Obedience, or other necessity more clothes then our nature needs, or is
willinge to bear. And in the cold of winter, to be contented to want clothes
which we conceive our nature needs, when that obedience, or necessity denies
them us.

5. Want of sleep, as when being in bed one cannot ^leepe through ^ome
bodily indisposition, or other; or when obedience will not permit me to have
so much time for sleep, as my nature would desire to have, or may seem
needful to have.

6. Hunger, thirst, the difficulties of fasting, and Abstinence, scarcity in
meat, or drink, as not having so much in Quantity as my nature would have,
or perchance requires, or less then I see some others have. Or when the
quality of the meat, or drink does not please my nature, and yet obedience
will yield me noe better; or when my meat is not so well dressed, as I could
wish it were; or when I have it not in such a season as in my nature I could
wish, but is delayed me for some time.

7. I am resigned, and contented to see others better served, or provided for,
in, meat, drink, cloth, lodginge, and beddinge then I am: though I conceive,
and imagine that I deserve, and need as much as they do, and yet obedience
will not allow it me. Likewise when it seems to me that others are more
spared from corporal labors then I am; and yet it seems to me that they
need, or deserve noe more indulgence, or sparinge, then I do.

8. Indisgestion, vomitinge, or other pain, or defect in the stomach, not to
be able to get down some meat that is ungrateful to the stomach, or
palate; And yet obedience, or poverty will perhaps afford me noe better.

9. Pains, or Defects about the 5. external senses. As bitter, or unsavory
Tastes; ungrateful smells; hideous, and horrible sights, or representations to
the eyes, as the sight of Devils, or damned souls. Hideous and fearful
noises, as thunder etc. and noises displeasinge to the ear, and so of the
Rest.

It is continued.

THE II. EXERCISE.
1. AS to the fifth sense of feelinge. I Resign my self to suffer, and endure
scorgings, buffetings, beatings, as our Sauuiour endured; or stoneings as S.
Stephen: or incisions, and launcings, or c^ttinge of the flesh, or any other
corporal pains, or torments, be they external, or internal. To the loss of
eyes, or pains in them; to deafness, or dumbness; to undergo also some
external work, or labor from which I am naturally auerted: when that
obedience appoints itt, albeit I should conceive it prejudicial to my health.

3. To attend, and watch with the sick when that obedience appoints it.

4. I am resigned to loose any member of my Body when God shall permit, or
will have me to loose itt, be it feet, legs, hands etc.

5. To undergo all sort of corporal labors, and that with feebleness, and
indisposition of Body: so far as the will of God shall require.

6. I am resigned to loose all pleasure, delight, and Gust in the sense of Taste
so that I may find noe more taste in the pleasantest meat, then I should do
in eatinge a chipp, or a stone: or in drinkinge of a thing that has noe taste,
or is of a very ungrateful Taste.

7. I am resigned to any disfiguringe in the face, or other part of the Body:
come it naturallye, or by any chance, or accident.

8. To loose my life by suddayne death, or else by long sickness as it shall
please God.

9. To receive harm in my Imagination: whereby I may have my brains cracked,
or become a very fool, or madd man; And to be content with all this if God
permit the case to befall me.

10. That my Body putrify, and corrupt slowly, and with lenth of time; and
that others observe, and take notice of such putrifyinge, and in their natures
abhor it, and me for itt.

11. To endure, and suffer the Agonye of Death, and the unwillingness, and
horror that nature has in the separation of the soul from the Body.

I^ is continued.

THE III. EXERCISE.
1. I am resigned to dye a natural death; or otherwise a violent, and paynefull
death procured by others; which of them may best please thee my Lord.

2. To dye when, where, and in what manner it shall best please God, and that
without the help of any of the Sacraments; if I cannot come by them.

3. Being dead to want not only honorable, but even Christian Burial; And my
Body to be a prey, and food to beasts, and fowls: as has been, and often is
the case of Martyrs.

4. In the Agonye of death to endure such terrors, Afflictions, and
temptations as the devil does then vsuallye raise, and procure, or my dear God
permit.

Here follow Resignations about external Goods.
5. To be deprived of the Cloths I have, or may have, be they never so
necessary for me The like for good books, convenient lodginges, and to have
these things bestowed upon one whom in my nature I am most auerted from.

6. To be driven to wear cloths that seem base, or insufficient, or unfit
for the body^ as over heavy and ouerhott for the summer; or over thynne, and
light for the cold winter; or else cloths that are of hair, rugged, and
paynefull to the Body.

7. To be streitned, or otherwise ilaccomodated for chamber, or lodginge, and
hard beddinge, and to want necessaries in my lodginge, and beddinge.

8. To want necessary cloths so as to be brought to that poverty that I am
not only barely, and basely clothed, but hardlye able to cover my nakedness;
whereby I may be wonderfully contemned, and despised by others.

9. To be turned out of doors, and to be deprived of all certain, and proper
place of Habitation, and thrust into the wide world; and so entirely left to
such destinye as God shall permit to fall upon me.

10. To have all the temporal goods whereof I have the propriety, or use,
taken from me: and to be left as poor, naked, and desolate as ever Job was,
or any man, or weoman can be.

11. To endure the Crosses that in any sort spiritual, or corporal may fall
upon my friends, or kindred, or upon those who in my nature I most affect: as
to endure their deaths, imprisonments, dishonors, loss of their lands, or
goods, their extreme poverty, or whatsoever else may happen unto them.

12. And on the other side to forbear, and restreigne my self from all
inordinate joy, and complacence that I may take in their prosperities.

13. I am resigned also, and hope to be well content that my friends, and
kindred, lovers, and well wishers, do alienate, and withdraw their affections
from me; do forgett, and neglect me: yea and come to be auerted from me;
and to conceive, and speak evil of me, and do me evil offices; yet so as
I committ noe sin, or give noe just occasion of such auersion from me.

14. And further I resign my self to be left, and forsaken of all creatures
in the world; so that I have noe Man, or any thing to cleave unto, save thee
only my Jesus who will abundantly suffice me.

15. I am resigned, and indifferent in what place, and in what company I live,
and in particular to live with them from whom my nature is most auerted, and to
live with strangers as well as with my familiars.

16. And to live with them with whom, and from whom I shall find, and receive
most contradictions, discurtesies, and hard vsages, if it shall be the blessed
will, and pleasure of thee my Lord to allot, or ordain me to live in such
company.

17. I am resigned to abide in this life in all sorts of Afflictions for so
long time as it shall please God though it were to the end of the world.

18. And not to yield to the Motion, or inclination of my nature that would
perhaps out of wearisomnesse feign have life at an end. But in this I wholly
submitt my will to the will of God. Amen.

Here follow Resignations about good name, Honor, and Estimation.

THE IV. EXERCISE.
1. I Am resigned not only not to be beloved, or well thought of by Superiors,
Brethren, sisters, or others: but even hated, and evil thought of by them. Yet
will I take heed (through Gods Grace) not by any sin to give just Occasion of
such hatred, or evil opinion of me.

2. And I am resigned that all others yea mine enemies be in greater Grace,
favor, love, and good opinion with superiors, and all others then I am.

3. To undergo all manner of disgraces, Reproaches, slanders, infamyes,
Dishonors, Taunts, contempts, neglects, scoffs, backbitings, and injuries in my
fame. And to endure all these, be they done to my face, or behind my Back:
whither I have just occasion for them or not, and I am sorry for the sin,
(so far as there was a sin in it) and I am glad of the occasion grown by
it, of my Resignation, and Mortification.

4. And whither they be done me by my Superiors, or betters, or by mine
equals, or else by such as in the condition of the world are inferior to me.

5. And whither they be done by such as I esteemed my friends, and of whom I
had better deserved: or by any professed foes, or as such behave themselves
toward me, though I esteem them to be in charity with me, and all the world.

6. I am resigned that my life, or manner of my death be execrable, odious, and
hateful to others, and being dead to be evil thought of, and evil spoken of
by others, and to have noe man that will uouchsafe to pray for me being dead,
but to be either clean forgotten, or to have an ill memory, and esteem.

7. Yea thought by all the world to have dyed out of the state of Salvation,
and so damned for ever. Yea moreover to have it so set down, and expressed
in a printed book, or Cronicle: not only to my own everlasting shame, but to
the shame, and confusion of my kindred, and familye.

8. And finally in this life to be held for the scumme, and outcast of all the
race of Mankind, and forsaken by All both as to their doings, and to their
Affections toward me.

9. In sickness, and other occasions, and necessities to be chargeable, and
troublesome to others, and my self, to be profitable to none at all, nor in
any sort to be able to steed others.

10. So that the whole world grow weary of me, and of my life, and Being:
and daily long to be ridd of me by death, or some other way they care not
how; and in this case to remain diverse years, yea for my whole life time
though never so long.

11. I am resigned that dyinge in the Grace of God (which I hope, and earnestly
pray I may always do) and of a natural death: I be for all that, through
some occasion, or other by the permission of God, esteemed to have killed, or
destroyed my self and therevppon to be according to the custom of our
country pearsed through the midst of my Body with a stake, and buried in the
high way; and every one that passes by, to cast a stone on my Grave in
detestation of me to the unspeakable shame, c^nfusion, and damnation of my
own fame, and to the foul Aspersion of my Familye.

Resignations of and concerning the soul.

THE V. EXERCISE.
1. I Am resigned to undergo all sorts of temptations which may please thy
Divine Majesty to lay, or permit to fall upon me for mine exercise, and
Trial: And to endure them to the end: ever adheringe to thee; and not
yeildinge to sin by occasion of them, so far as thy holy Grace shall
enable me.

2. To endure all manner of desolations, Priuations, Aridities, Drynesses, and
indeuotion. All darkness in mine understanding, and all dullness, and
coldnes^e of Affection in my will toward my God; so far as I am not able to
help it; And will not for my comfort convert me to external solaces.

3. To want all manner of gifts, and Graces that are not absolutely necessary
to my Salvation; as all supernatural contemplations, sweetenesses, and
extraordinary divine visits, and favors.

4. To resign my self in all things be they never so contrary to nature,
and its inclination; to sensuality, and its affections.

5. To resign my self to bear with the repugnance which I find in my
sensuality until by the Grace of God (sooner, or later; ever, or never) in
this life, it may be brought to perfect subjection to the soul: and in the
mean time to bear with the labor, and difficulty: that is in fightinge
against it, or in resistinge the desires of itt.

6. To resign my self to dye before that I can reach to perfection, and to
live, and dye in that state, or degree of perfection which shall be pleasinge
to God, and not according to my own will, or way: yet ever wishinge, and
endeauouringe that I may not be wantinge in cooperatinge with His Graces, and
Calls.

7. To resign my self to be content to serve my God according to that manner
which He preordained, and not according to mine own proper will, desires, or
ways. Having reguard notwithstanding to my natural talents, and complexion,
or corporal constitution: And according to the measure of wit, or
understanding that is in me, and according to the supernatural helps, and
Graces that God shall afford unto me: and not according to the talents,
gifts, and graces which God has given, and imparted unto others.

8. I am resigned, and well pleased that God has given, and hereafter at his
pleasure may give to others far greater Graces, and Talents, or perfections
then he has given, or shall give unto me.

9. And that all others make greater progress in Spirit, and perfection then I
do: albeit I should use greater diligence, and industry then they.

10. I am resigned to understand learn, or know noe more, or otherwise then
God would have me to know, and to remain ignorant in what He would have me
to remain ignorant of.

It is continued.

THE VI. EXERCISE.
1. AND for what I do, or shall know: I do resign, and yield up to God (whose
it is by due) all the Honor, contentment, satisfaction, and commodity that
can come to me by such knowledge.

2. I am resigned to know noe more then is absolutely necessary to salvation,
and to want the knowledge of all other things, and especially of all
curiosities, and impertinencies.

3. I am resigned, yea desire to follow God by all ways whatsoever that He
shall call me, seem they never so strange, or unreasonable (so they have
noe sin in them: I mean both for internal, and external ways) though I
cannot understand the reasons of them, or perceive how they can lead, or bring
to a good end, or issue. And so to be contented to walk as it were blindfold,
and in darkness, as to the use of my natural understanding.

4. I am resigned, and contented that others do excel me in virtues, and
perfections, yet ever desiringe that I may not be wantinge in my endeauours:
And am resigned that they be far more then my self esteemed, loved, and
honored by all others for virtues, and perfection.

5. I am resigned not to know in what case I am, as to my soul; nor in what
degree of Perfection: and not to know whither I go backward, or forward in
perfection.

6. I am resigned not know whither I am in the state of Grace, or not: as noe
man (without special revelation) does know himself to be. I crave
notwithstanding, and desire that I may be industrious, and do my part, and
cooperate with my Grace.

7. I am resigned that God may give, and bestow on Him who of all creatures
living most hates me: all those gifts, Graces, and Favors which my soul,
my nature, or my heart could crave, or wish of thee my God for my self: and am
resigned to want them my self, and to have noe more then thy will is to bestow
on me.

8. And I am moreover contented, and resigned that in the end of my life thou
my Lord may bestow upon him that hates me most, the fruict, Benefit, and
reward of all the labors, afflictions, and mortifications which in my life
time I have undergone, albeit they were so great, and so many as has been
all the labors, Afflictions, and Mortifications, of all the Mar^yrs,
Confessors, and Virgins, all put together that ever lived, or hereafter shall
live in the Church of God. So purely, and freely do I desire to serve my God.

9. I am resigned willingly to endure all manner of contempts, and yet to be
esteemed by others that I endure them merely against my will, and not out of
Humility; and that I would be revenged if I could without further discredit,
or damage to my self.

THE VII. EXERCISE.
1. I Am resigned to serve my God in this life in all labors, and afflictions
which are possible for me to undergo: though there were neither heaven, or
Hell, or Purgatory, or any pain, or reward in the future life. So purely do
I desire, and purpose to serve my God for his own sake without any manner of
interest, or commodity thereby intended to my self.

2. I am resigned, and contented to enjoy the very lowest place in Heaven,
though God should enable me to meritt as much as all the SS. in Heaven putt
together have done.

3. I am resigned to do, and suffer both in soul, and Body what, and in what
manner, and for so long time as shall be pleasinge to God, and as it shall be
his divine pleasure to lay upon me to be done, or suffered by me.

4. For the love of my God I resign and renounce all manner of inordinate love
toward my self, and toward all other Creatures.

5. Even now, and ever I do renounce all inordinate Affection that I bear to
the personal company, or society of any Persons, or to correspondence with
them by letters, tokens, or messages: And I am contented to be deprived for
ever of their company, and all manner of correspondence with them.

6. And I will avoid such company, and correspondence so far as by the will
of God I may: where I do, or shall find it to be an occasion of fallinge into
sins, or imperfections.

7. And when I cannot avoid the company I will with Gods assistance be more
wary, and careful in my conversation with such persons. And I do resign my
self, and hartilye desire to be deprived of such company.

8. For the love of God I do resign, and yield up all seekinge to get the
Loves, or good wills of others toward my self, and all sollicitous seekinge
to please them further, or otherwise then shall be for God-sake.

9. And I will be contented that they whose love in my nature I most look
after, shall (noe just cause given for it by me) withdraw all their Affections
from me; yea Hate me, speak ill of me, and do me all manner of evil
Offices.

10. For the love of God I do renounce all manner of curiosities in dressinge
of my self, and all desire that other should affect, or esteem me for my
exterior Habit, corporal array, or dressinge; or for my personal visage,
feature, comeliness, Grace, Beautye, or stature, or any other Quality
Artificial, or natural that is in me; or generally for any gift, or Talent
that I have. I say I do renounce all propriety in them and all affection to
them. And would (if it so pleased God) for my mortification be deprived of
them.

11. And have them bestowed upon some other Man whom in my nature I do least
affect, and most detest.

It is continued.

THE VIII. EXERCISE.
1. AND as for such gifts Graces, and Talents as thou o my God wilt have still
to abide in me; I desire, and intend that they may be employed, and made use
of merely, and purely for thy Honor and Glory: and not for any Honor, or
other end of mine own. And therefore I wholly resign, and give them up (as to
any affection I retain to them) to thee my God, from whom all good things do
proceed; and to thee, and thy service only do they belong.

2. Likewise in particular I do renounce all complacence, love, and likinge to
elegancie, and Acuteness of wit, eloquence of tongue, and ability to
express my mind perfectlye by words, or by letters, or other writing. All
Humor, Abilitye, or facilitye to Jest, recreate, or delight others. All
affection I say to those talents, or qualities (so far as I have any of them
in me) I do for the love of God resign, relinquish, and abandon.

3. In particular likewise for the lover of God I do freely renounce all
complacence, and love that I have in the knowledge, or skill of any particular
art either of readinge, writing, speakinge, enditinge, and generally all
skill, and knowledge of any art, or science whatsoever. And also all desire to
be esteemed for nobility, Gentry, and gteate alliance. All things in a word
(that are not for God, and in God) with the love, and Affection to them, I do
for the present, and future, reject, and cast away.

4. For the love of God I do freely renonnce all manner of affection to the
occasions of sins, or imperfections: so that willingly I would utterly fly
from them, be they of what kind they will. And will endeavor to avoid all such
occasions as far as well I may, and what I cannot (such being the
necessity of our lives that we cannot avoid all manner of occasions) I will
with the Grace of God be as wary in them as my frailty will permit me, and
withdraw my self from those occasions so soon as well I may.

5. I do for the love of God renounce all propriety I have or may have in any
Kind of Office, Dignity, or employment. And am, and will be ever ready to
resign, and yield itt up, when it shall please God: and in the mean time
shall hold my self in itt out of Obedience to God, and for his service; and
not for mine own turn, Honor, or interest.

6. For the Love of God I do renounce all manner of proprietye to spiritual
Exercises (be they never so pleasinge to me) so that there is, or shall be
noe Exercise so sweet, or pleasinge which I would not give over, if I knew it
were Gods will that I should do itt.

7. Neither is there any Kind of Exercise so ungrateful, or paynefull to my
nature: but I would embrace it. If I knew, or thought itt to be Gods will that
I should; or otherwise could find it to be profitable to me.

8. In the mean time I will for the love of God serve him in such kind of
Exercises, as my poor knowledge shall inform me to be most for his Honor,
and service: and my own souls good.

9. I resign my self to undergo all manner of temptations be they corporal,
or spiritual: as Blasphemies, despair, or any other manner of Temptation
wherewith it would please God to exercise, and prove me: and will abide in
them as long as he shall please that they continue, be it for never so many
years, yea though it were for my whole life time.

10. And I purpose with the Aid of his Grace not to be carried by any of of
those temptations to offend his Majesty. But ever to adhere, and abide
faithful to him.

It is continued.

THE IX. EXERCISE.
1. AND if I should happen upon any of these temptations to fall, or prove
defective: (as who is not frail) I will notwithstande by the Grace of God so
soon as I can rise up again, reform what has been amiss; and for the
future time look better to my self, continuinge in resistance to those
temptations, so long as they continue.

2. Nor will I seek to drive them away, or lessen the pain of them, but only
as it shall be the will of God, and not according to the will of my nature,
that is apt to free, or ease herself of all temptations merely out of sloth,
and unwillingness to undergo the sharp and paynefull remedies provided by
God for my souls good, by the means of these temptations.

3. I also resign me willingly to embrace, and entertayne such defects or
blemishes (so they be noe sins) as are in me by nature, or by chance, in
body, or in soul; and by which I am less esteemed by others, so far as
any such defects, or blemishes are in me, as Dullness, or slownesse of wit,
or Judgment; disabilitie to express my mind by word, or writing; ignorance,
or unskillfulness in such Kind of things, as others of my calling vsuallye can
do; rawnesse, harshnesse, lowness, or unpleasantness of voice; Blemishes, or
defects in face or favor, or in any other part of the body, or in stature: or
in any other real or seeminge defect in soul, or body. Or in being
descended of poor, or less noble parents, or having poor or obscure
kindred, or Friends. In these, and all other such like points I resign my
self to God; and I do, and will still accept of my Coudition such as it is,
or may be: And do not desire any betteringe, lesseninge, or alteringe of itt.
But that it may continue, and be published to all others, for my mortification,
and humility.

4. I resign my self all the time of my life (prove it never so long) for
the Honor of God, and his divine pleasure, to labor all that I can both
corporallye, and spiritually for gayneinge of perfection (that is, the perfect
love of God) albeit I never reach unto itt, or near unto itt. Therein, and in
all other things resigninge, and wholly submittinge my self to what the
Majesty, Goodness, and Wisdom of God shall please to determine about me.

5. I resign my self as to all propriety, and affections to books, and
instructions printed, and written^ which I either have had, now have, or
hereafter may have. And do resign my self to be deprived of them, when, and
by such means, as shall please God to deprive me of them. And for the love of
God I do for the present, and for the future renounce, and give over all
Affection to them.

6. The like I do for all those things that I have for the use of my body, or
Exercise of devotion, as chamber, beddinge, cassocke, or any other cloathinge,
and all other things appertaninge to the body.

7. Beads Relics, Reliquaries, Agnus Dei, with their silver, gold, or other
precious cases; pictures medalls, and whatsoever other material things
appertayninge to Devotion; or that may be a recreation, solace, or pleasure to
the mind.

THE X. EXERCISE.
1. I Do most willingly resign my self to be deprived of all instructors (I
mean men, or weomen, that may, or do instruct me) and of all Confessors both
in General, and particular, purposinge with the Grace of God ever to serve him
the best I can according to the natural talents which I have, as also
according to the supernatural talents, and Graces that he shall bestow on
me hopinge in his goodness that he will by one mean, or other supply me
with all knowledge that shall be necessary for my soul: albeit I be deprived
of all those ordinary helps of books, instructors, and confessors.

2. I resign my self to have my superiors, and all others whom my nature
would have to be most friendly unto me; to be in all things cross, and
contrary unto me; yea, and to persecute me so far as the providence of
God shall permit, purposinge through his Grace, and for his love to endure all.

3. Since the tongue is an occasion of many sins, and imperfections, I do for
the love of God renounce all affection to the use, and Exercise of the tongue,
and to all manner of talkinge, and discoursinge so that if it might please God
I would be contented for his love to be made dumb, and to have noe tongue at
all, so that I could not speak.

4. Because nevertheless the necessity of his life will not admit such
mortification of absolute dumnesse in practice; but that I must often speak
either for mine own need, or for Charities sake, or for my own^ recreatio^, or
for some other iu^t occasion, I purpose with the grace of God that all my
words, and talkings shall not be out of Affection to talkinge, but out of a
reasonable necessity with a religious wariness that I offend not in the
matter, or manner of my speakinge; giuinge over so soon as conveniently I
may; ever affectinge (at least in my superior will, if not in my nature, or
sensuality) to have noe use of my tongue at all, nor wishinge to have need, or
just oc^asion for it, save only for praysinge, and Honoring^ God. So that by
this means my errors, and escapes by occasion of talkinge do not proceed out
of affection to talkinge itself: but that the talk itself be neces^^tated;
and the which we could not well forbear.

5. For the love, and Honor of God; I do renounce all manner of desire of
Honor, and Honorable places; dignities, and Offi^es that are o^ Authority,
command, or Directio^^ or whatsoever may breed me estimation with others, and
thereby feed my proud nature.

6. And in steed thereof I will undergo any office, place, or employment that
my nature does scorn, and abhor; if that obedience, charity, or the will of
God do impose itt on me.

7. For the love of God I do renounce all vain complyinge, conversation, and
correspondance with the world by letters, tokens, messages, or otherwise. And
all seekings to please the world, with which in affection I desire to have noe
more to do, then if I were really dead, and buried; desiringe only to serve,
and please God. Yea I desire so much to be forgotten by the world, that it may
not remember, or know tha^ there is, or ever was any such creature as I am; or
as if I had never at all been borne.

8. For the love of God I renounce all inordinate affection to my parents
Friends, and kindred: as if I were another Melchisedec, whose parents and
kindred were utterly unknown both to himself, and to all others. And do
resign my self to be neglected, and forsaken by them all; yea, and to have
them (without any just occasion given by me) auerted from me; so that they
abhor to hear me named, nor can endure so much^ as to think of me.

9. For the love of God I renounce all affection to meats, and drinks as to
any pleasure, or delight that I willingly intend in them; and do rather (if it
might please God to grant itt unto me) choose for the mortification of my
sensual^tie, that I might never need to eat, or drink at all; but be
delivered from the necessity of itt. And in such case would I desire to live
so long as it shall please God that I abide in th^^ lise. I mean without
eatinge, or drinkinge: and without need to eat, or drink, or to take any
thing that may be pleasinge to my Body, or nature.

10. But since it cannot be so but that I needs must eat, and drink, I will
do it for the love, and service of God, and not merely, or at all for my own
will, and pleasure.

It is continued.

THE XI. EXERCISE^
1^ IN the like manner I resign my self (as to the affection) for sleepinge,
Recreation, and all other corporal refreshments, and solaces; to take them
only for God; and not for mine own will, or satisfaction. And to be willing
altogether to forbear them, if that it could stand with the will of God
according to true discretion.

2. I do renounce all manner of Affection to created things be they corporal,
or spiritual as to any affection I hear them for their own sakes merely
de^iringe, and intendinge that all kind of created things spiritual, and
corporal, and all that is not God, may be loved by me for God, and in God,
and not otherwise.

3. In particular I renounce all Affection to sensible g^st, and Devotion; to
spiritual lights, to facility in Prayinge; to elevated contemplations both
Active, and Passive, Rapts, and extases, Visions, Apparitions, Extraordinary
Illuminations, Revelations, knowledges of the de^ine secrets, the beholdinge,
and conuersinge with Glorious Angels, Saints, or other good Spirits. And to
all other extraordinary gifts, and favors. I say I do resign all affection
to them; so that if I chance to have them; yet by the Grace of God will I have
no^ adheringe Affection to them, but refer it to the goodness, and freewill
of God to give, or not to give what He pleases (...).

4. And with the Grace of God, I will never ^^st in any gift of God, not in
any created thing be it never so noble; but only shall make use of itt, so
far as it may be of use for to pass further into that which is increated,
illimited, and infinitt: which is God himself the Creator, and Giver: who is
infinitely above all these, and other whatsoever gifts, Graces, and Creatures.
And in him only will I place, and make my final Rest, love, and intention.
Though I know well I shall not attain unto him, as He is in his true essence,
while I ^m in this l^fe.

5. And therefore I purpose with his Grace ever to labor more, and more to
approach unto him, and never to give over: knowinge well that I shall not
perfectly come by him in this life. (It being reserved for the future) but yet
with continual labor I may with his grace walkinge only in the light of faith
draw nearer, and liker unto Him, and more please his divine eyes, which I
desire, and intend seriously ever to do.

6. I resign my self for the love of God to be deprived of al bodily
necessaries, and to be as naked therein as when I was borne. And as for such
necessaries as God shall afford me for the maintayninge of my corporal life;
I do, and will likewise resign all love, and affection even to those
necessaries.

7. For the love of God I resign my self to be by all that do know, or
hereafter shall know me esteemed the most abject, unworthy, base, ignorant,
foolish, wittlesse, and most contemp^ible of all humayne creatures: And
therefore not only incapable of all Office, and employment; but also unworthy
to be admitted into the company, or conversation of any Others though of never
so mean condition.

8. For the love of God I do resign my self to be contented with the
natural, and supernatural gifts, and talents that I have, or shall have
wishinge noe more of them then it shall please God to give me, or continue in
me, which I will employ in his service while I have them, and will not repine,
or murmr ^o be deprived of them.

9, I am resigned, and contented to undergo all such mortifications,
Obediences, and difficulties whatsoever, which my superior mediate, or
immediate shall deliberately require of me to be undergone, or performed.

10. I am resigned after this life to abide in Purgatory in horrible pains,
and torments, and for so long time, as it shall be the will of God, and to
remain there even to the end of the world; if it shall so please God to
ordain of me.

THE XII. EXERCISE.
1. I Am resigned not to know what will become o^ me hereafter ^i^her for
body, or soul: but therein to refer my self to the private, and secret
Judgment of God. And to be resigned, and contented that God do reserve, and
conceal^ to himself those his knowledges, and judgments about me.

2. And in particular not to know where, in what company, with what
assistance, and in what manner, of what kind of sickness, and whither
suddenly, or of a: long sickness, or in what case as to the state of my soul
I shall dye; as whither my soul shall go to Heaven, or to Hell, or to
Purgatori^. In all these cases I am to resign my self, and to be con^^nted
that God only does know what will become of me, and my (...) to be Ignorant of
itt.

3. Nevertheless (as to my soul) I hope, and with the Grace of God ^uer will
hope (because he is good, and commands me to hope) that I shall be a saved
soul; and shall one day sooner, or later enjoy Him in Heaven for all
Eternity.

4. For the love I bear unto God, and purely for the love and excellency that
is in him, I resign my self to serve him all the days of my life with all my
soul, and body: without any reguard to a reward for so doing. In so much
as if there were neither Heaven, or hell, or Purgatory, or any Reward, or
punishment, in this life, or the next. Yet would I serve him in the best manner
I could, and this only in reguard that his Goodness, and Other His
excellencies do deserve infinitely greater loves, and services then I, yea or
all the Angels, and Saints, and other creatures whatsoever are able to do^, or
perform for him.

5. For the love of God in whose sight I am, and upon whom all my being
depends. I resign my self unto him with all that I have or can do, or suffer
in soul, Body, Fame, Friends, or external goods: for time, and eternity.
So that I do reserve to my self noe manner of will: but in all things do
make the will of God to be my will utterly neglectinge my own will; as if I
had none at all God by this means wholye reigninge in me, and doing by me,
with me, and about me (as being but his instruement) whatsoever shall please
him. And nothing as for, or to my self; or any end of mine own.

An Act for a timorous, or scrupulous Conscience.
6. For the love I bear unto God, I renounce, and give over all manner of
self will, and self conceit, or opinion in all matters generallye; and
particularly in this; that I will henceforth stand to, and practice such
advise, and direction as has been given me by such as I have reason to give
creditt unto in spiritual matters, about the saying of my Office, or about
Confessions, or about iudginge what is sin, and what not; and what I am to
judge to be mortal, and what not. Neither will I in any point vary from such
advise, or directions: But will tie myself (out of the love, and obedience I
owe to God) to ^^and to such aduises as have been, or shall be given unto me,
^ither about the matter, manner, or frequencie of Confession; or about the
iteratinge, or saying of my offi^e, or any part thereof, or about the
Attention unto it; or about iudginge what to be s^nn^, and that not: and what
to b^ morrall, and what not. Or about any, other thing that shall concern my
Confession, or saying my Office, or otherwise con^erni^ge my soul, and
conscience.

^. I ^es^gne my self to vnd^rg^e, and perform^ whatsoeu^r my sup^^io^, shall
deli^era^^lye, and Abso^utely^ req^i^e of m^^, ^lb^i^ neu^r ^oe ^^pugn^nt ^o
^yn^ ow^^ natural will or (...) And though it s^^m^ ^^ue^ ^oe r^pugnant to my
natu^all reason, and iudg^ment^ and ^^^me to be ^ayne, and impertinent, or
ag^^^st re^s^n^ (...) pro^^ very p^^nefull to my body, or preiudiciou^ to my
Fame, and honor; yea, and though it seem a thing impossible to be done, yet
will I attempt it, and endeavor to do it the best ^ can. Provided always
there be nothing commanded me (as without doubt I hope, there never will be)
against the Laws of God, and His Church.

9. I likewise resign my self willinglye to undergo any penance public, or
private that shall be enjoined me by my superior immediate, or mediate; yea
though such a penance be never so great a ^onfusion, or shame unto me; or
stayne ^o my honor, or credi^t; and though I be never so innocent in the
supposed crime for the which the p^^^an^e is imposed; and that ^ll Others do
e^^eem^, and judge me^ guilty of the crime though ind^ed I am not.

10. I resign my self so ^arre to overcome the ^a^hfullnesse, or other
diffic^l^^^^ ^ha^ i^, o^ shall ^e in me, for the discoueringe of my secret
bodilye necessities, or other secrets of my interior: Especially to do this in
matter of Confession.
That I will when there shall be cause for it therein mortifye my self, and
will with the Grace of God open my case to my superior, or Ghostly Father
according to the nature of my cases, and as it shall require, albeit my
natural will have never so great an auersion from such my discovery of my
necessities, or of my interior state.

THE XIII. EXERCISE.
1. I Resign my self that when Charity, Obedience, discretion, or necessity
shall require it: I will visitt, and help any One lyinge sick though of the
plague, or any other, infectious, odious, or horrid disease; and will attend
serve, and comfort them according to my ability without flinchinge any way;
and therein will reguard neither life, nor health: nor will avoid itt for any
horror, or loathsomenesse that my nature shall find, or conceive in the
disease, or employment. Yet it is not the will of God that I should without
cause desperately put my self into the said employment, but it must be done
according to the Rule of Discretion, and that good may come by it to the
party that is infected, or otherwise sick.

2. In like manner I resign my self to attend, serve, and watch with those
that be sick, or need help according to their necessity, and as Charity,
Obedience, and discretion shall require of me.

3. I resign my self to undergo, and put in execution all manner of remedies
that shall be deliberatelye advised me by the physician with the consent of my
Superiors, for the betteringe of my health, or sauinge of my life: be those
remedies never so harsh, bitter, paynefull, or odious to my nature. As the
taking of mo^^ bitter Potions, cuttinge of some of my limbs, or any other
paynefull remedy, ordained and prescribed unto me.

4. I am resigned to undergo the molestations of little but paynefully
^inchinge, bitinge, and troublesome creatures; as fleas, lice, eimises, and
other such like v^rmine so far as God will have me to be exercised by them,
and that I cannot rid my self from them. Yea though they should so far^e
pr^uayle over me as to bereave me of my life. ^as they have done to diuers] I
will, and do s^^ ^he love of God therein re^^gne my self to his will, and
prouiden^^ ^eerin.

^. I resign my self, when Obedience, Charity, or necess^tie shall ^^quire
it; to go to any House, room, or place: and lodg^, and dwell ^here
notwithstanding the fear of Devils, Hobgobblings, or other had Spirit^ that
are said to be there, (...) will (in the name of God, and when it shall be his
will] resort, and abide in such a place: albeit I should there really see a
1000. of those evil, and malicious Spirits; yea, and though God would permit
them to beat, buffet, scratch and torment my Body, as he permitted them to
do to the Bodies of S. Anthony, and other Saints for their Exercise. For I
know well that all the Malice of the Devil will not be able to hurt my soul,
so long as I continue my good will, and love to God, which the devil cannot
take away by molestinge of my Body, but he does thereby give me more, and
better occasion to unite my soul to God, the which being done, it little
imports what he does to my body, which [what harm soever he do in this
life] I believe, and am assured will be well restored to me at the general
day of Judgment, and in perfect health, as I hope also for the salvation, and
perpetu^ll felicity of my soul.

6. And therefore, and in like manner I do resign my self that if God will
permit, and have my body to be possessed by the Devil, or by millions of
Devils, and to be vexed, and tormented by them: or to have witchcraft prevail
on my body, and to vex, and torment me, I shall take it patientlye, and
resignedly as from the hand of God, and be contented that his, and mine enemies
those Devils do pe^forme their malice toward my Body, my soul being still
untouched by them over which they shall have noe more power then my Frewill
shall give way to, which by the Grace of God shall be in nothing at all. And
some Saints there have been who for their Exercise, and humiliatio^ have
desired of God that they might in their bodies be possessed by the Devil, and
have thervppon come to be possessed.

7. For the love I bear unto God I do renounce all desire to any manner of
Office, or employment that is of Authority, or Dignity, or in any sort
grateful to my nature, or sensuality, and do purpose with the help of his
Grace, for the keepinge my self in humility, and for auoydinge of occasions
of distractions not only not to desire, or go about directly, or indirectly to
procure the haueinge of any such Office, or employment.

8. But also by all the means that may be pleasinge to God to pre^ent the
having of them.

9. And being offered unto me to refuse them vt^erlye, so far as I may
without displeasinge God.

It is continued.

THE XIV. EXERCISE.
1. AND further I will endeavor, and procure (so far, as shall stand with
the pleasure of God) that any other (rather then my self) though he be my
junior, o^ of talents never so inferior to mine: shall have the office, if he
shall be judged fit, and sufficient for the place: yea though he be one, whom
in my nature I have least affection for, or one who is most auerted from me,
and is like to be most contradictori^, and troublesome to me. And of this mind
with the Grace of God I purpose to be while I liu^ though I live never so
long. And shall by the grace of God be contented if not rejoice, that I am,
and shall be held insufficient, and unworthy of any office, or employment of
worth, or creditt.

2. And on the otherside there is not, or shall be any Office, or employment
so mean, base, contemptible, paynefull, or otherwise ungrateful, but that I
will accept of it, if it be the will of God, and abide i^ it so long as it
shall please God out of pure obedience to His holy will, though the Office, or
employment were to continue all my life ^yme; and that I live, and dye the most
abie^^^ neglected, and contemptible person not only of all the house, but even
of all others that are in the whole world.

This present matter of Resignation is very necessary to be used in Prayer but
more necessary to be stood unto in practice when the occasion happens, Read
consider, and practice.

The virtue of prayer is Practice out of prayer.

This is the rule of Rules, and the only advise.


as ^ften it does. For God seeinge the soul to have over much pride, and to
want that humility he would have in her, will not perhaps have her to be
chosen to such an office, or place of Authority, or dignity which he
foreseeth would increase pride in He^, at least would not work in her that
Humility which were requisite for her. And therefore he prouides out of his
great love to her, that some other who perhaps seems to be much inferior in
Worth, a^^ talents; to be chosen to itt. And oftentimes God for her further
Humiliation in lei^ of the higher place does cause her to be chosen to some
Other l^w, or base place: which she in her nature contemns. And a soul that
means, or desires to be good does observe the divine Ordinances, and
dispositions about her, and does thereunto conform, and subject herself though
extremely perchance against the Inclination of her nature. But a soul that
neither is humble, nor desires to be humble, but would exalt herself above,
and against Gods ^ill, by contradictinge his divine Providence, does gro^ and
become wilful, impatient, and takes occasion by itt of much harm, yea
perhaps of utter ruin, and Fall. As it appears by almost in^init Examples
that heretofore have fallen out, and do yet daily fall out. For this has
been the very cause of Apostatisinge of all Arch-hereti^es, as Luther,
Be^nardinus^ Ochinus, and Others. And in very deed if you observe itt, you
shall find even at this day (and as it has, so ever it will be) the causes,
and roots of all the stirrs, factions, and contests that are in all Relig^ous
Conuents do most commonly, if not al^ayes arise out of Pride, Ambition, and
Irresignation in the point of Offices, and places now last mentioned. Which is
that either we covet places of Honor, or Credit for our selves, or for our
Friends; who being in the Places would favor us: or else we repine at the
puttinge in of those whom our nature does not affect for the place. Let us
therefore with the Grace of God overcome ourselves in itt; and stand unto the
most louinge Providence of God: for our humiliation, and final Perfection in
his love which is the proper cause, and end, of our being Religious, or our
vndertakinge a Spiritual course of life: The true end of our vndertakinge a
Religious life.
And if we do not heerin seek to subdue our selves, but yield to Ambition,
we do hereby resemble, and serve the most ambitious Lucifer, and shall
without adhaerents be pertakers with him, and his adh^^rents^ in his
vnspea^able everlasting torments, from which God of his goodness preserve us.
Amen.

3. I resign my self to undergo not only such Crosses, and Difficulties as
shall fall upon mine own person (of which kind are all the precedant acts of
Resignations) but also all such calamities, Crosses, Pestilence, famine,
scandal, infamies, des^lations, deuas^ations, disgraces, pouertye, and Other
Afflictions of what kind soever the Divine Providence shall by any means
permit to fall on this communi^ie, or upon any particular member or members
thereof. And I purpose with the grace of God ever to serve, and adhere to him
even in the midst of those calamities, or troublesome alterations.

4. In like manner I resign my self upon all public scandals given by
others, and upon all public calamities fallen on the whole Church, or any
member of it, or upon any particular Country, and namely upon our own, or
upon the city or Country wherein this Monastery, College, or House is
feared^ and in all cases to continue my adhereinge love, and good will to God,
as if such accidents had not at all happened.

5. I resign my self to dye when, and in what manner it shall please God; and
in particular to live in a house (the like for any other Danger which hangs
over my head) so long as God shall so ordain: that is very like to fall,
and thereby oppress, and kill me, and that ^oe suddaynely, that I shall not
have the time, or space to say, or think so much as Lord have mercy upon
me. Or perhaps I shall be fast a sleep when it shall fall upon me, and
oppress me ere I be awake. Or peradventure the fall will not suddenly bereave
me of my life, but will bruise my body, or my limbs, and make me live in
such intolerable pain that death would be a great ^ase, and pleasure to my
nature. I resign my self I say heerin, and the like; to the divine will, and
Providence in all such like cases. Still crauinge, and begginge of God that in
whatsoever manner, time, or place my death may happen, that I may dye in his
Holy Grace, and favor for the salvation, and eternal weal of my soul.

6. Finally I render, and resign my self to thee Alm^ God (whose I am by
Justice, and from who^ this my being depends) with all that I am, have, or can
do, or suffer in soul, and Body, Fame, or external goods for time, and
Eternity. So that I do reserve to my self noe will at all; but in all do
accept thy Will; utterly forsakinge, neglectinge, and contemninge mine own
will; as if I had noe will at all. By which thou only dear God may reign in
me, doeinge with me, and about me: as being but an instruement of thine:
what thou best likest, and please now, and ever more.

Fiat, Fiat. Amen, Amen.

An Exercise of Devotion to our Blissed Lady Mother of God.
1. HAIL sweet Mary: hayle most sacred Virgin; who^ God before all ages did
choose for his most Sacred Mother.

2. Thou art betwixt God, and man: that Blissed Mediatrix by whom the highest
things are joined to the lowest.

3. Thou art the beginning of life, the Gate, or entree of Grace, the safe
Haven of the world sufferinge shipwreck.

4. Obtain for me I beseech thee perfect pardon of my sins, and the perfect
Grace of the Holy Ghost.

5. That I may diligently worship: chastlye, and feruentlye love thy Son my
Sauuiour, and thee the Mother of Mercy.

6. Hayle sweet Marie, whom, forshewed in sundry figurative speeches, and
promised in diverse Oracles of the Prophets; the Ancient Fathers did coue^ most
earne^tly.

7. O my Lady receive me for thy poor servant: Adopt me O Mother for thy
Son!

8. Grant that I may be numbered among them whom thou do love (whose names
are written in thy Virginal breast) and whom thou do teach, direct, help,
cherish^ and protect.

9. Hayle sweet Marie; whom God by a most Honorable Privilege did preserve
from sin.

10. And adorned with most singular Grace: and most excellent gifts.

11. O Glorious Virgin, o Gracious Virgin, o most pure Virgin chosen amongst
thowsands.

12. Do^ not repel me wicked sinner: do not despise, and reject me defiled
with the filth of sin.

13. But hear me miserable wretch ^ryinge unto thee, comfort me desiringe
thee, and help me trustinge in thee. Amen.

An Exerc^se to the Holy Angels, and especially the Angel Guardian.
1. I Salute you o Holy Spiritt^, and with all mine Heart Congratulate your
Happiness who continuallye contemplate, and behold the Divine Face, and
Allsatiatinge goodness!

2. You o Seraphin, Cherubim, and Thrones who are of the higher Ierarchie! you
o dominations, virtues and powers of the middle! you o Princes, Archangells:
and Ang^lls of the lowest! who continuallye singe Holy, Holy, Holy Lord God
of Sabbath.

3. Thou o my Lord have made these holy Spirits, Angels, for my Benefitt, and
have commanded them to keep me in all my ways!

4. They do therefore assist us with great care, and with watchful endeavor
at all times, and in all pla^es succouringe us.

5. They present our sighs, and sobbs to thee o Lord: they inflame our will,
illuminate our understanding, and replenish our mind with holy thoughts.

6. They walk with us in all our ways, reioycinge at our virtues, and
contristated at our vices.

7. Their love is great, and excessive toward us.

8. They help such as are taking pains, they protect such as are at rest,
they encourage such as fight, they crown the conquerors: they rejoice with
such as joy, (I mean such as joy in thee) and they suffer with such as
suffer: (I mean such as are in sufferance for thee.)

9. Great, and very great is the Honor done, to man, to have Angels to
wait on, and assist him.

10. O my Dear Angel Guardian govern, protect, and defend me: illuminate,
comfort, and direct me now, and ever more.

11. O Blissed Angels be you ever blissed, and praised for all, and every
Favor, and benefitt you have most louingely, and powrefullye bestowed on me,
and vouchsafed me; and one (on my own experience) a most singular one.

12. Grant o Father of Heaven, and Earth that they may ever rejoice
concerning us, [that is: by our practice of vertue] and that thou may ever
be praised by them, and us, and that both they, and we may be brought into
one sheepefould, that together we may confess to thy holy name; O Thou
Cr^atsr of men, and Angels! Amen.

AN EXERCISE OF Devotion.
Toward our Holy Father, and Religious founder S. Bennet.
1. HAYLE most blissed, ^and glorius Father: I congratulate with all my heart
thy glory, and grace with God.

2. I praise likewise, and thank the divine goodness that made thee worthy^,
and brought thee to the same.

3. Bestowing^ on thee, in this life very great natural, and supernatural
gifts, and graces by means whereof thou have obtained thy present most
glorious, and happy condition.

4. In particular I praise, and magnify the same divine goodness for that it
gave thee the grace in the very flower, or prime of thy youth with a thristye
mind to seek after the sole felicity of the future life.

5. And for that end to forsake all the vain pleasures of this life, the
solaces of thy Parents, kindred, and Country, the desire of humane sciences and
learning: and [generallye] all things that might not be needful for thee
toward attayninge the foresaid felicity.

6. And I praise, and magnify the same divine goodness for that by such
calling, and taking of thee so tymelye out of the world, and the snares of
it: he freed and secu^ed thee from worser habits, and multitudes of sins
which the world [if tho^ had remained longer in it] had bee^e apt to breed,
and cause in thee.

7. I praise, and magnify the same divine goodness for leadinge thee to a
place of solitude, and there prouidinge for thee all corporal neces^aries
toward his holy service, and thine own souls good.

8. And especially for that the same divine goodness itself vouchsafed to
become thy immediate Master, and Director: inspiringe thee, and teachinge thee
what to do continuallye.

9. And gave thee Grace, and strenth to perform, and accomplish the things
necessary, and expedient to the end He called thee to.

10. And namelye to live in mortification of body, and will; And as it were in
continual prayer, and high Contemplation.

11. I praise, and glorify the same divine Goodness for bestowinge on thee
the most necessary gift of perseverance by which thou did remain constant
in such perfect divine service from thy first call to the very period of thy
life.

11. That comeinge to dye, even ripe for a most holy death, thou did as it
were pass from life to life: as one tha^ feels not what corporal death
means.

13. So that thy expiration was Aspiration according to what S. Gregory the
great says of thee. Vltimum Spiritum inter verba Orationis efflauit. To wit.
His last breath was Prayer. Passinge forth of the faithful Contemplation of
this life, to the real, and beatificke contemplation of the other.

1^. I now cordiallye congratulate the perfect felicity thou enioyest.

15. And since I am called by the divine Grace (as I truly hope) to live
according to thy holy Rule for my Salvation, and Perfection; vouchsafe thy
Holy intercession for that end that I may through Gods Grace live
accordinglye, and dye consummated, and perfect therein, and thereby for without
his Grace I can do nothing.

16. And as the said S. Gregory says thou framedst thy Rule according to thy
holy life, sweet Jesus give me grace interiorlye, and exteriorlye to be a
faithful Imitator thereof.

17. That I may be led by the same Guide the Holy Ghost.

18. And Exercise true Spiritual Prayer the only means to all virtues.

19. That I may in all things abandon my self with all pu^itie of Intention.

20. And do all good, and abstain from all evil which interiorlye, and
exteriorly may concern me.

21. Especially in all things occurringe, patientlye to suffer all injuries,
^^d Crosses.

22. And that all may be accomplished; God grant me, as he did to thee, the
gift of perseverance.

23. That I expiringe may be admitted into the happy society of thee, and thy
faithful followers. Which God grant Father Son, and holy Ghost. Amen.

This Exercise to S. Bennet was the Devotion of the Vener^ble Father ^ake^
before m^ntioned ^o gi^e God th^n^kes for the happiness of his Religious
v^c^tion, which I have ^eere ins^r^ed, as being grateful to those of the same
profession, and not ungrateful to any devout soul.

HAYLE JESUS. Or Acts upon the life, and Passion of our Sau^iour I^sus-Christ.
Which are indeed instar Omnium, and do contain in them Acts of all kind^ of
Prayer, as Contrition, Resignation, love, or what elsesoeuer. As a devout soul
in her Mental Exercises^therevpon may ea^ilye experience.

THE FIRST EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet^ Jesus, Praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ: who for
^y s^^e ha^t vouchsafed to come down from the Royal seats, and from the
mellisluous Boosome of thy Divine Father into this valley of misery; And to be
conceived, and incarnated, and made Man by the Holy Ghost in the most chaste
womb of the most sacred Virgin Mary.

2. Choose I beseech thee my Heart for thy dwellinge place; Adorn itt,
replenish it, with Spiritual gifts, and wholye possess itt.

3. O that I were able by profound humility to inuit thee to itt: and with an
ardent Affection to receive thee, and after having received thee, to retain
thee with me!

4. O that I were so fastened unto thee that I might never depart, or turn
away my mind from thee!

5. Hayle s^eete Jesus, Praise, Honor. and Glory be to thee ^ Christ: Who
would that the Virgin Marie having conceived thee: should make have to
visi^t her Cousin Elizabeth, and did inspire her, that she should salute, and
assist Her.

6. And thou have vouchsafed o Christ to lie hidd for nine months together in
the most chaste womb of the sacred Virgin Mary.

7. Power into my soul o Jesus the Grace of perfect humility, and imprint it
most deepelye in my Hart^ that I may be found ready always to serve, and obey
thee.

8. Grant that my Heart may loath all transitory things, and may incessantly
perceive that thou do pos^esse, and duel in itt.

9. Hayle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory, be to thee o Christ who have
vouchsafed to be borne of thy Virgin Mother, poor, and passible without any
pain, or detriment to her Virginity, in a poor stable.

10. Whom being borne she humbly adored.

11. O that it were thy will to be continually borne in me by a new fervor of
Spirit!

12. And that I may be wholly burnt with the fire of thy love.

13. O that thou were the only comfort, desire, and sollace of my Heart!

14. O that I did seek after thee Alone, t^inke on thee Alone, and love thee
Alone!

THE II. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Jesus, praise, hono^r, and glory be to thee o Christ. Who
being borne i^ the depth of winter did not refuse to be suaddled in poor
clothes, and weepinge to be laid in the manger, and as a little infant to suck
milk from thy Mothers breasts.

2. I adore thee most dear Redeemer, King of Angels.

3. Hayle Prince of Peace, light of the Gentiles, and most desired Sau^iour.

4. Graunt^ o Lord that I may always stand in thy sight, truly humble, and
truly poor in Spirit.

5. Grant that for thy Holy namessake I may willingly endure all kind of
Mortifications, and may love nothing in this world besides thee, nor wish to
possess any thing but thee.

6. Hayle sweet Jesus, whom the celestial legions of Angels did honor newly
borne with joyful praises: And the sheepheards devoutly seekinge, and
findinge; adored with admiration.

7. Grant that I may joyfully without tediousness persevere in thy praises,
and service.

8. Hayle sweet Jesus, who would upon the eight day like other childeren be
circumcised, and being yet an infant shedd thy precious Blood.

9. And for our singular Comfort would be ^aled Jesus which signifies a
Sauuiour.

10. O that itt would, please thee to admit me being circumcised from all
bad thoughts, words, and works into the number of thy childeren.

11. Thou o Lord art called Jesus, that is to say a Sauuiour; be thou therefore
my Sauuiour, and save me.

12. Hayle s^eete Jesus, whom the sages with a devout seekinge found by the
direction of a star, and haninge found most humblye adored.

13. Offeringe unto thee gifts of gold, Frankincense, and Myrrh.

14. Grant o Lord that with these blissed men I may always seek, and adore
thee in Spirit, and Truth.

15. Grant that I may offer daily unto thee the gold of bright shininge
Charity, the Frankincense of sweet smellinge Devotion, and the Myrrh of
perfect Mortification.

16. Hayle sweet Jesus, who for our sakes would be subject to the Law, and
to give us an example of Humility would be carried to the Temple by thy
Mother, and be redeemed with an offeringe ordained for such as were poor.

17. Where just Simeon, and Anne the Prophetess reioycinge greatly at thy
presence gave very glorious Testimony of thy Dignitye.

18. O that all Pride were utterly thrown down in me!

19. O that all desire of human Favor, and itch of selfeloue, were cooled,
and cured in me!

THE III. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Jesus, praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ: Who
stayinge in the Temple were for the space of three days with great grief
sought by thy devout Mother, and at lentgh with great joy found by Her
sittinge in the midst of the Doctors hearing them, and proposinge questions to
them.

2. Would to God thou would give, and Communicate thy self in such sort unto
me that I might never be se^arated from thee, not ever be dep^^ued of thy
comfort.

^. Hayle sweet Jesus, who for the space of thirty years remayninge unknown
have vouchsafed to be reputed by the Jews the son of Joseph the Carpenter,
and of his wife the blissed Virgin Marye.

4. Let thy Grace I beseech thee, pluck up, and utterly root out of the fund
of my soul all pride, and Ambition.

5. O that I may delight to be unknown, and to be esteemed vile, and Base!

6. Hayle sweet Jesus, who have not disdained to come to the river of Jordan,
and entringe into i^t, there to be baptized by thy servant John the Baptist.

7. I would through thy meritts I might become most clean, and pure even in
this life.

8. Hayle sweet Jesus, who for ou^ sakes abidinge amongst wild beasts in the
desert, and fasting forty days, and forty nights, and perseueringe in prayer
have permitted thy self to be tempted by Satan.

9. And ouercominge Him have been honored with the ministerre, and service of
Angels.

10. Give me Grace that I may chastise, and subdue my flesh with all the
vicious affections thereof.

11. Give me Grace that I may constantlye persevere in Prayer, and other
spiritual exercises.

12. Let noe temptation I beseech thee defile me, but rather let temptations
purge me, and join, and unite me unto thee.

13. Hayle sweet Jesus, who to the end thou might gather together the
dispersed children of God have vouchsafed to preach Penance, to call
Disciples, and out of them to choose twelve Apostles to be eminent preachers of
thy Faith.

14. Draw me after thee, and powrefully stir up my Heart to love thee.

15. Grant that I may adhere to thee Alone. Amen.

THE IV. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Jesus, praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ. Who for
me have suffered many afflictions, Heat, Cold, Hunger, Thirst, Labors, and
miseries.

2. Grant that I may receive from thy Hand cheerfully all Kind of Adversity.

3. Hayle sweet Jesus. Who thirstinge the conversion of souls, have passed
whole nights in Prayer.

4. Have been wearied with trauellinge, have passed from Country to Country,
from City to City, from Town to Town, from Village to Village.

5. Let thy love make me quick, and ready to all good things that I be
never slothful in thy service.

6. Grant that every where I may have zeal of thine Honor, and imploye my
self wholly in thy service.

7. Hayle sweet Jesus praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ. Who
conuersinge with men have vouchsafed most willinglye to comfort them and by
many miracles most mercifullye to cure their Maladies, and diseases.

8. Give me a devout hartfull of affection, and compassion: whereby I may
pity other Men's afflictions: and may have as great a feelinge of their
miseries, as if they were mine own.

9. Whereby also I may bear patientlye with all Men's imperfectio^s, and
cheifelye to my ability succor them in their necessities.

10. Hayle sweet Jesus praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ. Who
have not shunned the company of Publicans, and sinners, but have afforded them
thy most louinge Familiarity, and ready pardons of sins, to Matthew, Zacheus,
Mary Magdelene, and to the weoman taken in Adulteri^, and to the rest that were
repentant.

1^. Grant that I may embrace all men with cheerful love, and Charity.

12. May readilye forgive those that offend me.

13. May perfectlye love those that hate me.

1^. Hayle sweet Jesus, who for my souls sake have su^^ered many injuries,
many Blasphemies, many reproaches, and infinitt abuses of those on whom thou
had bestowed many Benefitts.

15. Give me a Heart truly innocent, and simple: that I may sincearely love
mine enemies, and unfeignedly pity them.

16. And Rendringe good for evil may through perfect charity, and meek
patience perfectlye please thee. Amen.

THE V. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ. Who
cominge to Jerusalem, in a meek, and gentle manner did^t ^ide upon an Ass:
and amidst, the praises which were sunge by the people that came to meet thee,
did power forth tears bewaylinge the ^uine of the City, and destruction of
those ungrateful souls.

2. O that I might never be delighted with the praises, and Favors of Men!

3. But always be profitablye employed in internal tears of compunction, and
Devotion.

4. Hayle sweet Jesus, whom Judas the treacherous Disciple sold for a little
Money to the Jews who did persecute thee, and conspire thy death.

5. Root out of my Heart all evil desires of transitory things.

6. Grant that I may never prefer any thing before thee.

7. Hayle sweet Jesus, praise. honor, and glory be to thee o Christ. Who in
Jerusalem according to the Law did eat the Paschall Lamb which thy
Disciples, and giuinge them an Example of Humility, and Holy Charity
kneelinge upon the ground did wash their feet, and having washed them
did wipe them with a towle.

8. Would to God this example might pierce my Heart, and utterly throw down in
me all pride, and loftiness.

9. Give me o Lord a most profound Humility by which I may without
difficulty, cast my self at all men's feet.

10. Hayle sweet Jesus, who with an unspeakable Charity have instituted the
Sacrament of the Eucharist, And with a wonderful liberality have in it, given
thy self to us.

11. Stir up in me a Desire, and enkindle in the intymme of my soul a most
vehement hunger of this most Venerable Sacrament^

12. Grant that when I come to that Table of life, I may with a chaste
Affection, singular humility, and perfect purity of Heart receive thee.

13. Hayle sweet Jesus, who being about to leave this world did exhort, and
comfort with words full of unspeakable sweetness thy elect Disciples, and
with most ardent prayer did recommend them to thy Father.

14. Giuinge testimony thereby how tenderlye thou louedst them, and us also
who were to receive thy faith by them.

15. Grant that thy word may be truly pleasinge to me, and sweeter then the
Honnie, and the Honnie comb to my soul.

16. O that the Spirit of that fiery Exhortation might enter into my Heart,
whereby I might wholye be ^ransformed into love! Amen.

THE VI. EXERCISE^
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ. Who
goinge forth with thy Disciples beyond the river Cedron did enter into a
garden where thou forsawest thou should be taken.

2. O that I could utterly forsake my own will, and always love, and follow
thine!

3. O that (for thy Honor, and for the ^aluation of my Brethren) I could with
an undaunted mind undergo any adversity whatsoever!

4. Yea that I might not fear (if it pleased God) to expose my life for them.

5. Hayle sweet Jesus, who immediatelye before thy Passion did begin to
fear, to greiue, and be sad; taking upon thy^el^e our weakness.

6. That by this thy infirmity thou mighst comfort, and strenthen those that
tr^mble at the expectation of Death.

7. Preserve me I beseech thee as well from vicious sadness, as from foolish
joy.

8. Grant that all the grief I have hitherto sustained may redound to thy
Glory, and the remission of my sins.

9. Hayle sweet Jesus, who fallinge upon the ground prayedst unto thy Father,
and humblye offeredst up thy self wholye unto Him saying Father thy will be
done.

10. Grant that in all necessities, and Tribulations I may have recourse unto
thee by Prayer.

11. And that I may give, and resign my self wholye to thy Will.

12. That I may with a quiet mind receive all things as from thy hands.

13. Hayle sweet Jesus, who being touched with a compassionate Affection
toward thy beloved Disciples did prefer their sorrow before thy Grief.

14. And interruptinge thy Prayer (to which thou was most Attentive) cominge
the third time unto them did raise up their dejected minds, and drowsy
Spirits to the Exercise of Prayer.

15. Grant that in all my Works, and Exercises I may fly all vicious
sluggishnesse.

15. Grant that with a vigilant mind, I may cheerfully serve thee.

17. That I may ever for thy sake on all Occasions forsake my self, and
prefer the good of my neighbor before my private devotions. Amen.

THE VII. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ. Who
being in an Agony did pray very long.

2. And being Creator of Heaven, and Earth; the King of Kings, and Lord of
Angels did not disdain to be comforted by an Angel.

3. Grant in all adversity, and desolation; in all tribulation, and
Affliction, that I may seek comfort from thee only.

4. And that I may find help, and assistance at thy hands.

5. O that I could in all Events wholly rely on thee!

6. And leave my self wholye to thy fatherly care.

7. Hayle sweet Jesus, who by reason of thy greatness, and vehemency of
grief had thy Body moistened all over with a bloodye sweat.

8. O that all the parts of my interior Man would sweat out holy tears of
Contrition!

9. Hayle sweet Jesus, who of thy own accord offredst thy self to be taken
by Judas the Traitor, and other thine enemies thirstinge after thy Blood, and
desiringe thy death.

10. Grant that for the honor of of thy name I may not fly adversities.

11. But may cheerefullye go to meet them.

1^. And joyfully receive them, as precious tokens sent from thee.

13. And humbly, and constantly endure them, as long^ as it shall please thee.

14. Hayle sweet Jesus, who did louingli^ kiss the traitor Judas cominge
deceitefullye to thee.

15. Shewinge by the calmness of thy countenance, and sweetness of thy
words, that thou did love him.

16. Grant I may show my self lo^inge, and mild to All mine enemies.

17. That I may pardon them from my heart, howsoever they shall offend me.

18. And tolerate, and love them, as the Ministers of thy will, and promoters
of my Salvation.

19. Hayle sweet Jesus, who did permit thine enemies most furiously to lay
their Sacrilegous hands upon thee.

20. And being cruellye bound by them, did not revenge, but mildly endure
the reproaches, Blasphemies, and injuries wherewith they did most wickedly
affront thee.

21. O that being freed from the bonds of vices I may be fast tied to thee,
with she sweet chains of Love!

22. O that thou would be^tow upon me the grace of true patience. Amen.

THE VIII. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ. Who did
restore, and heal the ear of Malchas one of thy furious Persecutors cut of
by Peeter thy chief Disciple.

2. That rendringe good for euil^, the riches of thy mercy, and mildness
might shine forth to us.

3. Grant I beseech thee that the desire of Revenge may never hau place in my
heart.

4. Grant that I may bear intimate compassion, and Affection toward all such
as offend me.

5. Hayle sweet Jesus, who like a Lamb amongst ravenous Wolves did remain
in the hand of reprobates.

6. Thy Disciples, and all friends runninge away, and forsakeinge thee.

7. Strenthen my too too great weakness, and make sted-fast my too too
great Inconstancy, with the most strong support of thy Grace.

8. Hayle sweet Jesus, who sufferedst thy self to be led bound as a
Malefactor, and theife by a troop of soldiers unto Annas, and to be presented
before him.

9. O unspeakable mildness of my Redeemer!

10. Behold whilst thou art taken; whilst thou art drawn, whilst thou art
haled: Thou do not complain, Thou do not murmr, thou make noe
resistance.

11. Grant o Lord that these examples of thy virtues may shine in me to my
Good, and thy everlasting Glory.

1^. Haeyle sweet Jesus, King of heaven, and earth: who standinge humbly like
a base, and abject person before the proud Bishop did with great mode^tie
receive a cruel blow given thee upon the face by one of his servants.

13. Suppress I beseech thee in me all Motions of Anger, and wrath; dull all
the stings of Indignation, and extinguish all desire of revenge.

14. That even provoked with injuries, I may not be troubled.

15. I may not strive, or make any Tumult.

16. But sufferinge all things with a meek, and patient mind, I may render
good for evil, and ever be ready to Favor those, who most Cross, and molest
me. Amen.

THE IX. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee ^ Christ. Who
did suffer thy self to be shamefullie ledd bound to Caiphas that thou mighst
restore us to true Liberty, freeinge us from the bonds of everlasting Death.

2. Grant that in the very midst of Derisions, and contumelies; I may give
thee thanks with all my heart.

3. And that by them I may be advanced, and increased in thy love.

4. Hayle sweet Jesus, whom Peeter the chief of thy Apostles thrice denied,
and yet thou most mercifully lookedst upon him, and prouokedst Him to
repentance, and holy tears for his offense.

5. O that it might please thee in like manner to look upon me with that
lovely eye of thy Mercy.

6. That with due tears of Repentance, I may bewail my sins past.

7. And having bewailed them, may not hereafter any more return to them
again.

8. Hayle sweet Iefus, who with a pleasinge countenance, and modest look
standinge before the Bishops, and the elders of the people of the Jews did
not disdain to be falselie accused, and suffer many injuries.

9. Grant that I may never utter any falsitie, or calumniate any Man.

10. But may suffer such calumnies as are laid against me, with great
tranquillity of heart.

11. And referringe all difficulties to thee, with silence I may expect thy
Grace, and comfort.

12. Hayle sweet Jesus; who whilst thou madst profession of the Truth
affirminge thy self to be son of God, adjured by Caiphas in the name of God;
yet did thou not disdain to be esteemed a blasphemer by the said Caiphas,
and his assistants.

13. Grant in all places, and before all men I may stand to the Truth, and in
awe of the presence of thy Divinity, and Majesty; not to fear the censures,
and Judgments of Men.

14. Hayle sweet Jesus; who by the wicked Jews wast proclaimed guilty of
Death, and without cause condemned.

15. That by thy unjust condemnation thou mighst deliver us form the guilt of
our sins wherewith we were justly attainted.

16. Grant that I may reject all sinister, and rash suspicions.

17. That I may suffer without any bitterness of heart all such wrongful
detractions, and wicked judgments as others shall devise against me.

18. And that on all occasions I may retain by the help of thy Grace a
quiet, and untroubled mind.

THE X. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ: Who for
my sake wast made the disgrace, and scorn of men and the out cast of the
people.

2. And did not turn away thy sacred face (which the Angels desire to
behold) from the filthy spittle of thy Adversaries.

3. Grant that I may imitate thy meekness, and patience.

4. Hayle sweet Jesus, who did vouchsafe to be most cruellye beaten, and
buffeted, and most unworthily reproached, and reviled for my sake.

5. Grant I beseech thee, that I may never refuse to be dis^ised, and to be
reputed base, and vile.

6. And according to thy permission be contented to be exercised with all kind
of injuries.

7. That I may receive them not as from men; but from the hand of thy
fatherlye mercy.

8. Hayle sweet Jesus, who did permit thy self to be mocked, and scoffed;
and thy lovely face (which to behold is the chiefest happiness) for thy
greater deri^^on to be blindfolded.

9. Grant that the veil of ignorance being taken a way I may be endued with
the knowledge of thy Will.

10. Imprint in my heart a continual remembrance of thee.

11. Hayle sweet Jesus, who for my sake were diversely afflicted by the Jews
for a whole night together.

12. Thou know o Lord how hard a thing it is for me to suffer though never
so small a matter.

13. Out of thy Mercy therefore assist my frailetie, and grant that I may
not cowardly fall, or faint at the cominge of any adversity.

14. Hayle sweet Jesus, who did permit thy self (being mocked, and bound)
to be led ^o the Profane Tribunal of Pilate the Judge, and in a disdaynefull
manner to be presented before him; thou thy self being the judge of the
living, and the dead.

15. Grant that I may be truly subject to my Superiors, and all Powers over
me ordained by thee.

16. That I may obey my Equals, and love, and honor all Men.

17. Grant that I may not fear other men's Judgments of me, but may receive
them with a ready, and meek mind. Amen.

THE XI. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ: King
of heaven, and Earth: who did affirm that thy Kingdom was not of this
world; that by this thy profession thou mighst auert our hearts from the Love of
this present life.

2. Grant I beseech thee that in Affection I may renounce all worldly, and
transitory things; let my heart desire nothing that is subject to corruption.

3. But let it love thee only, the true, and everlasting good.

4. Hayle sweet Jesus, who standinge before Pilate did humbly hold thy
Peace, whilst the Jews did wrongfullie accuse, and calumniate thee.

5. Grant o Lord that I may never be troubled at other men's slaunderinge me.

6. But that I may with silence overcome all injuries.

7. Give me the perfect Grace of hum^litie by which I may neither desire to
be praised, or refuse to be contemned.

8. Hayle sweet Iesus^ Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ. Lamb
without spott against whom the wicked Scribes, and Pharisees did rage with a
most obstinate hatred.

9. For though Pilate gave Testimony that he found in thee noe cause
deserving Death, yet they would not be appeased from seekinge after thy Death.

10. Grant that I may imitate thy Innocence, and Patience.

11. That I may both live well, and living well be contented to be evil
spoken of, and mispired.

11. Hayle sweet Jesus, who with great exclamations, and much noise of people
like a most heinous malefactor wast drawn from Tribunal to Tribunal; from
Pilate, to Herod: through the midst of the City.

13. Grant that I be not dejected with any injuries of mine enemies.

14. And that I be not much ashamed of Contempt.

15. To the end that by thy gracious assistance I may possess my soul in
Patience.

16. Hayle sweet Jesus; who being asked Vain Questions by Herod, and in
sundry things falsely accused by the high Priests, and Scribes, did humbly,
and prudentlie hold thy peace.

17. Give me that restraint of tongue, which may be acceptable to thee.

18. That I may love to speak well, and think rightly of all Men. Amen.

THE XII. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory b^^o thee o Christ: Who by
thy silence condemninge Herod's vain desire would not without good cause, and
for a good end delight his curious eyes by workinge a Miracle. And did
thereby give us a lesson to avoid ostentation in the presence of great men.

2. Power into my soul thy Spirit of profound humility.

3. Mortify, and extinguish in me all ticklinge of vain Glory.

4. Grant that I may not seek to gain the praises of Men; but to do all
purelie for thine only Honor, and Glory.

5. Hayle sweet Jesus, who did not disdain to be scoffed at by Herod, and
his whole Army, and to be clothed in a white Garment like a fool, or a mad man.

6. Grant that I may rather choose to be reputed base, and abject with thee
then Glorious with the world.

7. That I may esteem it better, and more worthy to suffer disgrace for thy
love; then to shine in the vain honor of the world.

8. Grant that knowinge thoroughly mine own iniquity, and mine own
unworthiness; I may grow base in mine own conceit; and despise reprehend,
and bewail my self.

9. Hayle sweet Jesus, who being compared with the notorious theife ^arrabas
wast judged more wicked, and more worthy of Death then he.

10. The Murderer is set at libertie^ and the envious Jews demand thy death,
who art the Author of life.

11. Thou art indeed that living stone, rejected by Man, but chosen by God.

12. O that I may prefer nothing before thee, or change thee for any Thing!

13. O that I could esteem all things as dunge, and filth; to the end I may
gain, and esteem thee!

14. Grant o Lord that the blott of envy may never stain my soul.

1^. Hayle sweet Jesus, who being stripped naked in the palace, and bound to
a pillar did suffer thy most naked, and immaculate flesh to be rent with most
cruel scourges; that with thy soars thou mighst heal out wounds.

16. O amiable Jesus; I make choice ^f thee covered with stripes for the spowse
of my soul!

17. Desiringe to be inflamed, and burned with the Fire of thy most sweet loue^

18. Strippe my heart naked I beseech thee from all indecent cogitations.

19. Grant that I may now patiently suffer the scourges of thy Fatherly
correction. Amen.

THE XIII. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee ^ Christ: upon
whom all discharged unspeakable injuries, and contumelies.

2. For they clothed thee King of Glory with a purple garment for thy greater
affront.

3. They fastened upon thy divine head a crown of thorns.

4. They putt into thy hands a scepter of reed, and kneelinge down in a
scornful manner saluted thee saying: Hayle king of the Jews.

5. Plant I beseech thee in my heart the memory of thy Passion.

6. Let scorns for thy sake, be my Glory, and injuries, and affronts my
Crown.

7. Hayle sueete Jesus, who did not refuse for my sake to be beaten with a
reed, to be buffeted, to be spitt upon, and to be the object of all kind of
derisions.

8. I beseech thee by thy wounds, by thy Blood, by thy Disgraces, and by all
the grief, and sorrow which thou sufferedst for me, to endue my soul with
all thy patience, and those Graces.

9. That thou will convert me, and all I have to thine everlasting praise,
and Glory.

10. Hayle sueete Jesus, Who being defiled with spittle, rent, and disfigured
with stripes, bound, and wholly miserable, wast brought forth as a spectacle to
the enraged people wearinge a crown of Thorns, and a robe of purple.

11. Grant that with my heart I may utterly tread under foot, spitt upon,
and have in detestation all ambition, ostentation, worldly pomp, and vanity,
and all earthly dignity.

12. That by profo^nd humilit^e, and true contempt of my self, I may
incessantly ^unne toward the Glory of thy heavenly felicity.

13. Hayle su^ete Jesus, Who being declared Innocent by Pilate the Judge,
did not refuse to hear the furious outcries of the Jews, by which they
demanded that thou should be crucified.

14. Grant that I may live innocently, and not be troubled by reason of Other
men's evil will toward me.

15. Give me this Grace that I may neither backbite other Men, or willingly
give ^are to those that do it.

16. But that still I may have a good opinion of others, and bear other men's
imperfections with a true compassion.

17. And love all men for God, and in God with a pure, sinceare, and cordial
affection. Amen.

The XIV. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sueete Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ: Who
did permit thy self in the presence of thy people to be unjustly condemned
to the most ignominious Death of the Cross.

2. That thou mighst free us from the sentence of eternal Death.

3. Grant that I may seek thy honor, and rather choose to be exercised with
thee in Adversity then by forsakinge thee to enjoy the commodities of this
life.

4. Hayle sueete Jesus, who being delivered over to the pleasure of those who
did persecute thee, did suffer great pain by puttinge of the purple garment
which did stick unto thy soars, and puttinge on thine own again.

5. Grant that after I have putt of the garment of my Body, and am vested with
the robe of perfect brightness I may appear adorned with thy meritts.

6. Hayle s^eete Jesus, Who with many disgraces, and injuries offered thee
did carry thy Cross on with great pain upon thy sacred, and torn
sholdiers.

7. And being weary, and breathless did languish under the burden.

8^ Grant that with fervent Devotion I may embrace the Cross of mine own
Abnegation.

9. And with an ardent charity imitate the Examples of thy virtues.

10. And may humbly follow thee unto Death.

11. Hayle sueete Jesus, Who in that lamentable journey in which thou went to
thy death, did meekely admonish the Weomen that did bewail thee, to bewail
themselves, and their childeren.

12. Give me accegtable tears of Compunction with which I man truly bewail
my sins, and mine own ingratitude.

13. Give me Tears of devout compunction, and of holy love which may melt my
hard heart, and make it grateful unto thee.

14. That I may love thee alone, and rest in thee only.

15. Hayle sweet Jesus, Who being led out with two thieves, did not refuse
to be driven forward, to be urged, and hastened, and in many other sundry
manners to be afflicted.

16. Draw me after thee, and let me cheerefullye follow thee.

17. Grant that I may rejoice in thee Alone.

18. Give me grace to love thee, and render Love for Love.

THE XV. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Jesus, Praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ: Who
having thy sholders bruised with the weight of the Cross, did at lenth
arrive weary at the place of execution.

2. Where Wine mingled with Gall was offered thee to refresh thy languishinge
forces.

3. O that thou would extinguish in me the allurements of Gluttony, and the
Concupiscences of that flesh!

4. And cause in me an auersion, and horror from all impure, and unlawful
delight.

5. And that I may eat, and drink soberly to the glory of thy name.

6. That I may hunger, and thirst after thee alone.

7. And in thee place my delight, and joy.

8. Hayle sweet Jesus, Who did not disdain to be stripped naked upon Mount
Caluarie in the sight of the people.

9. And to suffer a most bitter pain by thy soars renewed with the pullinge
of thy clothes.

10. Grant that I may love poverty of Spirit, and never be troubled for any
worldly want.

11. Grant that by thy example I may endure, and suffer any corporal
necessities, or calamities whatsoeuer^

12. Hayle sweet Jesus, Who being naked did not refuse to be rudely
stretched out upon the Wood of the Cross, and cruelly fastened with nails
unto the same.

13. In this manner did thou suffer thine innocent hands, and delicate feet
to be most greiuously wounded, and all thy sacred ioints to crack, and be put
out of joint.

14. Grant me o Lord that with a faithful, and grateful mind I may consider
this thy unspeakable Charity with which of thine own accord thou did
stretch forth thine arms, and willingly offered thy hands, and feet to be
peirced.

15. Vouchsafe o Lord to enlardge, and extend my heart with the perfect love of
thee.

16. Pierce it, and fasten itt unto thy self with the most sueete nail of
Charity.

17. And all my senses, cogitations, and affections enclose only in thee. Amen.

THE XVI. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Jesus, praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ: Who
did hang (thy hands, and feet being peirced) three hours upon the
shameful wood of the Cross, and sheddinge in great abundance thy precious
Blood did of thine own accord endure unspeakable torments through out thy
whole Body.

2. Lift up I prey thee upon the wood of thy Cross my miserable soul
grouelinge on the ground.

3. O healthful Blood! o reuiuinge Blood!

4. O that thou would purge, and througlie heal me being washed with this
thy precious Blood!

5. O that thou would offer this thy Blood to thy father for a perfect
satisfaction of all mine iniquities!

6. Grant I beseech thee that mine inward Man may with ardent Affection
mentally receive, and lick the lively dropps of thy precious Blood, and may
truly taste how sue^te thy Spirit is.

7. Hayle sweet Jesus: Who hanginge upon the Cross in the midst betwixt two
notorious theiues wast reputed with the wicked.

8. That by thy incomprehensible humility, and Patience, thou mights amend,
and withal satisfy for mine immense impatient Pride.

9. Lift up I beseech thee my Spirit aloft that from above I may despise all
things transitory.

10. That I may only admire thee my God Crucified for me.

1^. Let me think, speak, and dream of thee.

12. Hayle sweet Jesus, Who wast so good, even to those that were so wicked;
that for the very same parties who did crucify thee thou did pray unto thy
father, saying Father forgive them, for they know not what they do.

13. Give me I beseech thee the grace of true meekness, and Patience, by
which I may according to thy Commandment, and example love mine enemies.

1^. And do good to those that hate me.

15. I heartily pray unto thee, for those that hurt, and persecute me.

16. Hayle sweet Jesus, who would that the Title written in Hebrew, Greek,
and Latin (as it were the Trophie of thy Victory) should be fastened to the
Cross: that we beholdinge it, might courageously fight against our invisible
enemies.

17. Protect me under this Title against the wiles, and deceits of the Devil.

18. Teach me under this Title to overcome all Temptations, and to subdue all
uices.

19. That having by Grace conquered them, I may freely praise, and Glorify
thy holy name. Amen.

THE XVII. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sueete Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory be to thee o Christ. Whose
garments the soldiers having divided amongst themselves did leave thy coat
which was without seame (and signifies the unity of the Church) undivided.

2. Power down into my heart, I beseech thee the Spirit of Peace, and Union.

3. That I may never through my fault, deride, or trouble the concord, and
union of my Brethren.

4. But that I may always endeavor to repair divisions, and pacify
troubles.

5. Hayle sweet Jesus, Who sufferinge upon the Altar of the Cross
incomprehensible torments, and ineffable lanquishes; wast shamefully
reproached, and scorned by the Jews, who vomited out of their wicked Mouths
sundry Blasphemies against thee.

6. Grant o Lord that being mindful of thy humility, and Patience, and
mildness, I may quietly, and cheerfully suffer, pains, disgraces,
Persecutions, infamy, and contempt of my self.

7. And may remain with thee nailed to the Cross even to the end.

8. Let noe violence of temptation, noe storms of Adversities, noe tempest of
contumelies hinder me from effectinge my good purposes.

9. Let not Death, or life, or things present, nor to come, nor any creature
separate me from thy love.

10. Hayle sweet Jesus, who did tolerate one of the Theiues to vpbraid
thee: and did most mercifullye, and bountifully promise the Glory of
Paradise to the other who did humbly acknowledge his own injustice, and with
a devout faith did confess thee to be his king, and God.

11. Behold me I beseech thee with those eyes of mercy which thou did cast
upon the Theife repentant for his sins.

12. O that by thy Holy Help, and Grace I may lead a life so innocent that I
may so faithfullye serve thee, and purelye love thee!

13. That at the end of my life I may deserve to hear from thee (most
merciful Redeemer) that most desisired voice. This Day thou shall be with me
in Paradise.

14. Hayle sweet Jesus: Who from the Cross beholdinge thy most sweet Mother
full of grief, and tears with inward compassion did comme^d Her to Thy
Disciple John, and again John to Her, and us all in John unto thy said Mother.

15. Grant that I may Love, and Honor Her with a most chaste, and ardent
affection.

1^. That having Her for my Mother I may deserve also to be acknowledged by
Her for her son.

17. Grant that in all necessities, and especially at the hour of my death I
may find Her present assistance. Amen.

THE XVIII. EXERCISE.
1. HAyle sweet Jesus, Praise, Honor, and Glory he to thee o Christ: Who in
a most pitiful manner hanginge upon the Cross with wide gapinge wounds,
did profess thy self to be destitute of all all comfort.

2. Grant that with a firm confidence I may always have recourse to thee my
most merciful Father in all adversities, Temptations, and Desolations.

3. And wholly distrustinge my self, I may trust in thee alone.

4. And committ, and resign my self entirely to thee.

5. Wound the intymme of my soul with the remembrance of thy wounds.

6. Imprint, and caracter them in my Heart, and make my mind even drunk with
thy sacred Blood.

7. That I may attend to thee; and thee only seek, find, hold, and possess.

8. Hayle sweet Jesus: Who pantinge upon the Cros^e thy Body being drawn
dry for want of Blood becamst very thirsty, and did burn with an
unspeakable desire of our Salvation.

9. Grant that I may most ardently thirst after thine Honor, and the
Salvation of our souls.

10. And may with courage employe myself in this affair.

11. Grant that I may not be hindered, or entangled by any transitory thing.

12. Hayle sweet Ies^s, who would that a sponge dipped in vinegar, and gall
should be offered thee to drink thirsty even to death: that by tastinge
thereof thou mighst satisfy for our gluttony, and leave us an example of
poverty.

13. Give me grace to despise unlawful pleasures, and delights; and to avoid
all excess in meat, and drink.

14. Also to use those things moderately which thou give for the
sustentation of the Body.

15. Pacify the inordinatenesse of my desires that whatsoever does please
thee, may please me: and whatsoever displeases thee, may be displeasinge
also to me.

16. Hayle sweet Jesus: most enamoured of Mankind who duly performinge the
Work of our Redemption did offer up thy self upon the Altar of the Cross:
an Holy Sacrifice for the expiation of the sins of all Men.

17. Be thou I beseech thee, the scope of all my thoughts, Words, and Works.

18. That in all things I may With a right, and simple intention seek thy
honor.

19. Grant I may never grow cold, or Faint in thy service.

20. But that the fervor of Spirit may be renewed in me, and that I may be
daily more, and more inflamed to praise, and love th^^. Amen.

THE XIX. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Jesus, praise, hon^ur, and glory ^e to o Christ. Who of thine
own accord did embrace Death; and recom^endinge thyselfe to thy Heavenly
Father bowinge down thy venerable Head yeildest up thy Spirit.

2. Truly thus giuinge thy life up for thy sheep, thou have showed thy self
to be a good shepherd.

3. Thou did dye, o the only begotten son of God! Thou dyedst o my beloved
Sauuiour, that I might live for ever!

4. O How great Hope, How great confidence have I reposed in thy Death, and
in thy Blood!

5. I Glorify, and praise thy Holy name acknowledginge my infinite obligations
to Thee.

6. O good Jesus for thy bitter death, and Passion: give me Grace, and Pardon!

7. Give unto the faithful departed Rest, and life everlasting.

8. Hayle sweet Jesus, at whose death the ^unne withdrew his light, the veil
of the Temple rent in sunder, and the Monuments opened.

9. O Sun of Justice permit not I beseech thee, that the beams of thy grace
at any time forsake me.

10. But let them continually enlighten the inner parts of my soul.

11. Withdraw wholly from me the veil of Hypocrisy.

12. Shake the earth of my soul with wholesome repentance.

13. Rent my stony heart.

14. That being wholly renewed, I may contemn all things transitory, and
love only that which is eternal.

15. Hayle sweet Jesus; Who would that thy side should be opened with a
soldiers lance.

16. And out of itt pour out blood, and water to revive, and wash our souls.

17. Thou would o my best beloved, that thy mellifluous Heart should be
wounded for me.

18. O that it might please thee to make a most deep wound in my Heart with the
lance of thy Love!

19. And unite itt to thy most sacred Heart.

20. In such manner that I may have ^oe power to will any thing bu^ that
which thou will.

21. Bring in o my Lord, bring in my soul through the wound of thy side into
the Boosome of thy Charity, and the treasure-howse of thy Divinity.

22. That I may joyfully glorify thee my God Crucified, and dead for me.
Amen.

THE XX. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Jesus, praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ: Grant
that all other visible things may be blotted out of my memory, and that I
may freely apply my self to thee Alone.

2. Behold with as much Devotion as possibly I can, I salute the five
principal wounds of thy most blissed body.

3. Hayle ruddye, glorious, and mellifluous Wounds of my Redeemer, of my King.

4. Hayle glorious seals of my Reconciliation, and Salvation.

5. I humblye desire to abide, and be hid in you, and so by that means be
secure from all evil.

6. Hayle sweet Jesus, who being^ with great lamentation of thy frie^d^ taken
down from the Cross woulds^ be anointed with precious ointments, wrapped in a
windinge sheet, and buried where noe man was buried before.

7. ^urie I beseech thee all my senses, all my forces, and all mine affections
in thee.

8. That being joined to thee through efficatious love, I may become as it
were stupid, and insensible in respect of all other things.

9. Hayle sweet Jesus. Who have vanguished the power of the Devil, and
powrefullie, and lovingly in soul descendinge into Hell did make ioyefull
with thy presence the fathers there detained.

10. And did translate them thence ^ thy Glorious Ascension to the
delightful Guarden of the Celestial Paradise, and to the clear Vision of God.

11. Let the virtue of thy Passion, and of thy Blood descend now I beseech
thee into Purgatory upon the souls of my parents, knisfolkes, friends,
benefactors, and all the faithful departed.

12. That being delivered from pains they may be received into the Boosome
of Eternal Rest.

13. Hayle sweet Jesus: Who like a conqueror with glorious Triumph did arise
out of thy closed sepulcher

14. And reuested with thy lovely countenance did replenish thy friends with
new joy, and gladness.

15. Grant o Lord that leauinge the olds paths of my vicious conversation, I
may walk in the newness of life.

16. And seek, and Savor those things which are above in Heaven, and not
those things which are here upon earth.

17. To the end that when thou my life shall appear at the last Day, ^ may
appear with thee in Glory. Amen.

THE XXI. EXERCISE.
1. HAYLE sweet Ie^us, praise, honor, and glory be to thee o Christ. Who
forty days after thy Resurrection being expired did gloriously Ascend
into Heaven in the sight of thy Disciples, where thou sit on the right hand
of thy Father, blissed for ever.

2. O that my soul might always languish on earth, and ascend, and aspire
toward Heaven!

3. Mai^ hunger, and thirst always after thee.

4. Hayle sweet Jesus: Who did give thy Holy Ghost to thy elect Disciples
perseueringe together with one mind in Prayer.

5. And did send them to teach all Nations through out the whole world.

6. Cleanse I beseech thee the interior of my Heart.

7. Give me true purity, and constancy of mind that the Holy Ghost may
find a grateful Habitation in my soul.

8. And may replenish me with the special gifts of His Grace.

9. May comfort, strenthen, fill, govern, and possess me.

10. Hayle sweet Jesus; Who cominge as a Judge at the last Day wilt render
unto every one according to his Works: either punishment, or Reward.

11. O my most merciful Lord God grant that according to thy Will I may so
innocentlie pass the course of this miserable life.

12. That my soul departinge, out of the Prison of my body, I may be vested
with thy merits, and virtues.

13. And be received into thy everlasting joy;

14. And With all the Saints, I may bliss and praise thee for ever.

15. Hayle sweet Jesus, Whom I have most grieuouslye offended all the days of
my life.

16. Ala^! I have never ceased to be ungrateful to thee, resistinge thy Grace
in diverse manners, and always addinge new faults unto my ^ormer.

17. Behold o my sweet Refuge, behold me the outcast of all Creatures,
bringinge with me nothing but bundles of sins.

18. I prostrate my self at the feet of thy mercy, and humblye implore
pardon, and remission.

19. Pardon I beseech thee, and save me for thy names sa^e.

20. For I believe, and am assured that noe sins are so greiuous, and
heinous, but by the meri^s of thy most sacred Passion may be forgiven, and
washed a way. Amen.

These Exercises, and All Others may, and ought to be e^larg^d, and dilated
according to euer^e ones Grace. and Gift: which is the only infallible Guide,
and rule of our Prayer, and noe set, written, or printed form whatsoever; as
the directions particularly, and pertinently teach us.

A Dittie to the same subject.
IN sorrow deep, I wa^e, I sleep^ with grief my Heart oppressed;
My Watery eyes like winter skies bedew my mournful breast.
For when I see my love for me, in flames of love to burn.
My Lord, my Love, my God above, and why should I not mourn?
With feet, and hands transfixed he stands upon a fatal beam;
And from his side a wound most wide powers out a bloddie stream.
A peircinge Crown his head pulls down, his face quite wanne does turn.
He for my sake these pains did take, and why should I not mourn?
While i^ this pain, he^ did remain, his drink was mixed wiih Gall.
His Corpse lay bare, his Cloths they share, each as by lot did fall.
His Foes about, did laugh, and flowt, and at his virtues spurn.
Thus was his breath shutt up by death, and why should I not Mourn?
The Earth did quake, the rocks did shake, and rented all in sunder.
The Corpse from Graves, and hollow Caves, Arose to see this Wonder.
The sun so bright forsook his light, and all most wanne did turn.
Thus heaven, and earth laments his death, and why should I not mourn?
Lo when I see upon a Tree his breathless Body lie.
I greiue, I groan, I sigh, I moan, I pain, I Faint; I dye.
For thee Alone: my life being gone, until thou ba^ke return.
In endless grief without relief, I Will never cease to mourn.
FINIS.
THE TOPP OF THE HEAVENLY LADDER OR THE HIGHEST STEP of Prayer, and
Perfection. And the progress, and complement of the fore^aid Practices, and
Devotions.
My Throne in a Pillar of Cloud.
Eccl. 24. 7.
A life hidden with Christ in God.
Coloss. 3. 3.
TRVE HAPPINESS IN A Monastical life.
Thy forces straind, above ela raise,
Yet nere condignly can thou praise
A State Monastical.
Which if it be with learning stated,
And to studies dedicated,
Lord! how beneficial?
But if it want this ornament
And eeke the Grace from Heaven sent,
Sad! O sad imprisonment!
Let fiery Mars blow up the scot,
Or let the Britans go to th'pott;
The Col mean time reguards it not.
Or let some feirce, and foreign Host,
The Spaniard, sweed, or Dane accost,
Or, on the French men rush.
Let Heaven, and Earth together fall;
And crush the worlds inconsta^t Ball.
Yet Monks are out o th'Brush.
He shall sit solitary, and hold his peace, because he has lifted himself
above himself. Lam. 3. 28.
arrogatinge humane precepts, and inventions of mere Men. This Man of God I
say having written such a Discreet Rule concludes it in this manner.
Whosoever therefore thou art, who hastens to the heavenly Country observe
this least Rule of Beginning: And then at lenth by the helpe^ of God thou
shall come to those high perfections of doctrine, and virtues of which we have
before spoken. To such as fulfill these things the kingdom of God shall lie
open. Amen.

According to the conclusion of this Holy Man I must truly declare these
Exercises not to be perfect Prayer, but only the means thereunto; or the least
Rule of beginning; if rightly exercised, and practiced according to the
Directions, and will bring us to that ineffable, and all sanctifyinge Prayer
of which the Apostle speaks in the 8. to the Romans, and 26. in these words.
The Spirit asks for us with unspeakable groanings. This Prayer is the Hight
of Perfection, and virtue, and the very quintessence of all. Not to be
expressed, not to be understood, which none can know, but he that has itt,
A^oc. 2. 17.
a mere gracious gift of God, none can exercise this Prayer, none can have
any glimpse of it, but those to whom God freely gives it. In vain therefore do
they labor, who labor for it through their own industry; and high
arrogancy it is for any to presume that they can conceive how it is done, or
offer to teach Others how to do it. All that can be said of itt, is as the
Divine Clowd of vnknowinge expresses in these few words saying. It is a
tendance to God in the dark clowd of vnknowinge (that is Divine Faith) and
blind feelings of Love. (That is divine Charity.) If you ask me what this
is? I know not, and they shall know, and only they to whom God gives itt.
Howsoever for those that hasten to this Heavenly Country, to this Jerusalem,
and sight of God in this pure Prayer. I shall set them in the way the best I
can by the Example of a pilgrim goinge to Jerusalem in the 21. 22. and 23.
Chapters of that excellent Book called the Scale of perfection. To which in a
distinct Caracter I shall add that which may perchance facilitate the findinge
out of the Way, and the true meaning of itt.

The Spiritual Pilgrim goinge to

Jerusalem, or the sight of God.

There is noe Other way for our souls to tend to God, but by the Spiritual
^aces, or ascents, or ^spirings of the Mind; or to see Him in this life but in
the dark Cloud of faith: noe other sight can we have of him: and it is all
delightful, and all sufficient for this life, if truly enjoyed.

THE XXI. CHAPTER. An Entrye, and good beginning of a Spiritual journey,
shewinge how the soul is to be have herself interiorlye, and exteriorlye
according to the Example of a pilgrim goinge to Jerusalem.
THough this, and the ensuinge Chapters seem to have, and so indeed have
dependence of the precedent, and subsequent Chapters: yet notwithstanding they
are clear, full, and independent, as to the clear, and plain shewinge the
way to the pilgrim, how to go to Jerusalem. Which is all I aim at: and
therefore very sufficient for my Turn, and purpose, and more I would not
desire: Thus therefore it begins.

Nevertheless because thou couetest to know some manner of workinge, and
proceeding: By the which thou may the sooner and more ^ecurelye attain to
the said reforminge I shall for thy satisfaction, and souls Good in that point
by the Grace of God, and our Lord Jesus set forth, and show unto thee the
shorteft, and readiest help that I know for the said end.

Me thinks this Author aims just at the same thing I do by the Exercises;
to wit, perfect Prayer which he calls Reforminge. And therefore comes now in
this, and the ensuinge Chapters, the next way to it, or rather indeed to the
practice of itt. If God heervppon give itt.

And that I shall do by an example of a good pilgrim after this manner. There
was a man that would go on pilgrimage to Jerusalem: and because he knew not
the way; he went to another Man whom He had understood to be well acquainted
with the way, and asked Him whither he might have any hope of being able to
reach to that City that was so far off; and was so perilous a journey, as
he had heard it to be.

The common, and most ordinary way that God takes to putt us in this course
of ineffable. Prayer is by the means of an experienced instructor^ who brings
us to it, but God enables, and instructs us how to walk, and work, and
persevere in itt, yea some^ymes immediately leads us himself to itt, and makes
us walk in itt.

That other man ansuered Him that He could not reach thither without much
labor, and many sufferings. For the way (said he) is long, and perilous;
and full of Villainous theiues, and many other great lettings, and hindrances
there be that fall out to a man in his goinge thitherwards, as also the ways
in many place are very craggie, and paynefull, and some times hard to find. And
many men trauaylinge thitherward are oftentimes killed, or robbed of all they
have, and in conclusion are hindered, and disabled to reach to the place whither
they so desired to reach. Nevertheless there is one way, the which who so
takes it; I will undertake that he shall come to that city of Jerusalem;
and shall never be s^aine, or dye for want, or otherwise loose his life. He
shall indeed be robbed, and well beaten, and shall suffer much scarsitie, and
many difficulties in the journey, but for all that his life shall be safe.

The tediousness^ of the way, beatinges, robbings, and the like are bu^
necessary Mortifications which must be suffered, and born^ with all.

Then said the pilgrim so that I may have my life safe, and at length ariue
to the place that I desire to arrive unto, I care not what pain, trouble, or
mischeife I suffer in goinge. And therefore tell me and advise me what you
think necessary for me to do, or suffer in the journey, and I promise you
for certain that I will follow your Counsel. That other man answered, and
said. Lo; I will set thee in the right way, and see that thou well bear in
mind, and fulfill in deed what I shall now tell thee. Whatsoever ^hou see,
hear, or feel that would stay thee, let thee, or hinder thee in thy
way; do not willingly consent unto it, abide not willinglye with itt, tarry
not with itt, behold it not, or willingly gaze at it; or love, or like it:
fear it, or be affrighted by it, but still go forward holdinge on thy way.
And ever think, and say to thy self that thou would feign be at Jerusalem.
For that thou couetest that thou desire, and naught else, but that. And if
men rob thee, scorn thee, and laugh at thee, neglect, and despise thee; do
not thou strive against such their doing, if thou mean to have thy life safe,
but content thee with the harm thou have had, and hold on thy way, as if all
were nothing, least thou r^ceiue more harm. Also if men would seek to
tarry, or stay thee by tellinge thee tales, and feedinge thee with lies,
inventions, or conceits to draw thee to merriment, and to forsake, or prolonge
thy pilgrimage, give the but a deaf ear, and answer not again, and say
nothing else but thou would feign be at Jerusalem. Add^ if men proferre thee
gifts, and would make thee rich with worldly substance, do not reguard or
listen to their profers, or persuasions, but ever think on Jerusalem. And if
thou will hold this course, and this way, and do as I have said: I undertake
for thy life that thou shall not be slain, but shall at length come to the
place, which thou so much couetest. And now to apply the said similitude of
the pilgrim spirituallie and to our purpose. I say that Jerusalem, is as much
as to say, a sight of Peace, and betokens Contemplation with perfect love.
For Contemplation is nothing else but a sight of God which is true peace.

This Jerusalem, this Contemplation, this sight of God, this sight of Peace. Is
the same thing which is termed by others a feelinge of God in the dark Clowd
of faith, Romans 8. 2.

Apoc. 2. 17.


and pure charity or perfect Prayer when the Spirit asks for us. Or the
hiddenmanna, or the white counter in which a new name is written that noe Man
knows, but he that receives it. It is an Holy Idleness so called because
one seems to do nothing; yet in very deed a most secret inperceptible,
efficatious actiuitie. This is that which we know not whence it comes, or
whither it goes. In a word. It is the Good, and perfect gift of God
descendinge from the father of lights. Io. 3.8^

Iam. 1. 17.


A gracious gift by which we sweetly, and intimmelie aspire to God. A pure
clean thought by which God seems to be All, and all things else Nothing.
This is virtually all virtues; moral, and Theological; induinge the soul
with infinitt blessings exteriorlie, and interiorlie. This is that which the
simplest soul living may exercise, and become happy, and wise by it. And
the learned clearke, and sublimist wit can do noe more if assisted by God,
and endued with the Spirit; and otherwise his learning, or wit avails
nothing. Wisd. 10.21.
This is that which makes the tongues of infants eloquent. This teaches more
in the twinklinge of an eye, then the schools can teach in a thousand years.

If therefore thou covet for to come to this blissed sight of true Peace, and
to be a true pilgrim to Jerusalem, albeit, it be so, that I was never there,
yet shall I so far forth as I can set thee in the high way thitherward.
Now then if thou desire to make good iorneyes, and to hold a secure way, it
behooneth thee to hold these two virtues in thy soul, or in thy desires, and
these two virtues are Humility, and love.

By Humility is understood the ground wor^e, and foundation of all, with the
real practice of all necessary mortification, by which we come to be truly
dead to our selves, and all things whatsoever. So that we may truly say, we
are nothing, ^ee have nothing, and covet nothing. Love is all Kind of Prayer
by which our soul tends toward God as her only All, and sa^iatinge end. Be it
vocal, mental, or that Kind soever by which this fire of Love is nouri^hed^
and enkindled.

And therevppon thou shall often say to thyselfe in thy mind. I am nothing, I
have nothing, I Covet nothing, but one. Thou shall have the meaning, or
effect of these words in thine intent, and in habit in thy soul perpetually
though thou have them not always expresselye in thy soul, or mind. For it is
impossible thou should have them actuallye: for sometimes thou must sleep,
and be distracted about other necessary affairs, and can not actually have
the said good desires in thee, but yet have thou the^ virtually, and
habitually, nor is it necessary that thou always have actually in thy mind,
and thoughts the said desires, but it is necessary thou ever have them
virtually, or habitually in thee, and in thine intent be thou sleepinge, or
wakinge etc. Humility says in thee. I am nothiuge, I have nothing. Love,
says, I covet but one, and that is Jesus. For as in respect of Jesus (that is
God, and indeed All) certainelye thou art nothing, but art as a vessel that
stands ever empty, and as if naught were therein. For do thou never so many
good deeds external, or internal; yet till thou have, and feel that thou
have the Love of Jesus, thou have right nothing. For with that precious liquor
only (I mean the love of God) may thy soul be filled, and satisfied, and
with none other.

Luke 15.
This is the thing only necessary, and the best part: that is as in the
other page I discribed, a clean thought of God as He is to be known in this
world in the dark cloud of faith, and blind feelings of Love. Whither it be
done by an act of the understanding, or Will, or both; it matters not, for it
is imperceptible to us, and so not to be examined.

And for as much as that thing alone is so pretions, and noble: What
therefore thou have, or what thou do hold, esteem it as nothing as to rest
in it, without the sight and love of Jesus. Even as a wise pilgrim goeinge to
Jerusalem leaves behind Him house, and land, wife and childeren, and makes
Himself poor, and bare from all things that so he may go light, and
without incombrance. Even so if thou will be a Spiritual pilgrim thou must
make thy self naked from all that thou have that are either good deeds, or
badd, and cast them all behind thee; so that thou become so poor in thy
feelinge; that there is nothing of thine own workinge that thou will
restinglye lean on, or wherein thou will abide: but ever desiringe more grace,
and love, and ever seekinge the Spiritual Presence of Jesus.

And if thou do thus then shall thou resolve in thy heart fullye, and
resolutelye that thou would be at Jerusalem, and at noe other place but
there. And that is; that thou shall certainly determine in thy heart fully, and
wholly that thou would nothing have but the love of Jesus, and the Spiritual
sight of Him in such manner as he shall please to show Himself.

This sight of Jesus, This sig^t of God we may dispose our selves to, but
have it we cannot, but how, and when He pleases, and if we think to do it
by our own force of wit, learning, and understanding we delude ourselves
by a vain Fancy, and Folish species, and take the shadow for the substance,
this is Gods Wor^e, not ours.

For to that end only art thou made, and redeemed, and He it is that is thy
beginning, and thy end. Thy joy, and thy happiness, and who only can
satisfy thy hungry soul. And therefore whatsoever thou have, and be thou
never so rich in other deeds corporal, or spiritual unless thou have this
Love that I speak of, and know, and feel that thou have it, hold and esteem
that thou have right nothing. Imprint well in thy soul this desire of the
love of Jesus, and cleave fast thereunto, and itt shall save thee from all
perils in thy journey, so that thou shall never perish; and it shall save thee
from theiues, and robbers: which are the wicked Spirits so that though they
bear, or torment, or vex thee by diverse temptations yet shall the life of the
soul ever be safe. And if thou thus hold on thy way, as I advise, thou shall
escape all perils, and mischeifes, and shall in a short time come to the
City of Jerusalem.

Passinge, and transcendinge brings us to a good endinge. That is, thus
tendinge still to God, by slightinge all Creatures we shall attain to Him in
this life by faith, in the next by Glory.

Now thou art in the way, and know the place whither thou art to draw, and
tend; begin then in the name of God to proceed, and go on in thy journey. Thy
goinge forth, and thy proceedinge in thy journey is nothing else; but a
spiritual workinge, and a bodily also when it shall be expedient; which thou
shall use with the Discretion followinge. That is to say. Look what work it
be which thou do according to the state of thy life thou art in, be the
work spiritual, or corporal, if it help, increase, and cherish within thee
this gracious desire thou have to love Jesus: or do make thy soul more
strong, more ready, and more able for the practice of all virtues, and
goodness: That work hold I best for thee, be it prayinge, be it readinge, or
be it corporal workinge. And as long as the said work, or exercise
strenthneth most thy heart, and thy will to the love of Jesus, and furthest
draws thine affection, and thoughts from worldly vanity; for so long hold
thee still in that work. But if it prove so that through use of that same
work, or Exercise; the savor, or good taste of it do grow less, and that it
seems to thee that some other work, or Exercise, is, or would be more
sauourous, or rellishinge to thy Spirit, or that thou feel more grace in
another work, or Exercise, do thou take that other work, and leave that
former, For though thy desire, or longinge of thy heart to Jesus, and to his
love should be ever unchangeable, yet nevertheless thy Spiritual works which
thou shall use in prayinge, or consideringe; for to feed, and nourish thy said
desire may be diverse, and may well be changed according to that thou feel
thee disposed through Grace, and according to that thou feel thy Spirit
more to require, or relish. I mean what thou find to be most comfortable,
agreeable, and profitable to thy Spirit. For it faireth by works, and by
desire of the love of God, as it does by sticks, and by a fire. For the more
sticks are laid to the f^e, the greater is the fire. Even so the more diverse
spiritual workings at diverse times that a Man has in his thoughts, for to
keep whole, and sound his desire toward God the mightier, and more burninge
shall his desire be to God. Look therefore well what work thou can best
do, and that most helps to make well, and sound this Desire of Jesus (in
matters wherein thou art free, and not bound) that do thou. Bind not thy self
to voluntary customs unchangeable, that would, hinder the liberty of thine
heart for to correspond, or answer the motion, or inuitation of Jesus: if that
his Grace should specially visit thee, by which thy love toward Him would be
increased. For I will tell thee what customs are ever good, and needful to be
kept. Lo such customs are good always to hold which consists in gettinge
virtues, and in hinderinge, and resistinge sin. Such a custom thou must
never leave. For thou shall be ever humble, patient, sober, and chaste etc. if
thou do well; and so of other virtues. But the custom of another thing that
hinders a better is good to be laid aside giueinge place to that which would
be better for us when that the time is for such laieinge aside, and that we
may do it, without breach of our obligation otherwise. As for example if a
man have a custom to say so many beads, or to meditate of such, or such a
matter, or for so long a time, or to watch, or kneel thus, or thus long, or
to do any such bodily deed, this custom is sometimes to be let alone when
reasonable cause requires that we should leave it, or else that we find more
Grace, or devotion some other way, or in some other exercise.

This / Holy writer delivers the Truth so fullye, and clearelye how we
should walk, that a fool cannot err therein; leauinge all to the queen of
virtues discretion by which we may so prudently order all our Works, and
Actions; that we may still increase in us the divine Charity, and desire of
God. So that every one according to his Vocation in which he is called:
secular, or Religious, married or single, poor or rich, noble or ignoble, is
made decible of God, lead by his Holy Inspiration, and brought into the true
liberty of the Childeren of God, Gal. 5. 13.
not giuinge way to the liberty of the flesh.

THE XXII. CHAPTER. Of certain temptations, and lettings, which souls have
from their spiritual enemies in their journey to Spiritual Jerusalem, and of
the remedy against the same.
NOW art thou in the way, and know how thou ought to travel, and go. Now
beware of enemies that will be diligent, and busy to let thee if they can.
For their intent is to put out of thy heart, the desire, and longinge that thou
have to the love of Jesus, and to draw thee home again to the love of worldly
vanity. There is nothing that greiueth them so much as to see thee seek
after, and labor for the love of Jesus. Those enemies are principally fleshly
desires, and vain fears that arise out of thine Heart through the corruption
of thy corporal nature, and would let, and hinder thy desir^ of the love of
God, that so they might fully, and restingly possess thy Heart; These are thy
nearest enemies. Other enemies also there are, and namely the wicked Spirits
who are diligent, and busy with sleights, inventions, and deceits to deceive
thee. But one remedy thou have against them all, as before I have told thee,
and that is, that whatsoever they say unto thee believe them not, but hold
forth on thy way, and only desire the love of Jesus. Ever answer thus; I am
nothing, I covet nothing, but only the love of our Lord Jesus.

This is the best, securest, and easiest way of ouercominge all temptations^
and scruples whatsoever answer nothing to them, be not troubled with them;
but still go on thy way, and tend to the love of thy God, which will overcome
all, and make all right wit^ thee.

If thine enemies by suggestions to thy soul, say unto thee that thou have
not made thy Confession a right, or that there is some old sin or sins hidd
in thy heart that thou before knewst not; or that thou have not as yet ever made
thy Confessions a right, or as thou should have made them, and therefore
would have thee turn home again, and to give over thine earnest desire of the
Love of God; and to go, and make a better confession. Believe not this their
sayeinge. For it is folly. For thou art rightly confessed, and so do thou
surely hope, and trust thyselfe to be; and that thou art in the way, and that
thou need noe further to look into thy conscience for confession of what is
past. Hold on thy way, and ever think on Jerusalem. If they say also unto
thee that thou art not worthy to have the Love of God; and therefore why
should thou covet that which thou will not be able to come by, or art worthy
to have. Believe them not: but hold on thy way, and say thus. Not because I
am worthy, but because I am unworthy, therefore would I love God. For if that
I had His love, it would make me worthy. And since that I was created for
that end (which is for the louinge of God) though I should never come by it,
yet will I covet it, and therefore will I pray, and think how I ma^e get itt,
and will labor for itt. And then if thine enemies see that thou beginst to
grow bold, courageous, and resolute in thy said purpose, they begin to grow
afraid of thee. Nevertheless they will not cease, or giu^ over to seek to
stay, and hinder thee as much as they can: so long as thou art holdinge on
thy way; what on the one side with fears, and threatenings; and what on the
otherside with false flattery, and vain pleasings for to make thee give over
thy good purposes, and to turn thee home again. And for that end they will
say thus unto thee. If thou thus hold on thy desire to Jesus trauellinge so
fervently as thou now beginst; thou will fall into fancies, or into frenzy, or
craze thy head, or fall into bodily sickness, as thou see some do by
goinge about that which thou now do: or thou will fall into poverty, or some
bodilye harm, or mischeife, and noe man able to help thee; or thou may fall
into secret, and inward temptations, or illusions of the enemy so that thou will not be able to help thy self about them. For it is wondrous perilous
for any man, or weoman to give him, or herself wholly, to the love of God, and
to leave, and forsake all the world, and to covet nothing, but only the love
of Him. For so many perill^ may fall to a Man in such course of his, as he
cannot so much as imagine them before hand. And therefore turn thee home
again, and leave of this desire, for thou shall never bring it to an end; and
do thou as other worldly men, or the common sort of good Christ^ans, or even
of Religious do. Thus say thine enemies; but believe them not, but hold on in
thy desire, and say, or answer nothing else, but that thou would have
Jesus and be at Jerusalem. And if they perceive that thou will not give over:
neither for sickness, for fantazies, nor for frenzies, for doubts, nor for
fears of any temptations corporal, or spiritual for poverty, nor for any
mischeife, or harm. For life, nor for death, but ever seek, and longest
after the said one thing, and nothing else but that one thing, and yeildst
to them a deaf ear as if thou heardst them not, and holdst on stiffly, and
constantly, and perseuerantly in Prayer, and in other thy spiritual works
with discretion according to the counsel of thy superior; or the advice, or
direction given thee by thy Spiritual Father, or director, then begin they
to be very angry and to go a little more near thee. Then they begin to
rob thee, and beat thee, and do thee all the shame, and mischeife they can.
And that they do when they cause all the deeds thou do, be they never so
well done, to be deemed, and judged by others to be evil, and turned, and
taken in the worser sense, and meaning. And whatsoever it be thou would do,
or have done in help, relief or comfort of thy body, or of thy soul: it
shall be let, or hindered by those other men, so that thou shall be put from
thy will, and contradicted in it, in all or most of those things which thou
with reason desire to have. And this thy said enemies do, to the end thou
should be stirred, and provoked to anger, impatience, or evil will toward
thy Christian Brother, or sister, but against all these temptations, and
vexations, and difficulties, and all other that may come upon thee or which
thou may feel: use this remedy that I shall now again tell thee, as before
I have told thee. Take Jesus, or his love in thy mind, and trouble thy self
noe further with the^ but think on thy lesson. That thou art nothing, that
thou have nothing, that thou couetest nothing of earthlye, or transitory
things, that thou desire nothing but the love of Jesus. And in and with
these exercises hold on thy way to Jerusalem. And if thou happen sometimes
through thy frailetie or by the evil will of some other man, or through the
malice of thine enemy to be tarried, or let in thy way. Yet as soon as thou
can come again to thy self, leave of thinkinge of what has past, and
proceed in thy good exercises, and hold on thy way, abide not long with those
thy former defects, or difficulties, for fear of thine enemies who would still
hold thee in them, and in discussinge of them, thereby to hinder thee from
goinge forwards in thy way.

If in this our way to Jerusalem, and Spiritual tendance toward God we
chance to stray, and deuiate, or stoppet rough any sin, or defect, we must
presentlye get into the way again^, and go on, as if we had never strayed, or
stopped at all, and this is the only way to expiate the sins, or defects
themselves, and to ridd us of all scruples. For t^eir is noe such Contrition as
this aspiringe to God in the Clo^d of faith, and feelings of Love. Yea if we
fall into certain evident great sins let us meekely, and penitently
confess them, and trouble our selves noe further: but walk on again, as if
noe such thing had happened, or been done.

THE XXIII. CHAPTER. Of a general remedy against the temptation^, and
troubles, proceedinge from the flesh, the world, or the enemy.
AND after this: when that thine enemies see that thou art so well willed that
thou art not angry, nor much troubled; nor incensed against any creatures for
any thing they can do, or speak against thee, but art fully resolved in thy
heart for to suffer and undergo all that may happen to fall, be it easy, or
uneasy; sour, or sweet; praise, or disprayse: scarsitie, or plenty. And
that thou do esteem, or reguard nothing so thou may keep whole and
entire the desire that thou have of the Love of Jesus. Then are they much
abashed, and daunted. But then they will try, and essay thee with flattery
vain pleasinge, and complacence. As when they do bring to the sight of thy
soul all thy good deeds, and virtues, and would persuade thee that all men
praise, and speak much of thy holiness, and virtues. And how that all men
love thee, and reverence thee for thy virtuous, and holy living, and would
therefore persuade thee to be sollicitous of thy good name, and estimation with
others. Thus do thine enemies that thou should think their sayings to be
true, and take willinge delight, and pleasure in such vain joy, and
complace^ce, and should willingly rest thee theri^. But if thou will do
well, thou shall hold, and esteem all such thoughts, and suggestions to be
falsehood, and flattery of thine enemy that profers thee to drink venom
tempered with honey. And therefore refuse it, and say, that thou will not have
it, but would feign be at Jerusalem. Such offers, and lettings tho^ shall
find, and feel, or some other such lettings, or offers, what of thy flesh,
what of the world, what of thine enemy: more in number (I mean of the
temptations) and more diverse in the kinds, and qualities of them; then I am
able to tell thee of, or thou able before hand to imagine for a man so long
as he suffers his mind, and thoughts willingly to run about the world, or
about worldly desires (as all do that do not seriouslye apply themselves to
the service of God) in beholdinge, o^ thinkinge of vain, or hurtful things;
he perceives, or conceiueth but few lettings. But so soon as he draws
all his thoughts, and desires to the said one thing only; to have that, to
know that, to love that, and that is only Jesus, and his love. Then shall he
well feel, and perceive many paynefull, and troublesome lettings. For every
thing that he feels, and is not that he coueteth, or helps to the
gettinge of it; is lettinge to Him Therefore I hauerold thee of some
temptations, or lettings in particular, as for some examples. And moreover I
say in generallitie that whatsoever stirringe, motion, or suggestion thou
feel from thy flesh, or from the enemy: be it pleasant, or sour; louelye,
or dreadful; gladsome, or sorrowful that would draw down thy thoughts, and
desire from the love of Jesus, to wordly vanity; and would hinder, or cool
the Spiritual covetousness that thou have to the love of Him: and would have
thy heart be occupied with that stirring restingly. Do thou set it at naught,
receive it not willingly, or deliberately; tarry not therewith too long. But
if it be an exterior bu^inesse that behooves needs to be done, either toward
thy self, or toward thy Christian Brother or ^ister, dispatch it, and ridd
thee soon of it, and bring it to an end, that it hang not on thy Heart, and
so distract thee more then needs: if it be another thing that may be spared,
and needs not to be done, or else concerns not thee, or belongs to thee,
heed it not, harken not after it, nor trouble thy self about it, nor be angry
for it, nor afraid of it, nor love it, but cast it presently out of thy mind,
and heart, and say thus I am nothing, I have nothing, nothing do I feel, or
covet, but the Love of Jesus. Fasten thy mind, and thoughts to this desire, and
strengthen it, and maintain it with Prayer, and other Spiritual works that
thou forgett it not, and it shall lead, and guide thee in the right way, and
save thee from all perils; and make noe doubt but it will bring thee to the
perfect love of our Lord Jesus.

This naked, and clean aspiringe, and pure adheringe to God in the dark
cloud of faith, and blind feelings of Love, is a way so secure, and safe
that all the world, and all the devils of Hell; nor even the subtle craft of
our own self seekeinge can misleade us, or deceive us; for we still aim at
God, and nothing but pure God; so that we shall not rest in any thing but
him, not his very gifts, and Graces, noe relations, noe Visions, noe rapts,
noe ex^asies^ But still pass, and make use of all to tend to Him above all.

Nevertheless on the otherside; I also say and advise thee; that look what
work, or motion it be (be the same corporal, or spiritual) that may help,
or further thy said desire, strengthen it, and nourish itt, and draw thy mind,
and thoughts furthe^t from the loves, and desires of the world, or corrupt
nature, and which makes thy love, and desire toward God more burninge, more
hearty, or more efficacious. Whither it be prayinge either mentally, or vocally,
or for the nature, or manner of the Prayer, or be it meditation or silence, or
speakinge; solitariness, or being in company; sittinge, or walkinge; keep
it, and hold it for a time, and work therein, and therewith so long as the
savor, or taste of itt lasts.

This discretion, and freedom to do any thing that feeds this Holy desire to
God in us, is most necessary, and without this freedom, we can make noe
progress. Neither need we to scruple at anythinge that is not evil in itt
self, or contrary to the evident externe will of God by ordination of holy
Church, or our particular state, or profession.

If it be so^ thou take therewith (as needs thou must according to thy need)
meat, drink, sleep, and rest, as a pilgrim does, and hold dis^retion in
such thy workinge; thou shall do very well, and profitable in thy so doing.
For have he never so great have in his goinge, yet will he eat, drink,
and sleepe^ Do thou so likewise, for though it let thee for a time yet will
itt further thee afterward. Amen.

FINIS.
LAVS DEO, VIRGINI, Benedicto.
Hac est via, Ambulate in ea. Isa. 30. 21.
This is the way, walk in itt. Isa. 30. 21.
DEVOVT IDIOT.
THY Devotions are so happilye printed; that the faults escaped are such, as
thou may easilye take thy pen in the hand, and correct them thyselfe being
sometimes one letter for another. As an a, for an e, or an n, for an u, or a
letter too much, or a letter too little. All which the sense will soon tell
thee; and I know thou endeauours to mend faults, not find faults, and for thee,
and thy like it was set forth, and none other.

ADIEV.

TO THE V. R MADAME CATHERINE GASCOIGNE MOST WORTHY ABBESS of the English
Monastery of our Ladies of Comfort in Cambray.
MADAME
The same engagement which obliged me to set forth these simple, and pure
Devotions, has bound me to dedicate, and present them to your Lad P. who in
very deed has the most right, and title to them; being yours by the ^en le.
Authors own gift, yours by Possession, but above all yours in the highest
degree of practice. And truly they belong to such, and none but such as de
facto and indeed practice them. All others may look on them, and perchance
hardlye censure them, but they have noe right, and title to them. They have
them not in their heart, and nothing else can possess them; these are
treasures for the Heart: nothing else has right to them. This Idiot, who to
others seems ignorant, and foolish; to you is knowingly ignorant, and wisely
unlearned. They persuade themselves (who present him unto you, as they have
experienced themselves) that he has taught you more high, and evident truths,
more sapid, and fatisfactorie knowledge then all the subtle Scholasticks, and
subtle politics put together could have done. We see; knowledge, Prudence,
and virtue shine in all your Actions in an high measure; Noe other Master
could have taught them you. This Idiot who to others appears so unhandsome,
and insipide; to you shows himself most comely, and delightful. For you have
given all that you have; Math. 13.

Math. 19.

Phil. 3.

Luke 15.


or rather left all that you had; to converse with Him. You esteem all else,
as nothing. You have chose^ this best part which shall never be taken away.
Accept of Him then: and as hitherto let him be ever familiar, and grateful
unto your Lad P. which they wish from their hearts who are: and he hartyly by
whom they make this humble adresse,

MADAME, Your Ladps, most devoted, humble, and obliged servants etc.


