Humane Prudence: OR, THE ART By which a MAN may Raise HIMSELF and FORTUNE TO
Grandeur.

By A. B.

The Second Edition, with the Addition of a Table.

LONDON, Printed for John Lawrence, at the Angel in Cornhil, near the Royal
Exchange. M.DC.LXXXII.

THE BOOKSELLER TO THE Reader.
I Have had these few Sheets so long by me, that the Author (who is a Gentleman
of Modesty and Worth) has even almost forgot them, and left it to me to
recommend them to the public; though indeed they may very well expect a
welcome from you, without the compliment of an ushering Preface.

Upon the Credit of the Author, and some ingenious Persons who have viewed this
Treatise, I dare be bold to say, That he who is willing to be improved by
Reading, shall find so much contracted in this little Manual, as by ordinary
Reflection and Application, may be extended to the several Uses and Qualities
of his Life, if he intend to spend it in Virtue, and expects Reputation from
his Actions; and to such only Counsel is to be given and Reward proposed.
Prudence (in general) I am told, like Truth, consists in a single and
individual point (and that is in doing always what is best to be done) though
the kinds of it may be various, according as the matter to which it is applied
is diversified by the circumstances of Times, Places and Persons; for there are
indeed, many who would be thought prudent, that often take very different
Methods in pursuing one and the same Design; because reason, which ought to be
their Guide, either out of Weakness mistakes the way, or by Prejudice,
Interest, or other deluding Considerations, is diverted into Bypath: And
therefore it is necessary that Virtue and Integrity do carry the Light, else
Conscience it self may err and mislead Men in the dark; as being often swayed
by prevailing Passions, and forced forward by Pride, Whimsey, Prejudice, and
all the Regards that influence the Frailties of Man: Nay Knavery and Cunning
pass sometime for Prudence, and true Wisdom for Silliness and Simplicity; but
the Success does in some Men's minds, determine the Nature of an Action; yet he
that Acts with most Sincerity and Uprightness, according to the best measures
he can attain to, if he be not the most prudent in the esteem of the World, he
is certainly the honestest Man; and Honesty is the greatest Wisdom.

It Is upon this Principle alone, that the Author has founded the following
Sections, and discoursed of many things (for no man can treat of every thing)
so succinctly, and with so much sententious perspicuity, that he who carries
this little book about him in his Pocket, and being willing to learn, opens it
at a venture, when he has nothing else to do; shall I dare affirm shut it again
with satisfaction, and if he meet not with something in it at a superficial
glance, which may give him hints as to his Conduct; yet he will certainly find
that his patience has not been baited with tedious and magisterial Documents.

For those who are Virtuously inclined, but think themselves wise enough
already (as there are many who do so) this little Treatise, if it do them no
good, it will certainly do them no harm, nevertheless it is no presumption to
advise such not too hastily to leave off Trade; seeing, though their Stock may
at present seem sufficient, yet many Casualties of Losses and Times, may bring
them to want a new supply; and let them think on the saying of the old Poet.

-- Semper tibi pendeat hamus, Quo minime modis gurgite, piscis erit.

For such as are of an understanding and humble mind, this little Book (as I
have said) cannot miss of being an useful Vade-Mecum, because it gives
pertinent tho general Directions for the conduct of most part of any Man's Life,
the Actions of whom are not only the subject of the Manual, but of all the
Ethics and large Volumns of Morality that have been written since the
beginning of the World; but lest I should offend the Genius of the worthy
Author (who asserts Brevity) by the Prolixness of a Preface, that suits ill
with the bulk of the Book, I shall add no more, only wish the Reader benefit
in perusing of it; and so bid him*

Farewell.
THE CONTENTS.
Sect. 1. General Heads for one about to begin the World, as we commonly
speak, to act well the allotted part, to avoid vain, and embrace useful
studyes, not to be discouraged. p. 1. Sect. 2. Of Religion, p. 4. Sect. 3. Of
Religion, p. 6. Sect. 4. Of Loyalty, p. 9. Sect. 5. Of Conversation, Behavior,
Civilty, p. 11. Sect. 6. Of Conversation. Of talk and silence. Of Reservedness
of Secrets, p. 15. Sect. 7. Of modesty and humility in disputes. Of the
weakness of Humane knowledge, p. 18. Sect. 8. Of Reputation, p. 21. Sect. 9. Of
boasting Of being too open. Of speaking ill of persons. Of bearing reproaches.
Disoblige none, p. 22. Sect. 18. Of Passion. Of passing by Injuries, p. 27.
Sect. 11. Of Virtue and Bounty, p. 32. Sect. 12. Of Friends and Friendship, p.
34. Sect. 13. Of Wealth, p. 37. Sect. 14. Of Riches and Honor. Of the
Contempt, and use of them, p. 40. Sect. 15. Of going to Law, p. 46. Sect. 16.
Of Gaming, p. 50. Sect, 17. Of Marriage, p. 51. Sect. 18. Of Justice in
dealing. Of Promises. Borrowing. Fidelity. Considerations and Resotions, p. 54.
Sect. 19. Of Industry and Diligence. Of temporising. Of Secrecy and celerity.
Of vain confidence in undertakings. Of circumspection. Of chance and caution in
affairs, p. 59. Sect. 20. Of Opportunity. Of Nicetyes, and wise compliance in
affairs. Of concealing ones Prudence. Of fair words and promises. Not to rely
too much on another honesty. Of prudential diffidence. Of trust, Self Center,
over officious persons. Stand upon your Guard, p. 64. Sect. 21. A Diary of your
actions. The experience of our own errors is the best instructor, p. 68. Sect.
22. Of Complacency. Of laying hold on Opportunity, Against Singularity, p. 66.
Sect. 23. The dangers attending Virtue. What conduct to use in time: of danger:
And of faction. Of state factions. Not to be neuter in popular. Commotions. Sit
not still under an extraordinary misfortune. Be not disturbed at things out of
your power, p. 72. Sect. 24. In preferments, Money and the favor of great men
more useful than merit. Persons of worth often purposely neglected and
oppressed. Not the modesty of Wisdom, but the Confidence and Ambition transact
the business of the World, p. 76. Sect. 25. In adversity men betake themselves
to a Wife and Virruous man. Honor and preferment seldom the reward of Virtue,
but the issue of pleasure and interest. Virtue a reward to it self, p. 79.
Sect. 26. Of Ambition. Of moderation and privacy. A rising person must Study
the humor of the Prince: Not to monoplize his Ear. Beware of too great
services. Study the Interest of his Kingdom. Be ready to give an account of
your management. p. 81. Sect. 27. Be humble, and of easy access. Against Rigor
in Religion. How to be in prosperity. To make goodness accompany greatness, p.
88. Sect. 28. Age flatterers. To Worship the rising Sun. To sweeten denials.
Advice in managing designs, and in case of enemies, p 91. Sect. 29. Of Libells
and Pasquils. Of new Favorites, of the pretense of Public good, how useful, to
establish ones self in a Princes favor. Directions in Negotiations. Of
Council. Of matters of great concern, who to be in your Cabal. How to act in
dangerous attempts: And in doubtful matters. Where Wisdom misses, money hits, p.
93. Sect. 30. To intermix Wisdom with Innocence, p. 98. Sect. 31. Of Honor. To
retire to solitude if Fortune frown. The Mind must not vary with the Fortune,
the advantage of hope and benefit of Affliction, p. 100. Sect. 32. The
Happiness of Contentment. p. 102. Sect. 33. Of Contentment and Submission. Only
Heaven valuable. Piety the only Wisdom* and Happiness, p. 104* Maxims to be
observed by Statesmen, p. 108.
HUMANE PRUDENCE.
SECT. 1.
SIR,
I Know you are Ingenious and Industrious, the Conjunction of two such Planets
in your Youth does presage much good unto you.

You are now entering upon the Theater of the World, where every one must act
his part; what part you shall act, I know not* but if it be your fortune to act
that of a Beggar, do it with as much grace and comeliness as you can.

Never perplex your Head with the Schools, whether a Myriad of Angels can dance
upon the point of a Needle; nor spend time in the finding out of the proportion
between the Cylinder and the Sphere, though the Invention highly pleased
Archimedes.

Neither will it become you to quarrel the Orthography of a Word, and whether
we should write Foelix or Felix, but get to be so.

It will be an instance of great Prudence in you, to study Things which may be
of Solid use, and come home to Business; the whole province of Learning is
infested with Frivolous Disputations and Vain Impostures.

I must confess, the Speeulations of the Metaphysics (which are nothing but
the Needle Work of Curious Brains) are exceeding pleasant: but pleasure without
profit, is a Flower without a Root.

And all the Philosophy in Aristotle and Plato, or the Sublime Theorems of the
Schools, will not pay one Debt,

Add to your own Stores from Observation and Experience, a-Way of Learning as
far beyond that which is got by Precept, as the Knowledge of a Traveller
exceeds that which is got by a Mapp.

The whole Universe is your Library, Conversation, Living Studies, and
Observations, your best Tutors.

The New World of Experiments is left to the Discovery of Posterity; but it
has been the unhappy fate (which is great pity) of New Inventions to be
undervalued; witness that Excellent Discovery of Columbus, with the great
neglect which he under-went before and after it.

But let nothing discourage you; Worth is ever at home, and carries its own
welcome with it: your own Virtues will innoble you, and a gallant Spirit will
make you Cosin-german to Caesar.

SECT. 2.
LInk not your self with any Parties on Design, but with all Christians in
Communion; for you will find it true in some persons, that, Maxima pars
studiorum, est studium partium.

For my self, I wish the Christian World Unity in the few Fundamentals, which
are Necessary, liberty in things indifferent, and Charity in all things.

I know there are many things obtruded upon the World, as Oracles of Heaven,
when they are but the accustomed Cheats and Delusions of Impostors.

But Wisemen cannot be content to be abused with Umbrages, nor is the World
any longer to be entertained with Dark Lanthorns, since God has said, Fiat Lux.

I must confess I have not Faith enough my self to swallow Camels, nor can I
persuade my Reason to become a Dromedary, to bear the whole Luggage of Humane
Tradition, or the Impostures of the Alcoran.

That Religion to me seems best, which is most rational; especially if we
consider, how much of Interest and the strong impressions of Education, there
is in that which many call Religion.

I do not speak this, that you should try the Articles of your Creed by the
Touchstone of Aristotle.

Be content with a true Faith in God, the Comforts of a Good Life, and the
hopes of a better upon true Repentance; and take the rest upon the Authority of
the Church.

In things necessary go along with the Ancient Church, in things indifferent
with the present.

Though you have some Opinions and Motions of your own, yet yield (as the Orbs
do for the Order of the Universe) to the Great Wheel of the Church.

SECT. 3.
LET not your Faith, which ought to stand firm upon a sure Foundation, lean
over hardly, on a well-painted, yet rotten Post.

If in Scripture some Points are left unto us, less clear and positive, be
content, it is that Christians might have wherewith to exercise Humility in
themselves, and Charity toward others.

If you design to make your self happy, look to your thoughts before they come
to desires; and entertain no thoughts which may blush in words.

Be assured he has no serious Belief of God or the World to come, who dares be
wicked.

Instead of a Cato, set before you a GOD, whose Eye is always upon you; and
therefore keep your Eye always upon him.

Fear to do any thing against that God whom thou love, and thou will not love
to do any thing against that God whom thou fear.

Let your Prayers be as frequent as your Wants, and your Thanksgivings as your
Blessings.

In the Morning think what you have to do, for which ask God blessing; at Night
what you have done, for which you must ask pardon.

Take an exact account of your Life, be not afraid to look upon the Score, but
fearful to increase it; to despair because a Man is sinful, is to be worse
because he has been bad.

In all our Actions aim at Excellency; that Man will fail at last, who allows
himself one sinful Thought.

And he that dares sometimes be wicked for his advantage, will be always so, if
his interest require it.

Consider the Shortness of your Life and Certainty of Judgment, the great
reward for the Good, and severe punishment for the Bad; therefore make even
with Heaven by Repentance at the end of every day, and so you shall have but
one day to repent of before your Death.

SECT. 4.
NExt your Duty to God, I advise you, that you be Loyal to your King; never
sell Honor to purchase Treason.

A secure and happy Subjection is more to be esteemed than a dangerous and
factious Liberty.

Government is the greatest security of freedom; for as Obedience in Subjects
is the Princes Strength, so is the same their own Safety: Therefore they who
weaken the Sovereign Power, weaken their own Security.

Never suffer the Dignity of his Person to be slurred; for the most effectual
Method of Disobedience, is, First to sully the Glory of his Person, and then to
overthrow his Power.

As Rebellion is a Weed of hasty growth, so it will decay as suddenly; and that
Knot which is united in Treachery, will easily be dissolved by Jealousies.

Great Crimes are full of Fears, Delays, and frequent Change of Counsels; and
that which in the Projection seemed full of its Reward, when it comes to be
acted, looks big with danger.

And let me tell you, the Ends of the Common People, if nusled up in a Factious
Liberty, are much different from the Designs of Sovereign Princes.

Submission to your Prince is your Duty; and Confidence in his Goodness will be
your Prudence.

Let no pretense of Conscience render you disobedient to his Commands; for
Obedience to your Prince is part of your Duty toward God.

And Conscience is not your Rule, but your Guide; and so far only can
Conscience justify your actions; as it is it self justified by God and his
Sacred Word.

Remember always that Kings have long hands, they catch afar off, and their
Blows are dangerous.

SECT. 5.
LET your Conversation be with those, by whom you may accomplish your self
best; for Virtue never returns with so rich a Cargo, as when it sets sail from
such Continents; Company, like Climates, alter Complexions.

Keep Company with Persons rather above than beneath your self; for Gold in the
same Pocket with Silver, loses both of its color and weight.

Retain your own Virtues, and by Imitation naturalize other Men's; but let none
be Copies to you longer, than they do agree with the Original. Study to gain
Respects, not by little Observances, but by a constant fair Carriage.

Hear no ill of a Friend, nor speak any of an Enemy; Believe not all you hear,
nor speak all you believe.

Give not your Advice or Opinion before required, for that is to upbraid the
others Ignorance, and overmuch to value your own parts: Neither accustom your
self to find fault with other Men's Actions, for you are not bound to weed their
Gardens.

Never commend any Person to his face, but to others, to create in them a good
Opinion of him: Nor dispraise any man behind his back, but to himself, to work
a-Reformation in him of himself.

Overgreat Encomiums of any Person do not suit with Prudence; for it is a kind
of Detraction from those with whom you do converse, and it will express
arrogance in you: For he that commends another, would have him esteemed upon
his Judgment.

Nothing will gain you more reputation with the people, than an humble and
serene Deportment.

A rude and morose Behavior in Conversation, is as absurd, as a round
Quadrangle in the Mathematics.

Urbanity and Civility are a Debt you owe to Mankind: Civil Language and Good
Behavior, will be like perpetual Letters Commendatory unto you: Other Virtues
have need of somewhat to maintain them; Justice must have Power, Liberality,
Wealth, etc. but this is set up with no other Stock than a few pleasant Looks,
good Words, and no evil Actions. It Is an easy purchase, when Friends are
gained by Kindness and Affability.

Let your Behavior, like your Garment, be neither straight nor loose, but fit
and becoming.

Catch not too soon at an Offense, nor give too easy way to Anger; the one
shows a Weak Judgment, and the other a Perverse Nature.

Avoid in Conversation idle Jests and vain Complements, the one being Crepitus
ingenii, the other nothing but Verbal Idolatry. Virtue, like a rich Stone, is
ever best when plain set.

By Trifles are the Qualities of Men as well discovered, as by great Actions;
because in Matters of Importance they commonly temporize, and strain
themselves, but in lesser things they follow the current of their own Natures.

You will meet with many Persons (as I my self have done) which are wise in
Picture, and exceeding formal; but they are so far from resolving of Riddles
with Oedipus, as they are very Riddles themselves.

You must have a care of these, for a Pedant and a Formalist are two dangerous
Animals; but to the Solons and Heroes of the Times, out of Duty you must pay
them the Debt of an Honorable regard and memory.

If you meet with a Person subject to infirmities, never deride them in him;
but bless God that you have no occasion to grieve for them in your self.

SECT. 6.
BE not futile and over-talkative, that is the Fools Paradise, but a Wise-mans
Purgatory: It will express a great weakness in you, and does imply a believing
that others are affected with the same vanity.

Speak well or say nothing; so if others be not better by your silence, they
will not be worse by your Discourse.

By your Silence you have this advantage, you observe other Men's Follies and
conceal your own; and he discovers his Abilities most, that least discovers
himself; not that I would have you over-reserved, that is a symptom of a sullen
Nature, and unwelcome to all Society.

But let your Discourse be solid, not like a Ship that has more Sail than
Ballast.

There is no Man that talks, if you be wise, but you may gain from him, and
none that is silent, if you have not a care, but you may lose by him: If you
must speak, it will be prudence in you always to speak last; and so you will be
Master of others strength, before you discover your own.

Reservedness will be your best security, and slowness of belief the best sinew
of Wisdom: Never impart that to a Friend, which may empower him to be your
Enemy. Your Servants (which usually prove the worst of Enemies) you may admit
into your Bedchamber, but never into your Closet.

A Secret, like a Crown, is no Estate to be made over in trust; and to
whomsoever you do commit it, you do but enable him to undo you; and you must
purchase his secrecy at his own price.

Consider how precarious and unhappy your Life and Fortune will be, which
depends upon so slender a Thread as another pleasure; therefore let me advise
you always to carry two eyes about you, the one of wariness upon your self, the
other of observation upon other Men.

Parca lingua, aperta frons, and clausum pectus, are the best ingredients of
Wisdom; and that made the Italian say, Gli pensiere streti, and el viso
sciolto; Keep your Thoughts close, and your Countenance loose.

Never trust twice, where you have been deceived once; for he that makes
himself an Ass, it is fitting Others should ride him.

SECT. 7.
BE not Magisterial or too Affirmative in any Assertion: for the bold
maintaining of any Argument does conclude against your own Civil Behavior:
Modesty in your Discourse will give a luster to truth, and an excuse to your
error.

If you desire to know how short your Understanding is in Things above,
consider how little you know of your self, what the Soul is, of what Members
your Body is inwardly compacted; and what is the use of every Bone, Vein,
Artery, or Sinew: which no Man understands, as Galen himself confesses.

Protagoras has delivered to us, That there is nothing in Nature but doubt;
and that a Man may equally dispute of all things; and of that also, whether all
things may be equally disputed of.

I do pay much reverence to the humility of Plato, Democritus, Anaxagoras,
Empedocles, and all the New Academicks; who positively maintain, That nothing
in the World could be certainly known.

And Socrates was by the Oracle adjudged the Wisest Man living, because he was
wont to say (I know only this) I know nothing. Yet Archiselaus was of Opinion,
That not so much as that could be known, which Socrates said he knew, to wit,
that he knew nothing.

Much of the Knowledge of the Arts we profess, we have been instructed therein
by the very Beasts and other Creatures: Of the Spider we learn to Spin and Sew,
of the Swallow to Build, of the Nightingale Music: Of diverse Creatures
Physic, the Goats of Candia, being shot with an Arrow, do choose from out of a
Million of Simples, the Herb Dittany, and therewith cure themselves. The
Tortoise having eaten of a Viper, does seek for Wild Marjoram to purge her
self: The Dragon clears her Eyes with Fennel: The Cranes with their Bills do
minister Glisters of Seawater unto themselves.

Therefore I must tell you, as amongst Wisemen, He is the wisest, that thinks
he knows least, so amongst Fools, He Is the greatest, that thinks he knows most.

SECT. 8.
BE studious to preserve your Reputation; if that be once lost, you are like a
Cancelled Writing, of no value; and at best, you do but survive your own
Funeral; for Reputation is like a Glass, which being once cracked, will never
be otherwise than crazy. It will beget a contempt of you, and Contempt, like
the Planet Saturn, has first an ill Aspect, and then a destroying Influence.

A noble Reputation is a great Inheritance, it begets Opinion, (which rules
the World;) Opinion Riches, Riches Honor.

Chi semina virtu fama raccoglie. but howsoever be careful to keep keep up the
Reputation of your Parts and Virtue with the Vulgar; for it will be more
advantage to you to be accounted. Virtuous and Learned by the Ignorant, than
Ignorant by the Learned; for the Ignorant are many, but the Learned are few.

It was a Principle in Julius Caesar, not to be eminent amongst the
Magnifico's, but to be chief amongst Inferiors.

Thy Credit wary keep, it is quickly gone;
Being got by many Actions, lost by one,
SECT. 9.
NEver magnify your self, or boast of your great Actions (that is Pedantry)
and as in Falconry, so take it for a truth, That those of the weakest Wing are
commonly the highest Fliers.

Make not your self a Body of Crystal, that all Men may look through you; but
(as Wisemen ought to do) be like Coffers with Double Bottoms, which when
others look into, being opened, they see not all they hold on a sudden and at
once.

Let your Discourse of others be fair, speak not ill of any; if you do in his
absence, it is the property of a Coward to stab a Man behind his back; if to his
face, you add an affront to the scandal: Every Man thinks he deserves better
than indeed he does, therefore you cannot oblige Mankind more, than to speak
well: Man is the greatest Humourist and Flatterer of himself in the World.

I have observed, That no Men are so ready to sully the Honor and Reputation
of others, as those which do deserve the worst themselves; yet I have so much
Charity for them, that many times they do it not so much out of a Principle of
Malice, as thereby to gain a Reputation (as they think) of being Virtuous and
Just themselves; therefore if any person shall speak ill of you, I advise you
not to disquiet your self; but endeavor to live so virtuously, as the World
shall not believe that to be true, which is reported of you. And you must
understand, That many speak ill, because they never learned to speak well.

Your own Innocence will be a Back of Steel unto you, and a clear Soul, like a
Castle, against all the Artillery of depraving Spirits, is Impregnable.
Howsoever it will be your Wisdom to carry a Counterpest or Antidote in your
Ears against the poison of Virulent Tongues.

It was an instance of great Prudence in the Earl of Carnarvan, when
discourfing with a Doctor of Physic, the Doctor told him he lied: The Earl
(though a Person of much Honor and Courage) without any Passion replied, That
he had rather take the Lie of him twenty times than Physic once. This was a
Noble Gallantry of Spirit, for a Lie, like false and counterfeit Money, though
a Good Man may receive it, yet ought he not in Justice to pay it.

I am not much concerned if the Plebeian Heads take me for the Image of a Fly,
a Nullo, a Cipher; nay if they tell me I am a Fool, I can have the same
Sentiments with that great Chancellor, who when Cardinal Wolsey told him he
was the veriest Fool in the Council; God be thanked, said he, that my Master
has but one Fool here. I do desire to honor my life not by other Men's
opinions, but by my own Actions and Virtues.

Si vis beatus esse, cogita hoc primum contemnere, and contemni, nondum es
felix si te turba non deriserit. Howsoever disoblige none, for there is no
person so contemptible, but it may be in his power to be your best Friend or
worst Enemy: If you do Courtesies to a hundred men and disoblige but one, that
one shall be more active to your ruin than all the other shall be to serve you:
Therefore if you will gain respect, turn Usurer, and make all men enter into
Obligations to you. The World is a Shop of Tools, of which the Wiseman only is
the Master.

SECT. 10.
NEver be so below your self as to let any Passion be above you: Be assured
when Passion enters in at the Fore-gate, Wisdom goes out at the Postern.

He who commands himself, commands the World too; and the more Authority you
have over others, the more Command you must have over your self.

I cannot but admire at the temper of that Persian, who in his fury threatened
the Tempest and whipped the Sea.

It is a sorrow to me, to see a passionate Man scourge himself with his own
Scorpions, and in the midst of his innocent Contentments fondly to give himself
Alarms.

It Is the Infelicity of many Men, to sally into the greatest passion upon the
least occasion: Not unlike that Gentleman (though learned, yet none of the
wisest) when seeing his Man at Plow, fell into a great Distemper, and was much
incensed against him, because he did not plow, secundum Artem, in drawing his
Furrows mathematically, and in Linea Recta, as he said: A Friend of his
standing by, told him that he had little reason to be displeased, if he
considered the small difference between errare and arare.

I am not pleased, if I see a Butter-flie in the Air, and cannot catch it.

Be you like the Caspian Sea, which is said never to ebb or flow.

Have not to do with any Man in his Passion, for men, contrary to Iron, are
worst to be wrought upon when they are hot.

It Is more Prudence to pass by Trivial Offenses, than to quarrel for them; by
the last you are even with your Adversary, but by the first above him.

If you have an Injury done you, you do your Adversary too much honor to take
notice of it, and think too meanly of your self to revenge it: Let me advise
you, to dissemble an Injury, when you have not the power to revenge it, and
generously to forgive it, when you have the means to do it.

It Is a noble way of Revenge, to forget and scorn them; for Resentment does but
encourage that Malice which neglect would dissipate. Lewis the Twelfth of
France being advised by some of his Council to punish such as were Enemies to
him when he was Duke of Orleans, answered like a Prince, That it did not suit
with the glory of a King of France to revenge the injuries done to the Duke of
Orleans.

If you be displeased with every Peccadillo, you will become habitually
forward: Learn to be patient, by observing the inconveniences of impatience in
other Men.

If you have an infelicity upon you, by your impatience you super-add another
to it: He who submits to his Passions, at the same time is a Slave to many
Tyrants. I prefer the freedom of my Mind and the serenity of my Soul (not
clouded with Passions) before the Empire of the World.

It will be the test of Prudence in you, without any Passion to endure the
Injuries and Follies of other Men: If you cannot endure them in others, you may
make them your own: For first you lose your Judgment, and then offend your
Self; and so Passion will praecipitate you into that Ill which you would avoid.

If any Man does me an Injury, I am not disturbed, but must pity him; for he is
the first offended, and receives the greatest damage; because in this he loses
the use of Reason.

Every day I meet with Bravo's, false and perfidious Persons, but they can do
me no harm, because it is not in their power to disquiet me or to make me act
any thing dishonorable; neither am I angry nor disaffected toward them,
because they are by Nature near unto me; for they are all my Kinsmen by
participation of the same Reason and Divine Particle: If at any time I have an
injury done me by them, I convert it to my own advantage, I know how to avoid
them; and they discover to me my own Weakness, where I may be assaulted;
therefore I study to fortify that place: And if an Ass does kick me (as many
times he does) I never use to put him into the Court.

I speak this to you; not that I would have you without sense, for Chi la fa
Pecora il Lupo la mangia: He who makes himself a Sheep, the Wolf will devour
him.

It was a Maxim worthy of Caesar's Gallantry, Nec infer nec perpeti.

SECT. 11.
I Shall commend unto your practice that Excellent Precept of Pythagoras, Nil
turpe committas, neque coram aliis, neque tecum, maxim omnium verere teipsum:
And believe it, a good Man will blush as much to commit a Sin in the
Wilderness, as upon a Theater: The less the occasion of Sin, the greater is the
Nature of it: And to justify a Fault is a greater Sin than to fall into it:
And let me tell you, Sin is Masculine, and begets the like in others; and many
times like Venom it infects the Blood, when the Viper is dead, which gave the
Wound: Therefore take care that the bright Luster of your Virtues may inlighten
the whole Sphere wherein you move.

I would not have you like a Sun-Dyal in the Grave, of no use.

As to Acts of Charity and Virtue, let not your heart be a narrow Island, but a
large Continent; be your own Almoner, and dispose of your own Charity: but as
to Favors and Kindnesses, imitate the Wise Husbandmen, who when they sow their
ground, do not throw all their Seed in one place, but scatter it; and believe
me, small and common courtesies do more oblige than great favors: And whereas
others are made poor by Oppression, make you as many Beggars as you can by your
Bounty: And if you design to gain all Interests, make all Interests Gainers.

SECT. 12.
OUt of your Acquaintance choose Familiars, and out of those pick Friends.

But let me advise you never to make a Coward your Friend, or a Drunkard your
Privy-councellor; for the one upon the approach of the least danger, will
desert you, and the other will discover all your secrets; both dangerous to
Humane Society.

Friendship is a sacred thing, and deserves our dearest acknowledgments: A
Friend is a great comfort in solitude, an excellent assistance in business; and
the best protection against injuries.

In the Kindness of my Friend, I sweeten the Adversities of my Life; by his
Cares I lessen my own, and repose under his Frienship: When I see any good
befall him I rejoice, and thereby increase my own happiness.

Therefore I cannot but hug the Resolution of that Philosopher, who when he was
dying, ordered his Friend to be inventoried amongst his goods.

A Friend, like a Glass, will best discover to you your own Defects.

But never purchase Friends by Gifts, for if you leave to give, they will leave
to love.

Love is built upon the Union of Minds, not the Bribery of Gifts; and the more
you give, the fewer Friends you will have.

An Enemy is better recovered by Kindness, than a Friend assured.

Have a care in making any Man your Friend twice, except the Rupture was by
your own mistake, and you have done Penance for it.

When you have made choice of your Friend, express all Civilities to him; yet
in prudence I would advise you to look upon your present Friend, as in
possibility to be your future Enemy.

I never have forsaken my Friend, but when he has first forsaken himself and
Virtue (which was the True Lovers Knot which first united us;) and if at any
time I renounced his Familiarity, yet in respect of my former intimacy, I
retained an Affection for him, and wished him well.

I do profess my self a Citizen of the World, and have such an Aversion to any
thing that is unkind, that I look upon an injury done to another, as done to my
self.

And many times when I have heard that my Friend was dead, I have bemoated my
Eyes with Tears, and could as passionately have wept over his sacred Urn, as
that Grecian Matron did for the loss of her Mother: But when I had considered,
it was more Kindness in me than Prudence; for I might as reasonably have wept
that my Friend was born no sooner, as that he should live no longer.

SECT. 13.
STudy not only to preserve your Estate, but justly to increase it: Money is the
Heir of Fortune, and the Lord Paramount of the World.

Riches are the Keys to Greatness, and make the access to Honor more easy and
open.

A Man without Money is like a Wall without a Cross, for every Man to draw
upon, El senner dinero par un gran Cavallero.

It Is storied, That a Noble Man of Venice made his Address to Cosmo de Medicis
Duke of Florence, and signified to him that he understood his Highness had the
Philosophers Stone, and desired to see it.

It Is true, says the Duke, but my Elixir is this, Never to do that by another
which I can do my self; Not to do that to morrow, which I can do to day: Not to
neglect the least things. The Venetian thanked his Highness, and took his leave
of him; and by the Observation hereof became the wisest and the Richest man in
Venice. If you purpose to be Rich and Wise take this Elixir.

I know a generous Man least regards Money, but when he has it not, he wants
it most; and the most Excellent Person without an Estate, is like a Ship well
rigged, but cannot sail for want of Wind: If your Estate be but small, come
seldom into Company; but when you do, let your Money go freely.

Have a care you do not imitate his Fortune, who laboring to buoy up a sunk
Ship of another, bulged his own Vessel.

Those Men which have wasted their own Estates will help you to consume yours.
These are like the Fox in the Fable, who having lost his Tail, persuaded others
to cut off theirs as troublesome.

I have read there was a Goddess fastened to an Oak in a Grove, who for a long
time had many Worshippers; but when the Tree was ready to fall, none would come
within the Shadow of her Statue.

Love and Respect are rarely found in lost Fortunes, and Adversity seldom meets
with the returns of Friendship.

The World has no Kindness or Affection but Interest; and though you have many
persons allied to you, yet you will find them most akin to their own Interest.

And Charity, though a Saint, is yet without an Altar in the World; you will
meet with many Men, which have much of the Heliotrope in them, which open in
the Sunshine of Prosperity; but toward the Night of Adversity, or in stormy
seasons, shut and contract themselves.

And believe me, none will be so severe Enemies to you in Adversity, as those,
that in Prosperity have been your Friends.

SECT. 14.
I Am not by my Constellation destinated to be rich, neither do I much care;
for the more a man has, the more he wants.

And Riches were to be sought after above all things, if they brought Content
as well as Content bring them; if they be for real uses, then it follows, he
who has not need of so many things as another, is richest of the two; and be
assured, he who needs least, is most like God.

External Fortunes may befall the unworthiest persons, but a Man's own solid
worth is that which begets him glory. Nobility and Riches are reputed to make
Men happy, yet deserve not much to be commended, being derived from others.
Virtue and Integrity, as of themselves they are lovely, so do they also give a
singular luster to the most Excellent Person.

Crassus accounted him a Rich Man, who had an Estate to maintain an Army; but
he that has an Estate to maintain an Army, had need have an Army to keep his
Estate.

Get all the Possessions of the Earth, yet if you measure your own shadow (as
Archidamus told Philip of Macedon) he should not find it longer than before.

Bias made himself rich, by abandoning his Goods; and his Omnia mea mecum
porto, has raised him a glorious Pyramid of Honor to all Posterity.

The Rich Man lives happily, so long as he uses his Riches temperately; and
the Poor Man who patiently endures his wants is rich enough.

Methinks when I see a poor Man drink out of his Hand, I could with Diogenes,
throw away my Dish.

And many times wish with Crates, that the Stones were Bread, as well as the
Water Drink, that we might have a certain Provision by Nature.

What is beyond that which is purely necessary to me, is useless: If my
Clothes be sufficient to defend me from Heat and Cold, or my House from Wind
and Rain, I expect no more: If I find any thing beyond, I can behave my self
with indifferency. I value not the Treasures of the Samnites, or the Delicasies
of Apicius: Neither would I (if it were in my power) with Dyonisius the
Sicilian, reward those who could invent any new pleasure.

I am not ambitious with Scipio to be Magnus, or with Fabius to be Maxim^^; Nor
do I affect great Riches or Honors, but look upon them as pretty little Toys
and Nuts, which Fortune throws out to men, just as we do to little Children;
pleasing my self with tasting now and then one, which some accident has slung
even to me, too, whilst that others are struggling and contending who shall
get the most.

I am not much delighted with the Regalio's or Gaiety of the World: I can do by
them, as Princes do by great Banquets, look on them, and touch them, and so
away: There was no Magic in that Beautiful Face of Darius's Lady, which could
have enchanted me; neither could the Eyes of Cleopatra have triumphed over the
powers of my Soul, as they did over Caesar and Anthony; for this I am beholden
to my Stars; Saturn was Ascendent in my Nativity; I am but slow and dull: yet I
can say at any time with a good heart that Verse which Cleanthes has made
famous.

(...).
Quocunque voles Jupiter, me ducito, tuque necessitas.
For a Wilderness to me is as pleasant, as the Land of Promise, my Mind can
find a Hermitage every where; and in the most numerous Assemblies of Men in the
greatest Cities, I very frequently find my self in a Desert.

When I hear the Nightingale singing in a Wood (where I often retire) I do envy
her happiness, because she is perched on the Pinnacle of her highest Felicity;
free from Care and Toil, and entertaining her self, in her Solitudes, with her
own Music and Warbling Notes.

Of all persons I look upon them to be happy, who have their Estates in their
own hands (I mean Laborers) for as they never gain much, so they are sure
never to want but little.

However let me advise you, to make use of your Estate while you live; for when
you die, you shall leave it to the greatest Enemies you have, who wished your
Death when you were living.

And when you are dead, you are no more concerned in that you shall leave
behind you, then you were in that which was before you were born; therefore get
well to live, and then study to live well.

SECT. 15.
IF you design to your self happiness and an improvement of your Estate, let me
advise you to avoid Suits in Law; if you engage in any, you put your self into
a House of Correction; where you must labor stoutly to pay your Fees.

If the Case shall go for you, there are those who will tell you, That Victory
is a fair Game, but you must give them leave to divide the Stakes.

If it shall be your misfortune to engage in any, have a care of a rich Fool;
for there is nothing more dangerous, as to mischief, than a rich obstinate
Fool, in the hands of a Cunning Knave.

There were two Lawyers very passionately pleading their Clients Case, to their
great satisfaction; when the Case was done, the Lawyers came out of the Court,
and hugged each other; the Clients much admiring their Behavior, one of them
asked his Lawyer, How they could be Friends so soon? Tush Man, faith the
Lawyer, we were never Foes; for we Lawyers are like a Pair of Sheers, if you
open them, and then pull them down; they seem to cut one another; but they only
cut that which comes between them.

You remember the Epilogue of the Vulture, sitting upon a Tree to see the Lion
and the Bear fight, and to make prey of him which fell first; have you a care
you do not make the Moral.

I speak not this to reflect upon that Honorable Profession, to which I shall
ever pay the greatest Tribute of my Service.

I know there are many excellent Persons toward the Law, if it be your Fortune
to meet with them.

But you will be sure at every Market in the Country, to find some Fairies,
Elves, and little Spirits, with Hawking Bags or Snapsacks by their sides,
wherein they have their Familiars; some with Green Coats, others with Yellow
Vests, which they send forth to the disquiet of good Men, as Aeolus did the
Winds, which he had gotten into his Bottle, to the Disturbance of the World.

Certainly these Elves are much of the Nature of the Ant, very good for
themselves, but exceeding pernicious in the Garden of a Common Wealth.

If ever you should fly to these for succor, as the Sheep do to the Bushes,
in a Storm, you will be sure to leave a good part of your Coat behind you.

These, like a Quartane Ague, will never leave you, as long as any humor be
left in you; and if you shall have need to make use of them, they will stir no
more without their Fee, than a Hawk without a Lure.

My Advice to you is, that you seriously employ your self in the Study of the
Laws of this Nation (being the most excellent for their Justice and Wisdom) if
not to practice the Law, yet to gain so much knowledge therein, as to defend
your self and estate from the Robbin-good-fellows of it.

If you be not so disposed, you must lay up one third part of your Estate to
preserve the other two, or else you will be assuredly undone.

SECT. 16.
NExt Suits in Law (which are but jactus aleae) avoid Gameing; it has no
satisfaction in it, beside a sordid coveting of that which is another, or a
prodigality of that which is your own: It Is a Madness beyond the cure of
Hellebore, to cast a Die whether your Estate shall be your own or not, if you
have not a care (I can without an Augure tell what will be your Fate) this like
a Quicksand, will swallow you up in a moment; and Goods which are so gotten,
are like Pyramides of Snow, which melt away and are dissolved with the same ill
Husbandry that did beget them; and believe me, you will find it more chargeable
to you than the Seven Deadly Sins.

Remember that one Crown in your Purse will do you more honor than ten spent.

SECT. 17.
THere is one step more to make your Life comfortable, and to advance your
Fortune, and that is, well to dispose of your self in Marriage; certainly a
business which requires grave consideration.

Ride not post for your Match, if you do, you may in the period of your
journey, take Sorrow for your Inn, and make Repentance your Host.

If you marry, espouse a Virtuous person; a Celebrated Beauty, like a Fair,
will draw Chapmen from all parts.

Never marry so much for a great Living as a good Life; yet a fair Wife without
a Portion, is like a Brave House without Furniture, you may please your self
with the Prospect, but there is nothing within to keep you warm.

Be sure you love her Person better than her Estate; for he who marries where
he does not love, will be sure to love where he does not marry.

Remember there is a great difference between a Portion and a Fortune with your
Wise: If she be not Virtuous, let her Portion be never so great, she is no
Fortune to you.

But if you be able to live of your self, and out of Debt, and design to Marry,
have a care you make not too great a Jointure out of your Lands; especially if
you have Children by a former Wife: If you do, it will be more Fatal and
Calamitous to your Family than any Debt.

If you have Children, it is better to leave them a Competent Estate with a
Profession, than great Riches without it; for in the one there is a place for
Industry, but the other, like a Lure, will bring all Birds of Prey to devour
them.

Have a regard to a good Bishop to satisfy your Conscience; for an Honest
Lawyer to settle your Estate; and marry into a good Family, to keep your
Interest.

Choose such a Wife as may sympathise with you in your Afflictions; for Marriage
is just like a Sea Voyage, he that enters into this Ship, must look to meet
with Storms and Tempests.

Methinks the Zeal of that Priest did trespass upon his Discretion, when in a
Wedding Sermon he much commended Marriage, but compared the Women to a Grave.

For as every Grave (says he) has a Hic jacet, so when you come to marry, Hic
jacet the Wisdom of Solomon, Hic jacet the Valor of David; Hic jacet the
Strength of Sampson.

I must confess, I ever had a Noble Affection for that Excellent Sex, as great
Instruments of good, and the prettinesses of Society; and ever thought, that of
all Follies in Man, there is none more excusable than that of Love; but I find
by my self that Passion will grow old, and wear out in time.

SECT. 18.
When You come upon the Stage of Action, as it is your Duty, so it will be your
Glory, to deal justly with all Persons.

Clear and round Dealing is the Honor of Man's Nature: Hate nothing but what
is dishonest: Fear nothing but what is ignoble, and love nothing but what is
just and honorable.

To stoop to any sordid low action, is to imitate the Kite, which flies high
in the Air, yet vouchsafes to condescend to Carrion upon the Ground.

Do Injury to none, for by so doing you do but teach others to injure you.

Innocence will be your best Guard, and your Integrity will be a Coat of Mail
unto you.

It Is less difficult and more safe, to keep the way of Honesty and Justice,
than to turn away from it; yet commonly our Passions lead us into Bypath.

And be assured, He that in any one Affair relinquisheth Honesty, banisheth all
Shame in succeeding Actions; and certainly no Vice covers a Man with so much
Shame, as to be found false or unjust.

Whatsoever I act, I endeavor to do it, as if it were my last act; and
therefore I do it with Care and Integrity; I think on no longer Life, than that
which is now present. I forget all that is past, and for the future (with a
humble submission) I refer my self to providence: What others shall say or
think of me, or shall act against me, I do not so much as trouble my Thoughts
with it. I fear nothing, I desire nothing, I admire nothing: Yet I do even
reverence my self, when I have done a Just and Virtuous Action: But to enrich
my self by any sordid means, I dare not; for in so doing, I distrust
Providence, and be come an Atheist.

Keep touch in lesser Matters, not to deceive in greater, but the better to
dispose your self to perform things of Weight and moment: A Promise is a just
Debt, which you must take care to pay, for Honor and Honesty are the Security.

Borrow before you have need, and pay before the time you promised; it will
gain you Credit: Breaking your Faith may gain you Riches, but never get you
Glory.

It was well said by Monsieur D' Georgius a French Captain, who having burnt
many of the Churches of the Spaniards in Florida, and being asked, Why he did
so? Told them, That they which had no Faith, needed no Churches.

Before you act, it is Prudence soberly to consider; for after Action you cannot
recede without dishonor: Take the Advice of some Prudent Friend; for he who
will be his own Counselor, shall be sure to have a Fool for his Client.

Resolutions are the Moulds wherein Actions are cast; if they be taken with
overmuch haste or too mueh affection, seldom do they receive good success.

When you have fully resolved what course to take in any Action, you must not
after repent, or fear any difficulty; for such things will lessen the Gallantry
of your Mind.

And although some Difficulties do happen to arise, yet you must believe that
every other Course would have been accompanied with the same or greater
Impediments; yet many times it is more Prudence to follow the Direction of a
present good Fortune, than the first Resolutions.

In the Conduct of Affairs, you may show a Brave Spirit in going on, but your
Wisdom will most appear in securing your retreat, and how to come off; for
there is such incertainty in all Humane Affairs, that that Course to me seems
best, which has most passages out of it.

Therefore it was well observed by one, that the Turks, who made an Expedition
into Persia, and because of the Straight Jaws of the Mountains of Armenia, the
Bashaws consulted which way they should get in; one that heard the Debate,
said, Here is much ado how we shall get in, but I hear no body take care how we
shall get out.

SECT. 19.
IN Business be active and industrious, for many Men of large Abilities,
relying wholly upon their Wit, and neglecting the use of ordinary Means, suffer
others, less able, but more active and industrious, to go beyond them.

Diligence alone is a fair Fortune, and Industry a good Estate. Idleness does
waste a Man as insensibly as Industry does improve him.

Chi ha art, ha part, chi non corre non ha il pallio. Aesop's Fisher could
catch no Fish by his playing upon his Flute, but was necessitated, to preserve
his being, to cast his Nets and his Tackling into the River.

And you may observe, That in Heaven, the Moving Planets are of much greater
Consideration than those that are fixed and do not stir at all.

If Success of Business does not at first answer your expectation, let no Fumes
of Melancholy possess you; use other Expedients and Addresses: For he that
constantly makes head against the Assaults of Fortune, shall be sure to be
Victorious and attain his Ends.

Every Thing has two Handles, if the one proves hot and not to be touched, you
may take the other, that is more temperate.

Howsoever, in doing Business apply your Thoughts and Mind seriously to it, but
be not too eager, nor passionately engage your Affections in it; nor promise
your self Success: By this means you will have your Understanding clear, and
not be disturbed if you miscarry; which you must make account will often happen
to you.

When a Business may turn to disadvantage, it will be your Wisdom to temporize
and delay, and get what time you can by deferring; because time may occasion
some accident which may remove the danger.

But if it be for your advantage, Delays are dangerous, and you must act with
secrecy and celerity, which are the two Wheels, upon which all great Actions
move.

The Noblest Designs are like a Mine, if discovered, prove ineffectual.

And to spend that time in a grave gaze on Business, which might serve for a
speedy Dispatch of it, is to imitate that Musician, who spent so much time in
the Tuning his Instrument, that he had none left to exercise his Music.

If the Matter you undertake be doubtful, warrant your own Diligence, but keep
no Office of Assurance to warrant the Success: Remember the Italian makes it
part of the Character of an Englishman, when he is to undertake any thing,
presently he says I Will warrant you, but when he misseth of his Undertaking, he
says, Who would have thought it? However use Circumspection in all your
Actions, for he who intends what he does is most likely to do what he
intends: Half doing in any thing, is worse than no doing; and a middle course
in case of Extremity, of all is the worst.

It was Excellent Advice of Tiberius Caesar, Non omittere caput rerum, neque te
in casum dare: Follow safe Courses by Reason rather than happy by Chance.

Yet some things must be ventured, and many things which exceed the Prudence of
Man, are often by Fortune disposed to the best.

Certain it is, That he who will commit nothing to Fortune, nor undertake any
Enterprise, whose Event appears not Infallible, may escape many Dangers by
his wary Conduct, but will fail of as many Successes by his unactive
Fearfulness.

All that a Wise Man therefore can do, is to attempt with Prudence, pursue with
Hope, and support intervening Accidents with Patience.

SECT. 20.
IT will be great Prudence in you, rightly to take hold on Opportunities, for
Opportunity admits of no other Game; and those that have lost their first
Hopes, any thing that is future seems best.

In management of Affairs stand not upon niceties and punctilioes of Honor,
but by fair Compliance gain your ends: Heat and Precipitation are ever fatal to
all Businesses; a sober Patience and a wise Condiscention, do many times effect
that which Rashness and Choler will certainly ruin and undo.

Keep Formality above Board, but Prudence and Wisdom under Deck; for nothing
will give a greater stop or remora to your Affairs, than to be esteemed Wise by
them with whom you are to Deal; it will beget Jealousies in them, and your
Wisdom will be but as an Alarm to them never to come unprovided, when they have
any concern with you.

If you are to negotiate a matter with any Persons, observe their Temper, and
(as far as Prudence and Discretion will give leave) comply with their Humor;
suffer them to speak their Pleasure freely, rather than interrupt them; provoke
them to speak, for they will out of Ignorance or Inexperience, let fall
something which may be for your advantage.

Give fair Words, and make large Promises, for they are the most powerful
Engines to work your Ends.

Converse with all Men as Christians, but if you have to do with any Stranger,
look upon him as one that may be unjust (it is severe but it will be your own
safety) if he proves otherwise, he does but fail your expectation; for believe
me (and I have found it to my cost) nothing will undo you more than to rely too
much upon the Honesty of other men.

And if possible order your affairs so, that he with whom you are to deal,
perform first, when that is done, if you be deceived, you may thank your self.

If at any time you shall be overmuch pressed to do any thing hastily, be
careful, Fraud and Deceit are always in haste: Diffidence is the right Eye of
Prudence, Cavendo tutus.

In all great Actions take many (if you please) to your Assistance, but few to
your Trust.

When you have a present good in prospect, which may turn to Advantage, decline
it not by the importunity of others, if you do, you will make work for
Repentance; let the Business of the World be your Circumference, but your self
the Center.

If you meet with a Person that is more Compliant or Officious unto you than
usual, have a care, for he has some design upon you; and he either has or
does intend to deceive you.

Never put your self into the power of any Person how he will deal with you; if
you come to depend upon the Charity of others, you are undone; therefore always
stand upon your guard.

SECT. 21
KEep an exact Diary of all your Actions, and the most memorable Passages you
hear or meet with.

And if in the conduct of your Affairs you have been deceived by others, or
have committed any Error your self, it will be Discretion in you to observe and
note the same, and the Defailance, and the Means or Expedients to repair it; it
will make you more Prudent and wary for the future.

For let me tell you, No Man is truly Wise but he who has been deceived; and
your own Errors will teach you more Prudence than the grave Precepts or
Examples of others.

At a time there was a great Contest between Folly and Prudence which should
have the Precedence; the Difference grew so high, that they agreed to refer it
to Jupiter, who hearing what could be said on both sides, at the last gave this
Judgment, That folly should go before, and Prudence follow after.

Let all your Observations and Remarks be committed to Writing every Night,
before you Sleep, and so in a short time you will have a Dictionary of Prudence
and Experience of your own making.

For Wise Men now begin, not to be content to inhabit the World only, but to
understand it too.

SECT. 22.
IT will be great Prudence in you well to study the Art of Complacency,
certainly an Art of excellent use in the conduct of Affairs.

For there are so many Circumstances in the way to an Estate or Greatness, that
a Morose or Peremptory Man, rarely attains either.

Make Sail while the Gale Blows; follow the Current whilst the Stream is most
strong; for if Fortune be followed, as the first does fall out, the rest will
commonly follow.

Never violently oppose your self against the torrent of the times you live in,
thereby to hazard your Fame or Fortune; but by fair Compliance attain your
safety.

Plato compares a Wise Man to a good Gamester, which does accommodate his Play
to the Chance of the Die.

So should a Wise Man accommodate the Course of his Life to the Occasions which
do often require new Deliberations.

You must imitate M. Portius Cato, who was of such a Temper, that he could
fashion himself to all Occasions; as if he were never out of his Element. A
Wise Pilot always turns his Sails according to the Wind.

Be not singular but observe the Humor and Genius of the times; for he that
with the Camelion cannot change Color with the Air he lives in, must with the
Camelion be content to live only on the Air.

I must confess I am by the Malignity of my Stars, very Morose and Tart; I
cannot asservile my self to the Humor of other Men; I cannot with Anaxagoras
maintain Snow to be Black, nor with Favorinus a Quartan Ague to be a very good
thing; but must appear without any Disguise, and declare my Judgment according
to my own Sentiments.

I have no Sol in me, nor am I Ductile; I cannot mould my self Platonically to
the Worlds Idea: I had rather lose my Head than stoop to any low and
un-becoming Action. In my Solitudes, I can bless my self when I contemplate the
Felicity that my Ashes will meet with in the Urn.

SECT. 23.
HE that in a Wicked Age will endeavor to do that which ought to be done, or
to study to be truly Virtuous and Just (which I wish you ever to be) will
thereby hazard his Fortune and his Safety, and believe me, more Men are undone
for their Virtues than for their Vices, and a good Man is more in danger than a
bad.

A Plebian moved in the Senate of Athens to have Aristides banished; being
asked what displeasure Aristides had done him, he replied, None, neither do I
know him, but it grieves me to hear every body call him a just man.

Theodorus, the Patriarch, was scoffed at by the Grecian Court, as an Antic
for using Goodness when it was out of fashion, and adjudged Impudent for being
Virtuous by himself.

In elder story it passed for an Oracle of Prudence, that Honesty was the best
Policy, but in Modern practice you will find that policy is the best Honesty:
To deal justly looks like a piece of Knighterranty, and a good Man is but
Apuleus.

Virtue and Integrity when inversed Men were Good and Innocent, were great
Securities, but in a depraved State they are but as traps to ensnare those who
do profess them.

But if it shall be your infelicity to live in bad times (as I wish you the
best) I hope you may be the better for them by an Antiperistasis.

If the times be perilous, you must as a discreet Pilot, play with the Waves
which may endanger you; and by giving way thereunto avoid the hazard: So the
Tempest may shake, but not rend your Sails.

In all Factions carry your self with moderation, and so you may make use of
them all.

And herein Pompontus Atticus was so happy, that all Factions loved him, and
studied to do him kindness, and in the midst of them lived in Peace and
Prosperity.

Factions in State never long hold their ground, for if they be not suppressed
by the power of the State, they will be ruined by some Distempers rising in
their own Party.

But in Popular Commotions, if you stand Neutral, you will be sure to run the
fortune of the Bat, to be picked by the Birds, and to be bitten by the Mice.

I am of that boon Courage, that I had rather be devoured by a Lion than stung
to death by Flies.

Neither can I suit my self with those Persons who act for their advantage,
like the Bird whereof Leo Affricanus makes mention, which when the King of
Birds demanded Tribute would always rank himself amongst Fish, and when the
King of Fishes required his Service, would be always with the Birds.

But if any signal infelicity shall happen to fall upon you, the only way is,
not to sit still, but to resolve upon action; for so long as nothing is done,
the same accidents which caused your misfortune do still remain; but if you act
something, you may deliver your self: However you express a brave Spirit, that
you durst attempt it.

But that which is out of your power let it be out of your ear: you may if you
think fit, give your self much trouble, but leave God to govern the World as
himself pleases.

If you will live comfortably, let God alone with his Providence, and Men with
their Rights.

SECT. 24.
IF you aim at advancement, be sure you have Jovem in Arca, otherwise your
flight to Preferment will be but slow without some Golden Feathers.

You must study to enworthy your self into the favor of some great Person,
upon whom you must lean rather than upon your own Virtues; if not, you will be
like a Hop without a Pole, for every one to tread upon.

Though Virtue be a Patient for Honor, and Preferments ought to be an
encouragement for Worth. Yet in the Epoche and Account of Times, we have
observed that Men of the greatest Abilities are on Design suppressed; and they
deal with Persons of the best Accomplishment as the Birds in Plutarch did, who
beat the Jay for fear in time she might become an Eagle.

And it has been the unhappy sat of many Virtuous Persons, who like the Axe
after it has hewed out the hard Timber, to be hanged up against the Wall
unregarded; or like a Top which has been for a long time scourged and run
well, yet at last to be lodged up for a Hobler.

But methinks it is great pity to see the Courtain drawn between a Virtuous
Person and Preferment.

Yet I cannot with Carneades maintain that Injustice is to be preferred before
Justice; or that it is better to be a Knave than a Virtuous Honest Man.

But many times I am under such a Paroxism, that I am almost induced to think
that it is better to be Fortunate than Wise or Just, and cannot but with Brutus
cry out, virtus colui te ut rem, at tu nomen es inane.

Therefore if you design to rise and become great, I would not advise you to
accomplish your self overmuch, or study to be very Learned or Wise; for I have
observed that Wisdom many times gives a check to Confidence, which is the Scale
and Rundle by which many climb up to the Pinnacle; and I find by experience,
that under Heads and narrow Souls by Industry, accompanied with Ambition and
Covetousness, work Wonders, and do the Business of the World.

A little good Fortune is better than a great deal of Virtue; and the least
Authority has advantage over the greatest Wit.

SECT. 25.
BUt let nothing disquiet you, a Virtuous Person will at one time or another be
thought good for something; and a Wise Man will once in an Age come in fashion.

I am much pleased with the Remarks of Themistocles upon the Atheneans, who
resembled himself to a Plane-tree, the Leaves and Boughs whereof Men break off
in fair Weather, and run under it for shelter in a Storm.

You must know that Honors and Preferments are rarely the reward of Virtue,
but the Issue of Pleasure or Interest: Is it not strange to observe a Person
raised to the Dignity of a Constable of France, for having taught Magpies to
fly at Sparrows.

To what Grandeur do you think such another Person as Domitian, if he had lived
in that Princes time, would have advanced himself unto who was so excellent at
catching of Flies? But let Honor be your Merit, not your Expectation; and
attain to Preferment, not by Winding Stairs but by the Scale of your own
Virtues: If you miss of it, you must be content; there is a Reward for all
things but for Virtue.

And it is sometimes a greater Honor to fail of the Reward of Merit, than to
receive it; the glory and highest recompense of Noble Actions, is to have done
them; and Virtue out of it self, can find no Retribution worthy of her.

SECT. 26.
BEware of Ambition (that over-rides without Reins) lest you catch a Fall.

God gives Wings to the Ant, that she may destroy her self the sooner.

And many Men, like sealed Doves, they study to rise higher and higher, they
know not whither, little considering that when they are mounted to the Solstice
of their Greatness, every step they set is paved with Fate, and their Fall, how
gentle soever, will never suffer them to rise again.

Let it be your Ambition to be Wise, and your Wisdom to be Good: Reject
Opinion, and you are like a Ship in the Harbor safe: It Is the unhappiness of
many Men, to covet the greatest things, but not to enjoy the least. The Desire
of that which we neither have nor need, takes from us the true use and fruition
of that we have already.

A Wise Man, like Empedocles Sphere, is round, and all like it self.

That which a Sober Man has to do in this World, is to make his life
comfortable.

Ever think, it is the best living in the Temperate Zone, between nec splendide
nec misere.

If Heaven shall vouchsafe me such a Blessing, that I may enjoy a Groat or a
Molehill with content, I can look upon all the great Kingdoms of the Earth, as
so many little Birds Nests.

And I can in such a Territory prune my self, as much as Alexander did, when he
fancied the whole World to be one great City; and his Camp the Castle of it.

If I were advanced to the Zenith of Honor, I am at the best but a Porter,
constellated to carry up and down the World a vile Carcass: I confess my Mind
(the Nobler Part of Me) now and then takes a Walk in the large Campaign of
Heaven, and there I contemplate the Universe, the Mysterious Concatenation of
Causes, and the Stupendous Efforts of the Almighty: In Consideration whereof I
can cheerfully bid adieu to the World.

Depone hoc apud te, nunquam plus agere sapientem, quam cum in conspectu ejus
divina atque Humana venerunt. You will find by Experience (which is the best
Looking-glass of Wisdom) that a Private Life is not only more pleasant, but
more happy than any Princely State.

I can easily believe, That Dioclesian after his Retreat from the Empire, took
more content in exercising the Trade of a Gardener in Salona, than in being
Emperor of Rome; for when Maximianus Herculius went to him to resume the
Empire (which he had with much felicity governed for twenty years) he returned
this Answer, That if he would come unto Salona, and observe the rare
Productions of Nature, and see how well the Coleworts which he had planted with
his own hands did thrive and prosper, he would never trouble his Head with
Crowns, nor his Hands with Scepters.

And sometimes I think, that Dyonisius took as great pleasure in commanding his
Scholars in Corinth, as in reigning over Syracuse.

This made Scipio, after he had raised Rome to be the Metropolis of almost the
whole World, by a voluntrary Exile to retire himself from it; and at a private
House in the middle of a Wood near Linternum, to pass the remainder of his
glorious Life, no less gloriously.

The tallest Trees are weakest in the tops, and Envy always aims at the
Highest.

Those who have been bad, their own Infelicity praecipitates their Fate; if
good, their Merits have been their ruin.

If they have been fortunate abroad, they have been undone at home by Fears and
Jealousies.

If unsuccessful, the Capricio's of Fortune, are counted their Miscarriages,
and their Unhappinesses esteemed for Crimes.

Howsoever a Virtuous Honest Man (as I wish you ever to be) though his Bark be
split, yet he saves his Cargo, and has something left toward his setting up
again.

But if it be your Fortune to rise and become a Favorite to a great Person, as
you may have some hopes in Eutopia; for I have heard Men are advanced there for
their Merit and Worth.

You must understand there are many Doors which open to Preferment, but the
Prince keeps the Keys of them all.

Therefore be sure to study well the Alphabet of his Humor; and observe his
Inclinations, as the Astronomers do the Planet Dominant, and the Mariners the
North Star.

For Great Persons account them the Wisest Men, that can best suit themselves
to their Humor; and usually they tie their Affections no further than their
own Satisfaction; and to deal truly with you, the life of those who wait upon
great Persons is nothing but the Art of Fencing. He that on the right or left
hit their Humor, win and partake of their Bounty, but not he that uses much
Skill.

Therefore as Princes have Arts to govern Kingdoms, so Favorites must have
Arts by which they must govern their Prince.

Desire not to monopolize his Ear, for his Misadventures will be imputed to
you; and what is well done, will be ascribed to himself.

Too great Services will be oversights and weakness in you; that Merit to which
Reward may easily reach, does ever best.

To study the Humor of a Prince may for the present advance, but to understand
the Interest of his Kingdom, is always secure.

He that serves a Princes private Interest is great for a time, but he is
always so who is careful of the public good.

Be ready to give an account, if required, of all your Transactions: for he is
like Gold which has too much allay that fears the touch.

SECT. 27.
IN all your Deportments be humble and of easy access; a Favorite is like
Coin, to which Virtue may give the Stamp, but it is Humility must give the
Weight.

A high Fortune, like great Buildings, must have low Foundations.

Pride does ill become any Person, and though no Man be thereby injured, yet it
does move in others an offense; for none can endure an excessive Fortune any
where so ill, as in those who have been in an equal degree to themselves.

You must be Minimus in summo, like the Orient Stars, the higher they are the
less they appear; Honoris bonum sine clavi and sera; It Is like the Rose, which
in the Evening makes its Tomb of the Scarlet, which in the Morning it made its
Cradle: To be proud of Knowledge is to be blind with Light; to be proud of
Virtue is to poison your self with the Antidote; to be proud of Authority is to
make you raise your Downfall.

A Country Man in Spain coming to an Image enshrined, the first making whereof
he could well remember, and not finding that respectful Usage which he
expected, You need not (quoth he) be so proud, for we have known you from a
Plum-tree: Have a care you do not find the Mythology in your self.

To be humble to Superiors is Duty, to Equals Courtesy, to Inferiors
Nobleness, to all Safety.

Be careful not to exasperate any Sect of Religion; Rigor seldom makes ill
Christians better, but many times it makes them reserved Hypocrites: Zeal does
well in a private Breast, and Moderation in a public State.

Never do that in Prosperity, whereof you may repent in Adversity.

Ever think Goodness the best part of Greatness; when Honor and Virtue are in
Conjunction, it is a noble Aspect, and Jupiter is Lord of that Ascendent.

But greatness without Goodness, is like the Colossus of Rhodes, not so much to
be admired for its Workmanship, as its huge Bulk; therefore make Goodness like
a Diamond set in Gold, a support to Greatness.

Greatness may build the Tomb, but it is Goodness must make the Epitaph.

SECT. 28.
GIve things the right Color, not varnishing them over with a false Glass: A
Flatterer is a dangerous Fly in a State, yet they thrive and prosper better
than the most worthy and brave Men do.

I have much of the Genius of that Courtier in me, who being asked by
Heliogabalus, How he durst be so plain? Because I durst die, said he, I can but
die if I am Faithful, and I must die if I Flatter.

But I would advise you to have so much of the Persian Religion in you, as to
Worship the rising Sun; you must learn to translate into English, Neminem
tristem demittere; and when you cannot give Men satisfaction in that they
desire, entertain them with fair Hopes; Denials must be supplied with civil
Usage, and though you cannot cure the Sore, yet your Prudence may abate the
sense of it.

If you have any Virtuous Design in projection, it is Prudence before you come
to Action, sometimes to give things out on purpose, to see how they will take;
by that means you will discover the Inclinations of the People; if it has no
fair reception presently check it, and make no farther progress.

If you desire that the Designs you labor with, may not prove Abortive, do not
assign them a certain day of their Birth, but leave them to the Natural
Productions of fit Time and Occasions; like those curious Artists in China, who
temper the mould this day, of which a Vessel may be made a hundred years hence.

If you have Enemies, as you must expect many, being great in your Masters
Favor, the better to establish your self, is privately to give out false
Libels and Reports, tending to your own Disgrace; your Enemies like Powder will
fire at the first touch, and then you know what you have to do: And to deal
plainly with you, the greatness of one Man is nothing but the ruin of others,
and their Weakness will be your Strength.

SECT. 29.
BUt if any Pasquils or Libels shall be vented against you by others (as the
most excellent Persons many times are insested with them) it is more Prudence to
bury them in their own Ashes, than by confuting of them, to give them new
Flames; for Libels neglected will presently find a Grave.

But let me tell you, As false Rumors and Libels are not always to be credited,
so are they not always to be condemned; it being no less vain to fear all
things, than dangerous to doubt of nothing.

And we have Learned by Experience, that Libels and Pasquils (the only weapons
of some unhappy Persons) have been proemial to the Ruin and Destruction of the
bravest Men.

You must be careful to keep an Ephemerides, to know how the great Orbs of the
Court move; and if any new Star shall arise out of the East, and Men begin to
worship it, you must study either to eclipse or suppress it; therefore it will
be prudence to cut off all steps by which others may ascend to height or
grandeur, for if you leave any stairs standing others will climb up.

And I must tell you, it is more safe at Court to have many Enemies of equal
Power, than one false and ambitious Friend who has absolute Command.

But in case any shall get up, you must by your Sagacity remove him out of the
way, under pretense of some honorable Employment or otherwise; when that is
done, you know how Augustus Caesar dealt with Mark Anthony when he got him from
Rome into Egypt.

It has been the practice of some, like the Fox, to thrust out the Badger that
dug and made room for him, but this must be left to your Discretion.

In all Business ever pretend the public good, that will make you popular, and
so you may with more safety and security drive on your own private Interest;
and let me advise you to be so faithful a Servant to your Master, that
whatsoever you do your self, you suffer no others to deceive him.

Study what you can to partake of his Bounty, the more you obtain from him the
greater is your security; for he will look upon you as his Creature and by him
raised, and so will endeavor to preserve you; but if you propose any thing
which you are afraid will hardly be accepted or granted, offer it by parcels,
that one piece may be digested before the other be presented.

In all your Negotiations you must have an indiscernable way of Intelligence,
as Angels have of Communication: Gyges's Ring will be of great use unto you,
for he observes best, who is least observed himself.

And if you design your own safety ever speak Truth, for you will never be
believed; and by this means your truth will secure you if questioned, and put
those you deal with (who will still hunt counter) to a great loss in all
undertakings.

It will be Prudence in you to oppose in Council all Resolutions as to Business
of Importance in Dubious Matters; if the thing designed succeed well, your
advice will never come in question, if ill (whereunto great undertakings are
subject) you may make advantage, by remembering your own Counsel.

But in great Concerns it will be your Wisdom not to rest in the dull Counsels
of what is lawful, but to proceed to quick Resolutions of what is safe.

Admit none to be of your Cabal but such as have their Fortunes solely
depending upon you.

In dangerous Attempts put others before you to Act, but ever keep your self
behind the Curtain.

In doubtful Matters you must be always provided with some cunning Stratagems,
either to baffle your Enemies, or else to secure your self and your own party.

If by Wisdom you cannot attain your Ends, use Argenta tela, they never fail;
for Virtutem and sapientiam vincut, Testudines: And as Men have a Touchstone
to try Gold, so Gold is the Touchstone to try Men.

SECT. 30.
I Have hinted these unto you, not that you should act any thing against
Honor, or the Dignity of your Religion.

Prudence is an Armory, wherein are as well Defensive as Offensive Weapons; of
the first you may make use of upon all Occasions, but of the other only upon
Necessity.

We know that the Apocrypha is allowed to be digested into one Volumn with the
Sacred Word, and read together with it, but where it thwarts that which is
Canonical, it is to be laid aside.

Policy and Religion, as they do well together, so they do as ill asunder; the
one being too cunning to be Good, the other too simple to be Safe, therefore
some few Scruples of the Wisdom of the Serpent, mixed with the Innocence of the
Dove, will be an excellent Ingredient in all your Actions.

SECT. 31.
BUt I have stained too much Paper* I must with Apelles Manum de Tabula; if you
be mounted on the Pyramid of Honor, you must know it has but one Point, and
the least Step may hazard your Fall.

If you should chance to lose your self in the Empire of Greatness, return to
your own Solitudes and Privacy, and there you may find your self again.

Let no condition surprise you, and then you cannot be afflicted in any: A
noble Spirit must not vary with his Fortune; there is no Condition so low but
may have Hopes, nor any so high that is out of the reach of Fears.

In your worst estate hope, in the best fear, but in all be circumspect; Man is
a Watch which must be looked too and wound up every day.

It no less becomes the worthiest Persons to oppose Misfortunes, than it does
the weakest Children to bewail them.

It Is the temper of a brave Soul always to hope; Adversities are born with
greater Glory than deserted: For such are the Comforts of unhappy Virtues and
innocent Souls.

It was a rare temper of Eumenes, whose Courage no Adversity ever lessened, nor
Prosperity his Circumspection. One month in the School of Affliction will teach
you more, than the grave Precepts of Aristotle in seven years; for you can
never judge rightly of Humane Affairs, unless you have first felt the blows and
deceits of Fortune.

SECT. 32.
I Am not (I bless my Stars) disturbed at any thing, neither does Passion
disquiet me: I hate nothing except it be Hatred it self; and I am no more
troubled for the want of any thing I have not, than I am because I am not the
Sophy of Persia, or the Grand Signiour: He is a happy man that can have what he
will, and that I profess my self to be, because I will nothing but that I can
have.

I am much delighted with the pleasant humor of Thrasylus, and can in my own
conceit make my self as rich as the Indies.

I am a little World, and enjoy all things within my own Sphere: Honor and
Riches, which others do aspire unto, I do now possess and enjoy them in my
self: Health is the temperate Zone of my Life; and my Mind is the third Region
in me; there I have an Intellectual Globe, wherein all things subsist, and move
according to my own Idea's.

Does any Man rob you of your Goods, consider that God by that Man takes back
what he has only lent you; the thing you foresaw is come to pass, and what
should amaze you? That which has happened out, it is but that which you have
often seen and known.

All things, by Nature, in the Universe, are subject to alteration and change:
How ridiculous then is it, when any thing does happen, to be disturbed, or
wonder, as if some strange thing had happened?

I must own my self as a part of the Universe, and therefore cannot be
displeased with any thing that happens to my particular share; for nothing
which is good to the whole, can be hurtful to that which is part of it.

However Innocens sit Animus inirata fortuna; for Virtuous Persons, like the
Sun, appear greatest at their setting: And the Patient enduring of a necessary
evil, is next unto a voluntary Martyrdom.

Adversity overcome, is the highest Glory, and willingly undergone the greatest
Virtue; Sufferings are but the trial and touchstone of gallant Spirits.

SECT. 33.
ANd though you are fallen from your Princes Favor, yet you may be a Rex
Stoicus, a King in our own Microcosme; and he who knows how to rule that
well, may despise a Crown: Thrones are but uneasy Seats, and Crowns nothing
but splendid Miseries.

A quel les Rey, que nunca vio Rey. The change of your Fortune may diminish
your hopes, but it will increase your quiet; you must understand that
Favorites are but as Counters in the hands of great Persons; raised and
depressed in valuation at pleasure.

There is no constancy either in the Favor of Fortune, or in the Affection of
great Persons; so that no wise Man can trust the one or depend safely upon the
other.

But whatsoever the Traverses of Fortune are, let no discontent surprise you;
if the thing be within your power, manage it to your content; if not, it is
weakness in you to be disquieted.

Do your best, that the best may happen out; if that do not yet think it best:
However it will be but Piety in you to submit to Divine Providence.

A humble Soul, like a White Sheet, must be prepared to receive that which the
hand of Heaven shall imprint upon it.

Never antidate your own Misfortune, for many times Men make themselves more
miserable than indeed they are; and the Apprehension of Infelicity does more
afflict them, than the Infelicity it self.

Hope will be your best Antidote against all misfortune, and Gods Omnipotency
an excellent means to fix your Soul.

If you be not so happy as you desire, it is well you are not so miserable as
you deserve; if things go not so well as you would they should have done, it is
well they are not so ill as they might have been.

If you seriously consider, you have received more good than you have done, and
done more evil than you have suffered.

Measure not Life by the enjoyment of this World, but by the preparation it
makes for a better, looking forward what you shall be, rather than backward
what you have been: Believe me, he that anchoreth one thought upon any thing on
this side Heaven, will be sure to be a loser in the end.

To serve God, and keep his Commandments, is the only Wisdom, and will at
last, when the account of the World shall be cast up, be found to be the best
Preferment and highest Happiness: And so farewell; remember your Mortality and
Eternal Life.

Sententiae Stellares, OR Maxims of Prudence To be observed by ARTISONS of
STATE.
1. THat Government is best tempered, where a few drams of fear are blended
with the Peoples love.

2. It is the interest of Princes to make Acts of Grace, peculiarly their own;
because they which have commonly the Art to please the People, have commonly
the power to raise them.

3. He who puts off his Hat to the People, gives his Head to the Prince;
for the immoderate Favor of the Multitude, as it can do a Man no good, so it
will undo so many as shall trust to it. It was said of the Earl of Sussex, that
he was grown so popular, that he was too dangerous for the times, and the times
for him.

4. He that gives a Prince Counsel by his desires, sets Interest which cannot
err, by Passions which may.

5. It may sometimes be the Interest of a Prince, not only to remove
Grievances, by doing what is desired, but even Jealousies by doing something
which is not expected: For when a Prince does more than his People looks for,
he gives them reason to believe that he is not sorry for doing that they
desired.

6. In popular Tumults many times nothing is more safe than speed, and greater
advantages accrue by Expedition than Delays; for while some are in fear, some
in doubt, others ignorant, all may be reduced to the limits of Obedience; and
Fury when the first blast is spent, turns commonly to Fear; and those Persons
which are the Heads of Rebellion, whom the People honor and admire at first,
are at last plentifully repayed with scorn and contempt.

7. When a Prince seeks the love of his Subjects, he shall find in them enough
of fear; but where he seeks their fear he loses their love.

8. Denial from Princes must be supplied with gracious usage, that though they
cure not the Sore, yet they may abate the Sense of it; but best it is that all
Favors come directly from themselves, Denials and things of bitterness from
their Ministers. Therefore if a Prince resolve not to answer a Request, the
least offensive way is, not to use direct Denial, but by delays prolong the
time; and so in place of effect, afford good expectation. Henry the Fourth of
France was so courteous, that when he would not answer a Petitioner, he always
so obliged him with some good word, that he always went away satisfied.

9. The more a Prince weakneth himself by giving, the poorer he is of Friends.

10. Equal Authority with the same power, is ever fatal to all great Actions;
and therefore one wise General having but a thousand Men, is more to be feared
than twenty of equal Authority; for they are commonly of diverse Humors, and
judging diversely, do rarely what is to be done: And lose time before
Resolutions can be taken.

11. Reward and Punishment justly laid, do balance Government, but it much
concerns a Prince, the hand to be equal that holds the Scale; therefore if any
Subject does deserve never so highly of his Prince, if he becomes afterward a
Malefactor, he must be made an example of Justice, without regard of his former
Merit. Manlius Capitolinus, though by Valor he had delivered the Capitol of
Rome from the French, who beleaguered it; yet afterward growing seditious, was
thrown down from the Capitol, which by his great Renown he had formerly
delivered.

12. That Prince which scrues up the Pins of Power too high, will break the
Strings of the Commonwealth. Wise Princes make use of their Prerogative, as
God Almighty does of his Omipotency, upon extraordinary occasions.

13. The Prince is the Pilot of the Commonwealth, the Laws are his Compass.

14. Reversionary Grants of Places of Profit and Houour by Princes, are the
bane and ruin of Industry; but acts of Grace and Bounty are the golden Spur to
Virtuous and Generous Spirits.

15. In Holy things he that strikes upon the Anvil of his own Brain, is in
danger to have the sparks fly in his face.

16. A Kingdom is like a Ship at Sea, whose Ballast should be the Princes
Coffers; which if they be light and empty, she does naught but tumble up and
down, nor can be made to run a direct and steady Course: Therefore it is the
interest of Princes to have a good Treasure against all Extremities; for Empty
Coffers give an ill sound.

17. That Prince, who upon every Commotion of the Subject, rusheth presently
into Open War; is like him who sets his own House a fire to roast his Eggs.

18. That State which goes out of the Lists of Mediocrity, passes also the
Limits of Safety; while Sparta kept her self within those boundaries that
Licurgus presented unto her, she was both safe and flourishing; but attempting
to enlarge her Territories by new acquists of other Cities in Greece and Asia,
she every day declined.

19. Rather than the least dishonor shall fall upon the State, it is prudence,
sometimes to preserve the Honor of the Public, to cast the Male
Administration upon some Favorite or Councellor, and offer him a Sacrifice to
Justice.

20. Charles the Fifth laid the loss and dishonor he received in the invasion
of France, by way of Provence, to Anthony de Leva. The Spaniard, to cover the
Dishonor they received in their attempt against England in Eighty Eight, cast
it upon the Duke of Parma in his not joining with them in convenient time. So
did Charles the Sixth of France, upon the Duke of Berry, in his Design of
Invading England, as many Wise Princes and States had formerly done.

21. Reputation abroad, and Reverence at home, are the Pillars of Safety and
Sovereignty.

22. Taxes which the Sovereign Levies from the Subject, are as Vapors which the
Sun exhales from the Earth, and does return them again in fruitful Showers.

23. Too great a City in a Nation, is like a bad Spleen in the Body Natural,
which swells so big as makes all other parts of the Body lean; therefore some
sober persons have conceived that it is more Prudence to have three Cities of
equal Power, that in Case one should Rebel, the other too might Balance or
give Law to the Third. A great City is the fittest Engine to turn an Old
Monarchy, into a New Commonwealth.

24. That State which does not Subsist in Fidelity, can never continue long in
Potency.

25. Wise Princes must sometimes deal with Mutinous Subjects, as the Sun did to
take away the Passengers Cloak, not as the ruffling Winds, to blow him down.

26. There is nothing which does more impoverish a Prince, than Imprests of
Money at great usance, for thereby a Prince is brought to one of these two
Extremities, either to overthrow his Dominions and Finances, whereof the French
Kings are Examples, or else to play Bankrupt, and pay none, as King Philip of
Spain has done to the Merchants of Genoa, Florence, Ausburgh, and almost to
all the Banks in Christendom.

27. Tumults may be raised by Men of little Courage, but must be maintained by
Hazard, and ended with the Loss of the most Valiant.

28. In Popular Tumults it is safer for a Prince with some yielding, to
condescend to Peace, than by staning upon high Points of Honor, to Hazard the
Issue of a Battle, wherein the King cannot win without his weakening, nor lose
without danger of his undoing. Lewis XIII. of France was a sad and mournful
instance hereof.

29. When any mischief grows in a State, and becomes formidable, it is many
times more Prudence to temporize with it, than by force to attempt the redress
of it: For they who go about to quench it, kindle it the more, and suddenly
plucks down that mischief upon their Heads, which was then but feared from
them: By Courting or dissembling the mischief, if it does not remove the evil,
at least it is put off for a longer time.

30. Charles the Fifth (even he who was Surnamed the Wise) of France, at such
time as he was Regent in France, his Father at that time being a Prisoner in
England, by evil Counsel of some, being ignorant in matters of State, at once
suspended all the Officers of France, of whom he suppressed the greatest part,
appointing Fifty Commissioners for the hearing such Accusations, as should be
laid against them for Extortation and Bribery by them committed; whereupon all
France was in such a Tumult (by reason of the great number of such as were
Malcontents) as that shortly after, for Remedy thereof, he by Decree in the
High Court of Parliament in Paris, was forced to abrogate the former Law.

31. It Is a noble Ambition, and absolutely necessary for a Prince, to believe
none of his Subjects more worthy than himself, nor more fit to govern; when he
has not this good opinion of himself, he suffers himself to be governed by
others, whom he believes more fit than himself: and by this means falls into
many infelicities. This was the unhappiness of Philip the Third of Spain,
though a Prince of eminent parts, yet suffering himself to be governed by the
Duke of Lerma, he became of so little esteem with his People, and had no ways
to free himself from those Indignities which were cast upon him, but by
becoming a Churchman and a Cardinal.

32. A Wise Prince, when he is obliged to make War, ought to make it powerful
and short; and at first to astonish his Enemies with formidable Preparations,
because by this means it returns to good Husbandry; and the Conquests made
through fear of Arms, reaches farther than those made by the Arms themselves.

33. Punishment and Reward are the two Pillars where on all Kingdoms are built;
the former serves for restraining of vile Spirits, the latter for the
encouragement of the generous: The one serves instead of a Bridle the other of
a Spur.

34. The love of the Subject is the most sure Basis of the Princes Greatness;
and Princes are more secure and better defended by the love of the People, than
by many Troops and Legions. Every Wise Prince must suppose that times of
Trouble may come, and then will be necessitated to use the service of Men
diversely qualified; therefore his care and study must be in the mean time so to
entertain them, that when those storms arise, he may rest assured to command
them: For whosoever persuades himself by present Benefits to gain the good will
of Men, when Perils are at hand, shall be deceived.

35. It Is not safe for a Prince to commit his Secrets to his greatest
Favorite, for if he that is concerned will give, the Prince is certainly
betrayed.

36. It concerns a Prince to contain his best Friends within a moderate and
convenient Greatness, as to weaken and depress his greatest Enemies.

37. Foreign Succors are most dangerous, and therefore it must be the last
resolve of every wise State; for they are seldom gotten out but by the undoing
that State which received them; or else, as most commonly it happens out, they
make themselves Masters of it.

38. In all Distempers in a State, Pilae Aureae, are the best Physic; for they
ever work safely.

39. Those People which by Arms do endeavor to deliver themselves from
Oppression, do many times change the Tyrant, but not the Tyranny; and after a
Rebellion is suppressed, the King is more King, and the Subject more Subject.

40. The chief Wisdom and Happiness of a Prince, is to know well to enjoy the
Sovereignty of his Power, with the Liberty of his Subjects: Love, Fear, and
Reverence, are the three Ligaments which tie the Hearts of the Subjects to
their Sovereign: Let the Prince have the first in height, the second in good
measure: And of the last so much as he can.

41. That State which does affect Grandeur, or the Preservation of its
Interest, must be bold and daring; in the mean there is no safety: And those
attempts which begin with danger, for the most part are crowned with Glory, and
end in Honor.

42. That State which will preserve it self in Puissance, must prevent
Divisions, to which States are subject; and where People are Factious and apt
to Divisions, it is Prudence to soften them with Pleasures; for where they are
subtle and proud, they must be made voluptuous, so their Wit and Malice will
hurt the less. It Is some security that a Faction is deboshed, for it is not safe
to suffer sober Men to come to undo the Commonwealth. As in a Tempest each
Wave striving to be highest, rides upon the Neck of that which hasted to the
Shore before it, and is it self suppressed by a following: So it happens in a
Civil Tempest of the Commonwealth, each Party strive to suppress the other,
till a third undiscerned assaults and suppress the Conqueror.

43. When a Nation is at War within it self, it is not safe for any State or
Prince to attempt the Invasion of it, for it will certainly reunite them.

44. Whatsoever a Prince does, it is to be presumed that it was done with great
Reason: If he commands any thing, every one is bound to believe that he has
good reason to command the same; his Actions are manifest, but his Thoughts are
secret. It Is our Duty to tolerate the one, and not to murmur against the
other; for the Books of Kings are written in dark Characters, which few can
uncipher; and their Actions like deep Rivers, whereof we see the course of the
stream, but know not the source of it.

45. When a State is jealous of the Obedience and Loyalty of the Metropolis, or
Chief City in its Dominions; the only means to secure its Obedience, is to
borrow great sums of Money of them; for by that means they will not easily
break out into any Action or Rebellious Attempts, for fear of losing their
Money. Edward the Second of England, being deprived by his own Subjects of his
Royal Diadem, had never been restored, if he had not been indebted to the
Citizens of London, who upon his coming up to London, purchased him the Favor
and Friendship of the greatest part of the City; of which being Master, his
Power increased, and thereby became so strong, that he subdued most of his
Enemies, and thereby recovered his Kingdom.

46. Eumenes understanding that diverse Noble Men sought occasions to kill him,
to prevent their Malice against him, pretended that he had need of great sums
of Money, which he borrowed of them who hated him most, to the end they might
give over the seeking of his Death, whereby they were assured to lose all their
Money.

47. He who grows great on the sudden, seldom governs himself in the
change: Extraordinary Favor to Men of weak or bad defects; does breed
Insolency in them, and Coffeehouse in others; two dangerous Humors in a
Commonwealth.

48. Great Persons must not at all be touched, but if they be, they must be
made sure from taking Revenge; and there is nothing more dangerous than to
bring a great Courage to the place of Execution, and then grant him his Pardon;
for he will always remember the Affront and forget the Pardon.

49. Sudden Resolutions are always dangerous, and no less Peril ensues of slow
and doubtful delays.

50. It Is the Interest of Princes, that their Servants fortunes should be above
Temptation; for many times new Officers to Princes, are like fresh Flies, bite
deeper than those which were chased away before them.

51. Princes strike their Enemies more smartly with the Head than with the
Hand, and are as much to be feared for their Prudence, as for their Valor.

52. A good Magistrate must be like the Statue of Apollo, which had a Lance in
one hand, and a Harp in the other, that is, Resolution to awe on the one side,
and Sweetness to oblige on the other.

53. A Prince has more reason to fear Money that is spent, than that which is
hoarded up; because it is easier for Subjects to oppose a Prince by Popularity,
than by Arms.

54. Outward Esteem to a Great Person, is a Skin to Fruit; which though a thin
Cover, yet preserves it.

55. No Man can be Merry, that has more than one Woman in his Bed, more than
one Faith in his Heart.

56. What wants a Sovereign (says a flattering Courtier?) Truth, said a serious
King.

57. A sound Faith is the best Divinity, a good Conscience the best Law, and
Temperance the best Physic.

58. A good Magistrate must be made up of Craterus and Hephestion, who must
love the Kings Interest and his Person: For he that loves not his Interest,
has no kindness for his Person.

59. He that entertains a dangerous Design, puts his Head into a Halter, and
the Halter into his Hands to whom he first discovers it.

60. The dis-esteem of Religious Ceremonies, argues the decay of the Civil
Government. Pious Princes have first kept their People Religious, and thereby
made them Virtuous and United.

61. Heresies and Errors in the Church, are rather to be suppressed by
Discipline, than increased by Disputations; for in many Cases it is Impiety to
doubt, and Blasphemy to dispute.

62. The Riches of the People are the Princes Safety, but their Poverty his
Calamity; for they being Rich will not easily attempt against the Government,
For fear of loss; whereas being poor and beggarly, will upon every discontent
be apt to break out into Action; for such will think being poor, that they
cannot be worse, but by bold Attempts they may be better.

63. Great Men are the first that find their own Grief, and the last that find
their own Faults.

64. Discontent is the greatest weakness of a generous Soul, which is always so
intent upon its unhappiness, that it forgets its remedies.

65. There is a time when you may say nothing, and a time when you may say
something, but never a time when you should say all.

66. Emulation amongst Favorites is the security of Princes.

67. The Lord Chancellor worthily said, That he would not have his Servants
gain by his Livings or Decrees, because the first were Gods, the second the
Kings: To honest Men your places, said he, are enough, to Knaves too much.

68. When a Cousin of Justice Sir John Fitz-James, urged him for a kindness,
Come to my House (says the Judge) I will deny you nothing; come to the Kings
Court and I must do you Justice.

69. The two main Principles which guide Humane Nature, are Conscience and Law;
by the former we are obliged in reference to another World, by the latter in
reference to this.

70. Two things break Treaties, Jealousy when Princes are successful, Fear
when they are unfortunate.

71. Inconveniences which happen to Government, are sudden and unlooked for;
therefore a Prince must be provided in Omnem Eventum.

72. It Is safer for a State by Death to extinguish the Power, or by Pardon to
alter the Wills of great Offenders, than to put them to Exile or Abjuration;
therefore Henry the Fourth of France, being advised to banish Marshal Byron, he
said, That a burning Firebrand casts more Flame and Smoke out of a Chimney,
than in it.

FINIS.
A Catalogue of some Books sold by John Lawrence, at the Angel in Cornhill,
near the Royal Exchange.
THe Works of the famous Nicholas Machiavell, Citizen and Secretary of
Florence, containing his History of Florence, Art of War, Discourses on Titus
Livius, etc. Written Originally in Italian, and thence newly and faithfully
Translated into English, in Folio.

Gell's Remains, being sundry, Pious, and learned notes and observations on the
new Testament; opening and explaining it: Wherein Jesus Christ, as yesterday,
to day, and the same for ever; is Illustrated by that Learned and Judicious Man
Dr. R. Gell, late Rector of St. Mary Aldermanbury, London; in two Vollumes, in
Folio, 1l, 10s.

The Jesuits Catachisme, according to Ignatius Loyola, Quarto, price 1 s.

The Priveledges and Practices of Parliaments in England. Collected out of the
Common Laws of this Land. Commended to the High Court of Parliament, Quarto,
price 6 d.

A Collection of Letters, for the Improvement of Husbandry and Trade. Number 1,
2, 3, 4, 5. and intended to be still continued by John Houghton, Fellow of the
Royal Society, Quarto.

The Merchant Royal, a Sermon preached before the King at the Nuptials of an
Honorable Lord and his Lady, Quarto, price 6 d.

The Admired Satyr against Hypocrites, Quarto, price 6 d.

The Ruin of Papacy, or a clear display of simony of the Romish Clergy; with a
Circulatory letter to the Fathers of those Virgins that desert their Families
to turn Nuns: By the Learned Pen of that famous Divine Peter Du Moulin, Oct.

Indiculis Vniversalis, or the Universe in Epitome: Wherein almost the Works of
Nature, of all Arts and Sciences, with their most necessary Terms, are in
English, Latin and French, methodically, and distinctly digested, and Composed
at first in French and Latin, for the use of the Dauphin of France, by the
Learned T. Pomey. And now made English, by A. Lovell, M. A. in Oct.

Praxis Catholica, or the Countrymans Universal Remedy: Wherein is plainly and
briefly laid down the Nature, matter, manner, place and Cure of most Diseas^s
incident to the Body of Man; not hitherto discovered, by Chr. Pack, Operator in
Chemistry, Oct. price 1 s. 6 d.

English Military Discipline, or the way of Exercising Horse* and foot,
according to the Practice of this present time, with a Treatise of all sorts of
Arms and Engines of War* of Fire Works, Ensigns, and other Military
Instruments, both ancient and Modern, Oct. price 3 s.

Clavis Grammatica, or the ready way to the Latin Tongue, containing most plain
demonstrations for the Regular Translating of English into Latin, fitted to
help such as desire to attain the Latin Tongue, by F. B. Schoolmaster in
London, Oct. price 1 s.

The Abridgment of the History of Reformation of the Church of England. By
Gilbert Burnet, D D. With several Copper Plates, in Octav.

A Mathematical Compendium, or useful practices in Arithmetic, Geometry,
Astronomy, Navigation, Embateling, and quartering of Armies, Fortification and
Gunnery, etc. By Sir Jonas More late surveyor of his Majestyes ordinance, the 2
Edition, with many large Additions Twelves, price 3 s.


