TEARS FOR JERUSALEM; OR The compassionate Lamentation of a tender hearted
Savior over a rebellious and obdurate people.

A subject entered upon on the late day of solemn Humiliation, December 6.
1655. afterward prosecuted, and now published, as useful at all times, but
very seasonable for the present.

By John Brinsley, Minister of the Gospel at Great Yarmouth.

Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me, but weep for your selves, and for
your children, Luke 23.28. LONDON, Printed by J. L. for Tho. Newberry, 1656.

To the Mourners in Sion, Such as being truly sensible of, are cordially
affected with the present sad and calamitous condition of the Church of God in
the Island of Great Britain.
(Much esteeemed in the Lord.)
THe last year, I sent forth a Groan, a Groan for Israel; I now here second it
with Tears, Tears for Jerusalem. And whether there be cause for both these, I
appeal to you, whom God has in any measure made sensible of the present state
of the land of your Nativity, and specially of the Church therein. When
Nehemiah heard that sad report concerning Jerusalem, that the remnant which
were left therein were in great affliction and reproach, and that the Wall
thereof was broken down, etc. It came to pass (says he) when I heard these
words, that I sat down and wept, and mourned, Neh. 1.4. And is not this the
Condition of the poor Church of God among us in this Nation at this day? Is not
the Wall thereof broken down? All Church Government levelled? By reason whereof
all kind of dangerous and damnable Errors and Heresies, and enormious
practices, with unbrotherly and unchristian divisions, have broke in upon us,
to the rendering of us a scorn and derision to the Nations round about. Thus
does Englands sore run in this night of her Affliction, and cease not, her
calamity every day increasing. And yet (which is no small addition to her
misery,) how few are there who so lay it to heart, as to seek out for cure and
remedy? Nay, how many who refuse it being offered? not enduring to hear of any
such thing as Church Government. Insomuch as the servants of God, some and many
of them, may take up the like complaint concerning this Nation, that Babylons
friends once did concerning her ( Jer. 51.9.) We would have healed her, but
she is not healed. Nay, that which is far worse, she refuses so to be. So
deplorable, and almost desperate, is her condition now become. Now in this case
what shall Sions friends, do? What? desert and forsake her? This indeed is the
resolve of Babylons friends there. Let us forsake her (say they,) and let us
go every man into his own Country, for her Judgment reaches unto heaven, and
is lifted up unto the skies; They will give her over, and every one shifteth
for himself. But far be such thoughts from all the servants of God in this
Nation. How ever (it must be acknowledged) they have cause enough to fear the
event, having so many sad symptoms before their eyes, yet (not knowing but
that there may be hope in Israel concerning this thing) let them not in the day
of her adversity forsake their Mother, in whose womb they were conceived, and
whose breasts have given them suck; But let them with faith and patience, yet
look out, look up (for from thence must come Englands cure,) being importunate
with the God of Israel, that he who has in his just judgment for our
unfruitfulnesse, broken down the hedge of his Church amongst us, so as the Boar
out of the wood does waste it, and the wild beast of the field does devour it,
would in his free grace and mercy, return and look down from heaven, and visit
this vine, and the vineyard which his own right hand has planted. Which that
all may be excited to do, is the design of this small Treatise. To which end if
it may be in any degree serviceable to any. I have that I aimed at. In the
hopes whereof I rest,

Your Brother and Companion in the Kingdom and Patience of Jesus Christ, John
Brinsley.
Great Yarmouth, Feb. 2. 1655.
TEARS FOR JERUSALEM; OR The compassionate Lamentation of a tender hearted
Savior over a rebellious and obdurate people.
Luke 19.41, 42. And when he was come near, he beheld the City and wept over it.

42. Saying, If thou had known; even thou, at the least in this thy day, the
things which belong unto thy peace! But now they are hid from thine eyes.


THis portion of Scripture I now take up, The text upon what occasion taken up.
not that I look upon it as Prophetical to England. So indeed it was to
Jerusalem, to which it is, was spoken. I wish it may not be so to this Nation.
But as concerning it both useful and seasonable for the present times, and as
proper to the present occasion as any I can meet with, finding it put into my
hands by that Declaration, which has upon this day called us together, where
we are directed to make this one chief part of our arrand at the throne of
grace, to beg it of God that he would give his people in this nation to know
the things which belong unto their peace, Declaration Novem. 21. 1655.
which is the very thing which our blessed Savior here wishes to Jerusalem,
and that with tears in his eyes. And when he was come near, he beheld the City,
etc.

In the words we have a short History, reported only by this one Evangelist,
Division.
setting forth unto us the Passionate lamentation of our blessed Savior over
Jerusalem; wherein the occasion of it, Parts three.
the expression of it, the ground or cause of it. We may take notice of three
things.

First, The occasion of that lamentation; his approaching and beholding of the
City [And when he was come near, and beheld the City.]

Secondly, The expression of it, by tears [He wept over it.]

Thirdly, The ground or cause of it; the sad state of the City in regard of a
twofold evil, the one of sin, the other of punishment: of sin, the stupidity
and blindness of the inhabitants of that City in not laying hold upon the
offers and tenders of grace and mercy held forth to them. [ If thou had
known, etc.] The punishment first generally declared [But now they are hid from
thine eyes] Then more particularly explained in the verses following. These are
the severals, some of which I have now to deal with. Begin with the first. The
occasion of this lamentation.

And when he was come near, Part 1. The occasion of this lamentation.
he beheld the City] So he did, and that Oculis tam animi quam corporis, with
the eye both of his body and mind. With the eye of his body he beheld the
place. And beholding it wept over it. Thus is the eye of the body oftimes as a
window to let in affection The eye lets in affection to the heart.
and passion into the soul. Love and hatred, joy and grief, they often enter at
this door. Among other; in this way is pity and compassion often let into the
heart. The good Samaritane, he saw the man that was fallen among thieves; And
when he saw him (says the text) he had compassion on him, Luke 10.33. And thus
our Savior here saw the City of Jerusalem, and when he saw it, he was thus
affected with it. Seeing it, as with his bodily eye, so with the eye of his
mind, considering the state and condition of it.

Q. But what was it that he there saw, What Christ looked upon in Jerusalem,
that so affected him.
or looked upon that did so affect, and move him.

A. Why, 1. The City it se^f, magnificent for structure.
first with his bodily eye he took notice of the place, the City it self; where
he beheld as goodly a prospect as the earth could afford. A magnificent City,
beautiful for situation. Beautiful for situation, the joy of the whole earth,
is mount Sion, Psalm. 48.2. Beautiful for edifices and structures, which were
rich and stately. Among which the Temple rebuilt by King Herod was the most
sumptuous and magnificent pile; that then the world was owner of. So as had
there been nothing else, this alone had been enough to move compassion; to
think that so goodly a City as that, should within a short time be ruined: such
stately edifices laid level with the ground. This is conceived to have affected
the Disciples of Christ, as the story sets it forth, Matthew. 24.1. His Disciples
came (says the text) to show him the buildings of the Temple. This they did,
as by way of admiration, being much taken with the rich magnificence of the
structure, so also out of pity and commiseration, in as much as their master
had but a little before given them a hint of the destruction thereof; cap.
23.38. [Behold, your house is left unto you desolate] intimating that both the
City and Temple should be destroyed. Hereupon they now showed him the buildings
thereof, as pitying that sad fate, that so stately a fabric should be ruined.
This moved them; And I will not say but it might also at the present affect
their master, when he had this goodly prospect in his eye: to think what
afterward he speaks verse 44. that the enemy should lay that City and Temple
even with the ground, not leaving one stone upon another. This possibly might
move some compassion in him.

But this was but the least grain in the balance: There were diverse other
considerations besides this of greater importance, which our Savior might then
have in his thoughts: As viz.

In the second place, the number of people The number of people devoted to
destruction. Magis tamen subversionem planxit animarum quam ruinas par^etum:
Carthus ^d lot.
in that City, which was great and populous. All these generally he looked upon
as destinated to ruin and destruction either by sword or famine or pestilence
(Gods three stringed whip,) or by exile, or else miserable slavery. And this
questionless, could not but much affect him. So it did in another case, as the
Evangelist reports the story once and again, Matthew. 9.36. When he saw the
multitude he was moved with compassion in them because they fainted, and were
scattered abroad as sheep having no shepherd. And again, cap. 15. verse. 32. he
tells his Disciples: I have compassion on the multitude, because they continue
with me now three days and have nothing to eat. Thus did he pity the condition
of the people, having compassion both on their souls and bodies; the one
because they wanted instruction, the other because they wanted refreshment. How
much more then might this stir the like affection in him, when looking upon
this populous City, he considered how many were like to perish in that
desolation which hung over the head of it. As it is reported of that great
Commander Xerxes, that from a hill beholding his numerous Armies consisting of
some hundreds of thousands of able fighting men, and considering how that with
in a short time, 40. or 50. years, not a man of them should be left alive, he
could not refrain from weeping. And even alike consideration might here draw
tears from the eyes of our blessed Savior; Which also himself gives a hint of
in that 44. verse after the Text, where speaking how the City should be laid
level with the ground, he adds, and thy children within thee.] meaning that
they also should perish, the very little ones being (as the Psalmist says of
the Babylonians, Psalm. 137.) dashed against the stones.

The quality of the people: Gods people.
Thirdly, To this (in the third place) add the quality of the people, which as
they were numerous, so also they were a select, a choice people, Gods people. A
people whom God had chosen out of all the nations in the world; whom he had
adopted, and taken into Covenant with himself. To whom belongs the adoption
and the Covenant (says that Apostle, reckoning up the privileges of the
people,) Romans 9.4. Now that they through their own ingratitude and obstinacy in
refusing the offer and means of grace held forth to them, should perish so
miserably. This (as Calvin notes upon it) could not but exceedingly affect him
who came into the world to seek and save them. Quum populum qui in spem vita
aeternae ad opius erat, suae ingratitudine and malitia misere peri^e videret,
nihil mirum si lachrymas non tenuit. Call. ad. loc.
This thought exceedingly affected the blessed Apostle, as he tells his
Romans, Romans 9.1.2. I say the truth in Christ, I lie not, etc. That I have
great heaviness, and continual sorrow in my heart.] viz. for his countrymen
the Jews; to think of their obstinacy, and consequently their rejection. So it
follows. For I could wish that my self were accursed from Christ, for my
brethren, my kinsmen according to the flesh.] So was Paul affected with the
miscarriage of that people, that he could even have wished the greatest of
evils to himself, so as he might have prevented it in them. And the like
thought (no question) could not but exceedingly affect our blessed Savior, to
think that such a people, the hope of the world, the only people in Covenant
with God at that time, that they should miscarry, they should perish

Fourthly, Jerusalem the metropolis, the head city upon which the whole Nation
had a dependence.
To this add (in the fourth place) that that City as it was the Metropolis, the
head City of the Kingdom of Iudaea, so the whole Kingdom was concerned in it,
and depended upon it. Yea, the whole Nation of the Jews. As it went with that
City so it was like to go with the whole body of that nation. If that
miscarried, it could not but prove fatal to that whole kingdom, and to all the
people of God in it, who had all an adventure in that bottom, nay were
themselves imbarqued in it. And so were like to swim or sink with it. As it was
with Babylon, being the head City of the Persian Monarchy, the peace of the
whole Kingdom and all the subjects in it depended upon that; And therefore the
Prophet advises the Jewish captives, to seek the peace of that City, and to
pray unto the Lord for it; for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace, Jer.
29.7. Even thus was it with Jerusalem.

Yet again (in the fifth place;) This City it was the City of the great King,
so called by the Psalmist, 48.2. The great King; Jerusalem the City of the
great King, the city of God.
but what king? why not only the City of David (as it is sometimes called,
Luke 2.4.11.) the Emperial City, where David and his successors had sat upon
the throne for many Generations, almost five hundred years together before the
Captivity of Babylon. There are set thrones of judgment (says the Psalmist)
the throne of the house of David, Psalm. 122.5. Not only so, but it was the
City of the great King, of the King of heaven, the City of God. So our Savior
means it, Matthew. 5.35. where forbidding to swear by Jerusalem, he gives
this reason for it, for it is the City of the great King, i. e. of God. So the
Psalmist explains himself in the 8. verse of that psalm, ( Psalm. 48.) As we
have heard so have we seen in the City of the Lord of Hosts, in the City of
God. As also in the first verse, God is greatly to be praised in the City of
our God. So was Jerusalem, There God dwelt. The Lord has chosen Sion, he has
desired it for his habitation* This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell,
Psalm. 132.13, 14. This was the place, the only place upon earth, where God
manifested his presence in a fixed and constant way. Here formerly was the Ark
of the Covenant, the pledge and token of Gods presence; The glory of Israel,
and of the world, and therefore called, The glory. Romans 9.4. Here was the
Sanctuary, where God dwelt betwixt the Cherubins, and from whence the light of
salvation went forth unto all the world. This was urbs sacris dicata (as
Grotius says of it) a place dedicated to the worship and service of God, a
place which God had chosen to put his name there; the place whither the tribes
came up to worship, Psalm. 122.4. where the Ordinances of God were set up in
their glory, majesty, and held forth in a public way. So as this place
miscarrying, it could not but go ill with the Churches of God, and with the
Religion of God.

And this it was (as Gualter and Calvin note it upon the Text) which above all
other things our blessed Savior took to heart. Quum expenderet illam divinitus
electam esse sacram sedem, in qua resideret salutis aeternae foedus;
Sanctuarium unde prodiret salus salas toti mundo, fieri non potuit quam ejus
interitum graviter* doleret. Call. ad loc.
The other considerations might move him, but this above all, to think that
that place, which God had made choice of to put his name in, where he had
dwelt, where his Temple, Part 2.
the place of his public worship was, that that should be brought to such a
miserable desolation; The expression of Christ's compassion, by weeping.
Lachrymae sunt legati doloris. Cyprianus lib. Ep. 7.
as he by the eye of his divinity saw to hang over the head of it; this, this
it was that pierced his heart, and stirred up his compassions in him, drawing
tears from his eyes. When he beheld the City, he wept over it.

Wept over it] There is the expression of his compassion. Let me touch upon
that also, and I shall put the application of both these together.

He wept] This Passion Weeping a passion not unsuitable to Christ. Mutarunt
homines temerarii and delicati, quibus flere Christo indignis videbatur Grotius
ad Text.
some look upon as unsuitable to the person of Christ. And thereupon (as both
Beza and Grotius take notice of it from Epiphanus) in diverse of the ancient
Copies this passage was left out. But without any just cause. Gorranus ad Text.
and alli. Alii septies Christum flevisse asserunt: Gerhard Harm. ad loc.
To hear of Christ's weeping, is not such a rarity, that any should boggle at
it. Four several times (says one Writing upon the Text) we read hereof. The
first at his Nativity, his Birth. For this he cites that Apochryphal Text,
Wisd. 7.3. Where wisdom (whereby he understands Christ, who is so called,
Prove. 8.) says, that she was Borne crying and weeping, as all other do. Thus
Infants are commonly born, crying; whether weeping or no, I will not say. And
thus that pretended Solomon is conceived to set forth the birth of Christ, who
was therein conformed to the rest of the sons of men. But that (being
Apocryphal) I leave it, as I find it, uncertain, so as it may be believed or
rejected without any prejudice to the faith. The three other are clear. The
first, at the raising up of Lazarus; where we read, Joh. 11.53. And Jesus wept.
The second here, in this his Procession to Jerusalem (as he calls it) He
wept over it,] The third and last in his Passion in the Garden, concerning
which the Author to the Hebrews tells us, that he offered up prayers and
supplications, with strong cryings and tears, Heb. 5.7. Thus (says he) did our
blessed Savior, who was the fountain of life, water the world with his tears,
which he compares to the four Rivers, which went out of Paradise to water the
earth. But letting that pass, as more witty then weighty.

Weeping (we see) was no new or strange thing with our Savior. That ever he
laughed, that we read not; that he wept we meet with it more then once.

Q. But it may be said; Why Christ lamenteth what he could have remedied.
Wherefore should our Savior here weep over Jerusalem? what ever calamities
he saw impending, hanging over the head of it, he could have prevented them, if
he had pleased. And why then does he lament that, which with a word he was able
to have remedied?

A. To this it is answered: First, This he did, to show the truth of his
humanity: To show the truth of his humanity. Carne humana circundatus, vere
humanos induit affectus, Call. ad loc.
Taking upon him our nature, he took upon him also all Passions and Affections
common to that nature. Being made like unto us in all things, sin only
excepted, (as the Apostle has it, Heb. 4.15.) subjected to all our not sinful
infirmities. Thus he slept, eat, and drank, which the nature of man requires.
And thus we read that he was weary, hungry, thirsty; and thus he wept. All to
show himself truly man; and that, together with our nature, he had also taken
our Infirmities (as the Evangelist Saint Matthew has it, Matthew. 8.17.)

But secondly, Hereby he testified his affection To testify his affection to
the Jews. Hoc fletu testatus est fraterne se diligere eos in quorum gratiam
fuerat homo factus, Calvin ad Text. Viscera misericordiae suae per fletum
osstendit. Theophil. ad loc.
toward those for whom he was made man, and for whose sake he came into the
world. This he did first for the Jew; I am not sent save only to the Lost
sheep of the house of Israel (so he tells the woman of Canaan) Matthew. 15.24.
His arrand was first to the Jews, to seek and save them. And hereby he
expressed his indeared affection unto them. This was the contrition which the
Jews made of his weeping over Lazarus his grave. Behold, how he loved him (say
they) Joh. 11.36. And the same construction may we make of this his weeping
over Jerusalem. Hereby he showed that tender affection which he bare unto
them, and the desire which he had of their welfare and happiness.

Why did he not then help and save them.
Q. But if he loved them so, why did he not help them? Why did he not divert
those inpending evils? This had been a greater expression of love to them, to
save them, then to weep over them.

A. True, as God he could have helped them. Christ here in acts as man.
He could have prevented all those evils and miseries. But we must here look
upon him as acting the part of a Mediator. In the execution of which office the
Divine nature often rested, and hid it, not putting forth that power which
otherwise it could. Thus in his Passion the Godhead slept, while the Manhood
suffered. And thus here, the Divine nature rested, while the humane acted. And
he acting according to that nature, lamenteth the miseries of this people,
which in respect of his absolute power, as God, he could have prevented. He
could have done it, but he would not. And why? Because he came not to do his
own will, but the will of him that sent him. As he came to preach his Word, not
his own, My doctrine is not mine own, but his that sent me, Joh. 7.16. So he
came to do his work, his will, not his own. I seek not mine own will, but the
will of the Father which has sent me, Joh. 5.30. Now this was the will of the
Father, that that ungrateful people refusing and rejecting his Son, and the
offer of grace and mercy through him, should smart for that their ingratitude.
And this he, as man, here lamenteth and bewaileth, weeping over them. [When he
saw the City, he wept over it.]

And what shall we observe from hence that may be useful to our selves? Why
here see, Obs. Christians to be tenderly affected toward the Churches of God.
what affection there ought to be in all those that profess the name of Christ
toward the Church and people of God. How they ought to be affected, deeply
affected, with their miseries, their calamities. So was our blessed Savior, as
we see, with Hierusalems. Foreseeing that calamity which hung over the head of
it, the thought thereof melts his heart, and wrings tears from his eyes, He
wept over it. (...) (says the Original) which word coming from (...) (as the
Etimologist tells us) which signifies to break, it imports a breaking of the
heart with sorrow, which dissolveth it self into tears. And like affection
should there be in all Christians. It is that which Paul presses upon his
Philippians. Let the same mind be in you, which also was in Christ Jesus, Phil.
2.5. Now what mind was in him we see. He was affected not only with his own
private condition, but with the condition of others. He not only wept when the
bitter cup was coming toward himself, but he did the like when he saw it
coming toward Jerusalem. And let there be the same mind in all the Lords
people. Look not every man on his own things, but every man also on the things
of others; So the Apostle there presses it in the verse foregoing, (verse. 4.)
Thus should Christians look upon the condition of others, specially of the
Church and people of God, with an affectionate eye: as rejoicing in their
welfare, so condoling their misery and calamity. The Churches m^sery to be
mourned over.
So should they look upon private persons, pitying them in their misery. Have
pity upon me, have pity upon me, O ye my friends (says Job to his kindred) Job
19.21. much more upon the Church. Not looking upon her calamity with delight,
as a pleasing spectacle. So indeed the Edomites are said to have looked on the
day of their brother, Obad. 12. When their brethren the Jews were carried into
captivity, they rejoiced at it; but this was in them barbarous inhumanitie, for
which the Lord there threatens to be, even with them, verse. 15. As thou have
done, it shall be done unto thee; But with pitiful and compassionate eyes and
hearts, mourning over their miseries, whether present or imminent, felt or
found.

Thus shall we find the Saints of God to have been affected. That of Jeremy is
well known ^ho wishes his head waters, and his eyes a fountain of tears, that
he m^^^t weep day and night for the slain of the daughter of his people, Jer.
9.1. So great was his compassion toward the people of the Jews, that he
thought he could never sufficiently bewail the miseries, which by his
prophetical eye he saw ready to befall them. So was he affected therewith as if
they had fallen upon himself. So he expresses (...) in the chapter foregoing,
(cap. 8. verse. 21.) For the hurt of the daughter of my people, am I hurt (I am
broken, his heart was broken) I am black (like a mourner clad in sable, or I am
in heaviness) astonishment has taken hold of me] Like affection, like
compassion ought there to be in all Christians toward their brethren; they
ought to sympathize with them; Weeping with them that weep, as the Apostle has
it, Romans 12.16. Christians to mourn for those who do not mourn for themselves.


Yea, weeping for them, whilst it may be they do not weep for themselves. This
does our Savior here for Jerusalem. They thought their state and condition
good and happy. Being not sensible of the evils which hung over their heads,
they were not affected with them. I, but our Savior who foresaw those
judgments as God, he weepeth over them as man. Thus should Christians be
affected with those judgments of God which they foresee ready to fall upon
others; they ought to mourn for them. This will the Prophet Isay do for Moab,
as himself most pathetically expresses it. Isai. 15.5. My heart shall cry for
Moab, cap. 16.9. I will bewail with the weeping of ^^^er the vine of Sibma; I
will water thee with my tears O Heshbon. Again, verse. 11. My bowels shall sound
like a harp for Moab, i. e. with pity and compassion. And the like will the
Prophet Jeremy do. Therefore will I howl for Moab, etc. Jer. 48.31, 32. Now
were the Prophets of God thus affected with the condition of Moab, who were
strangers, nay enemies to God and his people. O how ought Christians to be
affected toward Jerusalem, toward the Church and people of God?

Great reason why they should mourn with them, for them. In as much as they are
members of the same body. Reas. Christians members of the same body.
Now such a sympathy we know there is betwixt the members of the natural body.
If one member suffer, all the members suffer with it, (as the Apostle observes)
1 Cor. 12.26. And such a sympathy there ought to be betwixt the members of the
Mistical Body.

Appli.
That it should be so I presume it will readily be granted. But then, why is it
not so? The present times to be mourned over.
Let that be the first branch of the Application. How is it that there are no
more mourners in this our Sion? Surely it is not for want of just cause of
mourning, I presume that among those who are most in love with the present
times, yet there are none that so doat upon them, but they will acknowledge
there is yet somewhat among us, which deserves both sighs and tears. So much
that Instrument which has this day called us together has proclaimed to the
world. And surely so we shall find it, if we seriously consider the state of
things both abroad, and at home.

Look a broad, In regard of the state of the Church abroad.
we may see or hear of that which deserves to be laid to heart. The sad state
of our poor persecuted brethren in Piemont; whose condition not long since has
been recommended to the needful charity of this Nation. As also that hand of
God which has lain so heavy upon our neighbors on the other side, where the
destroying Angel has been, and yet is at work, doing sad executions. To which
I might add the present state of our brethren in Scotland.

But we shall not need to go abroad: The presen state of England a matter of
just lamentation.
It was that which our Savior said to the woman of Jerusalem, whom he saw out
of a feminine temper, and some of them happily out of affection unto himself,
lamenting him going to his Passion. Daughters of Jerusalem, weep not for me,
but weep for your selves and your children, Luke 23.28. And truly the like may
be said unto us at this day; weep not so much for others as for your selves.
Such is the state of this nation that if rightly considered, it may be
conceived to deserve a weeping over* which that you may be brought to do, let
me desire you to approach and take a veivv of it. This it was that drew tears
from your Saviors eyes, viz. his approaching and beholding of Jerusalem. When
he was come near, he beheld the City, and wept over it That you may be like
affected toward this your native country; let me give you a sight of it:
Which I shall do in a three fold prospect, Englands condition looked upon three
ways.
desiring you to look upon it these three ways; considering what it was, what
it is, and what, unless God be pleased graciously to step in by a timous
prevention it it is like to be.

What it has been.
First, What it was, how happy under that long continued peace, which for so
many years together it enjoyed, to the admiration, if not envy of other
Nations. But again how unhappy under the late Civil Commotions, which like a
fire breaking forth in our own bowels, what sad devastations did it make, to
the effusion of much precious blood, which is yet so fresh, as that the memory
of it cannot but deeply affect the hearts of all those who bear any true love
to the land of their Nativity. Such it has been. What it is.


Secondly, But what is it? Here I shall not go upon any private account,
whether my own, or yours; which if I should, I might draw up a large Catalogue
of sins and judgments, under which at the present this nation lies, and
groans, deserving to bewept over. But I have a public one put into my hand.
That Declaration Set forth in the late Declaration,
which has occasioned this our meeting, I find it taking notice of three or
four particulars. Besides the late Rebukes, (those I suppose received on the
other side of the world, Iamaika,
where not a little English blood was shed, to the no small dishonor of the
Nation, which has not been acquainted with such repulses ( The tares of
Division, Abominable blasphemies, Dreadful appostacies, Four particulars justly
to be mourned over.
with the Impediments of Settlement and Reformation. These are held forth as
the just occasions and grounds of this days Humiliation. And truly if rightly
looked upon, as we see a reality in every of them, so we shall find that there
is never a one of them but gives the people of God to do over this Nation,
what their blessed Savior here did over Jerusalem to weep over it.

First, The tares of Division, Tares of division.
which vvhilest the Husbandmen slept, the envious man has sown; and that so
thick, as the whole field is over run with them, insomuch that they threaten to
eat out the heart both of Church and State, Divisions of all sorts. Divisions
both of Heads and Hearts, in jugdement and affection, in Church and State. So
as it may now be said of the people of England as once it was of Israel,
Hosea ^.2. Their he arts is divided. God having taken away his spirit of unity
and concord from them he has given them over to Seditions, Factions, Sects,
and Schisms: And is not this a just cause of mourning? Such are divisions in
the State. (In or for.) The divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of
heart, Judge. 5.15. Much more in the Church. O what means that noise of Axes and
Hammers in the Temple? In the building of it there were none of these heard, 1
King. 6.7. Surely this is for the breaking down of the carved work thereof at
once, Psalm. 74.6.

Abominable blasphemies.
Secondly, Abominable blasphemies; And those not only the sudden eruptions of
profane and impious tongs, by cursing and swearing, for which the Prophet
says the land of Israel mourned, Jer. 23.10. But deliberate blasphemies,
studied and resolved blasphemies. Blasphemies against Jesus Christ, and against
his holy Spirit, divesting both of their Divinity; denying the satisfaction of
Christ; blasphemies against Scriptures, Ordinances, Ministry; even spitting in
the face all religion. And is not this a just ground of mourning? The Jews of
old never heard a blaspemous word, but their manner was to rend their garments,
2 King. 18.37.19. 1. Matthew. 26.65. Act. 14.14.) O what cause have Christians
then to rend their hearts at the hearing and seeing of such blaspemies, as
daily fly abroad among us! The like whereunto are not to be found in Rome it
self, though she be the mother of abominations, Revel. 17.5. And has the name
of blasphemy written upon her forehead, Rev. 13.1.17.3.

Thirdly, Dreadful apostasy Dreadful apostasy.
and backsliding among many, who being like stars fallen from heaven; fallen
from their Principles into dangerous, destructive, desperate, damnable errors
and heresies, have not only forsaken, but also persecute that truth, and that
way, which themselves before made profession of and walked in.

Fourthly, And (in the last place) The hindrances of settlement and reformation
The hindrance of settlement and reformation.
in the Church. This the people of God in this Nation have desired, looked,
longed for, earnestly wrestling with God and man for the obtaining of it. And
they conceived to have had some return of their prayers in a hopeful beginning
of it. But now, how are all those hopes dashed? Reformation being turned to
Deformation: the walls of Jerusalem being broken down, and no Nehemiah as yet
undertaking the rebuilding of them. And are not these just grounds of mourning?
A sufficient cause why they who wish well to Jerusalem, to the Church of God in
this Nation should with their Savior here, weep over it? Such is the present
state thereof.

Thirdly, What like to be.
Beyond which if it be lawful for us to look, what can we see or expect,
unless God in mercy step into us by way of a gracious prevention, but even
Jerusalems fate, utter ruin and destruction? were there no other but the first
of these, those many and sad Divisions which are on foot, daily increasing
among us, what do they presage? If we know it not, let our Savior tell it us,
Mark 3.24. If a Kingdom be divided against it self, that Kingdom cannot stand.
And the naturalist will tell us no less. Cor divisum mors est; If the heart be
divided the body cannot live.

Now then having thus approached to and looked upon this Nation, what remains
but that our eyes should move our hearts to pity and compassionate it, to mourn
over it. Little else it is that private persons can do. And this let them do.
Preces and Lachrymae, Prayers and tears are the Churches weapons, which every
one both may, and ought to make use of. And this let us, as at other times, so
this day do. All of us pouring forth our souls before the Lord in an humble
confession of our own sins, and the sins of the Nation which have justly
deserved, what ever we either feel or fear begging it from him, that he would
graciously return unto us, undertaking the Cure of this Sin-sick nation,
healing our breaches; sanctifying and removing the judgments which lie upon
us, diverting those which further threaten us: yet showing us his salvation, in
carrying on that great and blessed work of Reformation, in despite of all
opposition from those accursed Balaamits, whether Romes emissaries, or others,
who seek and endeavor to frustrate it, setting up the kingdom of his dear Son
among us in a right way, so making us yet a people to praise his name.

Thus have I done with the two first of these particulars. The third is yet
behind, which my eye is principally upon, which we have in the verse following.

VERSE XLII. Saying, If thou had known; even thou, at least in this thy day,
the things which belong unto thy peace.] A Most Affectionate and Pathetical
Exclamation; Part 3. The cause of Christ's weeping. Pathetica est ratio, ideoque
abrupta Calvin ad loc. Passionate expressions often abrupt.
and therefore abrupt and defective. Such oftimes are the speeches of men in
Passion. Specially in the passion of grief and sorrow; wherein oftimes Vox
faucibus haeret, the tongue cleaves to the roof of the mouth, not able to
express and utter what is in the breast. Sorrow is a compression of the heart;
whereas joy does dilate and open it: grief does compresse, congeal and
straighten it, so as that which is within cannot readily get forth. Hence is it
that the expressions hereof are abrupt and broken. And such is our Saviors
here in the text. His heart being full of grief and sorrow for the sin and
misery of this people, he expresses himself in such an abrupt and broken way.
If thou had, etc. so leaving it with an Aposiopesis, a Reticentia, keeping in
what should have made the sentence entire and full.

This defect is variously supplied The defect here how supplied.
by Expositors: By some thus. If thou had known, etc. Known so well as I,
thou would have wept as well as I. By others thus. If thou had known, etc.
thou would not have done as thou have done; thou would not have gone on to
die and perish in thy sins. By others thus. If thou had known, etc. thou
would have hearkened to my counsel, thou would have been more studious of
thy peace. By Beza and Piscator (with whom I choose to go along) thus. If thou
had known, etc. Quam foelix esses and beata. How happy and blessed then
might thou have been! But this he leaves out beaking off bruptly; which he
does to intimate the greatness of his affection, to show how earnestly he
both wished their good, and bevvailed their misery. If thou (or O if thou as
the former Translation has it) had known; (...).

Obser. Christ's affection to an unworthy people the Jews.
Behold here then the affection of a tender hearted Savior toward an obstinate
and unworthy people. The people of the Jews a rebellious people. A people that
had deserved as ill at the hands of Jesus Christ, as ever people did, or could
have done. They had abused his messengers, his Ministers. They had killed his
Prophets, and stoned those whom he sent unto them (as he charge it upon them,
Matthew. 22.37.) And they intended to do no less to himself. They had already
rejected him, and all the offers of grace and mercy which he had made unto
them. So unvvorthy of all grace and favor were they. Yet see how he pitieth
and compassionateth them; how earnestly he wishes their welfare, how
passionately he bevvails their misery. Oh if thou, etc.

Like affection shall we find the Lord elsewhere expressing to this people,
breaking forth sometimes into such affectionate exclamations, professing his
earnest desire of their happiness and welfare. So he does, Deuteronomy. 5.29. O that
there were such an heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my
Commandments always, that it might go well with them, and with their children
for ever! And again, Deuteronomy. 32.29. O that they were wise, that they understood
this, that they would consider their latter end! How should one chase a
thousand, etc. elsewhere we find him bewailing their obstinacy and misery, as
Psalm. 81.13. O that my people had hearkened unto me, and Israel had walked in
my statutes! I should soon have subdued their enemies, etc. And the like Isai.
48.18. O that thou had hearkened to my Commandments! then had thy peace been
as the river, etc. Thus does the Lord as it were bewail the obstinacy, and
lament the misery of that people, wishing it had been otherwise with them.

So far is he then from taking pleasure in the death and destruction of poor
sinners. God not taking pleasure in the death of sinners.
This do tyrants sometimes, they take pleasure in their bloody executions,
feeding their eyes therewith, as with pleasing spectacles, But so does not our
God in the destruction of his creatures. To this purpose that of the Prophet
Ezekiel speaks fully, Ezekiel. 18.31, 32. Where the Lord bewayling the
perverseness of the people of the Jews in running on headlong to their own
destruction, he expostulateth the matter with them, verse. 31. Why will ye die O
ye house of Israel! then he professes that he was not delighted in their
destruction, or the destruction of any other, verse. 32. I have no pleasure in
the death of him that dyeth] No, though wicked persons, and so most worthy to
die, yet God takes no pleasure in their death. So he elsewhere explains it,
Ezekiel. 33.11. As I live, says the Lord God, I have no pleasure in the death of
the wicked.

Object. Why, but does not God will the death of the wicked? How God wills
the death of the wicked.


Answ. True, he wills it, but he takes no pleasure in it. He wills it as
an act of Justice, ordaining them to just condemnation for sin. But he is not
delighted in their destruction, their misery. Even as a just, but merciful
Judge, he pronounces the sentence of death upon a guilty malefactor, but it
is with tears in his eyes. God is delighted in mercy, mercy pleases him, (as
the Prophet has it, Micah. 7.18.) but so does not the misery of his creature.

Appli.
Let it be taken notice of by every of us. Not to the end that we should abuse
this mercy, Gods grace not to be turned into wantonness.
turn this grace into wantonness (as Saint Jude says of some in his time did,
Jude 4.) taking occasion thereby to go on and continue in sin. What shall we
say then? Shall we continue in sin that grace may abound? God forbid. (says
the Apostle) Romans 6.1. Shall we therefore go on to provoke this God because he
is so compassionate toward us, so loath that we should perish; what were this
but to abuse this his lenity and goodness to our own just condemnation? But
on the other hand, let this goodness of God lead us unto repentance. Gods
goodness leading to repentance.
This is the right use of it, (as we may learn from the same Apostle, Romans
2.4.) Be we hereby provoked to break off the course of our ways provoking
sins, and to come in unto this God by serious and unfeigned repentance. This
use will an ingennous child make of the indulgent affection of a tender hearted
parent. When he sees the bowels of his father or mother yearning toward him,
bewailing his destructive courses, if there be any spark of ingenuity left,
this cannot but work upon his heart, and make him think of betaking himself to
a new course, which may be pleasing and contentful to so affectionate a parent.
Behold thus is our heavenly Father, and thus is our blessed Savior affected
toward poor sinners. And therefore let it have the like work upon every of us,
to provoke us to break off those sinful ways and courses, which are so
offensive to those pure eyes; and come in unto our God by serious and unfeigned
Repentance.

Christ still retaining the same affection toward poor sinners.
So doing, now doubt not but we shall have comfortable experience of his grace
and mercy. What, was the Lord Jesus so affected toward a stubborn and
rebellious people, that he so earnestly wishes their good, and so passionately
bewaileth their calamity, and will he not show the like affection to poor
penitent sinners? such as by coming unto him seek for mercy from him? Surely
the Lord Jesus has carried his bowels to heaven with him; still retaining the
same affection toward poor sinners that here he had upon earth. How ever he
be not capable of expressing it in the like way: He can hence forth weep no
more; All tears being wiped from his eyes, as they shall be from the eyes of
all his Saints, when they shall be translated to that blessed and glorious
condition. Yet still he retains the same affection toward poor sinners. He
that wept over Jerusalem here, wishing that it had been otherwise with them
then it was, and was like to be, he does earnestly desire that those tears,
and that blood which he here shed in the days of his flesh, may be made
effectual for the washing away the sins of poor sinners; Which also they
shall be to all those, who turning away from them, come unto him, receiving him
as their Savior and Lord. But I shall not any longer dwell upon this; which I
take up from the general consideration of the words, or from the manner of
speaking.

Come we now to the matter; taking a nearer and more particular veivve of this
Lamentation. The matter of this lamentation; where the evil lamented,
Aggravations of it.
Wherein we shall take notice of two things: the Evil of sin it self which our
Savior here bewaileth; and secondly the Aggravations of that evil. The evil
bewailed is their stupidity, their not knowing of what belonged to their peace.
The aggravations of that evil are two, the one taken from the persons, the
other from the time. The persons who were thus stupid Jerusalem. [If thou, even
thou] The time, the day of their visitation [At least in this thy day.] These
are the severals, we have now to deal with. Begin with the first. The evil
lamented; The evil lamented.
their not knowing the things which belonged to their peace.]

Here, by way of explication three things Expli. Three things.
are to be unfolded. 1. What is here meant by peace. 2. What were those things
which belonged to Jerusalems peace. 3. How it is said that they did not know
those things.

Q. For the first, What here meant by peace; viz. All kind of happiness.
by Peace here understand we prosperity, felicity. So the word was familiarly
used among the Hebrews. In as much as Peace is a comprehensive blessing, they
set forth all blessings under this. Thus in their ordinary salutations they
were wont to wish Peace. Peace be unto thee, and peace be unto thy house, and
peace be unto all that thou have. It is the salutation which David sends to
Nabal, 1 Samuel 25.6. And thus our Savior sending forth his Apostles, he puts
this word into their mouths, directing them to salute the families where they
came after that manner, with an apprecation of peace. Into whatsoever house ye
enter, ye shall first say, Peace be to this house, Luke 10.5. i. e. all kind of
happiness. And so look we upon the word here in the text. By peace
understanding here all kind of felicity; Omnes foelicitatis parts (as Calvin
has it) all the parts, and kinds of happiness. Happiness both present and
future; temporal and eternal.

Q. 2. But what were the things which belonged unto this their peace. What were
the things which belonged to their peace; viz. Christ and his Gospel.
A. (...), why, in one word, Christ himself, and the doctrine of salvation by
and through him Christ and his Gospel. These were the things which conduced to
their peace, to the making of them a happy people, and that both here and
hereafter. Other things there were, which in a Political and civil way might
have tended to the outward peace, the temporal prosperity of that place. But
none like this, none like Christ who is the Prince of peace, Isai. 9.6. And our
peace, Ephesians. 2.14. In him is the salvation of a people bound up. This it is
which makes a people truly happy: The knowledge of Jesus Christ.

And this knowledge the inhabitants of Jerusalem were destitute of. They
neither did, nor would know this their Peacemaker. Moses they knew, he being
read in their Synagogues every Sabbath day, Act. 15.21. But Christ they knew
not.

Q. 3. But what did not they know him? had they not heard of him? How they are
said not to know these things, viz. in not owning of Christ.
Nay had they not both heard and seen him? heard his Doctrine, seen his
Miracles? A. True, but they did not receive him. He came unto his own, and his
own recived him not, Joh. 1.11. He came unto his own, to Israel his own
peculiar people, to the land of Canaan his own Country, he being of the seed
of Abraham, to Jerusalem his own City, he being the Son of David, but they
received him not, they would not own him, they would not acknowledge him to be
their Messiah; they would neither believe on him, nor submit unto him. This it
is truly to know God and Jesus Christ, To know God and Christ, what.
to know them in an affectionate way. Not barely to know and believe that there
is a God, and a Christ; no nor yet to know that Jesus is that Christ. This
knowledge the Devils had and have. I know thee who thou art, even that holy one
of God (says that unclean spirit to our Savior, Mark 1.24. But to know them
affectionately with a knowledge of approbation. So the word (knowing) in
Scripture is frequently used. In this sense Saint Paul says of himself, Romans
7.15. that the things which he did, he knew not. So the Original has it,
(...), I know not, meaning (as our Translation gives the sense of it) that he
did not allow, or approve of them. In this sense God is said to know, or not to
know men. If any man love God, the same is known of him, 1 Cor. 8.3. that is
approved of him. Verily I say unto you I know you not (says the Bridgroome to
the foolish virgins, refusing to own them, Mat. 25.12.) And in this sense man
is said to know God and Jesus Christ. This is life eternal, to know thee the
only true God, and him whom thou have sent Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.3. O
righteous Father the world has not known thee, verse. 25. Now in this sense
the inhabitants of Jerusalem did not know Jesus Christ. A general knowledge
they had concerning the Messia, that he should come. And many of them might
know Jesus, but they did not know him to be the Messia, they did not
acknowledge him to be the Christ.

Christ acknowledged by a small party.
Q. No (it may be said) did not they acknowledge him? What meant then that
Acclamation of the people who at this time brought him into Jerusalem in
triumph, as Saint Matthew more fully reports the story, Mat. 21.8. where he
tells us how a very great multitude spread their garments in the way, etc. And
they cried, Saying, Hosanna to the Son of David; Blessed is he that comes in
the name of the Lord, Hosanna in the highest. Now did not they own, and
acknowledge him. How is it then, that he here exprobrates them with their
disowning, sleighting of him?

By whom it was.
A. To this it is answered, True, Christ was thus acknowledged by some and many
at this time. But by whom was it? Probably by some of the neighboring villages
not by the inhabitants of Jerusalem. So much seems to be intimated in the tenth
verse, where it is said, when he came into Jerusalem, all the City was moved,
saying, who is this? To whom the multitude which came along with him return
answer, This is Jesus the Prophet, etc. But again, However some there were in
Jerusalem, that did so acknowledge him; so did the Children in the Temple,
which sung the same song, A party inconsiderable both for quality and number.
Hosanna to the Son of David, verse. 15. yet who, or what were they? No
considerable party whether for quality or number. For quality, they were such
as were of no account, being of the vulgar and meaner sort; Not any of eminent
place, whether in Church or State that appeared any more for him. Have any of
the Rulers, or of the Pharisees believed on him? (say the chief Priests to
their Officers, Joh. 7.48.) At that time when those Queristers sung that
Antheme in the Temple, it is said, that the chief Priests and Scribes were sore
dipleased, Matthew. 21.15. And it was no otherwise with the body of the people,
who were generally led (as for the most part they are) by the example of their
Rulers. They did not receive him and his Doctrine. And this it is which here he
so passionately bewailes in them, that they had not done it, and so
affectionately wishes that they had done it. O if thou, etc.] Obser. Not to
receive Christ and his Gospel, a most deplorable thing.


Lo then, How deplorable a thing it is, for a people not to receive Christ and
his Gospel being offered and tendered unto them. This is the observation I am
now to prosecute. For a people not to receive Christ and his Gospel, not to
give entertainment to the messengers of peace, not to embrace the offers of
grace and mercy, being held forth unto them in the preaching of the Gospel,
this is a most sad and deplorable thing. This is the thing which our Savior
here so passionately laments and bewails. And the same we find him doing again
elsewhere, Mat. 23.37. where he breaks forth into the like pathetical
exclamation. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, how often would I have gathered thy
children together, even as a hen gathers her chickens under her wings, and ye
would not.] O Jerusalem, Jerusalem! the word is doubled to intimate the strong
affection of the speaker. How often would I have gathered thy children? meaning
the people of the Jews, whose mother City was Jerusalem. This he had attempted
by sending his messengers, his servants unto them, then coming himself, to
admonish them, warn them, exhort them, so striving to bring them to faith and
repentance, that so they might have been sheltred from the wrath of God, and
secured from those imminent evils which hang over their heads. But they would
not. They rejected the offers of grace made unto them. And this is the matter
of our Saviors, lamentation, the thing which drew these tears from his eyes.
And indeed there is nothing more to be lamented then this. This is that which
belongs unto the peace of a people.


And will you have the Reason of it, take it from the Text. This is the thing
which belongs unto their peace. Upon this it is that the woe or welfare, the
felicity or misery of a people does depend. This is their making or marring;
the receiving or rejecting the Gospel of peace. This being entertained brings
peace along with it. It was the commission and direction which our Savior gave
to his Apostles, when he sent them forth, Matthew. 10.12, 13. When ye enter into
a house, salute it, and if the house be worthy (that is, such persons as are
willing and ready to entertain you and your message) now let your peace come
upon it. Now preach the Gospel of peace to them, and therewith wish all good
and happiness unto them: which also accordingly shall come and rest upon them.
So Saint Luke expresses it, Luke 10.6. If the son of peace be there,
(meaning such persons as were readily disposed to receive the doctrine of
peace; the Gospel) your peace shall rest upon it, (...), God will bring upon
that family all the good that you wish unto it; your apprecation of peace shall
be as effectual as your preaching of it. Thus is it with a family, And thus is
it with a City, and thus is it with a Nation. The receiving of the Gospel is
the happiness of it.

On the other hand, the rejecting of the Gospel is the undoing of a people. The
rejecting of the Gospel the undoing of a people.
So it there follows, Matthew. 10.14. Whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear
your words, when ye depart out of that house, or City, shake of the dust of
your feet. This were the Apostles to do as a token of Gods shaking them off.
Even as we read of Nehemiah shaking his lap, Nehem. 5.13. Also I shook my lap,
and said, So God shake out every man from his house, from his labor, that
performs not this promise, even thus be he shaken out and emptied. Thus were
the Apostles to shake off the dust of their feet against those that rejected
them: Or to shake their garments at them. So did Paul against the Jews, Act.
18.5, 6. He preaching Christ unto them, when they opposed themselves and
blasphemed, he shook his raiment, etc. Thereby intimating not only his
deserting, but Gods rejecting of them. Of such sad consequence is it for a
people not to give entertainment to the Gospel, and the messengers thereof.
This lays them under a curse; rendering them justly obnoxious to the vengeance
of God. I shall not dwell any longer upon Confirmation, or Illustration. Bring
we it home to our selves by way of Application.

Applic. A just cause of mourning over this nation, the slight entertainment
given to the Gospel.
Where (in the first place) see we what cause we have to mourn and vveep over
this Nation wherein we live, wherein Christ and his Gospel have found such
slight and slender entertainment as generally they have done, and yet do. A
long time it is that the Gospel has been held forth among us. Christ has sent
unto us his messengers, the Ministers of reconciliation, offering peace unto us
upon Gospel terms, upon our receiving him as our Savior and Lord. But what
is the reception, what is the entertainment that for the most part he has met
with? Is it any more then a formal reception, a formal profession of his name?
This indeed has generally obtained. The name of Christ is called upon us. But
is not this all? What is there more to be found among the greatest part, but a
naked profession without any power? How few are there that have received Christ
into their hearts? Truth is, our acknowledgment of Christ has been, and is
generally more in Ceremony then in reality. Not unlike that of the Jews, many
of which at his entrance here in to Jerusalem, were full of Ceremony and
outward expressions; They spread their garments in the way, as a Carpet for him
to ride upon. They cut down branches of trees, and strowed the way with them,
as tokens of festivity and solemnity. And they cry Hosanna; saluting him by the
name of a Savior. But yet they were far from taking him to be their King. No;
when he was propounded to them under that notion, as he was by Pilate, John
19.14. the chief Priests make answer for the rest, we have no King but Caesar,
verse. 15. And they who had even now cried out Hosanna, now change their note,
crying out as loud Crucifige, Away with him, away with him, Crucify him. And
is it not so with the greatest part of this Nation? In a formal way they have
acknowledged Christ for a Savior, complementing him with some Ceremonial
observances (such and no better have been the services which they have
performed unto him, mere shadows without any substance) but as for taking him
to be their King, how are the greatest part resolved with those Citizens in the
Parable, Luke 19.14. Nolumus regnare, we will not have this man to reign over
us.

Calling for deep lamentation.
And O what a sad and deplorable thing is this! what cause have we to sit down
and weep over England upon this account? This was the thing which belonged to
our peace. Had we thus received Christ and his Gospel, had we yielded up our
selves to be governed and regulated by his Laws, how happy a people might we
then have been? Then might we have hoped that God would have subdued our
enemies, and turned his hand against our adversaries: Then had our race been as
a river, and our righteousness as the waves of the Sea (as the divine Psalmist
and Prophet have it in the places forecited, Psalm. 81.13. Isaiah 48.18.) Then
had there been peace within our walls, and prosperity within our Palaces. But
sleighting and rejecting him, not submitting to his Government; not to his
outward Government (which the greatest part stand out against; having cast off
those golden reins, they will not now endure any Government in the Church;)
much less to his inward Government, to rule in their hearts; what evil have we
cause to fear? Nay, what may we not fear?

In the fear of God let this be seriously laid to heart by every of us this
day. We see how our blessed Savior laid to heart this wretchlesness in
Jerusalem. How he lamenteth over it, for it. O if thou had known the things
which belong unto thy peace! And have not we just cause to take up the like
Lamentation over this Nation! O England! if thou had known in this thy day
^he things which belong unto thy peace, O how ^appy, how blessed had thou
been! But now, what God intends toward thee, who knows? Should he remove thy
Candlestick, take away ^he Gospel from thee, (which is cause enough ^o fear;)
should he bring the like evils upon ^hee, as our blessed Savior here threatens
against Jerusalem; should he make our Houses, Cities, Temples, desolate; should
he bring ut^er desolation both upon Church and State; should he give a near and
larger Commission to ^he Sword to eat flesh and drink blood, second^ng it with
those ordinary attendants (which through a wonderful providence we have
hi^herto been freed from;) Famine and Pestilence, ^o sweeping us as dung off
from the face of the earth, yet must we acknowledge the Lord to be just and
righteous.

In the humble acknowledgment whereof, Use. 2. What to be done for the
preventing of judgment. (...)] (...) hic est utinam. Grotius ad loc.
let all of us seriously set our selves for the diverting and preventing of
these Judgments. To which end be we admonished and exhorted, yet to hearken to
this wish in the Text. So some here ^ook upon the words in the Text, reading
them Optatively, utinam nosses! O that, or would to God that thou had known!
And O that England would yet hearken to this wish, so as to comply with it!
Then which, what can be more desirable for it? What those things are you have
heard; viz. to receive Christ and his Gospel; to give such entertainment to him
and it as he requires. Now let all of us, as we wish well to our own souls in
particular, and to this Nation in general, seriously apply our selves hereunto.
As yet through riches of grace the Gospel of peace is held forth unto us; As
yet we enjoy the Ordinances of Christ, Word and Sacraments, with liberty and
purity. O let us now make much of them, and make use of them: with holy care
and conscience waiting and attending upon them; thereby making it manifest what
esteem we have of them. Specially endeavoring to profit by them; to find the
power and life of them inwardly in our hearts in the changing and transforming
them, and to express that power in the course of our lives and conversations by
so walking as becomes the Gospel. So doing, now may we yet comfortably hope
that he who does here so compassionately mourn over a rebellious people
rejecting him and his Gospel, will much more pity spare a repenting people
that is willing to hearken to his voice; So pity us, as to turn away those
threatened evils, continuing the Gospel of peace, with the peace of the Gospel
to us and our posterities after us, so long as the Sun and Moon endures.

Thus I have done with the substance of this Complaint, come we now to the
circumstances; the Aggravations The Aggravations of this complaint.
Aggravat^on, 1.
of this Evil. Which (as I showed you) are two, the Persons and Time. Begin
with the former.

If thou had known, The Persons.
even thou] (...). Si vel tu nosses. Si cognovisses and tu. Not, If thou had
even known] (as the former Translation renders it, putting the Emphasis upon
the word, Known) but if even thou had known, with reference to the Persons,
or Place.

Even thou] Thou also (say some) thou Jerusalem, as well as others; Thou as
well as others. Diodate Annot. ad loc.
as well as this poor troop of my Apostles and Disciples; or as diverse other
lesser Cities and Villages have done; or as this company now does, which
acknowledges me to be what I am, crying Hosanna; or as some other places
heretofore have done; some of which have been so happy, as timely to take
notice of what belonged to their peace. So did that great City Nineveh, at the
preaching of Jonah they repented, John 3.5. whose example elsewhere we find
propounded by our Savior to the Jews, Mat. 12.41. The men of Nineveh shall
rise in judgment against this generation, and shall condemn it, because they
repented at the preaching of Jonah. And the like had some other places and
persons done. And O that Jerusalem had also done the like! If thou also had
known! Thou as well as others. Or,

Secondly, Thou rather then others. Thou, rather then others.
So Calvin, and diverse other Expositors here conceive of it. As if our Savior
did here compare Jerusalem with other Cities of Judea; Yea with all other
Cities of the whole world. All which Jerusalem excelled in respect of many
privileges! (...)] Vel tu urbs illa supra omnes terrae urbes Deo dilecta, urbs
David, urbs Regia, urbs sacris dicata. Grotius ad loc. Jerusalem a Non-such in
respect of spiritual privileges.
This was the City of David, the Emperial City, yea the City of the great King,
the City of God; a City beloved of God above all other places upon the earth;
Coeleste in terris Sacrarium (as Calvin says of it) a heavenly Sanctuary upon
earth; where God had betrusted his Oracles, his Ordinances; where he had
manifested his presence after a special manner, dwelling between the Cherubins,
according to that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 132.13, 14. For the Lord has chosen
Sion, he has desired it for his habitation. This is my rest for ever, here
will I dwell. Such was Jerusalem, Heavens favorite, Earths Non-such; a City
paramount, preferred and advanced above all other Cities and places upon earth
in respect of spiritual privileges. And this our Savior here takes up as an
Aggravation An Aggravation.
both of his Sorrow and her Sin.

1. Of his Sorrow. 1. Of Christ's sorrows.
Even thou.] As for other places, other Cities, suppose Chorazin, Bethsaida,
Capernaum, the Gadarenes or Samaria, or the like, for any of these to perish
and miscarry as they did, this were no other but a sad thing, deserving to be
lamented over. But that Jerusalem should do so, this went nearer our Saviors
heart then any other. Even as Brutus his stab did to Caesar's, which made him
cry out, (...), and tu Brute; what, thou my son, thou Brutus? Even so did
Jerusalems obstinacy and ingratitude here to our Savior. And thereupon he
cries out after the same manner. (...). Even thou.] Like as it is with a
natural parent, he cannot but be offended with the miscarriage of any of his
children, but that his darling, the son of his delights, whom he has set his
love upon and shown most affection to, that he should miscarry, this goes
near him. So was it with Jacob, when he apprehended some sad disaster to have
befallen his son Joseph, his dear son, the son of his age, to whom he had
expressed more affection then the rest of his Brethren, (as appeared by his
party colored garment) this went near his heart, insomuch that he refused to
be comforted, resolving to go down to the grave to him mourning, (as we have
the story Genesis 37.3.35.) And so was David affected with his Absolon; He being
his darling, whom he had tendered and cockered, when he understood what a fatal
end he by his Rebellion had brought himself unto, this makes David break forth
into that passionate Lamentation. O Absolon my son, my son, etc. 2 Samuel 19.4.
Thus did Ierusalems carriage and miscarriage, her sin and punishment which our
Savior saw and foresaw; affect him more then if it had been any other place. O
if even thou had known]. This was an Aggravation of his Sorrow.

2. And so (secondly) of their Sin. 2. Of her sin.
This also our Savior may well be conceived to insinuate in this passionate
expression. If Even thou.] Thou which have enjoyed such means, so many mercies;
that have been lifted up to heaven, preferred before al places in the world in
respect of spiritual favors and Gospel privileges, that thou should be
thus stupid, thus blind, as not to see, not to regard the things which
belonged to thy peace and happiness, this renders thee of all others most
miserable, and makes thy ingratitude most superlative. So he here charge
this upon them as a heinous aggravation of their Sin, calling for an answerable
Judgment.

Obser. Means and mercies not answered, great aggravations of sin and judgment.
And so indeed it is, (as Calvin makes the observation) the more means, the
greater mercies a people enjoy, the greater is their sin, and the greater shall
their punishment be, in case they do not walk answerably to them, and in some
measure worthy of them. Mark it, this is the Observation which this passage
naturally yields; Means and Mercies, not regarded, not improved, not
answered, are dreadful aggravations both of Sin and Judgment. For this, express
and full is that obvious Text, Mat. 11.20. where our Savior breaks forth
into a like Exprobration against those Cities which he had honored with his
presence and doctrine, as here he does against Jerusalem. Then (says the Text)
began he to upbraid the Cities wherein most of his mighty works were done,
because they repented not] verse 20. In the verses foregoing he had taxed the
general morosity and frowardness of that people, upon whom no means could work,
neither John's austerity nor his own Comitie; this he does verse. 16, 17, 18, 19.
But ^ow he comes more specially to deal with those particular places, where he
had been most conversant, taxing them as being most faulty of all the rest.
Their sin was greater, and so should their punishment be. So it follows,
verse. 21. Woe unto thee Chorazin, woe unto thee Bethsaida, for if the mighty
works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and Sidon, they would have
repented long ago in sackcloath and ashes,] Chorazin and Bethsaida, two Cities
upon the Lake of Gennezareth, where Christ conversed much, taught often,
wrought many miracles; yet they repented not, they were not thereby wrought
upon to embrace the Gospel. What follows? you have it in the next verse, v.
22. I say unto you, it shall be more tolerable for Tire and Sidon at the day of
judgment then for you.] At the day of general Judgment, there shall be
appointed unto men different measures of punishment. Now at that day, our
Savior gives them to take notice, that it would go worse with them, who had
rejected the Gospel, then with those that never heard of it, though they lived
more profanely then themselves did. and the like he charge against Capernaum
in the verses following. And thou Capernaum which art exalted unto heaven
(listed up above other places in this temporal condition, in regard of wealth
etc.) shall be brought down to hell] depressed, and brought to the lowest
degree of poverty aad misery. So Grotius (not amiss) expounds both these
expressions, looking upon them as Proverbial phrases; Ad astra tolli. Sublimi
feriens sydera vertice.
the one signifying the highest pitch of outward felicity, which is called a
lifting up to heaven; the other the lowest degree of misery, which is called a
casting down to hell. This the Prophet Isaiah speaking of Babylon, Isai. 14.
describes the change of her condition in the like langvage. How art thou
fallen from heaven, O Lucifer; verse 12. Thou have said in thine heart I will
ascend into heaven, I will exalt my self above the stars of God, verse 13. Yet
thou shall be brought down to hell, verse 15. And so Hanna in her song,
speaking of Gods various dispensations and dealings with the sons of men, she
says that he brings down to the grave (Sheol, (says the Original) ad
infernum, (to Hell) and lifts up, 1 Samuel 2.6. In a like sense says our
Savior here of Capernaum; though she was lift up to heaven, flourishing with
all kind of outward prosperity, being a great Port Town, (not unlike unto this
where we now are) famous for fishing, and other merchandise, yet she should be
brought down to hell, brought to extremity of misery. Which accordingly
afterward came to pass in the days of the Emperor Vespasian, who overran the
whole Country of Galilee, spoiling that place amongst others. And what was the
cause of this so sad a change? why, her not answering the means afforded her;
so it there follows, verse 24. For if the mighty works which have been done
in thee had been done in Sodom, it would have remained unto this day; (In all
likelihood they would have been converted thereby from their wicked ways, and
so have escaped that judgment;) But I say unto you it shall be more tolerable
for the land of Sodom in the day of Judgment, then for thee, verse 24. Sodom,
a place of monstrous and most flagitious wickedness, infamously famous for
those three things, Pride, fullness of Bread, and abundance of Idleness, Ezekiel.
16.49. besides many other horrid abominations which were therein, it being a
sink of uncleanness, insomuch that God made it a spectacle of vengeance to all
posterity, destroying it with fire and brimstone from heaven. Yet Capernaums
portion of judgment at that day should be greater then hers. And why so?
Inasmuch as she enjoyed those means which Sodom did not. True, there was a
righteous Lot in Sodom, whose Example might have had some influence upon them;
But in Capernaum was Christ himself preaching unto them, and cofirming his
doctrine by miracles. And this it was which aggravated Capernaums sin, and so
heightened her judgment.

Thus the more light, The more light the greater sin.
the more means a people sin against, the greater is their sin. This is that
our Savior says of the Jews, John 15.22. If I had not come and spoken unto
them, they had not had sin; that is, comparatively, their sin had been nothing
in comparison of what now it is. Express to this purpose are those two known
Texts of the Apostle to the Hebrews; the former Heb. 2.2, 3. where comparing
the times of the Law with those of the Gospel. If (says he) the word spoken by
Angels (the Law given upon mount Sina by the ministry of Angels, (as it is
commonly expounded) or any other message sent by the Angels (as some conceive
it) was steadfast (was of such force, and authority, that none who violated it
escaped unpunished) and every transgression and disobedience received a just
recompense of reward; How shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation,
which at the first began to be spoken by the Lord, and was confirmed unto us by
them that heard him,] that is, the doctrine of salvation, the Gospel, which is
(...), the word of Salvation, Acts 13.26. being (...), the way of Salvation,
Acts 16.17. bringing so great salvation as no other way can, even eternal
salvation; which was preached and published first by Christ himself, then by
his Apostles. This doctrine being of such consequence, and so clearly held
forth, it makes the sin of those who shall not hearken to it to be more
heinous then of those under the Law; for which they must expect an answerable
judgment. Consonant hereunto is that other place, Heb. 10.28, 29. He that
despised Moses his Law died without mercy (the crime being Capital. and so
declared by the Law, it was not in the power whether of King or Senate to
pardon it;) Of how much sorer punishment suppose ye shall be thought worthy,
who has trodden under foot the son of God, etc. and has done despite to the
Spirit of Grace? Thus sins against the Gospel are greater and more heinous then
those against the Law. The more light the more grace a man sins against, the
greater is his sin, and the greater shall his punishment be.

R: R. Grace abused a high contempt.
And it must needs be so as Calvin gives the reason of it,) inasmuch as here
is an addition of one sin which is greater then any of the rest, viz. Sacrilega
caelestis gratiae profanatio, a Sacrilegious profaning and abusing of the grace
of God. Of all Sins none more heinous, none so heinous as this. This is the
Attribute, which God is most tender of, his Grace; To have that slighted,
disregarded, trampled under foot by a contemptuous disrespect, this is a
heinous addition to all former sins and offenses. As suppose a Malefactor
standing guilty of some capital crime, and adjudged to dye, should so far
slight the grace and favor of his Prince, as to reject his pardon being
tendered to him, casting it away, and trampling it under his feet, so not
accepting the benefit of it, who but would look upon this as a high
aggravation of his former offenses, and adjudging him most worthy to die and
perish in that his wilful contempt, and refusal of mercy. Thus stands the
case. All the sons of men standing guilty before God by reason of Adams sin,
and their own, and so obnoxious unto eternal death, it has pleased God out of
his abundant grace and mercy to grant a pardon to all those who repenting of
their sins shall believe on the name of his Son. This pardon he holds forth
in the preaching of the Gospel. Now for any to slight this Gospel, and the
offer of grace and mercy in it, how can this be looked upon but as the highest
contempt, and greatest ingratitude, against the Majesty of God, and as a
dreadful addition to all other offenses, so calling for a proportionable weight
of Judgment? That it is so it cannot, (I presume) it will not be denied. Bring
we it home to our selves by way of Application. Applic.


Let that be directed only two ways, by way of Conviction, by way of
Exhortation.

Conviction, Reflect we upon our selves, Application to the nation in general.
Jerusalem and England pararelled. In respect of spiritual privileges.
we of this Nation, we of this place, in Ierusal^ms glass beholding our own
face; beholding our ingratitude, our sin, what mercies, what favors, whether
temporal, or spiritual, was Jerusalem blessed with which England has not been?
Was Jerusalem lift up to heaven in respect of Spiritual privileges, has not
England been so? were the Oracles of God committed unto them, and have they not
been so to us? was Christ clearly held forth unto them, and has he not been
so unto us in the preaching of the Gospel, even evidently set forth, and
crucified, before our eyes (as Paul tells his Galathians he was to them, Gal.
3). was Ierusalems light greater and clearer then that which shone upon other
Cities, and has not Englands light (I may speak it without flattery) out
shined the light of any other Nation in the world? was God pleased to send a
continued succession of Prophets and Apostles unto them, and has he not done
the like to us in this Nation, sent a succession of able and faithful
ministers to declare and make known his mind, and will to us? Thus has England
been exalted above other Nations in regard of special privileges.

To which also add temporal favors, Temporal favors.
which how many, how great? what nation under heaven might compare with England
upon that account? what peace, what plenty of all things? what tranquillity and
prosperity did England for many years together enjoy, to the wonder if not
envy of most other nations. Thus was England for a long time the favorite and
darling of heaven, as Jerusalem.

But now what return has she made of these mercies, these favors?
Unanswerable returns.
Is not that too like Ierusalems? Have we not generally been an ungratful and
rebellious people, as they were? A people that have not known the things which
belong to our peace. Temporal, and Eternal? A people which have not given that
intertainment to Christ and his Gospel, that he expected. and other nations
probably would have done? A people that have rather cast off the yoke of
Christ, not enduring his government, any Government that looks like his; And for
our temporal mercies, our peace, our plenty, have we not been even forfeited
with them? have we not waxed wanton by their Abusing our peace to the making of
us secure, settled upon our lees; abusing our plenty (as evil stomachs turn
good meats into ill humors,) turning it into pride, Luxury, riot, and Excess.
Thus has this nation under these long continued mercies been like unto a piece
of ground, which being overmanured and grown too lusty, runs wild, bringing
forth a crop of weeds. Thus has this abundance of mercies amongst us through
the abuse of them brought forth abundance of sins. Neither are we to this day
bettered by all those sharp rods, those severe corrections wherewith of late
years God has corrected us, but, Israel like, we even revolt more and more;
as it were hating to be reformed. Such is the requitals such is the return
which England (I speak as to the greatest part therein) has made unto her God.

And what an Aggravation of her sin is this? That any nation should thus deal
with their God, A great Aggravation of Englands sin.
to walk stubbornly and rebelliously against him, it is inexcusable; but that a
people so favored, so honored of God, as England has been, should do this,
this is a thing which God cannot but take more heynously at our hands, then at
others. So the Lord makes his complaint concerning Israel Isaiah 1.2, 3. I
have nourished and brought up children, and they have rebelled against me. The
ox knows his owner etc. But Israel does not know, my people does not
consider. And may not he take up the like complaint against England? God has
nourished and tendered us as children, yet we have rebelled against him; England
has not known, England has not considered. Now this he cannot but take worse
at our hands, then at the hands of any other nation. (...)! And thou O England,
that thou should do this that thou should make such a return to thy God,
for all his mercies and favors! This is an heinous aggravation of Englands sin.

And aggravating the sin, Threatening a proportionable judgment.
what can we expect but that it should also aggravate thy Judgment? So it did
Jerusalems here. Her sin being upon this account greater then the sin of any
other place, so was her Judgment (as the verses following set it forth.) No one
place that the hand of God fell so heavy upon, as it did upon Jerusalem. And
have not we of this nation just cause to fear the like; that in as much as our
sins have exceeded the sins of other nations, our judgments should exceed also.

And what is said of the Nation in general, Application to the Town of Yarmouth
in special.
let it be applied to this place in special. Upon which it cannot be denied,
but God has bestowed many singular mercies, both Spiritual and Temporal. Among
other, preserving us in the midst of this late fiery furnace, which has burnt
so hot in most parts of the nation; to this day continuing our peace and
liberty, not suffering the sword (though shaken over us) to break in upon us in
an hostile way, as it has don upon ma^y other Cities and Towns. Now shall we
still persist and go on in our sinful provocations, in sleighting of Ordinances,
profaning Sabbaths, abusing creatures, etc. what can we expect but that as our
sins upon this account shall be greater then the sins of other places, who
have not enjoyed the like mercies, so should our judgments be.

Exhortation. Exhortation. To endeavor an answerable return to mercies.
All of us be we excited to endeavor an answerable return to the mercies and
favors bestowed upon us. Public mercies, Private mercies; Spiritual,
Temporal, Take notice of all, and study to answer all: Looking upon these
differencing and distinguishing mercies, as so many obligations, and
Engagements upon us, binding us to duty above others, let it be our care to
walk answerably. In as much as God has been pleased to exalt and prefer us
above and before others, let it be our endeavor to go before others in all
grateful and exemplarie obedience. That so these blessings which through the
mercy and goodness of our God we have, and do yet in so great a measure enjoy,
may not be (what otherwise they will) as so many testimonies against us,
affording matter of a just Exprobration. Which is a sad thing, when God comes
to upbraid a people with his favors.

Mark it. That is Jerusalems case, the Text, to whom our Savior here speaks
(as both Calvin and Beza (taking it from Budaeus) conceive of it) not only by
way of Commiseration, A sad thing for God to upbraid a people with his favors.
but also of Exprobration. As pitying, so upbraiding them. Pitying them in
regard of the Calamity which he saw coming upon them, but withal upbraiding
them with the mercies and favors which God had bestowed upon them above
others, to which they had made a most unworthy return. Even thou!] Thou whom I
have done thus and thus for; thou for whom I have done more then for any other
place upon earth, O, it is a sad thing when God shall come thus to upbraid a
people with his favors.

A thing which he is not ready and forward to do. So much we may learn from St.
James. A thing which he is not ready to do.
Jam. 1.5. If any man lack wisdom, let him ask it of God, who gives
liberally, and upbraideth not; viz. those who receiving his blessings
thankfully, endeavor to make a right use of them. But as for those who, being
ungrateful for them, shall not walk in measure worthy of them, them he will
upbraid, So he often does ungrateful Israel; as elsewhere, so Isaiah 5.1, 2.
where comparing Israel to a vineyard, Yet being provoked by ingratitude he
will do it.
he reckons up what offices he had done to it, in fencing, and planting, and
mannuring of it, etc. accommodating it with all necessaries and conveniences.
And this he does by way of exprobration, upbraiding them with those favors for
which they had made so ill a requital. And the like again Jer. 2.5. Thus says
the Lord, what iniquity have your fathers found in me? etc. Neither said they
where is the Lord that brought us up out of the land of Egypt; that led us
through the wilderness. And so he goes on, reckoning up the many favors he
had done for that Nation, which he does in an upbraiding way; inasmuch as they
had showed themselves so ungrateful and forgetful as they had done. And the
like does our Savior to those Cities in the Text forenamed, Mat. 11.20. (...),
He began to upbraid them. Be thankful for, and walk worthy of public mercies.
O take we heed that we do not give God just cause to do the like by us. And
therefore what special mercies and favors God is pleased to bestow upon us,
take notice of them, be thankful for them, endeavor to walk worthy of them.
This do we for public.

And this do we for private mercies. Private mercies.
Is it so that God is pleased to bless any of us above other of our brethren in
any kind. Be it in our Bodies with health and strength; In our Estates, with
larger portions of this worlds goods, advancing us above the common rank; In
our minds, enriching us with inward gifts and indowments of wit, wisdom,
knowledge, etc. O take we heed that these be not a matter of exprobration to us;
that by our abusing of them, not improving them, not walking worthy of them, we
do not give God just cause to upbraid us with them. Considering that in this
case every of these mercies will be as so many several aggravations of our
ingratitude. This is that which the Lord by his Prophet Nathan tells King David,
2 Samuel 12.7, 8. Where reckoning up the many favors he had done, and was ready
to do for him; how he had delivered him out of the hand of Saul, how be had set
him upon the Throne of Israel, giving him his Masters House and Wives, and the
House of Israel and of Judah. And (says he) if that had been too little, I
would moreover have given unto thee such and such things; then he comes to
expostulate the matter with him, why he should so deal by his God as he had
done. Wherefore have thou despised the Commandment of the Lord, to do evil in
his sight? Thus God takes the sins of his favorites more unkindly then the
sins of any other. And therefore, is it so that God has indeared any of us to
himself by any special favors, wherein he has preferred us before others, let
us be so much the more watchful and careful over our walkings, that so he may
never take up the like complaint against us, as our Savior here does against
Jerusalem; O that thou, even thou should do thus and thus! This it was that
David took most heinously, that his favorites and familiars should prove
treacherous to him, Psalm. 41.9. Yea, mine own familiar friend, in whom I
trusted, which did eat of my bread, has lift up his heel against me.] Some of
his Courtiers and friends. Which our Savior applies unto Judas's dealing with
himself. Joh. 13.18. He that eats bread with me has lift up his heel against
me.] This did exceedingly aggravate Judas's sin. Had some of the Scribes or
Pharisees done what he did, it had been no strange thing. But that Judas should
do it; one whom Christ had so far honored as to admit him to so near an
attendance upon his person, to make him one of his Privy Counsel (as it were)
this highly aggravated his offense. O take heed lest the like aggravation lie
against any of us. And therefore, the more gracious God has been or shall be to
any of us, let us be the more grateful, the more watchful, the more careful to
walk worthy of his mercies. I have done with the former of these Circumstances,
these Aggravations.

Second Aggravation, from the time.
Come we now to the latter, which is taken from the Time, and the Season, [In
this thy day.]

Q. And what is here meant by Jerusalems day?

The word (Day) explained.
A. Day in Scripture it has diverse senses and significations. Literally and
properly we meet with a Natural day, and an Artificial day. The one consisting
of twenty four hours, the Suns Revolution; the other of the time of light, from
morning to evening. Both which we find in that one verse, Genesis 1.5. And God
called the light day, and the darkness he called night. And the evening and the
morning were the first day. By the first understanding the Artificial day, by
the latter the Natural. But to let these pass as nothing to our purpose.

Tropically and improperly the word is diversely used.

1. Sometimes for the time of man's life, that space which he lives upon earth.
Your father Abraham rejoiced to see my day (says our Savior to the Jews) John
8.56. the time of my manifestation in the flesh, and abode upon earth. I must
work the work of him that sent me whilst is day, John 9.4. that is, whilst I
live here upon earth.

2. Sometimes it denotes the time of grace under the Gospel. So the Apostle is
conceived to use the word Romans 13.12. where he says, The night is far spent,
the day is at hand.] The night, the time of the Law, which was a time of
darkness and Ignorance, wherein spiritual and heavenly mysteries were all
clouded and veiled under shadows and figures. In opposition thereunto the time
of the Gospel is called, the Day, in regard of the clear manifestation of the
grace of God, and of the mystery of salvation to all sorts, not only to Jews
but Gentiles, And so that other Text of the same Apostle is looked upon, 1
These. 5.5. Ye are the children of the day; living in Gospel times. As also that
other prophetical Text, Heb. 4.7. To day if ye will hear his voice, (says
David speaking of the time of the Gospel, as it is there expounded.)

3. Sometimes it denotes any special opportunity, apt and proper season for any
transaction. So that forenamed Text may be understood, John 9.4. I must work
whilst it is day; that is, whilst I have opportunity. And so that other. To
day if ye will hear his voice; whilst the time and season of grace lasts,
whilst salvation is offered.

4. And lastly, by Day sometimes we are to understand a set time determined and
appointed by God for some special purpose. In this sense we find the word
frequently used by the Prophets.

Jerusalems Day, what, the time of special grace.
And in these two last senses understand we the word here in the Text.
Jerusalems Day was the time destinated and foreappointed by God, and foretold
by the Prophets, wherein the light of the Gospel should shine forth unto her,
and that more clearly then ever heretofore, and the offer of grace and mercy
should be held forth unto her after a special manner. Of this day, this time,
the Prophets make frequent mention. As the Prophet Isai. chap. 60.1. Arise,
shine (or be enlightened) for thy light is come, and the glory of the Lord is
risen upon thee. So Zachary 9.9. Rejoice greatly O daughter of Sion, for thy
King comes unto thee. Both which had their accomplishment in the coming of
Christ in the flesh; and particularly in his coming to Jerusalem at this time,
in this manner, presenting himself to it as a King. So he himself applies the
latter of these Texts, Matthew. 21.4, 5. And hereupon is this here called
Jerusalems day; the day that had been so often foretold; the time wherein God
did offer grace and mercy to her after a more special manner then ever he had
done heretofore. Before he had often made offers of that kind unto her (as to
the whole Nation of the Jews) by sending his Prophets to her. But now he does
it by his Son. So our Savior sets it forth in that known parable of the
Vineyard, Matthew. 21.33, etc. A certain man planted a vineyard.] This vineyard
was the Church of the Jews (Isaiah 5.1.) whom God took to be a peculiar people
to himself, performing like offices thereunto that the Husbandman would do to
his vineyard. Being thus planted he let it forth to husbandmen, and went
himself into a far Country;] God seemed to leave that Church wholly to the
care of the Priests. In process of time he sends his servants to the
husbandmen, that they might receive the fruits thereof, verse 34.] God sends
his Prophets to this Church, whom (by the Parable goes on) they beat and slew,
verse. 35. So they did the former Prophets many of them. Again he sent other
servants, more then the first, and they did unto them likewise, verse 36. Before
the Captivity he sent more Prophets to them then formerly, who found no better
entertainment then the former. But last of all he sent unto them his son, verse
37. God the Father sends his Son Christ into the world, with a special message
unto the Jews, to require from them the fruits of all that grace and favor
which had been shown to them. And this was Jerusalems day. The time of special
grace and mercy offered unto them after a special manner. and that by Christ
himself, wherein she had a special opportunity tendered unto her, if she had
but had the wisdom to accept it, to lay hold of it, and make use of it
accordingly. Even the time of her visitation, as the 44th verse after the Text
explains it.

But, hinc illae lachrymae, this was a matter of just lamentation. The day was
come, and even now spent, but Jerusalem had not an eye to see it, a heart to
make use of it. And this i^ is which our Savior here bewailes in them, and
exprobrates to them; pities them for, and upbraids them with. O if thou, even
thou had known, at least in this thy day, the things which belong unto thy
peace.]

At least] what it here imports.
At least] There is yet a further Emphasis in that Interjection. (...). Et
quidem in hac die tua (says the vulgar) even in this thy day. Hoc saltem tuo
die (says Beza, whom our Translations follow) At least in this thy day] that
is; though thou have along time stood it out, refusing and rejecting many
offers of grace, yet O that at the length thou were wise! Or [If at least] If
after that thou have slain so many Prophets, so many servants of mine, which
have been sent unto thee with conditions of peace, yet thou would receive me
their Master, harkening to the message which I bring. Or, [at least] If after
all the unkind and ungrateful repulses which my self has hitherto met with,
by thy obstinate rejecting of my Person and Doctrine, yet if now at the length
in this my last Expedition, the last journey that ever I shall make unto thee,
the last time of asking, now at the day of grace and salvation as to thee is
expiring. If now at last thou might yet know etc. Thus our Savior here
makes use of this circumstance as a further aggravation both of his sorrow,
and their sin, their stupidity and obstinacy; that in this day of grace,
wherein God was pleased to make such a gracious offer of mercy to them, they
should yet stand it out to the last, so neglecting and letting slip the present
opportunity, (as they had done many other) by the embracing whereof they might
yet have been happy.

So sad a thing it is for a people not to take notice of the seasons of grace
and mercy vouchsafed unto them, Obs.
Not to take notice of the seasons of grace, a sad thing.
for their spiritual and temporal felicity and welfare, so as to make a wise
use and improvement of them. This our Savior here so sadly lamenteth in
Jerusalem. And this we shall find the Lord elsewhere sadly complaining of in
this people, the people of the Jews. As Jeremy 8.7. Yea the storke in the
heavens knows her appointed times, and the turtle, and the crane, and the
swallow observes the time of their coming, but my people know not the judgments
of the Lord.] Those poor creatures, (with many other) merely by a natural
instinct, they observe the times and seasons of the year, and so order their
going and coming accordingly; but that people knew not the judgment of the
Lord, they took no notice of the seasons of mercy and judgment; they saw not
the judgments of God hovering over their heads, that so they might use timely
means for the diverting of them. And this the Lord there charge upon them as
gross stupidity. And the like regardlesness of seasons and opportunities, and
the workings and dispensations of Providence, he elsewhere complains of against
them, for by the same Prophet, Jer. 5.4. Surely these are poor, they are
foolish, for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment o^ of their
God. And by the Prophet Isaiah the like, Isai. 5.11, 12. Where he denounces a
woe upon that people for not regarding the wor^ of the Lord; not considering
the operation of hi^ hands; they had no regard of providential dispensations;
no regard of times and seasons whether of mercy or judgment. This is a gros^
and deplorable stupidity; a just ground both of Lamentation and Exprobration.
This is the thing which our Savior upbraideth the Pharisees and Sadduces with.
They were curious observers of times and seasons in natural things, but in
spiritual and heavenly they were altogether stupid. So he tells them, Matthew.
16.2, 3. When it is evening ye say it will be fair weather, because the sky is
red, etc.] They were very observant of the usual prognostics of fair or foul
weather, they could discern the face of the sky. But (says he) can ye not
discern the signs of the times.] they were not so wise as to take notice of the
choicest times and seasons, such as that then was, being the time of the
Messiah his coming unto them. So Saint Luke has it (as the Syriack also
renders that of Saint Matthew) Luke 12.56. How is it that ye do not discern
this time?] This time of grace, wherein the promised Messia comes unto you,
whom you professed to have so long looked and waited for; and which the Prophets
have so clearly pointed out to you, and is now evidenced unto you by so many
manifest signs and tokens, as were you not wilfully blind, you could not but
see this to be that time. This he charge them with, as gross stupiditie. And
so indeed it is, when men shall not take notice of the accepted time, the day
of salvation; not see what belongs to their peace in their day, in the times
and seasons of Grace which God vouchsafes unto them.

Especially when God is pleased to manifest and make known his mind and will
to them after a more clear and evident manner. Especially when more clearly
held forth.
That was Jerusalems case here in the Text. God had made known to them the
things belonging to their peace formerly; he had sent his Prophets to them from
time to time for that purpose; but now he did it more clearly, by sending his
Son to speak to them, to tender himself to them in person. Now this rendered
their neglect and contempt a great deal more heinous and inexcusable; that even
in this their day they should not know, etc. For them to have been ignorant
hereof at any time heretofore under the Law, had been inexcusable, but much
more under the Gospel. Even as for men to stumble in the twilight, it argues
heedlesnesse; but much more to stumble at noonday (as the Prophet speaks of
Israel in another sense, Isa. 59.10). Thus where God is pleased to afford men
but a little light, (such as that was under the Law, which Saint Peter
compares to a Candle, a Light shinning in a dark place (as that place is by
some expounded) 2 Pet. 1.19.) for men not to give heed unto that light, and
take notice of the mind of God which is held forth by it, is a great neglect;
but when the day star arises, a clear light breaks forth, such as
Gospel Light is; now for men to shut their eyes against the light, or not to
make use of it by walking answerably to it, this is an high contempt, of which
Calvin here says rightly, Contemptum manet severior vindicta; it has a
greater vengeance waiting upon it, then if it were a simple neglect. That it is
so, I presume, it will not be questioned. Bring we it home by way of
Application, which I shall direct (as formerly) only by way of Conviction and
Exhortation. Applic.


Use 1. A just Exprobation to many.
First by way of Conviction, how many are there who lie open to this just
Exprobration? They have not known, they do not know, even in this their day,
the things that belong to their peace. Not to speak of others; bring we it home
to our selves, and see whether the charge do not lie too justly against many of
us. None of us but have had our Day, a day of grace and salvation, a time which
God has allotted unto us to look out for our spiritual and eternal welfare;
which to some of us has been a Summers-day, a long day. And not only a long,
but a clear day wherein God has vouchsafed to us the means of grace and
salvation in a comfortable manner, causing the light of his truth to shine
forth most clearly unto us. And yet how many of us are there of whom it may be
too truly said, That yet even in this our day we have not known the things
which belong unto our peace, to our eternal peace and happiness. But still we
remain in our natural blindness, and ignorance, and unbelief having made
little or no improvement of these precious times and means.

Nay, notwithstanding God has come unto some of us after a more special
manner, come near unto us in a more clear manifestation of his Will to us by
some special providence, visiting us with special mercies, or special
chastisements, thereby calling us unto Repentance, yet have we not known the
time of our visitation.

Now what stupiditie, what blindness, what regardlesnesse, what wretchlesnesse
is this? A heavy aggravation of our sin for present, and (if not timously
prevented) of our judgment for future. So does many a soul in hell at this day
find and feel it; over whom (if it would any ways profit or advantage them)
we might justly weep and lament, as our Savior does herein the Text; O! if
they had known in their day the things which belonged unto their peace, how
happy, how blessed might they have been? But now how wretched, how miserable?
these things being now for ever hid from their eyes. Time was when they had
their Day, they had their time of grace, wherein they injoied the means of
salvation, so as had they but had the wisdom to have made use of them; happy,
happy had they been to all eternity. But letting slip that time, neglecting
those means, trifling away, that Day, now the night is come upon them, even a
night of blackness and darkness, an everlasting night, so as the Sun shall
never rise unto them again; they are put into a hopeless, helpless and
remediless condition. Not making use of the light whilst they injoied it, they
are now (as Saint Peter says of the Apostate Angels, 2 Pet. 2 4. Cast down to
Hell, and delivered into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto judgment.
Such is their condition now.

Use 2. All exhorted to know what belongs to their happiness, in their day.
Which that it may never be ours, give way to a word of Exhortation. Every of us
suffer our selves to be awakened and stirred up to take notice of our day, and
so to take notice of it, that therein we may see and know the things which
belong unto our peace, to our welfare and happiness, and that both temporal
and eternal.

1. Temporal hapiness of the Nation.
1. For our Temporal happiness. O! that we and all others in this Nation were
but yet so wise, as in this our day to know the things belonging thereunto; so
to know them as that we might complie with them.

What belongs thereunto.
Q. But here (it may be) some of you will be ready to ask me, What are these
things?

A. A Question not unuseful. In the resolution whereof I shall give you no
other directions then what the Text it self gives me the hint of.

1. Seek Peace it self; 1. Seek peace it self.
I mean external peace. It is not for nothing (as I told you) that Peace is
here, and so often elsewhere in phrase of Scripture, put for prosperity and
happiness. Peace, as in it self it is one of the chief blessings upon earth,
one chief part of this external happiness, so it is a thing which does much
conduce to the completing of it. As War makes a people miserable; so Peace
happy, making them flourish in all kind of outward blessings. And upon this
account seek we after this Peace, making this our Motto, Pacem te poscimus
omnes; all of us seriously desiring and indeavoring after peace.

1. Civil Peace; the Peace of the State. 1. Civil peace
It is the Prophet Jeremies Counsel to the Captives in Babylon, that they
should seek the peace thereof, Jer. 29.7. Seek the peace of the City, whither
I have caused you to be carried away Captives, and pray unto the Lord for it;
for in the peace thereof shall ye have peace. And the like do we for Englands
Pray for the Peace of it. Upon that depends her welfare and happiness.
Divisions hastened Jerusalem ruin. O! pray that Englands divisions may not do
the like to her. Seek the peace of the State, Civil peace.

2. And as Civil, so Ecclesiastical, 2. Ecclesiastical peace.
the peace of the Church, Pray for the peace of Jerusalem. Psalm. 122.6. Peace
be within the walls, and prosperity within thy palaces, ver. 7. Upon
Jerusalems peace depended the peace of the whole Nation of the Jews. And
surely upon the Churches peace in a great measure depends the peace of this
Nation. And therefore seek after this peace; seek it from God; being earnest
with him that he would heal our breaches, giving one heart and way to his
people. And promote it by all holy ways and means. But I shall not dwell upon
this which I do but meet with by the by, taking the hint from the word in the
Text. For the procuring the welfare of this Nation, seek Peace it self.

2. Embrace the Gospel of Peace.
2. And (Secondly) be we sons of Peace. It is the direction which our Savior
gives to his Disciples when he sent them forth to preach the Gospel (in that
forecited Text) Luke 10.5, 6. Into whatsoever house ye enter, first say,
Peace be to this house. And if the Son of peace be there, your peace shall rest
upon it.] The Son of peace, (...), that is, (as before I have explained it)
such persons as were disposed to receive and embrace the Doctrine of Peace, the
Doctrine of the Gospel; where they met with such persons, there their Peace
should rest; all the happiness which they had wished to them, should come upon
them. Now would we in like manner that that peace which is to be wished unto
this Nation might thus rest upon it; be we in this sense (...), Sons of Peace,
readily embracing this Doctrine of peace, the Gospel. This it was (as I have
shown you) which above all other things belonged to Jerusalems peace, her
receiving of Christ and his Gospel. Had she but done this, happy had she been.
That England may be so, have we a regard unto this. In this our day make much
of God's Religion, make much of the Gospel, which as yet through the goodness
of God is continued unto us. Let that at the length find such entertainment
amongst us as it deserves. Let the Messengers thereof be received. Let their
feet be accounted (as they are said to be, Isa. 52.7.) Beautiful, which bring
good tidings, which publish peace. This do the Ministers of Jesus Christ, who
are Messengers of peace, bringing those glad tidings of peace and
reconciliation with God through Christ, publishing salvation O! let their feet
be beautiful. Let their persons be welcome, much more their message. While you
receive them into your houses, receive that into your hearts; showing forth the
power of it in your lives and conversations, by so walking as becomes the
Gospel. In this way seek we the External peace, welfare and happiness of this
Nation.

However, in this our day, Use 3. Spiritual and Eternal Peace to be sought
above all, and that whilst the Day of Grace lasts.
seek we our own peace, Eternal peace; being all of us wise for our selves,
so wise as in this our day, to know what belongs to our peace; the peace and
happiness of our own souls, our eternal salvation. As yet through the mercy
and goodness of God our day is continued to us. The day of our lives. Whereas
the Sun is set upon many others before our eyes: every day it goes down upon
some or other of our brethren, our Relation, our friends, our associates, and
Companions. It is night with them. It is yet day with us. And as the day of our
lives, so the day of grace and salvation is yet continued to us; Yet does the
Sun of righteousness stand over our heads; yet does the light of the Gospel
shine forth unto us; yet is the Golden scepter of grace and salvation held
forth unto us; our day is yet continued. Oh that in this our day, whilst the
means of grace are continued unto us, and we to the means, we might all of us
see and know the things which belong unto our peace. Which word of Exhortation
I desire it may come home to every soul that hears it. It may be (and I
fear it is so,) some and many of us have a long time shut our eyes against the
light; we have not seen; we do not to this day see these things which do so
n^arly concern us: How many offers of grace and mercy have we slighted and
rejected? God has offered conditions of peace to us, entreating, beseeching us
by his Ministers to be reconciled unto him; striving with us by mercies, by
chastisements, by word, by the secret motions of his own Spirit. And yet for
all this we still stand out against him, harden our hearts against him, so as
we will not receive Jesus Christ upon Gospel terms, as our Savior and Lord.
Now unto all such be it spoken in the language of the text. Oh that you even
you, at least in this your day, did but know the things which belong unto your
peace! How ever you have most rebelliously and ingratefully withstood many
off^rs of grace, yet that now at the length, whilst this day of grace last's,
before the Sun set upon you, and your eyes be closed up with everlasting
darkness, you would come in and accept of these offers of grace, not standing
out any longer.

To that end consider, first, Motives:
that the time of your life, and of Gods grace, is but a day. 1. The time of
man's life and Ggds grace but a day.
[This your day]. A day is of no long continuance, specially a winters day. A
few hours the Sun is above the Horizon, but then it sets, and leaves a
sable darkness upon the face of the earth. Such is the life of man, a day; and
that (to make the best of it) a winters day; stormy and short. Brethren the
time is short (says the Apostle, speaking of the time of man's life upon earth)
1 Cor 7.29. How short who knows? oftimes does the Sunn go down upon man
before it be well up. Oh therefore now up and be doing? The day is a time for
Action, the night for rest. Man goes forth unto his work, and to his labor
until the evening, Psalm. 104:23. And so is the day of this life. This is the
time for the working out of our salvation. And therefore now set upon this
work. I must work the works of him that sent me whilst it is day (says our
Savior in that John 9.4.), the night comes when no man can work. The night of
death. There is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom in the grave,
whither thou go (says the Preacher) Eccles. 9.10. And therefore (as he
there makes the use of it.) whatsoever thy hand finds to do, do it with thy
might. Thus do we the work of the particular calling, much more of the
general; the working out of our salvation, the making of our Calling and
Election sure. This do we? and that in this our day. To day if you will hear
his voice, harden not your hearts, whilst the day of life, and the day of
grace lasts; Behold now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation,
(says the Apostle to his Corinthians) 2 Cor. 6.2. And therefore (as he there
presses it upon them ver. 1. Let not us receive the grace of God in vain. This
do they who enjoy the outward means of salvation, but are not bettered by
them; like the earth which receives the seed which is cast into it by the hand
of the Husbandman, and drinks in the former and latter rain, and yet remains
barren; Let not us so receive the grace of God tendered and held forth unto us
in the preaching of the Gospel. But let it into our hearts, that taking root
there it may bring forth Gospel-fruits in our lives. And this do we now; Now
whilst it is called to day. Remembering that the time of grace, and of our
life, is but a day.

2. Our Day.
2. And (secondly) remember that this is our day. [In this thy day.] This was
Jerusalems day, the Jews day wherein grace and mercy was offered unto them.
The next was the Gentiles day; or the next was Gods day, wherein he would visit
them after another manner, in judgment, not in mercy. And therefore says our
Savior here. Oh if at least in this thy day! And hear we him speaking the like
to every of us this day. Oh that you in this your day! The time of this life is
our day; A day that has no morrow. And the time of grace is our day. Shall we
let slip this day, then expect we God's day, even that diem ultionem, the day
of vengeance. Such days our Savior foretells were coming upon the Jews,
Luke 21.22. These be the days of vengeance; speaking of the time of Jerusalems
destruction, wherein the Lord would severely revenge all those indignities
offered to his Son. And such days of vengeance God has for all obstinate
sinners. It may be in this life: If not, yet at that last day, which will be a
day of blackness and darkness, a day of wrath and revelation of the righteous
judgment of God. Now knowing the terror of that day, Oh! that all of us would
be persuaded now in this our day to look out, to take notice of what belongs to
our peace and comfort at that day.

This is our day, 3. But one day.
a time allotted us by God for this purpose, to husband for the good of our
souls. And 3ly this is but one day. As for the Labouring-man he has many days
allowed him to do his work in. And so, if he have lost one, he may yet recover
it, get it up again at another time. But as for us, we have but one day. If
that day be past, there is no recovery. Soles occidere and redire possunt; The
Sunn sets and rises again upon the earth. But if the Sunn of our life, and
the Sun of God's grace be once set upon us, never look that it should rise upon
us again. O! therefore, in the fear of God, be we all of us awakened, and
stirred up, that we may not sleep nor trifle away this our day, either in doing
of nothing, or that which is worse, Remember that upon this our day depends our
Eternity. And therefore now whilst it is called to day, all of us look out to
what belongs to our eternal peace. Behold, at this day the Lord Jesus is
riding in triumph in the midst of his Ordinances, as here he did to Jerusalem,
in the midst of his Apostles and Disciples; O that there were such a heart in
every of us! that we might now Lift up, set open those everlasting doors, the
doors of our souls that this King of Glory might enter in; that the Lord Jesus
might come and take a full possession of all our hearts, so as to rule thereby
his Word and Spirit. Then quam faelices and beati, how blessed and happy shall
we be? Such use make we of this General day, this day of Grace.

Particular days in the general day.
Wherein there are also particular days, particular times and seasons, in which
Christ comes unto men (as here he did to Jerusalem), offering himself to them
after a more special manner. This is that which he tells the Laodicean Angel.
Rev. 3.20. Behold I stand at the door and knock. So he does at the doors of
men's Consciences, where he knocks both by Outward means, by his Word, by
mercies and Chastisements, every of which is a knock at this door; and by
inward motions of his Spirit. Now is it so that Jesus Christ thus knocks at
any of our hearts, at this, or at any other time; let us forthwith open unto
him. That is the meaning of every such knock. It is the voice of my beloved
that knocks (says the Spouse) saying open unto me, Cant. 5.2. And this do
we, receiving him into our hearts by Faith, that he may dwell theare as a
Savior and a Lord. And this do we forthwith. Not knowing but this may be the
last knock (as this was the last time that ever our Savior knocked at
Jerusalem's gates): which if it be and shall be slighted, then what remains
but a just retaliation, even that which we meet with Luke: 13, 25. That the
door being shut, we should stand without and knock, receiving no other Answer
but that which is there returned, I know ye not, whence ye are. Or that which
we find in the close of the Text, that the things which belong to our peace
should be from thenceforth hid from our eyes. So it follows.

But now they are hid from thine eyes]. Jerusalems doom.
In which words we have Jerusalem's Doom, or Judgment, (the spiritual part of
it, for that only I intend to deal with). A Judgment answearing to their sin.
Their Sin was, that they had not seen, they would not, when they might; Their
judgment is, that as they did not, so should not see what they might have done,
But now they are hid from thine eyes]

Q. But what was thus hid?

Vide Gerhardi Harmon. ad loc.
A. (...). It is hidden. A verb of the Singular number; admitting (say some)
of a twofold reference. Either to what went before, or what follows after.

Judgment hidden from Jerusalems eyes.
1. To what follows after. So it is looked upon by some, as relating to what
our Savior in the subsequent verses foretells concerning the final
destruction and desolation of Jerusalem. The days shall come upon thee, etc.]
This was hid from their eyes. A truth. It was so, and that through their
incredulity. Often had they heard the judgments of God denounced against them,
as by the Prophets, so by Christ himself, but they gave no credit to what they
heard. Their eyes being blinded with their present temporal prosperity, and
with the spiritual privileges which they then enjoying, looked upon as intailed
upon them and their posterity, they were ready rather to make a mock of all
threatenings of that nature. Flattering themselves, even as Babylon is said to
do, Isa. 47.8. which said in her heart, I am, and none else besides me (she was
a Nonsuch), I shall not sit as a Widow, neither shall I know the loss of
Children. Thus did Jerusalem; what ever was told her, by whomsoever, yet she
did not, she would not believe that ever such a change should happen unto her.
This was hid from her eyes. And even this was a sad thing, deserving to be
lamented over, in as much as hereby their condition was rendered the more
desperate. But I shall not insist upon this.

2. Things belonging to Jerusalems happiness hid from her eyes.
More properly these words are conceived to look backwards, relating to what
went before. And so much those particles do intimate unto us; [But now], as
looking back to the words precedent. If thou had known, even thou, at least
in this thy day the things which belong to thy peace? But now they are hid from
thine eyes; viz. the things themselves, or the knowledge of those things.

Q. But how is this here said to be hid from their eyes?

A. Why, it was so for the Present, And that both for the present and future.
and it was so for the future. For the present, they did not see it; for the
future, they should not see it.

Q. But how came it thus to be hid?

A. Hereof a double ground or Reason may be assigned.

1. Their own wilfulness 2. The ground thereof double.
God's righteous judgment. Through the former it was, that they did not see,
and through the latter it was they should not see what belonged to their peace.
Upon these two I shall insist severally.

1. This was hid from their eyes, 1. Their own wilfulness.
through their own wilfulness. They would not see what belonged to their
peace, their temporal and eternal happiness. Notwithstanding that it had been
clearly revealed and held forth unto them, yet they shut their eyes against the
Light. This is that which our Savior charge upon this people, the people of
the Jews in that known place, Joh. 3.19. Light is come into the world, but men
loved darkness rather then light. So was it with the generality of that
Nation. Christ, who was the light of the world, he was come into the world, and
in particular come unto them, declaring and making known to them what belonged
to their peace. But they loved darkness, the darkness of sin and ignorance,
preferring it before the heavenly light of Divine Truth, which shone forth unto
them. Such was their obstinacy, that they even closed their eyes, and would
not see. So our Savior himself sets it forth, Mat. 13.14. where citing the
prophecy of the Prophet Isaiah, he shows how it was verified in that people
of the Jews in his time. In them (says he) is fulfilled the prophecy of the
prophet Isaias, which says, Behold, hearing ye shall hear, and shall not
understand; and seeing ye shall see, and shall not perceive. (though they
daily heard the Word, and saw the Works of Christ with their bodily ears and
eyes, yet they did not believe him, or in him). How so? The reason follows in
the next verse. For this peoples heart is waxed gross, and their ears are dull
of hearing, and their eyes they have closed; lest they should at any time see
with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand with their hearts,
etc. Such was the wilful obstinacy of that people, that they even stopped
their ears against the Word of Christ, and closed their eyes against his Works,
they would not see what belonged to their peace; and in this way it came to be
hid from their eyes. And this our Savior here takes up as a just matter of
Lamentation to him, and Exprobration to them; bewailing them for it, and
upbraiding them with it.

And so it is, Obs. Wilful ignorance asad and sinful thing.
Wilful ignorance is a matter of just Lamentation, and Exprobration to a
people. So our Savior here takes notice of it in Jerusalem. But now these
things are hid from thine eye. Hoc non dicitur ad levandam Hierosolymae culpam
(says Calvin upon it.) our Savior does not speak this any ways to excuse,
or ex^enuate Jerusalem's fault, but to aggravate and highten it. Such is
wilful and affected ignorance. True indeed, as for simple ignorance, where men
are ignorant through the want of the means of knowledge, that excuses a
tanto, in part. The servant which not knowing his Masters will, did commit
things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes (says our Savior
in the Parable) Luke 12.48. In as much as he should have known it, and might
have known it, had he enquired after it, (which he ought to have done,)
therefore his ignorance does not wholly excuse him, yet being an extenuation of
his fault, it is so also of his punishment. Simple ignorance of the mind and
will of God as concerning what we do or believe, is no just plea for any, no
just excuse, in as much as they are by duty bound to know it, and might know
more of it then they do, were they not wanting in the inquiry after it. But
wilful affected ignorance, when men refuse to know, close their eyes against
the light, and stop their ears against instruction, shutting it out of their
souls, this is an high aggravation of the sin and punishment of those that are
guilty of it.

R. And well may it so be looked upon, in as much as it is not a mere neglect,
R. Being a contempt against God.
but carries a contempt with it. Now we know wi^h what an eye Contempts are
looked upon in the Courts of men upon earth. When men refus^ to take notice of
their Orders and decrees, this is highly taken as being an affr^nt to the
Court, and the offenders are severe^y pro^eeded against. And so is it in the
Court of heaven; when men shall refuse to take notice of the mind and will of
God clearly intimated unto them, this being a contempt, an affront to heaven,
God cannot but take it highly at the hands of those that are guilty of it, and
make them know that he does so. So much we have fully expressed in those words
of Wisdom, Prove: 1.24. Because I have called and ye have refused etc. ye have
set at naught all my counsel, and would none of my rep^oof; I will laugh at
your calamity etc. And again verse. 29, For that they hated knowledge etc.
Therefore shall they eat the fruit of their own ways etc.] Of such dangerous
and desparate consequence, is it to shut out any beam of divine light, out of
the soul, To close the eyes against Gospel Light a-high contempt.
to stop the ear against any word of God.

Specially when men shall close their eyes against Gospel Light, stop their
ears against the word of life, the word of grace and salvation. This was
Jerusalems case here. She did not, she would not know the things belonging to
her eternal peace, notwithstanding he who was the Pr^nce and Lord of peace, the
great Peacemaker, the Son of God himself came to preach peace unto them, to
show them what it was that was of so great concernment to them, yet they would
not hearken to him. And by reason hereof these things were now hid from their
eyes. And upon this account the Lord Jesus, as a tender hearted Savior, here
so passionatly weepeth over them. And surely of all things that can happen unto
man upon earth, there is no one thing more deplorable then this, when men are
thus wilfully blind, obstinately ignorant.

And (to make some Application of this Branch) Is not this the case of too many
among our selves at this day. Applica. Too many among our selves guilty hereof.
Alas, how many such poor ignorant souls are every where to be found? Men and
women willingly and wilfully ignorant of what concerns their eternal peace.
They cannot say it is for want of light that the are blind; that they do not
see. No, the light of the Gospel has for a long time shone forth unto them.
They have been born and brought up in Gospel Times and places; where they have
enjoyed the means of grace and salvation in a plentiful manner: So as in this
respect they may be called Children of the light, and Children of the day. And
yet for all that they walk in darkness; the things which belong unto their
eternal peace are hid from their eyes. They do not see, because they will not
see. They have no desire to be acquainted with the myste^ie of salvation; and
so continue strangers to it. A most deplorable state and condition.

So let it be looked upon by others; by those whose eyes God has opened to see
what they do not. A thing to be lamented by others.
Whil st they see these things hid from them which God has revealed to
themselves, let them, (blessing God for this his free grace which has caused
them thus to differ) in imitation of their blessed Saviors pity and
compassionate this their wilful obstinacy and blindness. This we may find the
Lord sometimes sadly bemoaning in this his people, the people of the Jews, Jer.
4.22. my people is foollish, they have not known me; they are sortish children,
and they have no understanding. And the like we may hear the Prophet doing in
the Chapter following, Jer. 5. where complaining of the incorrigiblenesse of
that people (the generality of them) under the Judgment of God; how
notwithstanding God has stricken them yet they were not sensible, they had
made their face harder then a Rock, (as he speaks ver. 3.) he then bemoaneth
and pittieth this their condition in the next verse, Therefore I said surely
these are poor, they are foolish etc.] of all folly none like this; when men
do (as it were) sanis insanire, they are wittingly mad or fool^sh. They will
not see what belongs to their peace. O pity we them that are in this
condition!

And O that they might be persuaded to pity themselves! Much more by
themselves.
to mourn over this their desperate obstinacy. This they shall do, sooner or
later; it may be when it is too late. So they may hear some of their Companions
doing; as viz. that impure Adu^terer, whom the Wiseman speaks of, Prove. 5. Who
having given his honor unto others, and his years to the cruel (as the 9 ver.
has it) having spent both his reputation, and estate, and strength upon
Harlots, who seeking nothing but themselves, care not how they make a prey of
others, ofttimes with their honesty putting off also all kind of humanity;
then he comes to mourn at the last, when his flesh and body are consumed (as
it follows ver. 11.), finding nature decayed and spent, and his body (it may
be) seized upon by some foul and loathsome disease, (some of which (it may
seem) were wont to attend this sin in those times, as well as in these,)
feeling his hones full of the sin of his youth (as Zophar speaks, Job 20.11.)
now he comes rugire in novissimis (as the Original has it). (...) Rugiit.
proprie Leonum; Bux torf:
At his last, seeing how he has by his lewd and dissolute courses brought
himself to an untimely and infamous end; now he roareth, roareth as a Lion (as
the word there properly signifies). Seeing himself ready to go to hell, now
his soul is filled with more horror, then ever his body was with pleasure. And
mark what follows, ver. 12. And say, How have I hated Instruction, and my
heart despised reproof? And have not obeyed the voice of my teachers, nor
inclined mine ears to them that instructed me.] Lo here the true original of
all his misery; which though before he would not, yet now when it is too late
he is brought to acknowledge, even his not harkening to Instruction. O take
heed that it may never be so with any of you! that you be not at your latter
ends brought to mourn upon any such account.

Instruction and reproof not to be slighted.
Which that you may not, do not any longer what he did, hate instruction,
despise reproof. Do not stop your ears against the truth of God held forth unto
you in the Ministry of his Word, discovering unto you the sinfulness of
those ways and courses wherein you have walked, and showing you how you ought
to walk so as you may please God, do not shut the counsel which the word gives
you, out of your hearts. Do not any longer say unto God, Depart from us. This
do all obstinate sinners, who living under the means of grace, do yet go on in
their sins. So Job describes some of them, Job. 21.13, 14. They spend their
days in wealth, (living in jo^litie, and mirth, and pleasure, happily
enjoying, an interrupted course of prosperiti^, not being acquainted with those
crosses and afflictions which befall others), Therefore they say unto God,
depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy Law. This do too many
even among our selves; though with their tongues they dare not, yet with their
hearts, and in their lives they speak as much; plainly m^nifesting to the world
by their words and actions, what the thoughts of their hearts are; viz. That
they do not desire to have any acquaintance with God, or his Word; to know his
mind and will that they may do it. And thus are the things which belong unto
their everlasting peace hid from their eyes.

O most sad and deplorable condition! The desperate contion of obstinate
sinners.
what hope can there be of such an one? Upon this account our Savior here
looks upon Jerusalems estate as most forlorn and desperate. She neither had,
nor would see what belonged to her peace. So as through her wilful ignorance
this was hid from her eyes. And therefore let her now make account of what
follows; The days shall come upon thee, when thine enemies shall cast a
trench about thee, etc. And even such is the condition of all wilful and
obstinate sinners, who shut out the light of Gods truth out of their hearts,
will not give way to the admonitions, directions, convictions of the Word and
Spirit, so as to be wrought upon by them, to be changed and reformed in their
hearts and lives, let them make account that the like days shall come upon
them; days of blackness and darkness, days of judgment and vengeance; it
may be temporal, (which they have just cause to fear, continually hanging over
their heads) however, eternal.

And O that now the terror of the Lord might fall and take hold upon every one
of you, An alarm to such.
whose condition this is! that being awakened, you may be also persuaded to
open your eyes, to set open the doors and windows of your souls, to let in the
Sun of righteousness, to let in that heavenly light which shines forth unto
you, that so the things which belong unto your peace, your eternal peace and
happiness, they may be no longer hid from your eyes; which if they still be
through your obstinacy and wilfulness (for other cause you can assign none),
then take heed lest that God, whose patience you have abused, and whose grace
you have rejected, do in his most righteous judgment seal up your eyes, passing
an irrevocable sentence upon you, that seeing you will not see, therefore you
shall not see, but that these things be now from henceforth for ever hid from
your eyes.

And so I am fallen upon the second Particular, 2. The second cause of
Jerusalems blindness, Gods righteous judgment.
the second ground and cause of this blindness in Jerusalem.. The things
belonging to her peace were hid from her eyes, as through her own wilful
obstinacy, so also through Gods righteous judgment. And thus they were hid not
only for the present, but also for the future. (...), But now they are hid
from thine eyes;] That is, from henceforth; so as now thou shall not see them,
and that through the righteous judgment of God, hiding them from thee.

Thus it is, Days of Grace have their dates. Obs. Days of grace have their
dates.
Mark it. This is the Observation which this passage naturally yields us:
Days of Grace have their dates. Times and seasons, wherein the Grace and
Mercy of GOD is offered and tendered to the Sons of men for their acceptance;
they are limited, they have their terms and boundaries, beyond which they shall
not extend. Hence is it that they are called by the name of Days, If thou
had known in this thy day]. Now a Day is a determined time. However there are
Winter-daies and Summer-daies, some shorter, others longer, yet each is limited
and measured by the motion of the Sun. And so are the Seasons of Grace which
God vouchsafes unto the Sons of men upon earth: though some are longer then
others, yet all limited, all determined by God. What the Prophet Habakuk ^aith
of Prophetical Vision, Hab. 2.3. The Vision is for an appointed time, the same
may be said of these gracious dispensations, the offers and tenders of grace
and mercy; they are for an appointed time. Days of Grace have their dates,
their limits.

So have both National and Personal days. 1. National days, 1. National days.
wherein God offers mercy to communities of men, these are limited. So it was
we know with the old world, concerning which we may hear God declaring his
purpose, Genesis 6.3. My spirit shall not ever strive with man, for that he also
is flesh, yet his days shall be an hundred and twenty years. A long time God
had striven with the men of that generation. He had so done, and that both
outwardly and inwardly. Outwardly, as by his Works, so by his Word, which was
preached to them by Noah, whom Saint Peter calls, (...), a Preacher, or
publisher of Righteousness; of the righteous judgments of God in case they
should not repent, to which in the name of God he persuaded them. By him it was
that Christ went and preached to the spirits in prison (as the same Apostle
has it) 1 Pet. 3.19. This he did by the Ministry of Noah, or some others,
who were inspired by him; In and by them he preached to the men of that
generation, who were then alive, but at this time, when Peter wrote that
Epistle, dead, and their spirits, their souls (many of them) in the prison of
Hell. And besides this Outward striving by his Word, he did also strive with
them Inwardly by the inward motions and operations of his Spirit, pressing and
urging their consciences to Reformation and Repentance. Thus he had striven
with them, and that long, but he will not ever so do. My Spirit shall not ever
strive with Man]. And thereupon he limits them a time for their Repentance:
The days of Man shall be an hundred and twenty years]. Not that the time of
man's life should not afterward exceed that number of years, for we find
diverse after the Flood living much longer; but so long should their day of
grace and mercy last. So long a time out of his gracious indulgence God would
yet allow to that generation to bethink themselves, to reform their hearts and
lives in; which if once past and not improved for the end to which it was
allotted them, then they must look for no more mercy, but a deluge of
vengeance should sweep them off from the face of the earth. To this I might
subjoin that of Nineveh, which had her forty days, and no more allowed unto
her for the same end. Forty days and Nineveh shall be destroyed, Jon. 3.4.
viz. except within that time they repented, which condition God reserved to
himelf. Thus there is a time appointed and determined by God, which though he
do not declare to others, yet he has set down with himself, how long he will
strive with a Nation, a people, how long he will wait for their Repentance;
which time being past, then the date of mercy is out. So it was with Jerusalem
here; she had had he Day, a day of grace, and that a long day; wherein she
might have seen what belonged to her peace, but that day being now spent, Now
these things are hid from her eyes.

2. Personal days.
2. And as National so Personal days. The times and seasons allotted unto
particular persons, for their accepting the offers of grace and mercy held
forth unto them, these also are limited. So is not only the Common and
General day; The time of this life, beyond which the tenders of mercy do not
extend. The general day, the time of this life.
Now is the accepted time, now is the day of salvation (says the Apostle, 2
Cor. 6.2. speaking (as he is conceived) of the time of this life). This is the
day of grace. If this day be gone, mercy is gone. As for those who have here
abused the patience and long sufferance of God, not considering that it should
have led them to repentance; so sleighting the offers of Mercy, let them look
for nothing but Ju^tice hereafter. That rich Glutton who would not out of his
abundance spare poor Lazarus a crum of bread, baing in hell may call and cry
for a drop of water to cool his tongue with, and yet go without it. The
Sacrifices of Grace and Mercy are only so long as this day of grace lasts,
during this life. If this be gone, then as the tree falls (toward heaven or
hell) so it lies. Death closing up the eyes of impenitent sinners, then are
the things which belong to their peace, their happiness, for ever hid from
them.

But also Particular days, Particular days.
particular times and seasons, and that during this life. Certainly such times
and seasons there are: As there are appointed times for all other occasions. To
every thing there is a season, and a time to every pupose under heaven, (says
the Preacher) Eccl. 3.1. So it is to things Natural; however to us they may be
Casual, and in themselves Contingent, or it may be Voluntary, left to the will
of man; yet they are all determined, as for other circumstances, so for the
time, and that by God, who does by his Providence order and limit them for
their beginning, duration, ending. And surely so it is in things supernatural;
he who has thus bounded and limited all other things upon earth, has not left
his own gracious dispensations sine die, at an uncertaintie; but he has also
set down with himself a day, a time for them, beyond which they shall not
extend; so as if that be expired, there is no more room for mercy. The truth
of this we may see in those Rebellious murmurers amongst the Israelites. A long
time God striveth with them. Forty years long was I grieved with this
generation (as the Psalmist has it) Psalm. 95.10. All that time they tempted
God, and proved him, and saw his works (as the Apostle goes on) Heb. 3.9. So
long experience they had of the gracious presence of God in the midst amongst
them, manifesting his power and mercy in delivering, protecting of them, and
providing for them, yet they tempted and proved him, not believing what he had
said unto them, nor yet so considering what he had done for them, as to trust
in him, and rest upon his Providence. Thus did they err in their hearts, not
knowing the ways of their God (as it there follows, ver. 10.) Now herewith
the Lord was (as well he might be) grieved, offend^ d, provoked, yet bearing
with them; but so he would not ever do. Having born it fo tie years, then he
will bear it no longer; [ So I swear in my wrath, they shall not enter into my
rest, ver. 11.] They should never come into the earthly Canaan, the land which
he had promised unto Abraham as a resting place for his Posterity. Which
sentence was accordingly executed upon those murmurers, whose carkases fell in
the wilderness (as it follows ver. 17.). None of them who came out of Egypt,
from twenty years old and upward, entering into Canaan, save only Caleb and
Joshua, (as you have it foretold Numb. 14. 29, 30.) So was it with them as to
the Earthly Canaan, and so shall it be with all obstinate and obdurate sinners
as to the Heavenly Canaan, that eternal rest (whereof the earthly Canaan was a
Type): However God may strive with them for a time, and it may be a long time,
yet there is a time when he will st ive no more, but will pass a peremptory
sentence upon them, that they shall never enter into his rest; so shutting the
door of mercy against them.

Which he does, The door of mercy sometimes shut in this life.
and that (as I said) often in this life. We know how it was with Esau, that
profane Esau, so stigmatized and branded by the Apostle, Heb. 12.16. for his so
far undervaluing of that high privilege of his primogeniture, his Birthright,
to which was annexed the Covenant, as to sell it for a morsel of meat, (or a
mess of Pottage) when afterward he came to make suit for it, he was rejected.
So you have it in the verse following, ver. 17. For ye know (says the
Apostle) how that afterward when he would have inherited the blessing, he was
rejected; for he found no place for repentance, though he sought it carefully
with tears. Thus however before he slightly esteemed that privilege, yet being
better advised, upon second thoughts, he seeks it, and that earnestly, but
all in vain, For he found no place for repentance; viz. in his Father Isaac,
who had conferred that blessing upon his other Son Jacob; he could not with all
his tears move him to repent of what he had done, so as to recall his grant,
and confer the blessing upon him. Herein was he a Type of profane obstinate
sinners, who slight and despise the grace of God when it is offered and
tendered unto them. Afterward it may be, when God comes to open their eyes,
to awaken their consciences, and to convince them of what they have done, and
to discover to them the misery of that state wherein they are, then they seek
and cry for mercy, and yet go without it; the Decree then (as it were)
falling in travel, and beginning to bring forth (as the Prophet speaks, Zeph.
2.2.) the door of mercy is shut against them:

R. The contempt of grace hereby vindicated.
R. Which God does (as I said) in his most just and righteous judgment; thereby
vindicating the contempt of his grace and mercy: which is an attribute that God
is tender of, and will not endure to have trampled upon. So as where that will
not take place, Justice shall. Hence is it that God shuts the door of mercy
against those that have rejected it when it was offered to them; refusing to
hear them, who have refused to hear him. So wisdom sets it forth in that Text,
which I willingly repeat, Prove. 1.24. Because I have called and ye have
refused, etc. Therefore I will also laugh at your Calamity, I will mock when
your fear comes. When your fear comes as desolation, and your destruction
comes as a whirlewinde, etc. Then shall they call upon me, but I will not
answer, thy shall seek me early, but shall not find me. ver. 28.29. A just
retaliation and requital, that whilst men shall let Jesus Christ stand at the
doors of their hearts and knock (as he tells the Church of Laod^cea that he
did Rev. 3.20) and yet not let him in, that he should shut the door against
them, so as though they knock, yet they shall find no audience, no entrance.

Obj. 1. Obj. 1. The promise of opening to them the knock cle^red.
But is not this directly contrary to the promise which our Savior makes,
Mat. 7.7, 8? Where encouraging h^^ Disciples to Pray, he bids them, Ask and it
shall be given you, seek and you shall find, knock and it shall be opened unto
you. For every one that asks receives; and to him that knocks it shall be
opened.

A. 1. Answ. 1. This promise made to believers.
For Answer to this, Take we notice (1) Who they are to whom our Savior here
speaks, viz. to his Disciples, such as had received him, and believed on him.
Now such indeed have the promise of audience and acceptance at all times. Being
favorites of heaven they have always free entrance to the Throne of grace, so
as they may come thither at all times with confidence and boldness (as the
Appostle exhorts them to do, Heb. 4. last); This being a privilege purchased
for them by the blood of Christ (as the same Apostle shows, Heb. 10.19.) But
not so others. Not so rebellious and obstinate sinners. What have they to do to
take the name of God into their mouths, by invocating of him? seeing they are
such as hate to be reformed. What have they to do to press upon the throne of
grace, who are despisers of it, and enemies to it.

Answ. 2. God must be sought in due time.
A. But (Secondly) this Promise must be looked upon not as Absolute, but as
Conditional, admitting of many restrictions and limitations. Among other, of
time. They who would seek God so as he may be found, they must seek him timely,
whilst he may be found. So the Prophet Isaiah directs the Jews. Seek ye the
Lord whilst he may be found. Isai. 55.6. with which agrees that of the
Psalmist, Psalm. 32.6. For this shall every one pray unto thee, in a time when
thou may be found: Tempore inveniendi, in a time of Finding. Clearly
intimating, that there may be a time wherein God, though he be sought, yet will
not be found. This is that he tells the Jews, Isai. 1.15. When ye spread forth
your hands, I will hide mine eyes from you, and when ye make many prayers, I
will not hear. Not hear them when they pray; no, nor yet hear others praying
for them. So the Lord tells his Prophet Jeremiah, upon that account willing
him to surcease his intercession, on their behalf. Therefore pray not for this
people, neither lift up cry, nor prayer for them, neither make intercession to
me, for I will not hear thee, Jer. 7.16. And elsewhere he tells the Prophet
Ezekiel concerning that Land, Though these three men, Noah, Daniel, and Job
were in it, they should deliver but their own souls, Ezekiel. 14.14, 20. So
irrevocable is the sentence which God sometimes passes upon obstinate and
rebellious sinners, such as have despised his grace and mercy, that all means
used for the procuring ana gaining his favor toward them, shall be
ineffectual, and to no purpose.

Replic. Replic. Repentance at all times finds mercy.
True, it may be said, so long as they continue in their sins, they can expect
no other: but repenting and forsaking them, there is mercy to be found. So it
there follows, in that of Isaiah 55.7. Let the wicked forsake his way, and
the unrighteous man his thoughts, and let him return unto the Lord, and he will
have mercy upon him; and to our God, for he will abundantly pardon. And the
Lord gives all sinners to know so much by his prophet Ezekiel, Chap. 18.21.
and 33.14. which Texts for substance (though not in express terms) speak what
the former of them was cited for in our late public Lyturgie, that At what time
soever a sinner repents him of his sin, God will qut away all his iniquities
out of his remembrance.

Answ. Repentance not promised to men at all times.
A. True plenty of such promises we meet withal, assuring mercy to
repenting sinners; but where is that promise that assures unto them Repentance
when they will. Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non promisit peccanti
poenitentiam; He that has promised pardon to the sinner whenever he
repents, has not promised to give him grace to repent whenever he will.
Saint Paul speaking of the Repentance of men ill affected to the truths and
Ministers of Christ, he puts in a Peradventure about it, 2 Timothy 2.25. If God
peradventure will give them repentance. This is God's gift; and being so, it
depends not upon Man's will, but His Will. And elsewhere he tells us of an
heart that cannot repent. So our former Translation (not amiss) renders that
Text, Romans 2.5. where the Apostle speaking of, and to such as despise the
riches of Gods goodness, not knowing that it should lead them to repentance,
he says that, After their hardness and impenitent heart, they treasure to
themselves wrath against the day of wraths, etc. (...), Cor resipiscere nesciens
(as Beza translateth it) A heart that knows not how to repent, knows not
how to go about this work. And elsewhere we read of some upon whom this doom is
passed, That it is impossible for them to be renewed again unto repentance, Heb.
6.6. Such is the case of desperate and malicious Apostates, whom God in his
just judgment gives up unto impenitent hearts, that they cannot, at least
shall not repent: Thus does God in his just and righteous judgment (as I said)
sometimes withold his grace from those that have slighted and rejected it
when it was offered: Thenceforth hiding from their eyes the things that belong
unto their peace. That he does this, and why he does it, you have seen.

Q. But how does he do it? Answ. 1. How God hides from men the things
belonging to their peace.
A. Here I shall not dare to attempt to follow God too close, in tracing of
those paths of his, which Saint Paul calls, (...), viae impervestigabiles,
Romans 11.33. How unsearchable are his judgments, and his ways past finding out!
By the former [Judgments.] (as Grotius distinguishes them) understanding the
Decrees of God, by the latter, the ways and means which he uses in the
executing and bringing those decrees into act. Both are to humane understanding
inscrutable and untraceable; fitter to be admired and adored, then curiously
pried into. Yet where God is pleased to hold forth a light unto us, we may
safely follow him, though it be a far off. And so shall I at the present in
opening this great mystery to you, showing you only what is revealed, and so
may safely be asserted concerning it. God hides from the eyes of men the
things belonging to their peace.

Answ. 1. By withdrawing the light.
1. By taking away the light, withdrawing and withholding the means of grace
from them. This is one thing which the Lord threatens against this unfruitful
Vineyard, the people of the Jews, sfaiah 5. ver. 6. I will also command the
clouds, that they rain no rain upon it. That is, (as some saf;ely, if not
somewhat too curiously, expound it), the means of grace and salvation should
not be continued unto that people as formerly. He would bereave them of their
Prophets, take away their Teachers. Which accordingly he did; as may be
collected from that Promise which the same Prophet makes to the Church,
Isaiah, 30.20. Though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water
of affliction, yet shall not thy teachers be removed into a corner any more,
but thine eyes shall see thy teachers. So it had be^n with that people.
Prophets had been very scarce among them. So much we may take notke of from
that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 74.9. where the Church lying under a sad
desolation, is brought in complaining; We see not our signs, there is no more
any Prophet, neither is there a-mong us any that knows how long. They wanted
their Seers (as the Prophets sometimes are called). And by this means were the
things which belonged to their peace hid from their eyes.

And by a like means came they here to be hid from Jerusalems; Means of grace
withdrawn from Jerusalem.
by withdrawing those means of grace from them which formerly they had injoied.
Christ himself being taken away, he also ordered his Apostles after a while to
withdraw from them. So much is insinuated in that Parable of the Marriage feast,
where the first guests that were invited, though solicited by messenger after
messenger, refusing to come, the servants are then ordered by the Master of the
Feast to go into the Highways, and Hedges, and By-lanes, and to bid new
guests, as the Evangelists have it, Mat. 22.9. Luke. 14.21.23. The meaning of
the Parable seems to be obvious. This Marriage is the marriage betwixt Christ
and his Church. The first invited guests were the Jews; to whom God sends his
servants one after another; first the Prophets, then John the Baptist, with the
Apostles and Disciples of CHRIST, who per^waded them to come and receive Jesus
Christ, and to have Communion with him: but they refusing, the Apostles, with
their Successors, are afterward sent to the Gentiles. Which accordingly,
sometimes after our Saviors Ascension, came to pass. For however at the
first, according to their Masters direction, they applied themselves only to
the Jews, yet afterward finding them unworthie, and being rejected by them,
they shook off the dust of their feet against them, turning to the Gentiles. So
Paul and Barnabas expressly tell them, Act. 13.46. When they heard the Jews
contradicting them, and blaspheming their doctrine, Then they waxed bold (says
the Text) and said, It was necessary that the Word of God should first have
been spoken unto you; but seeing you put it from you, and judge your selves
unworthie of eternal life, lo we turn to the Gentiles, for so has the Lord
commanded us. Thus when men do abuse the light of the Gospel, Christ often
removes the Cand^estick, (as he threatens the Church of Ephesus, Revel. 2.5.)
takes away that light, takes away his Ministers and Ordinances, and so
leaves them in the dark, by which means the things belonging to their peace
are hid from their eyes, and that through the want of means.

2. 2. Withholding the Spirit.
But (Secondly) sometimes the means are enjoyed, but the Spirit is withheld,
not accompanying, not going along with the means. Even as the Church
complains Psalm. 44.9. that God did not go forth with her Armies. Her Armies
went forth; but God did not go forth with them, as formerly, to direct, assist,
bless, and prosper them, to make them victorious. Thus God sometimes sends
forth his Ministers, but he does not go forth with them; he does not
accompany his Ordinances with his Spirit. This is that which the Prophet Isaiah
complains of; he lift up his voice like a trumpet, he spared not to his
duty, But who has believed our report, to whom is the arm of the Lord
revealed, Isaiah, 53.1. His Ministry was for the most part ineffectual; few
there were that were wrought upon by it, He had (as elsewhere he bemoans it,
Isaah 49.4.) even labored in vain, and spent his strength for naught: Now
whence was this? Why God did not concur with him by the efficacious, work of
his Spirit; he did not put forth his power, reveal his Arm, hence was it that
his endeavors became so ineffectual to the greatest part. And thus God is
pleased sometimes to enervate his Ordinances, by withdrawing his presence from
them. Even as it was in Ezekiels Vision, he saw the Glory of the God of
Israel going up from the Cherub to the threshold of the house, Ezekiel 9. Verse
3. The Cherub stood still in his place, but the glory was departed, God had
withdrawn his presence from it. Thus Ordinances may be continued, and yet the
Spirit withdrawn, whereby they become ineffectual. So as though the light shine
forth unto men, yet wanting that Spirit of Illumination which should open their
eyes, and let that light into their hearts, they still remain to the dark. So
fared it with the Scribes and Pharisees; though the mystery of Salvation was
as clearly held forth unto them as unto others, yet whilst others saw it, it
was hid from them. How so? Why this was God's work, to put a differencee
betwixt the one and the other. So much our Savior takes notice of, and
acknowledges, Matthew. 11.25. I thank thee Father, Lord of heaven and earth (or,
I confess unto thee, or, acknowledge before thee, (...)) because (or that)
thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent, and have revealed them
unto Babes. The same Word was preached by the same persons unto both, but it
had not the same effect in both. To the simpler sort of persons, men and women
of weak apprehensions, altogether unlearned and ignorant, very children in
understanding, the mysteries of eternal Salvation were clearly revealed by the
Ministry of Christ and his Apostles; but not so to the wise and prudent,
great and learned Clerks, men wise in their own and others opinions, as the
Scribes and Pharisees were. To them were these things hid. Now whence was this?
Why God did not cooperate with the Word as to them; he did not work upon
their minds by his Spirit, by which means the Word became ineffectual unto
them.

3. Blinding the eye and hardening the heart.
Again (in the Third place), God concurreth in h^ding these things from the eyes
of men, not only in Negative or Privative, but also after a sort in a Positive
way. Not only by not opening their eyes and hearts, but by blinding and
hardening them. So it was with this people, the people of the Jews, as our
Savior also takes notice of it, giving this as a reason why they did not
believe, John 12.39, 40. Therefore they could not believe, (says he) because
Isaias said again, He has blinded their eyes, and hardened their hearts, that
they should not see with their eyes, and understand with their hearts, and be
converted, and I should heal them. Thus dealt God with that people, justly
punishing their wilful obstinacy, by giving them up unto a reprobate sense, to
a spiritual blindness and obduracie. In as much as they had first blinded
themselves, closing their own eyes against the light [Their eyes they have
closed] (so Saint Matthew has it, Matthew. 13, 5. As also the Apostle, Act.
28.27.) therefore God in his just judgment blinds them. They blinded
themselves first, they would not see, therefore God in his justice blinds
them, that they should not see: So giving them up to spiritual blindness;
which (as that Apostle tells us) still rests upon that people until this
day. I would not, brethren, that ye should be ignorant, that blindness in
part is happened to Israel, until the fullness of the Gentiles be come in,
Romans 11.25. (...), Blindness, or Hardness (for the word signifies both) is
happened [in part], unto the greatest part, the generality of that Nation;
insomuch that they do not, nay, till the time appointed be come, they shall not
see the things which belong to their peace. This is the reason which the same
Apostle gives, why those of that Nation did not see what was so clearly held
forth unto them in the preaching of the Gospel, 2 Cor. 3.14. Their minds were
blinded, there was a veil upon their hearts (as the next ver. has it). God
has given them up in his just judgment for their contempt of the means of
grace to a fearful exceration and obduration, blinding their eyes, and hardening
their hearts. Thus the Lord is said to have done Pharaohs, Exodus 4.21. And the
like is said of Sihon King of Heshbon, that refused to let Israel pass by him,
Deuteronom. 2.30. The Lord thy God hardened his spirit, and made his heart
obstinate, that he might deliver him into thy hand. This he did, not only by
withholding his grace from them, but by delivering them up unto the
perverseness of their own spirits, and to Satan, to be acted by him unto their
ruin and destruction. And after the like manner may God be said to have
hardened the hearts of this people, the people of the Jews; not only by
withholding his Spirit from them, but also giving them up unto their own
hearts lusts (as the Psalmist has it, Psalm. 81.11, 12. My people would not
hearken unto my voice, and Israel would none of me, So I gave them up to their
own hearts lusts; (or, as the margin reads it, to the hardness of their
hearts) and they walked in their own counsels), and to the power of Satan to
be acted by him, to be blinded and hardened by him. Yea, even giving
Commission to his Word to have such an accidental effect upon them; even as the
Sun has upon the Clay, to harden it. So much we may learn from that Text of
the Prophet Isaiah, cited by our Savior, Isaiah 6. ver. 9, 10. Where the Lord
giving him his Commission to go unto that people, he bids him (or rather
foretells him what he should do) that he should make their heart fat. Make
thou the heart of this people fat, and make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, etc. Now how shoula he do this? Why only by preaching the Word to them.
But what then, had the Word any such proper operation of it self? Not so:
neither had the Prophet any such intention in the preaching of it; but through
their obstinate tempers it become so to them, an occasion of their further
blinding and hardening. God in his just judgment suffering and ordering that
his Word should have such a direful effect upon them, as that they should grow
worse and worse by it, until they should attain to that height of
impenitencie, as should be irrecoverable. This it is, The Word will have it
work, one way or other, being (as the Apostle says) the favor of life, or of
death, 2 Corinthians. 2.16. Where it does not open and clear the eye, it will close
and blind it: Where it does not soften the heart, it will harden it. And in
this way, and by this means does God in his most righteous Judgment, hide from
the eyes of men the things which belong to their peace, which they have refused
to see.

To these I might add, his sending of False Teachers Sending false teachers.
among them; such as those the Prophet Jeremie speaks of, who cried unto the
people, Peace, Peace, where there was no peace, Jeremiah 6.14. So lulling them
asleep in carnal security, that they shall not see what belongs to their
peace in truth.

As also his sending of strong delusions, Strong delusions.
that men should believe a lie, because they have not received a love of the
truth (as the Apostle has it, 2 These. 2.11. Sending a Spirit of Error, a
lying spirit to them, such as that was which seduced Ahab, to his destruction,
2 King. 2.22. These and many other ways God has to carry on this his most
just and righteous design. But herein I shall follow him no further. That which
has been spoken may be sufficient for doctrinal Confirmation and Illustration.
What now remains is Application.

Where (in the first place) let me design you to make a stand a little, Applic.
Application to the Nation in general.
and look upon this Nation wherein we live as our Savior did here upon this
City Jerusalem, and see whether there be any just cause to do what he did, to
weep over it, mourn over it upon any such account. Touching which let me first
declare for my self that not having my Saviors eyes, a prophetical eyeas he
had: I dare not pronounce the like sentence upon this, that he does upon that,
viz. that the things which belong, unto Englands peace are now hid from her
eyes. No, as my prayers have been and shall be, so my hopes yet are to the
contrary; that God will yet be merciful to this Nation; and I want not some
grounds to bottom these hopes upon. But yet let me show you what two just
causes of fear may be apprehended, Her sad prognostics; paralelled with
Jerusalems.
that God has a sad controversy with it. In the declaring whereof I shall (as
far as I may) parallel it with this City of Jerusalem; which I shall do
altogether upon a Religious account, not meddling at all with the Civil of these
sad prognostics I might reckon up diverse. But. I shall content my self to
single out some of those which are most obvious.

1 Not seeing what belonged to peace in his day.
Among which let the first and principal be, our not seeing the thing which
betmged to our peace in our day. Where I shall not do (what happily with too
much evidence of truth I might), descend to those particular times and seasons
wherein mercy has been held forth and offered unto this Nation, in a more
signal and remarkable manner. Surely such Critical days England has had, and
some of them, within our mememorie, seasons and opportunities, which had they
been laid hold of, and improved as they might, how happy might she have been? I
shall content my self with generalities. Only taking notice of that long day
of grace and mercy which this Nation has had; during which the light of the
Gospel has shone forth to it, and that in so clear and glorious a manner as (I
suppose without flattery I may speak it) it has not done to any other nation
under heaven. Now, have we in this our day known the things which belonged to
our peace? Has Christ and his Gospel found that intertainment among the
generality which he expected, and it deserved? The Generality (I say) True it
is, some there have been, and at this day are, who have sincerely embraced
both; And so there were in Jerusalem, some that cried Hosanna to the Some of
David, Hosanna in the highest, Matthew. 21.9, 15. But how is it with the greatest
part? do not they yet love darkness, rather then light? setting light, by the
light of the Gospel, and the Ministry thereof; even Gadarene like preferring
their swine before Jesus Christ. A charge, wherein I wish there were not too
much truth, Such slight and slender entertainment has the Gospel, with the
faithful messengers thereof, found among the greatest part of this Nation. A
sad prognostic.

Specially if it be considered to what a height this disaffection is at this
day improved, Disaffection to the persons and Calling of Ministers a sad
prognostic.
and risen even to the disclaiming and crying down of the Ministry it self. So
is it with some, and not a few. They are grown disaffected, not only to the
persons of Ministers, but even to their function and calling, disclaiming that
as Antichristian. Thus, are the feet of them who bring glad tidings of peace,
which sometimes were, and in themselves are beautiful, now become in the eyes
of many black and deformed. A sad symptom. So it was in Jerusalem, of which we
read, 2. Chr. 36.16. The Lord God of their fathers sent to them by his
Messengers rising up betimes, and sending them, because he had compassion on
his people, on his dwelling place; But they mocked the Messengers of God, and
despised his words, and misused his Prophets, until the wrath of the Lord rose
against his people, till there was no remedy, (no Healing.) This made their
disease incurable, and the wrath of God implacable. When sickmen being
distracted, shall fly in the faces of their Physicians, and there be none to
bind them, what hope of Cure can there be? This was Jerusalems case, as the
Parable sets it forth, Matthew. 21.33. God the great Householder, having planted
a Vineyard, (the Jewish Church) and let it forth to Husbandmen, (so the
Priests) he sends his servants, some after other, to receive the fruits
thereof, (his Prophets former and latter, to require that people to bring forth
fruits meet for repentance) but they beat one, and killed another, and stoned
another, (so did they use the Prophets) Hereupon he sends his son (Christ
himself) who met with the like usage. Now what follow;h hereupon? That you may
hear first from the mouths of the Jews themselves, to whom our Savior here
propounds this Parable, making them judges in the cause, that so he might
co^demn them out of their own mouths, They say unto him he will miserably
destroy these wicked men, and will let out his vineyard to other husbandmen,
which shall render him the fruits in their season, v. 41. which afterward you
find explained and applied by our Savior to themselves, v. 43. Therefore I say
unto you the Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and given to a Nation
bringing forth the fruit thereof. When the Ministers of God come to meet with
such intertainment, and that for doing their office, it is a sad presage that
the Kingdom of God, the Gospel shall not long continue there, and that
Judgment is not far from such a people. Upon this account our Savior looks
upon Jerusalems condition as desperate. O Jerusalem, Jerusalem, thou that
killest the Prophets, and stonest them which are sent unto thee; How often
would I have gathered thy children together, as a hen gathers her chickens
under her wings, and ye would not. Behold your house is left unto you desolate.
Matthew 23.37, 38. Here is a first Prognostic, and that a sad one.

Secondly. Let a second be that which I have named and touched upon already. 2
Gods withdrawing the light, by putting out the Candles.
Gods withdrawing the light, by putting out the Candles, I mean taking away his
Ministers, who are said to be the light of the world. Thus was it done to
Jerusalem. And whether this be in any degree applicable to this Nation or no, I
shall leave it to those who are privy to the present state of it, to judge. Of
late how many able and faithful Ministers taken away? Now when a Prince begins
to call away his Ambassadors, it is ordinarily looked upon as a Passing Bell
to the peace of that Nation.

Repl. But howsoever (it may be said) some be by Providence taken away, yet
others by the like providence are substituted in their rooms.

A. True it may be in some places, Many places destitute of true Gospel
Ministers.
but not so in all. Some Candlesticks there are at this day, (and I suppose not
a few,) destitute of Candles; not well knowing where to find a supply.

Again, as for those which are thus substituted by the providence of God, are
they also all substituted by his Ordinance? Are there not some (and not a few)
Ambassadors without their commission? men running before they are sent; not
called nor empowered to do any Ministerial act, which yet ( Vzziah like) they
attempt to do; that not only to preach, (which the Apostle will tell us none
can do except they be sent, Romans 10.15. speak they may, but not Preach, which
is an act of office) but also (some of them) to administer the Seals, the
Sacraments. And by this means the Church in many places comes to be deprived
of an Ordinance, upon which all other public Ordinances have a dependence; I
mean of a true Gospel Ministry, with which Jesus Christ has promised his
special countenance.

Thirdly. To this add (in the third place) that where means are continued, 3
The Spirit with drawn from the means.
yet is not the Spirit withdrawn? So was it with Jerusalem; they enjoyed
Ordinances, but there was no life in them; the Glory of the Lord was gone up
from the Cherub. And is it not so in many parts of this Nation at this day.
Ordinances remain, but is not the glory of the Lord departed from them? where
is that life, where is that power, which heretofore appeared in them? God has
yet his Armies of Prophets, many faithful and powerful Ministers, who may be
looked upon as the Chariots and Horsemen of Israel, but he does not go forth
with these his Armies as formerly, giving such success unto the labors of his
servants as heretofore he has done. How is it that in many places where the
word is purely and powerfully preached, there are such thin Auditories as there
are (specially upon the week days) in comparison of what they have been, some
refusing to come, not willing to lend an ear to any but their own; others
neglecting to come out of an irreligious profaneness: and among those that do
come, yet how few constant conscionable attendants upon this Ordinance? A plain
evidence that this ordinance has lost much of that respect, as also of that
power that sometimes it has had.

And what I say of the word, I may also apply it to the Sacrament, the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper. Which though held forth in the purest and most
comfortable way of Administration, according to Christ's Institution, and the
Churches primitive practice, yet how is it by many slighted and neglected? So
as those who heretofore were wont to come (as it now seems) for fear or
fashion, being now left to themselves, will not come for love. The feast is
prepared, and the Guests invited, but they find some excuse or other to keep
them away. A thing which I wish there were not too just cause to complain of
even in this place. Now surely, among other, this is also a sad token.

4. 4 The eyes of many blinded.
To which let me add those other which I have also made mention of. Gods
blinding the Eyes, and hardening the hearts of many, sending so many false
Teachers, with strong and strange delusions amongst us, giving up many to the
believing of them. All sadly remarkable in this Nation at this day; I think
never more in any. And what may we conceive these to portend? Surely, sad Omens
they are; giving us too just cause to fear, lest God should be about to depart,
to take away his Kingdom, his Gospel from us, which meeteeh not only with such
sleightings, but such affronts and oppositions as it does.

5 Judgments not profited by.
5. To which let me yet subjoyn, that which bodes as ill as any of the former;
our not profiting by Judgments, but rather being made worse by them. This is
that which the Lord complains of against Israel, Isai. 1.5. why should ye be
stricken any more, ye will revolt more and more. Gods judgments had a contrary
effect upon them to what they were intended. He corrected them for their
amendment, thereby to bring them home to himself, but they took occasion
thereby to go further away from him; so as his Corrections were in vain to
them, (as elsewhere he complains) Jer. 2.30. In vain have I smitten your
children, they received no correction.] viz. so as to be bettered by it, but
rather waxed worse and worse. And would to God that this did not lie as too
just a charge against this sad Land and Nation wherein we live! That God has
stricken us, I suppose there are few but are in some kind or other sensible.
But what effect have these Rods, these Judgments had upon us? Are we better by
them? Are we thereby reclaimed, reformed, brought home to God? Are we made the
more humble, the more careful, the more watchful, the more fruitful? O that
these effects were to be found amongst us, But is it not clean contrary? Are we
not grown more proud (a sin I think never so visible in this Nation as at this
day) more remiss, more loose, more barren and unfruitful then ever? And if so,
what just cause have we to fear lest the Lord in his most righteous judgment do
unto us, as there he threatens unto Israel; give us over, striving no longer
with us, but leaving us to our selves, letting us alone (as elsewhere he
threatens unto Ephraim, Hos. 4.17.) to go on in our sinful provocations, until
there be no remedy.

These are some of those grounds upon which we may build our too just fears. To
which I might yet have added some other. But I forbear any further charge:
Coming rather to enquire,

Q. What shall we now do for the Land of our Nativity? What to be done for this
Nation.


A. 1. Do what our Savior here does for Jerusalem; Mourn over it, weep over
it, 1 Mourn over it.
with compassionate and affectionate tears, laying to heart the sad state and
condition thereof. This does he, knowing how it was with that City, that the
things belonging to her peace were now hid from her. And this do we over
England, fearing lest it should be so with it.

2. But tears alone will not help. When Joshuah was fallen upon his face, 2
Take away the Action by feeling a National Reformation.
mourning for the discomfiture which had happened unto Israel, Josh. 7.10. the
Lord takes him up with these words, Get thee up wherefore lie thou upon thy
face? Intimating unto him, that it was not his humbling and afflicting himself,
without somewhat else, that would heal that breach, which Isreal's sin, their
violating and transgressing the Covenant of their God, had made upon them (as
it follows in the next verse.) There must be some other course taken for the
reconciling of them unto God, and making their peace with him. And what was
that? Why the people must be sanctified, and the Accursed thing must be taken
from among them, (as the 13. verse has it.) And O that England might take the
like course? It is not all our falling upon our faces before the Lord, all our
days of public Humiliation (though that be a sacrifice acceptable unto God)
that will serve to appease his wrath, and to procure his favor; that alone
will not do it, unless also the people be sanctified, and the Accursed thing
removed from among us. This then let every of us in our several places
endeavor. Beginning first with our selves. Every one searching and trying our
own ways, that we may find out the Action in our own hearts and lives, our own
personal sins. Which having found out, now take them away, putting away the
evil of our doings from before the eyes of our God by serious and unfeined
repentance and reformation; renewing our Covenant with our God, cleaving unto
him with full purpose of heart. Then endeavor we the like for others; every of
us in our places (as I said,) Magistrates in their places, Ministers in theirs,
Masters of families in theirs, private Christians in theirs contributing what
we may to wards a real and Rational Reformation; that so the Accursed thing,
even all kind of wrath, provoking abominations, may be taken away from the
midst of us, and that we may be a people sanctified, dedicated and consecrated
unto the Lord.

So doing, now knew we for our Comfort, God not willing to cast off a people in
Covenant.
that we have to deal with a God gracious and merciful, slow to anger, and of
great kindness, ready to repent of what ever evil he intends against a
people; Especially his own people; not willing to reject and cast off a people
that are in Covenant with him. So much he expressed to this people, the people
of the Jews before the Captivity, by making so many removes before his final
departure from them, so the Prophet Ezekiel saw it in his Visions; in which the
glory of the Lord removed not less then five several times before it took its
leave; First, from the Cherub to the threshold of the house (the Temple) Ezekiel.
9.3. 2. It removed higher standing over the door; cap. 10.4. 3. From the
threshold it returned and stood over the Cherubins, which were mounted up from
the Earth as ready to take their flight, v. 18, 19. 4. From thence to the midst
of the City, and 5ly. From thence to the Mountain on the East side of the City,
the Mount of Olives, Cap. 11. v. 23. Now what did these frequent removes
import? Surely a great unwillingnesse in God to depart from that people. And so
it is, so long as there is any remedy; God is not willing to forsake a people,
whom once he has taken into Covenant with himself. So much we may hear him
passionately, declaring concerning Israel, Hos. 11.7, 8. My people (says he)
are bent to backsliding from me, (So was Israel, yet mark what follows.) How
shall I give thee up O Ephraim? how shall I deliver thee O Israel? How shall I
make thee as Admah? how shall I set thee as Zeboim? Mine heart is turned within
me, my repentings are kindled together.] So loath is God (as it were) to cast
off a people whom once he has struck a Covenant with, if there be any hope of
teturning unto him, and demeaning themselves as becomes his people. And who
knows what his thoughts may yet be toward this sinful and most unworthy
Nation? Only turn we unto him with all our hearts and souls. And then (as the
Prophet Joel goes on, Joel 2.14.) Who knows if he will return, and leave a
blessing behind him?

And thus have I done with the first branch of the Application, Application in
particular.
as is directed to the Nation in general. Come we in the next place to bring it
nearer home, applying it to every of our selves in particular.

And this I shall do (in the first place) by way of Terror to some. Is it so,
Use. 1. Terror to obstinate and obdurate sinners.
that days of grace have their dates? what terror may this strike into the
hearts of all obstinate and obdurate sinners? of which kind. I wish there were
none before me this day;) Despisers of Grace; such as have had their Day, their
day of grace and mercy, wherein God has shown unto them the things belonging
to their peace; but they have not known them, they would not know them; they
have done what the Jews did, stopped their ears, closed their eyes, hardened
their hearts, refusing to hearken to the counsel which Wisdom gave them, to
hearken to Jesus Christ speaking to them in and by his Ministers, not regarding
the counsel which the word held forth to them, sleighting those offers of grace
and mercy, tendered to them in the Gospel upon their receiving of Christ, but
still going on in their wonted Rebellions. Now to all such be it spoken, how do
you know but that the date of your day may be out? the time of grace and mercy
may be past, and the dreadful doom passed upon you in heaven, which our Savior
here denounces against Jerusalem upon earth, that, Now the things belonging to
your peace are hid from your eyes; so as you shall never see what you have
refused to see. Certainly so it has been with some others. And why not so with
you for ought that you, or others know? How ever, a just and righteous thing it
is with God God that it should be so; that seeing you have closed your eyes,
and would not see, that he should seal them, so as you should not see. And if
so, how deplorable, how miserable is your condition? So we loook upon a poor
blind man whose bodily eyes are put out, past hope of ever recovering his sight
again. What is it then to have the eye of the soul blinded? So as it shall
never see, never se what belongs to its peace and hapines, but is shut up
under an everlasting darkness. Miserable and deplorable is the condition of
every such a soul, in as much as it is now desperate, helpless, hopeless. So
is it with a person upon whom this doom is once passed. Now he may call and cry
for mercy, with Esau seeking blessing with tears, but all in vain. Neither his
own, nor yet the prayers of any other shall be available on his behalf. Though
Noah, Job, and Daniel, the chiefest favorites of heaven, should undertake to
intercede for such a one, yet shall they not be able to procure a revocation
and reversement of that sentence which is past upon him. Such was Saul's case
upon whom Samuel denounces that irrevocable sentence from the Lord, 1 Samuel
15.26. Thou have rejected the word of the Lord, and the Lord has rejected
thee. A sentence not to be reversed. So he tells him, v. 29 Also the strength of
Israel will not lie, nor repent, for he is not as man that he should repent.
No, though Saul himself sought God, by confessing and bewailing of his sin
(as he does, v. 24.) begging pardon for it, desiring Samuel to go along with
him that he might worship God, (as it follows, v, 25.) which accordingly he
did ( v. 31) Yet would not all this avail. No nor yet though Samuel was an
intercessour for him, praying, and mourning for him (as we find him, v. last.)
So irreversible was that sentence which the Lord had passed upon Saul, that
what ever he did, or Samuel could do, all could not change the purpose of God
concerning him. Rejected he was for his Rebellion, and rejected he should be.

O fear and tremble you obstinate and rebellious sinners, who stand guilty of
the same sin, that is charged upon him, of rejecting the word of the Lord, not
harkening to his voice, not yiedling obedience to his Commands, but doing what
is good in your own eyes, fear ye and tremble (I say) least the Lord should
have passed or should pass the like sentence upon you; which if once done, I
and others may do for you what Samuel there did for Saul, mourn for you, but
cannot help you.

Obj. But what, is Gods decree so absolute Whether Gods decrees be so absolute
as not to be reversed.
and peremptory concerning any particular person here upon earth, that what
ever mean shall be used by themselves, or others for them, shall not be able to
reverse it? It was not so with that barren Figtree in the Gospel, upon which
the owner had passed his doom, that it should be cut down, giving order to the
dresser of his vineyard that he should execute what he had decreed, Cut it
down, why cumbreth it the ground? Yet notwithstanding at that his servants
request it was reprived, and spared one year longer, Luke 13.7, 8, 9.

A. True, thus God is pleased to deal sometimes with some; to exercise great
long sufferance and forbearance toward them: Gods dealing not a like with all.
Yea sometimes reverting the sentence which is past upon them. Thence it is
that he is said sometimes to Repent Sometimes he is said to Repent.
of what he has done, or intended to do. So he did concerning the Ninevites,
which Jonah supecting, takes up as his excuse for his not going to the City
according to Gods direction, to denounce that sentence against them, but rather
fleeing to Tarshish, Jon. 4.2. Therefore (says he) I fled before unto
Tarshish, for I knew that thou art a gracious God, slow to anger and of great
kindness, and repentest thee of the evil; the evil intended and threatened,
which accordingly he did, reversing that sentence which was passed upon them.
And the like he did to Israel, at Moses's intercession, the Lord repented of
the evil which he thought to do unto his people, Exodus 32.14. But it will not
hence follow, But not always.
that because God deals thus with some therefore he will do so to all.
However that Figtree was spared for a year, yet the other Figtree which we read
of was not spared an hour. So the Story tells you, Matthew. 21.19. Jesus passing
by the way and espying a figtree on which he found no fruit, however (as St.
Mark notes it, Mark 11.13.) the time of Figs was not yet, yet he presently
blasteth it, passing that doom upon it, let no fruit grow on thee hence forward
for ever. which sentence wag accordingly executed, and that forthwith. So it
follows, And presently the figtree withered away. Thus though God may for
time spare some, and seem to repent of what he has threatened concerning them,
yet as he will not ever do so to any so neither will he do so to all. He that
spa^ed, Israel at that time, yet afterward swear in his wrath that they should
not enter into his rest. And he who spared Aaron at Moses request, when he was
angry with him to have destroyed him (as you have it, Deuteronomy. 9.20.) would not
spare Korah, and his Company of whom you read Numb. 16. Upon their Rebellion
against Moses and Aaron there was a sudden and dreadful execution done upon
them, The ground clave a sunder that was under them; And the earth opened her
mouth, and swallowed them up, etc. So as They went alive into the pit v.
31.32.33. And so for those others who at the same time usurped the Priests
Office, taking upon them to offer Incense presently, There came out a fire from
the Lord and consumed them; v. 35: As it was also with the Sons of Aaron,
Nadab and Abihu; they daring to offer strange fire before the Lord, presently
there went out a strange fire from the Lord and confounded them, Lev. 10.1.2.
Thus however God belong suffering toward some, yet not so to all. And however
he does (as it were) repent over some, yet not over all. Cain, Esau and Saul
could find no place for such repentance. And what know thou who take up
this plea but that this may be thy case? thy lot?

whereupon man's repentance, God will always repent.
Obj. why, but has not God engaged himself to do the like to all that shall
repent and turn to him? This is that which Jeremy assures the Princes and all
the people of Israel. Ier. 26.13. Amend your ways, and your doings, and obey
the voice of the Lord your God, and the Lord will repent him of the evil which
he has pronounced against you. And what he promised them, he likewise assures
unto others, all others in the like case: Cap. 18.7, 8 Where the promise is
indefinite, At what instant I shall speak concerning a Nation, and concerning a
Kingdom, to pluck up, and to pull down and destroy it, If that Nation against
whom I have pronounced turn from their evil, I will repent of the evil which
I thought to do unto them. If they repent of the evil of sin, he will repent
of the evil of punishment, And if it be thus with a Nation; why not with
particular persons?

Repentance not in man's power.
A: To this I answer as before. True, it is so, upon man's repentance God will
also repent. But how know thou (as before I said) whether ever God will give
thee that grace or space to repent? How know thou but that in his just
judgment he either already has, or suddenly may give thee up to that
impenitent heart, that shall not, that cannot repent; Not repent truly and
sincerely. Possibly in an hypocritical or Legal way thou may; So did Cain,
so did Esau, so did Saul, so did Judas; being sensible of what they had brought
upon themselves, they bewailed their condition, yet were far from true
repentance. Their countenance was changed, (as it is said of Cain Genesis 4.5 his
countenance fell) but not their hearts. And so may it be with thee. True
Repentance, Repentance unto life and salvation is Gods gift, which he bestows
freely upon whom he will, and when he will. And being so, he may justly deny
it, which hold it from those, who have slighted and despised his grace, when
it was offered and held forth to them. To all such this doctrine upon this
account speaks abundance of terror. Use. 2 Take heed of receiving the grace
of God in vain; by hardening the heart against it.


Which let it serve (in the next place) as a Needle to draw in a thread after
it, making way for, and now letting in a word of Advise and Counsel, and that
to all that are here this day before the Lord. Take you heed that you do not
receive the grace of god in vain. This is Paul's Obtestation to his
Corinthians 2. Cor. 6.1. We then as workers together with God, beseech you
also that you receive not the grace of God in vain. And let it now be mine to
you, all and every of you, who hear me this day I, as a poor Minister of
Christ, working together with him as his unworthy Instrument, exhort and
beseech you that you receive not the grace of God in vain, this Gospel grace,
the offer of grace and mercy held forth unto you in the Ministry of the word;
see that you do not receive it in vain, by only giving it the hearing, and so
letting it dye and perish in the ear, not having any such affect in, and upon
you, as is intended by it, viz. to bring you home unto God and Jesus Christ, to
receive and embrace him as your Savior and Lord, to believe on him, to submit
unto him. This is the end of all our preaching, thus to some this good seed
(as the doctrine of truth is called Math. 13.24.) the seed of the word, for
the begetting of faith and obedience in the hearts of those that hear us. Now
see you to it, that this seed do not fall, like that in the Parable, which
fell by the high way side, Math. 13.4. where the ground being hardened by the
feet of the Passengers, the seed cannot enter, but lies above ground, and so
is sown in vain, being spilt and lost. Take heed that the word be not so
spilt upon any of you; that your hearts be not hardened against it, that you
should not receive it into them. This is that which the Apostle presses upon
his Hebrews, Heb. 3.7.8 wherefore as the Holy Ghost says. To day if ye will
hear his voice, harden not your hearts. And let me press the same upon you. To
day if you will hear the voice of the Son of man the voice of Jesus Christ,
so hear it as that you may live, do not harden your hearts, do not oppose,
do not resist the call of God, by shutting the word out of your hearts. This
did the Israelites in the wilderness. When God spoke unto them by his servant
Moses, they hardened their hearts, not regarding what was said to them. But
what was the issue? Hereby they exceedingly provoked God against them. This was
a day of Provocation, as the Apostle there calls it. Harden not your hearts,
as in the Provocation, etc. (...) Such was that day of Temptation in the
wilderness, the time wherein the Israelites tempted their God, by not harkening
to his voice, it was a day of Exacerbation, and Exasperation. So it was not
only to Moses, betwixt whom and the people there was a sharp contention, (as
we find it Exodus 17.2.) But also unto God, who by that their not harkning to
his voice was exceedingly greived (as it there follows Heb.3.10,) yea so
provoked and exasperated. that he swear in his wrath that they should never
enter into his rest. v. 11. Now take you heed that it be not so with you, that
you do not thus provoke God by hardening your hearts, not receiving his word,
not embracing his Gospel. Which if you shall do, know that this will be a
greater Provocation then that of theirs was, So much you may learn from the
Apostle, Heb. 12.25. Where upon this ground he exhorts his Hebrews to give
ear to the Gospel. See (says he) that ye refuse not him that speaks, (viz.
Christ speaks to you his word,) For if they escaped not who refused him that
spoke on earth, (the Jsraelites who hearkened not unto Moses) much more shall
not we escape, if we turn from him that speaks from heaven; viz, from Jesus
Christ who came from heaven, and now speaks in and by his Gospel Ministeries.
And upon the same ground let me persuade you. Take you heed how any of you
turn away from Jesus Christ thus speaking unto you; turn away your ears, turn
away your hearts, so as not to receive, not to embrace the doctrine of the
Gospel held forth unto you. This if you shall do, how know you but that God may
justly retaliate, and requite this contempt of yours, by turning away his face
from you, for ever hiding from your eyes the things which belong unto your
peace?

Offers of grace to be presently accepted.
Which that he may not do, Know you these things: And that Now, in this your
day. Now whilst it is called to day (as the Apostle there has it, Heb. 3.13.)
embracing the present time; Not putting off this work till the Morrow. It is
the Wisemans Council, Prove. 27.1. Boast not thy self of to morrow, for thou
know not what a day may bring forth. And St. James speaking to men, who lay
out their business, what they will do such a day, and such a year, not
considering what cross providence may happen, Go too now (says he) Ye that
say, to day, and to morrow, we will go into such a City, and continue there a
year, and buy and sell, and get gain, whereas ye know not what shall be to
morrow. Nemo lam Divos habuit faventes, Crastinimut possit sibi polliceri Senec.
Such is the uncertainty of man's life, that no man can assure unto himself the
succeeding day. And therefore now, whilst it is called to day, now harden not
your hearts. Now that God is pleased to knock at the doors of your hearts, to
call upon you in, and by the Ministry of his word, do not send him away as
Foelix did Paul, with a complement, that you will hear him again another time.
What know you whether ever he will vouchsafe to speak unto you again, so much
as to your ears? Probably here are some present before the Lord at this time,
who shall never hear him speak unto them again after this manner; not speaking
to their ears in the Ministry of his word. But if he do, how know you
whether ever he will knock at the doors of your hearts by his spirit again?
And therefore new hear and hearken, and set open those everlasting doors, the
doors of your hearts, that the King of glory, the Lord Jesus may enter in, and
take a full possession of them, henceforth to rule and reign in you, and that
for ever.

Obj. But what need such haste? Some called at the eleventh hour.
May not old age be soon enough? Do we not read of some who came into the
vineyard at the eleventh hour, the last hour of the day, and yet received their
penny as well those that came in at the sixth, or third, or first hour?
Matthew 20.6.

A. True, there were so; But who were they? Such as had not been called before.
Such as had not been called before.
That is their excuse, when they were questioned by the Lord of the vineyard,
why they stood all the day idle, They say unto him, because no man has hired
us. v. 7. And so it may be with those who either have wanted the means of
salvation; or else have had no such workings upon their hearts at to awaken
them; and convince them. Possibly God may have mercy upon them, (as he had
upon that penitent thief upon the Cross,) calling them home at the last hour
of the day, in their old age. But let not others promise to themselves the like
indulgence. Those who were brought into the vineyard at the eleventh hour were
none of those that had been called at the first, third or sixth hour, but such
as had not been hired before. What ever may happen to others who have not
enjoyed the means of grace, or have not been acquainted with the Motions of the
Spirit of God, It is not for you who have enjoyed the former, an have been
acquainted with the latter, and yet withstand both, to promise the like unto
your selves. No, you that have rejected the call of God again and again, in
your Childhood, Youth, Manhood, you have no ground to hope that God should come
unto you, and bring you home to himself in your old age; but you may rather
fear that if he do not cut you off before, he should then hide from your eyes
those things, which formerly you have refused to know.

Obj. But is there not still hope so long as there is life? The day of grace
and life, how said to be of equal extent, how not.
And is not the day of life, and the day of grace, of an equal latitude and
extent? Does not the Apostle say, Now is the Accepted time, now is the day of
salvation? meaning the time of this life; 2 Cor. 6.2. does not the one last as
long as the other?

A. Yes, in some sense they may be said so to do. And these two may be looked
on as of an equal extent.

1. Because the one is the utmost limit of the other; The day of grace is
bounded by the day of life, not extending beyond it. When the one is ended, the
other is ended also.

2. As to others, they are so to judge of it. Not being of Gods counsel, not
acquainted with his secret decrees; they are to hope well of others so long as
they live: Not shutting the door of mercy against any while they are here. So
long, as private Christians both may and ought to pray for them, so the
Ministers of Christ are to hold forth the tenders of grace and mercy to them
upon Gospel terms.

3. And (3ly.) as to themselves, so long as they live they stand obliged to
accept of these offers, which still refusing to do, their sin is thereby
aggravated, and heightened through that continued contempt.

4. But yet (in the 4th. place) If we speak of Gods secret decree and purpose,
questionless the day of grace may determine unto a man before the day of his
life. So it did there to Jerusalem. She still lives and flourishes for a
time; Her day of prosperity was yet continued but her day of grace was now at
an end. Now are these things hid from thine eyes. And questionless so may it
be with some particular persons, whom God in his just judgment has given up to
final impenitence, so delivering them up unto Satan and themselves, as that
from thenceforth they never shall know the things belonging to their peace.

The doubtful supposal of a despairing sinner answered and satisfied.
Obj. But what then (may some say,) may not this be our case? And if so, then
it is in vain for us to strive, to seek for what is not to be found, to knock
at that door which is shut upon us as it shall not be opened.

A. In answer to this I shall deal as tenderly as I may; so as I may not
discourage or dishearten any soul that intertaines but a thought of returning,
and coming in unto God; that begins so much as to cast a glance heavenward.
Wherein I shall do no other then what the Lord Jesus himself does, of whom it
was prophesied that he should not quench the smoking flax Matthew. 12.20. Such
was and is the gracious lenity and clemency of the Lord Jesus in his dealing
with poor sinners, in whom there are as yet only some weak desires after
grace, some slender beginnings of conversion and faith. And so shall I deal
with all such.

Gods revealed will the only Rule to walk by.
1. Willing them (in the first place) to take notice what is their Rule to walk
by. Not the secret but the revealed will of God. Secret things belong unto the
Lord, but those things which are revealed, to us and to our children for ever,
Deuteronomy. 29.29. This is that which we are to look at, and take notice of. And
therefore let not any upon this account disquiet and trouble their own souls
with such anxious disquisitions, as neither they, nor any other for them,
whether man or Angel, is able to resolve. But apply themselves to the use of
means. This will men do as concerning their temporal estates. They ne-over
stand prying into Gods decree, to enquire what portion in his secret purpose he
has laid out for them, but they set about the work of their calling, applying
themselves to the use of means. And so do you touching your spiritual and
eternal estates. Stand not to enquire how God has diposed of you in his
secret purpose; but go about the work of your general calling, apply your
selves to the use of such means as God has appointed to bring you home to
himself by, so waiting upon his good will and pleasure. This is that which the
Lord requires you to do. And therefore in obedience to his command, do it, with
that Poor impotent person ( John 5.) lying at the pool, until the Angel shall
come down and stir the waters; attending upon Ordinances, until God by his
spirit concurring with them shall please to work effectually by them, inclining
your hearts to look toward himself; giving you a sight and sense of your own
sinfulness and misery; making you to see and feel the need you have of Jesus
Christ, and heginning to draw your hearts toward him. Which when you find, let
this be a comfortable evidence unto you that your day is not yet past.

Only be not you now wanting to this grace of God, The motions of the Spirit
to be entertained.
in giving intertainment to these motions of the spirit, in opening of the
door of your hearts, that so the Lord Jesus, who is now knocking at them, may
enter in, Which, in the fear of God, be ye now persuaded to do, Not knowing
but that this may be the last knock; this the last sermon that ever we shall,
hear, or the last mention of the spirit that ever you shall feel. Now
therefore, even now before you go from this place, strike up the Covenant
betwixt Jesus Christ and your souls, accepting and receiving him in all those
Gospel Relations, not only as a Savior casting your souls upon him, so as
to rest upon the alsufficiencie of his merit for the pardon of sin and eternal
salvation, but also as a Lord, a Husband, a Head, giving your selves up undo
him to be guided and governed by him, by his word and Spirit, so receiving him
into your hearts, as that he may dwell in you, and rule over you, and that for
ever.

This being done, now know you for your comfort that you are through grace and
mercy exempted out of this black list, Where Christ is received the day of
grace is not past.
out of the number of those from whose eyes the things belonging to their peace
are hid. God having thus revealed his Son Christ not only to you, but in you
(as the Apostle says of himself Gal. 1.16.) not oneiy revealed him to your
ears, but to your hearts, as by his word so by his spirit, inclining your
hearts to close with him, to receive him upon these Gospel terms, now he has
made you to know the things which belong unto your peace. Which whilst he has
hid from others, he has revealed to you.

For which differencing mercy (to close up all in a word) bless you God; Use.
Bless God for his differencing mercy.
giving unto him the glory of this his free grace, which has put such a
difference betwixt you and others, This does our Savior in the behalf of his
Disciples, in the Text forecited. Math. 11.25. I thank they O father Lord of
heaven and earth, because thou have hid these things from the wise and prudent,
and have revealed them unto babes. The great miseries of his Kingdom God had
revealed them unto the poor and simpler sort of people, the poor received the
Gospel, whilst in the mean time they were hid from the Scribes and Pharisees,
men worldly wise and learned. And this our Savior there acknowledges to be
his work, an art of his mere good will and pleasure. Even so father, for so it
seemed good in thy sight. v. 26. And the like do you for your selves. Seeing
God has now revealed unto you those things, which he has hid from others,
many others, who upon a Natural, or Civil account, are far your betters.
being preferred before you, as in place and estate, so in understanding and
worldly wisdom. Give ye unto him the glory of this mercy, acknowledging it
to be an art of his free grace, a singular favor vouchsafed unto you. For
which let your souls for ever bless him; praising and magnifying him, who has
thus now made you Children of light, whereas others, the greatest part of the
world, still sit in darkness in the shadow of death; some of them having
their eyes already closed up, so as they neither do, nor ever shall see the
things belonging unto their peace, being already doomed and adjudged to
everlasting darkness. You are now called into that mavelous light, (as Saint
Peter calls the grace of the Gospel. 1 Pet. 2.11) (...) not undeservedly so
styled, in as much as therein are revealed those (...) the wonderful things of
God As the Apostles auditors of them at the day of Penticost, that they heard
them speak the wonderful works of God (...) magnifica, the magnificent,
great and admirable things of God. Such are the ministers of the Gospel,
wherein those wonderful acts and Counsels of God touching the salvation of his
Elect by Christ are revealed and held forth. A mystery which the Angels
themselves do earnestly desire to look into (as Saint Peter tells us. 1 Pet.
11.2.) Being much taken there with, when they saw it more clearly revealed
under the Gospel then it had been under the Law, they even stooped, bowed down
(as it were, for so the word there used properly signifies, (...) as desirous
to pry and look narrowly into it. Now these are the things which God has
revealed unto you, And for this do you praise and magnify his name for ever.

Taking this as a pledge, and assurance of what hereafter you shall see. Faith
an assurance of Vision.
Your eyes being thus opened to see Christ by faith here, you shall see him
hereafter, when you shall have a full sight of him, see him as he is, see him
in his glory; Which when you shall do, then shall ye be made like unto him, (as
St. John assures you, 1 John 3.2.) like him in glory. When Christ who is our
life shall appear, then shall ye also appear with him in glory. Col. 3.4. Which
beautiful vision, the Lord of his free grace and mercy in Jesus Christ
vouchsafe to every soul of us; Amen.

FINIS.

