A SHORT-METHOD OF PHYSIC: SHOWING The Cure of Fourty-five several Diseases,
which are the general, and most incident to Men and Women's Bodies.

Collected out of several Authors, and Experienced beyond the Seas, and also
in England.

By the Practice of C. B. G^nt^

To the which is Annexed the Portrature of a Man, and in it there is plainly
demonstrated those veins, that upon any necessary occasion are to be opened.

Together with a Register of the Diseases, with a line drawn from every one of
them, to that part of the body where they make seizure.

Very necessary for young Practitioners, or Chyrurgions that go to Sea; or for
House keepers in the Country who are remote from a Physician.

LONDON: Printed by M. S. for Thomas Jenner, at the South-entrance of the
Royal EXCHANGE. 1659.

Head Ach 6. all over Virtigo giddiness in the head 3 Arising from an
inordinate and circular motion of ye Anymal spirits in the fore part of the
Brain. Meloncholi or dotag 4 In the fore part of ye Brain or fantasy. Pin
and webb in the Eye 7 It is a little membrane, Neruous fibrous and somewhat
white, which cleueth fast unto ye Adnata tu nicle in the Eye Bloodshot in the
Eye 8 This is common and needs no description. Coriza or pose 9 This is com^on
and no demonstrat^ but that in its Chapter is needful Bleeding at nose 19 The
imoderate Excresion of the blood by the veins of the nose, the veins being
divided rarefied or openned. Ulcers in the mouth and Iaws 15 It is evident in
what places they are Tooth Ach 16 The Chapter tells you the cure if you can
choose which is ye cause Blacknes and rottennes of teeth 17 Look in ye Chapter
and you will find cure for ye Corosion of them Hoemop tisis or spitting of blood
21 It comes from ye Breast and Lungs and great Artery being vital parts Loss of
Appetite vomiting 22 It is a defect of ye sense of Sucking in the upper Pain
in the stomach 24 Orifice of ye Stomach Chollick 25 In the Colic gut and ye
pain is about ye Loins. Illiack passion 26 In the gut Ileon and other small
gutts Worms 23 Some are in ye Stomach some in ye inferior parts called
Ascarides causing a continual pain and a most trouble some Itching about the
fundament Binding of the Belly 27 The increase of the ^e^^^tiue faculty and
meakness of ye Expulsive faculty of the gutts pain of the Spleen 35 Dropsy
Ascites 34 A distention of ye Belly by a watery and salt humor, with a Tumor of
ye ^ods Thyghs and also of ye Feet Timpanites dropsy 34 A distention of ye
belly from much wind. Anasarca dropsy 34 This is in ye whole body Equaly as
well as in ye Legs and feet. Bloody flux 28 pain in the Hemorrhoids 31 This
line runs to ye fundament and so to ye Hemorrhoid veins Tenarsinus or
falling out of the fundame^t 36 Hanging forth of ye outer part of ye right gutt
White flux 29 defect of ye retentiue faculty and expulsive faculty of ye
gutts. Ich or watery pin^pells in the hands 40 Dysuria or Scalding of urine 39
Caused sometimes in the Raines and sometimes by disseases at ye neck of ye
bladder Stone in the kidneys 38 The kidneys lies by ye Raines pain in the
Rain 37 This line is directed to ye small of ye back Obstructio^ of the Liver
33 By a matter filling up there caueties and hinders ye distribution of
Nourishment Iaundice 32 It proceeds from the gal yt Joins to the Liver Hott
distemper of the Liver 30 pleurisy 20 It affects some time ye left side
sometime toward the throat Cough of the Lungs 18 The Lungs being near the
Back parts Quinzte 14 It is a shutting up of ye Jaws or the Supreme parts of
the gullet and the throat. A falling down of the pall at 13 This is known to
every Houskeeper the cause and the cure you have in ye Chapter pain in the
Ears 12 The cause of it being sometimes inward as well as outward look in ye
Chapter Noise in the Ears 11 Being it is in the Ears look in the Chapter for
the cause and cure Thick or dull Hearing 10 This line directs the place but the
Chapter tells in what manner it is Apostume in the Ears 12 This is commonly
known where it lies Catarrh or defluxion 5 Ecrementitious humors proceeding
from the distemper in the bruine or from over abundant repletion irritating and
stirring up the expulsive faculty of it falling Sickness in children 2 falling
Sickness 1 In the Brain at ye back part of ye Head occasioned by a sharp
matter offensive to ye brain ^ringing the Nerves where they begin and as it
were binding them fast together
A: Vena frontis, or vain in the forhead, b: Vena Temporum, or Temple vain.
A: Vena Cephalica or the great vain in the Arm proceeding from the head, c:
d. Vena Basilica-Ioyning to the Cephalic Vain and is com^only called the
Liver vain. * Vena Mediana, the middle heart Vain. e: Saluatella manus
Senistrie, a certain vain run^ing between the little finger or Spleen vain.
f: Cephalica ejusdem manus, or the head vain in the same hand g: Tibice
interior, the vain in the inside of the Shank or shine bone h: Ischiadica, a
vain upon the foot proceeding from the hip or hucklebone i: Saphoena the
vain in the Ancle. k: Vena pollicis in pede, the vain of ye great Too of ye
Foot l: Vena Minimi Digiti pede, The vain of the little Too of the foot


diagram of male anatomy

The Weights and Measures their Marks.
A Grain gr. 1. A grain and a half gr. 1. ss A Scrupell 1. Half a scrupell
ss. A Dragme 1. Half a dragme ss. An Ounce 1. Half an ounce ss. A Pound lb 1.
Half a pound lb ss. XX. Grains is a Scrupell. Three Scrupells iis a Dragme.
Eight Dragmes iis an Ounce. Twelve Ounces iis a Pound. To take or receive A
drop gut 1. A handful M. 1. Half a handful M. ss. A Pugill is as much as is
taken up with all the fingers P. 1. Half a Pugill P. ss. Of each ana


These marks signify what the quantities are of every ingredient, specified in
this Book.

I. CHAPTER, Epilepsie, or Falling Sickness.
THE Epislepsie it is a convultion of the whole body by fits, with a
depravation of both mind and senses. The Cause Cause.
is either contained in the ventricls of the brain, or sent up from the
stomach, and spleen unto the head, and the brains l^bouring to expel that
which is offensive unto it, shakes it self, and by consequence all the Nerves
adjacent to it.

I shall not instance many signs for Diseases, in this small vollume, neither
are they indeed proper, because they do not always fall out alike, for they
are very various; only I shall mention this. ^igne.
The senses inwardly and outwardly are hindered, and the body diversely moved,
he stares and thrusts forth his eyes, and gnasheth his teeth, breaths
difficultly, his seed, dung, and urine, breaks forth involuntarily, and near
unto the fits end he fometh at the mouth and nose, and the fit being ended he
forgets all his actions.

ure.
For the Cure, generally the matter that offends in this distemper is for the
most part phlegm, wherefore you must administer those things that purges phlegm:
First, if his body be bound give him this glyster. Take of Fountain water lb 1.
and dissolve in it ss of Castle Soape, and of Electuarium de succo rosarum, and
Diaphanicon, ana ss and make a glyster, afterward give him this potion; Take
of Senna ss. Anniseeds and Cloves ana ss. leaves of Mints and Bittony, ana M.
ss. of the tops of Time, P. ss. boil them to a quarter of a pint in
Spring Water, and strain it, and infuse in it of Troches of Agarick 2.
Cinmamom ss. Diaphaenicon, 3. Syrup of Roses 1. make a potion and let it be
given with safe government. If there be signs of repletion, and the party be
sanguine, let him blood in the Cephalic vein in the right arm, otherwise not.

In this disease weak medicines avail little, therefore Chymicall medicines
are most effectual, let this be it. Let the Patient take ^ 2. of the infu^ion
of Crocus-Mettallorum for a vomit, it is one of the most prevailing medicines
in this distemper, it man be taken 3 or 4 times, once every fourth or fifth day.
Oil of white Amber rightly made, given in water of Swallows, is very
commendable, the dos is from ss to 1. or you may give it very well in Treacle
water.

II. Falling Sickness in Children.
This disease is common among Children, and very dangerous, and differs very
much from that of elder people, therefore it is necessary to speak of their
Cure Cure.
by it self, as follows.

First, Make the body solluble by a Glyster or Suppostor, after or about the
same time, give 2. of the Electary of Diacarthamum, if this purge have not
profited, let the Child have a vomit of white Vitriol prepared, or salt of
Vitriol, which may be given three or four times, at two or three days
distance one after another. And if the disease abates not, but rather increase,
let there be given often in Milk or Broth this following powder, it is called
De Gutteta; you may give it from ss. 1. The powder is thus made.

Take of Peony roots and seeds, white Dictamnus, M^sleto of the Oak ana ss the
Seed of A^riplex or orage ^ 2. the po^der of M^ns skull ^ 3. Red Currell
prepared, Hyacinths prep^red, ana ss Elks hoof prepared ss. M^sk 1. Le^te-Gold
1. mix them into powder, take the dosse in a small spoonful of Milk or Broth,
or Water, or instead thereof Cinamon-Water. Whilst that these things are
doing, you must give once in a day a Glyster. Take of the Lixivium of
Castel-So^p 1. Hiera Picra 3. Honey of Rosemary ss. Oil of Rue and Lillyes ana
2.

If that the Child suck, let the Nurses milk be good, let her drink no wine
only water, or water and honey, and a small drink of Sarsaparilla, some
Children are so subject to this D^sease, that it returns again after that it
is cured; let them be purged twice a month with M^nna, or Syrope of Cichory
with Rhubarb, and every New-Moone, give it a dosse of Epileptick powder,
Degu^teta, give it thrice in two days.

But an approved medicine (after general evacuation) in Childrens Epilepsis,
as I have often found by experience, is to give fine musk the quantity of 5 or
6 grains in thin small wine, twice or thrice in a day. It cures perfectly.

III. Vertigo, or Giddiness.
The Vertigo, it is a false imagination in which all ob^ects and the head it
self, seems to turn round, so that the Patient often f^lls.

The Cause Cause.
is the circumvolution of the spirits, coming of a vapotion matter or wind, and
coming to the Ventricls of the brain disturbs the spirits, and m^kes them run
round, whence the species of the object, brought by those spirits are moved in
like manner, and so the objects themselves seem to be moved the same way, and
these vapors are sent up from evil humors, and the humors are such as produce
vapors, namely, blood, phlegm, choler, and melancholy, and watery humor, for a
cold as well as a hot vapor causes a Vertigo.

The Cure Cure.
of this disease is much like that of the Epilepsie, co^ing almost of the same
causes. If blood abound you must open a vein, and let blood by degrees, open
the Cephalic vein in the right arm, but give a Glyster first, the same that
is mentio^ed in the Cure of the Epilepsie, after that make evacuation by the
purging potion there mentioned, then give this Sternutatorie or sne^zing
powder; Take leaves of M^rjorum, Sage, and Rosem^ry, all dried, ana ss.
P^llitory of Spain, and white Helibor, ana 1. Musk gr. 3. make a subtle
powder, and with a quill blow some i^to the nostrils. The Patient must drink
often of the Decoction of Gu^jacum, and sometimes four or five drops of oil of
while Amber in it, and sweat on it, and not neglecting Glysters, at such times
when you do not sweat, to keep the body solluble, the Glyst^r that is used is
in the Cure of the Epilepsie.

IV. Melancholy.
M^lancholia, It is a kind of doting accompanied with fear and sadn^sse. Great
variety of doting arises from the various disposition of the humor, whereby
some thinks themselves Kings and great men, others that they are beasts, and
that they are glass and fear to be touched lest that they should be broken,
others that they have Frogs or Mice and other creatures in their bellyes.

The Cause of this disease is a dark spirit or vapor very bla^^, (...).
for when the Animal spirits ought in their own nature t^ b^ p^re, and thin,
and transparent, for the cheerful performing of the actions of the brain and
to cause cheerfulness, if that they change their constitution and become dark
they produce sorrow and fear. The Cause of this evil qu^lity of the Spirits is
a M^l^ncholly humor, which being thick, da k, and black, does inf^ct the
Spiri^s, and make them cloudy, and dark, and this humor is cold and dry and
fit for fixing and condensing the spirits, which fixing and co^densing, and
thickning of the spirits, causes sorrow and heaviness.

The ^ignes are propounded, namely sorrow and fear without a cause, for the
Cure, Cure.
let the distemper take its original from what part soever, two things are to
be observed, that the wh^le body be freed from the humor by general
evacuation, as also from the fi^th of other humors, for it seldom happens that
one pa^ty is alone affected. Secondly, That your chief remedie^ b^ directed to
the Hypochond^a, because in the Spleen and Liver, is the first generation of
Melancholy, and the gathering of it is in the parts adj^cent.

First, Give a Glyster, then this following potion, take of Se^a ss. Anniseeds,
and Cream of Tartar ana 1. Bou^age flowers, ^amiterie and Sorrel, ana M. ss.
Liquorice 3. boil them to 3. dissolve in the straining, of Rhubarb infused in
Lavender-water ^ss. double Catholicon 3. compound Syrup of Succory ^ 1. ^ake a
potion to which you must add if the disease be strong ^ 1. (...) Confectio
Alkermes; The day following let blood in the left ^rme, chiefly or as the Liver
and Spleen are most affected, after the ^ody is well purged give asses milk
with Sugar of Roses, and a (...) of Species arromaticum rosatum mixed with it.
It is necessary ^^t r that you have received your Cure, that for the prevention
(...) a relapse, or falling into any other dist^mper, that you purge ^^ce a
week, for a month, in s^ring and fall with these following ^^s, for they open
b^ degrees incomparab^y all manner of ob^^uctions, and purge Mellancholly, and
gently allayeth it. Take ^^der of Senna and Cream of Tartar, an^ 1 powder of
Ci^mon ss. with Syrup of Lemons m^ke a mass of which take ^ ss ^e ^oure before
Supper, for salt of Tartar has a great virtue ^^llay black Melancholy humors,
for it d^aweth to it self by a ^taine property it has sower thing.

V. A Catarrh or D^fluxion.
A Catarrh is the falling down of an excrimentitious humor from the head into
the inferior parts.

This is caused Cause.
by an il con^^ction or want of a good digestion, by r^ason of which, bad
humors are generated, and the brai^^ being as a Cupping glass applied to the
body never ceases to (...) tract humors and vapors from the inferior parts,
hence the ex^ments are increased, which by their quantity and quality provoking
the expulsive and overcoming the retentive facculty, run imm^d^ra^^y b^
unusual and improper ways which they find ou^ to the g^^at disturbance of the
bo^y. A violent Catarrh proc^^^; from a sh^rp salt humor rising from a hot
Liver, and being sent up unto the brain, is by the frigidity or coldness of
it, condenced and ^o falls down into the Lungs, or other inferior parts.

The Cure Cure.
consists in the evacuating the humor offending, and in the stopp^ng of its
motion, the matter offending is to be dimin shed b^ these pills. Take pills of
Cochie the lesser 2. with water of Bittony, make them into five or six pills,
and gild them, let them be taken in the morning early, having eat a light
^upper over night, if that the cause be very strong, then give 2. of pill,
Tartary Quercitany, and add to it five grains of pulp of C^l q^intida, for it
very excellently purges the brain, and open obstructions, after that the body
and head is sufficiently cleansed of the humor offending, to stop the course of
the Catarrh use Luc Sulphuris, or this infallible remedy. Take of Conserve of
ed Rose^ 2. Fl^s, or flower of Brimstone ss. Spirit or oil of Sulpher, four
drops, and incorporate them well together, and every morning and evening first
and last, take the quantity of half a Wal-nut, and let it dissolve by degrees
in the mou^h, and continue thi^ medicine till the rhume cease. An issue in
the arm is a great help to stop or divert the course of the rhume, if it
proves a stubborn Catarrh, but that is the last thing to be done.

VI. Head Ach.
Cephalalgia, or the pain in the H^ad; It is of several kinds, and proceeds of
several causes, a pricking pain comes from a sharp collerick humor or vapor,
which touches the membraines of the brain. A heavy pain comes from the
multitude of thick and cold matter, namely phlegm and melancholy compressing
the sensible parts, and extending pain comes of wind or milder humors, which
work themselves into the membranes and distend them, a beating or pulsative
pain comes from thin chollerick blood or spirits abounding, by which the
Arteries being swollen or stretched do beat more vehemently, and shake the
membranes, and so striking the adjacent parts, cause in them a sense of
pulsation; the pain coming of either a hot or cold cause, the Cure must be
directed to the taking away of both.

The Cure Cure:
of an Headache proceeding from a cold cause, the flegmy matter is first to be
evacuated by these following pills, Take Coloquintida 1. Trochis of Agarick,
Scammony prepared, Black Hellibore and Turbith, ana ss. Alloes 1 Diarrhodon
Abatis ss. let the purging things beaten together, and put into a glass with
spirit of wine, as much as is sufficient, and let them macerate eight days in
a warm place, and then add the powder of Diarrhodon, and infuse them four
days longer, then strain them, and press them, and let the liquor so pressed
be stilled in Balneo, so long till the extract in the bottom of the Still or
Alimbeck, becomes so thick that it may make pills, the dosse is 1. or you may
take this which I have often experienced. Take Alloes ss. the powder of the
Electuary of Pearls, the three sanders and red roses ana gr. 3. with Syrup of
wormwood and violets, make a mass, give 1. thereof twice in a week, one hour
before Supper. Whilst these medicines are using, you must use all along this
specificall medicine. Take the powder of Zedoary 1. Bittony-water, and of
Vervine and Elder, ana 1. mix them and apply them hot to the part grieved. The
hot cause of this Head ach proceeds from blood or choler, and the like
remedies are proper for both, only they must be made stronger or weaker
according to the strength of the disease. First, after a Glyster let blood,
draw more if the grief proceeds of blood, then if it comes of choler, then
give a medicine that purge choler, not only when choler is the principal
cause, but when blood abounds, whose thinner part is easily turned into
choler, if that the offending humor be not sufficiently taken away by one
purge, you must purge again at due distance, and after apply repelling
medicines to the head; namely, vinegar of roses, or which is better this
Epitheme. Take of musk gr. 12. Camphir 1. red rose water in which sanders have
been infused 20. mix them, shave the head, and wet double clothes therein, and
apply them warm to all the Sutures of the head, when they are d y wet them
again, and continue the application four and twenty hours, and in so doing
you provoke sleep, strengthen the br^ine, and wonderfully recover the Patient.

VII. Albugo, or white spot called Pin and Web in the Eye.
This Pin and Web comes of phlegm or a thick humor remaining after an Opthalmy,
and is easily cured if it be not inveterate, and sometimes it comes by a wound
or ulcer, and is a scar, but that is hardly cured, because it is in a party
that has exquisite sense, and sharp medicines, such as are proper to wear
away. A Cicatrize or skar, cannot be endured, therefore I shall instance only
the cure of the form, and it is as follows. You must first make general
evacuation by this following medicine; Take of Sema ss. Fennel-seeds 1. the
leaves of Bittony, and Eyebright, and Vervaine, ana M ss L^quorice 3. boil
them to three ounces, and dissolve in the straining of D^ap^aenicon 3. Syrup of
Rose 1. make a potion and give it in the morning, afterward foment the eyes
with the decoction of Fanugreek, Mellilote, and Celondine, and Fennel, with a
sponge to soften the hard matter, afterward take the distilled water of honey
used alone in the eye, for it is incomparable in taking away all blemishes in
the eye, by continuing the use of it sometime, Sugar candy is good, being
dissolved in Eyebright water, or Fennel water.

VIII. Sugillatio, or Blood-shot in the Eye.
Sugillatio, or Blood-shot, or that red color of the eye that comes of blood
sent thither, Cure.
if young is easily cured, only by dropping of Pidegons blood into the eye, or
in want thereof, you may use women's milk with a little Frankincense and
Saffron, or apply the yolk of an egg with wine. If the disease be old and
stubborn and that the redness turns black, take dried Hyssop, tied in a rag
and put into hot water, and applied to the eye, it is excellent, for experience
teaches that this medicine is of such force that the blood is drawn away by
its sticking to the clout.

IX. Coriza, or Pose.
Coriza, is a Catarrh falling from the brain into the Nose, which defluxion is
of a cold humor contained in the fore ventri^ls and comes for the most part of
an external cause, which cools the brain, for then it is squeesed like a
sponge, and so it sends down the humor into the inferior parts, as also by
over cooling the brain, there is an increase of phlegm, for through want o^
heat the excrements are not concocted, therefore are they sent ^orth through
the open passages by the expulsive facculty.

The cure Cure.
of this disease is by curing the Catarrh, for it requires the same evacuation,
only you must not use sneezing p^wders lest they should draw the humors more to
the part af^^cted. The vapor of b^yled M^rjoram, or of Marjoram water, taken
into the nose does good, the fume of red rose vinegar sprinkled upon a red hot
iron, is good, If the defluxion be very cold, dry fumigations of Frankincense
is good, only strewed upon embers, by these the cold distemper of the brain is
amended and the supe^fluous moisture consumed.

X. Baruecoia, Thick or Dull-hearing.
Thick, and Dull-hearing here is meant that which is caused by an external
cause, which is discerned (whether it be a tumor or thick matter or any other
heterogoneall substance of any other nature which fills the Cavety) ^f you
look upon them in the sun, if any thing has fallen into the ears, the Patient
will inform you.

The infallible cure Cure.
for this, is that the Patient take his morning urine and let it stand in a
glass to putrefaction, or till it stinketh, and then morning and evening to
inject his ears three or four times with it, being warmed and after the
injection let him put in three or four drops of this oil into his ears. Take
candy oil 2. put into it sixty Hog-lice, by some they are called Sows, let
them be boiled and strained and then dissolve in it gr. 10. of Musk, and keep
it for use, let the body be purged three times in twelve days with this pu^ge.
Take All^es 3. Rhubarb Sema ss pulp of Coloquintida 1. with Syrup of violets
make a mass and take of them 1. or less according to the age and str^ngth of
the patient, let it be taken very early in the morning, by the use of method I
never failed the cure of this d^stemper if it came of an outward cause.

XI. Paracousis, or noise in the ears.
This comes from a preternaturall motion of the air, which is naturally
contained in the ears, the causes of this preternaturall motion are many, but
chiefly a vapor or wind sent from other parts into the ears, or bred there,
either coming from the whole body or from some particular part, namely, the
stomach, liver, spleen, midriff, womb, whence it comes to pass that in great
vomitings in Hypocondriak mellancholly, Cause.
and fit of the mother, there is a noise in the ears, in feavours it comes
from the whole body; and Hypocrates says that a noise in the ears coming in
an accute disease is deadly, for it comes of wind sent by the Arteries from
the whole body into the ears, wind is bred in the ear by phlegm contained
therein, whence it comes to pass that thick hearing is always accompanied
with an noise in the head, for by the humor there is a stoppage, from whence
comes deafness, and from the wind that proceeds from that humor comes the
noise, many other causes there may be laid down, but there is no certain
knowledge of them, but this we may conjecture, that the noise comes from wind,
because sometimes it cease and comes again, and if the fault be in the
ears only, there is a continual noise without intermission.

The cure Cure.
of the noise of the head coming from consent with other parts, depends upon
the cure of the diseases of those parts, but that which comes principally from
the ear distempered by a cold distemper and thick vapor, is cured in the same
manner as in the Chapter of thick and dull hearing, for they are alike, and one
is changed sometimes into the other, and sometimes they are joined together,
for a noise in the ears, is the forerunner of thick hearing and deafness.

XII. Pain in the Ears.
It is caused by matter, wounds, ulcers, or things fallen or put into the ears,
which by dissolving the continuity of those sensible parts, which compass the
cavety of the ear, causes pain, a cold distemper sometimes causes pain in
the ears, and it comes from cold winds, baths, and other cold causes. To the
Cure

Cure.
Let the body first be purged with this following purge. Take Sema, Rhubarb, ana
1. Alloes ss. vitriolated Tartar 1. let them be made into pills with ss of
Diarrhodon Abbatis, and Syrup of Wormwood and Violets, and let him take 1. in
the morning, let him drink often of clarified Whey, or Pippin possets which are
thus made. Take Pippins cut them and coar them, and put them in milk, and let
them boil till the milk turn, then take away the curd and reserve the posset
for use.

Apply this Cataplasme to the ear. Take one Onion, Impostume in the Ear.
fresh Butter 2. Oil of Cammomell and Roses ana 1. Saffron 1. make a Poultice
and apply it warm, The superation being made, the Impostume breaks, and the
matter comes forth, either by the membraine of the ear made thin, or else
coroded, and then the Patient must lie upon the ear that is pained that the
quitter may come forth and you must drop things into the ears that may cleans,
take the decoction of Barley 4. honey of Roses 1. drop this warm into the are at
several times. If the pain in the ear come from any thing fallen into it as a
Cherry-stone and the like, which will be very grievous and cause pain,
Convulsions, and inflammations, and sometimes death, you must draw out those
things thus. Take an Eare-picker and dip it in Rosin, Turpintine, Gum, or the
like, turning of it till you get it out by degrees. If thus you cannot, put hot
oil of Almonds continually into the ears to relaxe the party, and make the
thing contained in the ear slippery, so it will easier come forth, use
sneezing with the mouth and nostrills shut, and so it will be forced out of the
ears, these are to be continued till the party be free; for if the thing
continue long in the ear, it will be inflamed and become more difficult and
dangerous to be drawn forth. If Flees get into the ears, for the taking out of
them make a ball of dogs hair and put into the ears and the Flees will come to
it, or make a tent and put it often into the ears with a little Turpintine.

XIII. The Relaxation of the Vuula.
The Relaxation of the Vuula, Cause.
comes from a rhume falling from the brain upon the Vuula or Collumella, and
does so moisten and soften and relax it, that it will be extended to the upper
part of the Aesophagus or Weraud, and cause a nauseousnesse, so that the
Patient will seem to have something in his throat which he cannot swallow
down, by which you may know it without looking into the mouth.

The Cure Cure.
is performed by purging away the humors flowing, from which is the Anticedent
cause, and that is done by Pil Iperialis, take 2. every night for a week, all
along make use of these powders, to consume the humor. First, apply Pomegrannet
p^lls powdered, and after mixed with a little Pepper, or take red Roses,
Pomegrannet flowers, and Pills ana ss. the roots of Snake ^eed and To mentill,
Galls, and Flower-deluce roots ana ^. burnt Alum 2. make a powder. Ordinary
Chirurgions apply the powder of long Pepper but that is dangerous and is a
means to draw more the humors to the place. The manner of applying this powder
is to depresse the tongue with a speculum oris, and then blow up some of the
powder with your Vuula spoon, do this often till the humor be spent.

XIIII. Angina, or Quinzie.
It comes from inflammation caused by pure blood or mixed with choler, Cause.
phlegm, or melancholy, and falls out of the branches of the jugular veins
into the muscles of the jaws and throat and swells them and by that means
stop and contract the ways of breathing and swallowing.

This Angina is an accute disease and sometimes kills a man in one day, what
remedy is to be used must be done with great diligence, Cure.
and what hour the Physician comes, let him let blood out of the same side the
head is affected, out of the head vein in the arm, and if that appear not,
out of the vein called Mediana, and take away a pound or two, not all at once
but by degrees, a little every three or four hours, for this kind of blood
letting is very necessary, then open a vein under the tongue, then apply under
the throat and so under each ear this following Cataplasme, Take Althea roots
and the roots of Briony, and the wild Cucumer, ana 1. Mallows, Pellitory,
Origon, and the lesser Centaury, ana M. 1. Fat number six or seven Lint-seed
and Fenugreek-seed, ana 1. boil them then strain them and add of the powder
of Swallows-nest, and of Album Greecum, ana 3. Brimstone ^ 1. fresh Butter, and
Ducks-grease ana 1. Oil of Dill 2. and make a Cataplasme and apply it warm,
and gargarise the mouth with this, Take Plantain, Sorrel, and the tops of
Brambles, ana M. 1. the grains of Sumach, ss. one Pomegrannet beaten with
grains and pills and red Roses P. 1. make a decoction to a pint, and dissolve
in the strainings Syrup of Mulberries 3. Sal Prunella 2. and make a gargell;
The next day purge with this, take of Rhubarb 2. Ro^^n of Scammony, gr. 6.
dissolve them in broth and drink it, it is not amiss to give a Glyster before
and after purging, and with the continuance the gargel, let him swallow
sometimes of this Julep, Take of Rose water Plan^aine water ana 6. Syrup of
Lemons 1. Syrup of Maidenhair and Violets, ana 1ss. spirit of Sulphur ten
drops, mingle them for a Julep, and by this method under God he need not fear
but be cured.

XV. Ulcer in the mouth and jaws.
These are bred of sharp humors or vapors coming from diverse parts into the
jaws, as in malignant feavours it often happens, Cause.
or to those that have hot Livers and foul bodies. To the Cure

First, A Glyster, Take of the common decoction for Glysters lb 1 and dissolve
in it of Cassia new drawn, Cure.
and Diaphaenicon ana ss Oil of Violets 2. oil of Rue, 1. and administer it;
then open a vein in the arm, the Liver vein, then purge with a dosse of
Pillulae Ruffi, the next day give the Glyster again, and gargell the mouth
with the gargell mentioned in the Quinzie, and if the inflammation be great add
some juice of Nightshade, Henbeene, and Plantain to it with as much Sal
prunella, as will not make it too sharp, and let him drink of this Julep, Take
red Rose leaves 2. Fountain water lb1. and when they are warm on the fire, put
into them of spirit of Vitriell, gut. 10. and let them remain pretty warm for
half an hour, then strain them and then dulcifie it with as much Syrup of
Violets and Mulberries as is sufficient, and take now and then 3 or 4
spoonfulls, by this means I have cured many.

XVI. Toothache.
It comes from a flux of humors either cold and flegmy and is cured only by
powdering a little Ginny Pepper, Cause.
and tie it up in (...) little piece of Sarcenet, and let it steep a little in
Clove-water, and then take it out and apply it to your teeth pained, and r
itte^ate it three or four times, and it will draw away the cold fl^gm, and the
pain cease; Or this pain comes of a hot and ^tery and salt sharp humor, and
then is cured by putting of a T^och of Alhandall, (which is made of
Coloquintida seed) unto the teeth ^ained, and it does the like effects to the
former; But your ^leum Heracli, which is oleum Buxi, or oil of Box, put into
the teeth is above all other medicines, and never fails, yet I have seldom
failed by the former. If the pain is caused by cold air got into the hollow
of a tooth, stop it with this pill; Take of Opium and Beeswax, ana gr. 2. and
make a pill of it, and put it into the hollow of the Tooth, and it will give
ease presently and keep the air out.

XVII. Blackness and rottenness of Teeth.
The teeth contracts to themselves a black, livid, or yellow color from the
evil humors cleaving unto them, which by long continuance do also corrode
them and make them rotten.

Many and infinite are the medicines that Authors have invented for making
teeth white, Cure.
but I have contented my self only with this one, which presently makes them
white, cleanses them and keep them from rotting. Namely spirit of Vitriel or
Sulpher, in which you must dip a little stick and rub the teeth with the end
thereof, and then wipe them with a rag; in great foulness use the oils
themselves, otherwise you must mix them with honey of Roses and fair water,
lest by the often use of them the gums should be corroded. Afterward the teeth
being made white, to prevent their blackness again, and preserve them white.
First, cleanse them with a stick of Rosemary beaten at one end as a stick of
Liquorice, and brush of the filth that hang on the teeth, then wash the mouth
with wine, and rub them with this powder, Take roots of Snakeweed, Alum, and
white Currel, ana 1. make of them a powder to rub the teeth.

XVIII. Cough of the Lungs.
Such as is occasioned by a Catarrh, or defluxion of rhume from the head, Cause.
you must first purge with Pillula Imperialis for fourteen days together, you
must take ss. at a time, every night a little before you go to bed, Cure.
after the humor is well purged, use every morning this pectorall Bole, which
indeed has not its parallel. Take Lac Sulphuris 2. if that you cannot get that,
take of Flos, or flower of Brimstone ss. of white Amber and Mastick ana 2.
Specierum Diatragacanth frigid. 2. oil of Sulphur ss Conserve of red Roses 3.
mix them well, and take the quantity of a small wal-nut morning and evening,
but let it dissolve by degrees in his mouth, let him drink at times the
decoction of Liquorice and Maiden hair, made in Barley water, and sometimes
possets made of Pippins, many ^as found miraculous effects by this means, and
I have had great credit by it.

XIX. Haemorrhagia.
The Haemorrhagia, or bleeding at the nose, the cause^ are too many to be
inserted here, therefore I shall only set down the speediest and most
universal way of stopping of it, Cause and Cure.
and it is done by revultion of blood from the nose, and by repelling it to the
parts adjacent, by stopping the veins that are open, by staying the disorderly
motion of the blood, and by evacuating the sharp and thin humors mixed with the
blood, which are the chief cause of an Haemorrhagia, by correcting them and
hindering their increase, and by strengthening the retentive faculty of the
Liver and veins, all which are done as follows.

First, Let blood on the same side the nostril bleeds on the Cephallick, or you
may in the Liver vein, do it speedy before the party be too weak, and that in
a large quantity if the Patient be strong, and out of a large orifice, for to
make the blood move a contrary way, there must be a stronger motion to hinder a
weaker, therefore by how much the larger the Orifice and more violent the
motion is of the blood from the vein opened, by so much the sooner is the blood
of the nose stopped, if once letting blood and applying other remedies do not
stop it, you must repeat letting of blood according to the strength of the
Patient, you may open a vein in the foot, that a revultion may be made at a
greater distance which is very prevalent. After blood-letting, apply to the
poule of the neck some rags that are wet in the spaun of frogs, and because it
is not to be had at all times in the year, you may have the water of it that is
distilled, in the Apothicaryes shops. Apply to the temples this Cataplasme.
Take Bole-Armeniske, Terra Sigillaeta, Sanguis Dragonis, Frankincense, Mastick
and Alloes, ana 1. one white of an Egg, the Juice of Plaintaine, Houselick,
and Nightshade, of each as much as is sufficient to make it into a Cataplasme,
but put some of the hair of an hare to it, let it be applied to the forehead
and temples. The Cotton of an Inck-borne squeezed a little, and made into a
tent and put into the nostril that bleeds, does powerfully stop, as also laid
and bound to the forehead, you may add to it a very little white Vitri^l, for
it stays bleeding extraordinarily by astringing the orifice of the Veins,
being put into the nose tent ways. You must restrain also the motion of the
blood by cooling, thickning, and coagulating Juleps. Take Sal prunella 1.
Troches of Amber ss Bloodstone and red Correll prepared, ana 1. Syrup of dried
Roses 1. Plantain water 3. make a Julep to be taken three or four times a day.
-- Drink sometimes Oxicrate, that is, Vinegar and water, apply Vinegar and
water to the privities, Their own blood dried in a pan and poudered and mixed
in the above mentioned Julep is a very rare medicine, and also blown into the
nostril. Choose a cool air, and let the Patients diet be of little
nourishment, as Calves and Sheeps feet, or of Goats, hard eggs, rice, and new
fat Cheese, and the like. Eat fruits that are sharp, binding, and bitter,
abstain from wine, use little motion, and speak little, let him sleep or be
caused to sleep, for that contemperates the humors, and stays the motion
thereof, avoid passion (for it causes the blood to ascend) as Anger, Laughter,
and Joy.

XX. Pleuritis, or Pleurisy.
It is the inflammation of the membraine that goes about the ribs, Cause.
of the Internal intercostall muscles. These knowledge of this disease signs,
Signs.
1. A pricking pain in the side. 2. A continual sharp Feavour. 3. Difficulty
of breathing. 4. A hard pulse like a Saw. 5. A troublesome Cough.


1. The pricking pain is chiefly in the Membraines, and comes from matter, and
this pain possesses the side, and stretches it self into the adjacent parts.

2. A continual sharp Feavour has its original, from a flegmon, or
Sanguinious tumor in some part near the breast.

3. D^fficulty of breathing follows in this disease, because the parts inflamed
cannot sufficiently distend themselves to draw in a great quantity of air,
which is requisite for the cooling of the inflamed heart.

4. The pulse is hard, because the memb^ai e is affected and stretched forth,
which also distendeth the Arteries, and they therefore make the difference of
pulse called Sarratilis, like a Saw.

5. The Cough follows because nature striveth to expel that which is
troublesome from the p^rty affected, also some of the matter swetteth from
thence into the Lungs, and moves the expulsive faculty, whence the Cough comes.

There is a spitting of blood as another sign, but it is not in all
Pleurisi^s, and therefore is not a proper sign.

To the Cure, Cure.
First of all give a glyster, and if the disease be not violent, open the vena
Basilica on the same side, but if it be violent let blood first and give the
glyster afterward; Blood-letting in the beginning of this disease it must not
be omitted, neither in old nor young, nor in women with Child, or in
Childe-bed, you must let blood oftentimes every day till the pain or Feavour
grows less, and from the beginning of the disease twice or thrice in a day
give this Julep. Take Poppy water 4. Syrup of Violets 1. Sal Prunella 1. make a
Julep. After the first phlebotomy let the side be anointed with this unguent,
mix the unguent of Althaea with oil of sweet-Almonds, and after he has
anointed sprinckle on the powder of Cummin-seeds, and lay on a Colwort leaf,
and this is of high commendation; after he has taken of the former Julep two or
three days, let him use this pectorall Jelep. Take Barley P. 1. Liquorice and
Raisins stoned ana 1. Jujubes number 20 the four great Cole-seeds ana 3.
Bugless and Violet flowers, ana P. 1. boil them to a pixt and a quarter, and
dissolve in the straining Syrup of Violets, and Jujubes, ana 2 make a Julep for
four dosses to be taken morning and evening. The whole time of the disease let
him drink Barley water for his ordinary drink, made with Liquorice, Poppies,
and Ma^den-haire; Wine in this disease is poison, and all sharp things that
prov^ke Coughing, and by their astringency hinders spitting; Purging is
improper in this disease, unless it be in the declination and then use this.
Take Senna ss. Aniseeds 1. Buglesse and Maiden-haire, ana M. ss. Liquorice and
Raisins stoned, ana 3. flowers of Buglesse and Violets, ana P. 1. boil them to
2. and in the straining dissolve of Rhubarb, infused in Scabious water, with a
little yellow sanders 2 ss Manna and Syrup of Roses, ana 1. m^ke a po^ion. --
Many other medicines I could mention, but they who follow these shall not loose
their expectations.

XXI. Haemoptisis or Spitting of Blood.
This is taken for that spitting of blood that comes from the vital parts, as
breast, lungs, and rough Artery, and this is occasioned by the t^o great
quantity of blood, which either breaks the v^ines, Cause.
or open their orifices, and so makes either a Rexis or Anastom^sis; the same
blood offending in quallity, as when it is too hot or too thin, because heat
does open the orifices, and thinness makes it flow easily through; Many causes
may be reckoned up, but it will be too tedious for the Reader to have them
inserted he^e, for this book is intended only for a vade mecum, To the Cure.

Cure.
First, Let blood in the arm, on the same side you find heaviness or pricking,
in a small quantity, but often; at distance for the better ^evultion afterward
open a vein in the foot, and it is most profitable, If the distemper comes
from the obstruction of the terms, and the party subject to the Hemorrhoids,
open them with Horse-leeches, let them take this Julep three times in a day.
Take P^antaine and Poppy-water ana 2. Syrup of dried Roses 1. Lapis prunellae
1. mix them for a Julep. -- Let him purge the serous and chollerick humors that
make the blood more thin and fluid, with medicines of an astringent virtue; As,
take Rhubarb 1. yellow Mirabolaus ss. Tammarinds ss. infuse them in
Plantain-water, strain it, and dissolve in it powder of Rhubarb ss. Syrup of
dried Roses 1. make a potion; then give medicines that closes the orifices of
the vessels, by an astringent quallity, such as will not retain the blood in
the breast by too much astriction, therefore mix such things with them as do
dissolve and ^xpectorate the congealed blood which is out of the vessels, for
the which this is the best. Take Bole-Arminick, Terra sigillata both sorts of
Correl, Blood stone, ana ss. Sugar of Roses ss. ^ith one white of an Egg well
beaten with Rose Water, make a Lohoch, to licked up, sometimes make a Syrup of
Purslaine, and use that, it is excellent in spitting of blood.

XXII. Want of Appetite, or Loathing of meat.
There are many Causes Cause.
for this disease, but generally it proceeds from a cold distemper, when flegmy
melancholy humors are gathered into the stomach, and hinders its office; or
being drawn from all other parts of the body, as is in them who use to vomit,
draw the impurity of other parts to the stomach, from the brain, spleen, and
mother, and other parts.

To the Cure; Cure.
You must first make evacuation of the humor offending by a vomit, and then
apply medicines to the stomach that may strengthen the parts thereof. For the
vomit let it be 1ss. of the infu^^on of Crocus mettallorum and after it has
wrought sufficiently, give him of this Julep to drink at times, 2 or 3
spoonfulls. Agna rosarum aq. Boraginis, ana 3. spirit of Vitrioll, so much as
will give a gust, then put to it of Syrup of Quinces and Violets, ana 1. Spec.
aromaticum rosatum 1. make a Julep; Let him foment the stomach often times in a
day with this fomentation, Take garden Mints, wormwood, ana M 3. boil them in a
sufficient quantity of wine and vinegar to the consumption of a third part, and
with woolen stups foment the stomach with it, and once every morning take 4
grains of this powder to strengthen the stomach Sal Niter, flower of Brimstone
ana ss. Sal Gemnae, Gallengall, Mastick, Cubebs, ana ^s. Mace ss make of them a
subtle powder, and give it of 4 grains in sweet wine. By this powder such as
go to Sea, that are apt to vomit there, if they take of it when that they find
their nauseousnesse to come upon them, it shall prevent it by correcting the
coldness of the humor that lies over the stomach. I never failed the Cure of
this disease, when I followed this method or course.

XXIII. Worms.
There are many causes of them, but the material cause, is commonly sweet phlegm
that grows putrid, by which it gets a disposition to be turned into worms;
food also, if it wants a good digestion turns into putrefaction, and begets
worms in it self, as we see in Cheese, and in fruits which brings forth
worms by being putrified, so it is in our bodies, especially in children which
are given to gluttony, and eat the aforesaid things, and take new commonly
before the old is concocted, hence it is that they putrify and breed worms,
and it is daily to be observed that sucking Children that eat meat are most
troubled with worms, because their stomachs are not able to digest it, moreover
milk is quickly digested in the stomach, and presently sent to the guts, and if
it have meat mixed with it which could not so suddenly be digested, it will be
sent into the intestinesse with the milk, and therefore corrupt and breed
worms, for worms never breed of milk alone.

The Cure of the worms is by driving them out because they are wholly against
nature, and this is done by purging medicines which kill worms, and evacuate
the matter that breeds them, first, give a dosse of this powder, Wormseed ^s.
Senna 1 ss. Coriander-seeds prepared, Harts-horne, ana ss. Rhubarb 2. dried Rue
ss. beat them into a fine powder, it is to be given from 1. to 1. according to
the age of the party, mix it with such things as please the palate, two hours
after give this glyster. barley bran and red Roses, ana P: 1. Liquorice and
Raisins scraped and stoned, ana s. boil them to half a pint, dissolve in it
strained, red Sugar 1. and one yolk of an Egg make a glyster, you may add
Cassia or Diacatholicon to make it stronger, give these medicines 3 or 4 times
in good order. Oil of Juniper given one drop at a time in broth is excellent
for Children that have worms.

A Cataplasme to kill worms. Take meal of Lupines 2. Mirrh and Alloes, ana 2.
ox gall as much as is fitting, oil of Wormwood 2. make a Cataplasme for the
belly, let the belly be covered, but make a hole in the middle that the navel
may not be covered but ly open, by this I have found merveilous effects; for
flat worms or ass worms, glysters made of bitter things never fails, as
milk 6. pulp of Col^quintida 1. oil of Rue 2. give as a glyster and this is
the best it is somewhat sharp but sure, you may put some Cassia to it, or
Catholicen to make it more purgative, to carry away the filth that breeds them.

XXIV. Pain in the Stomach.
Many are the Causes, but the immediate pain, is solution of continuity by
things sharp and distending, and they are chiefly humors or wind, or sometimes
worms knawing the tunicles. The humors are green choler, or black, salt
phlegm, corrupt matter sent into the stomach from an Impostume broke in the
Liver or breast, these cause pain, also sharp vapors coming from those humors,
also wind contained in the Cavety of the stomach does cause swelling and
painful distension, especially if it be restrained within its Tunicles.

The Cure of this disease is according to the diversity of the cause, that
which comes from wind, is cured by medicines that discuss and evacuate the
flaltulent matter, as also phlegm from whence it comes. First, give this gentle
emollient glyster, Althea roots 2. Mallows and Violets ana M. 1. Guord-seeds
ss. Lint and Fleebene-seeds ana 2. water Lillyes and Roses ana P. 1.
Cammomel-flowers P. ss. boil them in fountain water to ^ 1. and add to the
strainings oil of Roses 2. Cassia 1. Make a glyster, when that is come away
give another carminative glyster, that is, expelling wind and discussing, made
of the decoction of Origon, Callamnius, Peny-royall, Rue, the lesser Centaury,
Anniseeds Fennel seeds, Carrots-seeds, and Cummin-seeds, and the like, and
dissolve in them Benedicta Laxativa, and oil of Rue. Dill and honey of
Rosemary and the like. If the pain continue make a Glyster with white Wine,
and with oil of Juniper, or with 8 drops of Chymicall oil of Cinnamon or
Cloves, which does wonders, then foment the stomach with this, which seldom
fails. Althea roots ss red roses, Cammomel flowers, tops of wormwood, ana M. 1.
boil them in common water, and Cammomel-water to one pint and a half, adding in
the end a little Rennish-wine, Rose Water, and Vinegar, make a fomentation,
aster fomentation anoint with oil of Rue and Dill mixed with Aqua vi^ae and a
little oil of Sage or Cloves, after anointing apply a Cataplasm of Honey and
Cummin-seeds. He must also drink of this following Julep, which is admirable to
assuage pain, discuss wind, and strengthen the stomach. Wormwood, the lesser
Centaury, and Agrimony ana M. ss. boil them to 5. and add to them being
strained 1. of Sugar, let him take it two mornings together. Whilst these
things are doing, if there be a loathing or inclination to vomit, move vomit by
warm water and Sallet-oyl* to carry off the phlegm. If the pain comes of
choler, it is cured by the evacuation thereof, by a vomit of 1ss. of infusion
of Crocus Mettallorum, and the next day give the emollient glyster mentioned in
this Chapter; afterward quallifie the sharpness of the humors with Almonds,
Milk, or with oil of sweet Almonds new drawn, and with yolks of new laid
eggs. If the pain comes from Impostume, or U cer you must begin with letting of
blood in both arms by degrees, so long as the Patient is able, give no purges
for they are improper in this cause, give Turpentin washed in Wormwood-water
for that does mightily maturate the Impostume of the stomach, and afterward
this emollient and cooling and senitive glyster, Chicken broth or the decoction
of Mallows, and Violets, of altogether a pint, oil of Roses and violets ana 2.
Cassia 1. Sugar ^ ss with two yolks of Eggs make a glyster. Give this glyster 3
or 4 days. Let his drink be Barly-water and Syrup of Violets taken cold, and
give him of the former Julep, adding to it some Syrup of Poppies.

XXV. Chollicke.
The Cause of the Chollick is an excrementitious matter, which by distending
pricking or corroding make a solution of Continuity and these are either wind
or humors.

Winds are bred of condities or a cold distemper of the stomach, or
intestinesse and if they be not sent forth by reason of the hard excrements and
other things that of obstructs the intestinesse, they are in great plenty shut
up, especially in the Colon, and make very great pain, all gross cold and
phlegmatic humors, being f^stned upon the tunicles of the guts cause the same
pain, by knawing, if they are sharp and flat, as also by cooling the part
which by consequence must suffer constriction, and divulsion, Chollerick, and
sharp humors, and melancholy and sour humors, by twitching and pricking the
guts cause these pains.

To the Cure of this disease you must give the emollient and carminative
glysters mentioned in the Chapter of the pain of the stomach, which must be
repeated 3 or 4 times in a day, and if he goes not to stool in one or two
glysters as sometimes happenneth, you must give a Suppositer made of Honey and
Salt with 1. of Coloquintida in it, to cause motion; If you mix with the second
glyster four ounces of infusion of Crocus mettallorum, you shall find it do
wonders, and after the excrements are come away, give him oil of sweet Almonds
mixed with Manna and fat broth, for it eases pain and throws out the matter
offending, and afterward give him 1. of Anniseeds in powder in wine, for it
also asswageth pain, and the second time it is given quite takes away the
pain, applying at the same time a Cataplasme of Turpentine, 3. laid on with
Staphes sprinkled with Pepper, and Sanguis Dragonis finely powdered of each 1.

XXVI. Iliak Passion.
This Iliak Passion is a preposterous motion of the Intestinesse, in which the
belly is always bound, for after that expulsive faculty of the guts has long
labored to through out some fluities the ordinary way, and is frustrated of
her intention; desiring to simpafie the necessity of exclusion, she takes no
other course, and by a preposterous motion drives them upwards and vomiteth
them out.

The Causes obstructing are hard dung long retained, gross vapors gathered in
abundance into the guts and violently distending them, Inflammations and other
great tumors which wholly shut up the internal caveties of the gut, and the
circumvolution of it, so that it is as it were roled together, and knit in a
knot. The chief business in this cure is abstinency; and give twice this
glyster to mollify the exceedments. Take the broth of a sheep paunch, in
which let be boiled Mellelote flowers, and Cammomel flowers and Elder flowers,
and take of this 22. put to it butter 3. Honey 1 ss. Sal Gemma 1 ss. after you
have given it twice, give a dry glyster, of the fume of Tobacco, and if he be
not inclined to vomit, you must move him to vomit with warm water and oil of
Violets that the upper parts may be cleansed, then give him this glyster.
Fountain water 12. Castle Soape ss. make a Lixivium of it, and put to it 4. of
infusion of Cr^cus Mettallorum, and 3. of oil of Almonds and give it. It is an
infa^lible medicine. Let his drink be Barley water, sometimes give oil of sweet
Almonds newly drawn, in white wine, sometimes adding of Syrup of Poppies to
it. This disease is to be attended with diligence for it is for the most part
deadly.

XXVII. Astriction, or binding of the Belly.
Is understood here a dull and slow dejection, by which the feces and relics
of meat are seldom, and not according to the quantity of food, thrown forth,
therefore they are necessarily indurated, because of their long continuance,
being dried with heat, and the moisture is always drawn from them by the
Misseraick which reach not only to the thin but thick guts; It is a symptom of
the expulsive faculty diminished or the retentive increased, and it is the
cause of many diseases, as Headache, and Catarrh, and other distempers in the
brain.

The Cure of this disease is generally performed by emollient and laxative
glysters made thus. Marsh mallows and Lilly roots ana 2. M^llows, Marsh
mallows, herb Mercury, Violets ana M. 1. Lint and Faenugreek seed, ana ss.
Anniseeds 1 ss sweet P^unes, N. 6. Cammomel and Mellilot flowers, ana P. 1.
boil them to a pint and a half, dissolve in the straining oil of Lillyes and
Lintseed ana 2. fresh Butter, 1 ss. Diacatholicon and Diaprunis simple, ana 6.
make a glyster to be given as often as need requires. Sometimes use this.

the decoction of sheeps entrells one pint, fresh Butter 2. Cassi,
Diacatholicon, and Diaprunis simple, ana ss. red Sugar 1. make a glyster.

Also twice in a month you may give one pint of Sallet oil only for a
glyster, and because that nature will grow dull by too much use of glysters,
and at length will never afficiate that way, but when she is provoked by one,
therefore you must endeavor to mollify the belly with this means, be eating
sweet Prunes and roasted Apples with Sugar, before dinner an hour, and that the
Prunes may work better, drink half a glass of your Venum Lynphaticum, or
wine and water before and after he take them. Once a week use this medicine.
Take Cassia newly drawn 1. Cream of Tarter 1 make a bole, by the observing
these rules you shall seldom miss of your expectations.

XXVIII. Dysenteria, or Blood-Flux.
A Dysenteria is a bloody looseness of the belly, with pain and torment
depending upon the ulceration of the intestinesse. The causes of Dysenteria,
are sharp and ulcerating humors as yellow choler, green like Leeks or
Verdigrease, and black as also salt phlegm bred in the head from great heat, or
in the belly by putrefaction, and so brought to the intestines, where cleaving
a long time it does ulcerate.

The Cure of this disease is done by medicines that assuage, cleanse, and
evacuate sharp humors, that consollidate and dry ulcers and stop the flux. And
first you must evacuate the humor offending with this medicine. Tammarinds ss.
Citron Mirabolans 2 boil them in Barley and Plantain-water, then in^use in the
straining of Rhubarb 1 ss. yellow Sanders ss to 4. of the straining add 1. of
Syrup of Roses solutive, make a potion, you must purge with this often and if
you think it not safe to purge every day or every other day, do it every third
or fourth day.

After the body is well purged of the humors give some glysters, give this
often, Marsh mallow roots 1. Rice one Pugil, Lint-seed, and Quince-seed, ana 1.
Henbeene-seed 2. Cammomel-flowers P. 1. boil them in milk or broth of a foul,
or sheeps head, and take of it 12. and add to it two yolks of eggs,
Mutton-suit 2. oil of sweet Almonds 1 ss and make a glyster. If the pain be
great mix with it 6 grain of Laudanum Paracelsi, for it is merveilous good to
assuage.

Let the party eat hot or new bread tempered with sallet Oil Nutmeg and Sugar,
and sometimes let him drink of this Julep. Take Plantaine-water, Rose Water,
ana 4. Spirit of Vitriel ss. Syrup of Quinces 3. Trochis of Spodium 2. make a
Julep.

Lastly, To complete the Cure, give this astringent Julep. Take all these
things in the Julep forementioned, and add to them conserve of Sloes 2. Syrup
of Mirtles 2. Juice of Purslaine 1. the powder of Elderberyes 2. Currell
prepared 1. Crecus Martis 2. and Rose and Plantain-water, of each 2. more, and
make a Cordial and astringent Julep, of the which take two or three spoonful
thrice in a day. Having followed this Method I have cured many.

XXIX. Diarrhaea a white flux so called.
It is a flux without blood, and without the ulceration of the intestinesse, it
comes generally of corrupt humors, chollerick, flegmetick, melanchollick, or
serous, and especially from chollerick, which provoke the expulsive faculty of
the intestiness by their sharpness.

To the Cure, Begin with a vomit, 1 ss. of infusion of Crocus M^ttallorum, for
it revelleth and evacuateth the matter of the disease excellently, afterward
follow the whole method of the cure of the Dy^^^teria and you shall find
merveilous success, only this is to be done ^^at is seldom done in that
disease, that if there be sign of blood abounding and strength you must let
blood, and if there be a feavour you must not omit letting of blood, though
there appear no plethorie, before and after purges give glysters, and after the
body is sufficiently cleansed, give astringents and strengthners, as is
mentioned in the foregoing Chapter.

XXX. Hot distemper of the Liver.
Many persons have a hot distemper of the Liver from their birth, but I shall
not speak of that, that which is meant here, is that preternaturall disease
which manifestly hinders the actions of the Liver. It is for the most part a
compound distemper joined with matter, because a hot distemper of the Liver
uses to produce hot and chollerick humors, there are infinite causes of it.

The Cure consists in the correcting of the distemper by cooling medicines, and
by the evacuation of the chollerick humors which comes from the Liver,
increasing the distemper, and that distempers it, and is the cause of other
diseases.

First, Give a laxative glyster. Chicken Broth lb 1. Cassia new drawn 1. oil
of Roses and Violets, ana 2. Sugar 1 ss. with two yelks of Eggs make a
glyster. After the glyster open a vein, for that do much cool the Liver, and
takes away some of the chollerick humo^s, and opens obstructions that comes
from choler, therefore you must open the Liver vein in the right arm, and
take such a quantity of blood as is agreeable to the strength of the Patient,
either at once or at diverse times. After you must give medicines that do
gently purge choler and rep^a^ it often at distance. And the best purge is the
Syrup of Succo^^ 3. it must be compounded with a four fold proportion of
Rhub^rb.

The^e things following are excellent to cool the Liver, drink often of the
decoction of Barley with Liquorice. The tincture of Roses is admirable, and is
as follows. red Roses dried 1. warm water 3 pints, spirit of Vitriel 1 ss.
infuse them 3 or 4 hours, add to it being strained lb 1. of white Sugar, keep
it for use.

The Alexandrian Julep is very good also. Spring Water lb 1. Rose Water, Juice
of Lemons and white Sugar, ana 4. boil them on a gentle fire till they are
skimmed. These two last remedies are used two ways, either for an ordinary
drink, or as a Julep twice or thrice in a day. Pippin possets are also very
cooling and restorative, they are only sliced into milk and boiled till the
curd rise and take it off and clear it for to drink cold.

XXXI. Pain of the Hemorrhoids.
The Hemorrhoid veins that are in the end of the Rectum Intestinum or straight
guts sometimes do swell and cause very great pain. The Cause is namely of
blood offending in quantity or quality, which if it find not a way and cannot
open the end of the veins, there it setleth, and by filling of the veins
causes a tumor, with inflammation and pian, the principal cause why blood
cannot get out of the veins is the thickness of it, because it is melancholy,
for the internal Hemorrhoid veins are said to receive melancholy from the
spleen and sometimes to purge it forth.

For the Cure hereof first let blood in the arm, and make revultion from the
part affected, which being sufficiently done open the vein in the ancle,
strong purges are not good in this disease, because they draw the humors to the
part and increase the tumor, but you must constantly keep the body open,
because hard excriments and voided with straining increase pain. An infusion
of Cassia given morning and evening is the best for this, and it is thus made.

Take of Lettice, Buglesse tops, Mallows ana M 1. Liquorice scraped, Raisins
stoned, ana ss Buglesse, Burrage and Violet flowers ana P. 1. boil them to 8.
in the strainings infuse Cassia new drawn 1. strain it, and clarify it, and
then put to it 1. of Syrup of Violets, give it twice a day as aforesaid.
Topicall applications must be used to appease pain, and the best is this, oil
of Box tree because stupifying, and as it cures all Toothache miraculously, so
does it mittigate all other pain, by only laying a drop with a little Lint
upon the Hemorrhoid, or use it thus, mix 1. of oil of Box with ss of Lintseed
oil, and apply that with Lint it works merveilous effects Fresh Butter put in
a leaden mortar, and set in the Sun till it do look black, is an excellent
medicine. The fume of your Horse mints received is a rare medicine, and gives
present ease, it is to be dried and laid upon a red hot pan, and so receive the
fume from under a close store.

XXXII. Jaundice.
It is a yellow color of the whole body, coming of choler, spread on the skin.
The cause is the obstruction of the bag or cistis which contains the gall,
hinders the passage of it into the guts, whereby it remains in the Liver and
goes from thence with the blood into the whole body, and it is occasioned from
gross phlegm ot choler abounding, and sometimes from little stones, which are
often bred in the bag of gall, which makes narrow the passage by the
compression of the party nigh unto it.

The sign of this distemper is a yellow color throughout the whole body,
especially in the white of the eyes, with an itching and lazienesse,
bitterness of the tongue, and sometimes chollerick vomitings. These things
show the obstruction of the bag of the gall, white excriments, and a belly
bound for what of choler which uses to make the excriments yellow, or red,
and to stir up the expulsive faculty of the guts like a glyster, the vomit is
yellow, inclining to red, and what linen is put into it is dyed yellow.

The Cure it depends upon the Cure of the disease on which it depends. That
obstruction that is caused by a stone, is incureable, because the stone cannot
be dissolved which comes from the obstruction of the Cistis or bag of the gall,
as thus you must make an universal evacuation throughout the whole body with
this Bolus.

Take of the electuary of the Juice of Roses and Diaprunis solutive ana 3. The
powder of Rhub^^b 1. Saffron ss. vitriolated Tarter ss. and with Sugar make a
Bolus, which may be given once or twice if the body be of a very ill habit. And
if you perceive abundance of blood, you will find necessary to abate it,
after the body is sufficiently unladen of the humors, this following infusion
used 8 or 9 days, plucks up the disease by the roots. Madder roots ss. the
greater Celandine M. 1. the tops of Sea Wormwood, and of the lesser Centaury
ana P. 1. Cinnamon ss. Saffron ss infuse them a whole night in 8. of white wind,
and add to the straining 1 ss. white Sugar and let him take it in the morning
three hours before dinner, sometimes ad to it 1. of the Syrup of the Juice of
Horehound. After the obstruction is taken away the yellow color will in a short
time vanish by the strength of natural heat, which will discuss the humor from
the skin, but that it may sooner be done, make a Bath of warm-water and rub the
body therein with a bag of Barley and Bean-meale.

XXXIII. Stoppage or obstruction of the Liver.
The obstruction of the Liver is preternaturall closing or straightness of the
branches of the Vena Porta and Cava, and sometimes of the substance of the
Liver hindering the passage of natural humors, and the distribution of
nourishment, for these ways or passages are not only the veins which are
dispersed through the whole substance of the Liver, but also the pores and
insensible passages, with which the whole substance of the Liver, and also of
the other parts, is very full, which being shut up by a preternaturall humor;
neither can the heat of the Liver be cooled, nor can the thin vaporous
excriments be evacuated.

The cause of these obstructions, is a gross excrement viscuous and clammy,
which being not able to pass freely, sticks in the passage and is more and
more thickened by the heat of the party, so that the longer obstructions
continue the worse they are.

The Cure is begun with a general evacuation throughout the whole body, and by
a potion correspondent to the nature of the distemper, and afterward if there
be signs of plethory or fullness, if the body be thin you must draw blood out of
the liver vein in the right arm.

The Potion. Smallage, Parsley and Fennel-roots infused a whole night in
White Wind an^ 1. the roots of the greater Cilandine 2. Fearn-roots, Elicompane
Barbs, the roots of Capers, the inward bark of an Ash, and Tamarisk ana ss.
Wormwood, Agrimony, Maiden-haire, Garmender, the tops of St. John's Wort, and
the lesser Centaury, ana M. 1. Smalledg, Parsley, Annis. and Fennel-seeds ana
ss. Senna, Polypody of the Oak, and the kernels of Catharmus-seeds, ana 2.
Epythimum or dodder of Thin 1. Ginger and Cloves ana 1. Tamarisk flowers,
Merrigolds and red Fitches ana P. 1. make a decoction to a pint and a quarter,
dissolve in the straining of the Syrup of the fine opening roots, and of Roses
solutive, ana 2. and make a potion, clarified and aromatized with 2. of
Cinnamon, and devide it into 4 parts for 4 mornings draught, adding to every
mornings draughts of vitriolated Tarter, and of salt of Wormwood and Tamarisk,
ana ss.

In the last dosse (if the first have not sufficiently purged) dissolve of the
electuary of Citrons solutive, and Diacarthamum ana 1 ss. Or do this. Take
vitriolated Tarter which has great power to open obstructions, and use it
thus. Barley Water 4. Senna, Senna 2 ss Rhubarb 1. vitriolated Tarter 1. let
them infuse, a little then strain them for to drink. This one that I have found
great credit by, for by the often use of it, it takes away all obstructions. I
have cured Agues Quotidian and Tertian by using this for 12 days together. Let
his drink be Barly-water and Juice of Oringes, and you may dulcifie it with
Syrup of Violets, or he may drink of the Tincture of Roses mentioned in the hot
distemper of the Liver 31. Chapter. Either of them both are very excellent. I
could instance many other medicines but I have found in my practice none so
previlent as these.

XXXIV. Dropsy.
According to Gallens description, there are 3 sorts of Dropsies namely
Ascites, Tympanites, and Anasarca.

Ascites is a swetting of the belly, causes of a serous humor, and not only of
the belly but also of the feet legs thighs and cods, sometimes it begin with a
swelling of the feet which ascends afterward to the legs and to the thighs
and cods. This humor as it is of the nature of water it is cold, but as it is
salt, it has in it heat, and is increased by the neernesse of the bowels, and
more by the putrefaction which it gathers by its long continuance, from
whence comes a feavour and thirst, from the stinking salt vapors which do rise
and infect the mouth of the stomach.

The Dropsy called Timpanites, has his name from Timpanum a Drumb, because the
abdomen is stretched out like a Drumb, and if you strike it, it sounds like it,
and this stretching comes from wind shut up in the cavety of the abdomen, and
sometimes in the cavety of the guts. And we must observe that the wind that
causes this Timpany, is not contained in the b^lly alone, but mixed with
water, as in the Ascites. The difference of these two is the thing that
predominats, if more wind then water, it is a Timpany but if more water then
wind an Uscites.

The Dropsy called Anasarca comes of a phlegmatic humor, spread through the
whole body, and therefore the body is swollen and white, this phlegm comes from a
cold Liver, which instead of good blood, produces cold and fl^gmatick, which
when it cannot be turned into the substance of the parts, leaves the curdy
part that is unfit for nourishment upon them, and makes them swell, hence comes
an Anasarca.

The Cure of the Dropsy consists in the evacuating the matter, whether it be
in the whole body, or in the abdomen or belly, in taking away the cause that
produce that matter, and in strengthening the bowels, especially the Liver, and
for general evacuation this powder is the best. Take of Jallap and the best
Rhuba^b ana ss vitriolated Tarter ss Ginger gr. 6. give it in White Wind, it is
necessary that this be taken every third or fourth day, and sometimes sweet
with Antimonium Diaphoreticum, for it cures without manifest evacuation,
observe that day you take the swet you must omit purging. The Cure also lies
much in their drink, they must be very sparing of drinking, and endure thirst
as much as they can. For drink let them take the decoction of Juniper or of
Guajacum, or of Sasaphras or Madder which provokes urine very much, let eat
with their meats (which must be dry roasted) a little salt of Wormwood. Amongst
internal, let not be forgotten external Medicines for they are of great force
to discurse the humors of the belly, as fomentations as follows Take the
urine of a sound boy 4 pints, Lapis prunellae 3. boil them to the consumption
of a third part for a fomentation, or take Limewater, in which dip a new
sponge which will compass the whole abdomen, strain it and bind it on, by
this the waters that cause the Dropsy are consumed, the cold and moist
distemper of the bowels are taken away, and the hardness of the spleen
dissolved, after the fomentation anoint with a little oil of Scorpions mixed
with the oil of Rosemary, and little powder of Gallengall and Bayberries,
these be also good to foment the legs and thighs with all and must not be
omited, and by this method I have cured many.

XXXV. Pain of the Spleen.
It is caused from wind, which does not only stretch the substance of the
Spleen, which is almost insensible, but the membrains that covers it, it is
hardly distinguished from the chollick, because the Colon is just under and
over the Spleen, but the pain of the Spleen is weighty, and in one place, but
the pain of the Colon is stretching, sharp, and moveable, and runs about the
whole belly.

The Cure of this disease is with Carminative glysters, that expel wind with
convenient purging, and with emollient fomentations with Vinegar. A glyster. of
the decoction of French-Barly 2. put into it 2 yolks of Eggs, oil of sweet
Almonds 3 pulp of Coloquintida ss. make a glyster, this glyster must be given
as often as need requires, foment the side with the decoction of Mellilote
flower and Elder-flowers made in hard wine, and after apply this Emplaster. Gum
Ammoniak 4. dissolve it in strong Vinegar, then strain them and boil them
till the Vinegar is consumed, then with a little wax make an Emplaster and
apply it. Let the party drink 2 or 3 times in a day a small glass of water
distilled from Elder-buds, it may be sweetened with Sugar if they please. By
using this course I have had great success in this Cure, I have sometimes
caused the opening of a vein in the left arm, when I saw there was an
inflammation.

XXXVI. Tenesmus.
It is a continual desire to go to stool, and voiding nothing but slime and
bloody matter, the cause of it is an ulcer in the straight gut called
Intestinum rectum, from which quitter or filthy matter flows and stirs the
expulsive faculty, by which means there is a continual desire to go to
stool, for the causes they need not to be repeated for they are the same with
a Dysenteria, and differ only in respect of the part affected, and in the
knowledge of this you may observe there is a continual needing. And in a
Dysenteria, it is by fits, besides in that after great straining, there is
voided only slime, bloody or mattery, in a Dysenteria, both excrements and
humors are voided. A Tenasmus is easily cured, it seldom kills any, but is
very grievous in respect of its troublesomnesse and long continuance. The Cure
little differs from the Cure of a Dysenteria. And first the sharp humors that
come from the Liver and other parts are to be purged with medicines that leave
an astringent quallity behind, as Rhubarb, which must be so often given till
the humor seem to be spent, and give it thus. Take torrified Rhubarb 1.
Plantain water 2. Syrup of Violets 1. mix them to drink, use it often as is
said. If there be inflammation (as is known by a feavour) open a vein, and if
after bleeding it continue, and cause a Strangury or difficulty of urine (as
often it does) then open the Hemorrhoids with Horse-leeches, you must use
asswaging glysters if much pain, and astringent, ^s the disease requires, the
composition you will find in the Cure of the Dysenteria. But in the use of
glysters, observe; First, that you give them often, and that they exceed not
the quantity of half a pint, because they will not be kept any time because of
their continual needing, and the pipe must be warily put in, lest the pain be
increased.

And Lastly, You must diligently apply this fomentation, from the beginning, a
piece of Scarlet-cloath boiled in Vinegar and applied pretty hot, as they may
endure. And sometimes fill 2 bag with Barley bran, and boil them in Vinegar, and
let the party sit one while upon one and other while upon another as hot as he
can, and sometimes use dry fumigations to dry the ulcer; as thus. Amber Mastick
Frankincense and Mircles ana 1. make (...) powder for a fumigation, and sit
over it on a close stool. By this means being daily observed, I cured 7 people.

XXXVII. The Stone in the Kidneyes, and pain in the Reins, called Doler
Nephriticus.
This disease is called by some people the Stone-Chollick. The cause of this
pain, the stone or thick phlegm, a stone continuing in the Reins, causes
either little or no pain, because the substance of the reins have little
sense, but if it fall upon the head of the U^iters, or get into the passage and
distend it and cannot be brought to the bladder by reason of its greatness,
then it causes grievous pains, but gross phlegm fastened upon the uriters and
distending them, causes the Nephritick pain, ordinary causes are thick blood
in the uriters, or thick matter coming from the Kidneys, or wind got into the
cavery and causes great pain. There are many controversies (about the stone
which is the chief cause of the pain in the Reins) by several Authors, but I
shall omit the tediousness of them, and fall only to the Cure, as I have found
by my practice.

The Cure consists in the enlarging of the passages, and relaxing them by
throwing forth the stone and any other thing that hurts them, and by taking
away the Anticedent cause, which is thus done. First, give this glyster. Marsh
mallow and Lilly roots an. 1. Mallows, Violets, and Pellitory, Bearefoot, ana
M. 1. Lint seed and Fenugreek seed ana ss fat Figgs 6 Cammomel and Mellilot
flowers ana P. 1. boil them to a pint, dissolve in the straining Cassia and
Diacatholicon ana 6. pulp of Coloquintida gr. 6 oil of Lillyes and Violets ana
1 ss. fresh Oil 2. make a glyster to be given presently, afterward open the
Liver vein in the right arm, and take 8 of blood according to the strength of
the Patient, to prevent i^flamation. After blood-letting g^ve this glyster.
Flowers of Cammomel and Mellilot, the tops of Dil, Pellitory of the wall and
Rue, ana M 1. Annis: Fennel and Cummin seeds ana ss. make a decoction to one
pint in which dissolve Diaphaenicon ^ Turpentine dissolved with the yolk of an
Egg, 1 oil of Dill and Scorpions ana 3. mix them for a glyster, to mollify
more and to assuage pain after your laxative make a glyster of oil thus, oil
of Dill and of Cammomel ana lb ss oil of sweet Almonds 2. oil of Rue 1. mix
them for a glyster, at the same time make a fomentation to the part pained, of
the decoction of the first glyster, with Anniseed and Fennel seeds, and oil and
water, and use it with a sponge and because that in this disease there is
abundance of curdy humors that cannot be carried away by glyster, you must give
a vomit, namely 2. of the infusion of Crocus mettallorum, or less according to
the age of the party, for by this the plenty of humors may be abated, and a
revultion is made from the part affected, and often nature it self endeavor
the same when the pain is great, you must observe before and after purging and
glyster, you must give somewhat at the mouth which opens the passages and abate
pain, which is this. Marsh mallows 3. boil them to a pint dissolve in the
straning lbss Sugar. Let his ordinary drink be the decoction of Marshmallow
roots with two Pugils of French Barley, and Liquorice 6. in 5 pints of water
boiled to a pint. Oil of sweet Almonds new drawn does mollify and relax and
assuage pain 3. or 4 given by its self or with White Wind. Sometimes I have
given when the pain has been great 5 or 6 grains of Laudanum in a glyster, or
three grains at the mouth, by these rules I have merveilous success in
bringing away the stone, and other causes of the pain, in the reins and never
failed, and I have cured many in England and beyond the Seas.

XXXIX. Dysuria, or Scalding of the Urine.
The Cause of this painful pissing, is a solution of continuity in the
Sphincter Muscle or the passage of the bladder, and therefore whatsoever can
cause a wound in those parts, may cause heat of urine. The most chief cause is
sharpness of urine sometimes without mixture of other humors, which is caused
by a hot distemper of the bowels, or of the whole body, or by eating hot and
sharp meats, but it often come by mixture of hot and sharp humors as choler
and sharp phlegm, sometimes matter coming from the reins and bladder being
ulcerated may cause a sharpness of urine, sometimes a white humor like milk
comes plentifully forth with the urine and causes scalding, which by some is
thought to be matter from the veins, other causes there are, as a stone in the
bladder if it strike against the neck of it in time of pissing causes pain,
but I never had a Patient in that kind. But to the Cure of them who have it by
the sharpness of hot phlegmatic and chollerick humors, and it is thus. First,
Let blood according to the plethory and inflammation, first from the right arm
in the Liver vein to evacuate and revel the matter, and after in the lower
vein in the anckle, to drive it from the part affected, then give this mild
gentle and cool purge. Pulp of Cassia and Tamarinds ana 1 ss. Turpintine 3.
make a Bole. A vomit is better as experience witness it, for it revelleth from
the part affected and hinders those inconveniences that use to come by purging,
therefore g^ve once or twice in a week to them that can vomit easily 1 of
Crocus mettallorum, afterward give sharp glysters, for they bring the sha^p
humors to the guts and send them out by degrees give this. Marshmallow roots 1.
Mallows, Violets, and Lettice ana M. 1. water Lillyes and Barley ana P. 1. boil
them to a pint, and dissolve in the straining Cassia new drawn 1. one Eg, and
2. of oil of Violets, make a glyster, sometimes make the decoction in milk
every other glyster, for it do powerfully allay heat and pain. At the time
let this Julep be drank of 5 or 6 spoonfulls at a time and often. water of
Pursl^in, Lettice, and Roses, and water Lillyes ana 1. Syrup of Violets and
water Lillyes ana 6 Sal Prunellae 1. mix it for a Julep, repeat it often, and
instead of this you may drink the simple decoction of mallows with Syrup of
Violets. When the pain is very great, put the Yard when you piss in warm
Milk, or decoction of Marshmallows, and white Poppy-seeds, or warm water. The
small decoction of Marsh mallows and Syrup of violets, and conserve of Roses,
let that be his ordinary drink, and sometimes Almond milk. This I have found a
safe an infallible way of cure of this disease, which of it self is not
dangerous, though very painful.

XL. The Itch.
It comes from the obstruction of the Liver, occasioned by a gross diet, and
an intemperate course of life, by great drinking, and eating of unripe fruits
and things of hard digestion. The cause why it is catching is too la ge to
insist upon here, but I shall set down very briefly the ^x^ct and speedy cure,
and I never failed the cure of any I undertook, and it is as follows.

For men and women let them take for three times this purge, in the space of
twelve days. Take of Rhubarb and Zallap an^ ss, vitriolated Tarter gr 8 Ginger
gr. 7. make a powder and drink it with warm posset.

Let children take this purge four times in twelve days. Take Syrup of
Rhubarb, and Chicory 8 and add to it the powder of Rhubarb 1, and let it serve
for four dosses, and all the time let his body be ungued and bathed with this
following unguent.

Take Sage M. 2. stamp them and then boil them in half a pound of fresh
Butter, then strain it and add to it 2. of the powder of Brimstone. I have
experienced this way often and have cured many hundreds, both beyond Seas and
in England, and by no other means.

XLI. Chlorosis, or Green-Sicknesse.
It is an evil habit of body proceeding from the obstruction of the veins of
the Liver, Spleen, and Mesentery, especially of those veins which are about the
womb, and the cause of the obstructions of the veins of the womb and other
parts, are thick slimy and curdy humors coming from evil diet, by drinking
Vinegar, eating Herbs and unripe fruit, Chalk, Oatmeale, Nutmeg, etc. for
hence it is that natural heat is impaired and cruid humors increased.

The Cure is, by opening the obstructions, by evacuating of the filthy humors
from out the whole body, and correcting the distemper of the bowels and
strengthening them. The obstructions are taken away by these pills. Take of
Steel prepared with brimstone ss. Alloes, Senna, Agarick ana 2. Diarrhodon
Abbatis ss. Saffron ss. with Syrup of Roses solutive make a mass of pills, of
1. thereof make six gilded pills which give in the morning for fifteen days
together, three hours before meat. The body being cleansed open a vein in the
arm, if her terms are stopped for if you draw blood from the foot, the
obstructions of the veins in the womb will be greater, by their fullness if the
Liver be most stopped draw blood from the right arm, if the Spleen from the
left. After bleeding take one purge more, after that make this Bath following
to open and loosen the vessels and to dissolve and digest the matter causing
obstructions. Take Marsh mallow-roots, Lilly-roots, Elicompane, Bryony, wild
Cucumer, ana lb 2. Mallows, Violets, Mercury, Penny-royall, Feaverfew, Balm,
ana M. 4. Lint-seed and Faenewgreek-seed beaten ana 2. boil them in spring
water for a Bath, Let her go into it warm twice in a day, do this two days,
renewing each day the decoction, The day after if the terms be stopped open
the vein in the Anckle called Saphaena, and take away three ounces of blood,
and it may be done twice or thrice in a time (that is to say) at the same time
the terms use to flow. After the obstructions are opened, you must discuss
the phlegm like serous humors that remain in the veins by swets, use the
decoction of Guajacum in cold constitutions, and in hot, the decoction of Chyna
and Sarsa for 15 or 20 days, with this caution that every fourth or fifth day
you give a purge to cleanse the bowels of humors that cannot be sen^ forth by
swet.

Lastly, Copulation if it may be done lawfully, is very good after the use of
opening medicines, for by it the natural heat is stirred up, and the vessels
of the womb much enlarged.

This is a sure way of Cure and often experienced.

XLII. Stoppage of the Terms.
There are many causes of this disease, but chiefly it proceeds from cold and
thick humors.

Cause.
Sometimes the blood offending in quantity quality or motion may be a cause. In
quantity when it is too much or too little, too much when it stretches out the
veins so that they cannot contract themselves to expel it. Too little when
the body has not blood enough to nourish it. Blood offends in quallity when it
is thick and slimy, by reason of the cold distemper of the Liver and other
parts. It offends in motion when it passes other ways, as by the Nose,
Vomiting, Spitting, Urine, Hemorrhoids and the like.

To the Cure, Cure.
if it proceeds from too much blood, let blood in the arms, and abate the
quantity of it, for if you should first open the vena Saphena or lower vein,
the blood would be drawn more to the womb and cause a greater obstruction and
distention of the vessels, and break them, or cause inflammation of the womb
After abundance of blood is taken away, you must draw the blood down by
opening the lower veins, about the time the woman use before to have her
Terms.

After these things use Baths, you need to follow no other rules then those in
the Cure of the Green-sicknesse, in order for generally when the obstructions
of the bowels are opened, the courses flow of their own accord.

XLIII. Immoderate Flux of the Courses.
The Cause Cause.
of the immoderate coming down of the Courses are, viz. an opening of the ends
of the veins, a soaking of the blood through the coats of the veins, a
forcible rending of the veins, and there being eaten through by sharp humors.
All which are caused by the too great abundance of blood, its heat, thinness
and sharpness.

To the Cure, Cure.
to draw blood from the part affected the Patient must bleed in the arm, as
much as her strength can bear, but not all at once but by degrees, now and
then stopping the orifice with the finger, some use to fasten a large
Cupping-glasse unto the dugs, to stop the courses, and if she grow short
breathed, they take it presently off, I never used it, but after bleeding gave
these pills. Take pills of Bdellium 1. the Troches of Amber and terra sigillata
ana 1. with the Mucilage of Quince seeds extracted with Rose water, make a
Mass of pills which I give twice in a day the quantity of 1. before Dinner and
Supper, it is good that you ad 1. of Blood stone to it, endeavoring to vomit
before Dinner by the help of your fingers, but not so as to vomit, does
powerfully draw the blood upwards. Drink now and then the Juice of Plantain
newly drawn, the quantity of three or four ounces, I have found it to be the
best medicine in the world. I have cured many by these rules and medicines.

XLIV. The Whites.
A woman is said to have the Whites when excrementitious humors do slow from
the womb, without any certain order, and the excrementitious humors are
sometimes white and phlegmatic, sometimes they are pale or yellow, or green by
the mixture of choler, sometimes watery by the admixture of serous humors,
sometimes blackish by the mixture of melancholy, sometimes sharp and corosive,
so as to eat into, and exvulcerate some parts of the womb, sometimes they are
of an ill sent, sometimes not so offensive, and these proceed from a bad diet
or from a vicious habitual distemper of the whole body, and they take their
course unto the womb as unto a Sink, or Common shore, whereinto the rest of the
parts of the body disburden themselves.

The Cure Cure.
of this disease is by a convenient purging of the Peccant humor, and because
phlegmatic and wheyish humors do most commonly abound, purge four times with
this medicine. Take Plantaine water 6. Rhubarb, Senna, ana 3. Zallapium 1. let
them infuse for one hour then strain them, and add to it the powder of
Rhubarb 1 ss. pulp of Tamarinds 2. Syrup of Violets 1 ss. let it serve for
four dosses, afterward purge every other day for 8 days, with half an ounce
of the pulp of Tamarinds, and three dragmes of Venice Turpentine. There is no
necessity of bleeding in this disease, after sufficient purgations, procure
swet to expel the remnants of the excrementious humor, and also to cause a
further revultion of the humors falling into the womb, and for this purpose a
decoction of Lignum Guajacum, and Sassaphras is excellent in cold bodies, and
in chollerick and melanchollick bodies the decoction of China and Sarsaparilla,
with cooling herbs lest the humor should be more exasperated. Sulphurons Baths
do powerfully help to consume the relics of this disease, and have
experienced it often by those who I have after universal purging recommended
to the Bath. A small decoction of Guajacum, China may be their diet drink. When
occasion is of injection, let it be with Barley water, or water sweetened with
Sugar, afterward to dry and strengthen the womb, use these fumes (of
Franckinscence Laudanum, Mastick* Sanders, Nutmeg, and red Rose leaves) over a
Close-stoole. With these rules you will not find any difficulty of the Cure if
it be not old and stubborn, as I can and have made it appear by practice.

XLV. Fits of the Mother.
Cause.
When the seed and menstruous blood are retained in women besides the intent of
Nature, they putrify and are corrupted, and attain a malignant and venomous
qua^ity, from whence venomous vapors are elivated and carried to diverse parts
of the body, from whence arises an infinite number of sorrows and diseases.

To this disease I cannot say it ever made a perfect cure Cure.
of any, yet have made much experience beyond Sea, in several Nunner-yes,
besides other people, but have given ease for a good time by this following
means.

First, I give this laxative and wind expelling glyster, to discuss such
filthy vapors as cause the filth. Take Mercury leaves, Pellitory of the wall,
Mugwort, Penny royal, Rue, Calaminth, ana M. 1. Carraway-seeds, Cummin-seeds
and Barberryes ana 2. boil all to a pint and a half, in the straining
dissolve, Hierapicra, and Benedicta Laxativa, ana 6. oil of Rue 3. Camphir
half a Scrupel, mix it for a glyster, give this glyster twice, then this
Historical glyster. Take oil of Rue 4. Aqua vitae 1. Canary Sack 9. Galbanum
2. mix all and make a glyster, and give it after the other is out, I given only
a glyster of Vinegar tempered with water, and it presently assuage the Mother
fit, by compressing and coagulating the vapors which cause the same. I have
found also great effects and very sudden in this medicine, only 10 grains of
Camphir burned in warm water, and when it is out, let her drink it, it is the
quantity of half a pint, it presently allayes the fit. These medicines I have
made large experience of, and have found them effectual in what I have said in
this Cure, that is to the giving ease to the Patient.

Laus Deo.
FINIS.

